Museum Notes
By A. L. LEACH, F.G.S., Hon Curator.
A TALE OF THE SEA.
A few weeks ago these Notes contained an account of the Merman of Linney Head,
taken from a strange story related by a farmer who claimed to have seen the
creature in December, 1781. An earlier story of one of these perplexing
appearances has now come to light according to Mr. H. M. Vaughan, who writes as
follows:

A MERMAID AT PENDINE.
A curious and indeed unique little pamphlet recently purchased by the National
Library of Wales, is an account of the appearance of a Mermaid off the coast at
Pendine over 340 years ago. This pamphlet, which was unknown at the British
Museum, where the authorities are greatly interested in its discovery, consists
of four leaves octavo with the text in black letter and a picture of the
Mermaid on the title page. It is shown as "Imprinted at London, 1603, for W.B."
The title runs "A most strange and true Report of a Monsterous Fish that
appeared in the form of a Woman from her waist upwards, seen in the Sea by
diverse men of good reputation on the 17 of February 1603, near Gylmanes point
in the parish of Pendine in the County of Carmarthen."

The account of the Mermaid is contained in a letter by "Mr. P. G." to his
cousin "Mr. H. P." in London, and from internal evidence it appears to be based
on a careful enquiry made by Mr. William Sandars, of Pendine, a magistrate and
otherwise a person of local influence, but he did not make his investigation
until several weeks after the event. Many witnesses were then examined and the
report contains the names of thirteen of these in full. Here is the substance
of the story.

The creature was first observed by one Thomas Raynold, yeoman, who after
watching it for two hours, fetched several friends and neighbors so that they
might see the weird object and bear witness to its reality. It had "the shape
of a lively Woman from her waist upwards which was all above the water; her
color brown: a very large and fair [head of] Hair: her breasts round and
very white with two fair hands: everything formally as a Woman." This
description tallies with the figure on the title page. Various people watched
the strange obect until darkness set in: then it was lost to sight and was not
seen or heard of again.

What did all these people see? Was it a dugong or manatee or other visitor
from tropical seas, or was it, as the picture seems to suggest, an unusually
large seal? The chief hindrance to an acceptance of these naturalistic
explanations arises from the very human hands and arms. Much imagination would
need to be called into play to convert a seal's paddles into the "two fair
hands" shown in the drawing. But apart from these features the figure might be
interpreted as a representation of a seal.

I hope to obtain from the National Library a photostat facsimile of this rare
if not unique pamphlet concerning the Mermaid. This copy will be placed in the
Library of the Tenby Museum.

It is a curious coincidence that the narratives of the Pendine Mermaid and the
Linney Head Merman both begin with stories told by local farmers, Raynold and
Reynold respectively, bearing names so unusual in this district that neither of
them appears in the current list of Electors in the parish of St.
Mary's-in-Liberty. Again in each case the creature had human hands and arms,
and the descriptions of its appearance were written not by the chief witnesses
but by local persons of importance. May it not be that the Linney Head story is
a distorted version, told long afterward, of the Pendine event and that this
may have arisen from an exaggerated and imaginative account of a very large
seal?

A most strange and true report of a monsterous Fish, who appeared in the form
of a Woman, from her waste upwards.

depiction of a mermaid

Imprinted at London for W.B.

A most strange and true report of a monsterous Fish, that appeared in the
form of a Woman, from her wast vpwardes: Seen in the Sea by diverse men of
good reputation, on the 17. of February last past 1603* near Gylmanes point,
in the parish of Pendine in the County of Carmarthen.
To his loving Kinsman and Friend M. H. P. at his lodging in London, these. etc.
MY most loving Coosen,
like the touch of the purest Arabian Gold, have I ever found your Love, which
so often having approved, in all true frindship has obliged me by all bonds
of gentillitie and honesty unto you (especially) for your kindly and paineful
participating from time to time, all those honorable services done his most
excellent Majesty, from place to place (in your Letters) so largely describing
his royalty, and the subjects duty: with the cheering whereof, our hearts
were no less replenished with all comfort and true affection of loyalty, then
you, the most happy beholders thereof: with remembrance of those happy
tidings, such a simphanie of true zeal and duty comoyning, as brought more
comfort to our grieved hearts, which care had over charged with imaginations,
That the care of the one, was expeld by the joy of the others: and our decayed
sprightes revived, as Aqua Celestis the body, resigning his latest gasp to his
maker.

For these, and millions of other your kind favors (my good Coosen) set me
lade you with thanks, and so many wishes of happiness and prosperity from all
your Friends, in the Western Mountains of Wales, as we desire: then should
you not need (in ought that should either conserne the worlds felicity, or
heavens biessednesse) but all in all should concur to make you happy, both
with God and men? The time is short of my Messengers stay: his haste on his
journey requiring haste, yet could I not omit this opportunity, to gratify your
London News of joy, with a most rare and strange matter here in our confines,
not long fithence happening.

Strange things many have published, as monsteerous Birthes, strange Beasts,
taking of Whales and other strange Fishes* fiery Dragons, and strange sightes
in the Air, some by nature, (others, as tokens of Gods powerful Majesty) all
great and admyrable for men to wonder at, and exalt his glory, to the abating
of men's pride, and for warning or us that our sinful lives may be amended,
that true repentance may follow, and pride* whoredom, bryberie, extortion,
covetousness, letcherie, and such like pernicious damnable vices, may be
utterly abolished: reta^ning in their place, the fear of Gods wrath for sin,
charitable love amongst men, and all other holy prescriptions from God, our
gracious Sovereign, and Preachers of his sacred word.

I am somewhat tedious, good Coosen: therefore I refer you to the true report
of this most admirable and strange news, which on my credit I write you: but
impart it with the best of our and your good friends, as follows. Viz.

ON Friday the xvij. day of February last past 1603. about three of the clock
in the after noone, one Thomas Raynold of Pendine, (a Village in the County of
Carmarden) a very honest and substanciall Yeoman, walking near the shores
side, not far from a high Land or Point in the same parish, called Hollogoho,
between Gylmanes Point and Tolwen, he saw swimming in the Sea (near the
Point) a most strange and wonderful thing: the greatness and rarenes whereof,
being of that form and length, albeit he was a man of good sense and spright,
having reason and judgment, more then many of no better education, drove him
so to admire there at, that he spent the better part of two hours viewing of
it, as it drove with the Tide toward the shore, between the two Points:
where he did discover it at his full pleasure in this form.

The shape of a very lively Woman, from her wast vpwardes, which was all above
the water: her color brown: a very large and fair Pair: over which (to his
seeming) was a thing like a Hood, about her neck in manner of a white Band, her
Breasts round and very white, with two fair hands, every thing formally as a
Woman.

Thomas Raynold having with great wonder noted all this, near two hours
space, in good fight, and took good notise thereof, imagining what might be
thought, of unbelieving people, if he should report it, having no body to
justify his words, although he be a man of credit: yet leaving it for a
time, as waighing his reputation, speedeth him in all haste to the Town,
where, so many of his honest neighbors and coosens as he could suddenly
find, he caused to go with him to the Point, where he left it, to witness
what he had seen: who likewise had good view thereof half an hour and more,
never changing any shape, but as Raynold had seen it. A most dreadful wonder
to many of those beholders, which diversely censured thereof: some being
afraid, least it might be otherwise then it showed: Standing thus amazed at
the sight, with turning of the Tide, it made way from the place where they saw
it swimming: then in swimming, (which was more admirable) it appeared in
color gray, with ears like a Hound, but somewhat greater and shorter: her
back like unto a Cock-boate, a full yard or more in breadth: her tail to
their seeming, two fothomes in length: in her swimming she went Soth-east to
the Sea: Then came she North-east to Tolwen, where she continued until
night: at which time, the darkness of the night approaching, the beholders
lost her sight, and from that time, was never seen more, or heard of as yet,
about all the coast. Three hours full or more, they had perfect sight of her,
as I have written.

The people, as a wonder, filled the parish with the rumor of this strange
sight, and far and near went the report. Amongst many others which came, and
sent to Pendine, to hear the certain news hereof, one M. William Sandars, of
the same Parish, having been for his Majesty's business at Garmarthen that day,
at his home coming hearing a rumor hereof by his servants, and knowing well
Thomas Raynold to be a man of good name amongst them, desirous to be resolved
of the truth hereof, on the morrow following sent for him, and examined him of
every part and particularitie hereof, as you have heard, who confirmed the same
unto him: and for the better satisfaction of the said M. Sandars, Raynold sent
for all those, or the better sort, which were present with him, who confirmed
under their hands, what Raynold had spoken: whose names I likewise send you,
as they were subscribed. Viz.

The Examiner M. William Sandars of Penden. Examinates. Thomas Raynold. William
Raynold. John Raynold the elder. John Raynold the younger. David Moris Smith.
Morish Webb. Harry Mores of Morras. Alice Row. Ioane Mories. Anne Mories.
Elinor Bullock. Kath^rine Griphine. Philip Day.

With many others, both of Penden and other places.

What this wonder may pretend, to his Majesty that made us all, it is best
known: but with us, greatly admired. Accept this (good Coosen) which am at
your service, and let us all, as our bounden duty, beseech God all powerful,
and full of might, to bless and preserve our royal and most gracious king,
the Queen, and all their Princely progeny: strengthen our taythes, and
continue our peace, to his eternal glory, and our comfortes in Jesus Christ.

Your Coosen, and ever devoted Friend: P. G.

FINIS.

