A new balade entitled as follows.
To such as write in Metres, I write
Of small matters an exhortation,
By readyng of which, men may delight
In such as be worthy commendation.
My verse also it has relation
To such as print, that they do it well,
The better they shall their Metres sell.
And when we have done all that ever we can,
Let us never seek praise at the mouth of man.
HORACE, that noble Poet did write
In his learned book, the art of Poetry
Notable things, of which to resite
One is now to be noted specially
In these our days, and wot ye why?
For some there be, take matters in hand
Chiefly in Meter, to show their fancy
As did in his days, a certain band.
Read in his books, and then understand,
They vexed his ears, they troubled his eyes
With Metres in number, compared to ye sand:
And lacked not such, as would to the skies
So praise their works (such was their guyse)
And also extol their Metres so
With words freuolous, and manifest lies,
That like unto them, there was no mo.
But what says HORACE, before we go
Any further herein? because they did use
To procure friends, lest that their fo
Should paint them out, and so accuse
Their doings in verse, and their abuse
Which men to praise them, were not so pressed
As Horace again would still refuse
To admit that number in to his breast.
Such could not dwell in his study or chest
LVCILIVS, with other in Horace days
Was one which he could not digest
His verse in words, or sense always
For the most part deserved small praise.
And why? because he had more respect
To covet the garland, of Laurel or Bays
For number rather, then verse select.
For when by writing men do detect
Their wisdom, or else their folly in deed
If it be foolish, they do correct
Or ought that can, and that with speed
As HORACE did: the unskillful breed
Of Poets that wrote in his time (I say)
The works of such, as ye may read,
Continue not long, but fall away.
Such spices and wares as come from the sea
They be good to use from town to town,
To the Peddler they be a right good stay
To put in his stuff, black white or brown,
Good for the Master, and good for ye Clown
To make (as ye know) the matter clean,
Good to took up, and good to cast down
When ye have done, ye know what I mean.
Your balades of love not worth a bean
A number there be, although not all,
Some be pithie, some weak, some lean
Some do run as round as a ball:
Some verses have such a pleasant fall
That pleasure it is for any man
Whether his knowledge be great or small
So that of a verse some skyll he can.
But some if ye take in hand to skan
They lack their grace, they lack good sense,
The Printer should therefore with his fan
Pourge chaff from corn, to avoid offense.
And not for lucre, under pretense
Of news, to print what comes to hand,
But that which is meet to bring in pence
Let him print, the matter well stand:
Our englysh men, some out of the land
A sort of Rebels sturdye and stout,
with our pope holy men, that overthwart band
At Louaine, with open sclander breath out.
What envy can do, to bring in doubt
The godly works well written of late
Of learned men, and now go about
To stir up against us war and debate.
Wherefore let us not open a gate,
Either the Printer, or they which write
To such as they be, knowing their state,
Their sclanderous pen does cruelly byte.
Let them not say that those which endyte
Lack knowledge in that, the pen does express,
Let them not say that a rauenyng Kyte
Is as good as a Lark, at a Printers mess.
But now lest ye think me to use excess
I will to an end my self prepare,
Wyshyng all them that will adresse
Their pen to Metres, let them not spare
To follow Chawcer, a man very rare,
Lidgate, Wager, Barclay and Bale:
With many other that excellent are,
In these our days, extant to sale.
Let writers not covet the bottom or dale
If they may come to the hill or brinke,
And when they have written their learned tale
The Printer must use good paper and ink.
Or else the reader may sometime shrink
When fault by ink or paper is seen,
And thus every day before we drink
Let us pray God to save our Queen. Amen.
FINIS.
by R. B.
Imprinted at S. Katherins beside the Tower of London, by Alexander Lacie.


