ARTICLES TO BE INQVIRED OF IN THE FIRST TRIENNIALL VISITATION OF THE MOST
REVEREND FATHER, WILLIAM, By GODS Providence, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England; and METROPOLITAN: In and for the Dioces of Canterbury,
In the year of our LORD GOD 1637, And in the fourth year of his Graces
Translation.

printer's or publisher's device EX IGNE RESVRGIT VIRTUES


Printed at London, by Richard Badger.

The Tenor of the Oath, to be Ministered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear, that you, and every of you, shall duly consider and
diligently enquire, of all and every of these Articles given you in charge; and
that all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward and gain, or fear of
displeasure, or malice set aside; you shall present all and every such person,
that now is, or of late was within your Parish, as has committed any offense,
or made any default mentioned in these, or any of these Articles; or which are
vehemently suspected or defamed of any such offense or default: wherein you
shall deal uprightly and fully; neither presenting, nor sparing to present
any, contrary to truth: having in this action God before your eyes, with an
earnest zeal to maintain truth, and to suppress vice* So help you God, and
the holy Contents of this Book

Concerning the Church, the Ornaments thereof, and the Churches possessions.
IMprimis, Whether have you in your several Churches, and Chapels the whole
Bible of the largest volume, and the Book of Common Prayer^ both fairly and
substantially bound: A Font of stone set up in the anc^ent usual place: A
convenient and decent Communion Table, with a Carpet of silk, or some other
decent stuff, continually laid upon the same at time of Divine Service, and a
fair linen cloth thereon, at the time of the receiving of the holy Communion.
And whether is the same Table placed in such convenient sort within the
Chancell or Church, as that the Minister may be be^^ heard in his Prayer and
Administration, and that the greatest number may communicate. And whether is it
so used out of time of divine service, as is not agreeable to the holy use of
it; as by sitting on it, throwing hats on it, writing on it, or is it abused to
other prophaner uses: and are the ten Commandments set upon the East end of
your Church or Chapel, where the people may best see and read them, and
other sentences of holy Scripture, written on the walls likewise for that
purpose?

2 Whether are the afternoon Sermons, in your sever all Parishes, turned into
Catechizing by question and answer; according to the form prescribed in the
Book of Common Prayer? And whether does every Lecturer read divine Service,
according to the Liturgy printed by authority, in his Surplice and Hood,
before the Lecture? And whether are his Majesty's Instructions in all things
duly observed?

3 Whether have you in your said Church or Chapel, a convenient seat for your
Minister to read Service in, together with a comely Pulpit set up in a
convenient place, with a decent cloth or cushion for the same, a comely large
Surplice, a fair Communion Cup, with a cover of silver, a Flagon of silver,
tin, or pewter, to ^ut the Wine in, whereby it may be set upon the Communion
Table, at the time of the blessing thereof, with all other things and ornaments
necessary for the celebration of divine Service, and administration of the
Sacraments? And whether have you a strong Chest for Alms for the poor, with
three locks and keys, and another Chest for keeping the Books, and Ornaments
of the Church, and the Register Book? And whether have you a Register Book in
Parchment, for Christnings, Weddings, and Burials, and whether the same be kept
in all points, according to the Canons in that behalf provided? And is the
Mothers Christian name therein Registered as well as the Fathers, and a
transcript thereof brought in yearly within one Month after the 25 of March
into the Lord Archbishop or Bishop of the Diocese his principal Register? And
whether have you in your said Church or Chapel, a Table set, of the degrees
wherein by law men are prohibited to marry?

4 Whether are your Church and Chapels, with the Chancels thereof, and your
parsonage or vicarage house, your parish Almes-house and Church-house, in good
reparations: and are they employed to godly, and their right holy uses? Is your
Church, Chancell, and Chapel decently and comely kept, as well within as
without, and the seats well maintained, according to the 85. Canon, in that
behalf provided? Or have any patrons or others decayed the Parsonage-houses,
and keep a stipendary Priest or Cu^^te, in place where an incumbent should be
possessed? Whether is your Churchyard ^ell fenced with walls, railes, or pales,
and by whom: and if not, in whose default the ^^me is, and what the defect or
fault is? And whether any person have incroached upon ^he ground of the
Churchyard, or whether any person or persons, have used any thing ^r place
consecrated to holy use, profanely or wickedly?

5 Is your Church or Chapel decently paued, and is your Churchyard well and
or^erly kept without abuse? Are the bones of the dead decently interred, or
laid up in ^^me fit place as be seems Christians? And is the whole
consecrated ground kept free from Swine and all other nastinesse, as becomes
the place so dedicated?

6 Whether have any ancient Monuments or Glasse-windowes been defaced, or any
^rasse Inscriptions, Lead, Stones, or any thing else belonging to your Church
or Chapel, been at any time purloined, and by whom?

7 Whether have you the Terrier of all the Glebe lands, Meadows, Gardens,
Or^hards, Houses, Stocks, Implements, Tenements, and portions of Tithes
(whether within your parish or without) belonging unto your Parsonage or
Vicarage, taken by ^he view of honest men in your said parish? And whether the
same Terrier be laid up ^n the Bishops Registry, and in whose hands any of them
are now? And if you have no Terrier already made in Parchment, you the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, together with your Parson or Vicar, or in his
absence with your Minister, are to make diligent inquiry and presentment of the
several particulars following, and make, subscribe, and sign the said
Terrier, as aforesaid?

1 How many several parcels of Glebe-land, do you know, or have you credibly
heard to belong unto your Rectory, Church, Parsonage, Vicaridge, etc. and by
what Names are they (or any of them) commonly called and known; and what
yearly rent have you known or heard to have been paid, unto the Parson,
Vicar, or to his or their Assigns, for every, or any of the said parcels?

2 In whose occupation are the said parcels at this present? How much does each
parcel contain by measure of the 16 foot Poale? How is each parcel Butted,
on every part? And who is to repair the fences on each side thereof?

3 What hedge, ditch, mere, tree, thorn, doole, or distinction, is there now,
at this present, whereby the said parcels of Church Lands may be apparently
known and distinguished, from the lands of other men, upon whom they do abutt?

4 What Cart-way, Horse-way, Foot-way, Gates or Styles do lead from your
Parsonage or Vicarage-house, unto every of the said parcels of Glebe land?
Declare your knowledge therein.

5 Whether do you know, or have you credibly heard, that some styles, gates,
hedges, ditch, mere, tree, thorn, or other doole (formerly growing or being,
between the said parcels of Gleabe (or some of them, and the Lands of other
men) have been dug up, felled down, destroyed, put by or defaced? And who
had the said parcel (so wronged) in occupation, when the said style, gate,
hedge, ditch, mere, tree, thorn, or other ancient doole, was so dug up,
felled down, destroyed, put by or defaced?

Concerning the Clergy.
1 WHether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, distinctly and reverently say
Divine Service upon Sundays and Holidays, and other days appointed to be
observed by the Book of Common Prayer; as Wednesdayes, and Fridayes, and the
Eues of every Sunday and Holyday, at fit and usual times? And does he duly
observe the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies, prescribed in the said book of
Common Prayer, as well in reading public prayers and the Letany, as also in
administering the Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimony, visiting the sick,
burying the dead, Chur^ing of Women, and all other like Rites and Offices of
the Church, in such manner a^ form as in the said book of Common Prayer he is
enjoined, without any omission addition. And does he read the Book of the
last Canons yearly, and wear a Surpl^ according to the said Canons?

2 Whether have you any Lecturer in your parish, who has preached in his Cloa^
and not in his Gown, and whether have you any Lecturer who will not profess
h^ willingness and readiness to take upon him a Living or Benefice, with cure
of soul^ or who has refused a Benefice when it has been offered unto him?

3 Does your Minister bid Holy Days and Fasting-dayes, as by the Book of
Common Prayer is appointed? And does he give warning beforehand to the
parishioner^ for the receiving of the holy Communion, as the two and twentieth
Canon requiret^ and whether he does administer the holy Communion so often, and
at such times, that every parishioner may receive the same, at the least thrice
in every year; where once at Easter, as by the Book of Common prayer is
appointed? And does your A^nister receive the same himself, on every day that
he administreth it to others, a^^ use the words of institution according to the
Book, at every time that the Bread a^^ Wine is renewed, accordingly as by the
prouiso of the 21. Canon is directed: A^^ does he deliver the Bread and Wine to
every Communicant severally, and kneeling Whether he has admitted to the holy
Communion, any notorious Offender or Sch^maticke, contrary to the 26. and 27.
constitutions, or received any to the Communion being not of his own Cure, or
put any from the Communion, who are not public^ly infamous for any notorious
crime? Does he use the sign of the Cross in Ba^tisme, or baptize in any
Basin, or other Vessel, and not in the usual Font; or a^mit any Father to be
Godfather to his own child, or such who have not received (...) holy
Communion, or baptize any children that were not borne in the parish, or
willfu^ refuse to baptize any infant in his parish, being in danger, having
been informed (...) she weakness of the said child; and whether the child
dies through his default wi^^out baptism?

4 Whether has your Minister married any without a King, or without Banes
p^^lished threee several Sundays or Holidayes in time of divine Service, in
the seuer^ Churches or Chapels of their several abode, according to the Book
of Common pra^er, or in times prohibited, albeit the Banes were thrice
published, without a License dispensation from the Archbishop, the Bishop of
the Diocese, or his Chancellor, fi^ obtained in that behalf? Or not betwixt
the hours of eight and twelve in the for noone, or have married any in any
private house, or if the parties be under the age 21 years, before their
parents and governors have signified their consent unto hi^

5 Does he refuse to bury any, which ought to be interred in Christian burial,
or ^fer the same longer than he should, or bury any in Christian burial, which
by the con^tutions of the Church of England, or Laws of the Land, ought not to
be so interr^

6 Is your Minister a Preacher allowed, if yea, then by whom? If not, whether
do^ he procure some who are lawfully licensed, to preach monthly amongst you at
the lea^^

7 Does your Minister (being licensed,) preach usually according to the Cano^
either in his own Cure, or in some other Church or Chapel near adjoining,
wh^ no other Preacher is, and how often he has been negligent in that
behalf, and does preach standing, and with his hat off? Or whether does he or
his Curate upon eue^^ Sunday, when there is no Sermon, read an Homily, or some
part thereof, accordi^^ as he ought to do; or in case he be not licensed to
preach, does he take upon him Preach or expound the Scriptures in his own
Cure, or elsewhere? If so, then you (...) (...) present the same, the time and
place, when, and where he did it?

^ Does your Minister use to pray for the Kings Majesty, King Charles, and for
the ^aeenes Majesty, Prince Charles, and all the royal Progeny, with addition
of such ^le and Titles as are due to his Highness, and exhort the people to
obedience to his ^aiesty, and all Magistrates in authority under him: And does
he also pray for all ^^ch-bishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical persons?

9 Is your Minister continually resident upon his Benefice, and how long time
has bin absent, and in case he be licensed to be absent, whether does he cause
his Cure to (...) sufficiently supplied, according to the Canons? Or in case he
has another Benefice, ^^ether does he supply his absence by a Curate
sufficiently licensed to preach in that ^ure where he himself is not resident?
Or otherwise, in case the smalnesse of the li^ng cannot find a preaching
Minister, does he preach at both his Benefices usually?

10 Does your Minister or Curate, serve any more Cures than one: If yea, then
what ^her Cure does he serve, and how far are they distant?

11 Does your Minister or Curate every Sunday and Holyday, before Evening
^^ayer, for half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant
persons (...) his Parish, in the ten Commandments, Articles of the Belief,
and in the Lords ^rayer, and the Sacraments, according as it is prescribed in
the Catechism, set ^^th in the book of Common Prayer only? And if he do not,
where is the fault, either (...) the Parents and Masters of the children, or in
the Curate neglecting his duty? And (...) he careful to tender all such youth
of his parish as have been well instructed in their ^atechisme, to be
confirmed by the Bishop in his Visitation, or any other convenient ^ne, as is
appointed by the book aforesaid.

12 Does your Minister in the Rogation days, go in perambulation of the
circuit of ^^^e parish, saying, and using the prayers, Suffrages, and
Thanksgiving to God, ap^^inted by Law, according to his duty, thanking GOD for
his blessings, if there plenty on the earth: Or otherwise, to pray for his
grace and favor, if there be a fear scarcity?

13 Has your Minister admitted any Woman begotten with child, in adultery or
^^nication, to be churched without license of the Ordinary?

14 Has your Minister, or any other Preacher, baptized children, churched any
wo^^n, or ministered the holy Communion in any private house, otherwise than by
law is ^^^owed?

^5 Does your Minister endeavor and labor diligently to reclaim the popish
Recu^nts in his parish from their errors (if there be any such abiding in your
parish.) Or ^^ether is your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, ouerconuersant with, or a
favorer of Recu^nts, whereby he is suspected not to be sincere in Religion?

16 Has your Minister taken upon him, to appoint any public or private Fasts,
^ophesies, or Exercises, not approved by Law, or public authority, or has
used to ^et in any private house or place, with any person or persons, there to
consult how to ^peach or deprave the Book of Common Prayer, or the doctrine or
discipline of the ^^urch of England: If yea, then you shall present them all?

17 Has your Minister stayed the publication of any excommunications or
suspenti^s, or does he every half year deuounce in his parish Church, all
such of his Parish (...) are excommunicated, and persevere therein without
seeking to be absolved, or does he ^^ttingly and willingly keep company with
such as are excommunicate: And has he ^mitted into your Church any person
excommunicate, without a certificate of his ab^ution from the Ordinary, or
other competent Judge?

18 Does your Minister carefully look to the relief of the poor, and from
time to time call upon his parishioners to give somewhat, as they can spare to
godly and charitable uses, especially when they make their Testaments.

19 Whether your Minister or any, having taken holy Orders, being now silenced
or suspended, or any other person of your knowledge, or as you have heard, hold
any conuenticles, or does preach in any place, or use any other form of divine
Service than is appointed in the Book of Common prayer: If yea, then you are
to present their names, and with whom?

20 Whether is your Curate licensed to serve, by the Bishop of this Dioces, or
by any other, and by whom?

21 Does your Minister use such decency and comeliness in his apparel, as by
the 47. Canon is enjoined: is he of sober behavior, and one that does not use
such bodily labor, as is not seemly for his function and calling?

22 Is your Minister noted or defamed, to have obtained his Benefice or his
orders, by Symonie, or any other way defamed, to be a Symoniacall person, or
any way noted to be a Schismaticke, or schismatically affected, or reputed to
be an incontinent person, or does table or lodge any such in his house: or is
he a frequenter of Tauernes, Innes, or Alehouses, or any place suspected for
ill rule: Or is he a common Drunkard, a common Gamester, or player at Dice, a
Swearer, or one that applies himself not at his study, or is otherwise
offensive and scandalous to his function or Ministry?

23 Does your Preacher or Lecturer read Divine Service, before his Sermon or
Lecture, and Minister the Sacraments twice a year, at least, in his own
person, according to the Canons?

24 When any person has been dangerously sick in your Parish, has he
neglected to visit him, and when any have been parting out of this life, has
he omitted to do his last duty in that behalf?

25 Does your Minister, Curate, or Lecturer, in his or their Sermons deliver
such doctrine as tends to obedience and the edifying of their auditory in faith
and religion, without intermedling with matters of State, not fit to be handled
in the pulpit, but to be discussed by the wisdom of his Majesty and his
Council. And if you find any faulty herein, you shall present them?

Schoolmasters.
1 Does any in your Parish openly or privately take upon him to teach School,
without license of the Ordinary, and is be conformeable to the Religion now
established? And does he bring his Scholars to the Church, to hear divine
Service and Sermons? And does he instruct his Scholars in the grounds of the
Religion now established in this Church of England, and is he careful and
diligent to benefit his scholars in learning?

2 Does your Schoolmasters teach and instruct his youth in any other
Catechism than is allowed by public authority? And what Catechism it is that
he so teaches?

3 Is any Living or means given toward the erection or maintenance of any
School withheld back or otherwise impolyed, and by whom?

4 Does any keep school in the Chancell or Church, by which means, that holy
place, and the Communion Table are many ways profaned, and the windows broken?

Parish Clarke and Sextons.
1 Have you a fit Parish Clarke, aged twenty years at least, of honest
conversation, able to read and write? Whether are his and the Sextons wages
paid without fraud, according to the ancient custom of your parish: if not,
then by whom are they so defrauded or denied? by whom are they chosen? and
whether the said Clarke be approved by the Ordinary? And has he taken an Oath,
as in such cases is fit and required: and is he diligent in his Office, and
serviceable to the Minister, and does he take upon him to meddle with any thing
above his Office: as Churching of Women, burying the dead, or such like?

2 Does your Clarke or Sexton keep the Church clean, the doors locked at fit
times? is any thing lost or spoiled in the Church, through his default? Are the
Communion Table, Font, Books, and other Ornaments of the Church kept fair and
clean? Does he suffer any unseasonable ringing, or any profane exercise in
your Church? Or does he (when any is passing out of this life) neglect to toll
a bell, having notice thereof?

Concerning the Parishioners.
1 WHether any of your Parishioners, being sixteen years of age or upwards,
or others lodging or commonly resorting to any house within your Parish, do
wilfully absent themselves from your parish Church upon Sundays and Holidays
at Morning and Evening prayers? Or who come late to Church, and depart from
Church before service be done upon the said days? Or who do not reverently
behave themselves during the time of Divine Service, devoutly kneeling, when
the general confession of sins, the Letany, the ten Commandments, and all
Prayers and Collects are read, and using all due and lowly reverence, when the
blessed name of the Lord Jesus Christ is mentioned, and standing up when the
Articles of the Belief are read; or who do cover their heads in the Church
during the time of Divine Service, unless it be in case of necessity, in which
case they may wear a Night cap or Coife? Or who do give themselves to babbling,
talking, or walking, and are not attentive to hear the Word preached, or read?
Whether any of your parish, being of sixteen years of age or upwards, do not
receive the holy Communion in your Church thrice every year: whereof once at
Easter, and whether they do not devoutly kneel at the receiving thereof? And
whether any having diverse houses of remove, do shift from place to place of
purpose to defeat the performance of their Christian duties in that behalf?

2 Whether any of your parishioners, being admonished thereof, do not send
their children, servants, and apprentices, to the Minister, to be catechized
upon such Sundays and Holidays as are appointed? Or whether any of them do
refuse to come; or if they come, refuse to learn those instructions set forth
in the Book of Common Prayer?

3 Whether any of your Parish do entertain within their house, any soiourner,
common guests, or other persons, who refuse to frequent Divine Service, or
receive the holy Communion, as aforesaid? present their names, their qualities
or conditions.

4 What Recusant Papists are there in your Parish, or other Sectaries? present
their names, qualities, or conditions? whether they keep any Schoolmasters in
their house, which comes not to Church to hear divine Service, and receive
the Communion? What is his name, and how long has he taught there, or
elsewhere?

5 Whether any of the said popish Recusants, or other Schismatics, do labor
to seduce and withdraw others from the Religion now established? Or instruct
their families or children in popish religion: or refuse to entertain any,
especially in place of greatest service, or trust, but such as concur with
them in their opinions?

6 How long have the said popish Recusants abstained from divine Service, or
from the Communion, as aforesaid?

7 Is there any in your parish that retain, sell, utter, or disperse, any
popish books, or Writings, or other Books, Libraries, or writings of any
Sectaries, touching the Religion, State, and Government Ecclesiastical of
this Kingdom of England, or keep any Monuments of Superstition uncancelled or
defaced?

8 Whether have you any in your Parish, which heretofore being popish Recusants
or Sectaries, have since reformed themselves, and come to Church to hear
divine Service, and receive the Sacraments: if yea, then who are they? And how
long since hau^ they so reformed themselves? And whether they still remain and
abide in that conformity.

9 Is there any in your parish that refuse to have their children baptized, or
themselves to receive the Communion at the hands of your Minister, taking
exception against him, and what causes or exceptions do they allege; or have
any married wives refused to come to Church, according to the Book of Common
Prayer, to give God thanks after their childe-birth, for their safe
deliverance? And whether do any of, or in your Parish, refuse to have their
children baptized in your Parish Church, according to the form prescribed in
the Book of Common Prayer?

10 Do any of your Parish usually go to other Parish Churches to hear Divine
Service or Sermons? Or do they communicate, or baptize their children in any
other Parish?

11 Whether there be any in your Parish who will come to hear the Sermon, but
will not come to public prayers appointed by the Book of Common Prayer,
making a schism or division (as it were) between the use of public prayer
and preaching?

12 What persons within your parish, for any offense, contumacy, or crime, of
Ecclesiastical Conusance do stand excommunicate? present their names, and for
what cause they are excommunicated, and how long have they so stood, and what
person or persons do wittingly and usually keep them company?

13 Whether any not being in Orders, do execute any Priestly or Ministerial
Office, in your Church, Chapel, or Churchyard, and what be their names?

14 Whether any in your parish, that having heretofore taken upon him the order
of Priest hood or Deacon, has since relinquished the same, and lives as a
Layman neglecting his vocation?

15 Has any person in your Parish quarrelled, or stricken, or used any
violence to your Minister, or have stricken or quarrelled with any other person
within your Church or Churchyard, or demeaned himself disorderly in the
Church, by filthy or profane talk, or any other base or immodest behavior?
Or has disturbed the Minister in time of Divine Service or Sermon, or has
libelled or spoken slanderous words against your Minister, to the scandal of
his vocation, or defamed any of his Neighbors, touching any crime of
Ecclesiastical Conusance?

16 Whether any of, or in your Parish, without consent of the Ordinary, or
other lawful authority, have caused any to do penance, or to be censured or
punished for any matter of Ecclesiastical Conusance, by any Vestry-meetings,
or otherwise by their own authority? Or have taken any money or commutation for
the same? Present their names that have done it: And who have been so
punished? In what manner, and upon what cause?

17 Whether any person in your Parish, do exercise any Trade or labor, buy or
sell, or keep open Shops, or Warehouses upon any Sunday or Holiday by
themselves, their Servants, or Apprentices, or have otherwise profaned the
said days, contrary to the orders of the Church of England? And whether there
be any Inne-keepers, Ale-house-keepers, Victuallers or other persons, that
permit any persons in their houses, to eat, drink, or play, during the time of
Divine Service or Sermon, or reading the Homilies, in the forenoone or
afternoon, upon those days?

18 Whether the fifth day of November be kept holy, and thanksgiving made to
God, for his Majesty's and this States happy deliverance, according to the
ordinance in that behalf?

19 Whether any of your Parish hold or frequent any conuenticles or private
Congregations, or make or maintain any constitutions, agreed upon in any such
assemblies? Or any that do write, or publicly or privately speak against the
Book of Common prayer, or any thing therein contained, or against any of the
Articles of Religion agreed upon, in Anno 1562. or against the Kings Supremacy,
in causes Ecclesiastical, or against the Oath of Supremacy, or of Allegiance,
as pretending the same to be unlawful and not warrantable by the Word of God?
Or against any of the Rites or Ceremonies of the Church of England, now
established? Or against the Government of the Church of England under the Kings
most excellent Majesty, by Archbishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and other
Officers of the same: affirming, that the same is repugnant to the Word of God,
and that the said Ecclesiastical Officers, are not lawfully ordained? Or
whether there be any Authors, Maintainers or favorers of Heresy or Schism,
or that be suspected to be Anabaptists, Libertines, Brownists, of the Family of
Love, or of any other heresy or schism? present their names?

20 Whether any in your Parish have married within the degrees by Law
prohibited, and where, and by whom? And whether any couple in your parish being
lawfully married, live apart one from the other, without due separation by the
law, or any that have been divorced, which keep company with any other at bed
or at board?

21 Whether do any persons administer the goods of the dead without lawful
authority, or suppress the last will of the dead? Or are there in your parish
any wills not yet proved or goods of the dead (dying intestate) left
vnadministred? By authority in that behalf you shall not fail to present the
Executors and all others faulty therein: and also how many persons being
possessed of any goods and chattels, have died within your Parish, since the x.
day of February? 163^.

22 Whether any withold the Stock of the Church, or any goods, or other
things, given to good and charitable uses?

23 Whether your Hospitals and Almes-houses, and other such houses and
corporations, founded to good and charitable uses, and the lands, possessions,
and goods of the same, be ordered and disposed of as they should be? And do
the Masters, Gouerners, Fellows, and others of the said Houses and
Corporations, behave and demean themselves according to the godly ordinances
and statutes of their several Foundations?

24 Whether have you any in your Parish to your knowledge or by common fame or
report, which have committed adultery, fornication, or Incest: or any which
have impudently bragged or boasted, that he or they have lived incontinently
with any person or persons whatsoever: or any that have attempted the chastity
of any Woman, or solicited any Woman to have the carnal knowledge of her body,
or which are commonly reputed to be common Drunkards, Blasphemers of Gods holy
Name; common Swearers, common Slanderers of their neighbors, and sowers of
discord, filthy and lascivious Talkers, Usurers, Symoniacall persons, Bawdes,
or harbourers of Women with-childe, which be unmarried, or conueying or
suffering them to go away before they have made satisfaction to the Church, or
any that having heretofore been presented, or suspected of any the aforesaid
crimes, have for that cause departed your Parish, and are now returned again?
Or any which have used any enchantments, sorceries, incantations, or
witchcrafts, which are not made felony by the Statutes of this Realm, or any
which have committed any perjury in any Ecclesiastical Court, in an
Ecclesiastical cause, or which have committed any forgerie, punishable by the
Ecclesiastical Laws, and the procurors and abettors of the said offenses: you
shall truly present the names of all, and singular the said offenders, and with
whom they have committed the said offenses, in case they have not been
publicly punished to your knowledge for the same crimes?

Physicians, Chirurgions, and Midwives.
25 HOw many Physicians, Chirurgions, or Mid-wiues, have you in your Parish?
How long have they used their several Sciences or Offices, and by what
authority? And how have they demeaned themselves therein, and of what skill are
they accounted to be in their profession?

Touching the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1 WHether you and the Churchwardens, Quest-men, or Sidemen, from time to
time, do, and have done their diligence, in not suffering any idle person to
abide either in the Churchyard or Church Porch, in Service or Sermon time, but
causing them either to come into the Church to hear divine Service, or to
depart, and not disturb such as be hearers there? And whether they have, and
you do diligently see the parishioners duly resort to the Church every Sunday
and Holiday and there to remain during divine Service and Sermon? And whether
you or your predecessors, Churchwardens there, suffer any plays, Feasts,
drinkings, or any other profane vsages, to be kept in your Church, Chapel,
or Churchyards, or have suffered to your and their uttermost power and
endeavor, any person or persons to be tippling or drinking in any Inn or
Victualling house in your parish, during the time of divine Service or Sermon,
on Sundays and Holidayes?

2 Whether, and how often have you admitted any to preach within your Church or
Chapel, which was not sufficiently licensed? And whether you together with
your Minister, have not taken diligent heed and care, that every parishioner
being of sixteen years of age or upwards, have received thrice every year,
as aforesaid: and also that no stranger have usually come to your Church, from
their own parish Church?

3 Whether have there been provided against every Communion, a sufficient
quantity of fine white bread, and good and wholesome wine for the communicants
that shall receive? And whether that wine be brought in a clean and sweet
standing-pot of pewter, or other purer metal?

4 Whether were you chosen by the consent of the Minister and the Parishioners?
And have the late Churchwardens given up a just account for their time, and
deliuere^ to their successors by Bill indented the money, and other things
belonging to the Church which was in their hands? And are the Alms of the
Church faithfully distributed to the use of the poor?

5 Whether do you see the names of all Preachers which are strangers and
preach in your parish Churches, to be noted in a Book for that purpose, and
whether every Preacher do subscribe his name, and of whom he had his License?

6 Whether any do trouble or molest you for doing your duties?

7 Whether there be any Legacies withheld given to the Church or poor
people, or to the mending of Highwayes, or otherwise by the Testators? In whose
hands it is, by whom it was given, and by whom it is withheld?

8 Do you know of any thing that has been complained of, that is not yet
redressed?

Concerning Ecclesiastical Magistrates and Officers.
1 Whether do you know or have heard of any payment, composition or agreement,
to, or with any Ecclesiastical Magistrate, Judge, or Officer, for winking at
or sparing to punish any person for any offense of Ecclesiastical Conusance,
or for suppressing or concealing of any excommunication, or any other
Ecclesiastical Censure, of or against any Recusant, or any other offender in
the cases aforesaid? What sum of money, or other consideration has been
received or promised, by, or to any of them in that respect, by whom, and with
whom?

2 Has any person within your parish, paid, or promised any sum of money or
other reward, for commutation of penance, for any crime of Ecclesiastical
Conusance? If so, then with whom? When, and for what, and how has the same
been employed?

3 Are your Ecclesiastical Judges and their substitutes Masters of Arts, or
Batchellors of the Laws at the least, learned and practiced in the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Laws: Men of good life and fame, zealously affected in
Religion, and just and upright in executing their Offices? Have they heard any
matter of Office privately in their Chambers, without their sworn Registers,
or their Deputies presence?

4 Do you know, or have you heard, that any Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or
Minister, has received or taken any extraordinary fees, or other rewards or
promises, by any ways or means, directly or indirectly, of any person or
persons whatsoever, either for the granting of the administration of the goods
and chattels of those that have died intestate, to one before another, or for
allotting of larger portions of the goods and chattels of those that have died
intestate, to one more than to another: or for allowing larger and unreasonable
accounts, made by Executors or Administrators: or for giving them Quietus est,
or discharges, without Inuentory or account, to defraud Creditors, Legataries,
or those who are to have portions. And what sums of money do you know, or
have you heard, that any Ecclesiastical Judge or Officer has taken out of the
state of any dying intestate, upon pretense to bestow the same in pios usus:
and how have the same been bestowed?

5 Has any Ecclesiastical Magistrate, Judge, Officer, or any other exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this your Dioces: Or any Advocate,
Register, Procter, Clerks, Apparitors, or other Minister belonging to the same
Ecclesiastical Courts, exacted or taken by any ways or means, directly or
indirectly, extraordinary or greater Fees than are due and accustomed? And
whether is there a Table for the rates of al Fees, set up in their several
Courts and Offices? And whether they have sent or suffered any Process to go
out of the Ecclesiastical Courts otherwise than by law they ought? Or have
they taken upon them the Offices of Informers or Promoters to the said Courts,
or any other way abused themselves in their Offices, contrary to the Law and
Canons in that behalf provided?

6 What number of Apparators have every several Judge Ecclesiastical? And
wherein, and in what manner is the Country ouerburthened by them? And wherein
have they caused or summoned any to appear in the said Courts, without a
presentment or citation first had? Or whether have they threatened any to
prosecute them in the said Courts if they would not give them some rewards, and
what bribes in that behalf have they taken?

7 What reward or fees has any of the Apparators taken, to save the iourneyes
to ye Ecclesiastical Court of any persons, and what (after composition so
made) have they or any of them taken and received, and what acquittance or
discharge have they given or promised them, and whether have they not cited
some to appear before the Archdeacon, or his Official, after they have been
ordered by the Commissary, and done their penance accordingly, and whom have
they so cited and troubled, and what has it cost them, as you know or have
heard, or by inquiry can find.

If you know of any other default or crime of Ecclesiastical Conusance, you
are to present the same by virtue of your Oaths?

The Minister of every Parish, may and ought to join in presentment with the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, and if they will not present, the Minister may and
ought himself to present the defaults and crimes aforesaid: and there must be
several presentiments made to every several Article: and the Minister,
Churchwardens, and Sworne-men, are to meet and confer about the said
presentiments, and answering of every of the aforesaid Articles?

FINIS.

