ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF WITHIN THE Dioces of LONDON, IN THE SECOND
TRIENNIALL Visitation of the Right Honorable, and Right Reverend Father in God
WILLIAM Lord Bishop of London.

HOLDEN In the year of our Lord God, 1631.

Printed at LONDON. M. DC. XXXI.

The Oath to be ministered to the Churchwardens and Sworne-men.
YOu shall swear that you and every of you shall diligently enquire of the
Articles given you in charge; and without any affection, favor, hatred, hope
of reward and gain, or fear of displeasure, or malice of any person, you
shall present all and every such person and persons that now is, or of late was
within your Parish, as has committed any incest, adultery, fornication, or
symony, and any misdemeanour or disturbances committed or made in any Church or
Chapel, in time of Common Prayer, Preaching, or divine Service there used, to
the disturbance thereof: and also that have committed or done any other
offense, fault, or default, presentable in the Ecclesiastical Court, according
to the Articles now delivered to you. Wherein you shall deal uprightly and
according to truth, neither of malice presenting any contrary to truth, nor of
corrupt affection sparing to present any, and so conceal the truth: having in
this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain the truth,
and suppress vice. So help you God, and the Contents of this Book.

The charge of the Churchwardens and Sworne-men set down for the better
performance of their duties, and discharge of their Oaths.
THey are not to bring in any Bills unto the Archdeacons Courts upon the
Articles to be enquired of in their Visitation, by reason of my Lords
Visitation, but only now during the said Visitation, to make their
presentiments upon these Articles. They are therefore charged, that after their
Oath taken, and their return home, they do require their Minister to read
over both the book of Canons or Constitutions set forth by his Majesty, in the
Convocation holden in the year of our Lord God 1604. and also these Articles
unto them, and to consider of every particular Article, and of the offenses by
them to be presented, as also of such persons in their Parish as shall be noted
to offend in the same: and so the Churchwardens and Sidemen assembling
themselves together within some convenient time, are to make their Bill
answering every Article by it self, before the time hereafter appointed them,
which Bill shall be signed with the hands of all the Churchwardens and Sidemen,
with conference had with their Minister upon the said Bill of presentment, who
according to the 26. Canon, is to see that the said Churchwardens do their
duties, in presenting, upon the penalty in the 26. Canon prescribed. These
Bills for their better ease, and saving of travel and charges, shall be
brought by one of the Churchwardens upon the (...) day (...) next (...)

Articles to be enquired of within the Dioces of London, in the Visitation to
be holden in the year of our Lord 1631.
Concerning the Clergy.
INprimis, Whether does your Minister, before or after his Sermons, use to pray
for the Kings Majesty, King Charles, Queen Mary, Frederick the Prince Elector
Palatine, and the Lady Elizabeth his wife, and all their Princely Progeny,
giving unto the King such style and title of supreme Governor in all causes,
and over all persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, as by Law are due
unto him? And also for all Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical
persons?

2 Whether is the prescript form of Divine Service used by your Minister upon
Sundays, Holidayes, and other days appointed by the Book of Common Prayer,
at fit and usual hours? And whether does your Minister duly observe all the
Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies prescribed in the said Book of Common Prayer,
without omission or addition, as well in reading public prayers and the
Letany, as also in administering the Sacraments in such manner and form, as by
the Law now established is enjoined?

3 Whether does your Minister administer the holy Communion so often, and at
such times, as that every Parishioner may receive the same at least thrice in
every year, whereof once at Easter?

4 Whether does your Minister receive the same himself on every day that he
administreth it to others, kneeling at the same, and administreth it to none
but such as do kneel at the receiving thereof, and use the words of the
institution according to the Book, at every time that the Bread or Wine is
received, in such manner and form as by Law is appointed, and causes
sufficient warning thereof to be given before? And does he deliver the Bread
and Wine to every Communicant severally?

5 Whether does your Minister use the administration of the Lords Supper,
Baptism, Instruction of children, Solemnization of Matrimony, Visitation of
the sick, Burial of the dead, the Commination and Churching of women, under
such words, rites and ceremonies as are set forth and prescribed by the said
book of Common prayer and no other?

6 Whether has your Minister rejected any from the Communion, who were not by
public presentment, or other open scandal, infamous and detected of some
notorious crime by common fame, or vehement suspicion known in the Parish?

7 Whether has your Minister received people of other Parishes to his Church
to the Communion and divine service; And whether his Parishioners have gone to
other Churches and places to hear Service or receive the Sacrament? If yea,
then you shall present every offender herein.

8 Whether has your Minister, Churchwardens and Sidemen presented unto my Lord
Bishop or his Chancellor within forty days after Easter, the names of all the
Parishioners, as well men as women, which being above sixteen years of age
received not the Communion, at, or about Easter before, according to the 112.
Canon? If not, you shall present whether that presentment should have been
brought in by your selves, or your predecessors, and specify the names of
every one that should have made such presentment for Easter last past?

9 Whether does your Minister use to sign the children with the sign of the
Cross upon the childrens foreheads when they are baptized, according to the
book of Common prayer? And whether he has deferred or wilfully refused to
baptize any Infant in his Parish being in danger, having been duly informed
of the weakness thereof? And whether the child has dyed by his default
without baptism? And has he baptized any children that were not borne in the
Parish?

10 Whether is your Minister continually resident with you upon his Benefice,
or for how long time has he been absent? And where is he resident for the
most part, and what other Benefice has he? And does he in his absence make
allowance for the poor?

11 Whether does your Minister, being a Preacher, preach usually in his own
Cure with you once every Sunday, or how has he been negligent in that
behalf?

12 Whether is your Minister a Preacher allowed? If yea, then by whom? if no,
whether does he procure Sermons to be preached among you once in every month
at the least, by such as are lawfully licenced, or does contribute toward a
licenced Preacher?

13 Whether has your Minister any other Benefice? and whether does he supply
his absence by a Curate that is sufficiently licenced to preach in that Cure
whereon he himself is not resident? or otherwise in case he does not find a
preaching minister there, by reason of the smalnes thereof, whether does he
preach at both his benefices usually himself?

14 Whether is your Curate licenced to serve by the Bishop of this Dioces, or
his Chancellor? and whether does your Minister or Curate serve any more Cures
then one? If yea, then what other Cure does he also serve?

15 If your Minister be not licenced to preach as aforesaid, whether does he
read Homilies, or rather take upon him to expound the Scriptures, either in his
own Cure or elsewhere, contrary to the 49. Canon? And does he or his Curate
read an Homily every Sunday, or some part thereof, when there is no Sermon?

16 Whether has any person been admitted to preach within your Church or
Chapel, but such as you have well known to be licenced: whom have you so
admitted? You shall present their names, and how often have any such been
admitted to preach, and by whose procurement?

17 Whether have you caused every strange Preacher licenced or not licenced, to
subscribe his name, according to the 50. and 52. Canons? And if he were
licenced, then by whom was he licenced?

18 Whether does your Lecturer and Preacher read divine Service, and minister
the Sacraments in his own person twice every year, observing all the
Ceremonies in the Book of Common Prayer established? And does any man read a
Lecture in your Church that is beneficed out of the Dioces, or if he be
beneficed in the Dioces, is he by that Lecture kept from his Cure: or has he
no benefice at all?

19 Whether does your Minister wear the Surples whilst he is saying the
public Prayers and administering the Sacraments, and a hood according to his
degree of the University?

20 Whether does your Minister every Sunday and Holy Day before Evening prayer
for half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant persons
of your Parish, in the ten Commandments, the Articles of Belief, and in the
Lords Prayer?

21 Whether has your Minister without license from the Bishop of the Dioces,
or his Chancellor, solemnized Marriage betwixt any parties, of the Banes not
being three several Sundays or Holi-dayes first published in time of divine
Service, in the several Churches or Chapels of their several aboades,
according to the book of Common prayer: or without license, in time prohibited,
albeit the Banes were so published? Or at any time except betwixt the hours of
eight and twelve in the forenoone? And if any have been otherwise married or
licenced to be married by any authority other then aforesaid, especially since
the last triennall Visitation by any of our Commissaries, Archdeacons, or their
Officials, you shall present the Minister so marrying, the parties so married,
and the Authority whereby this was done, and you shall present whether you
know or have heard of any License of marriage granted by any Archdeacon or his
Official, since the last trienniall Visitation, and to whom such License was
granted.

22 Whether does your Minister upon Sundaies at Morning prayer declare unto the
Parishioners what Holi-dayes and fasting days are appointed to be kept the
week following?

23 Whether does your Minister in the Rogation days, use the perambulation of
the Circuit of the Parish appointed by law? And in the same perambulation move
the people to give thanks to God for his benefits, using such Psalms,
Prayers, and Homilies as are to that end set forth?

24 Whether does any man (being neither Minister nor Deacon) read Common
Prayer openly in your Church or Chapel, or use any other ministerial duty in
the Church that belongs to a minister or Deacon, and what is his name that so
does or has so done?

25 Whether does your Minister every six months denounce in his parish all
such of his Parish as do persevere in the sentence of Excommunication? And
whether has he admitted any person Excommunicate, into the Church, without a
Certificate of his absolution from the Ordinary? And has he stayed or forborne
to denounce any Excommunication or suspension that has been sent unto him?

26 Whether does your Minister, being a Preacher, endeavor and labor
diligently with mildness and temperance to confer with, and thereby to
reclaim the Popish Recusants in his Parish from their errors? And whether they
or any of them do refuse such conference with your Minister?

27 Whether is your Parson, Vicar, Lecturer, or Curate, too much frequent, or
overmuch conversant with, or a favorer of Recusants, whereby he may be
suspected not to be sincere in his Religion?

28 Whether has your Minister, or any other taking upon him the place of a
Minister, Preached, Baptized children (unless in case of necessity) solemnized
Marriage, Churched any women, or ministered the holy Communion in any house or
houses? If yea, then where, when, and how often has he so offended in any of
the premises?

29 Whether, when any person has been dangerously sick in your Parish, your
Minister (having knowledge thereof) has not resorted to every of them, to
instruct and comfort them in their distress, according to the manner and form
appointed in the Book of Common Prayer? And whether, when any Parishioner has
been passing out of this life, your Minister has slacked to do his last duty
in that behalf?

30 Whether your Minister has at any time refused or delayed to bury any corpse
that has been brought to the Church or Churchyard, convenient warning having
been given to him thereof before, in such manner and form as is prescribed in
the book of Common Prayer? And has he buried any in Christian burial, which
ought not to be so interred?

31 Whether has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or
private Fasts, Preaching or Lecturing, not approved and established by law or
public authority? Or has he attempted upon any pretense, either of
possession or obsession, by fasting and prayer to cast out Devils?

32 Whether your Minister uses buying and selling, or trading, or to hedge,
ditch, or go to plough, or has solicited other men's suites for gain, or
employed himself about other such business not beseeming or fitting his
calling?

33 Whether do you know in your Parish any, that having heretofore taken upon
him or them the order of Priesthood, or of a Deacon, has since relinquished
the same, and betaken himself in the course of his life as a Layman, or
neglecting his vocation, lives idly, and serves no Cure, nor preaches as a
Lecturer authorized in any one certain place? If yea, then you shall present
his name and the place of his abode.

34 Whether is your Minister reputed to be an incontinent person, or to keep
in his house, or frequent the company of any man or woman that are suspected,
either to be of evil religion or bad life? Or whether is he a common haunter
of Tauernes, Alehouses, or any suspected place? Or whether does he board or
lodge in any of them? Or is a common Gamester, or player at Dice, Cards,
Tables, or other unlawful games? A common swearer, a drunkard, or one that
applies not himself in his Study, or faulty in any other crime punishable by
Ecclesiastical censures, whereby he is offensive and scandalous to his
Function or Ministry?

35 Whether does your Minister use the form of thanksgiving to women after
their Childbirth? Or has he admitted any woman begotten with child in
Adultery, to be churched, either publicly or privately, without license from
the Lord Bishop of London, or his Chancellor?

36 Whether does your Minister baptize any children in any Basin or other
vessel then in the Ordinary Font, being placed in the Church, or does put any
Basin into it?

37 Whether your Minister or any other that has taken holy Orders now licenced
or suspended, or other person or persons, either of the Ministry or Laity,
within or near your Parish, of your knowledge or as you have heard, has been
at, or use to meet in any Barnes, Fields, Woods, private house or houses, and
held private conuenticles or meetings, either in your Parish or in any other
Parish? And whether has your Minister or any other publicly or privately
preached or spoken in eregation of the book of Common Prayer, or in any thing
depraved the same; or against the present estate of the Ecclesiastical
government established by authority, affirming the same to be unlawful,
Popish or Antichristian?

38 Whether at any such meeting do they or any of them preach, confer, or
agree upon any private orders for divine Service, Prayers, Preaching or
expounding the Scriptures, or use any other Prayers, Preaching, or form of
Divine Service, then such as is in the Book of Common Prayer, and by the Laws
established appointed, or be drawers or perswaders of others to any such
Schismatic conuenticles? If yea, you shall present them all and every one of
them, specifying their names, surnames, and quality or addition, and places of
abode.

39 Whether his Majesty's Instructions lately sent to your Parish concerning
Lecturers, celebration of divine Service, catechizing, and Sermons be duly
observed, if not, you shall present by whom, and when, any of the said
Instructions have been transgressed.

40 Item, you shall carefully and heedefully observe and inquire, whether your
Ministers in their Sermons preached by them in your public Churches and
Congregations, do raise and deliver out of the texts chosen by them, such
pertinent notes as tend to teach obedience, and to edify the understanding of
their auditorie, in matters of faith and religion, without intermeddling with
any State-matters, not fit to be handled in the Pulpit, but to be discussed by
the wisdom of his Majesty, and his Counselors of State? And if you find
any faulty herein, you shall present him.

Concerning the Church.
WHether have you in your several Churches and Chapels the Book of
Constitutions or Canons Ecclesiastical?

2 Whether is there in your Church or Chapel one parchment Register Book,
provided for Christnings, Marriages, and Burials? And whether is the same duly
and exactly kept according to the Constitutions in that behalf provided? And
is the mothers christen name therein registered as well as the Fathers; and a
transcript thereof brought in yearly within one month after the 25. day of
March into the Lord Bishops principal Registry?

3 Whether have you provided the Book of Common Prayer lately commanded by his
Majesty's authority only to be used, and the Book of Homilies, and two
service Books, and a large Bible of the last edition?

4 Whether have you in your Church or Chapel a Font of stone set up in the
ancient usual place, a convenient and decent Communion Table standing upon a
frame with a Carpet of silk, or some other decent stuff, and a fair Linen
cloth to lay thereon at the Communion time? And whether is the same then placed
in such convenient sort within the Chancell or Church, as that the Minister may
be best heard in his prayer and Administration, and that the greater number may
Communicate? And is the same Table so used out of divine service, or in it, as
it is not agreeable to the holy use of it, by sitting, throwing hats on it,
writing on it, or is it abused to other profane uses?

5 Whether are the ten Commandments set upon the East end of your Church or
Chapel, where the people may best see and read them, and other sentences of
holy Scripture written upon the walls likewise for the same purpose?

6 Whether have you a convenient seat for your Minister to read Service in,
together with a comely Pulpit set up in a convenient place, with a decent Cloth
or Cushion for the same, a comely large Surplesse, a fair Communion Cup of
Silver, and a cover agreeable for the same, with all other things and ornaments
necessary for the celebration of divine Service and the administration of the
Sacraments, and a strong Chest for the Alms of the poor, with three locks
and keys, whereof the Minister to keep one key, and another Chest for the
keeping of the ornaments of the Church and Register Book?

7 Have you a fair paper-booke wherein every Preacher (which is a stranger)
shall write his name, the day he preached, and by whose authority he is
licensed.

8 Whether are your Church or Chapels with the Chancels thereof, and your
Parsonage or Vicarage house, and all other houses thereto belonging, in good
reparations, and decently and comely kept, as well within as without, and the
seats well maintained, as in the Canons is appointed? If not, then through
whose default, and what defects are?

9 Whether your Churchyard be well and sufficiently repaired, fenced and
maintained with walls, railes, or pales, and by whom? And if part be to be
maintained by any particular persons, then you shall present how much, and what
part every such person has, or is to maintain and repair?

10 Whether any person has incroached upon the ground of the Churchyard? If
any has, then you shall present him, and specify what quantity of ground he
has so incroached, and how the old and former fences stood, and how they
nowstand and are fenced, and with what matter or stuff.

11 Whether have you in your Church any ancient or true note, or terrier of all
the gleabe lands, meddowes, gardens, orchards, houses, stocks, implements,
tenements, and portions of tithes, lying within or without your Parish, which
belongs to your Personage or Vicarage? If there be any, whether it is well kept
and preserved for the good of the succeeding Incumbents, and in what particular
place it is kept? And whether a true copy thereof under the hands of the
Ministers and Churchwardens has been transmitted into the Lord Bishops
principal Registry? and when? if you have none, you shall make one, and bring
it in with your presentment, subscribed as before.

Concerning Ecclesiastical Officers.
WHether do you know, or have heard of any payment, composition or agreement,
to or with any Commissarie, Archdeacon, or his Official, or their Registers or
other inferior Officers Ecclesiastical, within this Diocese, for suppressing
or concealing of any presentment, excommunication, or other Ecclesiastical
censure, of, or against Recusants, or any other offenders, or for not
certifying of Recusants to the Ordinary, or for not serving of Process without
a sum of money, or other consideration, received or promised to any of them
in that respect, and by whom?

2 Whether the Archdeacon, Commissary, Official, or any other using
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this Dioces, their Registers or Actuaries,
Apparators, or Summoners have at any time winked at, and suffered any
Adulteries, Fornications, Incests, or other faults or offenses presented unto
them, to pass and remain unpunished and uncorrected, for money, rewards,
bribes, pleasure, friendship, or any other partial respect?

3 Whether do the Commissaries, Archdeacons, or any their Officials, hear any
matters of Office or correction, privately in their Chambers, without the
presence of the sworn Register, or his Deputy, or has discharged any man's
penance for money, without the consent of the Lord Bishop, according to the
Constitutions, or do send any writing under their own hands to your Church,
without the Registers presence at the doing of it, either for Marriage of any
couples, or for ending or ordering of any matter or penance?

4 Whether has any Commissary, Archdeacon, Official, or any other exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this Dioces, or any Register, Apparator, or
Minister belonging to the same Ecclesiastical Courts, exacted extraordinary or
greater fees then heretofore of late has been accustomed? And whether is
there a Table of the rates of all fees set up in their several Courts and
Offices? Or whether they or any of them have any way abused themselves in their
Offices, contrary to the Law and Canons in that case provided?

5 Whether any Commissarie, Archdeacon, or Official, has, or does commute or
change any penance or corporal punishment for any money, and what money such
Commissary, Archdeacon, or Official, has received, and of whom? when and what
the offense was, for which any such sum of money was received or appointed to
be paid, and set down the particulars of the premises, and what Court any of
them have kept since the first day of July last past, upon what days, and in
what Church and place?

6 What number of Apparators has every several Judge Ecclesiastical: and
wherein, and in what manner is the Country ouerburdened and grieved by the said
Apparators? And whether does any of the said Apparators cause any parties to
appear in the said Courts, without first a presentment or citation obtained
from the Judge of the Court.

Concerning Schoolemasters.
WHether the Schoolmaster or Schoolemasters within your Parish, openly, or
privately in any Noble or Gentleman's house, or in any other place, be of good
and sincere Religion, life and conversation, and be diligent in teaching and
bringing up of youth: and whether they have been examined, allowed and
licensed for Schoolemasters, by the Lord Bishop of London, or his Chancellor?
And how many several Schoolemasters have you, and what be their names?

2 Whether your Schoolmaster or Schoolemasters do themselves receive the holy
Communion as often as they ought to do? and whether do all their Scholars,
which be of age sufficient, and of capacity by instruction to receive the Lords
Supper, come to the Communion either in your Church, or where their Parents
dwell, once every year, and be diligent to hear common Prayer?

3 Whether the Schoolmaster, or Schoolemasters, either private or public, do
teach their Scholars the Catechism authorized by public authority, at the
least once every week, and do instruct and examine them in the same, or do
teach any other Catechism: and what Catechism is it that they do so teach?

4 Whether your Schoolmaster or Schoolemasters, or any of them be known or
suspected to read unto their Scholars privately any unlawful Books; or
privately to instruct them in their young years, either in Popery,
Superstition, or disobedience, or contempt of his Majesty, and his laws
Ecclesiastical, by public authority allowed?

5 Whether your Schoolmaster or Schoolemasters, or any of them, under pretense
of Catechizing their Scholars, which is a most godly order carefully by them
to be observed, do keep Lectures, readings or expositions of Divinity in
their houses, having repair unto them of people, not being of their own
family and household?

6 What Recusant Papists are there in your Parish, and whether do any of them,
or any other keep any Schoolmaster in their house which comes not to Church
to hear Divine Service, and receive the Communion, what is his name, and how
long he has taught?

7 Whether your Schoolmaster or Schoolemasters, within your Parish, do teach
his or their Scholars any other Grammar then that which is commonly called the
Kings Grammar, set forth by the Authority of King Henry the eight, teaching the
prescript form thereof?

8 Whether are your Schoolemasters negligent in instructing their Scholars in
the Catechism and grounds of Religion, and in bringing them to the Church to
hear Divine Service and Sermons?

Concerning Parish Clerks.
WHether have you a fit Parish Clerk, aged twenty years at least, of honest
conversation, and sufficient for reading and writing? and whether he be paid
his wages without fraud, according to the most ancient custom of your Parish?
If not, then by whom is he so defrauded and denied? and whether he be chosen
by the Parson or Vicar, or by whom? And whether he has presumed to take upon
him the execution of the said place or Clerkeship, before he has taken the
oath of supremacy before the Lord Bishop of London or his Chancellor? and has
his approbation from the said Lord Bishop or his Chancellor?

2 Is he diligent in his office, and serviceable to the Minister, does he take
upon him to meddle with any thing above his office, as Churching of women,
burying the dead, or such like?

3 Is the Church clean kept, the doors locked at fit times? Is any thing lost
or spoiled in the Church, and are the Communion Table, Font, Books, and
ornaments of the Church kept fair and clean?

Touching Churchwardens and Sidemen, and other Church Officers.
WHether the Churchwardens and Sidemen do every Sunday and Holy Day diligently
search who absenteth himself or her self from Church, and whether do they
suffer any to abide in the Church Porch or Churchyard in the time of Common
Prayer or Sermon? And you shall present such as have been or shall be found to
be absent?

2 Whether the Churchwardens and Sidemen, or any of them have (for money,
reward, favor, or affection) forborne to present any that were or be
negligent in coming to Church, or whom they have found as idle persons abroad,
either in the Churchyard or streets, in the time of Common Prayer or Sermon
on the Sabbath day or Holy days, or any that did not receive the Communion
yearly at the feast of Easter, or within some convenient time after?

3 Whether the Churchwardens do provide against every Communion, with the
advice of the Minister, a sufficient quantity of fine white bread, and of good
and wholesome wine for the number of the Communicants that shall receive, and
that to be brought in a clean and sweet standing pot of Pewter, or other pure
metal?

4 Have you admitted any to preach within your Church or Chapel which was not
sufficiently licensed, and how often? And have you with your Minister taken
diligent care that no strangers do usually come to your Church, from their
own parish?

5 Whether have you or your predecessors Churchwardens there, suffered, since
the last Visitation of the Lord Bishop of London, any Plays, Feasts, Banquets,
Church-ales, Drinkings, Musters, and showing of Arms, or any other profane
vsages to be kept in your Church, Chapel, or Churchyard? Were you chosen by
the consent of the Minister and Parishioners?

6 Whether has your Minister, Churchwardens and Parish Clerk or Clerks,
taken care that all excommunicated persons be duly published in the Church, as
the law requires? And likewise had care that no excommunicated persons be
admitted to the Communion, nor suffered to be present at Divine service and
public prayers in your Church? you shall truly present every one that has
neglected this duty, or been stacke therein.

7 Whether the Churchwardens at the end of their year, give up in writing a
just account before the Minister and Parishioners, of their receipts and
disbursements, and deliver the residue by Bill indented to the next
Churchwardens? And whether at any time heretofore the Churchwardens, or the
Ministers, or the Parishioners, or any of them to your knowledge, or as you
have heard, have withheld, or detained in their custody, or have sold, wasted,
spent, or otherwise alienated any Lead, Bells, or Bell-metall, or other of the
Church goods or stock of money? and let them specify their names, and the
value and quantity of such things as were so sold, made away, or detained, and
how long since?

Concerning Parishioners, and others of the Laity.
WHether any in your Parish, or elsewhere near about the same, to your
knowledge, or as you have heard, has affirmed, that the King has not the same
Authority in all causes Ecclesiastical, which the Kings and Christian
Emperors had in the Primitive Church? or that have impeached or gainsaid his
Royal Supremacy?

2 Whether do you know, or have credibly heard of any within your Parish that
deprave the Christian Religion, and namely, as it is established by public
authority, and professed within the Church of England? And whether has any
person, as you have heard, affirmed that the Church of England is not a true
Catholic and orthodoxe Church, and does not teach and maintain the Catholic
Faith, and doctrine of the Apostles?

3 Whether any have said or affirmed, that any thing in the Book of Common
Prayer or in the Book of Articles set forth by the Convocation Anno Domini,
1562. Or any of the rites and ceremonies of the Church of England, in or by the
same appointed, are corrupt, wicked, Antichristian, superstitious, unlawful,
or repugnant to the Scriptures? or that any of the said Articles may not with a
good conscience be subscribed unto, or any of the said ceremonies may not with
a good conscience be approved, used, or subscribed unto?

4 Are there any that do not reverently behave themselves during the time of
Divine Service, devoutly kneeling when the general Confession of sins, the
Letany, the ten Commandments, and all prayers and Collects are read, and using
all due and lowly reverence when the blessed name of the Lord Jesus Christ is
mentioned, and standing up, when the Articles of the Belief are read, or which
do cover their heads in the Church during the time of Divine Service, unless
it be in case of necessity, in which case they may use a nightcap?

5 Whether have any affirmed, preached, or taught, that the form of making and
consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, or any thing therein contained, is
repugnant, or not agreeable to the Word of God? Or that the Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons so made, are not to be accounted for Bishops, Priests, or Deacons,
or ought to be ordained in any other form? Or that the government of the
Church by Archbishops, Bishops, or others that bear any Office therein, is
Antichristian, or not agreeable to the Word of God?

6 Whether any person have lurked or tippled in Tauerns, or Alehouses on
Sundaies, or other Holi-dayes, or used his or their manual Craft, Trade, or
Mystery, or any bodily labor, or kept their shops open upon the said days,
or any of them, especially in the time of Divine Service, or suffered his or
their servants to sell any wares or victuals in that time, or to offend in any
of the promises?

7 Whether are there any in your Parish, that (since the Lord Bishop of London
his last Visitation) have or do profane the Lords Day, called Sunday, or
other Holy Day, contrary to the orders of the Church of England, in that
behalf prescribed, which has not heretofore been openly punished for the
same, and what be their names?

8 Whether has any person in your Parish brawled, quarrelled or stricken, or
used any violence unto, or with your Minister, or any other person in the
Church or Churchyard, or used himself disorderly in the Church by filthy and
profane talk, or any other rude and immodest behavior?

9 Whether have any in your Parish bin Godfathers or Godmothers to their own
children? Or whether your Minister, or any Godfathers or Godmothers have used,
or do use any other form, answer or speech in Baptism, then is in the Book
of Common Prayer appointed? Or do give the children baptized any name absurd,
or inconvenient for so holy an action: Or whether any which have not
communicated, be admitted to be Godfathers or Godmothers, contrary to the Law?

10 Whether is there any in your Parish, that do refuse to have their children
baptized, or themselves to receive the Communion at the hands of your Minister,
because he is no Preacher? you shall present their names.

11 Whether do all Fathers, Mothers, Masters and Mistresses, cause their
Children, Servants, and Apprentices to come to the Catechism upon the Sundays
and holi-dayes, before Evening prayer, to hear, and to be instructed and
taught therein? And those that do not their duties herein, you shall present
their names.

12 How many Inhabitants within your Parish, Men or Women above the age of
sixteen years, do refuse to frequent Divine Service established by public
authority of this Realm, or to receive the holy Communion, or are negligent
therein? or coming to Church, do depart before the end of divine Service or
Sermon, what be their names, and of what degree, state, or trade of life are
they? you are to present them all of each sort.

13 Whether do any of the inhabitants within your said Parish entertain
within their house any soiourners, lodgers, or any common resorters and guests,
who refuse to frequent divine Service, or receive the holy Communion, as
aforesaid? what be their names, and of what quality or condition are they?

14 Whether any of the said Popish Recusants be of insolent behavior, not
without public offense, or do boldly busy themselves in seducing, or
withdrawing others, either abroad or in their own families, by instructing
their Children in Popish Religion, or by refusing to entertain any, especially
in place of greatest service or trust, but such as concur with them in
opinion of Religion, and what be their names that so do?

15 How long the said Popish Recusants have obstinately abstained either from
divine Service, or from the Communion, as is aforesaid, whether any long time,
or only since his Majesty's Reign, and how long?

16 Whether there be any Popish Recusants married: the child of any Recusant
christened, or any Recusant buried within your Parish, by any other then the
Minister of the Parish, where, when, and by whom, and what certificate you have
received thereof? or whether the child of any Recusant remain unbaptized above
one month, or be not baptized in the Parish Church?

17 You shall present how the children of such as refuse to come to Church are
brought up, under what Schoolmaster or Tutor, where, and in what School or
place, what those childrens names are, how long their Parents have been
married? by whom, when and in what place, and by what authority were they
married, and what Certificate you have received of their marriage?

18 What persons aforesaid within your Parish, either for the offense
aforesaid, or for any other contumacy or crime, do remain excommunicated?
what be their names? and for what cause? and how long have they so stood
excommunicated? And whether any do familiarly use the company of such as do
obstinately stand excommunicate, knowing the same, and what be their names?

19 Whether do all persons above the age of sixteen years, usually resort to
hear divine Service upon Sundays and Holi-dayes approved? and whether has
each one of your parishioners (being above the age of 16. years as aforesaid)
received the holy Communion thrice this last year, chiefly once at Easter in
your Parish Church kneeling? If no, then you shall present their names which
have not so done.

20 Whether have any in your Parish been married within the prohibited degrees
forbidden by law, and expressed in a certain table published by authority in
Anno 1563? If yea, then you shall present their names. And whether have you the
said Table publicly set up in your Church, and fastened to some convenient
place?

21 Whether does any heretofore divorced or married and not divorced, keep
company at bed and board as man and wife with any other man or woman, then with
the person that he or she was married unto, and what be their names? If the
parties, now so living together, say that they be married? when and where were
they married, and how long have they so continued together?

22 Whether have you in your Parish to your knowledge or by common fame and
report, any which have committed adultery, fornication or incest, or any
bawdes, harborces, or receivers of such persons, or vehemently suspected
thereof, which have not been publicly punished to your knowledge? If yea,
then specify the names of them all.

23 Whether have you any in your Parish which are by common fame and report, or
vehement suspicion, reputed and taken to be common drunkards, blasphemers of
Gods holy name, common and usual swearers, filthy speakers, raylers, sowers of
discord among their neighbors, or speakers against Ministers marriages,
Usurers, contrary to the Statute made in the 37. year of King Henry the eight,
or Symoniacall persons? you shall not fail to present their names.

24 Whether have any in your Parish received or harbored any woman with child,
that was not before a householder in your Parish? If yea, whether you know that
she was married, and to whom, where, and when? and specify her name also, and
from whence she came.

25 Whether have any in your Parish received or harbored any woman gotten with
child out of wedlock, and suffered them again to depart without penance first
inflicted upon them by their Ordinary? You shall truly present as well the
party harboring as harbored, and all that helped to convey them or her away?
And who is suspected to have committed adultery or fornication with her?

26 Whether the parties offending in any of your Parishes in the sin of
fornication, adultery, or incest, bawdry, or keeping of a bawdy house, or
vehemently suspected of these or any other Ecclesiastical offenses, have for
them, or any one of them been presented since the Lord Bishop of London his
last visitation, to any Commissary, Archdeacon, or his Official, their
Surrogates or Deputies? and whether for such their offenses they have done
public penance before the Congregation in their own Parish Church in time of
divine Service? And if any so presented have not done such penance, what be
their names, what the offense was? and of what Parish they then were of, and
where they, or any of them do now remain and dwell?

27 Whether any person or persons suspected or detected heretofore of
incontinency, and therefore departing out of your Parish, is now returned
again? or in what place else is he or she now abiding, as you know, or have
heard? And whether he or she has done any penance, and what penance, or else
escaped without penance? and by what and whose means? You shall present the
whole truth in that behalf.

28 Whether there be any person or persons Ecclesiastical or Temporal, within
your Parish, or elsewhere within this Diocese, that have retained and kept in
their custody, or that read, sell, utter, disperse, carry, or deliver to
others, any English or Latin Books or Libels, set forth or printed, either on
this side or beyond the Seas, by Papists or Sectaries, against the Kings
Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, or tending to Popery, Puritanisme, or any
other Sect, error or heresy, against true Religion and Catholic doctrine, now
publicly professed in this Church, or the government or discipline of the
Church of England, now within this Realm received, and established by common
authority, that you know or have heard of, what their names and surnames are?

29 Whether there be any in your Parish, who are known or suspected to
conceal or keep hid in their houses, any Masse-bookes, Portesses, Breuiaries,
or other Books of Popery or superstition: or any Chalices, Copes, Vestments,
Albes, or other ornaments of superstition uncancelled or undefaced, which is to
be coniectured they keep for a day as they call it?

30 Whether have you any in your Parish to your knowledge, or as you have
heard, which heretofore being Popish Recusants and Sectaries, have since
conformed themselves, and come to Church to hear Divine Service, and receive
the Sacrament: If yea, then who they are, and how long sithence have they so
conformed themselves? And whether do they still abide in that conformity?

31 Whether are there in your Parish any Wills not yet proved, or goods of the
dead dying intestate left vnadministred by the authority of the Ordinary in
that behalf? And whether any possess the goods of any person deceased,
without authority from the Ordinary? You shall not fail to present the
Executors, and all others faulty and culpable therein.

32 What person or persons do you know that have dyed in your parish since the
Lord Bishops last Visitation, that had goods or debts in other parts of the
Dioces of London out of the jurisdiction in which the party dyed, or that dyed
in any other Archdeaconrie or Jurisdiction of this Dioces, and had goods in
your Parish? and whether the Executor to such person or any other, meddled with
such deceased goods by authority of the Commissary or Archdeacons Official,
and not by the authority of the Lord Bishop of London or his Chancellor?

33 Is there any Legacy given to the Church, or to other good and godly uses,
as relief of the Poor Orphans, Poor Scholars, Poor Maidens marriages,
Scholars, Highways, and such like, which is not yet performed? If there be
any such, you shall present what you know or can learn thereof, and by whose
default the same is not performed.

34 Whether any of your Parishioners, having a Preacher to their Parson, Vicar,
or Curate, do absent themselves from his Sermons, and resort to any other
place to hear other Preachers, or refuse to receive the holy Communion at his
hands for the same respect? And whether any other Minister has received to the
Communion any of your Parish? and specify the names both of the Minister and
Parishioner. And whether do any in your Parish refuse to have children
baptized in your Parish Church, according to the form prescribed in the book
of Common Prayer?

35 Whether there be any Inne-keepers, Ale-wiues, Victuallers, or Tiplers, that
suffer or do admit any person or persons into their houses to eat, drink or
play at Dice, Cards, Tables, Bowls, or such like games, in the time of Common
Prayer or Sermons on Sundays or Holy days?

36 Whether have you any Butchers or other, that commonly use to sell meat or
other things in the time of Common Prayer, Preaching, or reading of Homilies?

37 Whether any Markets or selling of wares be used or suffered in any
Churchyards on the Sabbath day by common Packmen and Pedlers going about, or
any Butchers, or others?

38 Whether there be any in your Parish, who will come to hear the Sermon, but
will not come to the public prayer, appointed by the Book of Common prayer,
making a schism or division (as it were) between the use of public Prayer
and Preaching?

39 Whether there be any who being present at public prayer, do not devoutly
and humbly kneel upon their knees, at such times as by the Book of Common
prayer they are appointed: to wit, when they make a general Confession of
their sins, when all prayers and Collects are read, in the time of the Letany,
when the ten Commandments are read, and at the receiving of the holy
Communion, etc. And what be their names?

40 Whether there be any married women or others within your parish, which
after childbirth refuse, contemn or neglect to come to the Church to give God
thanks for their safe delivery, and to have the prayers publicly appointed on
that behalf by the Book of Common prayer to be used?

41 Whether any do keep their Children unbaptized longer then is convenient,
unless that it be for the sickness of the Child, or other urgent occasion?

42 Whether any do carry their Child or Children from the parish they are
borne, into other parishes to be baptized, and so refuse their own parish? And
to what other parish: and who baptized any child or children so carried from
your parish: and whose child was it?

43 Whether any do bring strange Ministers into their own houses to baptize
their children privately according to their own fantasies, or receive any
child or children borne elsewhere, to be baptized in your parish? If you know
any such, then who received any such, and whose child or children were so
baptized: and what was the name of the child, and who baptized it? And whether
you know of your own knowledge that the Parents were married together, and
where, when, and by whom.

44 Whether do you know, or have heard, of any Patron or Aduensoner in your
Parish that have made a gain by any color, deceit, or symoniacall pact, in
bestowing his Benefice for gain: for, or receiving money or promise of the
Lease of the whole part, or by reserving his own tithes, or any pension to
himself or any other?

45 What Almes-houses, Hospitals, or Spittles for poor people have you in your
Parish, that are not of the foundation or patronage of the King: and who was
the founder or Patron thereof: And whether the said Almes-houses, Hospitals, or
Spittles in your Parish being under our rule and governance, be well and godly
used, according to the foundations and ancient ordinances of the same, and
whether there be any other placed in them then poor, impotent, and needy
persons, that have not wherewith or whereby to live?

46 How many Midwiues have you in your Parish which do exercise that office,
how long they have so done, and by what authority? and what be their names? Of
what skill they are accounted to be of in their office and vocation?

47 How many have you in your Parish that do practice as Physicians or
Chyrurgions, and are so reputed? How long they have so done, by what authority,
of what skill are they accounted to be of in their profession?

48 Have you any in your Parish, which have used any Enchantments, Sorceries,
Witchcrafts, or Incantations, which are not made Felony by the Statutes of this
Realm, or any Charms: or which do resort to any such for help or Counsel?

49 Whether do you know of any other matter of Ecclesiastical cognizance
worthy the presentment in your judgment, heretofore in these Articles not
expressed, and which is fit to be reformed in Ecclesiastical censure? If you
do, you shall likewise present the same by virtue of your oaths?

Admonition.
FIrst, for that in great Parishes, where diverse do come in great multitudes
to receive the Communion, whereof some do stand excommunicate: To avoid this
inconvenience in every parish, the Minister and Churchwardens shall keep a
Book of all excommunications brought unto them, and from what Court, and of
the day, month, and year it was received; and of the parties names so
excommunicated, and for what cause, and of the day, month, and year of the
Denunciation, and likewise of the Absolution, to the end that all persons may
be drawn to conformity, and none admitted to be partakers of Common Prayer and
the Sacraments, who do stand Excommunicate, when they offer themselves ready
to receive the same.

That in the time of Divine Service and Sermons, all persons behave themselves
reverently and attentively, and that all men do sit and continue uncovered,
with their Hats off, the whole time of Divine Service and Prayers.

That from time to time diligent inquiry be made what children are borne in
every Parish, and where, when, and by whom every child is baptized: And if in
case of necessity any child or children be found to be baptized privately in
any house, that upon due Certificate thereof, the same shall be published in
their own parish Church, where the Child or Children were borne, the next
Sunday after notice thereof so taken, that upon such necessity the said Child
or Children were so baptized, and that rightly, that the Parish may take notice
thereof.

And concerning your Transcript of the names of all persons Baptized, Married
or Buried, you shall observe the form prescribed in the Book of Articles
ministered in the last Trienniall Visitation of the Lord Bishop of London, viz.
Anno 1628.

AT the delivery of your Bill of Presentment, at the time and place above set
down, you are likewise in the said Bill, to set down the names of all such as
have been buried at any time since the (...) day of July last past (...) being
Men, Maids, or Widows: and likewise the Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen
of every parish, must in the end of the said Bill of Presentment, set down
beside their presenting, which they make of all Recusants and non-Communicants,
this Note following.

Recusants men. -- Recusants women. -- Non-Communicants of both sex. --
Communicants of both sex in the whole Parish.
So setting down the number of every one, the Minister, Churchwardens and
Sidemen must put their hands to this Note.


