WITCHCRAFTS, Strange and Wonderful: Discovering the damnable practices of
seven Witches, against the lives of certain Noble Personages, and other of
this Kingdom, as shall appear in this lamentable History.

With an approved trial how to find out either Witch, or any Apprentise to
Witchcraft.

depiction of witches

Imprinted at London, by M. F. for Thomas Lambert at the Horshooe near the
Hospital Gate in Smithfield. 1635.

WITCHCRAFTS, Strange and Wonderful.
MY meaning is not to make any contentious Arguments about the discourses,
distinction or definition of Witchcraft, the power of Devils, the nature of
Spirits, the force of Charms, the secrets of Incantation, and such like;
because the Scriptures are full of prohibitions to this purpose, and proclaims
death to the presumptuous attempters of the same: Besides, both Princes, (yea,
our own learned and most judicious King) Philosophers, Poets, Chronologers,
Historiographers, and many worthy Writers, have concurred and concluded in
this; that diverse impious and facinorous mischiefs have been effectuated
through the instruments of the devil, by permission of God, so that the Actors
of the same have carried away the opinion of the world, to do that which they
did by Witchcraft; or at least to be esteemed Witches, for bringing such and
such things to pass: For howsoever, the learned have charactered delinquents
in this kind, by titles of sundry sorts, and most significant attributes; as
Pythonissae, dealing with artificial charms; Magi, anciently reputed so, for
extraordinary wisdom and knowledge in the secrets of Simples, and Herbs;
Chaldei famous for Astronomy, and Astrology; Negromancers, for practicing to
raise dead bodies, and by them to foretell events of the earth; Geomantici, for
conversing with Spirits, and using Incantations; Genethliaci, for presuming on
the calculating of Nativities; or, if you will, assuming the credit of
Figure-casting; Ventriloqui, for speaking with hollow voices, as if they were
possessed with Devils; Venefici, for dealing with poison, and either killings,
or curing that way: For you must understand, however the Professors aforesaid,
practice murder and mischief; yet many times, they pretend cures and
preservation; with many others, carrying the show of great learning and admired
knowledge; yet have they all but one familiar term with us in English, called
Witches. As for the conceit of Wisemen, or Wise-women, they are all merely
coseners and deceivers; so that if they make you believe, that by their means
you shall hear of things lost or stolen, it is either done by Confederacy, or
put off by protraction, to deceive you of your money.

Only (as I said before) there be certain men and women grown in years,
and over-growne with Melancholy and Atheism, who out of a malicious
disposition against their betters or others thriving by them; but most times
from a heart-burning desire of revenge, having entertained some impression of
displeasure, and unkindnesse, study nothing but mischief and exoticke
practices of loathsome Arts and Sciences: yet I must needs say, that sometimes
the fained reputation of wisdom, cunning, and to be reputed a dangerous and
skillful person, has so prevailed with diverse, that they have taken upon them
indeed to know more than God ever afforded any creature, and to perform no
less than the Creator both of heaven and earth; making you believe with Medea,
that they can raise tempests, turn the Sun into blood, pull the Moon out of
her Sphere, and sail over the Sea in a cockell shell, according to the Poet:
Flectere si neueam Superos, Acheronta movebo.
If Art do fail to move the Gods
consent unto my mind:
I will the Devils raise, to do
what they can in their kind.


But howsoever special persons are transported with an opinion of their own
worth, and prevailing in this kind, yet by lamentable experience, we know too
well, what monstrous effects have been produced, even to the horror of the
hearers, and damnation, of their own souls, by such kind of people: For as
it is in the tale of the envious man, that put out one of his eyes to have his
companion lose both; so fares it with them and worse, to give away their
souls to be revenged of their adversaries bodies, where in the monstrous
subtlety of the Devil is so apparent, that it is wonderful one way to relate,
and lamentable another way to observe the same. For no sooner shall such
motives poison the inward conceit or apprehension of such damnable caitiffes:
But then steppeth forth the Devil, and not only shows them the way, but
prescribes the manner of effecting the same, with facility and easiness,
assuring that be himself Will attend them in some familiar shape of Rat, Cat,
Toad, Bird, Cricket, etc. yea effectuate whatsoever they shall demand or desire;
and for their better assurance and corroboration of their credulity they shall
have palpable and forcible touches of sucking, pinching, kissing, closing,
colling, and such like. whereupon, without any fear of God or man, knowledge
of Christ, hope of redemption, confidence of mercy, or true belief, that there
is any other thing to be looked after but this present world; according to that
Atheistical position of Epicurus: Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas.
Eat, drink, sport, play, and take thy pleasures rest:
For after death who knows what shall be best.
they admit of those execrable conditions of commutation of souls for the
entertaining of the spirits, and so fall to their abominable practices,
continuing in the same till God laugh them to scorn, and will by no means
suffer them to abuse his holy Name, nor deceive others by their profane lives
any longer: Witness for the general, those infinite Treatises of many of them
convinced by Law, and condemned to death, to the fearful example of all
carnal and hypocritical Christians: but more especially you may over-looke
(if you please) that learned Discourse of Daemonology, composed in form of a
Dialogue, by the high and mighty Prince, James by the grace of God, King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc. and printed (as I take it)
according to the copy of Edinburgh, 1603. As also a Treatise of Witchcraft
made by that learned Mr. Alexander Roberts, Preacher at Kings-Linne in
Norfolk, 1615, upon the discovery of the Witchcrafts of Mary Smith, wife of
Henry Smith Glover, with her vocal contract between the Devil and her self,
in solemn terms, and such like imposturing filthiness; with many hurts and
mischiefs which thereby she procured. As also a certain discovery 1611. made
by John Cotta Doctor of Physic in Northampton, of Empericks, women about
sick persons, Quacksalvars, and Fugitives, which seem to work iugling
wonders; Surgeons, Apothecaries, practisers by Spells, the true discovery of
Witchcraft, especially in the sick, with many instances of that kind:
Wizards, and servants of Physicians, who may be called, ministering helpers: To
this he has added, the Methodian learned deceiver, or heretic physician;
Astrologers, Ephemerides-masters, Conjecters by urine, Travelers: and last of
all, the true Artist his right description and election. As also a Dialogue
concerning Witches and Witchcraft, composed by George Gifford, Minister of
Gods word in Maldon, 1603. wherein the cunning of the Devil is discovered,
both concerning the deceiving of Witches, and seducing of others into many
great errors: As also an ancient Discourse of the fearful practices of four
notorious French Witches, with the manner of their strange execution. As also
the several and damnable practices of Mother Sutton of Milton Mills in the
County of Bedford, and Mary Sutton her daughter, who were arraigned, condemned
and executed for the same. As also, 1612. the wonderful discovery of Witches
in Lancashire, being 19. in number, notorious for many infamed actions, and
convicted before Sir James Altham, and Sir Edward Bromley, Barons of the
Exchequer: together with the Arraignement and trial of Iennet Preston at
York, with her fearful execution for the murdering of Mr. Lister by
Witchcraft, with infinite other relations concerning the general conviction
of Witches, and their practices, and condemnation of the particular opinion of
some men, who suppose there be none at all, or at least, that they do not
personally or truly effect such things as are imputed unto them, and which out
of some dangerous impression of Melancholy, Vain glory, or some other diseased
operation, they assume to themselves by reason of a former Contract with the
Devil. And so much for the certainty of Story, and fearfulness of the truth
concerning the damnable practices of Witches, and cunning of the Devil to
deceive them.

But yet because the mind of man may be carried away with many idle
conjectures, either that women confessed these things by extremity of torture,
or that ancient examples are by this time forgotten (although the particulars
are upon record, for the benefit of all posterity:) Or that they were besides
themselves, or subject to some weak device or other; rather to bring in
question the integrity of justice, than to make odious the lives of such
horrible offenders: I have presumed to present on the Stage of verity, for the
good of my Country, and the love of truth, the late woeful Tragedy of the
destruction of the Right Honorable the Earl of Rutlands children, who (to his
eternal praise) proceeded yet both religiously and charitably against the
offenders, leaving their prosecution to the Law, and submitting himself and
deplorable case to the providence of God, who afflicts his best servants with
punishments, and many times, sends extraordinary vengeance as well on the
innocent, as the bad deserver, to manifest his glory: Therefore by way of
Caution I advise thee (gentle Reader) whatsoever thou art, to take heed how
thou do either despise the power of God in his creatures, or vilipend the
subtletic and fury of the Devil, as Gods instrument of vengeance, considering
that Truth in despite of gaine-sayers will prevail, according to that
principle; Magna est veritas and praevalebit.

The Story follows.
AFter the Right Honorable Sir Francis Manners succeeded his brother in the
Earldom of Rutland: and so not only took possession of Beaver Castle, but
of all other his Demeanes, Lordships, Towns, Manors, Lands, and Revenues
appropriate to the same Earldom: he proceeded so honorably in the course of
his life, as neither displacing Tenants, discharging Servants, nor denying the
access of the poor; but welcomming of strangers, and performing all the
duties of a noble Lord, that he fastened as it were unto himself the love and
good opinion of the Country; wherein he walked the more cheerfully and
remarkably, because his Honorable Countess marched arm in arm with him in
the same race: So that Beaver Castle was a continual Palace of entertainment,
and a daily receptacle for all sorts both rich and poor, especially such
ancient people as neighboured the same: amongst whom, one Joan Flower with her
daughters, Margaret and Phillip, were not only releeved at the first from
thence, but quickly entertained as Chair-women, and Margaret admitted as a
continual dweller in the Castle, looking both to the Poultrey abroad, and the
Wash-house within doors: In which life they continued with equal
correspondency, till something was discovered to he noble Lady, which concerned
the misdemeanour of these women. And although such Honorable persons shall not
want of all sorts of people, either to bring them news, tales, reports, or to
serve their turn in all Offices whatsoever; so that it may well be said of
them, as it is of great Kings and Princes, that they have large hands, wide
ears, and piercing sights, to discover the unswept corners of their remotest
confines, to reach even to their farthest borders, and to understand the
secrets of their meanest Subjects: yet in this matter, neither were they
busybodies, flatterers, malicious politicians, underminers, nor supplanters
one of another good fortune: but went simply to work, as regarding the honor
of the Earl and his Lady, and so by degrees gave light to their understanding
to apprehend their complaints. First, that Ioane Flower the mother, was a
monstrous malicious woman, full of oaths, curses, and imprecations irreligious
and for any thing they saw by her, a plain Atheist: besides, of late days,
her very countenance was estranged, her eyes were fiery and hollow, her speech
fell and envious, her demeanor strange and exoticke, and her conversation
sequestered; so that the whole course of her life gave great suspicion that she
was a notorious Witch: yea, some of her neighbors dared to affirm, that she
dealt with familiar spirits, and terrified them all with curses and threatening
of revenge, if there were never so little cause of displeasure and unkindnesse.
Concerning Margaret, that she often resorted from the Castle to her mother,
bringing such provision as they thought was unbefitting for a servant to
purloine, and coming at such unseasonable hours, that they could not but
conjecture some mischief between them, and that their extraordinary riot and
expenses tended both to rob the Lady, and to maintain certain debausht and
base company, which frequented this Ioane Flowers house the mother, and
specially her youngest daughter. Concerning Phillip, that she was lewdly
transported with the love of one Thomas Sympson, who presumed to say, that she
had bewitched him; for he had no power to leave her, and was (as he supposed)
maruellously altered both in mind and body, since her acquainted company.
These complaints began many years before either their conviction, or public
apprehension: Notwithstanding, such was the honor of this Earl and his Lady;
such was the cunning of this monstrous woman in observation toward them; such
was the subtlety of the Devil to bring his purposes to pass: such was the
effect of a damnable woman's wit and malicious envy, that all things were
carried away in the smooth channel of liking and good entertainment on every
side, until the Earl by degrees conceived some mislike against her; and so,
peradventure estranged himself from that familiarity and accustomed
conferences he was wont to have with her: until one Peake offered her some
wrong; against whom she complained, but found that my Lord did not affect her
clamorous and malicious information: until one Mr. Vavasor abandoned her
company, as either suspicious of her lewd life, or distasted with his own
misliking of such base and poor Creatures, whom no body loved but the Earls
household; until the Countess misconceiving of her daughter Margaret, and
discoverig some undecencies both in her life and neglect of her business,
discharged her from lying any more in the Castle, yet gave her forty shillings,
a bolster, and a mattresse of wool; commanding her to go home; until the
slacknesse of her repayring to the Castle, as she was wont, did turn her love
and liking toward this Honorable Earl and his Family, into hate and rancour:
whereupon despighted to be so neglected, and exprobrated by her neighbors for
her daughters casting out of doors, and other conceived displeasures, she
grew past all shame and womanhood, and many times cursed them all that were the
cause of this coffeehouse, and made her so loathsome, to her former familiar
friends and beneficial acquaintance.

When the Devil perceived the in ficious disposition of this wretch, and that
she and her daughters might easily be made instruments to enlarge his kingdom,
and be as it were the executioners of his vengeance; not caring whether it
lighted upon innocents or no, he came more nearer unto them, and in plain
terms, to come quickly to the purpose, offered them his service, and that in
such a manner as they might easily command what they pleased: For he would
attend you in such pretty forms of Dog, Cat, or Rat, that they should neither
be terrified, nor any body else suspicious of the matter. Upon this they agree;
and (as it should see me) give away their souls for the service of such
Spirits, as he had promised them; which filthy conditions were ratified with
abominable kisses, and an odious sacrifice of blood, not leaving out certain
charms and conjurations, with which the Devil deceived them, as though
nothing could be done without ceremony, and a solemnity of orderly
ratification. By this time does Satan triumph, and goes away satisfied to have
caught such fish in the net of his illusions: By this time are those women
Devils incarnate, and grow proud again in their cunning and artificial power
to do what mischief they listed: By this time they learn the manner of
Incantations, Spells, and Charms: By this time they kill what Cattle they
list, and under the covert of flattery and familiar entertainment, keep
hidden the stinging Serpent of malice, and a venomous inclination to mischief:
By this time is the Earl and his family threatened, and must feel the burden
of a terrible tempest, which from these women's devilish devises fell upon him,
he neither suspecting nor understanding the same: By this time both himself
and his honorable Countess are many times subject to sickness and
extraordinary convulsions, which they taking as gentle corrections from the
hand of God, submit with quietness to his mercy, and study nothing more, then
a glorify their Creator in heaven, and bear his crosses on earth.

At last, as malice increased in these damnable women; so his family felt the
smart of their revenge and inficious disposition. For his eldest Son Henry
Lord Rosse sickened very strangely, and after a while died: and his next, named
Francis Lord Rosse, accordingly, was severely tormented by them and most
barbarously and inhumanely tortured by a strange sickness: not long after the
Lady Katherine was set upon by their dangerous and divellish practices, and
many times in great danger of life; through extreme maladies and unusual
fits. Nay (as it should seem, and they afterward confessed) both the Earl and
his Countess were brought into their snares as they imagined, and indeed
determined to keep them from having any more children. Oh unheard of
wickenesse and mischievous damnation! Notwithstanding all this did the noble
Earl attend his Majesty, both at New Market before Christmas, and at Christmas
at Whitehall; bearing the loss of his children most nobly, and little
suspecting that they had miscarried by Witchcraft, or such like inventions of
the Devil, until it pleased God to discover the villainous practices of these
bad women, and to command the Devil from executing any further vengeance on
innocents, but leave them to their shames, and the hands of Justice, that they
might not only be confounded for their villainous practices, but remain as a
notorious example to all ages of his judgment and fury. Thus were they
apprehended about Christmas; and carried to Lincoln Jayle, after due
examination before sufficient Justices of the Peace, and discreet Magistrates,
who wondered at their audacious wickedness; but Joan Flower the mother, before
conviction (as they say) called for bread and butter, and wished it might never
go through her if she were guilty of that whereupon she was examined; so
mumbling it in her month, never spoke more words after, but fell down and died
as she was carried to Lincoln Jayle, with an horrible excrutiation of soul
and body, and was buried at Ancaster.

When the Earl heard of their apprehensions, he hasted down with his brother
Sir George, and sometimes examining them himself, and sometimes sending them
to others; at last left them to the trial of the Law, before the Judges of
Assize at Lincoln; and so they were convicted of murder, and executed
accordingly, about the 11. of March, to the terror of all the beholders, and
example of such dissolute and abominable creatures: and because ye shall have
both cause to glorify God for this discovery, and occasion to apprehend the
strangeness of their lives, and truth of their proceedings: I thought it both
meet and convenient to lay open their own Examinations and Evidences against
one another, with the manner of their proceeding and revenges, with other
particulars belonging to the true and plain discovery of their villainy and
Witchcraft.

The Examination of Anne Baker of Bottesford in the County of Leicester
Spinster, taken March 1. 1618. by the right Honorable Francis Earl of Rutland,
Sir George Manners Knight two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the
County of Lincoln, and Samuel Fleming Doctor of Divinity, one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the County of Leicester aforesaid.
She says, That there are four colors of Planets, Black, Yellew, Green,
and Blew: and that Black is always Death, and that she saw the Blew Planet
strike Thomas Fairebarne, the eldest son unto William Fairebarne, of
Bottesford aforesaid by the Pinsold there, within the which time the said
William Fairebarne did beat her and brake her head, whereupon the said Thomas
Fairebarne did mend. And being asked who did send that Planet? answered it was
not I.

Further she says, That she saw a hand appear unto her, and that she heard a
voice in the air said unto her, Anne Baker, save thy self, for to morrow thou
and thy Master must be slain: and the next day her Master and she were in a
Cart together; and suddenly she saw a flash of fire, and she said her
prayers, and the fire went away and shortly after a Crow came and picked upon
her clothes, and she said her prayers again, and bade the Crow go to whom
he was sent and the Crow went unto her Master, and did beat him to death, and
she with her prayers recovered him to life; but he was sick a fortnight after,
and says, that if she had not had more knowledge then her Master, both he and
she and all the Cattle had been slain.

Being examined concerning a child of Anne Stannidge, which she was suspected
to have bewitched to death; says, the said Anne Stannidge did deliver her
childle into her hands, and that she did lay it upon her skirt, but did no
harm unto it: And being charged by the mother of the child, that upon the
burning of the hair and the pairing of the nails of the said child, the said
Anne Baker came in and set her down, and for one hours space could speak
nothing, confesses she came into the house of the said Anne Stannidge in great
pain, but did not know of the burning of the hair and nails of the said
child; but said she was so sick that she did not know whither she went.

Being charged that she bewitched Elizabeth Hough, the wife of William Hough
to death, for that she angered her in giving her alms of her second bread;
confesses that she was angry with her and said she might have given her of
her better bread, for she had gone too often on her errands, but more she says
not.

This Examinate confesses that she came to Ioane Gylles house, her child
being sick, and that she entreated this Examinate to look on her child, and
to tell her whether it was forespoken or no, and this Examinate said it was
forespoken; but when the said child died she cannot tell.

And being asked concerning Nortley carrying of his child home unto his own
house, where the said Anne Baker was, she asked him who gave the said child
that loaf, he told her Anthony Gill, to whom this Examinate said, he might
have had a child of his own if he would have sought in time for it; which
words she confessed she did speak.

Being blamed by Henry Mills in this sort; A fire set on you, I have had two or
three ill nights: to whom she made answer, you should have let me alone then,
which she confesses.

The said Anne Baker, March 2. 1618. confesses before Samuel Fleming Doctor of
Divinity, that about 3. years ago, she went into Northamptonshire, and that
at her coming back again one Peakes wife and Denis his wife of Belvoyre told
her that my young L. Henry was dead, and that there was a glove of the said
Lord buried in the ground; and as that glove did rot and wast, so did the liver
of the said lord rot and wast.

Further she said, March 3, 1618. before Sir George Manners Knight, and Samuel
Fleming Doctor of Divinity, that she has a spirit which has the shape of a
white dog, which she calls her good spirit.

Samuel Fleming test.

The Examination of Ioane Willimot, taken the 28. of February, in the 16. year
of the reign of our Sovereign Lord James, over England King, etc. and over
Scotland the 52. before Alexander Amcots Esquire, one of his Majistise Justices
of the Peace of the said Parts and County.
THis Examinat says, That Ioane Flower told her that my Lord of Rutland had
dealt badly with her, and that they had put away her daughter, and that
although she could not have her will of my Lord himself, yet she had spied my
Lords Son, and had strick on him to the heart. And she says, that my Lords
son was stricken with a white Spirit, and that she can cure some that send
unto her, and that some reward her for her pains, and of some she takes
nothing.

She further says, That upon Friday night last, her Spirit came to her and
told her, That there was a bad woman at Deeping who had given her soul to the
Devil: and that her said Spirit did then appear unto her in a more ugly for
me then it had formerly done, and that it urged her much to give it something,
although it were but a piece of her girdle, and told her that it had taken
great pains for her, but she says that she would give it nothing, and told
it that she had sent it to no place, but only to see how my Lord Rosse did,
and that her spirit told her, that he should do well.

The Examination of the said Ioane Willimot, taken the second day of March, in
the year above said, before the said Alexander Amcots.
THis Examinate says, That she has a Spirit which she calls Pretty, which
was given unto her by William Berry of Langholme in Rutland shire, whom she
served three years, and that her Master when he gave it unto her, willed her
to open her mouth, and he would blow into her a Fairy which should do her
good; and that shoe opened her mouth; and he did blow into her mouth and
presently after his blowing, there came out of her mouth a Spirit, which stood
upon the ground in the shape and form of a woman, which Spirit did ask of her
her soul, which she then promised unto it, being willed thereunto by by her
Master. She further confesses, That she never hurt any body, but did help
diverse that sent for her, which were stricken or fore-spoken: and that her
Spirit came weekly to her and would tell her of diverse persons which were
stricken and fore spoken. And she says, That the use which she had of the
Spirit was to know, how those did which she had undertaken to amend; and that
she did help them by certain prayers which she used, and not by her own
Spirit: neither did she employ her Spirit in any thing, but only to bring word
how those did which she had undertaken to cure.

And she further says, That her Spirit came unto her this last night (as she
thought) in the form of a woman, mumbling, but she could not understand what
it said. And being asked whether she were not in a dream or slumber when she
thought she saw it, she said no, and that she was as walking as at this present.

Alexander Amoors. Thomas Robinson. test.

The Examination of Joane Willimot of Goadby in the County of Leicester widow,
taken the 17. of March, 1618. by Sir Henry Hastings Knight, and Samuel Fleming
Doctor of Divinity, two of his Majesites Justices of the Peace of the said
County of Leicester.
SHe says, That she told one Cooks wife, of Stathorne in the said County
Labourer, that John Patchet might have had his child alive, if he would have
sought forth for it in time, and if it were not death stricken in her ways,
and that Patchets wife had an evil thing within her, which should make an end
of her, and that she knew by her girdle.

She says further, That Gamaliel Greet of Waltham in the said County
Shepherd, had a Spirit like a white Mouse put into him, in his swearing; and
that if he did look upon any thing with an intent to hurt, it should be hurt,
and that he had mark on his left, arm, which was cut away; and that her own
Spirit did tell her all this before it went from her.

Further she says, That Ioane Flower, Margaret Flower, and she, did meet
about a week before Ioane Flowers apprehension in Blackborrow hill, and went
from thence home to the said Ioane Flowers house and there she saw two
Spirits, one like a Rat, and the other like an Owl; and one of them did suck
under, her right ear, as she thought: and the said Ioane told her, that her
Spirit did say, she chould neither be hanged nor burnt.

Further, she says, That the said Ioatie Flower did take up some earth and
spit upon it, and did work it with her finger, and put it up into her purse,
and said, Though she could not hurt the Lord himself yet she had sped his
son, which is dead.

H. Hastings. Samuel Fleming.

The Examination of Ellen Green of Stathorne in the County of Leicester, taken
the 17. of March 1618. by Sir Henry Hastings Knight, and Samuel Fleming Doctor
of Divinity.
SHe says, That one Ioane Willimot of Goadby came about six years since, to
her in the Wowlds, and persuaded this Examinate to forsake God, and betake her
to the Devil, and she would give her, two Spirits, to which she gave her
consent and thereupon the said Ioane Willimot called two Spirits, one in the
likeness of a Kitlin, and the other of a Moldiwarp, the first the said Willmot
called Pusse, the other Hiffe, hiffe, and they presently came to her, and she
departing left them with this Examinate, and they lept on her shoulder, and the
Kitlin sucked under her right ear on her neck, and the Moldiwarp on the left
side, in the like place. After they had sucked her, she sent the Kitlin to a
Baker of that Town, whose name she remembers not, who had called her Witch and
stricken her; and bade her said Spirit go and bewitch him to death: the
Moldiwarp she then bade go to Anne Dawse of the same Town, and bewitch her to
death, because she had; called this Examinate Witch, whore, jade, etc. and
within one fortnight after they both died.

And further this Examinate says, That she sent both her Spirits to Stonesby,
to one Willison a husbandman, and Robert Williman a husbandmans son, and
bade the Kitlin go to Willison and bewitch him to death, and the Moldiwarp to
the other, and bewitch him to death, which they did; and within ten days they
died. These four were bewitched while this Examinate dwelt at Waltham
aforesaid.

About three years since, this Examinate removed thence to Stathorne, where
she now dwelt: upon a difference between the said Willimot and the wife of
John Patchet of the said Stathorne Yeoman, she the said Willimot called her
this Examinate to go and touch the said John Patchets wife and her child,
which she did, touching the said John Patchets wife in her bed, and the child
in the Grace-wifes arms, and then sent her said Spirits to bewitch them to
death, which they did, and so the woman lay languishing by the space of a
month and more, for then she died; the child died the next day after she
touched it.

And she further says, That the said Ioane Willimot, had a Spirit sucking on
her, under the left flank, in the likeness of a little white dog, which
this Examinate says, that she saw the same sucking in Barley-harvest last,
being then at the house of the said Ioane Willimot,

And for her self, this Examinate further says, That she gave her soul, the
Devil, to have these Spirits at her command; for a confirmation whereof, she
suffered them to suck her always as aforesaid, about the Change and full of
the Moon.

H. Hastings. Samuel Fleming.

The Examination of Philip Flower, sister of Margaret Flower, and daughters of
Ioane Flower, before Sir William Pelham, and Master Butler, Justices of the
Peace, February 4. 1618. Which was brought in at the Assizes as evidence
against her sister Margaret.
SHe says, That her mother and her sister maliced the Earl of Rutland, his
Countess, and cheir children, because her sister Margaret was put out of the
Ladies service of Laundry, and exempted from other services about the house,
whereupon her said sister; by the commandment of her mother, brought from the
Castle the right hand glove of the Lord Henry Rosse, which she delivered to her
mother; who presently rubd it on the back of her Spirit Rutterkin, then put it
into hot boiling water, afterward she pricked it often, and buried it in the
yard, wishing the Lord Rosse might never thrive, and so her sister Margaret
continued with her mother, where she often saw the Cat Rutterkin leap on her
shoulder, and suck her neck.

She further confessed, that she heard her mother often curse the Earl and
his Lady, and thereupon would boil feathers and blood together, using many
Devilish speeches and strange gestures.

The Examination of Margaret Flower.
SHe says and confesses, That about four or five year since her mother sent
her, for the right hand glove of Henry Lord Rosse, afterward that her mother
bade her go again into the Castle of Bever, and bring down the glove or some
other thing of Henry Lord Rosse, and she asked what to do? Her mother replied,
to hurt my Lord Rosse: whereupon she brought down a glove, and delivered the
same to her mother, who stroked Rutterkin her Cat with it; after it was dipped in
hot water, and so pricked it often, after which Henry Lord Rosse fell sick
within a week, and was much tormented with the same.

She further faith, That finding a glove about two or three years since of
Francis Lord Rosse, on a dunghill, she delivered it to her mother, who put it
into hot water and after took it out and rubd it on Rutterkin the Cat, and bad
him go upwards, and after her mother buried it in the yard, and said a
mischief light on him, but he will mend again.

She further says, That her mother, and she, and her sister agreed together
to bewitch the Earl and his Lady, that they might have no more children: and
being demanded the cause of their malice and ill will; she says, that about
four years since, the Countess (growing into some mislike with her) gave her
forty shillings, a bolster, and an attresse, and bade her lie at home, and come
no more to dwell at the Castle; which she not only took in ill-part, but
grudged at it exceedingly, swearing in her heart to be revenged. After this her
mother complained to the Earl against one Peake, who had offered her some
wrong, wherein she conceived that the Earl took not her part, as she
expected, which dislike with the rest, exasperated her displeasure against him,
and so she watched an opportunity to be revenged: whereupon she took wool
out of the said mattresse, and a pair of gloves, which were given her by
Master Vavasor, and put them into warm water, mingling them with some blood,
and stirring it together, then she took the wool and gloves out of the
water, and rubd them on the belly of Rutterkin her Cat, saying, the Lord and
the Lady should have more children, but it would be long first.

She further confesses, that by her mothers commandment, she brought to her a
piece of a handkerchiefe of the Lady Katherine the Earls daughter, and her
mother put it into hot water, and then taking it out, rubd it on Rutterkin,
bidding him fly, and go; whereupon Rutterkin whined and cried Mew: whereupon
she said, that Rutterkin had no power over the Lady Katherine to hurt her.

Another Examination of Philip Flower, before Francis Earl of Rutland, Francis
Lord Willoughby of Ersby, Sir George Manners, and Sir William Pelham.
She confesses and says, That she has a Spirit sucking on her in the form
of a white Rat, which keeps her left breast, and has so done for three or
four years, and concerning the agreement betwixt her Spirit and her self,
she confesses and says, That when it came first unto her, she gave her soul
to it, and it promised to do her good, and cause Thomas Simpson to love her,
if she would suffer it to suck her, which she agreed unto; and so the last,
time it sucked was on Tuesday at night, the 23. of February.

Margaret Flower, at the same time confesses, that she has two familiar
Spirits sucking on her, the one white, the other black spotted; the white
sucked under her left breast, and the black spotted within the inward parts of
her secrets. When she first entertained them she promised them her soul, and
they covenanted to do all things which she commanded them, etc.

She further says, That about the 30. of January last past, being Saturday,
four Devils appeared unto her in Lincoln Jayle, at eleven on twelve a clock
at midnight: The one stood at her beds feet, with a black head like an Ape,
and spoke unto her, but what, she cannot well remember, at which she was very
angry because he would speak no plainer, or let her understand his meaning:
the other three were Rutterkin, Little Robin, and Spirit; but she never
mistrusted them, nor suspected her self till then.

THese Examinations and some others were taken and charily preserved for the
contriving of sufficient evidences against them, and when the Judges of Assize
came down to Lincoln about the first wecke of March, being Sir Henry Hobert,
Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Sir Edward Bromely, one of the
Barons of the Exchequer, they were presented unto them, who not only wondered
at the wickedness of these persons, but were amazed at their practices and
horrible contracts with the Devil to damn their own souls: And although the
Right Honorable Earl had sufficient grief for the loss of his children; yet
no doubt it was the greater to consider the manner, and how it pleased God to
inflict on him such a fashion of visitation: Besides, as it amazed the hearers
to understand the particulars, and the circumstances of this devilish contract
was it as wonderful to see their desperate impenitency, and horrible
distraction, according to the rest of that sort, exclaiming against the Devil
for deluding them, and now breaking promise with them, when they stood in most
need of his help.

Notwithstanding all these aggravations, such was the unparalleld magnanimity,
wisdom, and patience of this generous Nobleman, that he urged nothing
against them more then their own confessions, and so quietly left them to
judicial trial, desiring of God mercy for their souls, and of men charity to
censure them in their condemnation: but God is not mocked, and so gave them
over to judgment, nor man so reformed, but for the Earls sake, they cursed
them to that place which they themselves long before had bargained for.

What now remains (gentle Reader) but for thee to make use of so wonderful a
story, and remarkable an accident, out of which, to draw to a conclusion, thou
may collect these particulas: First, that God is the supreme Commander of
all things, and permits wonderful actions in the World, for the trial of
the godly, the punishment of the wicked, and his own glory: of which man shall
never attain to know the reason or occasion. Secondly, that the Devil is the
mere servant and agent of God, to prosecute whatsoever he shall command rather
then give leave unto; limiting him yet thus far in his own nature, that he
can go no further then the bounds within which he is hedged. Thirdly, that
this God has punishments, ad correctionem, that is to say, chastisements of
the godly, and Ad ruinam, Videlicet, judgments against the wicked, wherein yet
man must disclaim any knowledge, and forsake prejudicate opinions. For the
very just shall be tried like gold, and no man exempted from castigation whom
God does love. Fourthly, that this Devil, though he be Gods instrument, yet
works altogether by deceit: for as he was a lier from the beginning; so let
no man trust him, because he aims at the confusion of all mankind, Fifthly,
that the wicked (however they may thrive and prosper for a time) yet in the end
are sure to be paid home, either with punishment in this life or in the life
to come, or both, as a final reward of menstrous impicty. Sixthly, that man in
his frailty must not presume of prosperity, but prepare a kind of stooping
under the hand of God, when it pleases him to strike or punish us. Seventhly,
that there is no murmuring nor repining against God, but quietly to tolerate
his inflictings, whenever they chance, of which this worthy Earl is a
memorable example to all men and ages. Eighthly, that the punishments of the
wicked are so many warnings to all irregular sinners to amend their lives, and
avoid the judgment to come, by penitency, and newness of life. Ninthly, that
though man could be content to pass over blasphemies and offenses against the
Statutes of Princes, yet God will overtake them in their own walks, and pull
them back by the sleeve into a slaughterhouse, as here you know the evidences
against these people took life and power from their own Confessions. Tenthly,
and last of all, that private opinion cannot prevail against public censures:
for here you see the learned and religious Judges cried out with our Savior,
Ex ore tuo. Therefore though it were so, that neither Witch nor Devil could
do these things, yet Let not a Witch live, says God, and Let them die (says
the Law of England) that have conversation with spirits, and presume to
blaspheme the Name of God with spells and incantations. O then you sons of
men, take warning by these examples; and either divert your steps from the
broad way of destruction, and irrecoverable gulf of damnation, or with Iosuahs
counsel to Achan, Bless God for the discovery of wickedness, and take thy
death patiently, as the prevention of thy future judgment, and saving
innocents from punishment, who otherwise may be suspected without a cause.

Vtinam tam facile vera invenire possem, quam falsa convincere. The trial of a
Witch.
Now as touching the trial and discovery of a Witch (then which these cannot
be any president more necessary and behoovefull for us) there are diverse
opinions holden; As some by the pricking of a sharp knife, naule, or other
pointed instrument under the stool or seat on which the Witch sits (for
thereon she is not able to sit or abide) others by scratching, or drawing of
blood from the Witch, by either party that is grieved, or the next of blood to
the same, and others by fire; as by burning any relic or principal ornament
belonging to the suspected Witch, which shall no sooner be on fire, but the
Witch will presently come running to behold it; and of these, trials have been
made both in Hartfordshire, Northamptonshire, and Huntingtonshire; But the
only assured and absolute perfect way to find her out, is to take the Witch
or party suspected either to some Mildam, Pond, Lake or deep River, and
stripping her to her smock, tie her arms acrosse, only let her legs have
free liberty; then fastening arope about her middle which with the help of by
standers may be ever ready to save her from drowning (in case she sink) throw
her into the water, and if she swim aloft and not sincke, then draw her
forth, and have some honest and discreet women near, which may presently
search her for the secret mark of Witches, as Teates, blood-moales, moist
warts, and the like, which found, then the second time (binding her right
thumb to her left toe, and her left thumb to her right toe) throw her into
the water again (with the assistance of the former rope to save her, if she
should chance to sincke) and if then she swim again and do not sincke you
may most assuredly resolve she is a Witch: and of this many pregnant and true
proofs have been made, as namely by one Master Enger of Bedfordshire, upon
the person of Mary Sutton (a notable Witch) whom he cast into his Mildam at
Milton Mills, and found the effect as has been declared, and for her
Witchcraft was there condemned and executed, and as this so I could recite a
world of others in the same nature. But the truth is so manifest that it
needs no flourish to adorn it.

FINIS.

