_(...) (...)the he! (...) of God d^ dyseases ^n^ ^s, what ^rt (...) namely any
man or children that be broke^n in their coddes, so that their guts be fallen
down into their coddes, or (...) other swellynges: The canker or ty^tle, the
colyck and (...) ^e skarre in the lyppe, or other dyseases in the mo^^h. Also
if any man have any disease in his eyes, whe^^^^ it be with spurblindnes, or a
wem or any other skin ^^^wen over the syghte. These and other such like
diseases ^an this forsaid master avoid and heal by the grace and help of
God. Moreover if any be diseased with the pockes, or other pryuy diseases, or
have sore legs of old or new greues: let him come to the forsayde master
Geruaes, which is lodged in it long Southwarck, in saint Thomas hospital. And
he will heal him with the grace of God: the poor freely for the honor and love
of God: and the rich for a reasonable reward.

God save the King.
LIBRARY OF HARVARD UNIVERSITY CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS THE HOUGHTON LIBRARY
16 November 1959
Dr. W. R. LeFanu, Librarian Royal College of Surgeons of England Lincoln's Inn
Fields London, W. C. 2
Dear Dr. LeFanu:
Many thanks for the photograph of your quack bill. I cannot of course be
certain of this, but I think it was printed by William Copland about 1550, that
is it must have been not after the reign of Edward VI. Copland used the
ornament on the right hand in his edition of the Four Sons of Aymon, 1554, he
having derived this ornament from Wynken de Word where I have traced it in
several uses. The zig zag ornament was also Wynken de Worde's, but about this
period I haven't found it used except "in the house of Berthelet", which should
mean Thomas Powell, where it occurs in STC 10477. However the type is Copland's
and not Wynken de Worde's or Berthelet's, and I think that as Copland inherited
a good many of these minor cuts of Wynken de Worde's and as the type is his, it
would appear to be reasonably certain that Copland was the printer and that
it is rather later than it is been hitherto dated. The difficulty of course is
that the state of the cuts from the tears in the paper is difficult to
establish, but certainly they look later than when used by de Word.

With kindest regards, Very truly yours, William A. Jackson WAJ:mbd


