(...)

Manured By Si^e (...) (...)


Dressed and Maintained;
Printed at (...) for Thom^^ (...)

SOLOMON that most renowned and royal King, weighing the wretchedness of this
world, by the weight of his wonderful wisdom; could no less but redouble
his words and say, Vanitas vanitatum, Eccle. 1. 2.
vanitas vanitatum: and omnia vanitas. Which seeing it is so (Right (...)) it
behooves every one of us, not so much to avoid the causes that may provoke us
to vanity, as to practice all the means that may procure us to piety; and to
walk with such foresight in this terrestrial pilgrimage, as we may have
fruition of felicity in the Celestial Paradise; according to the counsel of
our Savior Christ, who wills us first to seek the Kingdom of God, and his
Mat. 7. 33.
righteousness: and not dissenting from the saying of the Apostle, who
persuades us to set our affections on things that are above, and Col. 3. 2.
not on things that are on the earth; Insomuch that all our knowledge is but
vain, that is seduced with vanity: all our wisdom is but meare folly, that
is carried away with earthly cogitations: yea al our doings detestable that
tend only to temporal dispositions; for there is none to be deemed wise
indeed, that will not bestow his talent in the treasure of Gods word,
considering it is so precious, that it ought more to be desired then Gold, yea
then much fine Gold: and it is so delectable, that in sweetness it excels the
honey, and the honey comb, wherein Psalm. 19. 10.
David did oppose his whole Psalm. 119. 97.
delight: And it is so expedient for us to profit therein, as he that has much,
may yield somewhat, sithence that he that has less, shall not be excused
with nothing; the Lord will look for ten Talents, where he Mat. 25. 22.
left five, and will punish him that makes no profit where he bestowed one.
Hereof it is I have proceeded in this enterprise, and bestowed my time to the
benefit of others which although it be not comparable to any comme^dable
work, yet that is not excusable for any to detract his duty, seeing God will
accept of a Mite, of a willing mind, neither ought to be contemptible amongst
others, though all be not current: for the building is furthered by inferior
helps, though it be framed by finer heads.

Again the world is now grown into his last age, wherein Sects, Schisms, and
errors do spread, and sin and iniquity. abounds: Insomuch as (I fear
me) it is with many of us in ENGLAND, as it was with the people of ISRAEL,
they loathed Exodus 16.
Manna that fell from Heaven for the sustenance of their bodies, and too too
many of us do little regard that spiritual Manna, (the word of GOD) that is
sent for the succor of our souls. Hereof it I have made choice of your good
(...) and presented my labors to your Godly patronage, assuring my self as
you be favorers and followers of Gods word, so you will be defenders of the
fruits of the same, and rather be preferrers then defacers of a forward
action, not doubting but your (...) will well accept of it, as a work
ymporting and proceeding of good will, by the consideration of that example of
the poor widow preferring the simplicity of the giver, before the
sufficiency of the gift, knowing that the imperfection of the present may be
covered by the presumption of the Poet; and I may say in the want of well
doing, Est voluisse satis. Thus being loath to be too tedious in my Epistle,
having observed brevity in all my said book, I refer the consideration
thereof, to your grave censures; submitting my self to your good courtesies,
and committing your to the protection of the Almighty.

Your to command.

To the Christian READER.
HE that does publish a matter to the judgment of many, the same requires to
be done, not lightly, but deliberately; considering it is a subject to sundry
censures, and in reading and judging all are not Candidi Lectores. In regard
whereof (good Christian Reader) I have published my pains to thy profit, and
presented thy liking of it, to thy looking over, having (as nigh as I may) not
only cut off all such occasions, as might cause cavillation, but also
ministered such matter as concerns our consolation: and although it be not
pollished precisely, for the expectation of the curious; yet it is finished
plainly for the information of the simple. Now it may be there be many that
will use obiectio^s against the Triple form of this Treatise, because no art
has reduced althings (and rightly) to Dicotomies. True; but wisdom may
contriue much compendiously, and yet profitablie: besides although I have
framed it as an easy entrance for the erudition of the ignorant, I have not
excluded what may further be added by the consideration of the learned, and
abject much more might be inserted in many places for prolixitie, yet much
less I fear me is observed of the most part for their utility. Some will
require a more direct placing of things in their order; Certes that is well
placed, that is well applied: And those that do more respect the manner of
placing, then the matter it self, may be noted in the number of those, who
would have the Psalms of DAVID to proceed, and not to follow the Book of
JOB; making a scripulous question without cause, when we all know they are
both included in the Scriptures, and contain comfortable matter for our
salvation. Some will not like so many diverse sorts of sundry things congest
together in one heap, other will require more prospycuitie, some one thing,
some another: Insomuch that he that expects to please the opinions of all
people, must either refrain from open Publication of any thing, or refer
himself to their general dispositions in judgment: And this is the common
success of acceptance; many will commend it, most will mislike it, few will
follow it. But as my meaning was to profit the simple, by the setting forth of
it; so I shall persuade the godly to a good liking of it: and as for the
froward, I will not refell their foolish questions in disputation about it,
knowing what the Apostle Paul says, that foolish and unlearned questions,
engender strife.

So wishing all to measure by the meet they would receive themselves, and so
to report as (...) ^^^pect (...) pris^ I both submit myself to reprehension,
so it be pertinent; and commit every one to his own liking, so it be
indifferent.

Vale.

Yours in the Lord.

GODS Acre of Land, taken out of the holy Scriptures; And diverse other learned
Authors.
EVERY man's knowledge ought to be reasonable toward Man (...) not presu^^
God, that he presume not to understand above that Rom* (...)
which is meet to understand.

Applyable to himself, that ac^^^ding to his knowledge, he show (...) same in
his life and conversation Luke 12.
^or else his great knowledge will ^o^^emne him.

Profitable to others, that as he received the gift, he minister the ^^er. 4.
10
same to others.

He that would attain to an efectuall knowledge of God, must remember his
precepts, his promises, and his threatenings.

The eternal power of God, may be known by the revelation of his Word, by the
creation of the world, and by the consideration of all his Works.

The infaillible providence of God, may appear unto us by the Dan. 6. 6.
Jonas. 1. 15
preservation of Daniell in the Lions Den: of Jonas in the Whales belly, and
of the three Children, in the fiery Oven.

The providence of God is wonderful, Gods prouide^^^ wonderful. M. P.
for he works by means. For meat is a mean to serve ^is providence for the
preservation of health and life here, he that contemns to eat because his
providence is infallible; does contemn his providence, without means: For if
it were so that meat could not be had, then should we not tie his providence
to this mean, for without meat, God can help and give health, and life here.
Against means, for his power and wisdom is infinite, and therefore we
should depend upon his providence, even when all is clean against us.

The exceeding mercy of God, is made manifest unto us in the Gods (...)
manifest.
Scriptures, by the miraculous examples of compassion, by the manifold words of
consolation, and by the death of his only Son for our propitiation.

He that mistrusts the mercy of God, denies him to be Love, Gods mercy must
not be^ mistrusted.
wherein consists all the hope of poor sinners, because of his great love,
he sent his only Son to suffer death, for the remission of our sins,
(Truth) because he promised for the love of his Son, pardon to all poor
sinners, so often as they require it in faith, with a contrite heart

Power, because he is as true of his promises, as he is able to perform
them; and as he is of power so will he do whatsoever pleases him.

The super-aboundant love of God, appears unto us in this, that Gods
super-aboundant Love.
he sent his own Son for our redemption, for our justification, and for our
sanctification.

The joys of Heaven, prepared for those that love God, are such: Joys of
Heaven. 1. Cor. 2. 9.
as the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, and the heart cannot
conceive.

Every man ought to know the difference in believing, A God is to be belieud,
he is the only true, and almighty Difference in believing. M. P.
God, this faith is Historical, for so Devils believe as well as the wicked,
of God: All is true that he says in the scriptures of him, and so do the evil
Christians, as well as the good, unless they be Heretics. In God, is to love
him, and to trust in his goodness, and in believing, to join our selves to
him by love, and obedience, this Faith is Evangelical, only propper to the
elect, (who live by Faith.)

It is not sufficient for us to say, we know God, love God, and fear 1. John 2.
God, unless we keep his commandments.

God shows upon earth, mercy, Iere. 9. 24. etc.
wherein consists our salvation: Judgment, wherewith he punishes the wicked:
Justice, whereby he preserves the godly.

God, often times crosses and John 9. 3. Luke 13. 3.
punishes man upon earth, for his own glory, as appears by the Blinde-man;
for example to others, as appears by the Galilean; for trial of his faith,
as appears by Job that patient man.

God in times past, spoke, and preached to his people by dreams, by visions,
and by revelations.

God has appointed three places Three places appointed*
for all persons, the joys of Heaven, for the godly, the pains of Hell, for
the wicked, the use of the Earth, ^or all persons.
for both.

God is worthily said to be Rich in mercy, in that he respects the ^od
rich in ^ercy.
humble freely. Mighty in Justice, in that he judges the wicked justly.

Bountiful in grace, in that he saves Barnard.
sinners pitifully.

God requires no more at our hands: but these three things, Fear, Deuteronomy. 10.
12.
Obedience, and Love.

God ought to be beloved of us, with all our hearts, with all our souls Deuteronomy.
10. 12. Romans 8. 28.
and with all our strength, all things work for the best to them that love God.

God is loved effectually three God loved three ways.
manner of ways, entirely, in having a good will to him: rejoicing greatly,
he is such a one as he is: orderly, in referring our selves, and all that we
have to him, in such manner and measure as he wills.

Love, is the end of the Commandment. ^ Tim. 1. 5.


Love, cannot be without a good conscience. A good conscience, cannot be
without Faith. Faith, cannot be without the word of God.

We ought continually to be thankful to God, because, of him, Romans 11. 3.
through him, and for him are all things.

True thankefullnesse, consists True thankfulness. M. R.
in three things, commemoration, because in recounting Gods exceeding
benefits, he has done for us, we shall find the better occasion (if we will
consider) to be the more thankful for them, as David did which made him in
feruencie of spirit burst forth into these speeches: What shall I render unto
the Lord, for all Psalm. 116. 12. 13. 14.
his benefits bestowed upon me.

Abiection, because if we measure Gods benefits with our deserts, we shall
find our selves not worthy of the least, but in respect of our imperfections,
we are no better then abiects, which we should not only acknowledge, and say
with the same Prophet, Lord what is man that (...). 114. 3.
thou art so mindful of him? But also in regard thereof say (with him) I will
not die: but live (to this end) to declare works and goodness of god, ^sal. 118.
17.
he has done for me. Narration, because it is not enough for us to receive
Gods benefits and be mindful thereof, but also we are bound to make others to
profit thereby, and praise God, as the same Psalmograph Psalm. 6^. 16.
did, come (says he) and hearken all ye that fear God, and I will tell you
what he has done to my Soul.

We ought continually to have the fear of God before our eyes, Pro. 9. 10.
Pro 19. 23. Luke 1. 15.
because it is the beginning of wisdom, because it causes us to depart from
evil, because his mercy is on such from generation to generation. It was the
treasure of Hezekiah. Esaias. 33. 6.


There be three kinds of fears, Fears three ^^ndes.
childelie fear, this appertains to the godly: who fears God only for
his goodness, without any finister Acts 9. 31.
respects. Servile fear: this is proper to the wicked, who fear 2. Kings 7.
3^*
God only for his punishment. Natural fear: this is common to Mat. 14. 26*
both, for faith often times fails the very elect.

The fear of God, (as Saint Barnard says) is the water of wholesome wisdom,
he that has this fear before his eyes, his ways are beautiful, the well of
Life: He that has this fear before his eyes, his paths are peaceable, the
beginning of knowledge: He that has this fear before his eyes, his
footesteps are immovable.

This may enforce us to fear God because he is said to be terrible, and Exodus
23.
a God of revenge, because his house shall soon be overthrown: that Eccle.
27. 3*
fears him not, because he is such a Mat. 10. 28.
one as is able to cast both body and soul, into hell fire.

God repented him of three things Genesis 6. 6.
that he made man on the Earth, that he made Saul King, that he ^^m 15. 11.
^ Sam. 24.
had sent evil to the Israelites.

God never repented, although it seemed to man's judgment, when any thing goes
contrary to his temporal election: because his eternal Hosea. 13. 14 1. sam.
15. Eccle. 39. 16.
council is immutable: because he is not man that he should repent: because
all his works are exceeding good.

God ought to be worshipped of us with our hearts, sinceerelie, because with
the heart man believes Romans 10. 10.
unto righteousness: with our mouths boldly: because with the mouth he
confesses unto salvation, with our works accordingly, Iam. 2. 17.
because by works he shows the fruits of his faith and profession.

In the true worship of God, this is to be considered, if we acknowledge Luke
12. 9.
him in our hearts and deny him with our mouths, or any of our members, he
will deny us, and this is no better then Idolatry, if we draw nigh him with
our lips, Psalm. 18. 41.
and are far from him with our hearts, he will not hear us, for this is
mere hypocrisy, if we do works without faith, he will not accept Romans 14.
13.
them, for it is but iniqoitie.

Whatsoever we need; we must Phil. 4. 6.
require the same of God by Prayer, For although he knows our want Luke. 21.
39.
before we ask, yet we must pray: because he has commanded we should,
because we continually want that grace which he has promised Luke. 22. 40.
to give: because the devil is busy, least we fall into temptation.

Prayer is very expedient and profitable, (considering our whole Prayer
profitable. M. Pla.
salvation in the calling upon the name of God) for thereby he is wholly
present with us, by his Fatherly providence, by the which he continually
watches over us: infallible power, by the which he sustaineth and succoureth
our weakness, being every moment ready to perish: infinite goodness, by the
which he receaueth us into favor being miserably laden with sin.

Our Prayers are to be used generally Prayers at ^ll times.
at all times; because the Lord has promised to hear us at what time soever
we call upon him Ezekiel. 18, 19.
faithfully: in all places, because he Psalm. 139. 6.
is every where, whither shall I go from thy spirit (says David): for all
persons, because it is our duty to pray one for another. Iam 5. 16.


In our prayer we are to consider in whose presence we stand, that Eccle. 18.
22. Consideration in prayer.
seeing we stand in the presence of God (to whose majesty so innumerable
thousands of Angels do assist and be subject,) we may have a reverent regard
of his majesty, in preparing our selves to prayer, least thereby we tempt him.

To whom we speak, that seeing we enter common with him, that knows the
secrets of our hearts, (before whom nothing is more odious then hipocrysie)
we call upon him in truth, least he reject our suits, what we desire, that
seeing prayers at adventure are unprofitable (which proceed more Iam. 4. 2.
of custom from the lips, then of zeal from the heart) we ask those
things which be most to the glory of God, and the comfort of our consciences,
least we ask and receive not.

We must offer and continue our Prayers faithfully without doubting, because
the Lord has not promised to grant, but only to such Mar. 11. 24.
as believe to obtain, and therefore he says, whatsoever you desire when you
pray, believe that you shall have it, and it shall be done unto you,
charitablely without wrath; because we cannot be assured of Gods favor,
unless we forgive (which is after the manner of a Sacrament unto us) hereof
says our Savior Christ, when you pray, Mar 11. 25.
forgive, that your father may forgive you. Incessantly without fainting;
because the Lord requires perseverance in our Prayers, according to that same
saying of S. Paul. In due season we shall reap, if we Gale. 6. 9.
faint not.

We must not offer our prayers to any I doll; for it is abomination in the
sight of God, to any earthly Deuteronomy. 17. 15. Iere. 17. 5.
man, for cursed is he that puts his trust in man. To any heavenly Saint;
for Christ is our only mediator. John. 17. 3.


Our prayers must be used and Prayers used. John. 5. 22.
offered to God by Christ Jesus, because power is given into his hands, because
in him, the Father is well Math. 3. 17.
pleased; because without him we can do nothing. Ioh. 15. 5.


He that offers an effectual Psalm. 145. Peter. 3. Math. 6. John. 3. Psalm.
109.
prayer, must have a lively feeling Faith. least it be hindered: peace and love
with his neighbors, least it be no^ regarded: a life answerable to this Faith,
least it be turned into sin.

Our prayer has his perfection Prayers perfection* 1. Cor. 5. 2^*
from Christ, or else it could not prevail: for he was made sin for us,
that we might be made the righteousness of God, for to him that works not,
but believes in him Romans 4. ^.
that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted righteousness, for we
being justified through Faith, have peace toward God, through Romans 5. 1.
him.

Christ Jesus, may very fitly be called our eyes: because by him we Christ
our eyes.
see the Father. Our mouth: because by him we speak to the father. Our hand:
because by him we offer to the father.

The Lord will not always presently hear our prayers, or grant our requests;
because he will try our faith and patience, Hereof says David, I waited
patiently for the Psalm. 40. 1.
Lord, and he inclined unto me and heard my cry: because they are impertinent:
for we know not what to pray as we ought: and therefore Romans 8. 26.
we ask and have not, because we Iam. 4. 3.
ask amiss, because they accord not with his pleasure: for this assurance
Ioh. 5. 14.
we have, if we ask according to his will, he hears us.

To this end, in prayer we should lift up our eyes, that they may not Psalm.
119. 37.
incline or be carried with vanity. Hereof says David, turn away my eyes
from regarding vanity. Our hands, that we should remember our selves to be
far off from God, unless we lift up our hearts also on high: and therefore
says the same Psalm. 25. 1.
Prophet. To thee have I lifted up my Soul. Our hearts, that thereby we should
know if our hearts be not far from terrestrial cogitations, we shall hardly
receive any celestial consolations.

We may lawfully in prayer ask corporal benefits of God: because Corporal
benefits.
we should thereby know that he is the author and giver thereof, and should not
only be thankful to him for it, but thereby to seek, love, and worship
him, because we should Ios. 7.
be persuaded of his good providence toward us, in that he has Ios. 7.
not only promised, he will never fail us: but also has an outstretched
hand, to help them that call upon him. Because our faith of recociliation and
remission of sins, should be exercised through the asking of these corporal
things.

The fervent prayer of the righteous Prayer avails. Exodus 8.
much aualyeth, not only for them, but for others. At Moses prayer the plague
ceased. Elias, great 1. King. 17.
plenty of rain. Queen Hester delivered Hest. 14.
her, and her people.

We ought to refer all our prayers, Prayers etc referred.
requests and doings to Gods good pleasure, following the example of Christ,
when he was crucified Mat. 26. 4
without cause by the Jews. Of David, when he was dispossessed of his 2. Sam.
15. 26
Kingdom by his son, and of Job, Job. 2. 7 and 13
when he was afflicted most grievously by Satan.

The means whereby we are Salvation*
drawn to salvation, is Faith, (...), and Charity; The chiefest of these is
love, because it serves hear and Co. 13. 13
in the world to come.

The work of a true faith is builded True faith builded.
upon things past, we believe the death of Christ is past: things present, we
believe at this present, he sits at the right hand of his Father; and
things to come, we believe that Christ shall come to judge the August.
quick and the dead.

Faith does grow and increase in us, three manner of ways; By the hearing of
the word of God preached: Faith increases 3. ways. M. P.
because it lays before our eyes, the promises which God in his Gospel has
made unto us in his Son. By the reverent receiving of the Sacraments, because
they being rightly received of us, are as pledges and seals of the promises of
God, made unto us in his word. And by prayer and invocation, because God has
made an especial promise to us thereby, that he will hear whatsoever we ask
according to his will.

A true and lively faith must be A description of true Faith. M. S.
Simple in believing the word of god without inquiring or searching in Gods
mystical matters by humane reasons. Sound in defending the truth thereof with
inclyning or leaving to the erroneous opinions of the adversaries of the same.
Constant, in following the same word without doubting, for any reason of man's
blame that seems contrary, nor to be drawn away from it by temptations,
promises or threatenings either of torment or of death.

Such as will know whether they Faith the knowledge.
have an effectual faith, must consider, the fruis of it is, good works: for
Iam. 2. 17.
faith without works, is dead. The trial of it is Affliction, for it is not
sufficient Phil. 1 29.
for us to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for his sake. The end of it is
Salvation, for he that continues to the end (has this comfort) Mat. 24.
shall be saved.

A Justifying Faith is known by these effects: It brings forth Mat. 7. 18.
Iam. 3. 18. Galat. 5. 6.
fruits; It works by love: It apprehends Gods mercy offered in Jesus Christ.

Faith differs from Hope, and Faith the difference.
yet we hope in things present, as when I hope I am in Gods favor. things
past, as when I hope my sins be forgiven me: things to come, as when I hope to
have eternal life.

Charity is a singular virtue, for Charity a virtue.
without it, what is Faith? It avails little though it move mountains.
Knowledge, it profits little though I speak with tongues of men and Angels.
Martyrdom, It helps little though I offer my body to be 1. Cor. 13.
burned.

We ought to live in love and charity, How to live. 1. Tim. 1. 5.
because it is the effect and fulfilling of the Commandment and whole Law:
Because it is a testimony unto us of our translation from 1. John. 3. 14.
death to life, whereby we are made 1. John 4. 8.
the Children of God and heirs in heaven: Because it works the cause in us,
for God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.

Works of superarrogation are Works of superarrogation.
very frivolous, for our works are in no wise availeable to save us, by reason
of their Imperfection: because all righteousness is no better then filthy Esa.
64. 6.
clouts (or as some writ) menstruous Romans 11. 6.
clothes. Gods election, because we should then chose God rather by our works,
then he should elect us of his mere grace, and then grace were no grace.
Christ's passion, because his son should have suffered in vain, if we had any
sufficiency of our selves.

Although works are not the cause of our salvation, yet partly they are the
effects of it: good works are very necessary to be used amongst Christians;
That thereby God may glorified: That by their good examples Mat. 5. 16. 1.
Peter. 3. 1. 2. Peter. 1. 10.
others may be won to the word: That by them they may make their Election
sure.

David numbered three degrees of our salvation. Gods mercy, whereby Psalm. 40. 10
Degrees of salvation.
he fatherly pittieth us: His righteousness, whereby he continually protecteth
us: His truth, whereby appears his constant favor towar^s us.

There be three causes of our salvation: The efficient cause God the Salvation
3. causes. M. P.
Father is the beginning of our salvation. The material cause, Christ Jesus is
he in whom our righteousness is resident. The Isntrumental cause, faith is the
mean whereby we apprehend the same.

S. Paul approves the formal cause of our salvation to be the free mercy of
God: for whom he predestinateth, Romans 8. 30.
he calls: whom he calls, he justifies: and whom he Ephesians. 2. 8.
justifies, he glorifieth. By grace ye are saved through faith.

Although there be many reasons whereby we may assure our selves to be elected,
yet we may briefly gather our election, by the holy Ghost, which testifies
with our spirit, that Romans 8. 15.
we are the Children of God: by the fruits of the spirit, in having good
works or will to do well. By remorse of conscience, joined with the loathing
of sin, and love of righteousness.

Election is known by these testimonies, Faith is gathered by sanctification,
Election. Beza. 2. These. 10. 11
and according to the truth: truth is gathered by calling, through the preaching
of the Gospel: The Gospel assures us of a certain hope of glorification.

Touching Election and Reprobotion, Elestion and Reprobatio^. M. Deuteronomy.
this is to be considered: That the only will and purpose of God is the chief
cause of both. That his free mercy in Christ is an inferior cause of salvation.
That the hardness of heart, is an inferior cause of damnation.

This undoubted persuasion we ought generally to have: Every one is elected,
or rejected at the beginning: Every one is an unprofitable servant, when he
has done his best: Every one shall have reward according to his work.

We ought not to condemn or Condemn not. Psalm. 64. 4.
judge any to be Reprobate (albeit to be without fear of God) and reverence
of man, are signs of reprobation. Because it is a secret, only reserved to
God, and therefore he Mat. 7. 1. Iam. 4. 12.
has said, judge not, that ye be not judged. Because the Lord is not so
merciful in forgiving, as he is miraculous in calling; making of a persecutor
Acts. 9. 3.
an Apostle, as he did by Paul. Because the very Godly have 1. Kin. 19. 10.
been very greatly over gone in this matter, as that great Prophet of the Lord
Elias in judging the people of Israel.

These three steps do lead us into Barnard. Destruction 3. steps.
destruction; The dissembling of our weakness, The ignorance of our
wretchedness: The excusing and perseuering in our wickedness.

The Scriptures are written for us, Script^res writteo.
That we might know the will of god and follow it. That we might believe that
Jesus is Christ the Son Ioh. 20. 31.
of God. That in believing we might have life through his name.

The whole Scriptures are divided Barnard. Scriptures divided.
into three parts: Law, Prophets, Gospel. The Law consist in doing, the
Gospel consist in believing.

This may persuade us to believe the authority of the scriptures to be true:
The secret testimony of the Bib:
holy Ghost in our hearts, which causes us to consent thereto. The
incomprehensible Majesty of God appearing in the simple and sincere doctrine
therein. The godly agreement of all parts together, with the orderly
disposition, certainty and success thereof.

The Scriptures do set forth unto us (amongst many other) three special
matters which we ought to remember: The frailty of man, and his prone
inclination to evil; The Justice of God, and his severe punishment appointed
for obstinate transgressors. The mercy of God, and his free pardon promised to
penitent sinners.

Every one ought effectually to know and search the holy scriptures (for
knowledge,) because the ignorance of them is the cause of all error. (for
confirmation,) because we must believe nothing, but that which is approved by
them. (for consolation,) because in them is Acts 17.
contained eternal life.

We may gather knowledge in the scriptures three manner of ways, by attendant
hearing of the same well preached; By diligent reading of the Acts. 8.
same with understanding: By continual conference with such as can open them.

The word of God then draws us unto him, when it is so preached and heard, as
we understand and learn what is taught thereby. When we receive thankfully
that which is given, promised and assured therein. When we be moved with desire
and diligence to do that which it commands. Word of god perfect word 1.
Peter. 4. 8.


The word of God has then his perfect work, when it is Preached truly,
Believed faithfully, Followed effectually.

Such as will not believe the word of God, what follows: If the righteous
searcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinners appear? Every
unfaithful, shall dye in his vnfaithfullnesse, says Esdras. Every Esdras. 15.
4. Ioh. 3. 18. 2. These. 1.
vnbelieuer is condemned already And shall be punished with everlasting
perdition.

Ignorance can no way be excusable, Ignrance inexcusable Romans 1. 19.
for that which may be known of God, is made manifest unto us: For those that
know not the Law, shall perish without the law. For the offering for ignorant
sins, in the Leuiticall law, argues no excuse to Leuit. 4. 12.
be admitted.

Our Savior Christ describes Mat. 13. A description.
by the parable of the Sower, three unprofitable hearers of the word. Such a
one as hears it, and understands it not, by reason the evil one comes and
catches it away out of his heart. Such a one as hears it, and receives it
presently with great joy, but when persecution or tribulation comes, by
reason of the word, he is offended. Such a one as hears it, but the cares of
this world, and the deceitfullnesse of riches choke it, and the same is made
unfruitful.

We ought to resort to the Church of God, because his holy ministeries Church
of God must be used. M. Fox.
are there laid open, which are hid and obscure to many: because we may be
united and copled together by receiving the Sacraments: because if the Lord
has promised to grant our requests, where two or three be gathered together
in his name, how much more will he be mindful of a multitude that so
assemble themselves.

The Church of God has three Church 3. Ornaments.
ancient and excellent Ornaments,

Preaching, Prayer, Sacraments.
Preaching, ingendreth Faith.
Prayer, increases it.
Sacraments, confirm it.
The Church or Congregation Congregation must pray without difference.
ought to pray for all men, without any difference of Nation, kind, age, or
order: because the Lord by calling of all sorts, yea sometimes those that are
the greatest enemies to the Gospel, will have his Church gathered together
after this sort, and therefore prayers to be made for all; because God should
not else be manifested to be the only God of all men, unless he should show
his goodness in saving of all sorts of men: because his son Christ Jesus
should not be seen to be the only mediator between God and of al sorts of
men, by having taken upon that nature of man, which is common to all men, and
made intercession for all.

Sacraments are signs or badges Sacraments
of Christianity, seals or pledges of our faith, assurance of our salvation
whereof there be two, Baptism and the Lords supper.

The sacrament of Baptism, teaches Bib: Baptism.
us to put on Christ, that his righteousness may cover our sinfulness:
assures us that we are grafted in Christ, that all our corruption is clean
washed away, charge us to mortify and dye to sin, that we may become his
servants, and live in mutual amity.

The sacrament of the Lords supper, Bib: Lords supper.
shows us, that the body and blood of Christ crucified is the only food for
the regenerate, assures us that Christ is wholly ours, and that by faith our
souls are fed and nourished in him unto everlasting life: requires a
thankful remembrance of his death, with unity amongst brethren.

The sacrament of the Lords supper Sacraments M. Dent.
is unworthily received, when we receive it only by the visible sign,
without regard of the invisible grace, when we receive it more of custom,
then good consideration, or more for fear, then good affection: when we
receive it disorderly (being drunked) or with a corrupted conscience
(continuing in malice or enmity.

The sacrament of the Lords supper must be received reverently: therefore let
every one try and examine his knowledge. Eaten effectual, therefore let every
one try and examine his faith. Disgested thankfully, and therefore let every
one try Article Religio. 26.
and examine his repentance.

Good Ministers are most fit to minister the holy Sacraments, yet Good
Ministers most fit
we may receive them by the evil, because they do it in Christ his name, and
not in their own: because their wickedness cannot take away the effect of the
ordinance, because of Christ's institution and promise, so it be rightly
received by faith.

These three things are to be noted (whereof hitherto has arisen some
question) concerning the sacrament Note three things.
of the Lords supper; By whom we receive it, we ought to receive it at the
hands of the good minister, if it be possible; yet we must not reject the
ministry thereof by the wicked, so it be done formally. With whom we receive
it, we may communicate with every one, so the 1. Cor. 5. 11.
be not such as are not notoriously known to be Drunkers, Adulterers and such
like, for that is prohibited. How ought we receive it, we may rereiue 1. Cor.
11. 27
at all times, so our faith and confirmity be fit for the same: otherwise it
will turn to our condemnation, says Paul.

It is a pitiful (nay rather a pestiferous thing) to see such placed in
Apittifull thing.
the ministry as be Ignorant in learnning, for where there is no vision, the
Prove. 29. 18.
people perish. Negligent in their calling, for they are accursed that do
Iere. 48 10.
the work of God negligently. Impudent in their living, for their lewdness
makes the word of god worse liked of. 1. Sam. 2. 17.


Idle Ministers, unpreaching Pastors, and such like, are nothing else, Idle
Ministers. Esa. 56. 9. 10. Ezekiel. 13. 4.
but; Blind watchmen, Dumme dogs, Subtle Foxes, who destroy Gods vine for
their own advantage.

Godly Preachers will be very Godly Preachers.
careful, of the sinceritye of their doctrine, that it be agreeable to the
word of God: Of the integrity of their lives, that they be confirmable to the
same word: Of all their whole actions, that they be profitable to the example
of others.

These sayings may move Preachers and such like, to be very careful; Sayings
to move Preachers.
Because they must one day yield an account of their Stewardshippe. Watchful,
Because his blood Ezekiel. 33. 6. 1
shall be required at their hands, that dies in their iniquity through their
Wisd. 6. 5.
negligence. Fearful, Because an hard Judgment shall try him that bears
rule.

Godly Preachers and Pastors are greatly to be accepted, for their office
sake: Because they represent Luke. 9. 41. Mark. 10. 41. 1. These. 5. 13.
the person of God. Loved, for their works sake: Because they dispose his
secrets and mysteries. Obayed, for Commandment sake: Because they are
appointed Overseers, and watchers for our souls, as those Heb. 13. 17.
that must yield account for them.

S. Peter wills preachers, pastors 1. Pete. 1. 18.
and such like, to feed their flock, caring for it; Not by constraint, but
willingly: Not for filthy lucre, but of a willing mind: Not as though they were
Lords over Gods heritage but as examples to them.

S. Paul showed a most worthy example to preachers and such like, by An
example to preachers Acts 20. 31.
his dutifulness in preaching; For he ceased not by the space of three
years, to preach and warn every one both night and day with tears: by his
painfulness in laboring; For he wrought with his own hands to minister to
his necessities, not 1. Cor. 4. 12.
only because he would be chargeable Act. 20. 23.
to none, but also to help to relieve others: by his contentment in living,
for although his living was little, yet he well accepted of all estates,
without coveting any man's silver, Gold, or apparel.

Preachers must teach the word of God, whether they regard it or no: because it
may be a Testimony against Deuteronomy. 18. 19
the unbelievers, or neglectors of the same at the latter day: Iere. 7. 27.
because the Lord will use the means of his servants to make the wicked more
faulty to prove his: because it is their duty to be instant in season 2. Tim.
4. 2.
and out of season.

The spirit of Prophesiyng and Io. 11. 51. 1. sam. 10. 10. 1. Ioh. 4. 1.
preaching is sometimes given to the wicked as well as to the Godly, as by
Caiphas, Saul, Judas the Apostle. Therefore we must try the spirits whether
they be of God.

The word of God ought not to Gods word not to be exempted to any.
be exempted from any estate, neither ought to be contemned in any person in
respect of his condition, calling, or unworthiness; profesing the same
profitably, considering God has called Plowmen from the fields, to be
Prophets; Shepheardes 1. King. 19. 19 Psalm. 78. 7 Mat. 4. 18.
from the folds, to be zealous professors: Fishermen from the nets, to be
followers of him.

We must not condemn, or contemn Ministers not to be contemned.
the Ministers of God, if by infirmity they fall into horrible offenses, for
Satan has beguiled the most Godly professors, as Lot Genes. 19 30
that ancient Patriarch, became incestious. David that excellent prophet, 2.
Sam. 11. 25.
committed Homicide. Peter that good Apostle proved perjured. Ioh. 18. 27.


It is very dangerous to despise, pensecute, or conspire the death of A
da^gorous thing.
the Ministers of God, as may appear by these three Examples.

1 Iesubel did threaten the death 2. Kin. 19. 35. and 36.
of Eliah, yet he lived and was taken up into heaven; when she died, and was
eaten of Dogs.

2 Saul intended the death of David, yet he escaped and became King; 1. sam.
31. 4.
but Saul procured his own death 2. sam. 1. 9. 15
most desperately.

3 Herod put to death John Baptist, Acts. 12. 13.
but as his deeds were detestable before God, so his end was ignominious to
the world, for he was eaten to death with worms.

Preachers Pastors and such like, Preachers subject to contempt. M. Gray.
of all others are most of all subject to contempt and enmity: Because Satan
by policy procures many to a disdain of their persons, as a mean to induce
them to a disliking of their Doctrine: Because the spirits of error are now
spread abroad, 2. Tim. 3. 2.
which will deceive the hearts of many, and cause them to become cursed
speakers, especially against Gods ministers: Because these are 2. Tim. 3
those perilous days, wherein it was long sithence prophesied, that many
should be dispisers of them which are good.

Peter was three times commanded Bar.
to feed his flock, which is expounded three ways: with sound doctrine, with
honest life, with good Ioh. 21. Flock fed
Hospitality.

This word (Behold) does commonly import some great admiration unto us, as it
is used concerning Christ at his Nativity: Behold (says Luke 2. 10.
the Angel to the Shepeheardes) I bring you glad tidinges, that unto you is
borne this day, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. At his passion, Behold (at
his yielding up of the ghost) Mat. 27. 51.
the veil of the temple was rent it twain the earth shaked, Stones cloven,
the graves opened etc. At his second coming, Behold (says our Savior Apoc.
22. 12.
Christ) I come shortly, and my reward is with me to give to every man as his
work shall be.

Christ Jesus came into the world, Christ's coming.
not as a just Judge, but as a Physician: Not as a destroyer, but as a Savior:
Not to call the Just, but sinners to repentance.

Christ Jesus descended and came (as it was promised) Of the seed of Christ's
Lineage.
Abraham. Bethelem brought him forth, Of the tribe of Judah. Nazareth Theoph.
brought him up, Of the stock of David. Capernaum was his dwelling place.

Christ Jesus was transfigured upon Mount Thabor, was crucified Mat. 17. 1.
Heb. 13. 12. Luke 24. 50. Acts 1. 3. Christ transfigured.
at Jerusalem: was taken into Heaven, at Bethaniah. He lived upon the earth
before his passion Thirty Three years. After his resurrection, Forty days.

Christ Jesus consists of three Christ's of 3. parts.
parts. Godhead, Soul, and Body, who as touching his humanity, had no
father: as concerning his divinity, had no mother.

It was necessary that CHRIST Christ's death necessary. (...) Mat. 26. 56. Genesis
3. 15. 1. Ioh 4. 9. 1. Tim. 2. 6. Heb. 6. 11.
should die: That the Scriptures might be fulfilled. That he might bruise the
Serpents Head. That we might have life through him.

Christ is said to die (generally) for all the world, (specially) for those
that believe: (valiantly) for that he overcame death.

Christ had small comfort of his Apostles, when he was taken prisoner: for
Judas betrayed him, Peter forsware him, all the rest forsook him, And a great
multitude followed him to his death: all to see the end of him.

The benefit we reap by the death Colos. 1. 20. 1. John. 2. 2. Galat. 3. 13.
Mat. 11. 30.
of Christ, is great. He reconciled us to his father. He redeemed us from the
curse of the Law. He showed us an easier way to heaven.

Christ by his death became for man, Curse, considering the quality of his
death. Sin, considering Deuteronomy. 21. 23. Esa. 53. 9. Phi. 2.
the integrity of his life. Servile, considering the qualilie of his estate.

It was requisite that Christ should Christ's resurrection requisite.
rise again after death; because he foreshewed it to his Apostles: because
his flesh might not see corruption, because we might be justified through him.

It was necessary that Christ should ascend after he was risen, that he might
be fully glorified, that he Ioh. 7. 39. John 16. 7. Ioh. 17. 3.
might send down the Comforter: that he might become our Mediator.

Christ said that the Comforter at his coming should reprove the Ioh 16. 8 9.
10.
world of sin, because they believe not in him. Of righteousness, because
he is gone to his father. Of Judgment, because the Prince of this world is
judged. A wonderful example Esa. 53. 7.


Christ has showed us a worthy example of Patience, because being oppressed
and afflicted, he did not open his mouth; but was like a sheep dumb before
the shearer: Of Humility, because he took upon him Phil. 2. 7.
the shape of a servant being equal with his father. Of Love, because he laid
down his life for us: than this, what love can be greater?

Christ is very fitly called a Priest, Christ a Priest.
because by his only Sacrifice he appeased his fathers wrath. A King, because
he reigns over all. A Prophet, Ioh. 5. 22. Acts. 7. 37.
because he declared his fathers will.

There be three things that bear record of Christ in heaven, the father ^.
John. 5. 7.
who sent his son, the word which became flesh: the holy ghost which proceeds
from both.

There be three things that bear Romans 8. 16. Ioh. 3. 5. Ephesians. 1. 7.
witness of Christ upon earth, Spirit, this assures us of our adoption, Water,
assures us of our Regeneration: Blood, assures us of our redemption.

Christ being the Truth, maifesteth* to us his Nature, so that in him we
Christ manifests his nature.
must begin: the Way, manifests to us his Will, so that in him we must
continue: the Life, manifests to us his office, so that in him we must Beza.
end.

He that will come after Christ, must deny himself, wherein is laid before
us Bondage, in denying him self. Take up his cross, wherein is laid before us
Baseness, in taking up the cross. Follow him, wherein is laid before us
Hardness, in following Christ.

Christ amazed and appeased his enemies three manner of ways, by Christ
appeased his enemies.
his sound doctrine, by his strange Miracles, by his mild answers.

Christ descended into Hell, as may appear by these places, for so Psalm. 16.
10. Ioh. 20. 17. Ephesians. 4. 9.
we confess in the creed of Nicene, Athanasius, and the Apostles.

Many produce these direction, to approve that the power, and not the soul of
Christ descended.

His speech to the Theife upon the cross, this day shall thou be with me in
Paradise.

His yielding up the Ghost, when Luke. 23. 4.
he said, it is finished.

His Agony in the Garden, in sweating drops of Blood and water.

God spoke most by parables to Gods speech by parables.
the multitude, because by seeing, they should see, and not perceive, because
by hearing they should hear and not understand: because it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the prophets.

The great Miracles and wonders Christ wrought in the world, were done partly
to this end: to she^ Mat. 15. 31.
the great power, glory and goodness of his father. To prove himself Acts. 2.
22.
the Son of God, and that he was sent of him. To confirm the authority Ioh.
11. 42.
and excellency of his doctrine, to win the unbelievers of it. Ioh. 2. 23.


Miracles are often called in the Beza. Heb. 2. 4. Miracles called signs.
Scriptures, Signs: Signs, because they appear one thing, and represent
another. Wonders: Wonders, because they import some strange and inexcusable
thing. Virtues: Virtues, because they give a glimps of Gods power.

Three singular benefits shown to man, by the father, he sent his The fathers
3. benefit.
Son for our reconciliation: by the Son, his righteousness is our
imputation: by the holy Ghost, Yet all one union.
this proceeds from both, for our sanctification.

It is a singular comfort unto us, A singular comfort. D. King.
to consider the exceeding love of Christ toward us, (by that he has done,)
because he did not only sacrifice himself upon the cross for our sakes,
but also satisfied his fathers wrath for our sins. By that he still does,
because he did not only suffer for us, but became also a continual
intercessor for us. By that he will do, because he has not only saved us,
but also come to judge.

Such as will presume of the time Mat. 24. 36. markc. 13. 32 1. These. 5. 1.
Acts. 1. 12
that Christ shall come to judgment, may ^e reproved by these places, ^or it is
not for us to know the times and the seasons, the father has put in his own
power*

The coming of Christ is of 3. sorts. Unto men, Into men, Against John 1. 14
John 14. 18. Apoc. 22. 12.
men, Unto men, in the flesh. Into men, by his spirit. Against men, in
Judgment.

It stands us not so much upon to Christ's coming to Judgment not to be
disputed on.
use disputation, of the time of Christ's coming to Judgment, as to be in a
daily preparation, and reformation of our lives, considering, every man's end is
imminent and uncertain, every man's death is his latter Iam. 4. 14. Heb. 9. 27.
Eccle. 11. 3.
day, every man as he dies, so he shall be judged.

The coming of Christ to judgment will be, Fearful to the wicked; Christ's
coming fearful.
because that day to them will be the beginning of their woe: Joyful* to the
Godly, because it is to them the full fruition of their felicity. Wonderful to
both, because of the sudden alteration of all things.

These three things do argue the A sign of the worlds end. Mat. 4. 23. Mat.
24.
world to draw to an end. The Fig Tree, because it florisheth. Charity, because
it waxes cold. Iniquity, because it abounds.

The coming of Christ to judgment will be of a sudden, as a woman Christ's
coming sudden.
trauailling with Child. As lightning from the East. In the hour we think
not. Be sober and watch, for happy are those servants Luke. 12. 37.
which the Lord when he comes shall find waking.

Although it was said One Thousand Five Hundred years and more since, the day
of the LORD is at hand; And yet the world endure: We must not suppose those
words to be frivolous or frustrate: for thereby the Lord does make manifest
unto us (His infinite wisdom) In Computation of years, because he does not
reckon or record the time, according to our knowledge or reason: For one day is
with him, as a Thousand Psalm. 19. 4.
years, and a Thousand years as one day. (His exceeding mercy) In delaying of
the day, because he would not have us perish, but 2. Pet. 3. 9.
would all men to come to repentance. Our ympudent misery, In Romans 2. 4.
consideration thereof, because we do not use the bountifulnes of his patience
and long suffering accordingly. Account to be made. Romans 2. 25. Mat. 12. 37.


We must yield account at the later day of all our sines, committed (In
cogitation, our thoughts shall either accuse or excuse us, In communication,
our words shall either justify or condemn us.

In Action, our works shall then have Heb. 9. 27.
their due reward.

Our great accusers at the yielding The Law our accuser.
up of our last account, shall be the Law: beside that, we shall stand
helpelesse before so many Judges as have excelled us in good works. The
Devil, besides that, we shall be cast by so many evidences as have given us
example of good life. Our Consciences, we shall be convinced with so many
witnesses as have admonished us with wholesome counsel, and by their virtuous
deeds, have been patterns for us to imitate.

The Pope does rather prefer, then make himself equal, with the The Pope.
excellency of our Savior Christ.

He will be the Supreme of all the world, exempting himself from all
obedience to an earthly Prince, or reverence to any people, when Christ was
content to acknowledge mat. 17. 27.
the authority of the Magistrate in Tole, yea even to such as were enemies to
Religion. He gives out his feet to be kissed of men, even of Kings and
Emperors: when Christ did never so lay forth his feet; but that he washed his
poor Ioh. 13. 5, 15
disciples feet, and that because they should do, as he had done to them.

He does of pity free one or other every day from the pains of Purgatory.
Purgatory, when our Savior Christ did free none at all from those hellish
pains.

The Soul of man after death Soul of man.
does go either to Joy or pain imediately, whereof there be three examples,
(besides manifest proves,) that may flatly refell their erroneous opinions of
such as falsely affirm there is a Purgatory. The Soul received into Abraham's
bosom. The Soul of the Theife ascending into Paradise. The soul Luke. 16.
22. Luke. 23. 33. Lu^^. 16. 2^.
of the Rich man descending into Hell.

These three things are worthy continually to be noted. The secrets Note
three things.
of God are unsearchable. The Joys of Heaven are unspeakable. The pains of
Hell are intolerable.

A virtuous man disposes his A virtuous man his disposition.
way in this world Prudently, to dispose and order things present: Penitently,
to consider his misdeedes past. Prouidently, to provide and foresee for things
to come.

S. Paul deuideth man into three Man's devision.
parts, Spirit, for then is man fully sanctified, when his mind thinks
nothing. Soul, for then is man fully sanctified, when his will couets nothing.
Body, for then man is fully sanctified, when his body executes 1. These. 5. 23.
nothing, contrary to the will of God.

A Godly Christian ought to live in this world, Soberly, concerning D. Milwood.
himself, that he keep his body temporately without abusing the gift of God,
wantonly or wastfully. Justly, concerning his neighbor, That he deal
plainly, uprightly, and charitably, without dissimulation. Godly, concerning
God, That he presume not to much of himself but refer all to Gods good
pleasure and providence.

A man should not do amiss says Augustine, If forgetfullnes confou^d not his
memory. If error obscure not his understanding. If iniquity* deprave not his
will.

The state of man is three ways to Man's estate
be considered, by creation, he was made like to the Image of GOD, Ephe. 4. 24.
which Image is expounded here, by fall and sin, he became slave unto
Satan, and so procured the same thraldom to all posterities. By Regeneration,
he is ingrafted into Christ by faith, and in him has recovered the former
right.

A man is happy in this world that Man happy
can rejoice in adversity, following the example of Paul. Bear all 2. Cor.
11. 30
crosses patiently, following the example Ioh. 1. 1.
of Job. Lament his sin sorrowfully, following the example of Luke. 22. 62
Peter.

Every man should be mindful of his Creation, because he is dust and to dust
he shall return. Of his Conversation, Genesis 3. Eccle. 12. 24.
because he must one day yield account of his living. Of his Dissolution,
because his end is uncertain, Eccle. 11. 3.
and as he falls, such judgment follows.

Herein consists the whole duty of man toward God, to fear him, for his
Justice: because it is horrible Man's duty.
to fall into his hands. To love him for his goodness, because he loved Heb.
10. 31.
us first: To keep his Commandments, 1. John. 4. 19. 2. John. 5. 3.
to confirm it, because those that love him, will keep his commandments.

S. James wills every man to be, Iam. 1. 19.
Swift to hear, Slow to speak, Slow to wrath.

No man has cause to glory in himself, if he consider what he is of
himself, By Substance, he wa^ Genesis 3. 7.
made of the dust. By Nature, h^ is the child of wrath. By Knowledge Ephesians. 2.
3.
he is but a beast. Iere. 10. 14.


For a man to glory or attribute any praise to himself in any good attempts,
It is Vanity, because of himself he cannot think a good 2. Cor. 3. 5.
thought, much less do a good deed. It is Arraganey, because he attributes
Iam. 1. 17.
that to himself, which is proper to God, for every good and perfect gift
comes from above. It is Iniquity, because he does not acknowledge Colo. 3.
17.
the giver thankefully, for all praise and honor is to be given to God.

Herod by abridging GOD of Acts. 12. 23. Herod end.
his glory, came to a most miserable end.

This may abate the high aspiring Eccle. 10. 9.
mind of man, His birth being sinful, His life being miserable, His body
being worms meat.

Every man must have a Godly Man's care to live. Exodus 20. 9. 1. Tim. 5. 8.
care to live in this world, because God has commanded he should labor Six
days, because he is worse then an Infidel, that provideth not for his
household: because he may avoid the inconvenience of 2. These. 3. 10. Prou. 12.
11.
Idleness, which brings much evil.

A good Christian ought to be wise, unto that which is good, Simple, Romans 16.
19. 1. Cor. 1. 20.
concerning evil: Foolish in respect of this world.

Heretics and erronnyous persons Heretics dangerous.
are very dangerous to be permitted amongst Godly Christians, considering
their condition: Because they think it not enough to err and do evil
themselves, except Esa. 3. 10. Wis. 14. 21.
they draw others with them as appears. In considering their corruption:
Because by continuance they will defile many, for a little leaven, leaueneth
the whole lump. Heb. 12. ^5.
Considering the season, because in these latter times many shall give 1. Tim.
4. 1.
heed to spirits of error and doctrine of Deuil^s.

Wicked men are f^tly compared in the Scriptures, To Thorns, because Comparison
they be as pricks to procure hurt to the Godly.

To Chafe, because as the wind does scatter the Chafe, so shall the be soon
cut off from the face of the earth. To tares, because as Tares are to be bound
in bundels and burnt, so shall they in hell fire.

Wicked men are called by sundry names, and compared in the A comparison of
wicked men.
Scriptures, To Foxes, because they are subtle in undermining, and doing of
mischief, Insomuch as the Church requires to have the foxes Cant. 2. 15.
taken away. To Dogs, because they are Currish in controlling and barking
against all goodness. Hereof Paul wills the Phillipians to Phil. 3. 2.
beware of Dogs. To Beasts, because they are prophaine in their lives, and
degenerate from their kind worse then beasts. So Paul 1. Cor. 15. 32
complains that he fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men.

The wicked and ungodly, are Wicked men not to be supported.
not to be supported purposly, because it is an abomination before God to
justify the wicke. Accompaned Prou. 17. 15.
willingly, because it is dangerous, for he that touches pitch, Eccle. 13. 1.
shall be defiled. Condemned utterly, because the Lord will have Romans 9. 15.
mercy on whom he will, and when he please.

These sayings may terrify such as attempt any evil. The face of the 2. Pet.
3. 12 Romans 2. 9.
Lord is against him; Tribulation and anguish shall be upon his soul: There
shall be no end of plagu^s Pro. 24. 20
to him.

God tempts no man to evil, God tempts not any.
but we are drawn to it, by the Devil, who watches to work our overthrow.
By our own concupiscence, to consent to his suggestions. By vicious company,
and ill persuasions of others, when we be seduced.

The Devil will undermine us in our musings, if we take not great Barnard.
The Devil undermines.
heed, for in them he talks with us wittily; he eggeth us cunningly: He
deceives us craftily, whom if we resist by faith, the Lord will overlooke us
fighting, succor us fainting: crown us overcomming.

The Devils have knowledge after Iam. 2. 19.
a sort, for they believe there is a God, and fear and tremble. They can
plead scripture for their own purpose: They acknowledge the Mat. 4. 6. mat.
829.
coming of Christ to Judgment.

The Devil has three evil properties, he is subtle as a Serpent, for he
can transform himself into many shapes, (yea into an Angel The Devils
properties 3. M. Smith.
of Light) and use many shifts to deceive withal. He is sttong as a Lion, for
he is not so busy in seeking daily for his prey, as he is forcible to resist
where he assaulteth. He is cruel as a Tiger, for where he has any entrance at
al, he will never rest, until he brings to confusion.

The Devil uses three policies The Devils policies 3.
to tempt Christ in the Wilderness, persuading him, to distrust in God, To the
desite of riches and honor: To a vain confidence of himself.

We have three cruel foes that fight against the spirit in this life. Three
cruel foes.
The Flesh, The World, And the Devil. The fiercest foe in this fight is the
Devil: whom we may expel with these three weapons. Faith, Prayer, The word
of God.

We ought not to follow the lusts of the flesh, but lead our lives holy,
Beza. 1. Pet. 2. 11.
because those lusts though they flatter us, yet they cease not to fight
against our salvation. Because we are Citizens in heaven, and therefore ought
to lead our lives thereafter although we be strangers hear. Because the glory
of God is greatly set forth by that means, whilst by example of our honest
life, even the most profane men are brought unto God, and submit themselves
unto him.

There are many walk in this world (says Paul) whose God is Phil. 3 19.
their belly, whose glory is their shame, whose end is damnation.

The wretchedness of this world made Solomon say, the day of death is better
then the day one is borne: Eccle. 7. 3.
made Job say, My soul is cut off Job. 10. 1.
though I live: made Paul say, I desire to be loosed from this life. Phil. 1.
23.


What should we so account of this world, seeing the fashion of it goes away.
The wisdom of it is mere foolishness. The amity of 1. Cor. 7.
it, is enmity with God. Use this world as though ye used it not says Paul.

These three things may withdraw Note three things.
a man from desiring long life in this world. The wretchedness of his life,
because it is but a continual temptation and full of misery. The grieuonsuesse
of his sins, because they will more increase by continuance. The greatness
of his Account, because it will be the more fearful at the yielding up.

The Godly desire to be out of Godly their desire.
this world, because it is variable and nothing but vanity, because of the
innumerable evils they are subject unto, because they long to be clothed with
the heavenly habit.

Life is very sweet, and so sweet that it has provoked the Godly to Life
sweet. M. Dodd.
prolonge the safety of it by shifts.

David doubting of evil dealing, fained himself mad to save his life.

Paul perceiving their cruelty that would kill him, had rather in the night
be let down in a Basket, then abide.

Peter fearing death, did forswear his Master.

The faithful and Godly in this world do daily Fight, by reason of their
adversary. Faint, by reason of their Infidelity. Fall, by reason of Psalm. 37.
24.
their infimity, yet the shall not be cast away.

These three things are worthy to be considered, he that lives three things
to be considened.
best does daily sin. He is happy that has grace to repent. He is blessed
to whom God imputes no sin.

Although every man is a sinner, yet every sin is not of like consideration,
for some sin of Ignorance 1. Tim. 13. 2. Sam. 11. 2 Dan. 3. 1.
as Paul did: some of Infirmity, as David did: some of Malice, as
Nabuchadnezzar did.

Every sinner must beware of Sinners to beware of 3. things. Mat. 24. 50 Romans
6. 1.
these three things, of Procrastination In delaying the time of repentance, Of
Presumption, In presuming still upon hope. Of Provocation, In sinning
obstinately against the holy Ghost.

Sin is nothing else but a sweet poison, a flattering death, and a
destruction Sin two sorts.
of the soul: whereof there be two sorts, Original, and Actual

ADAM did further his fall and increase his sin in the Garden 3. Adams fall
ways, by Ambition, because he Genesis 3. 6.
thought to be as GOD knowing good from evil. By Hypocrisy, because Genesis 3.
10.
he hid the cause of his nakedness, which was the breach of gods Genesis 3. 12.
Commandments. By Impenitency, because he was so far from acknowledging
his transgression, that he burdened God with his fault, in that he had given
him a wife.

It appears by this that sin is Execrable, because it repented God Sin
execrable. Genesis 6. 6 Zepan. 1. 3.
that he had made man on the earth. Detestable, because he destroyed dumme
creatures for our cause. Intolerable, because he would not spare his only
Son for our sins.

It is an exceeding comfort to a sinner, to consider, That God is as An
exceeding comfort. M. Rog.
well a Father as a Lord. That Christ is as well a Savior, as a Judge. That
the Scriptures includ, as well a Gospel as a Law.

Sinners should not despair of Gods mercy, if they did but perceive Sinners
not to despair.
his goodness, which appears unto them, by his readynesse in calling, before
they cry (says the Lord) I will answer, and whilst Esa. 65. 24.
they are yet thinking what to speak, I will hear. By his worthynesse in Wis.
11* 20.
sparing he makes as though he saw not the sins of men, because they
should amend. By his unwillingness in stricking, he takes Ezekiel. 18. 23.
no pleasure in the destruction, but in the conversion of Sinners.

What greater comfort can sinners have, since Christ himself says Sinners
comfort.
Ask, and ye shall have. Seek, and ye shall find. Knock, and it shall be
opened unto you. I stand at the door and knock, etc.

He that will obtain mercy by Apoc. 3. 20.
true repentance, must acknowledge his sins sorrowfully with the Prodigal
Son: Must show a hearty contrition for the same, and loath them. Must do
good works worthy Acts 26. 20.
amendment afterward.

He that is fully persuaded of the forgiveness of his sins, it behooves
him to remember these three Remembrance of 3. things.
things. The mercy of God, that he be thankful unto him for his gracious
goodness shown unto him, by remitting his offenses, and receiving him into
his favor. The Subtilty of Satan; that he watch and pray continually, for
the Devil 1. Pet. 5. 8.
goes about like a roaring Lyo^ seeking whom he may devour.

The frailty of himself, that seeing his own infirmity he may the rather
depend upon God, and crave his mercy to increase his faith and strengthen his
weakness, or else he shall not be able to withstand the opposite evils he is
subject to.

God shows himself to all his people: Merciful to the Elect, In M. Pe.
pardoning their sins. Good to the Reprobate, Albeit they cannot feel the
sweet comfort of the same* Just, to both of them: In giving Judgment.

The Lord will not reject the suit of a sinner, neither accept of it, unless
in asking he has a special regard of these three things. Of the time: For
the Lord will not be found at all times, but requires opportunity. Hereof
says the Prophet Esaias, Seek the Lord while h^ Esa. 55. 6.
may be found, and call upon hi^ while he is near. The Five foolish Virgins
coming to late, were excluded. Mat. 25. 12.
Of the manner: For the Lord will not only have such as call upon him, depart
from iniquitye, but will also have their prayers proceed from the very heart.

Then shall thou call (says the same Prophet to the Hypocrites,) Esaias. 58. 9.
and the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, here I am. Of
the end, For God requires not only opportunity of us in asking; as appears
by the woman of Canaan, but also respects the Mat. 15. 28.
end of our requests, in asking according to his will, otherwise we may ask,
and receive not, because we ask amiss, to consume it on our Iam. 4. 3.
lusts.

He that will reclaim a sinner, Observation of 3. things. D. King.
must observe three things in handling of him, which the Apostle saint Peter
practiced with the Jews.

1 Demonstration of the matter, in showing him (by the word of God) it is a
sin, that it may so appear unto him: whereby he may the better acknowledge
it before God.

2 Reprehension of the Offense, In reproving him (by the Judgments of God,
pronounced against the same) that he may both hear the punishment he has
worthily deserved, and also thereby, be the more terryfied from attempting
evil.

3 Exhortation to the sinner, In persuading him (by the promises of Gods mercy)
that he may not only be driven from despair, but also by that means be
drawn to amendment.

The same notable example of Manasses in his conversion, does A notable example.
minister singular matter to every sinner, wherein he may note three special
causes for his comfort. Note three special causes.


1 That God will punish the wicked, that he intends to save: that by this
means they may seek him by repentance, according to that same saying of the
Psalmist, when he slew them, he sought the^ and Psalm. 78. 34
returned, and sought God early.

2 That the mercy of God is very great, who although he will not suffer sin
to pass unpunished, yet he is ready to forgive, though it be very grievous,
as he has promised by the Prophet Esayas, to such as Esaias. 55. 7. 8, and 9.
heartily repent.

3 That those whom God has Luke. 1. 75.
thus called, are not to return to their sins, as the dog to his vomit,
but as becomes newborn Children, to live in holiness and righteousness
all the days of their life.

God keeps his Children commonly in this world sparingly, that they may not
be to proud with prosperity; that by this means they may the better see their
own misery: that thereby they may the rather depend on his mercy. Godly care
of time.


The Godly think that day to be ill spent, wherein they Do nothing, that may
make to the glory of God: Wherein they Say nothing, that may make to the
comfort of themselves. Wherein they Think nothing, that may make to the
edyfiyng of others.

Tribulations and affliction are to the Godly and faithful a confirmation A
confirmation of Gods love. M. Dent.
of Gods love: Because he will not suffer them to be condemned with the world,
and therefore he chastises those whom he loves. A probation of their faith
and patience: Because he will see if they will stand as strict to him now, as
they promised in prosperity, not that God is ignorant of the issue, but because
he would have it appear to others, that he does Crown such Mat. 24. 13.
with his glory, as continue constant. A purgation of their lives: Because he
uses these crosses to make them remember their miserable estate that by these
means they may be made perfect against the day of restoration.

The Godly do rejoice in Tribulation, knowing that Tribulation brings forth
Patience; Patience, Experience: Experience, Hope: And hope makes not ashamed.

The afflictions of the Godly differ from the wicked, because the Beza. 1.
Peter. 4.
Godly communicate with Christ in their afflictions, and therefore shall in
time also be pertakers of his glory: because in suffering these crosses, their
adoption is sealed in them by the spirit of God, although the Infidels think
far otherwise, who in afflicting the Godly, blaspheme God. Because they are
not afflicted for their evil doings, but for righteousness sake, which
ministers unspeakable joy to them.

The faithful in their afflictions, The faithfuls confidence. 1. Cor. 10. 13
have this confidence in God: that he will la^ no more upon them, then he
will make them able to bear. That he will deliver them out of their troubles
in a good time. Apoc. 2. 10.
That he will give them a Crown of life in the end.

Such as suffer affliction may take Comfortable saings. Act. 14. 22.
comfort by the consideration of these sayings. We must by many afflictions
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. All that live 2. Tim. 3. Romans 8. 18.
Godly in Christ, shall suffer persecution. All the afflictions in this life,
are not counted worthy of the glory of the life to come.

Afflictions are very necessary for the Godly, because their faith is Beza.
^am. 2. 3. afflictions necessary.
tried through afflictions, which ought to be most pure, for so it is
behooueable for them: because patience is a far passing and more excellent
virtue, is by this means engendered in them. Because the Cross is as it were
the Instrument wherewith God does pollish and fine them, therefore the works
and effects of afflictions, is the perfecting of them in Christ.

Patience is very expedient for Christians: That by it their faith Patience
expedient. Phil. 4. 5.
might be confirmed. That thereby they may be made perfect and Iam. 1. 4. Hob.
10. 36.
entire. That after they have done the will of God they might receive the
promise.

There be three worthy examples 3. worthy Examples.
of patience set forth unto us.

The Example of Christ himself Iam. 5. 10.
the only pattern of patience.

The Example of Job, whose patience ye have heard of.

The Example of the Prophets, whose patient examples appear unto us.

These three points are required of the faithful. That their talk Psalm. 37.
30. 31. etc.
be Godly; That Gods law be in their heart: That their life be upright.

There be three things very dangerous for the Godly, Prosperity 3. things
dangerous.
of themselves: because it makes them to forget God. Hereof says David, I
said in my prosperity I will Psalm. 30. 6.
not be moved. Prosperity of the wicked: because it makes them dispute with
God, thinking he does not rightly consider of them, as the Psalm. 73. 13.
same Prophet did. Extremity of affliction: because it makes them despair of
God, thinking he would destroy them utterly; Insomuch as the same Psalmist
burst forth with Psalm. 39. 13.
these sayings. Stay thine anger from me that I may recover my strength before
I go hence, and be not.

Cornelius was a devout man in Acts. 10. 2.
three respects: He feared God with all his Household. He gave much Alms to
the people. He prayed to God continually.

And Job a just man in three respects. He feared God. He eschewed Job. 1.
Job. 31. 16.
evil. He did good works.

He that will be acceptable to God, must be, Just in word; Upright Barnard.
in deed: Undefiled in his thought.

The Just do rejoice at the punishment of the wicked, because Psalm. 94. 2.
thereby God shows himself Judge of the world, and by this means continues
his honor and glory. Because hereby he shows he Psalm. 41. 11.
has care over his Children, in that he punishes their enemies: Because
Deuteronomy. 17. 13. 2. These. 3. 14.
by their example others may fear, and be reformed in some measure.

We ought to love and do good to our enemies: Because Christ Love our enemies.
himself did so, whose example we ought to ymitate. Because it is not Luke.
3. 24. Mat. 5. 46.
praise worthy, to love where we are beloved, for so do the Hypocrites and
Publicanes. Because it Romans 12. 17. 20.
is our duty, not only to suffer injury, but also to do good.

Such as continue in malice and Mark. 11. 25.
hatred should consider their prayers are unprofitable, if they ask mercy and
forgive not. The Lords supper 1. Cor. 11. 27
is profaned, if they receive it unworthily. They themselves are 1. Ioh. 3.
13. 15.
but Manslayers if they live not in charity.

These three things (says the Son of Syrach) My soul loves, 3. things to
be loved. Eccle. 25. 1.
Unity of Brethren. Love of Neighbors: And agreement of man, and wife.

Every one ought to know, how Knowledge how to live.
far and in what manner he ought to love. A mutual friend in God; because in
loving other he shall offend God: for he that loves father or mother (much
less a common friend) more then me says our Savior Christ, is not worthy of
me. Mat. 10. 37.
A malicious foe, for the love of God: because he cannot love God 2. Ioh. 4* 20.
whom he has not seen, if he loves not his brother that he has seen. A
manifest sinner, for humanity sake: because we ought to have a consideration
of his soul, though we have a detestation of his 2. These 3. 15.
sins, according to the council of the Apostle, who wills us to account
such a one not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.

There be three things prohibited, which ought not to be used of 3. Things to
be prohibited.
any to their very enemies. To envy their estate: Because envy turns to a
man's own evil in the end Galat. 2. 21.
according as it was written, No envious persons or such like, shall not
inherit heaven. To rejoice at their full: because it is dangerous, Pro. 24. 18.
least the Lord see it (as Solomon says) and it displease him, and he turn
his wrath from him, to be avenged on thee. To render evil for evil: because
it is the part of a Romans 12. 20.
good Christian, not to use the means to further a mischief, but to overcome
evil with good.

David being both a Prince and Psalm. 78. 72. A Kings charge.
a prophet, shows wherein a Kings charge stands. To provide faithfully for
his people. To guide them by counsel. To defend them by power.

Such as are called to be Rulers Magistrates.
and Magistrates, ought to be men of courage, fearing God. Men Exo. 18. 21.
dealing truly, hating Covetousness. Deuteronomy 1. 13.
Men of wisdom and understanding.

Such as intend evil attempts, or use any rebellious means, or mischief
against Gods anointed, Kings and princes must remember
Kings and Princes should remember the end of these three Examples 3. examples
1. Sam. 24. 5. 6.
David having but privily cut off the lap of a King Saul's garment, was
touched vehemently in his heart for it. Absolon having betrayed King 2. sam. 18.
14.
David his Father, came to an untimely death, for he was hanged by the hair of
his head upon an Oak. Achitophel being a coadiutor in preferring 2. sam. 17.
23.
the lewd practices of Absolon, against his father; when he perceived his
counsel prevailed not, he went desperately and hanged himself.

He that will use reverent obedience to his Prince, must be very Dangerous
to offend.
careful to consider, how dangerous it is to offend, in thinking evil: for
the foul of the heaven shall carry Eccle. 10. 20.
the voice, and that which has wings shall declare the matter. In Exodus 22. 28.
uttering evil, for it is written: Thou shall not speak evil of the rule of
thy people. In committing evil, for if the Lord does detest the evil intent,
and forbid filthy speeches, how much more does he abhor his act of evil,
and will punish the Malefactors.

There be three points commendable and necessary for him 3. Commendable
points. Hest. 10. 3. aec
that is in authority. To have the favor of the people. To procure their
wealth. To be gentle and loving toward them.

Good and Godly Magistrates Magistrates obeyed. Romans 3. 5.
ought to be obayed in respect of Conscience, Because they are ordained of
GOD, whose will is, they should be obeyed. Fear, because they are his
Ministers to take vengeance Romans 13. 4. Judge. 16. 6.
on them that do evil. Necessity, because where no rule is, all things go
to ruin.

Herein consists the whole duty Magistrates duty. Wis. 6. 8.
of Magistrates, That the higher they are placed, the sorer is their trial.
That their negligence in suffering evil, is their iniquity. That the ill
example of themselves is a double sin.

There be three things not tolerable in any Magistrate. Partiality, Leuit.
19. 15. Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
in respect of persons, for that is abomination in the sight of god. Mat. 4.
24.
Cruelty, in ministering Justice, for such measure as they meet, shall be met
to them again. Bribery, in detayning right, for fire shall consume Ioh. 15.
the houses of bribes.

He that will be Master over a Masters duty.
Godly Household, must know his own duty to his Family, Wife, Children and
servants, and how to ^se them being well disposed or evil enclyned.

The duty of the Householder, is: Pro. 27. 23. Psalm. 78 5. 1 Timothy 5. 8.
To know the state of his flock. To instruct them in the fear of GOD. To
provide carefully for his family.

The Husband ought to have a Honsholders care.
special honest care and love to his Wife, in three respects. Because she
comes of his own flesh, and therefore who will be biteer to his own body.
Because they are the weaker vessels, and therefore who will not bear with
their infirmities. Because she was made a comforter to man: and therefore he
is worse then a beast, that will be cruel to her.

There be three causes should Wife obedient.
move and make the Wife obey, honor and submit herself to her husband. The
Priority of man's 1. Tim. 2. 14.
Creation: Because Adam was first fo^med, Eve afterward for his sake.

The Superiority of his placing, because man was made to bear rule Ephe. 5.
23. Superiority.
Whereunto Paul very well alludeth and says: That as Christ is the head of
the Church, so is the man of the woman. The iniquity of the woman's procuring,
because the 1. Tim. 214. Genesis 3. 16.
man was deceived by the woman, whereupon God enjoined her (amongst other) this
punishment of subjection.

Parents must have a great regard Parents.
of their children, in observing three things. That they bring them up Ephe.
6. 4.
carefully in the Information of God, least they grow graceless. That they
bridle them discreetely, Pro. 22. 6.
while they are young, least they grieve them when they are old. That they
provoke them not too rigorously at any time, least they Collo. 3. 21.
discourage them.

Such Children as are obedient to Childrens duty.
their Parents, shall have this benefit: They shall live long upon the earth.
They shall prosper in all M. Perk.
their proceedings. They shall have joy of their own Children.

Children ought to obey their Parents, by the Law of God, by the course of
nature, by the rule of reason, so it be in the Lord.

Masters should continually remember, Masters duty.
That they have a Master above that sees all. That they shall receive for the
wrong they offer, of him who respects no persons. That they be as careful
to redress their faults, as ready to reprove their servants escapes.

Herein consists the duty of servants: To obey their Masters in Servants
duty. Ephesians. 6. 6.
the Lord, without murmuring. To do their duty in singleness of heart,
without eye-seruice. To suffer patiently rebukes and chastisements without
resisting.

Riches oftentimes be the means Riches.
to cause Impiety, as appears by the Parable of the young man. Security, as
appears by the Parable of the rich man. Misery, as appears by the Parable of
Dives and Lazarus.

Wicked, wealthy worldlings Amos. 6. 1. Esaias. 65. 13. Iam. 5. 1. Mat. 20.
should do well to consider continually of these places. A rich man shall
hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Such as gather their goods by vsery, bribery, extortion or such Pro. 28. 8.
like unlawful means, what follows. They gather them for such as (Solomon
says) will be good to the poor. The rust of their gold Iam. 5. 3.
and silver as (S. James says) will be a witness against them, and eat
their flesh as it were fire. They lie in grave like Sheep, as (David says)
and death gnaweth upon Psalm. 49. 14.
them.

Although worldlings do make Phil. 3. 8. Worldlings God.
their God of their goods, yet the just man does but esteem Gold and Silver to
be colored Earth, yea but dunge. Worldly and voluptuous feeding, to be filth
and famine. Dignity and delight, to be smoke which the air consumes
suddenly.

Riches are good in this respect, If we can use, and bestow them to that end
they are given us: If we can as willingly leave them, as receive them: If we
set not our Psalm. 62. 10.
hearts on them, as they increase.

It is a vain thing for a man to hunt so greedily after these worldly goods,
or take such delight in gathering: Esa. 49. 17. 1. Tim. 6. 10.
Because he shall take nothing with him, when he dies: because he cannot
prolong his life with them though he has abundance, because they will not
avail Ephe. 5. 5.
him in the day of wrath.

Coueteousnesse is contemptible Coueteousnesse. Eccle. 6. 2. and c
in any, especially in such as GOD has sent plenty unto: because it is a
plague to a rich man to want a liberal heart. Because it is the root 1. Tim.
6. 10.
of all evil. Because it will be their own destruction in the end.

Riches should not make a man high minded, if he did but think upon God.
Because he is but his Steward over them for a time. Because he can ympouerish
him as he Job. 1. 12. Acts. 12. 23.
did Job. Because he can punish him as he did Herod.

God has chosen in this world, Gods choice.
Foolish things, to confound the wise. Weak things, to confound the mighty.
Vile things and things 1. Cor. 1. 17.
which are not, to bring to naught things that are.

Although begging be a miserablelife, yet we must not despise the Begging.
poor; For he that despises them despise him that made the^. For God has
made them as instruments for Pro. 17. 5. Deuteronomy. 25. 11.
the trial of our hearts and charity. For God has chosen the poor in Iam.
2. 5.
this world, that they should be rich in faith and heirs of his kingdom.

Adversity and poverty is oftentimes Job. 1. Adversity.
sent of God, for the trial of our faith, as appears by Job, whose safety of
substance was taken away. For amendment of our lives, as appears by the
Prodigal son, who by these crosses was reclaymed. For Pro. 20. 13.
neglect of our vocation, as appears by Salomons saying, love not sleep least
thou come unto poverty.

We ought to give to the poor, for the glory and honor of GOD. Pro. 3. 9.
Give for Commandment sake: Mat. 5. 16.
For good example to others. Give for necessity sake: For a sign of Iam. 2.
18.
the sincerity of our profession. Give for natures sake. Poor a comparison.
Pro. 12. 10.


It may appear unto us by way of comparison, we ought to give to the poor,
for if a good man will have pity on his beast, how much more ought we to
respect a Christian. Ioh. 3. 16.
If we ought to lay down our lives for our brethren, how much more ought we
to relieve them with our goods. If a Factor ought to dispose his goods where
his temporal Master pleases: how much more ought we to distribute them,
where our eternal Master appoynteth.

He that gives to the poor, Gifts to the poor secret. Mat. 6. 2. Romans 12.
8. Eccle. 35. 10.
must bestow his benevolence:

1 Secretly, without ostentation.

2 Liberally, according to his abillitie.

3 Chearefully, without grudging.


This assurance has he that gives Pro. 19. 17. Pro. 28. 27. Mat. 25. 40.
to the poor: He lends to the Lord: He shall not lack; He shall not want
his reward.

The poor ought rather to be bidden to Feasts, then the rich: because such
have most need. Because Mat. 25.
they can make no recompense. Because it is most acceptable to God.

Feasting is not amiss, so it be used; In remembrance of Gods benefits: Nehe.
8. Feasting allowed.
For the maintenance of mutual friendship. Toward the relief of the poor.

We must be more mindful of the poor, if we did but remember A dangerous
thing. Pro. 28. 27.
how dangerous it is: To hide our eyes from them, such shall have many curses.
To stop our ears at their cry, such shall cry and not be Pro. 21. 13.
heard. To show no mercy at all: such shall have merciless condemnation. Iam.
2. 13.


Pure Religion consists in this: To visit the fatherless and widows Barnard.
Religion.
in adversity. To follow the Example of Christ. To keep thy self unspotted
of the world.

Such as will be perfect Christians in Religion ought not to be Revel. 3. 19.
Christians.
Hot, Cold, Lukewarm; but zealous professors.

It is very dangerous to deal A dangerous thing.
craftily in this world, because it greatly offends God, who is the Author
of truth: Because it defraudeth a man's Neighbor with a show of honest meaning.
Because it destroys the deceiuer in the end. Pro. 19.


Hypocrites may well Iuggle with the world, but they cannot deceive Hypocrites.
these three. GOD, For he sees their secrets, and will one day reveal all.
DEATH, For he comes of a sudden, and will destroy them with all. The
DEVIL, For he waits for their Souls to reward them for all.

An Hypocrite is resembled to these three things. A sheep in Woe to you
Hipocrits.
skin: He talks smoothly. A Fox in subtlety: He intends craftily. A
Wolf in cruelty: He attempteth villainy.

Truth is a most excellent treasure Truth excellent.
and worthy to be, Honored: Because it overcomes all things. Embraced,
Because it defends all things. Advanced, Because it indureth for ever.

Such as delight in Lying, should but remember the Author of it. It Lying.
is a seed of the Devils sowing. The evil of it, It is abomination before
the Lord: And the end of it, It procures sorrow to his own soul at the last.

This discommodity comes of lying: when one does accustom it, he shall
seldom leave it; when Lying the discommodity.
he says truth, he shall hardly be believed; when he is known to be such
a one, the better sort will abhor him.

He is happy that in his communication has an eye in fear to Heb. 10. 3.
Feane of God.
Gods Majesty, because it is fearful to fall into his hands. To his Brothers
frayltie: Because it is the easiest thing of a Thousand to offend him. To his
own safety, because he must give account of every Idle word.

Our Communication ought to Communication what. Esa. 19. Heb. 6. 16.
be yea, and nay; yet we may lawfully Swear: For the glory and worship of
God. For confirmation of truth and equity. For discharge of our conscience
being lawfully called

The Magistrate may lawfully require Oaths.
an oath, so it be done for the manifestation of Justice, Judgment, and
Truth. But we ought not to swear, vainly, when there is no cause at all:
Lightly, upon every small occasion. Rashly, without good consideration.

Who shall inherit heaven (says Psalm. 24.
David) He that has clean hands and a pure heart. He that has not lift up his
mind to vanity. He that has not sworn to deceive his neighbor.

The Mischeifes that ensue of Lechery, Lechery.
are many, if we confer the beginnig with the end, at first it tickleth the
flesh with touching, afterward it poisoneth the mind with filthy delights; and
last of all by consenting to sin, both body and soul are overcome. The sin of
Lechery is the pleasa^ts to the devil, because it hurts body and soul,
because he was never touched with it, being a spirit: because it brings a
heap of other sins withal.

The Lecherous man in this life Lechery tormented.
is three ways tormented, with the heat of the Harlot; with the pain of his
hurt: with the worm of his own conscience.

The Son of Syrach, says there Eccle. 25. Sirach his hatred.
are three things which his soul hates. A poor man that is proud. A rich
man that is a liar. An old Adulterer that doteth.

There be three special reasons, that fornication should be eschewed Because
it defiles the body with a peculier kind of filthiness, Because Fornicators
Sacriligious persons.
a fornicator is sacriligious, for that our bodies are consecrated to God:
Because we ought both in body and soul, to serve him, who has saved us.

This briefly is to be observed in Eccle 26. A Whores Comparison.
a Whore: She brings a man to a morsel of bread, therefore compared to a
Dog. She hunts for the precious life of him, therefore compared to a Sow.
She leads him the high way to Hell, she is therefore compared to Dung.

A whore is to be abandoned, if A Whore abandoned. Deuteronomy 23. 17. Pro. 23. 28.
2. Esd. 16. 42.
it were but for these causes, because God has forbidden any such to be
suffered: Because she increases the transgressors among men: Because she
enuieth honest and virtuous women.

There be three things may terrify A Theife terrified by 3. things. Bradford.
a Theife in his lewd attempts: the precept GOD has set down, (that is) Thou
shall not steal. The Positive Law of this Land (that is) Death of body. The
ymportable judgment to come: destruction both of body and soul.

A theife by following one (that is the Devil) he offends three. He
displeases God, by breaking his commandment. He hurts his neighbor, by
taking away his right. He hates his own soul, Pro. 29.
by following sin.

This inconvenience comes of Idleness, when one is rooted in it, Idleness
the inconvenience.
it will hardly be^ removed: when he has the end of his lust, it will be most
loathsome: when he is so idle, the devil is most occupied.

There be 3. things that grieved the wise man: A man of war, that Eccle 26.
29. Wiseman grieved.
suffered poverty. Men of understanding that are not set by. When one departs
from righteousness to sin.

God punishes his people for their sins with 3. kinds of plagues Plauges 3.
kinds.
which commonly go together. War, Famine, and Pestilence: And where he
blesses, there follows three benefits, Peace, Plenty, and Blessings 3.
kinds.
Salubrity.

Christian Soldiers fight but faintly, if they want these weapons. Ephe. 6.
12. Soldiers weapons.
The Shield of Faith, The Helmet of Hope, The Sword of the Spirit.

Every Christian Soldier has 3. Soldiers enemies. Iam. 4. 1. Ephe. 6, 12.
enemies to encounter with, the lewd affections of themselves: The evil
prouocations of the people. The daily suggestions of Satan.

There were three persons spared Persons spared from the Wars. Deuteronomy. 20 7.
Deuteronomy. 24. 5. Deuteronomy. 20. 8.
in the old Law from going on warfare, he that was betrothed to a maid, he
that was but new married: he that was faint hearted.

God sends Rain, Cold, Heat, Tempest and such like oftentimes, Job. 37. 13.
Weather.
to punish man, to profit the earth, to declare his favor toward man.

One may eat flesh at all times, so it be done without scruple or doubting,
Flesh.
without offense of our brother without breach of Godly orders. For every
creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be refused, if 1. Tim. 4. 4.
it be received with thanksgiving.

Our meats are sanctified unto us Beza. 1. Tim. 4. 5. Meats.
by the word of God and prayer, because we confess and acknowledge that God
is the maker and giver of those creatures which we use, because we are of the
number of those, who through Christ's benefits have recovered that right over al
cretures which Adam lost by his fall: Because by our Prayers we crave of the
Lord that we may use those meats with a good conscience, which we receive at
his hands.

Such as by their Doctrine will Difference made of meats. Fox.
make difference of meats, the same may be called Deuillish or deceitful, in
three respects.

1 Because the teachers of them make laws of things which are not their own,
for God created the meats.

2 Because they overthrow with their decrees, the end wherefore they were made
of God, (to wit) that we should use them.

3 Because, by this means they rob Christ of his glory, who will be honored
in the use of them.

Our behavior ought to be used, Behavior to be used.
To our Betters, reverently; To our Equals, lovingly; To our underlings, lowly.

We ought to call our Elder, Father; our Younger, Brother; every man our
Neighbor.

Marriage was instituted for three ends. Marriage.


1. For a remedy against Incontinencie; It is allowed of the Patriarchs.

2. For the propagation of Children; It is condemned by the Prophets.

3. For the consolation of Man and Woman; It is followed by the Apostles.


Men are made three manner of Mat. 19. 12.
ways.

1. By Nature; such are borne of Chastity.
their mothers belly.

2. By Art; such as be made chaste by men.

3. By Grace; such as have made themselves chaste for Heaven.


We have great cause to rejoice at these days, more then our predecessors
had.

1. Because Christ has made easy Mat. 11. 31.
unto us that importable yoke they were subject to.

2 Because he has brought v^ the glad tidings of salvation, which Romans 16. 17
they longed to see.

3 Because many Prophets and Mat. 13. 17.
righteous men have desired to see these days.

Although honest Mirth be tolerable, yet foolish or excessive mirth Mirth.
is Vain.

1 Because such mirth shall be mingled with mourning, and the end of such joy
is Lamentation.

Wicked: Because thereby we clean forget the means that should make us
remember our misery. Eccle. 7. 4


Dangerous: Because our Savior says, Woe be to them that now Luke 16. 25
laughe, for they shall wayle and weep.

There are three kind of Fools.

1 Such as are naturally borne Fools three kinds. Pr. 17. 21. 25
without wit, and those (as Solomon says) are a grief to the father, and a
heaviness to her that bare them.

2 Such as become fools, and 1. Cor. 3. 18.
are so contented to be counted in this world, that they may be wise in the
world to come.

3 Such as are given over to their own lusts, and follow all kind of
filthiness; these are they whom David called Fools, who lewdly say in their
hearts (as they falsely think) Psalm. 53. 1.
there is no God.


A wise man is noted and discerned three manner of ways.

1 By discreet Silence, for as Solomon Pro. 27. 28. A wise man noted three
ways.
says, his peace is counted wise: not that any should be restrained of speech,
but that they should observe opportunity in speaking; Hereof says the
Philosopher. Qui nescit ta^^re, nescit loqui.

2 By modest Speech: For it is proper to fools to be full of frivolous talk,
but he that has knowledge (says the wiseman) spares his Pro. 17. 27.
words.

3 By sober Life: For he that is heavenly wise indeed will (as St. James
says) show by conversation Iam. 3. 13.
his works in meeknes of wisdom.

Sickness is very necessary for Eccle. 7. 4. Sickness necessary. 2. King. 20
2. Heb. 12. 6.
man for three causes.

1 Because thereby he is put in mind of his own frailty.

2 Because thereby he shall be better incited to call upon God.

3 Because it is a testimony unto him of the love of God. Loath to die



He that is loath to frame himself to die especially in sickness, Heb. 11.
13.
does show himself Unnatural: Because he so little desires to be at home
with his heavenly Father, considering he is here, but as a stranger and a
Pilgrim. Unwise, 1. Cor. 7. 13.
Because he takes felicity in the vanity of this world, considering the
fashion of it goes away. Wretched: Because he had rather still live to augment
his misery, then frame himself by a Godly end, to embrace eternal blessedness.

In our sickness we ought to remember M. Dent.
three things.

1 To seek to God to purge our sins, which are the chief cause of all our
diseases. 2 To use the help of the Physician, as a mean by whom God works.
3 To dispose our temporal goods where they may make most to his glory that gave
them.
For a man to make his Will in Will made.
sickness or health it is Lawful; because the Lord willed Hezekiah to 2.
King. 20. 1.
put his house in order before he died. Godly; because his mind being quiet in
worldly matters, he shall the better apply it to heavenly motions. Necessary;
because a good stay being made, it shall cut off occasion of contention, that
may happen afterward.

The minds of men are very mutable, M. Rodg.
and their opinions (especially such as be perue^se) are very scripulous to
please: For, he that did well, offended some, and yet was an Apostle. He that
did worse, pleased many, and yet was but a Beast. He that did best of all,
could not please all: and yet was a God.

ENLAND has three special Enland thankful for three causes.
causes to be continually thankful to God for.

1 The free passage of the Gospel.

2 The blessed time of Peace.

3 The Godly Governor thereof. Which Passage, Peace, and Prince; The Lord for
his mercy sake, still prosper, preserve, and protect. Amen.

FINIS.
A Morning Prayer to be used in Private Families.
O Lord our God and heavenly father, we thy unworthy Children do here come into
thy most holy and heavenly presence to give thee praise and glory for all thy
mercies and manifold blessings toward us: especially for that thou have
preserved us this night past, from all dangers and fears thereof have given us
quiet rest to our bodies and brought us now safely to the beginnig of this day,
and do now afresh renew all thy mercies upon us, as the Eagle renews her
bill, giving us all things abundantly to enjoy: as food, raiment, health,
peace, liberty, and freedom from many miseries, diseases, casualties, and
calamities, which we are subject unto in this City every minute of an hour,
and not only so, but also for vouchsafeing unto us many good things, not only
for necessity, but even for delight also. But above all (dear Father) we
praise thy name for the blessings of a better life, especially for thy most
holy word and sacrament, and all the good we enjoy thereby: for the cotinuance
of the Gospel amongst us, for the death of thy son and all that happiness
which we have thereby. Also because thou have chosen us to life before we were,
and that of thy mere goodness, and undeserved favor toward us, and have
called us in thine appointed time, justified by thy grace, sanctified us by thy
spirit, and adopted us to be thine own children and heirs apparent to thy
great Crown. O Lord, open our eyes every day more and more, to see and
consider of thy great and marvelous love to us in all these things, that by
the due consideration thereof, our hearts may be drawn yet nearer unto thee, even
more to love thee, fear thee, and obey thee: that as thou art enlarged toward
us in mercy, so we may be enlarged toward thee in thanksgiving: and as thou
do abound toward us in goodness, so we may abound toward thee in obedience
and love. And since (deer father) thou art never weary of doing us good,
notwithstanding all our unworthiness and naughtines, therefore let the
considerat^on of thy great mercy and fatherly kindness toward us, even as it
were force our hearts, and compel us to come into thy most glorious presence
with new songs of thanksgiving in our mouths. We pray thee (O most merci-God)
to forgive us all our unthankfulness, unkindness, profane and great abusing of
all thy mercies, and specially our abuse and contempt of thy Gospel: together
with all other sins of our life, which we confess are innumerable, and more
then can be reckoned, both in omission of good things, and commission of evil.
We most humbly entreat thee, to set them all over to that reckoning which thy
son Christ has made up for them upon his cross, and never to lay any of
them to our charge, but freely forget all, and forgive al. Nail down all our
sins and iniquities to the cross of Christ, bury them in his death, bath them
in his blood, hide them in his wounds: let them never rise up in judgment
against us; set us free of the miseries that are upon us for sin, and keep
back the judgments to come both of soul and body, goods, and good name* Be
reconsiled unto us in thy deer Son, concerning al matters past; not once
remembering or repeating unto us our old and abominable iniquities, but accept
us righteous in him, imputing his righteousness to us, and our sins to him. Let
his righteousness satisfy thy justice for our unrighteousness, his obedience for
our disobedience: his perfection for our imperfection. Moreover we humbly
beseech thy good Majesty to give us the true sight and feeling of our manifold
sins, that we may not be blinded in them through delight, or hardened in
them through custom, as the reprobates are: but that we may be even weary of
them, and much grieved for them, laboring and striving by all possible means
to get out of them. Good Father, touch our hearts with true repentance for all
sins; let us not take any delight or pleasure in any sin, but howsoever we fall
through frailty, (as we fall often) yet let us never fall finally; let us never
lie down in sin, or continue in sin, but let us get up upon our feet again,
and turn unto thee with all our hearts, and seek thee whilst thou may be
found, and whilst thou do offer grace and mercy unto us. O Lord increase in
us that true and lively faith whereby we may lay sure hold on thy son Christ,
and rest upon his mercies altogether. Give us faith, assuredly to believe all the great and precious promises made in the Gospel, and strenghthen us from
above, to walk and abou^d in all the true and sound fruits of faith. Let us
grow daily in the sanctification of the spirit, and the mortification of the
flesh: Let us live holily, justly, and soberly in this present evil world,
showing forth the virtues of thee in all our particular actions, that we may
adorn our most holy profession, and shine as lights in the midst of a crooked
and froward generation, amongst whom we live, being gainful to all by our
lives and couersations, and offensive to none. To this end we pray thee, fill
us with thy spirit, and all spiritual graces; as love, wisdom, patience,
contentment meekenes, humility, temperance, chastity, kindness and
affability: and stir us up to use prayer and watchfulness, reading and
meditating in thy Law, and all other good means whereby we may grow and
abound in all heavenly virtue bless us in the use of the mean from day to
day: make us such as thou would have us to be, and such as we desire to be,
working in us both will, deed purpose, and power.

For thou O Lord, art all in all: thou will have mercy upon whom thou will have
mercy: and whom thou will, thou hardnest. Have mercy upon us therefore (dear
father) and never leave us to our selves, nor to our own wills, lusts and
desires, but assist us with thy good spirit, that we may continue to the end in
a righteous course, that so at length we may be received into glory, and be
partakers of that immortal Crown, which thou have laid up for all that love
thee, and truly call upon thee.

Further we entreat thee O heavenly Father to give us all things necessary
for this life; as food, raiment, health, peace, liberty, and such freedom
from those manifold miseries which we lie open unto every day, as thou see
meet. Bless our stock and store, corn and cattle, trades and occupations,
and all the works of our hands: for thy blesssing only makes rich, and it
brings no sorrows with it. Grant these things good father unto us here
present, and to all thine absent, praying the in special favor, to remember
our friends and kinsfolks in the flesh, all our neighbors and wellwiller, and
all those for whom we are bound to pray, for Jesus Christ's sake our only
mediator and advocate. Amen.

An Evening Prayer to be used in private Families.
O Eternal God, and our most loving and dear Father, we thy unworthy
children do here fall down at the foot of thy great Majesty, acknowledging
even from our hearts, that we are altogether unworthy to come near thee, or
to look toward thee, because thou art a God of infinite glory, and we are most
vile and abominable sinners, such as were conceived and borne in sin and
corruption: such as have inherited our fathers corruption, and also have
actually transgressed all thy holy statutes and laws, both in thoughts, words,
and deeds, before we knew thee, and since, secretly and openly, with our
selves, and with others, our particular sins are more then can be numbered: for
who knows how oftentimes he offends? But this we must needs confess
against our own selves, that our hearts are full of pride, covetousness, and
the love of this world; yea, the very sinckes of sin, and dunghils of all
filthiness; so that thou have have just cause to proceed to sentence of
Judgment against us as most damnable transgressors of thy holy Commandments;
yea, such as are suncke in our rebellios, and have many times and often
committed high treason against thy sacred Majesty: and therefore thou may
justly cast us down into Hell fire, there to be tormented with Satan and his
Angels for ever: and we have nothing to except against thy Majesty for so
doing, since therein thou should deal with us, but even according to equity,
and our just deserts. Wherefore (dear Father) we do appeal from thy Justice
to thy Mercy, most humbly entreating thee to have mercy upon us, and freely to
forgive us all our sins past whatsoever, both new and old, secret and open
known and unknown, and that for Jesus Christ his sake our only Mediator and
Redeemer.

Give us therefore) dear father) every day more and more sight and feeling of
our sins, with true humiliation under the same. Give us also that true and
lively faith, whereby we may lay hold upon thy dear son Christ, and all his
merits, applying the same to our own souls: so as we may stand fully
persuaded, that whatsoever he has done upon the Cross, he has done for us
particularly, as well as for others. Give unto us faith (good father)
constantly to believe all the sweet promises of the Gospel, touching
remission of sins and eternal life, made in thy son Christ. O Lord increase
our faith, that we may altogether rest upon thy promises which are all yea
and Amen. Yea, that we may settle our selves, and all that we have, wholly
upon them: both our souls, bodies, goods, name, wives, children, and our whole
estate, knowing that al things depend upon thy promises, power and providence:
And that thy word does support and bear up the whole order of Nature.
Moreover we entreat thee O Lord, to strengthen us from above, to walk in ever
good way and to bring forth the fruits of true faith in all our particular
actions, studying to please thee in all things, and to be fruitful in all good
works, that we may show forth unto all men by our good conversation, whose
children we are: and that we may adorn and beautify our most holy profession,
by walking in a Christian course, and in all the sound fruits and practice of
Godliness and true religon.

To this end we pray thee sanctify our hearts by thy spirit yet more and
more; sanctify our souls and bodies, and all our corrupt natural faculties,
as reason, understanding, will, and affections, so as they may be fitted for
thy worship and service, taking a delight and pleasure therein, stir us up to
use prayer, watchfulnes, reading, and meditation in thy Law and all other good
means whereby we may profit in grace and goodness from day to day. Bless us in
the use of the means that we may die to sin, and live to righteousn^^^ Direct
all our steps in thy word, ^^ none iniquity have dominion over v^ Assist us
against our special infirmitie^ and master sins, that we may get the victory
over them all, to thy glory, and the great peace and comfort of our ow^
consciences. Strengthen us, good Father, by thy grace and holy spirit against
the common corruptions of the worl^ as pride, whoredom, covetousness, contempt
of thy gospel, swearing, yin^ dissembling and deceiving. Oh dear^ father, let
us not be overcome of those filthy vices, or any other sinful pleasures, and
fond delights wherewith thousands are carried headlong into destruction.

Grant these things, and all other needful graces for our souls or bodies,
for Jesus Christ's sake. In whose name we further call upon the as he has taught
us saying, Our Father which art, etc.

FINIS.

