ARTICLES TO BE INQVIRED OF WITHIN THE DIOCES OF NORWICH, in the ordinary
visitation of the reverend Father in God, SAMVEL, Lord Bishop of NORWICH.

Anno Domini 1620. and Translationis suae, primo.

ANCHORA FIDEI SICELEVABITVR FILIVS HOMINIS^ Io 3


Imprinted at London 1620.

The form of the Oath to be ministered unto the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear to make diligent inquiry and true presentment of all and
every the offenses mentioned in the subsequent Articles in this book, which be
known to you either by notoriety of the fact, confession of any party, or by
any public speech and common fame, or by other proof had and made, without
affection of love or hatred to any person; So help you God, and the Contents
of this Book.

ARTICLES TO BE INQVIRED OF IN THE DIOCES OF NORWICH. ANNO DOMINI. 1620.
TIT. 1. Articles concerning religion, prayer, and Sacraments
1. FIrst, whether be there any person or persons abiding in your parish or
resorting thereunto, above the age of sixteen years, that wilfully, and
obstinately, refuse to repair to their parish Church Chapel or oratorie,
upon sabbath days and Holidaies* and be thereby taken to be Popish or sectary
recusants.

2. Item, whether be there any that be known to have defended or maintained
any heretical opinions, contrary to the holy scriptures of God, and first
four general counsels or any of them, and what be those opinions, and who be
the authors thereof.

3. Item, whether be there any in your parish, that has been or is vehemently
suspected, to have been present at any unlawful assemblies, or private
conuenticles, under color or pretense of any exercise of religion: or does
affirm and maintain such meetings to be lawful.

4. Item, whether does any person within your Parish, deprave the form of
common prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, rites and ceremonies, set
forth and prescribed in the book of common prayer of this realm.

5. Item whether is there any doctrine taught, published, or preached, by any
person or persons directly or indirectly against the state eclesiasticall, and
lawful government of the Church of England, and the consecrating of
Archbishops and Bishops, and the ordering of Deacons and Ministers, after such
manner and form as is now used and prescribed by his Majesty's laws within
this Realm of England.

6. Item, whether be there any within your parish, that deny or persuade any to
deny, withstand, and impugn the kings Majesty's authority and supremacy, in
causes eclesiasticall within this realm.

7. Item, whether does any person within your parish, above the age of 16.
years, refuse or forbear thrice in every year, and at Easter especially, to
communicate and receive the blessed Sacrament of the Lords supper: And what
reverence do the people within your Parish use by outward gestures of their
bodies, when they be partakers of that blessed Sacrament: and whether do they
reverently kneel upon their knees when the minister delivers the same to
them.

8. Item, whether does any person within your Parish defer the baptism of
his child, longer then until the next Sabbath day or holiday, after the birth
thereof.

9. Item, whether has any child died unbaptized within your Parish, and by
whose default.

10. Item, whether be the parents of any child to be Baptized, admitted to be
godfathers or godmothers to the same.

11. Item, whether have the children of popish recusants, or wilful sectaries
borne within your Parish, been privately baptized by any lay man not in holy
orders.

12. Item, whether has any person not lawfully confirmed according to the
form of confirmation, prescribed in the book of common Prayer of this realm,
been admitted to receive the holy communion.

13 Item, whether has any Popish recusant, after he or she has been
conformed, repaired to Church and received the blessed sacrament of the Lords
supper, once a year at the least, in that parish Church where he or she do
most usually abide.

14. Item, whether do any within your parish upon Sabbath days and holy
days, negligently and carelessly repair to your parish Church, so that half
or the most part of divine service is ended before they come, and upon light
occasion depart out of the Church before prayers be done.

TIT. 2. Articles Concerning the Ministers and Preachers of Gods holy word.
1 FIrst, whether does the minister of your parish Church, read the form of
common prayer, in such sort as is set forth in the book of common prayer,
confirmed by his Majesty's authority, and administer the Sacraments with due
observation of all rites and ceremonies prescribed to be used in the
administration thereof, without adding altering or omitting any part or parcel
of the said prayers, or innouating any other matter in the administration of
either of the Sacraments.

2. Item, whether is the said form of common prayer duly and orderly red in
your Church, Chapel, or oratorie, upon sabbath days, holy days, wednsdaies,
and fridaies, and upon holy eues and Sabbath eues.

3. Item, whether be the words of institution of the Sacrament of the Lords
supper, used by the minister in delivery of the bread and wine to every
communicant.

4. Item, whether be the words in the administration of the sacrament of
baptism, I sign thee with the sign of the Cross, only used, and noe
visible or formal cross made in the forehead of the child so baptized.

5. Item, whether is the sacrament of baptism denied to any children borne out
of wedlock, and by whom.

6. Item, whether is the form of common prayer red upon the 24. of March, the
fifth of november, and the fifth of August, yearly in your parish Church: and
public thanksgiving used upon those days to almighty God, for his Majesty's
gracious succession to the royal crown of this realm, the deliverance of his
highness, and the whole state from the damnable gunpowder treason, and for his
Majesty's preservation from the conspiracy of Gowry.

7. Item, whether is the statute entitled An act for a public thanksgiving
to almighty God, etc. every year distinctly red in your parish Church at
morning prayer, upon the fifth day of November,

8. Item, whether does your Minister always and at every time, both morning
and evening, reading divine service, and administering the sacraments, wear the
surplice, and does he never omit the wearing of the same, at such times or at
any of them.

9, Item, whether does he catechize the youth of his parish upon sundaies and
holidaies before evening prayer, for half an hour or more, in the catechism
set forth in the book of common Prayer, and in none other: And whether do all
the parishioners attend his catechizing: And whether do any of them neglect or
refuse to send their children to be catechized by him.

10. Item, whether does your minister once every year in your parish church
read the book of canons published Anno Domini. 1603. and whether does he visit
the sick as by law is required.

11 Item, whether does he give thanks for women after their childbirth in such
manner as is prescribed in the book of common prayer of this realm: And does
he admit any to the performance of that holy action, that do not come having a
decent veil upon their heads Matron like as has been accustomed heretofore:
And whether does any woman refuse to give thanks in that manner after her
childbirth.

12. Item, whether is your minister resiant at and upon his benefice or
spiritual promotion, and does he preach every sabbath day or monthly in his
said cure, or read an homily when there is no sermon there preached.

13. Item whether is your Minister a graduate and has taken any scholasticall
degree of bachelor or Master of arts, or bachelor or doctor in divinity,
either in Cambridge or Oxeford, and is he a preacher lawfully licensed, and by
whom?

14 Item whether does your Minister preach or teach any matter publicly in
his pulpit within his parish Church, which is not agreeable to the doctrine of
the old and new testament, and which the learned Fathers, and aunceient Bishops
have not taken and gathered out of the holy scriptures, for an undoubted truth?

15 Item* whether does your minister side it in his preaching, by taking part
with one of them that be at variance, and thereupon preach doctrine tending to
the breach of christian love and unity, and stirring up of schism and faction
amongst his auditors, offensiuely and scandalously, and color his
schismatic designements by a secret perswasiue of his desire of peace and
unity in the Church?

16. Item, whether does your Minister use always to pray for the Kings
Majesty, the Prince, Clergy, and Counsel, in the form of Prayer prescribed
in the constitutions published in that behalf, in the yeace of our Lord 1603.

17 Item, Whether does your Minister hold any more Benefices with cure of
souls then one, and by what dispensation does he so retain them?

18 Item, Whether is your Minister vehemently suspected by common voice,
public fame, or credible report, to have obtained his spiritual promotion or
benefice with cure of souls by any symoniacall compact, directly or
indirectly, or for any lucre or gain to have resigned his said Benefice or
spiritual promotion*

19 Item, Whether does your Minister upon light cause not warrantable by law,
and upon private displeasure by him conceived against any of his Parishioners,
repel and debar any of them from the receiving of the holy Communion?

20 Item, Whether has any notorious or known fornicator, adulterer,
scandalous person, or blasphemer of Gods holy name, been admitted to receive
the holy Communion without public repentance?

21 Item, Whether does your Minister read public prayers at meet and
convenient hours, and bid holidaies and fasting days?

22 Item, Whether does your Minister every six months denounce in his Parish
Church all such as do persevere and continue in the sentence of
excommunication, not seeking to be absolved: and whether has he admitted into
the Church any excommunicate person without certificate of his absolution from
the Ordinary, or other competent Judge, under their authentical seal?

23 Item, Whether does your Minister diligently labor and endeavor to
reclaim the Popish Recusants in his Parish from their errors, if there be any
such there-abiding?

24 Item, Whether is your Minister familier and conversant with Popish
Recusants, or a favorer of them, and thereby taken not to be sound and sincere
in Religion?

25. Item, Whether does your Minister publicly in the Church upon the Sabbath
day next before his administration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, give
knowledge of it to all his Parishioners, that such as intend to communicate may
prepare themselves for the receiving of that blessed Sacrament.

26. Item, Whether is your Minister studious in the holy Scriptures, and
abstaineth from mechanical trades, or labor, not befitting his function, and
from gaming, swearing, and drunkenness, or such notorious crimes?

27. Item, Is there any in your Parish who (having been admitted unto holy
Orders, either Deacon or Priest) does relinquish and forsake his calling, and
lives in the course of his life as a Lay man?

28. Item, whether has any Lay man (not in holy Orders) read public prayers
in your Church, or churched any women, or buried any dead person within your
parish?

29. Item, whether has your Minister buried any excommunicate person, not
absolved from that censure?

30. Item, Whether has your Minister with any other persons within your
Parish, used to meet in any private house, or other place, there to confer
and consult together, how to impeach or deprave the book of Common Prayer, or
the doctrine or discipline of the Church of England?

31. Item, Whether has any person being merely ignorant in the holy
Scriptures, not able to render a reason of his faith in Latin, nor having a
special gift of preaching, been from a manual trade or artificer, admitted
to holy orders, and to administer the Sacraments, and preach the word of God?

32 Item, Whether is there any opposition amongst the preachers used publicly
in matters of faith and doctrine in their sermons preached: And what Ministers
admitted to holy orders be within your Parish, and allowed Preachers, not
having any pastoral charge or cure committed to them?

33 Item, Whether does your Minister or Curate in Rogation week, go in
perambulation of the circuit of the Parish, using thanksgiving to God for his
blessing according to law?

TIT. 3. Articles concerning Lectures.
FIrst, Whether does any person read any public Lecture, or expound the holy
Scriptures in your Church, Chapel, or Oratorie, he being not in holy orders,
and lawfully licensed for a public Preacher according to the laws of this
Realm?

2 Item, Whether does every such Lecturer before his Sermon, or exposition of
the Scriptures, read public Prayers in his surplice, according to the form
prescribed in the book of common prayer of this realm, without omission of
any part thereof.

3 Item, whether does your said lecturer before his sermons, use any other
form of prayer for the whole state of this realm, then that which is
prescribed in the constitutions eclesiasticall, published and confirmed by his
Majesty's authority, Anno Domini. 1603.

4 Item, whether does your said Lecturer maintain any doctrine directly
contrary or repugnant to the articles of christian faith and religion,
published and ratefied, Anno Domini 1562.

5 Item, whether is any lecturer admitted to preach in your Church, that is not
conformable to the discipline and government eclesiasticall within the church
of England, but schismatically and phantastically affected to novelties and
innouations.

6 Item, whether does your lecturer or sole preacher, twice at the least, every
year in his own person, read both morning and evening prayer, two several
sundaies in the parish church where he preaches, and at those times wear the
surplice; and twice every year administer the Sacraments, without omission of
any rites or ceremonies, that are prescribed in the book of common prayer of
this realm to be used at the administration thereof?

TIT. 4. Articles concerning Matrimony.
FIrst, whether has any matrimony been contracted, and solemnized within
your parish, betwixt any persons being in consanguinity or affinity within the
leuiticall degrees, and by the word of God prohibited.

2 Item, whether has any matrimony been solemnized, or rather profaned,
secretly in any private house within your parish?

3 Item, whether has the uncle married his niece, by consanguinity, or
affinity; or has any person successively married two sisters: and who be they
that have contracted such incestuous marriages.

4. Item, whether has any person two wives now living, or any woman two
husbands: and who are so voiced, noted, and reported to be offenders in this
behalf.

5. Item, whether be there any persons coupled together, in matrimony, that
live a part without lawful divorce?

6. Item, whether has any person lawfully divorced, been coupled in matrimony
with any other man or woman, during the life of the other person so divorced?

7. Item, whether have any matrimonies been solemnized betwixt any persons
being under the age of xxi. years without their parents or governors consent
first had and obtained?

8 Item, whether has any person by license or without, been married in your
Church, neither of them at that time dwelling in your parish?

9 Item, whether have any Popish recusants or their children been married
within your parish; and in what sort were those matrimonies solemnised, when,
and by whom?

TIT. 5. Articles concerning the parishioners and others of the Laiety.
FIrst, whether be there any person or persons within your parish, who in your
hearing or to your knowledge, have at any time depraved by word or deed, the
form of common prayer, and administration of the Sacraments of Baptism and
the Lords Supper?

2 Item, whether have any dwelling within your parish reviled and abused the
Ministers of Gods holy word by contumelious words, and disgraced their lawful
marriages.

3 Item, whether have any person or persons disorderly behaved themselves, in
the Church or Churchyard, by brawling, quarrelling or fighting?

4 Item, whether be there any abiding within your parish, or resorting
thereunto as an usual parishioner thereof, that refuse to receive the
Sacrament of the Lords supper administered by an unpreaching minister, and who
be they that so do?

5 Item, whether do any in your parish profane the sabbath day by unlawful
games, drinking or tippling in the time of comman prayer or sermon, or by doing
the ordinary works of their vocations and trades?

6 Item, whether is there any within your parish, that denies the church of
England by law established under the kings most excellent Majesty to be a true
and apostolical church.

7 Item, whether do any of the inhabitants within your parish, entertain in
their howses any soiourners or common guests (other then his or her father or
mother wanting other habitation or sufficient maintenance, or the ward of any
such person, or any person that shall be committed by authority to the custody
of any of them) that be Popish recusants, and refuse to frequent divine
service, or receive the holy communion and what be their names?

8 Item, how long have the said Popish recusants obstinately abstained, either
from hearing divine service red, or receiving the blessed sacrament of the
Lords supper, administered in the parish Church?

9 Item, whether is there due reverence and humble submission used within your
church or chapel, in the time of divine service as by the xviii. constitution
eclesiastical of this realm Anno Domini, 1603. is prescribed; whether each one
in the church or chapel do apply and order himself there in time of divine
service, as by the latter part of the same constitution is most commendably
enjoined; namely that no man do cover his head in the time of divine service,
except he have some infirmity, that all do kneel upon their knees, when the
confession and other prayers are read; stand up at the reading of the belief,
and bow their bodies reverently when Jesus shall be named?

10 Item, whether be there any within your parish that come upon sabbath days
and holy days, and at other times of prayer, to the sermon only, and not to
hear divine service; And be there any that do not reverently stand up, when
Gloria Patri etc. is read, and at the reading of the Gospel?

11 Item, whether be there any within your parish, that by walking or talking,
disquiet your minister in reading of prayers, or in his sermon?

12 Item, Whether be there any in your parish, that do only come once a month
to their parish church, to hear divine prayers red, and never receive the
sacrament of the Lords supper?

13 Item, Whether does any within your parish, in contempt of his own
minister, repair to any other Church in time of common prayer to hear the
same red, and to receive the sacrament; and what be there names that be so
affected, and the names of the ministers of other churches, that admit those
that be not their own parishioners to prayers and sacraments by him or them
read and administered?

14. Item, is there any in your parish that be commonly known or reputed to be
blasphemers of Gods holy name, drunkards, adulterers, fornicators, incestuous
persons, or concealers or harbourers of fornicators or adulterers: Have any
been detected for any such notorious crimes, or of the common and public fame
of them, and never performed any penance, nor given satisfaction to the
congregation for the said offenses?

15 Item, what persons testate have died within your Parish since the first of
February 1619. and whether be their last wills and Testaments proved, and who
be executors of the same?

16 Item, what persons have died intestate since the time before expressed, and
who do administer the goods of the persons so deceased?

17 Item, whether have any person or persons being duly rated in equal
proportion, for the repairing of your parish Church, or for provision of bread
and wine, for the administration of the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
or for any other necessary ornaments and vtensils belonging to your Church,
that have or do refuse to pay that rate, or to give satisfaction to the
Churchwardens in that behalf, and who be they that have offended herein?

TIT. 6. Articles concerning the Church and Churchyard.
FIrst, Whether have you in your Church, Chapel or Oratorie, the Book of
Common Prayer by the Kings Majesty confirmed, a Bible of the largest volume,
and the last translation, Jewels Apology of the last edition, with the rest of
his Works adjoined, the Books of Homilies, Erasmus paraphrase, and the Book
for special thanksgiving with the Statute in that behalf, for the gracious
deliverance of the whole state of this Realm, from the Gunpowder treason; and
have you the Book of Canons ecclesiastical, published Anno Dom. 1603. and all
other books by Law or Custom usually to be had within your said Churches?

2 Item, whether are the Ten Commandments religiously hung up in a fair Table
within your Parish Church, and the Table of the degrees of Matrimony prohibited?

3 Item, whether have you in your Parish Church one or two Surplisses, and a
Hoode faced with Taffaty or Satin, if your Minister be a Graduate, a Master of
Arts, a Bachelor or Doctor in Divinity?

4 Item, whether have you a decent seat for your Minister to read public
prayers in, a seat nigh unto him for his Clarke, and a seat for the women that
come to give thanks after their Childebirth, a comely Pulpit, with a Cushion
and a Cloth for it, a decent Communion Table, with a Carpet of broad cloth, and
a fair linen cloth, a Communion cup of Silver, and a flagon of silver or
Pewter, to be used at the Communion?

5, Item, whether have you a Bear for the carriage of dead bodies to their
burial, a convenient and decent Font with a cover standing in the accustomed
place, and a Register book in parchment, wherein be duly entered the names of
all such as be baptized, married, and buried?

6 Item, whether have you one Chest, with three locks and keys, wherein the
Register book, and other vtensils belonging to your Church be duly kept: And
whether have you one book in Parchment or Paper, wherein be entered the names of
all strangers that come to preach within your Parish, and their licenses
therein recorded?

7 Item, whether is your Parish Church, Chapel or Oratory in good and
sufficient reparations, not profaned, comely and decently kept and the seats
therein well maintained?

8 Item, whether be there any Pues lately built within your Parish Church,
without the authority, consent and approbation of the Ordinary, and who have so
built them?

9 Item, whether have any Pues been taken up which were formerly set in any
other Church, and be transferred to your Church, and there set up, and by
whom, and by what authority?

10 Item, whether is there any Church or Chapel (wherein there be a competent
number of people, to the number of ten or above dwelling and abiding) profaned
and converted to any irreligious use, by making of it a Barn, Stable, or
Granary, and the Parishioners thereof not known to resort to any other Church,
Chapel, or Oratorie, by lawful assignation of the Ordinary?

11 Item, whether be there in your Steeple the usual and ancient number of
Bells still remaining and hanging; and by whom have any Bells been taken out
of your Steeple, and to what use have they been converted?

12 Item, whether have there been kept in your Church any Plays, Feasts,
Banquets, Church-ales, drinkings, or any other profane vsages by laying of
Drums or Guns in your Church or Steeple, and discharging them there, and by
whose commandment and appointment?

13. Item, whether is your Churchyard well and sufficiently repaired by a
comely wall of Stone or Pale: and whether have you a grate at the entrance into
the said Churchyard, to keep out Swine, and other noisome beasts?

14 Item, whether be not the Graves and Monuments of the dead broken, and
rooted up by Swine in your said Churchyard: and whether be not noisome draines
and priuies made and suffered within the said Church yard, and unusual doors
and passages made into the same?

TIT. 7. Articles concerning Parsonage and Vicaridge-houses.
FIrst, Whether be the Houses, Edifices, and Buildings belonging to your
Parsonage or Vicaridge well and sufficiently repaired; and whether be any of
them ruinated, wasted, and dilapidated, and by whose default?

2 Item, whether is the Chancell of your Parish Church ruinated, and by whose
default is it so decayed?

TIT. 8. Articles concerning Legacies and Bequests given to godly uses.
FIrst, Whether be there any Legacies given in the last Will and Testament of
any person deceased, out of his moveable goods, for the relief of the poor,
or to the reparations of the Church, or to either of the Universities,
Cambridge, or Oxford, or to any School of Learning or College, for the
increase of virtue and knowledge, or to any other charitable use; what be those
bequests, and by whom were they given.

2 Item, what Legacies given to the uses aforesaid, have bin detained by the
executor of any person deceased; and who be they that do so detain them?

TIT. 9. Articles concerning Churchwardens.
FIrst, Whether be the Churchwardens of your Parish chosen by the Minister and
Parishioners, according to the 89. Canon; and whether has any taken upon him
to be Churchwarden being not so chosen?

2 Item, whether have the Churchwardens been diligent in the execution of
their office, to see decency and comeliness kept in the Church, in the time of
divine service, and at the administration of the Sacraments?

3 Item, whether have any Churchwardens detained any of the Church goods in
their hands, and not made a just account of what they have received and
expended?

4 Item, whether have the Churchwardens at every Communion provided sufficient
Bread and Wine for the Communicants, and set the same upon the Communion Table,
in the presence of the Minister, before he begin the administration of the
said Sacrament?

TIT. 10. Articles concerning Schoolmasters, Physicians and Chyrurgions.
FIrst, Is there any Schoolmaster within your Parish that teaches publicly
or privately, not licensed by the Bishop of the Diocese, or his Chancellor,
and that so teaches and comes not to Church to hear divine service, upon
days appointed for reading of the same, and receive the Communion thrice in
the year at the least: Or does he teach any Papists or Sectaries children,
that come not to Church in time of public prayer read?

2 Item, whether does he instruct his Scholars in the Catechism set forth in
the Book of Common Prayer of this Realm, and in no other?

3 Item, whether does any practice Physic or Chyrurgerie, being not lawfully
licensed thereunto, or created Doctor of Physic, in either of the
Universities of this Realm?

4 Item, what ignorant persons have left their manuell trades, and taken upon
them to profess Physic or Chyrurgerie, and who be they that so abuse the
people?

TIT. 11. Articles concerning Eclesiasticall Officers.
FIrst, What corporal punishment enjoined for any offense of eclesiasticall
cognizance has been commuted by any ecclesiastical Judge within this dioces
into a pecuniary mulct, or sum of money and how was the same money employed?

2 Item, Whether is there not a table of fees in every of the courts
eclesiasticall within this dioces hung up in some public place in the court
and Registry, and no other fees taken and received by any ecclesiastical Judge
more or greater then in the said table are expressed.

3 Item, Whether does any ecclesiastical Judge speed any judicial acts
privately himself, and not in the presence of some public notary or actuary?

4 Item, What presentiments have been made for any offense cognizable and
punishable in the ecclesiastical courts within this dioces, and have been
suppressed by any judge or register, and by them with-drawne and not
effectually proceeded in, according to the laws ecclesiastical of this realm?

5 Item, whether do you know any person enjoined by judicial decree or
sentence in court to do public penance for his sin, or excommunicate for
not doing the same, that does still by conniuencie or favor of the Judge, or
Register of that court, where the said penance was enjoined, still continue
winked at and unreformed?

6 Item, What numbers of apparitors be there to your knowledge within the
Arch-deaconry wherein you live; and whether have any of them under color and
pretense of their office and authority committed unto them, cited or summoned
any person unlawfully; and wrongfully troubled him, or for the concealing of
any offense or sin, and for the avoiding of punishment in the offenders, have
taken any reward or gift, or otherwise dealt corruptly, and who be they that
have so offended?

7 Lastly whether have you without affection of love or hatred to any person,
presented and detected all offenders mentioned in the precedent articles,
known to be delinquents either in truth, or by their own confession, or by
lawful proof, or by common fame, and report: And whether do you know any
other matter of ecclesiastical cognizance, worthy the presenting in your
judgment, which is not heretofore by you presented?

FINIS.

