ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED of, in the Diocese of Norwich In the ordinary
Visitation of the Reverend Father in God, FRANCIS, Lord Bishop of NORWICH.

Anno Domini 1629.

Imprinted at LONDON by JOHN BILL. 1629.

The form of the Oath to be ministered unto the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear, that you and every of you, shall duly consider, and
diligently enquire, of all and every of these Articles given you in charge; and
that all affection, favor, hope of reward and gain, or fear of displeasure,
or malice set aside; you shall present all and every such person, of, or within
your Parish, as has committed any offense, or made any default mentioned in
these, or any of these Articles; or which are vehemently suspected or defamed
of any such offense or default: wherein you shall deal uprightly and fully;
neither presenting, nor sparing to present any, contrary to truth; having in
this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain truth and
virtue, and to suppress vice. So help you God, and the holy Contents of this
Book.

ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF, IN the Diocese of NORWICH: ANNO DOM. 1629.
Articles concerning Religion and Doctrine. Titul. 1.

Heretical opinions.
1 WHether be there any abiding, or resorting, to your Parish, that have
wilfully maintained and defended any heresies, errors, or false opinions,
contrary to the faith of Christ and holy Scripture.

Absence from Church.
2 Item, Whether does any in your parish, being 16. years of age or upwards, or
others, lodging, or commonly resorting to any house in your Parish, wilfully
absent themselves from your Parish Church, Chapel, or Oratorie, upon Sundays
and Holy Days, and other days appointed, at Morning and Evening prayers. Or
who come late to Church, and depart from Church, before divine Service and
Sermon be ended. Or whether be there any that persuade others to forbear and
abstain coming to Church to hear divine Service, and receive the holy
Communion, according to his Majesty's Laws in that behalf enacted.

Unlawful Conuenticles,
3 Item, Whether be there any in your Parish, that has been, or is vehemently
suspected to have been present at any unlawful assemblies, conuenticles, or
meetings, under color or pretense of any exercise of Religion; or does any
affirm and maintain such meeting to be lawful, contrary to his Majesty's
Statutes in that behalf.

Impugners of the Kings Supremacy.
4 Item, Whether be there any within your Parish, that deny, or persuade any to
deny, withstand, and impugn the Kings Majesty's authority and Supremacy in
causes Ecclesiastical within his Realm.

Popish Recu^^^^^.
5. Item, Whether be there any abiding, or resorting to your Parish, that be,
or are commonly reputed to be ill affected in matters of Religion professed in
our Church or taken to be Recusant Papists, refusing to repair unto the
Church to hear divine Service, and receive the holy Communion, and being
disobedient to his Highness Laws in that behalf provided. Or do any
publish, sell, or disperse any superstitious books or writings; or other
books, libells, or writings of any lectuaries touching the Religion, State or
Ecclesiastical government of this Kingdom of England. Present their names,
qualities, and conditions. Does any Papist keep a Schoolmaster in his house,
which comes not to Church as is required. What is his name, and how long has
he taught there or else where.

Articles concerning public Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments.
Titul. 2.

^^^rauing the Book of Common prayer, and ^^^^^monies.
FIrst, Whether has any of your Parish spoken or declared any thing, in the
derogation, or deprauing of the form of Gods worship in the Church of England,
and Administration of the Sacraments, Rites, and Ceremonis, set forth and
prescribed in the Book of common Prayer by the Kings Majesty authorized and
confirmed. Do any preach, speak, or declare, that it contains any thing
which is not agreeable to the holy Scriptures.

^^^^wading any ^ister to alter form of ^^mon prayer.
2. Item, Whether has any in your Parish caused, procured, or maintained any
Minister to say any common or public Prayer, or to administer either of the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper otherwise, or in any other manner
and form then is mentioned in the said Book of Common Prayer. Or whether has
any interrupted, hindered, let, or disturbed the Minister to read divine
Service, and administer the Sacraments, in such manner and form as is
mentioned in the said Book, or interrupted him in his Preachings and Sermons.

^^ruation of ^orme of ^^^^^sme, and ^^^e.
3. Item, Whether is the Sacrament of Baptism rightly and duly administered a
cording to the prescript Form expressed in the book of Common Prayer with due
observation of all Rites and Ceremonies prescribed in the administration of the
same, without adding, or altering any part or parcel of any prayers,
interrogatories, or not using the sign of the Cross in the administration of
the same.

Deferring of Baptism.
4 Item, Whether is the administration of the Sacrament of Baptism deferred
longer then the next Sunday or Holiday immediately following the birth of the
Child.

Children refused to be baptized, or dying without Baptism.
5 Item, Whether is the Sacrament of Baptism refused to be administered to any
children borne in or out of wedlock, their birth being made known to the
Minister of the parish, and offered unto him to be baptized, or have any such
children died unbaptized.

Parents of children admitted Godfathers.
6 Item, Whether be the Parents of any child to be baptized, admitted to be
godfathers, and godmothers to the same.

Private Baptism.
7 Item, Whether have there any children been baptized in private houses by
any Lay person, or midwife, or Popish Priest, or by any other Minister, but
upon urgent occasion when the child was in danger of death.

Baptizing of Papists children.
8 Item, Whether have the children which have been borne to any Popish
Recusants, or begotten by them in your parish, been publicly baptized in your
parish Church by your Parson, Vicar, or Curate; or by whom were they baptized,
or where to your knowledge.

Receiving of the Lords Supper thrice a year,
9 Item, Whether has the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper been duly and
reverently administered every month, or thrice every year at least, whereof
once at Easter, within your Parish Church to every parishioner being of
sixteen years of age, or upwards.

Kneeling at the Communion,
10 Item, Whether is the said holy Sacrament delivered unto, or received by any
of the Communicants within your Parish, that irreverently sit or stand, or do
not devoutly and humbly kneel upon their knees.

Notorious offenders admitted to the Communion.
11 Item, Whether has any of your parish which be openly known to live in
notorious sin without repentance, or excommunicate persons, or Schismatikes,
common and notorious deprauers of the Religion and government of this Realm,
without unfeigned sorrow showen for their impiety and wickedness, been
admitted to be partaker of the said holy Communion.

Debarring others without cause.
12 Item, Whether has any of your parish been debarred from the said holy
Communion without just cause, and without intimation first given to the
Ordinary, or Bishop of the Dioces: and by whose default.

Articles concerning the Church, Titul. 3.
the Ornaments thereof, and the Churches possessions.
Books and ornaments in the Church.
FIrst, Whether have you in your Church or Chapel, the whole Bible of the
largest volume, and of the last translation, the Book of common Prayer, lately
set forth by his Majesty's authority, the two books of Homilies, and Bishop
Jewels Apology, all well and fairly bound: A Font of stone set up in the
ancient usual place: A convenient and decent communion Table, with a carpet of
silk, or some other decent stuff, continually laid upon the Table at time of
divine Service, and a fair linen cloth at the time of administering the
Communion. Abusing of the Communion Table.
And whether is the same Table placed conveniently as it ought. And whether is
it so used in or out of time of divine Service or Sermon, as is not agreeable
to the holy use of it; as by sitting on it, and by throwing hats on it, or
writing on it; or is it abused to other prophaner uses. Are the ten
Commandments set upon the east end of your Church, with other sentences of
Scripture about.

Things appertaining to Churches.
2 Item, Whether have you in your said Church or Chapel, a couuenient seat
for your Minister to read divine Service in, together with a comely Pulpit set
up in a convenient place, with a decent cloth or cushion for the same; a
comely, large, and fine Surplice, a fair communion Cup, a Flagon of silver, or
pewter, with all other things and ornaments necessary for the celebration of
divine Service, and administration of the Sacraments: and whether have you a
Chest for alms, with three locks and keys, and another Chest for keeping the
Books and ornaments of the Church, Register books.
and the Register Book* Have you a Register Book in parchment for
Christnings, Weddings, and Burials, and is the same kept in all points
according to the Canons. And have you a Table set in your Church of the degrees
wherein by law men are prohibited to marry.

Reparations of Churches, and parsonage houses.
3 Item, Whether is your Church or Chapel, with the Chauncell thereof, and
your Parsonage or Vicarage house, your Parish Almeshouse and Church-house in
good reparations; and are they employed to godly, and their right holy uses: if
any be ruinated and wasted, in whom is the default. Is your Church, Chancell,
and Chapel decently and comely kept, as well within as without, and be the
Seats well maintained, the Steeple and Belles preserved, the Windows well
glazed, or any part of the Church, or Chauncell windows daubed or closed up
with Board, Lyme, or Stone, the floor kept paued, plain, and even, and all
things in orderly and decent sort, without dust, Keeping clean of Churches.
or any thing that may be either noisome or unseemly for the house of God, as
is prescribed in an Homily to that effect, and the 85 Canon.

4 Item, How often have you presented unto the Commissaries, and Officers
Court, the want of reparations of your Church, Chancell, Chapel, or your
Vicarage and Parsonage houses. What dismission Fees have you paid to the
Register since the last Visitation, the faults being not amended.

Fencing and keeping the Churchyard.
5 Item, Whether be your Churchyards well fenced, and kept without abuse; if
not, whose default is it: has any person encroached upon the ground of the
Churchyard. Have any used a place consecrated to holy use profanely or
wickedly: have any quarrelled, or stricken another in Church or Churchyard:
have any anoyed your Churchyard, or the fence thereof, by putting in of
cattle, by banging of clothes, or by laying there any dust, dung, or other
filthiness.

Churches vacant.
6 Item, Whether is your Church full, or vacant of an Incumbent; if vacant, who
receives the fruits thereof, and who serves the Cure, and by what authority:
And whether is it a Parsonage, Vicaridge, or Donatiue, or Appropriation.

Concealing of Church goods.
7 Item, What legacies have been given to the use and benefit of your Church,
how they have been bestowed: who received them, and deteineth them without due
employment. Does any detain or embezel any of the Church goods, or any other
gifts given to charitable uses.

Erecting up seats and pues.
8 Item, Whether is there any execting of pewes, or innouating of seats in your
Church by any private man of his own authority: and what seats have been so
built, and by whose procurement, and by what authority.

Defacing of seemly Ornaments.
9 Item, Whether has any in your parish defaced, or caused to be defaced any
monuments or ornaments in your Church.

Burying of Popish Recus^nts.
10 Item, Whether has any Popish Recusant being lawfully excommunicate, been
enterred or buried in your Church or Churchyard, before absolution of that
censure and excommunication: if yea, then by whom, and when.

Alienation of tithes and profits of the Church,
11 Item, Whether be not the profits, tithes, and other commodities
Ecclesiastical, impiously and wickedly to the dishonor of Almighty God, and
prejudice of the sacred Ministry, converted to the use and benefit of covetous
Patrons, and by them received and detained, and how long have they been so
used to your knowledge.

A Terrier of Glebelands, and other possessions of the Church.
12 Item, Whether you have the Terrier of all the Gleab-lands, meadows,
gardens, orchards, houses, stocks, implements, tenements, and portions of
Tithes (whether within your Parish or without) belonging unto your parsonage or
Vicaridge, taken by the view of honest men in your said Parish. And whether the
said Terrier be laid up in the Bishops Registry, and in whose hands are any of
them now. And if you have no Terrier already made in parchment, you the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, together with your Parson or Vicar, or in his
absence your Curate, are to make diligent inquiry, and presentment of the
premises, and make, subscribe, and sign the said Terrier, as aforesaid.

Articles concerning Ministers, Titul. 4.
and Preachers of Gods holy Word.
Degrees of Ministers.
FIrst, Whether is your Minister, Parson, Vicar, or Curate, a Graduate in either
of the Universities, or no: if yea, then of what degree. Is he a public
preacher of Gods word, and by whom is he so licensed.

Observation of the form, and time of common Prayer, and the Sacraments.
2 Item, Whether does your Minister distinctly, and reverently say Divine
Service upon Sundays and Holidays, and other days appointed to be observed
by the book of Common Prayer, as Wednesdayes, and Fridayes, and the Eues of
every Sunday and Holyday, at fit and usual times. And does your Minister duly
observe the orders, Rites, and Ceremonies prescribed in the said book of
Common Prayer, as well inreading all public Prayers, and the Letany, as also
in administering the Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimony, visitation of the
sick, burying the dead, churching of women, and all other like Rites, and
Offices of the Church, in like manner and form, as in the said book of Common
Prayer is enjoined, without any omission or addition of any thing. And does he
read the book of the last Canons yearly.

Continual wearing of the Surplice.
3 Item, Whether does your Minister always, and at every time both morning and
evening, reading Divine Service, and administering the Sacraments, and other
Rites of the Church, wear the Surplice according to the Canons, and does he
never omit wearing of the same at such times.

Observation of Rites.
4 Item, Whether does your Minister bid Holidays and Fasting days, as is
appointed. Does he administer the holy Communion every month, or thrice in the
year at least, whereof once at Easter, to every Parishioner: does he receive
the same himself on every day that he administreth it to others, and uses he
the words of Institution, according to the Book, without alteration, at every
time that the Bread and Wine is renewed. Does he use and never omit the sign
of the Cross in Baptism, or does he ever baptize in any Basin, or other
thing but the usual Font. Does he marry without a Ring, or in times
prohibited, or without the Banes thrice published, without a special License
from the Archbishop, or Bishop of the Diocese, or his Chancellor first had
and obtained.

Preachers without license. Reading Homilies when there is no Sermon.
5 Item, Whether is your Minister a Preacher licenced or no: If no, whether
does he take upon him in his own Cure or elsewhere to expound any Scripture
or matter of doctrine, and does not keep himself only to the reading of
Homilies published by Authority: if so, then you are to present the same, the
time and place where he did it. And if he be licenced, does he preach
usually according to the 45. Canon, in his own Cure, or some other neighbor
Church, where no Preacher is: does he preach standing, and with his hat off.
Or whether does he or his Curate upon every Sunday when there is no Sermon,
read an Homily, or some part thereof, according as he ought to do.

Preaching of false doctrine, and new opinions.
6 Item, Whether does your Minister publish in his Sermons, any doctrine which
is new and strange, and disagreeing from the word of God, and from the Articles
of Christian Faith and Religion agreed on and published An. Dom. 1562. or
whether does he teach any thing, which he would have the people religiously
to observe, and believe, but that which is agreeable to the Scriptures, and
that which the Catholic Fathers and ancient Bishops have gathered out of that
doctrine, according to the Canon.

Names of strange Preachers to be taken.
7 Item, Whether is any Minister admitted to preach in your Church, who does
not before the Churchwardens subscribe his name in your book for that purpose,
the day when he preached, and the name of the Bishop of whom he had license to
preach. And is any one admitted to preach before he has showed his license.

Opposition of Preachers in their Sermons.
8 Item, Does any Preacher in your pulpit particularly impugn and confute any
doctrine delivered by other his fellow Preachers, before he has acquainted
the Bishop of the Diocese therewith, and received order from him what to do
in that case.

Praying for his Majesty, etc.
9 Item, Does your Minister use always to pray for the Kings Majesty, the
Queen, Clergy, Council, etc. giving them their full titles, as in the Canon
is required.

Non residence of the Minister.
10 Item, Whether is your Minister resident upon his Benefice, or absent; if
absent, by whom is the Cure served, the fruits received. Does your Minister or
Curate serve any more cures then one: if yea, then what other Cure does he
serve, and how far are they distant.

11 Item, Catechizing.
Whether does he catechize the youth of his Parish upon Sundays or Holidays
before Evening prayer for half an hour, or more, in the Catechism set forth
in the book of Common prayer: and whether do all the Parishioners diligently
attend his catechizing, and who refuse to send their children and servants to
be catechized by him.

Ministers to call for relief of the poor, and alms-deeds.
12 Item, Does your Minister carefully look to the relief of the poor, and
from time to time call upon his Parishioners to give somewhat according to
their ability to godly and charitable uses, especially when they make their
Wills.

13 Item, Simonie.
Whether is your Minister suspected, or known to have obtained his Benefice,
or Spiritual promotion by any Simoniacall compact directly or indirectly.

^emising of Benefices.
14 Item, Whether does your Minister demise the profits of his Benefice to any
Layman above one year, and is not resident there, and keeps no hospitality
upon his Benefice being of sufficient value.

Conferring with Recusants.
15 Item, Whether has he being learned and sufficient, conferred with the
Popish Recusants of his Parish, endeavoring to reclaim them from their
errors, and presenting them being obstinate, for their Recusancie.

Observing of Rogation week.
16 Item, Does your Minister in the Rogation days go in perambulation of the
circuit of the Parish, saying and using the prayers, suffrages, and
thanksgiving to God, appointed by Law, according to his duty, thanking God
for his blessings, and praying for his grace and favor.

Preaching, etc. in private houses.
17 Item, Has your Minister or any other Preacher made any Sermons,
administered the Sacraments, or Churched women in any private houses, otherwise
then is by Law allowed.

Curates not licensed, and laymen doing offices of a Minister.
18 Item, What Curates or Preachers do read prayers, or administer the
Sacraments in your Parish, without lawful license from the Bishop of the
Diocese under his hand and seal, according to the Canon: or does any Layman,
not having holy Orders, presume to read public prayers in the Church.

Lecturers and Preachers to read service.
19 Item, Whether have you any Preacher or Lecturer in your Parish, and whether
(if any such be) he does twice at the least every year read himself Divine
Service both morning and evening two several Sundays publicly in his
Surplice; and also twice in the year administer both Sacraments, with such
rites and ceremonies as are prescribed in the book of Common prayer, according
to the 56. Canon.

Conversation of the Minister.
20 Item, Whether is your Minister studious in the holy Scriptures, and
abstaineth from Mechanical trades, or labor not be fitting his function, and
from apparel unseemly for his calling, and from gaming, swearing, and
drunkenness, and in frequenting from Innes, Tauernes, and Tippling houses, and
sitting and drinking inordinately in the same, or such notorious scandals: or
is there any in your Parish, Ministers forsaking their calling.
who having been admitted into holy Orders, either Deacon or Minister, does
relinquish or forsake his calling, and lives in che course of his life as a
Lay man.

Ministers revealing private confessions.
21 Item, Whether does your Minister before the several times of the
administration of the Lords Supper, admonish and exhort his Parishioners, if
they have their consciences troubled and disquieted, to resort unto him, or
some other learned Minister, and open his grief, that he may receive such
ghostly counsel, and comfort, as his conscience may be relieved, and by the
Minister he may receive the benefit of absolution, to the quiet of his
conscience, and avoiding of the scruple; And if any man confess his secret and
hidden sins being sick or whole to the Minister, for the vnburthening of his
conscience, and receiving such spiritual consolation, does or has the said
Minister at any time revealed and made known to any person whatsoever, any
crime or offense so committed to his trust and secrecy, contrary to the 113.
Canon.

Articles concerning Matrimony. Titul. 5,

FIrst, Marriage within Leuiticall degrees.
Whether there be any in your Parish that have married within the degrees of
affinity, or consanguinitie by the Law of God forbidden; if any, what be they.

Private marriage, and without consent of Parents.
2 Item, Whether have any been married secretly in private houses, or without
their parents or governors consent signified, being under the age of 21.
years.

Married person living apart.
3 Item, Whether do any persons lawfully married, live asunder unlawfully, and
in whom is the default.

Marriage without banes, and license.
4 Item, Whether any persons, (the Banes being not thrice published in the
Church,) have been married without license lawfully obtained, who were present
at such marriages, and what Minister married them.

Persons married out of their parishes.
5 Item, Whether any persons by license or without have been married in your
Parish Church, neither of them at that time dwelling in your Town.

Recusants marriage.
6 Item, What Popish Recusants or their children have been married in your
Parish, in what sort was that Matrimony solemnized, when and by whom.

Bigamy.
7 Item, Is there any in your Parish that is voiced, noted, and credibly
reported and accused to have two wives living, or two husbands.

Articles concerning the Churchwardens. Titul. 6.

Election of Churchwardens.
FIrst, whether be the Churchwardens chosen by the Minister and Parishioners,
according to the 89. Canon, and whether has any taken upon him to be
Churchwarden being not so chosen: Or has any continued above one year in his
office without a new choice.

Churchwardens due account.
2 Item, Whether have any Churchwardens retained any of the Church goods, and
not made a just account of what they have received and expended.

Churchwardens diligent in the Church.
3 Item, Have they been and are they diligent in their office, to see decency
kept in the Church, and order in the time of Common prayer, and administration
of the Sacraments, and that there be no disturbance, A book for ^range
Preachers.
but soberness and quietness in the Church. And do the Churchwardens keep
a book in your Parish, wherein the name of every strange Preacher in your
Parish is set down; and have the Churchwardens suffered any to Preach not
showing or having no license.

Articles concerning the Parishioners.
FIrst, Titul. 7.
Whether do any in your Parish profane the Sunday by unlawful games,
Profaning the Lords day,
drinking, or tippling in the time of Common Prayer, or Sermon; and by working,
and doing the ordinary works of their vocation and trades.

impugning the rites and government of the Church.
2 Item, Is there any in your Parish that do impugn or speak against the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, or the lawful use of them; and
the government of this Church under his Majesty, by Archbishops, Bishops, and
other Ecclesiastical officers.

^^^euerent behavior at Divine service,
3 Item, Who in your Parish do come to the Sermon only, and not to divine
Service, and who do not reverently behave themselves during the time of divine
Service, devoutly kneeling when the general Confession of sins, the Letany,
the ten Commandments, and all Prayers and Collects are read: and using all
duly and lowly reverence when the blessed name of the Lord Jesus is mentioned,
and standing up when the Articles of the Belief, and the Gospel are read: or
who do cover their heads in the Church, during the whole time of divine
Service, unless it be in case of necessity, in which case they may wear a
nightcap. Or who do give themselves to babbling, talking, or walking, and are
not attentive to hear the Word read and preached.

Leaving their own Churches to go to others.
4 Item, Is there any of your Parish, having a Preacher to their Minister, that
do absent themselves from his Sermons, and resort to other places to hear
other Preachers: or do any in your Parish Communicate, or Baptize their
children in any other Parish.

Exception against the Minister.
5 Item, Is there any in your Parish that refuse to have their children
baptized, or themselves to receive the Communion of your Minister, taking
exception against him: or have any wives that refuse to come to Church,
according to the Book of Common Prayer, Churching of women.
to give thanks to God for their safe deliverance, in a decent habit, as has
been anciently accustomed.

Disgracing of Ministers.
6 Item, has any in your Parish spoken slanderous and reproachful words
against your Minister, to the scandal of his vocation, or against their
marriage or wives, or against his neighbor, defaming them touching any crime
of Ecclesiastical cognizance.

Opening of shops upon holidays.
7 Item, Whether do any in your Parish exercise any trade, or labor, buy or
sell, or keep open shops, or set out any wares to be sold upon Sundays and
Holy Days by themselves, their servants, or apprentices, or have otherwise
profaned the said days.

Keeping holy of 27. March. 5. November.
8 Item, Whether is the 27. of March, and the fifth of November kept holy, and
thanksgiving made to God, according to the order set forth in that behalf.

Adultery, fornication, incest, etc.
9 Item, Is there any in your Parish that be, or are commonly known or
reputed to be blasphemers of Gods holy Name, drunkards, adulterers,
fornicators, incestuous persons, concealers or harbourers of fornicators or
adulterers: have any been detected of such notorious crimes, and what penance
have they done for the same.

Commutation of Penance.
10 Item, what corporal punishment for any such offenses, have been commuted
and changed into a pecuniary mulct or sum of money by any Ecclesiastical
Judge, exercising jurisdiction within this Diocese, by virtue of any Grant or
Commission; or what was the sum of money by them or any of them so received and
taken, and to what uses was the same bestowed: or whether upon such
commutations, was the unfeigned repentance of the delinquents published in the
Church.

Persons dying since the 1. of March, 1628.
11 Item, What person or persons have died and departed this mortal life,
since the first day of March last past, and whether did they make any last
Wills or Testaments, and who were their Executors, or whether died they
intestate, and who has the Administration of their goods; and what be the
names of such deceased, and Executors, and Administrators.

Administering of goods without authority.
12 Item, Whether have any in your Parish administered the goods of any person
deceased without lawful authority, and before he or they have proved the Will
and Testament of the party deceased, or have obtained commission from the
Ordinary to dispose of the said mooueable goods; or are their any Wills
unproven, or goods not administered.

Excommunicate persons.
13 Item, What persons be excommunicate within your Parish, and for what cause
to your knowledge: and whether do any of them repair to the church in time of
Prayer, vnabsolued.

Articles concerning Schoolemasters, Titul. 8.
Physicians and Chyrurgions, and Parish Clearkes.
Schoolemasters not licenced.
FIrst, Is there any Schoolmaster in your Parish, that teaches publicly or
privately, not licensed by the Ordinary or the Bishop of the Diocese. Does he
teach any Papists or Sectaries children, that come not to church. Duty of all
Schoolemasters.
And does he instruct all his scholars to learn the shorter Catethisme, by
Law established, contained in the Book of common Prayer. Is he a graduate,
and sufficient to teach.

Physicians not licenced.
2 Item, What Physician or Chyrurgion is in your Parish unlicensed, and being
not a Doctor of physic in either of the Universities, does practice
physic. And what ignorant persons have left their trade, and taken upon them
to profess Physic, or Chyrurgerie; and who be they that so abuse the people.

Parish Clerks.
3 Item, Have you a fit parish Clarke, aged 20. years at least, of honest
life, able to read and write. Are his and the Sextons wages paid without fraud;
if not, then whose default is it. By whom is he chosen: is he diligent in his
office, and serviceable to the Minister; does he meddle with any thing above
his office; does he keep the Church clean, the doors locked. Is any thing
lost and spoiled by his default, and does he execute his office duly.

Articles concerning Ecclesiastical offices. Titul. 9.

Excessive fees.
FIrst, Whether be there any Ecclesiastical officers, that exercise
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within this Diocese, that take and receive, or
exact any extraordinary and excessive fees for any cause. Whether have your
Churchwardens and Questmen, concealed any abuses, or offenses punishable in the
Ecclesiastical court; and whether such offenses being presented are suppressed
and unpunished.

Tables of fees in Courts.
2 Item, Whether is there not a table of Fees in every Court, of the
Consistory, Archdeacons, and Commissaries, allowed and subscribed by the Judge
and Register of the court of Consistory Anno Dom. 1597. and the same every
Court day hung up in some public place of the Court, and Registry. And whether
does the Register of your courts take more for Wills, and Administrations and
other things, then is set down in that Table.

Speeding of Acts without a Notarie.
3 Item, Does any Ecclesiastical Judge speed any act in any cause privately
of himself, and not in presence of some public Notarie, or Actuarie.

Abuses in apparitors and Sumners.
4 Item, Whether is there any excessive number of Apparitors and Sumners in
this Diocese: or have any of them under pretense of authority cited or
summoned any person unlawfully, or has taken any reward for the concealing of
any offense or sin, or the avoiding of punishment of the offenders, and who
be they that have done so; or do they take any fees not accustomable. Have
they threatened any to prosecute them if they had no reward, and do they summon
any without a Citation first had.

Abuses in Ecclesiastical offices.
5 Item, Has any Ecclesiastical Judge, or Officer, Advocate, Register,
Procter, Clerks, or other such ministers any way abused themselves in their
offices, contrary to the law and Canons in that behalf provided.

Sincerity and impartialitie in the Inquisitors.
6 Item, Lastly, Whether have you and every of you, sincerely, uprightly, and
without any partial affection, and concealing, presented and made known all
and every the offenders in any of the matters mentioned in the precedent
Articles exhibited unto you, either as they are taken in truth to be, or by
common fame reported.

If you know of any other default or crime of Ecclesiastical cognizance, you
are to present the same.

The Ministers of every Parish may join in presentment with the Churchwardens
and Sidemen, and if they will not present, then the Ministers themselves
(being the persons that should have the chief care for the suppressing of
sin and impiety in their parishes) may present the crimes aforesaid, and
such things as shall be thought to require due reformation. Can. 113.

There must be several presentiments made to every several Article.

FINIS.
Hos Articulos sub hisce Titulis in hac visitatione, 1629. proponit
inquirendos, FRA: NORVICENSIS.


