ARTICLES To be enquired of by the Churchwardens and Sworne-men within the
Arch-deaconrie of Barnestaple, in the Diocese of Exeter, in the Visitation
there holden in the year of our Lord God. 1617.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot. An. Dom. 1617. (*)

THE Churchwardens and their Assistants are straightly required to read, or
hear red, all these Articles, and diligently to consider of them between the
time of the delivery hereof unto them, and the making of their presentiments,
for the better discharge of the Oath which they shall receive.

The Oath to be ministered unto the Churchwardens, and their Assistants.
YOu and every of you shall make diligent Inquisition and true presentment of
al such crimes, offenses and enormtties, which are to be reformed and corrected
by authority of the Kings M. Ecclesiastical laws of this Realm, and which by
confession of the party or parties notorietie of the facts, or by common fame,
have been committed within your parish or hamlet, by any person or persons,
and have not yet been duly reformed, presented and punished according to the
said Ecclesiastical Laws: and you shall present the names and Surmames of
every of the said offenders, as you shall be directed by the Articles now
delivered unto you. So help you God in Christ Jesus.

Articles concerning the Clergy.
WHETHER your Minister has said and used in your Church or Chapel, upon all
Sundaies and holi-daies and their Eeues, and other days prescribed by public
authority, common and open Morning and Evening prayer, and has administered
the Sacraments in such order and form, as is prescribed in the book of Common
prayer established by public authority, and that, plainly, distinctly, and
reverently, as by the said Book is appointed, and at due and convenient
hours, without any innovation or change of any part thereof?

2 Item, whether your Minister upon all Wednesdaies and Fridaies, not being
holi-daies, has said in your Church at the accustomed hours of service the
Letany prescribed in the book of Common prayer?

3 Item, whether your Minister has administered the holy Communion in your
Church twice a year at the least in his own person, and so often, and at such
times as every parishioner might communicate at the least thrice in the year
(whereof once at the Feast of Easter) according as by the book of Common
prayer is appointed? And whether as often as he so administered the Communion,
he reverently kneeling, did first receive the Sacrament himself? And whether
he has used any Bread or Wine newly brought, not first rehearsing the words
of Institution, when the said bread and wine is set upon the Communion Table?
And whether he has delivered the bread and wine to every Communicant
severally?

4 Item, whether your Minister has given warning to his Parishioners publicly
in the Church at Morning prayer the Sunday before every time of administering
that holy Sacrament, for their better preparation of themselves, and for all
holy days and fasting days?

5 Item, whether your Minister has admitted to receive the holy Communion, any
of his Cure, who have been openly known to live in notorious sin, or any
who have maliciously and openly contended with their neighbors, until they
were reconciled? Or any Churchwardens or swornemen, who wittingly and
ignorantly refused or neglected to present to their Ordinary all such public
offenses as they themselves did know to have been committed in their Parish,
or to have been notoriously offensive to the congregation there?

6 Item, whether your Minister, when he has celebrated the Communion in your
Church, has wittingly administered the same to any person not kneeling, or to
any that then refused to be present at public prayers, according to the order
of the Church of England, or to any that then were common and notorious
Adulterers, fornicators, blasphemers, excommunicate or suspected persons of
incontinency, common swearers, common gammesters or suchlike?

7 Item, whether your Minister has adminitted any parent to answer as
Godfather for his own child? or has admitted any person to be Godfather or
Godmother to any child at christening, before the said person so undertaking,
has received the holy communion, or does not use the sign of the cross in
baptism, or baptizeth in any Basin, any child not borne in the parish?

8 Item, whether your Parson or Vicar (not being allowed to be a Preacher)
has procured sermons to be preached in his Cure once in every month at the
least, by preachers lawfully licensed? and whether upon every Sunday when there
has not been a sermon, he or his Curate has read some one of the Homilies
prescribed by authority?

9 Item, whether your Parson or Vicar, being licensed by the laws of this
Realm not to reside upon his Benifice, has not in his absence caused his Cure
from time to time to be supplied by a Curate that is a sufficient and licensed
Preacher?

10 Item, whether the Minister or Churchwardens have suffered any man to preach
in your Church, but such as have first showed their Licenses to preach, viz.
from the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, or from the Lord Bishop of Exeter, or
one of the Universities in writting under their seal?

11 Item, whether in the beginning of all Sermons, Lectures, and Homilies, your
Preacher or Lecturer has wittingly omitted to move the people to join with
them in prayer, for Christ's holy Catholic Church, and therein for the Kings
most excellent Majesty, our gracious Queen, the Noble Prince Charles, and the
rest of the King and Queens Royal Issue, in the form, or to the effect of
the 55 Canon Ecclesiastical, agreed upon in the Convocation, Anno, 1603.

12 Item, whether your Parson or Vicar, stipendary Preacher, or Lecturer in
your Church (though chiefly he attend to preaching) has twice at the least
every year, read himself the divine service in your Church upon the several
Sundaies publicly, and at the usual times, both in the forenoone and
afternoon, and has likewise as often in every year administered the
Sacraments of Baptize (if there have been any to have been baptized) and of
the Lords Supper, in such manner and form and with the observation of all such
Rites and Ceremonies, as are prescribed by the Book of Common prayer in that
behalf?

13 Item, whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate has either received to the
Communion any person or persons, which have not been of your Church and
Parish, or any child dyed without Baptism through his default?

14 Item, whether your Parson, Vicar or Minister, saying the publiks prayers,
or ministering the sacraments or other rites of the Church, has wittingly
omitted or neglected to wear a decent and comely Surplice with sleeus,
provided at the charge of the Parish? And further whether such of them as are
graduats have omitted to wear upon their Surplices at such times, such hoods
as by the orders of the Universities are agreeable to their degree?

15 Item, whether your Minister has neglected upon every Sunday and Holi-day
before evening prayer by the space of half an hour, or more, to examine and
instruct the youth and ignorant persons of your parish in the ten
commandments, the Articles of the belief, and in the Lords prayer, and
diligently instructed and taught them the Catechime set forth in the book of
Common prayer?

16 Item, whether your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Minister, has celebrated
Matrimony between any persons without any faculty or license granted by such
as have Episcopal authority, or by the Comissary for faculties, or by the
Vicars general of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, or the Lord Bishop of
Exeter, except the Banes of Matrimony have been first published three several
Sundaies, or Holidaes in the time of divine service in the parish Church or
Chapel where the said parties then dwelled, according to the book of Common
prayer, or at any other time, then between the hours of eight and twelve in
the forenoone, or any other place, then in the Church or Chapel where one of
the parties dwelled, or at at any time when Banes have been so thrice asked,
before the parents or governors of the parties to be married being under the age
of 21 years have signified their consent, or married any Adulterer, fornicator,
or incontinent person, or any womankind with child before marriage?

17 Item, whether your Parson, Vicar or curate, has in his cure neglected to
declare to the people every sunday at the time appointed in ye communion book,
such Holidaies and fasting days as have been in the week following?

18 Item, whether when any person has been dangerously sick in your Parish,
your Minister (having knowledge thereof) has not resorted to every of them (if
the disease were not probably suspected to be infectious) to instruct and
comfort them in their distress according to the manner and form appinted in
the Communion Book if he were no Preacher, and if he were a Preacher, then as
he thought most needful and convenient?

19 Item, whether your Minister has at any time refused or delayed to christen
according to the book of Common prayer, any Child that has been brought to
the Church to him upon Sundaies or Holi-daies to be christened or to bury any
corpse that has been brought to the Church or Churchyard, (convenient warning
having been given him thereof before) in such manner and form as is
prescribed in the book of Common prayer.

20 Item, whether your Minister has preached, and administered the holy
Communion in any private house, except it has been in times of necessity,
when any of your parish by reason of impotencie could not come to Church, or
being very dangerously sick, were desirous to be partakers of that holy
Sacrament in their house? And in that case, whether without a convenient number
of three, four, or more, to communicate with the sick person?

21 Item, whether your Minister without license of his Diocesan first obtained
under his hand and seal, has appointed or kept any solemn fasts either
publicly, or in any private houses, other then such as by public authority
have been appointed? Or has been present at any such?

22 Item, whether your Minister has at any time (other then for honest
necessity) resorted to any Tavern or Alehouse, or has boorded or lodged in
any such place, or has given himself to any servile or base labor, or to
drinking or riot, spending his time idly by day or by night, at Dice, Cards,
Tables, or any other unlawful games? Or has been suspected of any notorious
crime, or has given any evil example of life?

23 Item, whether your Minister has from time to time diligently called upon
his parishioners, especially when they make their testaments, and earnestly
moved and exhorted them to confer and give somewhat as they may spare, to
the necessity of the poor?

24 Item, whether your Minister has once in this last year read in your
Church and Chapel all the Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical agreed upon with his Majesty's license, in the Synod holden at
London An. Dom. 1603. according to the Kings Majesty's commandment?

25 Item, whether any Parson not being ordered at the least a Deacon, has said
or read common prayer openly in your Church or Chapel, or has solemnized
Matrimony, or administered the Sacrament of Baptism?

26 Item, whether your Minister has rejected any married woman, which has come
to Church to give thanks after childbirth, according to the order set down
in the book of Common prayer, or uses not the prayers appointed for the
visitation of the sick, burying the dead, and churching of women?

27 Item, whether the Chancell, Mansion house, and other edifices belonging to
your Parsonage or Vicarage, be in any ruin or decay, and how long they have
remained so decayed or ruinated? and to what value, as you are verily persuaded
in your consciences?

28 Item, whether any Curate or Minister have served your Church before he was
examined and admitted by the Bishop of Exeter, or his Chancellor in writing,
and did show his, or his Chancellors license under seal unto the
Churchwardens, and whether any Curate has served Two Cures in one day?

29 Item, whether for the retaining of the perambulation of the circuit of your
parish, the Minister, Churchwardens, and certain substantial men of the
parish in the days of the Rogations (commonly called Gang days) have walked
the accustomed bounds of your parish? whether in the same they have used any
superstitious or popish ceremony?

Articles concerning the Churchwardens and their Assistants.
ITem, whether they have suffered any idle persons to abide either in the
Churchyard, or in the Church porch upon any Sundaies or Holidaies during the
time of divine Service or Preaching, and have not either caused them to come
into the Church at that time, or to depart thence?

2 Item, whether against the time of every Communion, they have neglected or
omitted at any time to provide a sufficient quantity of fine white bread, and
of good and wholesome wine for the number of Communicants, and the same brought
to the Communion Table in a clean and sweet standing pot or stoop of pewter,
if not of purer metal?

3 Item, whether all and every of the parishioners of your parish, being of the
age of Eighteen years or above, have come so often to the holy communion, as
the Laws and constitutions Ecclesiastical do require: viz. Thrice a year at
the least, whereof once at, or about the feast of Easter? And whether any
strangers have come from other parishes to your Church to receive the
communion? And whether the Churchwardens have observed such access of
strangers, and thereof advertised the Minister, to the intent he should not
admit them to the Communion?

4 Item, whether they have caused the names of all Preachers which have in the
time aforesaid preached in their Church, coming from any other place, to be
noted in a book provided by them for that purpose; and every preacher to
subscribe his name, and the day when he preached, and the name of the Bishop of
whom he had license to preach?

5 Item, whether there be any person or persons within your parish, that has
refused to have his or their children baptized with the sign of the cross by
your Minister, because he is no preacher, or to receive the holy Communion at
his hands in the same respect?

6 Item, whether there be provided in your Church a parchment book, and
therein have been and are written the names of all the children, Men, and
women, Baptized, married, or buried within your parish, contained in your former
Register books, and especially since the beginning of ye Reign of the late
Queen Elizabeth?

7 Item, whether you have in your parish a sure Coffer with three locks and
keys for the safe custody of that book? And whether the day and year of
every Christening, Wedding, and Burial, which has been in your parish, has
been weekly written in the said book?

8 Item, whether there be provided in your Church the book entitled,
Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastiall, agreed upon by the Clergy of the
province of Canterbury, with the Kings Majesty's license in their Synod at
London, in the year of our Lord 1603.

9 Item, whether there be provided in your Church a fair Bible, the book of
Common prayer lately ordained to be used, a Font of stone within your Church or
Chapel, standing or set up in the ancient and usual place, a convenient and
decent Table for the celebration of the holy Communion, a carpet of silk, or
other decent stuff with a fair linen cloth, at the time of the ministration
of the Lords Supper for the same table, and a fair and comely communion cup of
silver, and a cover for the same; the Ten Commandments set upon the East end
of your Church of Chapel, where the people may best see and read the same, a
convenient seat for your Minister to read Service in, and a comely and decent
Pulpit set in a convenient place, and the same seemly kept for the preaching
of Gods word, a Pulpit cloth and cushion, a strong Chest with a hole in the
upper part thereof, with three locks and keys set and fastened in some convenient
place of the Church for the Alms of the poor?

10 Item, whether your Church or Chapel be well and sufficiently repaired and
so kept and maintained, the windows well glased, the floares kept paued plain
and even in decent sort, without offense or lo thsownesse of dust, or any other
unseemly thing, as best becomes the house of God, your Churchyards well and
sufficiently repaired, fenced, and maintained with Walls, Railes, or Pales, as
have been in your parish accustomed, without encrochment upon the same, or any
profanation used in them?

11 Item, whether for the avoiding of incestuous and ungodly marriages, you have
in your Church publicly set up and fixed in some fit place a table,
expressing, that no persons shall marry within the degrees prohibited by the
Laws of God?

12 Item, whether you do know, or by any common fame and report you have heard
of any person or persons, who within these two years last past, or at any time
before (being not presented and punished) have committed the grievous sins of
Incest, Adultery, or whoredom, within your parish? Or have been bawdes, or
receivers of any such lewd and incontinent persons, or have been receivers or
harbourers of women with child, who have been unmarried, or who have conuaied
any such out of your parish before they gave notice thereof to the Ordinary, or
before they did public penance for such offense? Or whether any person within
your parish in the time aforesaid, has been vehemently suspected of any such
crime? Or has been a blaspheof the name of God, or a great and often swearer,
and what is the name and surname of every such offender?

13 Item, whether any offender in any of the crimes before mentioned within your
parish, has not yet been presented, and detected to the Ordinary for the same
offense? and what is the name of every of them not yet so presented, or not
punished for the same?

14 Item, whether any of your Parishioners have behaved themselves rudely and
disorderly in the Church in time of divine Service or Sermon, or by untimely
ringing of Bells, walking, talking, or any other disordered noise, has
hindered the Minister, or Preacher, or frequent the company of excommunicate
persons?

15 Item, whether any Church-ales, Drinkings, temporal Courts of leets, Lay
Iuries, Musters or any other profane usage have been kept in your Church,
Chapel, or Churchyard, without good cause allowed by the Laws and Canons
Ecclesiastical?

16 Item, whether the Churchwardens of any of the former years, did at or
within a month after the end of every year before the Minister and
Parishioners give up a just account of such money as they in their year
received, and what particularly they bestowed in reparations or otherwise for
the use of your Church of Chapel, and going out of their Office delivered up
to the Parishioners whatsoever money or other things of right belonged to your
Church or Parish which remained in their hands to be deliued over unto the
Churchwardens of the year following?

17 Item, whether any man, woman, child, or servant, or any other person or
persons, who have dwelt, remained, or soiourned within your parish, or have
often repaired thither and remained there by the space of any one Month, being
of the age of sixteen years or above, has willingly or purposedly forborne
to come to your Church or Chapel, and to be present at divine Service, and
common prayer therein celebrated, by the space of any one month together
within one year last past, and what be their Christian names and Surnames?

18 Item, whether any of your parishioners have within this year last past
neglected to resort to your Church upon any Sundaies of Holi-daies, and to
continue the whole time of divine Service, or have used to walk up and down
in the Church, or to stand idle, or talking in the Churchyard or Church porch
during that time, or have used any gaming, or pastime abroad or in any house,
or have sitten idly in the street or in any Tavern or Alehouse upon the
Saboth or Holiday in the time of common prayer, Sermon, or reading of the
Homilies either before or afternoon, or any brawlers or quarrellers in Church
or Churchyard, or users of filthy or profane talk?

19 Item, whether the Almeshouses, Hospitalls, and Spittles for poor people
that are in your Parish, be well and godly used according to the foundation,
and ancient ordinances of the same, and whether there be any other placed in
them then poor, impotent, and needy persons that have not wherewith or whereby
to live?

20 Item, whether the Schoolemaisters within your Parish, openly, or privately
in any man's house, be lawfully licensed, and of good and sincere Religion, life
and conversation, and have been diligent in teaching and bringing up of their
youth? And whether with their Scholars they have resorted orderly on Sundaies
and Holidaies to Church, and received the holy communion so often as they ought
to do? and so many of their Scholars as be of sufficient age and capacity
have received the holy communion?

21 Item, whether all householders in your Parish have caused their children,
servants and Apprentices, both mankind and womankind, (which have not learned
the Catechism) to come to the Church on Sundaies and Holidaies, at the times
appointed for Catechizing, and there diligently and obediently to hear? and
what be the names of those that have not caused their Children, servants, and
apprentices so to come to the Church to be instructed and examined, being
thereto appointed by the Minster?

22 Item, whether have any of your parish wrought, or kept any shop, or any
part of their Shop open upon the Sabbath days or upon any Holidaies,
(appointed by the Laws of the Realm to be kept holiday) or have used to do
any unnecessary work, or labor, upon those days, especially in time of divine
Service?

23 Item, whether there be within your parish any Inkeepers, Alewiues,
Victuallers, or Tiplers, that have suffered or admitted any person or persons
in their house to eat, drink, or play at Cards, Tables, or such like games in
the time of common prayer or Sermon on the Sundaies or Holidaies? And whether
any Butchers or others that commonly use to sell meat or other things, have
made sale thereof in the time of Common prayer, preaching, or reading of
Homilies? And whether in any Faires or common Markets (falling upon the Sunday)
there have been any showing of any wares before Morning prayer were done? And
whether any Markets and selling of wares have been used, or suffered in your
Churchyard by any common packmen, or Pedlers going about, or any such people
either of your Parish, or not?

24 Item, whether there be any in your Parish that take upon them to administer
the goods of those that be dead, without lawful authority? Or any that have
supressed the last Will of the dead? Or any Executors that have not fulfilled
the Testators will, especially in paying of Legacies given to the Church, or to
other good and godly uses, as the relief of poverty, helples Orphans, poor
Scholars, poor maidens marriages, highways, and such like: and by whom they
are so withdrawn?

25 Item, whether there be any in your Parish noted to be common drunkards,
swearers, suspected persons of bad life, contentious with their neighbors,
slack comers to Church, haunters of Alehouses, or any that has taken
unlawful usury against the laws of God; and of this Realm, since the last
visitation? And what be the names of such offenders?

26 Item, whether your Minister or any of the Parish, without the consent of
the Ordinary have in their vestries or meetings, or otherwise caused any to do
penance, or pay any money, or be punished, either openly or otherwise, for any
crime punishable by the Ecclesiastical Laws only: and what be the names of
the parties that have so been punished, and in what manner, and for what cause?

27 Item, whether there be any in your Parish, that have used sorcerie, or
witchcraft, punishable by the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, or that
be suspected of the same; And used any charms, or unlawful prayers: or have
resorted to any forcerers or witches for help and counsel, and what be the
names both of such as use it, and of such as resort unto them for help?

28 Item, whether any Inhabitant do detain the Clarks wages, or live apart
from husband or wife without order of Law, or carry their children out of the
Parish to be christened?

29 Item, whether any within your Parish have resorted unto barnes, fields,
woods, or private houses, for any extraordinary expositions of the Scriptures,
or conferences together, and so have (as it were) made a several Church or
Sect unto themselves, to be drawers or perswaders of others to any such
schismatic Sects, and in whose houses, or in what places have you heard of
any such meetings?

30 Item, whether there be any of your Parish known or suspected to conceal,
or to keep hidden in their house any Masse-books, or other books of Popery and
superstition, or any chalices, copes, vestiments, or other like superstitious
ornaments in their form and fashion undefaced, for some exercise of their
superstition: or whether any be known or suspected to receive any such books,
or like trumperie from beyond the Seas, and to diperse and carry them abroad to
others?

31 Item, whether there be any in your Parish, married in any private houses,
since the last Visitation, or be known, or suspected to have been married by
any Popish Priest, or in any other order then is appointed by the Church of
England?

32 Item, whether any Children borne in your Parish, do remain unbaptized, or
be suspected to be baptied by any Popish Priest, Seminary, or Jesuit: and
whether any Recusant live together as man and wife, who are not known to be
married accord to the Laws of this Reame? what Physicians or Chyrurgions have
you, of what skill ar they reputed in their profession?

33 Item, whether any of the Stocks appertaing to the Church, be subtracted by
any person, and to what value, and by whom, and whether your Parish Clarke and
other Church Officer demean themselves according to their several duties?

Generally, what faults soever (...) know to be within your Parishes, not
specified, or mentioned in these ^rticles, and punishable by the Kings
Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws of this Reamle, you shall by virtue of your
Oath aforesaid duly and truly present them to your Ordinary, when and as
often as occasion is offered, that reformation may be had accordingly, wherein
your Minister may join in Patent?

And to all and every of these Articles you shall present expressly and
articulately, the full truth of your knowledges, or what by common fame you
have heard therein. (*)

FINIS.

