Articles TO BE JNQVIRED OF BY ^e Churchwardens and sworne-men of ^e Dioces and
Jurisdiction of Peterborough, the visitation of the Reverend father in God,
Thomas by Gods permission L. Bishop of Peterborough, in the year of our Lord
God 1602. and in the xliiij. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth by the grace of God of England, France, and Ireland Queen, Defender
of the faith, etc.



Printed 1602.

The tenor of the oath to be ministered to all and every of the Churchwardens
and sworne-men in the said visitation.
YE shall swear by almighty God, that you shall diligently consider all and
every the Articles given to you in charge, and make a true answer to the same
in writing under your hands or marks, presenting all and every such person and
persons dwelling within your parish, as have committed any offense or fault, or
made any default mentioned in any of the same Articles, or which are suspected
or defamed of any such offense, or default: wherein ye shall not present any
person or persons of any evil will, malice, or hatred, contrary to the truth,
nor shall for love, favor, mede, dread, or any corrupt affection, spare to
present any that be offenders suspected or defamed in any of these cases, but
shall do uprightly as men having the fear of God before their eyes, and
desirous to maintain virtue and suppress vice. So God help you, etc.

Articles to be inquired of within the Dioces of Peterborough, etc.
INprimis, whether your parson, vicar, or Curate, be a preacher of Gods word, a
maintainer and furtherer of the true and sincere Religion of Jesus Christ, now
established in this Realm of England by public authority: and whether he be
diligent and painful in preaching or reading of Gods word, and in catechizing
the youth of your parish the sabbath days and other festiual days. And
whether the churchwardens and sworne-men do assist the Minister as he shall
prescribe ^en in that godly action.

2 Item, whether in the celebration of divine service, and the admi^ration of
the sacraments, he do in every respect observe the form, ^er, and manner
prescribed and set down in the book of Common prayer, wearing then such
decent ornaments as by her Majesty's ^es and Injunctions are appointed.

3 Item, whether his life and conversation be sober, honest, and ^ly, and his
ordinary attire decent and comely beseeming a mini^ And if in any thing he be
offensive, then what the same is where^ he is so blemished or defamed.

4 Item, whether you have had sermons in your parish Church ^thly at the least:
and whether are the Homilies read when there (...) sermon: and whether such
beneficed men as be lawfully absent (...) their benefices, do leave their
Cures to an honest, learned, and (...) Curate, lawfully authorized: and whether
you have the Queens ^esties Injunctions read quarterly, or no.

5 Item, how often is the holy Communion celebrated in your ^h yearly, and
whether all within your parish which be of suffi^ years and discretion, do
receive the holy Communion thrice in ^re at the least, the feast of Easter
being one of those times: whether they do receive it kneeling, and whether
any excommunicate person, or any known or notorious offender, or any not
instructed in the principles of Religion be admitted to the Communion, and if
any such be admitted, then to show who they be.

6 Item, whether your Parson or Vicar be resident upon his benefice, and
thereon keeps hospitality: and if he be not resident, then what distribution
is made by him yearly among the poor people o^ your said parish.

7 Item, whether your said parson, vicar, or Curate has denied o^ delaied to
visit the sick, to bury the dead, to use the perambulation i^ the Rogation
week: and whether has he married any persons without banes three several
sundaies or holidaies first published, or within the time by law and order
forbidden, being not lawfully licensed the^ unto.

8 Item, whether your chauncell, your parsonage and vicaridg^ houses be in good
and sufficient reparations, and whether the same houses be in any sort abused,
by keeping any victualling, drinking, (...) gaming therein, or by any other
ways or means whatsoever.

9 Item, whether your parson, vicar, or Curate has bought the^ benefices or
Ecclesiastical promotion, or came by them by fra^guile, deceit, or simmonie;
and whether he has more benefices or there Ecclesiastical living then he ought
to have, not having sufficie^ license or dispensation thereunto, and how many
they be.

10 Item, whether your parson, vicar, or Curate does keep an elderly Register
book in parchment, wherein he truly writes (...) names of all persons
baptized, married, and buried within your paris^ with the several days
thereof. And whether he does every sabba^ day after morning or evening prayer
publicly read the names of (...) them who have been so baptized, married, and
buried within yo^ said parish, the week next going before, as is appointed by
the co^stitutions lately set forth and confirmed by her Majesty under (...)
highness great seal.

11 Item, whether has he churched any woman after childbir^ begotten in
incest, adultery, or fornication; or married any wom^ known to be with child
so begotten, without public confession their several offenses at the times
of such their churchings or ma^ings before the whole congregation then
assembled, being upon so^ ^both or festival day at morning prayer time.

12 Item, whether the exercises heretofore prescribed and enjoyed to the
Clergy of this Dioces for the increase of their knowledge (...) the holy
scriptures be accordingly observed: and if not, in whose ^ult the same has
been, or is so omitted or neglected.

13 Item, whether are there within your parish any notorious ob^nate Recusants,
or any who negligently or seldom come to your ^urch or chapel on the sabbath
days or other festival days, and ^o they be, and how long they have so
continued, and of what estate, ^gree, or condition they are of, and what are
their abilities and livings ^eemed to be.

14 Item, whether any do usually go out of your said Church or ^ppell, or
walk, talk, or sleep, or use any other unseemly, vnre^rent, or offensive
behavior in the times of public prayer, prea^ng, celebration of the
sacraments, or catechizing, and who they be.

15 Item, whether there be any which publicly or privily do in ^eches or
otherwise deprave any part of the true religion of Jesus ^rist, now established
within this Realm, or the Ministers or pro^sours thereof, or any part of the
book of Common prayer set forth ^d confirmed by public authority, or any
who dissuade from the ^me, and who they be.

16 Item, whether any Jesuits, Seminaries, or any other known ^isobedient
persons in matters of Religion, do resort unto your pa^ish, and where, and by
whom are they known or suspected to be ^boured or relieved.

17 Item, whether have you any schoolmaster, who teaches either publicly or
privately within your said parish, not allowed thereunto by his Ordinary in
writing under seal, and how long has he ^ught there: and whether does he not
usually catechize, or instruct ^is scholars in the principles of religion.

18 Item, whether have you in your Church or chapel all books and other
things necessary and comely for the celebration of divine service and
administration of the sacraments, and if not, what is wanting and in whose
default.

19 Item, whether is the body of your Church well repaired and reverently
kept, and whether the seats and stools, and all other furniture and ornaments
thereof be comely as is requisite: and if any default be, then wherein and in
whom the same is.

20 Item, whether your Church or chappellyard, be well fense and orderly kept;
and whether any fought, railed, skolded, or used a^ game or sport in the same;
and whether is there any faires or marke^ kept therein.

21 Item, whether any within your parish do suffer any to eat, drink, play,
or iangle, and talk in their house or yards in the time o^ Common prayer, or
any butchers, or other artificers, that usually keep (...) open their
shopwindowes, or sell meat, drink, or wares on sunda^ or other commanded
holidaies, in times of morning or evening prayer, sermon, or catechizing, or
any who labor and work on the sabbath or other commanded festival days, to
the profanation thereof, o^ the offense of others, and who they be.

22 Item, whether are there used within your said parish, any bullbaytings,
bearebaytings, maygames, morricedancers, or any such lik^ profane pastimes, or
assemblies on the sabbath days, or other commanded festival days, to the
hindrance of prayers, sermons, or other godly exercises, or to the grief or
offense of other godly and well disposed persons.

23 Item, whether are there in your parish, any incestuous persons, adulterers,
fornicatours, usurers, drunkards, swearers, or any who are vehemently suspected
or defamed for any such crimes, and who they be.

24 Item, whether (...) using Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in this Dioces,
their Registers or Actuaries, Apparitors or Sumnors, have at any time winked
at, and suffered any adulteries, fornications, incests, or any other faults or
offenses to pass and remain unpunished and uncorrected, for money, rewards,
bribes, pleasure, friendship, or any other partial or affectionate respect,
and what be their names.

25 Item, whether such as have been presented for incontinencie, for
adultery, or other notorious crimes, have done public penance in white
sheets, and with white wandes in their hands in the parish Church of that
town where such offenses have been committed; and if not, what be their names
which have so escaped, and by what means.

26 Item, whether any exercising jurisdiction Ecclesiastical within this
Dioces, have within two years last past commuted the penance any offender
within the said parish, by imposing upon him or her a ^me of money; how much
the said sum was to your knowledge, whom and for whom it was so done, and
for what offense.

27 Item, whether there be within your said parish any man that (...) two
wives, or any woman that has two husbands living, any ^ried within the degrees
forbidden, or without banes three several ^s first published, or in the time
by law and order prohibited with ^cense thereunto, or any who have had carnal
knowledge toge^ before marriage, or that are vehemently suspected thereof, and
(...) they be.

28 Item, whether any in your parish have been privately married ^ther by any
unknown priest or minister, or any who have not ^red their children to be
baptized publicly in your said church ^appell by your minister, according to
the order, manner, and ^e set down in the book of Common prayer, and who they
be.

29 Item, whether any within your said parish have harbored any (...) begotten
with child not being married, and have suffered them (...) part away not
punished, or any who do harbor or relieve any ^ate excommunicated person, and
what excommunicate persons ^dere within your said parish, and how long they
have so remai^

30 Item, whether any within your parish do refuse to contribute ^ds the
reparations of your Church or chapel, or toward the ^sion of any necessary
ornaments therein, or that refuse to pay (...) Curate or parish clarke their
wages, or other usual duties, and ^ey be.

31 Item, whether the Churwardens of the last year have faith^ and diligently
discharged their offices, and made a just account (...) payment of their
Receipts to the Church use: And whether your ^ch stock, or any other thing
given to any public use, be de^ by any, or otherwise employed then
appertains.

32 Item, whether have you within your parish a decent Register^ in parchment,
wherein are truly set down the names of all ^s baptized, married, or buried at
your said Church or Chapel, (...) the beginning of the Queens Majesty's
reign that now is. And ^er is the same book kept in a chest under three
locks, as is commanded by the Constitutions aforesaid.

33 Item, whether your Churwardens of the last and of the for year, have
within one month next after the feast of Easter in eit^ of the same years,
made and sent into the office of Registership longing to the Lord Bishop of
this Dioces, a true copy of all (...) christenings, marriages, and burialls
which have been within your ^rish, according to the tenor also of the same
late Constitutions.

34 Item, whether your parish Clarke be dutiful and diligen^ your Minister,
and meet and sufficient to discharge his place.

35 Item, whether any within your parish do occupy or in^ meddle with the
goods or chattells of any deceased, whose will (if (...) such be) is not
lawfully approved, or dying intestate the administ^ on thereof not lawfully
granted, and who they be.

36 Item, whether your Archdeacon or his Official, or any o^ exercising
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within this Dioces in places ^empt or not exempted
(other then the Chancellor of the said Di^ especially since the xxiiij. of
August 1597. have taken upon the^ grant licenses for marriages, admissions of
Curates, schoolema^ parish clerks, Sequestrations of vacant benefices, by any
their su^sed authority, and who they be.

37 And lastly whether you know or have hard by common of any other crime
worthy presentment, the reformation whereo^ longs to the Ecclesiastical
court. And if you do, that you d^ well present them which now come to your
memory, as those (...) shall hereafter come to your knowledge.

FJNIS.

