A Dialogue between Master Guesright and poor neighbor Needy. OR
A few proofs both real and true,
Showing what men for money will do
To a pleasant new tune, called, But I know what I know.




WEll met neighbor Needy, what walking alone,
Fow comes it I pray that you thus sigh and groan,
The cause by your physiognomie straight I can tell,
And know by the same that all is not well.
In truth master Guesright you speak very true,
For money I want, and believe so do you.
And therefore eene say, and do what you please,
I know you are sick of my sore disease.
For me neighbor Needy, the world is so hard.
That solely my self I now cannot guard
Besides young and old loves coin so entire,
That have it they will though out of the fire.
Nay, good neighbor Needy, I pray say not so,
For then you will wrong a many I know,
Besides I no way persuaded can be,
That money is loved in the highest degree.
Money if you think so I instant will prove,
That few or none but money do love,
And when I have done I know you will say,
It Is all real truth, then harken I pray.
Inprimis your Tailor, is loving and kind,
Nor do I with him any fault find,
But rest you assured, and take it from me,
That most he does, he does for his fee.
Your Mercer in courtesy seldom forbeares.
To show you the prime and best of his wares,
But if that a reason you would have me to show,
It Is cause he would get by the bargain I know.
Your Barber most nimbly will trim ^ort fine Patto,
And if that you please turn up yorr mo^^ ^atto,
But mark you what follows my kind loving neighbor,
He looks to be gratified well for his labor.
Your Vintner will spread you his linen most fine,
And bring you both Super, Tobaco and Wine,
And having so done requires but this
To pay him his shot, which you must not miss.
Again this is true, as I know do tell ye,
A Cook in Pye-Corner will fill up your belly,
And when you are satisfied he like an Ass,
Desires no money but eene for his sauce.
The second part,
to the same tune.


Your Taps^er is grown a right honest man,
For he will misreckon no more than he ran,
For by his Iug, his Pot, and his Pipe,
He has danced himself an Officer ripe.
Your outlandish Doctor most ready will be,
To cure you of your infirmity,
Which being effected, he for his skill,
Desires no more but a golden Pill.
Nay, what makes your Landlord let housen by lease,
That you may live in 'em daily peace,
But that he imagines and has an intent,
You will not fail for to pay him his rent.
What makes your In-keeper to harbor the poor,
And unto all comers set open his door,
But that he intends if possible can,
To have his reward of every man.
What makes your Usurer ever your friend,
And be so officious his money to lend,
But that he intends to bring you in thrall,
And get if he can, the Devil and all.
Nay, what makes your Hangman, I tell you but so
Such a base office for to under-goe,
But that he hopes, and ever pre^ages,
To have all their clothes as well as his wages.
What makes your Broker so often to cry,
See what you lack friend what will you buy,
But that he would as his neighbors all do,
Get if he could for one penny two.
What makes your Carrier to traverse the land,
Nay, what makes your Soldier fight while he ran stand,
But that they intend my own dearest honey,
To gain this same paultry thing called money.
What makes your footh drawer to cut off your corn,
What makes your Sow-gelder to wind up his horn,
Nay, what makes the world to do as they do,
But that they would purchase this same money too.
Nay, neighbor there is more then all these are yet,
Which I for brevities sake do omit,
But these I hope will very well prove,
That men do more for money then love.
Well neighbor Guesright if this same be true,
Then home we will straight without more ado,
And what we intend to none we will tell,
But keep to our selves and so fare-you well.
FINIS.
Printed at London for F. Cowles.


