A Discovery of the countries of Tartaria, Scithia, and Cataya, by the
North-East: With the manners, fashions, and orders which are used in those
countries.

Set forth by John Frampton merchaunt.

Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson. 1580.

To the right worshipful sir Rowland Hayward knight, and to master George
Barn, Aldermen of the city of London, and governors of the worshipful
company of the merchaunts adventurers for discovery of new trades, and to the
assistents and generality of all the said worshipful fellowship, John
Frampton wishes all happy success in all their attempts.
THere came of late to my hands, (right worshipful) a discourse of the several
and sundry customs, and manners of diverse nations, which are found to
inhabit in the North, in the North East, and in the East parts of the world,
etc. Collected and written by a certain learned man called Francisco Thamara,
a reader in Spain, in the city of Cadiz, and dedicated by him to the most
excellent Lord, Don John Claros de Guzman Earl of Niebla, and inheriter of
the dukedom and estate of Medina Cidonia: And understanding the purpose of
your worthy enterprise, for the discovery of the passages by sea to all those
regions of the North, and Northeast, etc. for very great zeal I bear to you,
and of desire I had to farther you in so famous an enterprise, I took the
translation of the same work in hand, and bestowed the same in writing on
such as you sent in the said discovery in your two Pinesses, late sent forth,
that falling on those coasts, foreknowing the natures of those people, they
might the better shun perilles, and on the other side take the benefit of
the place the better. And now having thought good to committ the same to
print, and to dedicate the same to your worships, that each of you may be
partaker of the contents, praying you to accept of my small travel, and good
meaning, and to take the same in good part, wishing that I were more able to
do you pleasure or service, to the furtherance of so noble an enterprise: since
the same tends to the ample vent of our cloth, and other our commodities of
England, to the increase of our navy, to the supply of sundry our wants, and
to the annoy of the mortal enemies of this kingdom, whereby you shall please
God, purchase the prayer of the poor, and not offend any one or other honest
person of the realm, and so I commit your worships to God, wishing the most
happy success that is to be wished.

From London this xv. of July. 1580. Your worships to command, John Frampton.

Of the Region of Tartaria, and of the Laws and power of the Tartars.
TArtaria, which by another name is called Mongall, as Vicencio writes,
stands toward the northeast, and at the East part joins with the Land of
the Catheos and Solangos: on the South part it bordereth with ye Country of
Sartanecos, and on the West part with that of the Naymanos, and of the North
part it is compassed about with the Occean Seas. It was called Tartaria, by
reason of a River running by it, called Tartar, and is a Region where the
greatest part is full of Mountains, and the most part of the plain fields
very sandy, being a barren country, saving that some part of it is
overflowed with the waters of ye Ryuers, and a great part thereof is
wilderness and little inhabited. There are no Cities nor Towns in it, saving
only the City of Cracuris. There is so great want and small store of wood in
it, that the people there are driven to use for the most part the offall and
dung of Oxen and Horses for their fuel, as well in rosting and boiling their
victuals, as otherwise. The air of this Region is very intemperate, and full
of storms and tempests, that in the summer time there are such wonderful
thunders and lightninges, that men die for very fear of the same. At other
times there is great heat, and immediately follows very extreme cold, and
snow falling very thick. The winds there are so boisterous an strong almost
continually, that they draw men backward as they are ryding on their iournyes,
overthrowing them to the ground, and also blow up trees by the roots, and to
conclude do much other harm. In the winter it never rayneth, in the summer
many times, and at every of the same so little, that scarselye it wetteth the
ground: and yet for all this it is a rich country of all kind of cattle, as
well oxen as Camels, etc. Of beasts of service and horses there is so great
store and plenty, that it is to be supposed, there are not so many more in all
the rest of the world. There were at the beginning in this Realm four sorts
of people: The first sort called Yeca Mongales, which is as much to say the
great Mongales: The second sort called Sumongales, which signifies the
Mongales of the water, because they dwell near to the River Tartar, whereof
they bear the name of Tartars: The third are called Market, and the fourth
sort Metrit: All these had one manner of shape of body, and used all one
language. Their manner of living at the first was fearce and barbarous,
without any laws or policy, they lived by the increase of rattell, and were a
brute people, and little regarded among the Scithians. Afterward in process
of time they divided and severed them selves into certain places and began to
take their Captains in company which had charge of the whole common wealth,
and yet for all that ceased not to pay tribute to the Naymanos, which next
adjoined to them, until that by chance one Canguista a man brought up among
them, was elected for their king, by means of an Oracle and revelation. This
man immediately after he had received the Empire and Sovereign government,
commanded that all honor accustomed to be done to the devil, should cease,
and established by his general edicte, that all people should honor and
worship one only GOD, the mightiest, greatest and best of all others, and
also gave express commandment, that it should be generally published that he
had received the Realm by the same Gods providence. After this he commanded
that all such as could bear armor, should come forthwith and represent them
selves before him by a certain day. And all the people apt for the wars
being come together, he in his own person having taken the number of them,
divided them in order, and appointed over the^ Corporals, Sargents, Captains
and Coronels. etc. After this, to prove what force and power he had in the
empire and supreme authority: he commanded seven of the most principal men
that first had the charge and government of all the Realm, to kill their
sons with their own hands, the which though it was and seemed a very hard
thing unto the^, yet they accomplished it forthwith, being moved thereunto,
partly for fear of the common people, and partly by reason of a devout
superstition in that they had conceived a steadfast belief that God was the
beginning and foundation of that kingdom, and that if they refused to obey the
commandments of their king, they committed not an offense to him, but to
God. And with this trust and power so raised, the king Canguista, first of all
brought under his subjection, by force of arms, the Scithians that bordered
upon his country making them his tributaries, with the other people also to
whom his own subjects had before paid tribute, and forthwith set upon diverse
other nations both far and near from his own dominions, having so
prosperous success, that he brought in subjection under his Empire all the
Realms, Dominions and nations, even from Scithia unto the Mediterran sea, where
the Sun ryseth, and some what more, insomuch that with reason he intituleth him
self Lord and Emperor of all the East parts.

All the Tartars are of an evil shape in their bodies, the most part of them
being of a small stature. They have great eyes, standing far out, and the
liddes thereof covered with very much hair, in such sort that there can but a
little of their eyes be seen, their faces are broad, they have no beards, saving
on their upper lips, and in the same have but a few hayres, and those very
thin: al of them for the most part are slender in the wast, in the fore pare of
their heads they wear their hair long like women of our country, and make
two rowles thereof, and so gather the^ behind their ears: and not only the
Tartars do thus, but also such as are joining nere to them do the like. They
are light people and good horsemen, but evil footmen, none of them do go
afoote, although they be very little. Their manner is to ride upon horses or
oxen whether so ever they travail, and the women use Geldinges that are not
fierce. They also use to have their forheds decked with silver and precious
stones, and conceive a great glory, in that their horses carry collers of
belles to make a great iyngling. Their speech is sharp and high, when they
would singe they howl like wolves, when they drink they shake the head, and
also they accustom to drink so often, till they fall down, and take it for
great honor.

They inhabit neither towns nor cities, but in the fields, as the Scithians
did in the old time, under Pauilions and Tents: For the most part are
shepheardes. In the winter they use to live in the plain fields, in the
Summer they continue in the mountains, for the fruitefulnesse of the pasture.
They make their lodginges and plates of abode like a shop either of bows, or
of timber, covered with felt, and in the midst of these sheddes, make a
round window where the light comes in, and the smoke goes out, in the
midst of the cottage is the fire, and their wives and children always about
it. The men use to shoot in bows, and to wrestle, they are merueilous
hunters, they ride a hu^ting armed on horsback, and when they see any wild
beasts, they compass them about, and every one of them shooting his arow,
they wound, and take him. They have no bread, use no table cloth nor napkins,
and believe in one God only, affyrming him to be the maker of all things,
visible and invisible, they honor him not with any ceremony, but make
certain Iodls of felt, or silk, or the likeness of a man, and put them on
both sides of their sheddes or shoppes, praying them to keep safe their
cattle, and showing great reverence toward them, offering them all the milk
that they have first of the cattle, and before they begin to eat or drink,
they set their part before them. Any manner of beast that they kill for to
eat, they put his heart in a vessel all night, and in the morning sees and
eat it. They honor and do sacrifise likewise to the Sun and Moon, to the
four Elements, and also the great Chaam their king and Lord, whom they
think to be the Son of God, and so honor him devoutly, and do sacrifice to
him, and believe that in all the world there is none better, nor of more dignity
then he, neither will they consent yt any other be named but be.

This people in respect of them selves, thinking no other nation worthy to be
compared with them, in wisdom nor goodness, and therefore will not willingly
speak with any other, but rather avoid them selves from their companies. They
call the Pope and al other Christians dogs and Idolaters alleging that they
honor stones and stocks. They are much adicted to wicked arts, give credit to
dreams, and enterteine and allow such as use the magical science and art of
divination, and can enterpret their dreams: Also they ask questions and
receive answer of their Idols, with full persuasion and belief that God
speaks in them. And therefore what enterprise so ever they take inhand, they
begin and proceed in the same by the counsel of those Idols. They behold and
mark the weather very much, and especially the Moon: for they make no
difference of one time more then of an other, nor honor any festival day, ne
use any manner of fasting or abstinence. At all times they live after one
fashion, and are so covetous, that what soever they see, if it like them well,
if they cannot get it with the good will of the owner, being no Tartar, they
take it from him by plain stafford law, accounting it a matter lawful to be
don by means of a commandment and establishment of the king their souereign
Lord. For they have an ordinance of their Canguista and Chaam their first king,
that any manner of Tartar or Tartars servant finding by the way as he
trauaileth any horse, man, or woman without a letter or safe conduct of the
king, may sense and take them as his own, and enjoy them forever. They lend
their monye to such as stand in need of it, and take a certain kind of
usury, both very great and also intolerable: for they take after the rate
often pounds upon the hundred for every month, and if the usury money be
not paid immediately, then they they take further usury. They constrain the
people subued unto them to pay so excessive tribute and taxes, and so greatly
molest and oppress them, that there is no people read of, that so much
molesteth their tributarie subjects. Their covetousness is such, as is skant
credible to be believed, they are always craving and brybing, yea the most
Lords of all others, give nothing to any, no not to such as are in necessity,
neither give to poor people alms: only in this they seem worthy of some
commendation, that if any guestes by chance come to them when they be at
meat, and would take part with them, they turn them not away nor disturb
them, but rather inuit them, and give them of that they eat with much pity.
In their diet they are very filthy having neither tables to eat upon, nor
table clothes, nor napkins, and use not to wash their hands nor bodies, nor
clothes. They eat no bread, for they have it not, nor any manner of herbs,
but feed only with the flesh of al manner of beasts, and likewise pigs
flesh, and of cats, horses and rats: and when they take any prisoner of their
enemies, to show their cruelty the more, and the desire they have to revenge
them selves, sometimes they roast them at the fire, and after many of them
assemble and eat him, like unto wolves, they tear him in pieces, and eat his
flesh, and take the blood the which they keep in certain vessels and drink
it, although that otherwise their accustomed drink is the milk of beasts.
They have no wine among them, but if by chance any be brought thither to them,
they drink it with great desire and affection, as all other men do. Likewise
they eat the lyce one of an other, taking them out of their heads, or any
other place: and when they have taken them, they say that they will do so by
their enemies. They take it for a great evil among them, when any part of
their meat or drink falls from them, or is lost, and throw not their boanes
to dogs, before they have fully burnished them. They use such scarcity and
niggardnesse of all things, that they neither kill nor eat any manner of
beast while it is whole and sound, but when it is lame, or has some
impediment in the body, or when it begins to wax old, or by chance is
sick: In all other things they are very modest, for they content themselves
with very little meat. In the morning they drink a vessel full of milk, and
afterward many times neither eat nor drink in all the day. The apparel they
use is well near after one sort, as well men as women. The men wear upon their
heads a certain thing, not very deep, which is plain before, and behind has
a tail well near a spanne long, and as much in breadth, and because it may
stand close to the head, and not be blown of for the wind, they have
certain gardes sowed with it, near to the ears, wherewith they bind them
under the chinne. The married women wear a garment made like to a round
basket, a foot and a half long, and the higher part of them plain much
after the fashion of a boot, being of many colors, al garnished and edged
about with silk, or Peacocks feathers, and laid over with many precious
stones, and gold: and the rest of the body every one apparelleth according to
their habilities, the richest sort of grain and silk after the same manner
that their husbands do, they have cotes made full of pleites, open in the left
side, whereby they put them on and off, having four or five lowpes or buttons
to keep them together and fast to their bodies. The apparel they wear in the
summer, is for the most part black, and that which they wear in the cold and
rayny wether is white: these cloths reach no lower the^ to the knee: the
mayde^s are not easily known from the married wives, nor the women from the
men: for almost they have the like faces and apparel that the men have, every
one equally and after one sort use all their small apparel alike. When they
enter into battle, some of them wear armor upon their arms with certain
iron leaves, which they tie together with stringes, other use leather many
times doubled, and in the like sort they arm their heads, there are few that
use Lances, and long swords, but commonly they carry short swords, three
spannes long, round with a sharp edge on the side, and with these they wound
their sides when they fight. The horsemen are very ^ight, and great archers, and
he is taken for more strong and valiant that is more obedient, and laboreth
most to preserve the Empire. They fight without wages, and are very subtle and
diligent in their battles, and (...) all that they take in hand, and very
ready at al times to serve and obey. The Captains and Princes enter not into
battle, but rather remain without, and cry with a loud ^^yce unto their
men, warning and steng^hening them, and from thence they provide diligently
what is convenient to be done. Sometimes they set upon horses their sons and
wives, and also the Images of men to ^^crease their army, because it should
seem (...) greater, and that it might be the more ^onderfull and terrible to
their enemies, ^hen they fight, if it seem good to them, ^^ey let them run
away, and it is not evil ^^ought of: when they should shoot their ar^^wes
they strippe their right arm naked, ^^d afterward shoot their arrows with
so ^reat strength, that there is no kind of ar^our can defend thenemies, but
that it will ^^sse through. They go together and fight in squadrons, and also
fly together, and then they wound their enemies, that follow them with mortal
wounds of arrows: and afterward when they see the small number of their
adversaries, suddenly they return to battle again, and then they shoot at
them and their horses, and when it is thought that they are overcome, then
chiefly they remain with the victory. When they will give battle to any
country, they divide their army, and set upon them in all parts, that they
cannot be succored of any, and none of the inhabiters can run away, and so
they have always victory, and when they have gotten it, they use the same
with great pride and cruelty, not pardoning any that they take, neither
children, women, nor old folks, they kill all without any difference, unless
it be the handy crafts men, whom they reserve for their work, and such as they
determine to kill, they divide them among their pety captains, who appoint to
every one of their servant ten, that so they may kill them, or more or
less, as the number requires, and when all are put to death with a hatchet
like pigs, that all others should be terrified, they take of every thousand
man one, and this manner they hang upon a piece of wood among those that are
dead, with his head downwarde, that it may seem that he gives warning and
advice to the other. They keep neither faith nor promise with any, what soever
they have promised, and much more cruelty they use against such as do render
and yield them selves unto them. The young women that they take captives, they
may ^se them at their pleasure, and they carrye with them all such as they
like well of and put them to all subjection and slavery, and ^ake them to
serve in bondage and misery ^s long as they live: these Tartars are the most
vicious men of all the world, and though ^^ey take all the wives yt they list,
or are able (...) keep, no degree of affinity or kindred can let them but that
they mary with any at their pleasure, except only the mother and the
^^ughter: yet for all this they are very vicious, no more nor less then the
Sarasens, and Moors. And the wife which they take, they ^^lde her not for
their lawful wise, neither (...) they receive her dowry, until she bring
^^rth children: and therefore it is lawful b^ them to put away such as are
barren, (...) have no children, and to take an other in ^^r steed. And it is
to be wondered at, that al^^it many women have but one husband, yet ^^ey never
fall out, unless it be great marvel. Notwithstanding that some of them be
preferred and made more of then others: sometimes the goodman keeps company
with one of his wives, sometimes with an other, but every one have their family
and habitation asunder, and they live very chaste: for if they be taken in
adultery, as well the man as the woman by their law shall suffer death
presently. When the men have no wars, they keep their cattle, go a hunting,
exercise them selves in wrestling, and do nothing else, all the rest of their
affairs remains in the charge and oversight of the women. They have a care
of yt is necessary, for their food, apparel, and all other things
apperteining to the house. These people use many superstitions and
witchcraftes: chiefly they take it for a heinous matter to cast a knife into
the fire, or touch the fire therewith, or take the meat out of the pot with a
knife. There can no stranger be admitted to the kings presence, though he be
of great dignity, and have waightye affairs with him, but first he must purge
him self. And if any man's feet do smell, and come into the place where the
Emperor is, although he be any of the Captains, forthwith he is commanded to
be slain: and besides this if any when he is eating, take a mouthfull that he
cannot swallow, but is forced to vomit it, immediately they run all to him,
and make a hoale under the place where he is, and that way they pluck him out
and kill him cruelly. There are many other things that these hold for sin,
without redemption: and in other respects they account it a small matter to
kill men, to take other men's lands, and to rob the goods of others against al
right and justice, and set light by the commandments of God, and with all this
they believe that they shall live after this life, for ever in an other world:
but they know not how to declare it, and believe that there they shall receive
reward according to their deserts. Immediately after that one of them falls
sick, and is near the point of death, they take a lance and pich it in ye
tent where he is, and set upon the top of the same a black cloth, in token
that none which passes that ^ay should enter in there: and this being seen,
^one dare go in, unless he be called. And when the sick person is dead, all
the hous^olde join together, and take the body out (...) the shop or shed,
and carries it to a ^lace yt they have appointed for this cause: (...) making
there a hollow place, long and broad they raise up a small cotage or stall, and
put a table therevppon full of meat, and set the dead body leaning to it,
very richly apparelled, and so cover it altogether with earth, they likewise
bury with him one of his Cattle, and a Horse with all things apperteining to
him. And such as are of most power and riches, when they are living do
choose one of their servant, and mark him with his Iron and mark, whom
they cause to be buried with his master, to the end that in the other world
they may have one too do them service. After this the friends of the
deceased, take an other Horse, and kill him, and eat his flesh, and fill the
skin full of hay, and sowing it together, raise him up with four pieces
of timber, upon the Sepulcher, in token that there is one buried, and the
women do burn the bones, saying that they are for the purgation of the Soul.
They which are of greatest authority do an other thing with the skin:
namely they cut it small into very little strings and stretching them round
about the Sepulcher, measure the earth, and believe that the dead body shall
have so much in the other world, as his friends do measure, with his skin,
and at the 30. days end, they make an end of their crying and lamentation.
There are of the Tartars, certain that are Christians, although contrary to
true christianity. These take after their fathers, when they wax old,
because they should dye the sooner, and make an end of themselves, and after
their deceases, burn them, and gather diligently the ashes, which they keep
as a precious thing, and therewith daily dress their meat. And now it would
be tedious to write any more of the^, as also perhaps to read with what
ceremonies and solemnity the Tartars do choose their kings. After that any
king dies (I will show it you in few words,) all the Princes, Captains,
and chief men, and all the people of the realm, assemble and meet together,
in a place appointed for that cause, in the fields according to their custom
and manner, and then take him, to whom the realm ought to come, either by
succession, or election, and place him in a Throne and Chair of Gold, and he
sitting down, all the people with a loud voice say in this manner, We pray
thee, and likewise will and command, thee to be our sovereign Lord. Whereunto
he answers: if you will have me so, it is necessary yt you be ready to do any
thing that I command you, and come when I call you, and that you go whether so
ever I send you. And any that I command you to kill, that forthwith it be
done, and that you put and leave all the kingdom in our hands. Immediately
all answer: So we are content. Then the king says, From hence forward I will
you to understand that the word of my mouth be my sword: all the people with
great noise and gladness confirm the same. Immediately, the principal and
chief men of the people take the king, and bring him down from the royal
chair, and cause him to sit upon the ground, upon a felt laid abroad, and
say unto him these words: Look upward, and know God, and then look down
upon the-felt whereupon thou sit. Thou shall understand, if thou govern the
Realm well, thou shall have all that thou will at thy will: and if thou
govern it ill, thou shall be thrown down, and dispossessed in such sort, yt
that thou shall not remain with this poor felt where upon thou sit: and
in saying this, they place him one of his wives near to him, that is best
beloved, and lifting them both up with the felt, they salute and reverence him,
as Emperor of all the Tartars, and she as Empress. Then the new Emperor and
Empress are presented with many gifts, by all the people yt are under their
Empire, and then they bring before him all that the deseased king left, the
which the new Emperor partly deuideth among the princes of his Realm, and
commands the remaynder to be kept for him self, and so the election is
finished, and the assembly dismissed, and from that time forward, all things
are in his hands and power, none can nor dare say, this is mine, nor, such a
ones, none can live in any part of the realm but where he is appointed. The
Emperor him self appoynteth places of abode, to the chief Captains, and
they, to the captains of thousands, and these, to the Centurions, and the
Centurions to the Corporals, and these to the other Lords. The seal and
signet which the king of the Tartars uses, has engraven God in heaven, and
Cuicut Chaam in earth, the fortress of God, and Emperor of all men, he has
five very great and strong armies, and five Captains, with the which he
destroys and keeps in subjection all his adversaries. Unto the Ambassadors
of other nations, he speaks very seldom, and consents not to have them
come before him, unless that they and the gifts they bring, (without the
which they neither may, nor can come to his presence) be first purified, and
by certain women appointed for that purpose, without the observing whereof he
answers them by third persons, and as long as he speaks, they must hear
and hearken kneeling upon their knees, be they never so great, and in such sort
they must give ear, that they err not in the words they speak to him, and
change no words, for it is not lawful for any man to alter nor change the
Emperors words, nor stand against any judgment that he has given in any
manner of cause whatsoever. He, nor any prince of Tartaria, never drinks
publicly, except they which serve first sing or play something upon an
instrument before him. And when ye noblemen ride abrod they carry over them a
hatte upon a long lance, which shadeth them, and their wives have the like.
These were the manners of the Tartars two hundredth years past, and this was
the manner of their lives, and about this time they overcame and brought in
subjection to them the Georgians, which were christians and kept the laws of
the Greeks, these were neighbors to the Greeks and their dominion did
extend very far even from the region of Palestina unto the Caspian
mountains, and had eighteen bishoprics and a Patriarcke Sea: at the
beginning they were subject to the patriarcke of Antioch: they were warlike
people. Some of the women were also expert in the wars and exercised their
weapons. When these Georgians would enter into battle, they accustomed to
drink a bottell of wine that they use to carry with them, and when they had
drunk it, they set upon their enemies with more courage.

The priests gave the^ selves freely to usury and Simonie, they had great
strife and hatred with the people of Armenia. These Armenians, of whom we
speak, were also Christians before the Tartars overcame them, and brought them
in subjection, and after that the Georgians were once subdued, they swarued in
many things and departed from the true faith and manners of the catholic
Church.

They know not the day of the birth of our Lord, they keep no holy days nor
fasting days, nor the four seasons of the year, the Satterday before Easter
day they did not fast: For they affirm that the same day our Lord had risen
near to the evening. All the Frydayes after Easter and Whitsontide they eat
flesh, and otherwise they fasted much, and began their Lent from the Sunday of
Septuagesima so straightly, that the Wednesday and Friday they would eat no
oil, nor fish, nor drink wine: for they thought he did sin more that
drank wine those days, then he which did commit the sin of lechery. They
did not all wholly refrain from all meats on the Monday. The Tewesday and the
Thursday they made but one meal. The Wednesday and friday they eat nothing.
The Saturday and Sunday they did continually eat flesh. They did admit
children of two months old to receive the holy Sacrament. They kept certain
Ceremonies of the Jews, all their Priests were usurers, as the Georgians
were, and gave them selves much to the art of Necromancie, and more to
drinking then the lay people did. They took wives, but as soon as any one of
them died, none of them could marry again. If any woman did commit adultery,
the Bishop gave license that her husband should put her away, and take an
other. Finally in xxx. articles the Georgians gave to understand, that they
were departed from the true Christian religion.

Of the Country of Scithia, and of the rude manners of the Scithians.
SCITHIA is a Region that lies toward the Septe^crion or north, so called by
Scitha, Son unto Hercules, as Herodoto says, or as Beroso affirms of an
other Scitha, Son to Araxes Prisca wife to Noe, who was borne in that
country. These Scithians at the beginning did possess a small country,
until by little and little, by their valiantnes and strength, they enlarged
their Empire, bringing under their subjection many nations. These people at the
beginning made their abode near to the river Araxes being very few in number,
and little esteemed, until they had gotten a Martial King excelling in the
feats of arms, under whom they enlarged their country and dominions, and it
extends by that side where the mountains lie unto the Ocean Seas, and the
lake Meotis passes by diverse places unto the river Tanais: from the which
river Scithia stretches in length. And at the east end it is divided into two
sorts of people parted assunder almost in the midst of the mountain Ymao,
the one of the which is called the Scithians within Ymao, and the other the
Scithians without. The Scithians were never set upon, or at the least not
overcome of any other strange empire. Darius king of the Persians set upon
them, but in the end returned flying away with great shame. They beheaded the
king Cirus with all his army, and destroyed a Captain of Alexander the Great
with all his power, they heard of the armies of the Romans, but felt them
not, they are a hard people and can suffer great labor, and wars, and be
very valiant, these people at the beginning did not go far one from another,
for they neither used tillage, nor had any houses nor abiding place, but
soiourned in the deserts and mountains, carrieng their beasts, and cattaile,
wives and children with them in carts, they had no laws, but observed Justice
and equity by their own accord. Among these there was no greater evil then
theft, nor any thing more punished, and so it was needful, seeing they had no
houses, nor enclosures for their cattaile, but all things lay abroad in the
fields.

There was neither gold nor silver among them, neither knew they what it
meant.

Their meat which they used most commonly, was milk and honey. They clothed
their bodies against the cold and frost with the skins of wild beasts, and
rats. The use of wool and apparel was not known among them.

This was the manner of living used, and common for the most part among the
Scithians, but not generally of all: for as some of them were far of from the
rest, by distaunce of places, so likewise they differ in their lives, and had
peculiar customs among them selves, of the which we will speak after we have
declared the manners of the common sort of people. The most part of the
Scithians rejoice to kill men, whereupon they have taken a custom to drink the
blood of the first man that any of them takes prisoner in battle, he
drinks blood, and of every one that any of the^ kills, he presents the
heads to the king, and for cutting off of the same, is partaker of any thing
of value that is found about him, and otherwise not. They cut of the head in
this sort, they take the skull and cast out all that is in it, and take of the
skin, and make it soft with their hands as the skin of a cow, and so keep
it as a precious thing, and put it in the raines of their horses, and of this
they triumph much: for he that has most of these is accounted ^he worthiest
and valiantest man. There are many of them that sow the skins of men
together, as though they were skins of ^eastes, and use them for coueringes,
and others of them use to pluck of the skin from ^e right hands of their
enemies with their ^ayles, and therewith cover the quiver of their ^rowes. An
other sort fleyeth the men, and casts their skins upon wood, and after put
^^em upon horses, and the heads being cut (...), as we have already declared,
they cover ^e skul with the raw skin of an ox, and gild ^^on the in side, and
use to drink in the same. and sometimes when guests come to their ^^uses, they
bring forth those cups, and show ^^w those men were overcome by them, and ^is
they account a worthy matter. Once a ^eare all the Princes of those Regions do
^anquet their neighbors, and all such as ^ell near unto them with wine, in
those Cups, whereof they all drink, that have ^^lled any of their enemies
with their own ^andes, and he that has killed none in that sort, tastes not
of the same, but without honor is set aside by him self from the rest of the
company, which is taken among them for a matter of great shame and reproach, and
such as have killed many drink with two cups together. The Gods unto whom
they pray and give honor, are the Goddess Vesta chiefly, and then Jupiter,
and the Goddess Tellus: For they think that the earth is wife to Jupiter.
After these they honor Apollo, and the celestial Venus, and Mars, and
Hercules: but their opinion is that they may not make any Intage of any of
them, nor alters, nor Churches, but to the God Mars only, unto whom they offer
in sacrifice one of every hundred of their captives. And to their other
Goddesses they offer other beasts, and especially horses: Swine they esteem
not of, neither will have any in their country.

When the king gives out a commandment to put any person to death, for any
matter or cause, he appoynteth all his sons to be slain with him, but there
is no hurt done to the women children. The leagues and amity that the
Scithians enter into in their wars are in this sort. They take a greater-then
vessel, whereunto they power wine with the blood of such as shall join in
friendship to them, wounding them selves with some knife, or cutting some place
of their body. After that in the same vessel they wette their swords and
arrows, halbards, and lances, and then conjure and curse with many words,
and immediately drink that wine, not only all such as enter into these
leagues, but also their associates and companions, and especially those that
are of greatest degree. The Sepulchers and Tombs of their kings are near to
the city called Gerros, where the River Boristeneus begins, to be
na^igable, and even there, as soon as the king is dead, they dig a great
square hole, and then take the body, and open it, and take ^ut the bowelles,
and make them clean, the which they fill up with the small bows of a willow
tree, beaten to powder, and of Thimiamo, and with the seed of Apio, and Annise
seed, and immediately sow it up again, and lay it in a cart, and so carrye
him from one country to an other, and wheresoever they receive him, they do
the like: but such as are of kindred to the king do cut of his ears, and also
his hair round about, they give his arms many small cuttes, and wound his
forehead and nose, they shoot throw his left hand with arrows and after this
they carry the kings body unto other people of his Empire, who accompany him
until they return where the first came forth, and after they have carried him
among all his people from country to country, they lay him among them that
dwell in the uttermost parts of the Realm, where the Sepulchers of the kings
are, and after they have put him into a place which is made upon the Sepulcher,
they shut him up with lances made fast from one side to an other, and prepare
good store of wood, and cover him with a cloak, and in the other side of the
Sepulcher, they cut the throtes of his woman which was best beloved of al, and
also of a servant, a cook, a driuer of Asses, a post, a page, and a horse.
They bury him with certain cups of gold, and with the principal of all
other things, and after a year expired they do the like, killing always the
kings chief servant. These servant of the kings are the most principal
of the people of Scithia: for there is no slave admitted to the kings service.
Of these they cut the throtes of fifty, and of as many horses of the most
excellent, and after taking out the bowels, and having garments, and
couerings stitched together, they take the horses and raise them up on their
feet in a place made hollow round about the Kings Sepulcher, and upon them
they place the servants sitting, and set them in such order, that afar off
they seem like to a company of men on horseback that tarryed for the King. In
this sort they use the buryals and Sepulchers of their kings. Likewise, such as
are next in degree to the king, and also the common people have their manner and
fashion in their buryals: for as soon as one dies, the next of his kinsfolks
lay him in a carte, and carry him among his friends, from one to another, and
every one by him self receives him, and makes great feasts, as well to the
kindred as to others that accompany the dead body. In this sort they carry him
forty days and after bury him, taking out first all that is in his head, and
washing it, and upon the body they put three pieces of timber, leaving one to
the other round about him, upon the which they hang certain woll. The men of
Scithia wash not them selves, but the women wash their bodies with water, and
rub them selves with a plain stone shut within a piece of wood of Cypres, or
Ceder, or ince^se. After they have so washed the^ selves, that they begin to
smell, they annoint all their body and face with ointments, and so they remain
very clean and shining. The manner of the oath that they swear, is by the
kings chayr. And if they find any perjured, which they know by the divines,
that have the knowledge thereof, immediately without any longer tarrying, they
behead him, and he loses all his goods, which is given to such as accused him
of perjury. There are in Scithia other people called the Massagetas toward the
part of Asia near to the Caspian sea, which are like to the people of Scithia
in apparel, and also in life, by the which many believe yt they are Scithians.
These fight both on horseback and on foot, and either way are almost
invincible. In battle they use arrows and lances, and short swords that
they always carry with the^. They use much gold in their girdels, and in the
trimming of their heads, and under their armepits, and in the breasts of their
horses. The heads of their lances and arrows be of copper. There is neither
Iron nor silver among them. Every of them takes out wife, but afterward she
is common to all. How long they live, no man hitherto could set down any
certainty: for as soon as any of them begins to wax old, his kinsfolks
and friends ^eete together and kill him, and then seethe him, and after
sacrifice him with certain ^heepe, and then eat of that flesh at a ban^et
which they make. And this manner of death they account a happy kind of death.
And if he dye of any disease, they eat him ^ot, but rather bury him, and hold
it for a great some and loss that he was not killed and sacrifi^ed. They sow
nothing in the earth, but live ^f the cattle, and fishes that are taken in the
^^uer Araxes, and for the most part drink ^ilke. They worship the Sun, and
to it they offer sacrifice with horses, saying it is the ^ightest planet, and
therefore the lightest beast ^ight to be sacrifised to him. There is another
sort of people called Seres, who are a^ong themselves very quiet and tame, they
(...) from the company of al men, in so much that they will have no trafique with
any strange people. Howbeit merchants may pass upon their river, and in the
same without any other ^^^ling put their merchandise to exchange, ^ that they
buy nothing, but by way of bar^^y exchange one commodity for another.

Among this last sort, there is no woman brought to answer in judgment nor
otherwise touched, although she be a wicked woman, an adulteress, or thief.
And as it is reported, there has been no man put to death among them at any
time: for the fear and reverence which they have to their laws, is of more
strength then any other constellation or sin. They dwell at the beginning of
the roundnesse of the world, and because they live chaste, they be not
afflicted with Caterpiller nor worm, nor hayle, nor pestilence, nor any other
evils. The woman after she is conceived, is neither touched nor desired of
any. Unclean flesh or forbidden, none eat thereof. Every one is Judge for
him self, according to the righteousness of Justice, and therefore they are not
chastened nor afflicted with those plagues that are used to come to others for
their sins, and so they live long, and end their life without any disease.
There are others which are called Tauroscythas of the mountain Tauro, near to
the which they inhabit. These offer in sacrifice to the virgin Ephigenia all
those that come sailing to them by sea, and are lost, and al manner of Greeks
that repair thither, and the sacrifice is in this manner. After they have made
certain prayers, they wound the head of the man, and so kill him. Others say,
they cast the body headlong from a great rock, because her temple stands
upon a high rock, and they set the head upon a stake. And some say, that the
body is not cast down from the rock, but that they bury it. This devil to
whom they offer this sacrifice, they say is Ephigenia, that was daughter to
king Agamemnon.

Their enemies whom they take they use in this sort: every one cutteth off the
head of his enemy, and carries it to his house, and sets it upon a staff,
the greatest that he can get, and then sets it upon his house, and commonly
upon the chimney, and say that they set them so high, to the end their
enemies may be keepers of all the house. They of this country live by
robberies and wars. There are others called Agatirsos, which are very
politic, and use to wear upon their bodies great store of gold. All their
women are common among them, for they say ^hey are al brethren, and of one
house. There is not among them any envy, nor contenti^^, but are like in
manners to the people of Tracia. There are others called Neuros, which use the
manners and laws of the Scithians. These were constrained to leave their
country one year before the conquest of king Darius, by reason of the
multitude of Serpents that breed in it. They hold for a certain truth, and
swear, that every year in certain days they were converted into Wolves, and
afterward returned into the form and shape that they were first of. There are
others which are called Antropophagis because they eat men's flesh, whose
manners and laws are the most rude and beastly of all others, which are among
men. They live under no manner of law. All their trade is in cattle. Their
apparel is like to theirs of Scithia. They have a language proper to them
selves. There are other called Melandenos, which use to wear all their apparel
black, and therefore are so called. These only among the Scithians do eat
man's flesh: In the rest they have the manners and laws of the people of
Scithia. The Budinos are another great nation, and all these have fair eyes,
and the colors of their bodies are white and red. The city that these
possess is called Gelona, of the which they are called Gelonas, and this is
the head place of that realm. They make their feasts in the honor of the god
Bacchus, which are called Trietericas Bacchanales, from three years to three
years. These were Greeks in times past, but going out of their country, came
to this region, where they made their abode, and even at this day, use part
of the Greek language, and part of the Scithians. The Budinos do differ from
the Gelones in their language and life: for these Budinos are naturalles of
this country, and al their living depends upon the trade of cattle, and
these of that region use to eat lyce. Gelones are laborers and tillers of the
earth, and have corn, and possess gardeines and orchardes, and have no manner
of likeness at all unto the Budinos, neither in countenance nor color: all
the realm where these inhabit is full of trees, by a very great lake that is
there.

They hunt great store of wild beasts. And of their skins make gowns for
them selves to wear. There is an other kind of people called Argipeos, which
live at the foot of certain high mountains. They are a people balde from the
time of their birth, as well the women as the men.

They have flat and broad noses, and very great beardes and a certain sound
of a voice wherewith they speak. They are apparelled like to the Scythians.
They live commonly of the fruit of trees. They care not for breeding of
cattle, and therefore have not many. Every one has his dwelling place under a
tree, which in the Winter they cover with a white covering, and in the Summer
it is not covered at all. No people of the world hurts them, for they say
that they are sanctified. They possess no armor, neither to defend, nor to
offend: but rather themselves by persuasions and fair means, take up all
manner of controversies and strifes that rise among them. Whosoever comes unto
them, they favor and succor him. There are others called Isledones, which use
these customs: whenever the father of any of them dies, all his kindred
bring thither their cattle, the which they kill and make bankets, and the like
is done of the father of him that has conuited them, and so they make their
banquet, eating the flesh of the dead man, with the flesh of the cattaile. They
flea and take off the skin of the head of the dead man, and cleanse it of all
that is therwithin, and after gilde the same, and have it for their image, and
make thereunto every year very great ceremonies, and sacrifices. This the
father does for the son, and the son for the father, even as the Greeks
do celebrate the day of their birth. These do affirm them selves to be a just
people, and their women are as strong as the men themselves. These were the
manners and fashions of the Scithians in times past, until they were brought
under the subjection of the Tartars, and then followed their manner of living,
and now live as the Tartars do, being all called Tartars by one general name.

Of the Country that is called, the other side of Ganges, and of Cataya, and
the region of Sinas, which is a country of the great Cham; and of the
marvelous things that have been seen in those countries.
BEyond the river Ganges toward the East, is the land and part of India, that
stands on the other side of the same river, and therefore is called the other
side of Ganges. This is the greatest, the best, and the rychest country of all
India, which is toward the East parts, where the Sun rises, and is now
called Cataya, and it appertains to the great Cham, who is lord of Tartaria.
In old time it was said, that it belonged to Prester John. The country of
Cataya is great, and has in it many kingdoms, and the buyldings like to
Europe. There is in it great policy of all things. It is a rich country of
Gold, spices, and precious stones, whereof there is great abundance. The
people are of great reason, and live in better order then we do. There are
among them Philosophers, who are much esteemed: The second sort are
husbandmen: The third Shepherds: The fourth, handicraftes men: The fifth, men
of war to defend the country: The sixth, the presidents and governors, that
govern the country: The seventh, are the counselors to the king. And these
are cheifest, and have charge over all the rest, and will not consent that any
one should leave his own office or science, and take an other, and therefore
they are better governed then we are. The great Chain divided this province
into nine kingdoms, in the which are two thousand great cities, or
thereabouts. There is no richer province in the world. It has all things
necessary, and in great plenty for the life of mankind. The Catayans are
idolaters, great merchauntes, and crafts men. They give them selves much to
Astronomy. There are among them many religious houses of Idolaters, which lead
a straight life.

They have among them there Universities and studies of learning, and the
scripture of the old and new Testament, whereof it comes to pass that they
honor God, and believe in the everlasting life, but are not baptized. They love
the Christians and give alms, with a good will. They have no beardes. They are
much like in face and countenance to those of the province of Mongall. There
are many Christians in Cataya. It is so great a country, and so inhabited,
that in a very short space the great Cham can join together an army of three
hundred thousand fighting men. In the province of Cataya they have no wine, but
make their drink of Rise. They have flesh, milk, and cheese. They bury their
dead bodies richely. In this province they celebrate their weddings with great
bankets, Songs, and Trumpets. They use bathes. They divide the year into 12
months, according to the twelve signs. The most part of these people
accompteth the year from August. They use Crosse-bowes, and gunnes, and of all
kind of artillery, for they are the best handycraftes men in the world. They
write upon the leaves of trees, and make books of them. They make money of
the rinds of Mulbery trees. In some places they use small Irons for money, like
to needles: In other places small pieces of Gold. There is among these neither
pestilence, nor any other contagious diseases, and therefore is such an
infinite number of people. There is in this country many and very great
Serpents, which the Catayans do eat in their bankets with great affection. The
principal city in Cataya is Cambula, containing xxiiii. miles in compass,
and is four square, and in every square reaches vi. miles. Some say that it
contains xl. Italian miles, which is xx. leagues in compass. The walls are
xx. paces in height, and v. in breadth, with pinacles upon all of three paces
in height. In the four corners are four round fortes, and every one of them
four miles in compass, with great provision of armor in every of the same.

This city has xii. gates, two miles distant one from another. Every gate
has over it a fair large house, wherein are continually a thousand watchmen
kept to guard the city. There is a wall that goes to every one of these
fortes, with their arches, where the king may pass into any of them. The great
Cham his palace is strong and very stately and fair. The streets are
straight, in so much that the light of the fire is seen from one end to
another. In this city are many fair and sumptuous houses, and palaces, and in
the midst of it, is a great and wonderful Palace, with a high tower
therein, whereupon there is a great bell, and when it ringeth in the night,
none dare walk abroad in the streates, but the watchemen of the city, and
Midwiues, and Phisicions, who must pass with light. And without the city are
twelve great streates, every one aunswering to his gate of the city, wherein
there are many crafts men and merchants dwelling: and in the same are lodged
all such as come to the court about any business: and the Stews are kept in
those streates, in the which are above xx. thousand women of evil living, and
not one of them dare enter into the city upon pain of burning. Out of this
city goes every day more then a thousand carts laden with silk. Nere to the
city of Cambalu there is a mountain, wherein are found black stones which
burn like unto dry wood.

There is also nere to Cataya a country of xx. days journey, inhabited with
Christians Nestorians, which have greater and fayrer churches then we have. In
this city of Ca^balu the great Cham has his Palace and Court, which is very
great. And it is said, that this Palace has 4. Columns of fine gold, and
the walls of the Palace laid over with gold, and the floores laid with
brickes of gold and silver. In this Palace are the great Cham his wives, which
are four in number of lawful birth, every of which has in her court thirty
thousand maids, and many pages, men and women that serve them which are more
then four thousand men and women. His eldest son of his first wife has his
court by him self. There watch every night xx. thousand gentlemen on
horseback, which are his guard: And four thousand persons sit at meat with
him. The first wife sits at his left hand, and the rest successively: and
at his other hand sit his sons, and his sons sons, every one according
to his age. He has xx. thousand huntsmen, and four thousand dogs, and xx.
thousand hawks, and five thousand Gerfalcons, and a great number of Acorres.
They pitch ten thousand tents in the fields, when he goes to his pastimes of
hunting. And two principal tents for him self, wherein may be two thousand
knights at pleasure, the which te^ts are furnished with such riches, that one
of the small realms is not able to buy them. The great Cham is the greatest
Lord of the whole earth, and so intitleth him self king of kings, and lord
of lords, and in truth, he is lord from Scythia, even through out all the
East parts, and from thence to the Mediteran Sea: so that not without reason
he causes him self to be written, lord and Emperor of all the East parts.
He commands him self to be called the son of God, and in this gloryeth
much. He has great countries and very rich, and thereby is the greatest
lord, and the richest of the world, as we have already rehearsed. In the
Winter, the Tartars come into the plain feeldes, which are hot and of good
pasture, and in the Summer they abide in the mountains, and among the trees,
and fresh places. They make round houses of timber and cover them with felts,
and these houses they carry with them w^^ther soever they go. And always they
set the door of the house in the Summer time toward the South, and in the
Winter toward the North. They bring likewise some carts covered with feltes,
so strong, that the water never passes through them, the which are drawn with
Camels. Upon these they carry their wives, children, and family. All the other
customs and manners of the Tartars are spoken of already, where ^e treated of
Tartaria. The province of Mangi otherwise called Mongall is near unto Cataya,
and subject to the great Cham. It has under the jurisdiction thereof eight
realms, and in every realm a 140. cities. And in all the province of Mangi is
a thousand two hundred and two cities, very great and rich. There is in this
country great ^rade of clothes of gold, and silk, and of precious stones,
and pearls, and of all sorts of spices. The people are for the most part all
handycraftes men. They cause the children to follow their fathers occupations.
There are a great number that use the science of Necromancie, and witchecraft:
and there are many evil people, and of wicked conditions. There is in this
country no man of war, nor horse for the wars, by reason it is situated in
a strong place, and shut up with many waters: and round about the cities and
towns are deep and broad ^aues full of water. The people of this country
are much toubled with sickness, and diseases. If they gave them selves to
seats of arms, all the world could not bring the province of Mangi under
subjection. They worship idols: they speak the Persian language: they burn
their dead bodies. They use in this country money of Coral, and the women
bring it hanging at their necks, and deck their Idols with it, and therefore
it is much desired and set by. In this province they make clothes of gold and
silk, and chamblet in very great quantity. There are in this province
mastiues, as great as Asses. All they that are borne in the province of Mangi
have the day and hour of their birthes written, that the lord of the country
may know it. When any man will take his journey, he goes to ask counsel of
the divines. When they dye they apparel their bodies in canuas, and burn them
with papers wherein are painted devils, horses, slaves, beasts, and apparel.
And they say, that all the same shall serve those that dye in another world.
And when they burn the bodies, they sing and make much mirth, and say that
the gods do so receive them with joy in the other world.

There are many great and rich cities in the province of Cataya and Mangi, as
for example one called Gengomsu, being ten miles in compass, and the walls of
the palace of that city, are round about on the inside lined with gold. In
the province of Mangi is another city called Nocian, subject also to the great
Cham, where men have their teeth covered with gold, and the women set great
store by their hair, and buy and sell, and govern all the goods, and the men
follow no kind of business, but apply their hunting, and pleasure, and
pastimes in the feeldes, and go to the wars. And when the women have brought
forth their children, the men go to bed and take the child and keep it until
forty days be past, and the women rise up and go abroad, as though they had
not ben delivered of any child and serve their husbands. Singni is also a great
and noble city, containing forty miles in compass, and in it is an
innumerable company of people, and al are Philosophers, Phisicions, merchants
and handy crafts men, very expert in all arts. There ^re in this city vii.
thousand stone bridges, brought very curiously, under the which, a Galley may
row very well. In the mountains of this city grows Rewbarb and Ginger, in
great abundance. There are wrought in it many clothes of gold and silk, of
sundry colors, the citizens rejoicing ^uch to apparel themselves therewith.
And five days journey beyond it, is the noble city of Quinsay, which is as
much to ^ye, as the city of Heaven, and it is the head city in the province
of Mangi. It is reported to contain in compass one hundred miles, and to have
twelve thousand bridges of stone, with arches so high, that a great ship may
pass under. This city is situate in the water, like Venis, and every one
dwelling therein follows the occupation of his father and ancestors. There
is in this city a lake xxx. miles in compass, and in the same lake stand the
best palaces of the world, especially in the midst thereof be two, wherein
are made all the marriage feasts of the city: and they are always furnished
and trimmed for the marriages. In this city they use the money of Tartaria,
which is of the rind of a Mulbery tree. Upon every one of those bridges there
be always watchemen ready, to the end there should no harm be done, nor any
tumult or rebellion arise in the city. There are in it xiiii. bathes. The great
Cham does set great store by this city. In the same there is a great and fair
palace of the kings, made four square, and compassed about with walls ten
miles, with very fair chambers and other rooms, and gardens, and fountayns,
and a great pond with much fish. There is also in this city an honorable
church of Christians Nestorians. Of the ci^ie (...) Quinsaye and of his
province the great Cham does receive four thousand and five hundred hanegs of
gold, and every haneg is 126. thousand duccats and above, and this only is
received of salt. Of his other rents he receives every year ten thousand
hanegs of gold. In this course near to Ganges is a country that is called
the golden Chersoneso, the which is in the Equinoctial, and runs
overthwart, and stands from Melaca four hundredth and fifty leages. All this
country is very rich, and has great abundance of gold, and therefore it
was so called, or because it seems that the Sun rises gilded, and shining.
And beyond that, more then 500. leages lies the Island of Ciampa or Ciampago,
as Marcus Paulus calls it. It is a great Island, and very abundant of gold
and precious stones. The king of this Island has his palaces all covered with
planches of gold for tyles, and the windows and marbles of the palace are
all of gold. All the trees of this Island are of a sweet smell: there is in it
much white pepper. The people of this Island are fair people, but evil in
manners, for they are Idolaters: they worship Idols, and figures painted in
diverse sorts. They kill their enemies, eat their flesh, and drink their
blood. They speak the Persian tongue. Near to this Island are many others
which are in number above seven thousand four hundredth, as they report that
have sailed in those parts. From Ciampa unto Iaua the great, are 150. leages.
Iaua has in compass three thousand miles: there are in it seven crowned
kings. It is an Island very rich of gold, and has very great store of
victuals: and there is in the same great plenty of Cinnamon, cloves, pepper,
and ginger, and many other spices in great abundance. The people are
Idolaters, they speak the Persian language. Iaua the less has 200. miles in
compass: there are in it eight kings: they speak the Persian tongue: they
worship idols: they have lack of all kind of victuals. Eight leages from Iaua
toward the Southwest is another Island which is called Iocat, great and rich.
There is in it great abundance of gold, and many Elefants and Apes, and many
small snayles, of the which, they use the shelles for money. And as they write
from Ophir, from whence Solomon caused gold to be carried for the Temple of
Jerusalem, it is believed to be the same: for in it is great abundaunce of
gold, and of all other things which were carried to Solomon. And thirty
leages from Iaua the less, is the Gatigara nine or ten degrees from the
Equinocciall on the other side toward the South. Beyond this there is no
other country known, by reason there has been no navigations any further from
these parts: and by land it cannot be travailed, for the great number of lakes
and high mountains, which be there. And it is reported that the earthly
Paradize lies that way.

Of many notable things that are found in the land of Tartaria, and in the East
India.
Like as the gatherer of grapes, after he has gathered all that he can, and
made his principal gathering in: yet after that he causes the refuse to be
gathered, and makes an after gathering. Even so it will hap to me in this
work: for at the conclusion I will not let to seek again, if there be any
notable thing to be found in these Indias and provinces of the East parts,
which have not been spoken of: and in the setting down thereof, will keep no
other order, then to begin by the description and division of India, the which
Pogio Florentino left written by the information of one Nicholas a Venecian
that travailed those parts and saw them.

All India is divided into three parts. The first part is from the region of
Persia, unto the river Indo. The second part is the midst from the river
Indo, unto the river Ganges. The third, called the farthest and last, is from
Ganges unto the end of that which is known to be inhabited: and this
exceeds much the other in policy, riches, and good laws. For it is certain,
that the men of this India have sumptuous houses, and well wrought, and all
things appertaining to them very clean and handsome.

There are very rich merchauntes which have tables and table clothes, and
cupbords of plate as we have: and many of them are not without forty ships of
their own, for their affairs, that every one of them is esteemed to be worth
80. thousand duccates. All these lack bread and wine. They live by Rice,
flesh, milk, and cheese, and also make their drink with Rice ground and
mingled with water: they make it a shyning red color with the juice of a
certain kind of tree. They have great abundance of hens Capons, Partriges,
Feysants, and other birds, and wild foul, and sleep in beds trimmed with
gold, and covered with quilts of cotton woll. They wear also clothes of
linen, and sarge, tied together with stringes of crimson and gold. The women
use to wear shows of thin leather painted with ^^^de and silk, and have
bracelets of gold on their arms, necks, feet, and breasts. There be women
that live like harlots, and the Indians know not what sin is. Some women use
to wear their hair black, which couller among them is much set by. In the
inner India which is that in the midst of the three, they consent not that
one man have more then one woman. In the other they have as many as they list
or can get. The manner of their buryals is not alike in all the India, but
diverse and differing one from another. The foremost India exceeds the others
in sumptuousness of their burials: for they make vaultes under the ground,
well and cunningly wrought, and lay the dead body in a bed costly decked with
gold and clothes very precious. In the middlemost India they burn the
bodies, and the first and bestbeloued wife of him that dies, is burned with
her husband. They weep and bewail them that dye diverse kinds of ways. The
Indians which are farthest within the country cover their heads with a sack,
and some put bows of trees by the ways, with verses written, and painted
papers. These play upon Instruments and feed the poor: others there be that
weep three days for him that is dead, and the kinsfolks and neighbors go to
the ^^use of the deceased, and carry meat with them, in such sort, that there
is nothing dres^^d in ye dead man's house in these iii. days. Such as bury
father or mother, carry a ^^tter leaf in their mouth: and for the space ^f a
whole year never change their appa^ell: neither eat nor drink but once a
day: neither pare their nails, nor hair of their ^ead, nor beard. The women
bewail such ^s dye, by striking themselves upon their ^reastes. Some put in
certain vessels of gold and silver the ashes of their Princes. The priests
which are called Bachales, eat of (...) beast, and especialy of the Ox,
saying, that ^e is very profitable for man. They eat ryce, ^earbs, and fruits.
They take but one wife who is burned with her husband when he ^^^th.
Throughout all India are found one ^ind of Philosophers which are caled
Bragmanes, Astronomers and also divines. They live long: yea, so long until
they come to be 300. years of age. They use great superstitions, and
imaginatio^s. Throughout all India they worship idols, and have churches very
much like to ours, painted within with diverse figures. There are in them idols of
stone, of gold, silver and Iuorie; some are 60. foot long. When they enter into
their temple, they wash them selves with clean water, and lie down upon the
ground, and holding up their feet and hands, they pray, and after kiss the
earth. They insence their sacrifices, offer meats to their gods, and after
distribute them among the poor to be eaten. The Chambaytas only write in
paper, all the rest in leaves of trees: and of them they make books very fair
to the sight: they write from above downewarde. There are among the Indians
many and diverse sorts of languages. They have a great number of slaves. The
debtor unable to pay, is driven to serve the creditour. He that is accused of
any crime, having no witness, does clear him self by his oath only. There is
no pestilence in the Indias, nor any other contagious diseases: and for that
cause there is a great multitude of people. There are many kings which make an
army of more then of one Milleon of men.

It is said, that in the realm of Lambry are men having feathers about their
secret parts, both great and long like unto Geese. And in Fansur is a kind of
great trees which have a thin rynde, and under it is full of meal very good, of
the which they make meat very excellent. In all these Islands, because there is
want of wine, they make it of certain trees like to Date trees: of the which
they break the bows, where comes out certain white and red licour like
(...) wine, and is very excellent to drink: and there is great store of it.
All those people live beastly, and have no manner of law.

They worship the first thing that they see in the morning. They eat of all
dead flesh good or evil, and flesh of mankind, not having care how it dye.
In the realm of Bisina are Munkeis of diverse sorts, and Unicorns little
lesser then Elephants, having heads like to a Pigg, and a long black horn in
their forehead, and their tongues sharp and thornie with thorns, long and
great. The Apes are little and have their faces like to young children: they
flea them, and then sees them, and dress them with spices in such sort, that
there remain no evil smell, and so eat them. There are in this country
black valiant hawks like to Crows, and good for the game. In the same
country, when any dies, his kinsfolks eat him, and keep the bones in a
chest. They kill all the strangers that they take, and forthwith eat them, if
they be not redeemed. The people of Nicuneya live like beasts and go naked
both men and women. They use them selves like beasts in all things. In
Nangama the people are idolaters, they live beastly and eat man's flesh; They
are very cruel: they have heads like to great mastiues, and teeth like to
dogs teethe.

There is in this Island great quantity of spices. And departing from this
country declyning toward the West, one thousand miles, which are two hundred
and fifty leages, you shall come to the Island called Saylan or Zaylan, which
co^tayneth in compass three thousand miles, and is the best Island of the
world, and the richest. The people are Idolaters. They have abundance of Ryce
and cattle, and wine made as we have said. There are in it the best Rubies of
the world, and many other precious stones, as Topacios, Amatistas, and others
of diverse sorts. The king of this Island has a Rubie, the best of the world,
a spanne long, and as great as an arm, and as redd as fire shining without any
soil or spot. The people of this country are very lecherous, and nothing
worth for the wars. Near to this Island toward the West, forty miles, which
are ten leages, there is a great province called Mohobar, which is called the
greater India. This is the greatest and the best province in the world: there
are in it Pearls very great and fine, and it is divided into five realms: and
all the men and women go naked, saving they carry a linen cloth, wherewith
they cover their secret places. Also the king goes naked, saving because he
will be known, he carries a string at his neck full of precious stones,
which are in number 54. in remembrance of so many prayers, which he is bound to
say, in the honor of their gods, morning and evening, and upon his arms,
legs, and feet, he carries as many precious stones, as ^enne rich cities
are worth. This king has eight hundred women. In this realm are fair women,
according to there fashion, they paynt their faces and bodies. When the king
dies, they burn him, and all such with him as kept him company in his life.
There is a custom in this land, that such as are condemned to death, kill
themselves for the love they bear to their Idols.

In this country every one has as many wives as he can maintain. And when
the husband dies, they burn the body according to their fashion, and the
women of their own accord leap into the fire. All those are idolaters, and
for the most part worship the Ox, saying he is a saint, because he ploweth
the ground where the wheat grows, and therefore will not kill an Ox for any
thing in the world, nor eat of his flesh. And when any Ox dies, they
annoint all the house with his tallowe.

These people descend of such as killed saint Thomas. The king and all the rest
eat their meat upon the ground. There grows nothing else in this country
but Rice. All men and women do wash them selves twice a day, morning and
evening, and he that fails therein shall be taken for an heretic. They are
good in the handeling of their weapons: and few of them drink wine. This
country is of an intolerable heat, and it never rayneth in it, saving at
certain times in June, July, and August. There are in this region many
Philosophers, Necromancers, and Soothsayers, and black hawks like to crows,
and great Owls like to Hens. In this province the body of Saint Thomas the
Apostle lies buried in a small city. And there live many Christians. The men
of this country do annoint them selves with Benjamin to make them the blacker:
for the blacker they are, the fayrer they think themselves to be: and they
paynt their Idols black, and the devils white. In all this India, they
observe neither law nor order in their maryages. By this course of the sea
toward the South, are two Islands of Christians, thirtye miles one from the
other, the one of men, the other of women: and the men go not to the women, nor
the women to the men, but three months in the year, August, September, and
October. The men children remain with their mothers until they be seven
years of age, and then they go to their fathers. They ^^ue by flesh, milk,
fish, and Ryce, having ^o other victuals. In this Island is great quantity of
Ambar. Mandagaister is an over Island toward the South, distant from Escorcia
near 250. leages. It has in compass one thousand and forty miles, which
are 260. leages. It has four kings Mores. There is not eaten in it any other
^leshe then of Elefants and Camels, where^f there be many: and therefore there
is ^reat trafique with Elefants tooth. There are found in this Island certain
birds that are called Nichas, so great, that the greatest Feathers of their
Wings are twelve paces long: they are of so great strength, that they take an
Elephant, and carrye him up into the air, and kill him, and after let him fall
and feed upon him at their pleasure. Tanquibar is another Island most noble,
and lies in the same course, and has in circuit 250. leages. The inhabiters
thereof are Idolaters, and so great of stature, that they be like Giantes, and
are of great force.

They be all black and go naked. They are to be wondered at. The women are
foul and evil favored. They are strong in battle: for they esteem not their
lives.

Returning to the cities of Cataya and Tartaria: It is said, that the city of
Berengalia has in circuit three score miles, which are fifteen leages, and
that it has nine hundred thousand men, that can carrye armor. The men of
that country take as many wives as they list, who are burned with their
husbands when they dye. And the king has twelve thousand, of the which two or
three thousand are taken upon condition, that when the king dies, they of
their own accord shall burn with him, and to these is done great honor. In
the city of Berengalia three times in the year they make a great feast to
their gods: they carrye their Idols through the city in procession, in the
midst of two carts, accompanied with many people, and many maidens finely
arrayed, singing joyfully with great devotion: they spend three days in
bankets, daunces and songs: and celebrate their marryages with bankets,
songs, and trumpets. They have all kind of Instrustruments as we have, except
Organs, which they lack. They dawnce as we do, one after an other, which is a
thing to be seen. They use bathes, except it be such as are near to Ganges.
The other wash them selves many times a day in told water.

Near to this city of Berengalia is a mountain so called, in the which are
many Diamonds, and the mountain is full of serpents, but they take them with
policye. They which dwell in these countries, divide the year into xii. parts
as we do, and account the months like to the xii. signs. The most part reckon
the year from August, by Augustus Caesar. In some of those realms, they use
certain small stones for money, which are called the eyes of a Catt. In others
they use certain small Irons like to needles: in others, certain papers
wherein is written the name of the king. In some provinces of the India, more
forward, they use Venice duccats of gold: in others they have money of
silver, and copper: in others they make pieces of gold, and use them for
money. Malpuria, or Malapuria, or Milipar is an other city in the province of
Mahabaria, near to the second entrance that the river Indo does run in at,
where the body of saint Thomas the Apostle is honorably buried in an honorable
church, where are resident well near 1000 Christians of the Nestorians: of the
which are many throughout all the India, even as the Jews are here among us.
In the province of Macino, which Volaterano thinks to be the region of the
Seras, are many Elephants. The king brings up ten thousand, and uses of
them in his wars. The men of this country take but one wife apeece. The
women are very lecherous. They are all Idolaters, and in the morning they
turn toward the Sun. They worship the divinity of God in Trinity. In this
region is a river called Daua, well near as great as Ganges: the city is
called Dua: it has 18000. paces in circuit: they write in the leaves of
certain trees, for in all the India is no paper, except only in the city of
Cambayta. They eat Serpents that are vi. foot in length, and as gro^e as a
man. They eat likewise Ants which are red and as great as crabbes. In the end
of this region toward Cataya, are certain Oxen, white, and black, with
maynes and tails like horses, having longer hair.

The hayres of their tails are very small, and as light as feathers: they sell
the^ by weight: they are highly esteemed. Cibalechia is a royal city, and one
of the chiefest in all Cataya, it has xxviii. miles in circuit: and in the
midst a palace very strong and fair: and at every end a round fort of four
miles compass, for a house of armor, where is all kind of armor, and engines
necessary, and that may be imagined for the wars. From the kings palace to
every one of these fortes, is a wall with arches: from whence the king may
pass to any of them. Volaterrano caleth this city Cubaleschia, and says it
has 32. thousand paces in circuit: and it should seem to be the same
Cambalu which we have heretofore spoken of. About fifteen days journey from
this city is an other city called Neptay newly buylt, having in circuit
thirty miles and very full of people. Nicholao did affirm, that the houses
and palaces, and all other things of these two cities were very like to our
houses, and that the men were modest, and full of courtesy, and very rich.
Near the city of Paconia, he found vines, yet very few: for all the India,
as is already declared, lacks wine, and grapes, and the grapes that there
be, grow of trees, and therewith they make sacrifice to their gods.

Coloen is a noble City, twelve miles in compass: it has near to the same
much Gynger, Pepper, and Cloves. And there be many serpents of diverse kinds,
some of six cubits in length wonderful to be seen, but they do no harm.
Others have four feet and a long tail like to a dog: they take them in
hunting, and eat them, and report it to be very good meat. Others there are
of the length of a Cubite with wings that have seven heads set in order by the
length of their bodies, and live in trees: and fly swiftly, and are so full of
poison, that only with their breath they kill. There are also cattes of the
mountains that fly. Cochin is an other city, that has five miles in
circuit, and stands at the entry of a river, of the which it takes his
name: wherein there are said to be fishes in a manner like to men and women
without any great difference. And passing farther, they go to another city
that is called Colichuchia, containing viii. miles in circuits, which is the
most famous and noble of trade in all India. Here is much Pepper, Lacar,
Ginger, and gross Cinnamon, and many other sweet spices. In this region only
the women take as many husbands as they list: and the husbands agree among
them selves, and every one contributeth toward the woman's mayntenance, and
dwells in his own house, and when he goes to the woman he leaves a sign
upon the door. Every manchilde is the husbands, to whom the wife will give
him. Their inheritance fall not to the sons, but to the cousines.

This city, according to the signs and shows is Calicut. From hence fifteen
days journey, he came to the city of Cambayta, nere to the sea, whose circuit
is xii. miles, and is toward the West, having great abundance of Espico
nardo, Lacat, Indico, Mirabolanos and Sarge. There is a certain kind of
Priests that are called Bacchales, which have but one wife, who burns her
self with her husband when he dies. These eat of no kind of beast, but live
with fruits of the Earth, Rice, milk, and wild herbs. In this city the
priests do preach to the people in the presence of their Idols. And many kill
themselves for the honor of their gods: and those that so do, are taken among
them for Saints.

There are many Oxen of the mountains, that have maynes like horses, and
horns so long, that if they turn their heads, they reche with them their
tails. Near to this city lies two Islands distant a hundredth miles a
sunder: the one inhabited with women, and the other with men: one while the men
pass to the women, another while the women to the men, every one returning
within six months to their own Islands: for they think, if they continued
any longer together, that they should dye: of the which people we have before
spoken. There remains behind, for the conclusion of this ^eregrination, to
treat of a region of the Si^as, who by the North part do border upon the Seras
toward the West: but it is vn^nowen what countries there are on the South
part, but that it is wilderness. Toward the West, the India lies near to
Ganges unto the great gulf that is called ^he South sea: where it is said,
that the ^cthiafagi, to wit, such as live only with ^^sh, dwell. It has many
cities. The metro^olitan and principal of all, is the city of ^ina, which is
at the South part. Of this Ptolomeo speaks, reporting it to be under the
Equinoctial line: and that it exten^eth unto the Antecos, which are on the
other side of the South. The country of Ga^igara encloseth it on the West
part, and the ^nknowen country, unto the Promontorio ^raso, and the sea of
Prasodia. Gatigara is ^port and a principal place, where the ^hips do ride and
harbor in this region. And Aspithra is a river, and great city in ^he same.
Calicut, Canonor, Cambayta, Narsinga, are no new regions: for in truth ^hey
were known of the ancient writers, and in our time have been discovered,
many and wonderful things which are found in these East Indias newely
discovered by the Spanyardes, but especially in every region of the same are
some precious things more in particular, as in the kingdom of Calicute and
Narsinga grows Pepper, Ginger, Cardamo, Mirabolanos and Casia.

In Cambaya and Cochin is much Espiquenardo and Mirabolannos and also cotton
wo^l in abundance. In the realm of Pego are all the like. And likewise the
stone Cornerina, the Calcedonia and the diamo^ds. In the Island of Armos are
stones in great abundance. In the Island of Zailon which is Taprobana are found
Rubies and Iacinets, Saphires and Topacios. In the realm of Melaca are many
Popingeys, and E^ephants. In Sumotra is great abundance of Pepper. The
Camfora is found in the Island of Porne, in Monoch and Bandan which are Islands.
Near to these parts, are Nutmegs, and Cloves great store, The Island of
Sipangry has much gold and great riches. The Island of Petar^ and both Iauas
yield great store of Pepper, Nutmegs, Espique, of Galanga and other sweet
odours. In Madagassar are many Elefants, and great abundance of Iuory very
fine.

The Island of Zauzibar is very much like to this, abounding with Lions, and
many other wild beasts. Nicolao Veneciano, as Pogio declares, reports yt
in the small brooks of the river Ganges there were canes of a marvelous
length, and so great that a man could skarcely insorace them about with both
arms, with the which they made small Boats to sail in, and at every side of
those brooks are many gardeynes and orchardes very pleasant and full of
delyght. And there grows a fruit very like to Figs that they call Musa,
which is exceeding sweet, yea, sweeter then honye. It is said, that the
Island Taprobana conteyneth sixteen thousand times, a hundredth thousand paces
in circuit, which amount to four hundred leages, accompting four English
miles to every leag. The men of that Island were very cruel in their manners,
and both the men and women have very great ears, laden with Zarcillos of
gold, and precious stones: and they wear linen loath, and cloth of Sarge. And
the men take many wives, and have low houses, by reason of the great heat, and
are Idolaters, and have great store of Pepper, of that sort which is called
the greatest, and of the tongue, and plenty of Canfora, and Gold. In a
certain place of this Island, which they call Bateth are a kind of people
called Anthropophagi, to wit, deuowrers of men, in respect that they eat the
flesh of their enemies, and keep their heads for treasure: and he that has
most heads, is accounted most rich: for they make a trade with them and barter
them away for other things. In Armenia the great, there is reported to be a
fountain, where water like oil springs, in so great abundance, that many
ships are laden therewith. It is good to burn for light, and to annoint
beasts. In the land of Tartaria toward the North, are dogs not much less
then Asses, the which draw a frame of timber, like as if it were a Cart,
saving that it goes not with wheels, upon the which two men may go, and they
put two or four dogs or more to it, according to the burden and necessity.
At the end of this realm, is a country called Darkness: because it is
always as dark as the first hour of the night: and the Sun is never seen
there. In this country are handsome men and women of person, but yellowe in
color. They have neither king nor law, but live like beasts. This country
joins with one part of Russia.

Russia is a great province toward the North, and a strong country. There
are in it fair men and women, and are Christians. They pay tribute to the king
of Tartaria. There is great store of costly skins and f^rres. There are in
Russia many mines of silver: the country is very cold. In the same time Pogio
declares that there came certain men from Aethiopia, which is parcel of the
Indias and the country of Prester John, and declared that they were of the
country, nere whereunto the river Nile springs: and also said that the same
river springs near to the Equinoctial at the foot of certain high
mountains, that are always covered with clouds: and that the said river
grows of three great fountains: two of them which are 40. paces asunder, and
these meet together at the end of 500. paces, and then make the river so
great, yt it cannot be waded through. The third fountain is a greater
stream, and a thousand paces from the other, and is near to his river, and
ten miles from the other ryuers. They say that there run above a thousand
rivers into the river of Nile. And in the months of March, April, and May,
the rain so much increases in that country, that they cause the rivers to
ouerflowe, and great floods to follow thereof. They say also that the water
of Nile is very sweet, before it mingleth with other ryuers, and that it had
virtue to heal the leprosy and scabbes, of such as washed them selves
therein: Saying that very near about the place where the river Nile springs,
there stands a city where they were borne that had 25. miles in circuit,
which is vi. leagues and above, and that it was inhabited with people. And they
said, that this region near to Nile was very temperate and abundant of all
things. In so much tha^ thrice a year they had Hay growing and mowen: and
twyce Wheat, and had abundaunce of bread and wine, and of all fruits like to
ours, but Almondes ther^ want. And the most part of Aethiopia in steed of
Wine use Water tempere^ with Barley. They said that unto the Ilan^ of Meroe,
the river of Nile was not naui^able by reason of the great number of rocks that
are in it: and that from the same I^ande forward, ships might easilye ^ayle
and pass. Men being asked of Aethiopia, which is of the Indias of Pre^er John,
upon the said river, and those that here we speak of, reported that those
people of Aethiopia, are com^only of a longer life then we are of, and many of
them live a hundred and fifty ^^ares, and in some places two hundred*

^hey never have the Pestilence nor other ^firmities: and that therefore it is
a ve^e populous country. They have no ^oll: they apparel them selves with
lin^n cloth, or with silk both men and wo^en, and the women for the most
part ^^rrye behind them a long train, and go ^^rte with certain broad
gyrdels garri^ed with gold, and precious stones ^ome cover their heads with
things ^^at are wouen in with Gold, others carry ^^eir hair loose. Both men
and women v^ ^weare rings on their fingers, they (...) ^^all tables to eat
upon: they cover the ^we do. All those people have one (...) ^^ters, but
diverse languages.

They have one king, who is entitled king of kings under God. There are in
Aethiopia Oxen, that are crooked backed like Camels with horns of three foot
long. Their dogs be as great as our Asses. They can do more then Lions, and
they hunt Lions with them. There are many Elefants that have teeth of six
foot in length. There are diverse other beasts, which differ from ours, and
also birds. They said, that in the deserts were serpents of 50. foot of
length without feet, that would swallowe up a whole calfe. Upon the river
Eufrates is a noble city, whose circuit is of 14. thousand paces. They say,
that it is one part of the ancient Babylon: It is called Baldach, or
Baldachia: and Eufrates passes through the midst thereof. It has one gate
of 14. arches. There appear from these parts many tokens of that great and
ancient Babylon.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson.
1580.


