A table instructiue when and how a man co^nyngly let blood of all the
necessary veins of man's body very profitable for all Surgeons and Barbers.
A THE veins of the foreheade and the tempels do syrynge and grow of the
exteriall throat veins like as branches, y^ which must be opened drawyng the
launcer overthwart the vain, I call it lettynge overthwart the vain
according to ancient doctors the which is not fully alonge the vain: nor
fully overthwart the vein, but keeps a mean between both. And the lettynge
of this vayn is good for apostems in the eyes, and the migrain, and for great
headache, and for alteration of the wit, for the frensy, and for the new
lepre.

B The veins of the neck that communelye are called the veins Guiden or^
iugulares exteriores must be opened overthwart the vein, lettynge the launcer
declyne a little a long the vein but not to much: or else it should be hard to
staunche the blood. And he that will open this vain well, must cause the
pacient to bow his head from that side where he will open the vain, that she
may be bent. And this vain must be opened (as says Auicen) with a launcer cum
pilo, that is to say, that has a pyn overthwart about the end of the
lau^cer, to keep it for going to deep in the vein. And the lettinge of these
veins is good for the humors of the head, for the rewme and the migrain. And
it is to be noted that all the veins of the head ought to be let after a man
has eaten, another ought these veins to be let in those, in whom is required
the power to engender, for (as says Auicen) through these veins are voyded
the sprites yt nature does send forth for generation.

C The vein on the out side of the arm the which the new practisers communly
do call Cephalica, and Galen vena externa and also Humeralis, takes his
original with the Guiden or iugulares exteriores from the holowe vein. And
this vein Cephalica must be opened with a greater hole then the other veyns,
or else (as says Haly abbas the ancient physician in the fourth book of his
practyse) y^ fore said vein is dangerous to fall to an apostemation. And
great head must be taken for faylynge in opening this veyn, for she is
yeopardous to let. For if ye dare not touch this vein Cephalyke, and shrugge
to open it (as some barbers or Chirurgens that be not well expert do) ye shall
do great harm to the patient and cause danger of apostumation. Always if ye
touch this vein well at the first launcyng, she is the same that of al veins
does grieve less in lettynge of blood: how be it what so ever ye do make the
hole metely great. The openinge of this vein is good for runnynge of the
eyes, and all manner of headeache, and for the falling sycknesse.

D The vein that appears in the mydde of the arm before the bowynge of it,
or after the bowynge, the which communely is called the Median or Mediana, or
Nigra after Auicen, or after Haly abbas Mediastina, and after Rhasis ad
Almansorem she is called vena matrix or Cardi ata: has her original or
spring partly of the Cephalica, and partly of the Basilica, y^ which must be
opened overthwart the vein or at the leest declinyng the lau^cer a little
awrye: without one will let twyse: and the lettynge blood in this vein, is
good for all grefes and diseases of the members, stomach, rybbes and sides:
for she is the fountain of all the body.

E The vein that co^munely is called the Basilica, and after Galen, uena
interna / sometime she is called lecoraria other do call her Hexatica or Regia.
Rhasis (because she does go through the arm holes) does call her vena
axillaris, and she does proceed and come from the holowe vein, being yet in
the breast before she has furnyshed the interior A figure for necessary lettyng
off blounde.
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

J

K

iugulares or throat veins. Her original or spring is of the stomach, liver
and heart, and her best perceauer is in the out side of the arm. Of the which
vein he that shall open her, ought to take diligently head for launcyng: For
hard by her is a great synowe like unto a vein, wherein the sprite of life
runs up and down, and is mixte with blonde, the which if it be opened, the
pacient stands in yeopardy of his life, as Galen does say in his book of
lettynge of blood. Under the same Basilica are also great synewes touching the
foresaid vein: Therefore says Rhasis in his. xxviii. book: Eschew the
Basilica as much as is possible, without it be for great need: otherwise it is
better to take the Median.

F The vein that appears about the top of the pulse is the branch or
twygge of the Cephalica.

G The second vein that lyghtely appears about the myddelmoste finger, and
is co^munely called Funis brachij, is also a branch or twygge of the
Cephalica.

H The third vein of the hand the which appears about the little finger,
and is co^munely called of the Phisicians or Chirurgians Saluatella or vena
titillaris or Ascellaris, is also a branch of the Basilica. The which veins
of the hand as also other outward veins, are of small value or profit to be
let or opened: because they never yield much blood. And these must be opened
as those of the fete, namely in warm water, to cause the veins to swell above
the senowes.

I The vein of the inner ankle of the foot, the which appears more
perfectely than the other, is co^munely called Saphena, and comes (as does
also the Sciatica) from the great holownesse that is under the knee.

K The other vein that is on the outsyde of the foot, is called Sciatica, and
comes likewise of the great holownesse under the knee. And the lettynge of
these two veins is good for all manner of swellynges and apostems of the preuy
members. The which veins of the feet are yeopardous for deep launcyng, and
specially the Sciatica, which is more fearful to be touched then the Saphena.
For if ye open the Sciatica and launche to deep, for fear of faylynge, because
they appear so small: ye shall hardly escape, but that ye shall touch some
senowe adioynynge to the same veins, whereof might come great pain and other
evil accidents: As we have seen otherwhyles that for ignorance of the barbars
and Surgeons, the pacient did fall into diverse greefes of the senowes or the
crampe. This and such like grefes therefore are yt causes why it is needful to
bath the hand and feet in warm water when they shall be launched, to cause
them to swell and appear the better: for they be little of them selves, and in
geuynge them a cut with the launcer, ye must always beware of the se^^^es. Also
the Sciatica must be launched as y^ Saphena, namely: a little overthwart, seeing
they appear enough. And generally every vein that is in a place full of
senowes or between senowes must be opened alonge the vain, and that for two
reasons: The first is to escheue the senowes ^^ what place so ever they be.
The second is that y^ vain, that is cut or blemished alonge the vein, is not
so dangerous for the crampe or other evil accidents (as says Galen in his.
v. book of Methodus Therapentice) as when she is launched alonge or a little
overthwart.

Behold gentle reader these are the veins y^ are co^munly in ure to be letten.
There are many other veins that may be cut or let for diverse grefes and
diseases, but because they are not or little in use: and also because Galen and
other ancient Greeks have made no mention of lettynge of them in their
writings: therefore let this little fruitful table suffice the at this time, by
the which thou may exercise and teach the self lyghtely and without danger
of any evil accidents to let any vain of man's body.

God save the king.
Imprynted at London in Aldersgate street by Ihon^ Herforde.


