ARTICLES To be inquired of by the Churchwardens and sworne-men, in the
ordinary visitation of the Reverend Father in God, LANCELOT Lord Bishop of
ELIE, within the Diocese of Elie, Ann. 1613.

AT CAMBRIDGE Printed by Cantrell Leg. 1613.

The tenor of the Oath of the Church- wardens and sworne-men.
YOu shall swear, that upon due consideration of these Articles given you in
charge, you shall present every such person of or within your Parish, as you
shall know to have committed any offense, or omitted any duty mentioned in any
of these Articles, or which are publicly defamed, or vehemently suspected of
any such offense or negligence. So help you God by the contents of his holy
Gospel.

Articles.
Touching the Church.
WHETHER is your Church or Chapel, with the Chauncell thereof, and every part
of either of them, well and sufficiently repaired, the windows well glased,
the floares paued plain and even, without dust, or any thing noisome or
unseemly?

2. Whether is your Churchyard well fenced with walls, rayles, pales, as has
been accustomed: if not, whose default is it?

3. Whether has there been any fighting, chiding, brawling, or quarrelling,
any plays, feasts, temporal Courts or Leets, lay Iuries, musters, or other
profane usage in your Church or Churchyard: any bells superstitiously rung on
holy days or their Eues, or at any other time, without good cause allowed by
the Minister and Churchwardens: have any trees been felled in your churchyard,
and by whom?

4. Whether is the mansion house of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, with all the
buildings thereunto belonging, your Parish Almes-house, and church house
sufficiently repaired, maintained, and to godly and their right uses employed?

5. Whether have you in your church the Bible in the largest volume, the book
of common prayer lately authorized by his Majesty, the books of Homilies
allowed, the two Psalters, a convenient pulpit for the preaching, a decent seat
for the minister to say service in conveniently placed, a strong chest with an
hole in the lidde, and three locks and keys, one for the Minister, the other
for the Churchwardens, for the Alms of the poor, and the keeping of the
Register book of the Christenings, marriages, and burials?

6. Whether have you in your Church a Font of stone for baptism, set in the
ancient usual place, a decent table for the Communion conveniently placed,
covered with silk or other decent stuff in time of divine service, and with a
fair linen cloth over that at the administration of the Communion?

7. Whether have you all such bells, ornaments, and other vtensils as have
aunciently belonged to your Church, a communion cup of silver with a cover, a
fair standing pot or stoop of pewter or purer metal, for the wine upon the
communion table, a comely surplesse with sleeves, a Register book of parchment
for christenings, marriages, and burials, book for the name of all strange
preachers, subscribed with their names, and the name of the Bishop or others
where they had license?

8. Whether is your alms for your poor quarterly at the least distributed by
you the churchwardens and the Minister in the presence of six of the chief
Parishioners to your poor? And are weekly the names and surnames of all
persons married, christened, and buried, and of their Parents, with the day and
year, entered in your said parchment book, and is every leaf being full,
subscribed by you the Minister and churchwardens?

9. Whether are the ten commandments set up in the east end of the church,
and other chosen sentences of holy Scripture upon the walls in convenient
places: are all your seats in your church in good repair, cleanly kept,
conveniently placed, and the Parishioners in them, or elsewhere orderly set,
and is there no contention or striving for any seat or place among them?

Touching the Ministry, Service, and Sacraments.
WHether is the common prayer said or sung by your Minister both morning and
evening distinctly and reverently, every Sunday and holy day and on their Eues,
and at convenient and usual times of those days, and in most convenient place
of the church for the edifying of the people?

2. Whether does your Minister observe the orders, rites, and ceremonies
prescribed in the book of common prayer, in reading the holy Scriptures,
prayers, and administration of the Sacraments, without diminishing, in regard
of preaching or any other respect, or adding any thing in the matter or form
thereof?

3. Whether does your Minister on wednesdayes and fridaies, not being
holydaies, at the accustomed hours of service resort to the church and say the
Letanie prescribed, and does your clarke or sexton give warning before by
tolling of a bell on those days?

4. Whether does your Minister as often as he administreth the communion, first
receive it himself. Whether does he use any bread or wine newly brought,
before the words of institution be rehearsed, and the bread and wine present on
the table, does he not deliver the bread and wine to every communicant
severally?

5. Whether does your Minister give warning publikly in the church at morning
prayer the Sunday before he administreth the communion for the better
preparation of the parishioners?

6. Whether has your Minister admitted to the communion any notorious sinner
openly known or defamed, or any who has openly and maliciously contended with
his Neighbor, before repentance and reconciliation made and done by
appointment of the Ordinary?

7. Whether has your Minister admitted to the communion any churchwarden or
Side-man, who has wittingly and willingly neglected, contrary to his oath, to
present any public offense or scandal, being moved to present either by
some of his neighbors, the Minister, or his Ordinary?

8. Whether has your Minister administered the Communion to any but such as
kneel, or do any refuse to kneel: has he administered to any who refuses to
be present at Public prayer: or who has depraved the Book of common prayer,
administration of the Sacraments, or the Rites and Ceremonies prescribed, or
the Articles of Religion agreed upon, or the Book of ordering Priests and
Bishops; or against his majesty's Supremacy; or have any been for these
causes repelled, and have they repented in writing, or otherwise, and what be
their names?

9. Whether has your Minister more Benefices then one, if he have, how far
distant are they, how often is he absent in the year: when he is absent, has
he an allowed preacher for his Curate?

10. Whether is your Minister an allowed Preacher, if he be, does he every
Sunday in your church, or some other near adjoining, where no Preacher is,
preach one Sermon every Sunday?

11. Whether does your Minister being no Preacher allowed, presume to expound
the Scripture in his own Cure, or else where does he procure every month a
Sermon to be preached in his cure by Preachers lawfully licensed, and on every
Sunday when there is no sermon, does he or his Curate read some one of the
Homilies prescribed?

12. Whether is your Curate allowed by the Ordinary, under his hand and seal,
to serve for your cure, and whether does he serve two churches or chapels in
one day?

13. Whether does your Minister in saying the public prayers, and administering
the Sacraments, wear a decent surplesse with sleeves, and being a graduate,
does he wear therewith a hood, by the order of the Universities, agreeable to
his degree?

14. Whether has your Minister or any other Preacher in your church, preached
any thing to confute and impugn any Doctrine delivered by any other Preacher,
and has he and they prayed for Christ's catholic church, as is prescribed by
the canon?

15. Whether has or does any preach in your church, which refuses to conform
himself to the Laws, Rites, and ordinances established, or which has not
first showed a sufficient license?

16. Whether does your Minister in his sermons, four times in the year at the
least, teach and declare the Kings Majesty's power within his Realms to be the
highest power under God, to whom, all within the same owe most loyalty and
obedience, and that all foreign power is justly taken away?

17. Whether does your Minister every sunday and Holyday, half an hour before
evening prayer or more, examine and instruct the youth in the ten
commandments, the Belief, the Lords prayer, and the catechism set forth in
the Book of common Prayer?

18. Whether has your Minister married any which have not bin three several
Sundays or Holidayes asked in your Church in the time of Divine service,
without license, and has he with license or without married any, whereof
neither dwelt in your Parish, or with any license but only from the Bishop of
Elie, or his Chancellers, or from his grace of Canterbury?

19. Whether has your Minister with license or without, married any at any
other times then between the hours of Eight and Twelve in the fore-noone, or
in any private house, or when there is no license, before their Parents and
Governors (the parties being under the age of 21. years) have testified
their consents?

20. Whether does your Minister declare to the people every Sunday at the time
appointed, what Holydaies and fasting-dayes be the week following? does he
being a Preacher, confer with all Recusants and persons Excommunicate or
suspended? being no Preacher, does he procure a sufficient Preacher to
reclaim them thereby?

21. Whether does your Minister keep a Note of all persons excommunicate, and
once every six months does he denounce them which have not obtained their
absolution, on some Sunday in service time, that others may be admonished to
refrain their company?

22. Whether does your Minister having notice given him, diligently visit the
sick (the Disease not being infectious,) does he instruct and comfort them,
does he then move them to make their Testaments, and remember the poor, and
other works of charity, and the passing Bell tolling, does he then neglect
his last duty?

23. Whether has your Minister refused to baptize any Child brought to the
Church upon any Sunday or holiday, or to bury any Corpse brought into the
Church or churchyard, or to church any women having had convenient warning
thereof?

24. Whether has your Minister being truly informed of the danger of death
of any Infant unbaptized, and being desired to go to the place where the
child is, to baptize it, neglected to go, by means whereof the child died
unbaptized?

25. Whether does your Minister at any time preach or administer the Communion
in any private house, except when any are so impotent that they cannot go to
Church, or very dangerously sick?

26. Whether has your Minister held or appointed any publik fast, or been
present at such, does he or any other in your Parish hold any lecture or
exercise, or attempt by fasting or prayer, or otherwise, to cast out any
Devils, without the license of the Bishop under his hand and seal?

27. Whether has there been any secret conuenticles or meetings in your
parish by any Priest, Ministers, or others, tending to the deprauing of the
form of prayer, doctrine, government of the Church?

28. Whether does your Minister in his journey, wear a cloak with sleeves
called a priests cloak, without gards, welts, long buttons, or cuts?

29. Whether does your Minister wear a wrought nightcap abroad, or a
peccadilly, with a broad falling band, or does he wear any cut or pinckt
apparel, does he in public go in his Dublet and Hose, without a coat or
cassocke, and does he wear any light colored stockings?

30. Whether does your Minister resort to any Tauerns or Alehouses, except for
his honest necessities, or does he board or lodge in any such place, does he
use any base or servile labor, drinking, riot, dice, cards, tables, or any
other unlawful games? is he contentious, a hunter, hawker, swearer, dauncer,
suspected of incontinencie, or give evil example of life?

31. Whether is there in your parish any Minister or Deacon, who has forsaken
his calling, using himself in his course of life as a gentleman or other lay
man?

Touching Schoolmasters.
WHether have you in your Parish any Schoolmasters, who teaches either in
public School, or private house, does he give any evil example of life, is
he allowed by the Ordinary, or does your Minister or Curate teach, and is he
allowed in like manner?

2. Whether does your Minister or Schoolmaster, who teaches, teach the
catechism by authority set forth, does he when there is any sermon or divine
service, bring his Scholars to church, and see the^ quietly and soberly
ordered, does he examine them after their return what they have learned of the
sermon?

3. Whether does he at other times teach them such sentences of holy Scripture
as may induce them to godliness, does he teach the Grammar set forth by King
Henry the eight, continued by King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth?

4. Whether has he spoken, writ, or taught against any thing whereunto he
formerly subscribed, as the Kings supremacy, the Articles of religion, Book
of common prayer, or any thing therein contained?

Touching the Parish Clarke and Sexton.
WHether have you a Parish Clarke sufficient for his place, of the age of 20,
years at the least, is he of honest conversation, can he read, write, and
sing, is he diligent in his office, and serviceable to his Minister, and not
given to overmuch drink?

2. Whether does your Clarke meddle with any thing above his Office, as
churching of women, burying of the dead, reading of Prayers, or such like?

3. Whether does your Clarke or Sexton, keep your church clean, the doors safe
locked, is any thing by his default lost or spoiled in the church, does he
suffer unseasonable ringing, or any profane exercise in your Church?

4. Whether does your Clarke or Sexton, when one is passing out of this life,
neglect to toll a Bell having notice thereof: or the party being dead, does
he suffer any more then one short peale, and before his burial one, and after
the same another?

5. Whether does any of your Parish, refuse to pay unto the Parish Clarke or
Sexton such wages as are unto them due, and have been accustomably paid?

Touching Parishioners.
WHether has any in your Parish spoken against, or any way impugned the Kings
Majesty's supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, the Truth and Doctrine of the
Church of England, the form of Gods worship contained in the book of common
prayer, and administration of the Sacraments?

2. Whether has any in your Parish spoken against or impugned the Articles of
religion agreed upon in An. 1602. the Rites, and ceremonies established in the
Church, the government by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and others
that bear office in the same?

3. Whether have any in your parish spoken against or impugned the form of
making and consecrating Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, or have any separared
themselves from the society of the congregation, and combined in a new
Brotherhood, or depraved the Synod lately held by the Kings authority?

4. Whether has any in your parish maintained or defended any such Ministers
or Schoolemasters as refuse to subscribe to the order of the Church, have they
affirmed that such Ministers, and their adherents may make rules and orders in
causes Ecclesiastical, without the Kings authority?

5. Whether does any in your parish profane, violate, or mispend the Sabbath,
or holy day, or any part of them, using any offensive conversation, or worldly
labor in those days, or any of them?

6. Whether has any in your Parish in the time of divine service covered his
head, albeit he has an infirmity, in which case a cap or night-quoife is
allowed, or is there any who has not reverently kneeled when the general
confession, Letanie, and other prayers are read, and which have not stood up at
the saying of the belief?

7. Whether has any in your Parish disturbed the service or Sermon by walking,
talking, or any other way, or departed out of the church during the service or
Sermon without some urgent cause, or loitered about the church or church porch?

8. Whether does all parishioners receive the holy communion thrice every year
at the least, whereof the feast of Easter to be one, and have all being of the
age of 16. years, duly received, or not?

9. Whether has any Parent been urged to be present or admitted to answer
as Godfather for his own child, or has any Godfather or Godmother made any
other answer or speech then is prescribed by the Book, or have any been
admitted for such at Baptism, who have not first received the communion?

10. Whether do all Fathers, Mothers, masters, mistrisses come, and cause
their children, servants, and apprentises to come duly to the church, and
according to the ministers direction to be instructed and catechized, or who be
they that have not obeyed the minister herein?

11. Whether have any persons married together within the degrees of
consanguinitie or affinity prohibited, set forth in a table, appointed to be
placed in every church, or have any married or contracted themselves under the
age of 21. years, without the consent of their Parents or Governors, if their
Parents be dead?

12. Whether have any persons, once lawfully married, forsaken each other, or
do live asunder without the authority of the Ordinary, or do any being
divorced or separated, marry again, the former wife or husband yet living?

13. Whether have any been married in the times wherein marriage is by law
restrained, without lawful license, viz. from the Saturday next before Advent
Sunday, until the Fourteenth of January: and from the Saturday next before
Septuagesima Sunday, until the Monday next after low Sunday: and from the
Sunday before the Rogation week, until Trinity Sunday?

14. Whether has any of your Parish irreverently used your Minister, or have
any laid violent hands upon him, or disgraced his Office and calling, by word
or deed?

15 Whether have you in your Parish any dweller or soiournour, a maintainer of
Popish Doctrine, or suspected to keep scismaticall books, or to favor any
heresy or error?

16. Whether have you any common resorters to your Church, which are not of
your parish, or do any such receive the Communion amongst you: what be their
names, and of what parishes are they?

17. Whether have any in the time of service opened their shops, exercised
their trade, used any gaming, been in any Tavern, or Alehouse, or otherwise
ill employed?

18. Whether are there in your parish any Adulterers, Fornicators, incestuous
persons, bawdes, receivers, close favorers, conueyers away, or which suffer to
depart any incontinent person unpunished, any blasphemers, common swearers,
drunkards, ribauds, usurers, malicious slanderers, scolds, or sowers of
discord, or any defamed of the said crimes?

19. Whether do any in your parish administer the goods of the dead without
authority, or suppress their will or Testament, have any Executors neglected
to perform their Wills, especially in paying of Legacies given to the church,
to the poor, or to any other charitable, or godly uses?

20. Whether do any refuse to pay to the reparations, ornaments, and other
things required in your church, as they are ceased by a lawful vestrie, or
any dwelling out of your Parish, which hold land in your Parish?

21. Whether has any person suspended or excommunicated, been suffered co
hear divine service, or the Sermon, to receive the Sacraments, to be married or
churched, or have any Excommunicants been buried in christian burial?

22. Whether have any in your Parish been christened, churched, buried, or
received the communion, or been married out of your church, both parties
dwelling in your parish?

23. Whether have all women in your parish delivered of child, come at
convenient time after to church to give thanks, and have they been churched
according to the form of the Book of common prayer?

24. Whether has the preambulation of the circuit of your Parish been
observed once every year, if not, whose default is it?

25. Whether have any in your parish given the churchwardens, or sidemen, or
any of them evil words for doing their duty, according to their oath and
conscience in making presentment for any fault?

Touching Churchwardens and Swornemen.
WHether do any in your Parish take upon them to be churchwarden or side-man,
which is not lawfully chosen by the Minister, and Parishioners according to the
canon, or do any continue that office longer then one year, except they be
chosen again, and are all such Officers chosen yearly in Easter week?

2. Whether do your churchwardens within one Month at the most after their
year ended, before the Minister and Parishioners give up a just account of all
such money, and other things, as they have received and bestowed, have they
delivered all remaining in their hands belonging to their church or parish, by
bill intended, to be delivered to the next church wardens?

3. Whether have the churchwardens with the advice of the the Minister, from
time to time provided a sufficient quantity of fine white bread and wholesome
wine for the number of communicants?

4. Whether do the church wardens and Swornemen, before every Visitation, and
at other times when there is just occasion, meet and confer about their
presentiments, and the answering of these Articles, and who has (after notice
given him of the time and place) carelessly absented himself?

5. Whether the forfeiture of twelve pence for absence from church, appointed
by statute for the use of the poor, be taken and levied by the churchwardens,
and employed according to the said Statute: and whether is the same forfeiture
taken of all persons which stand wilfully suspended or Excommunicated?

6. Whether have any churchwardens lost, sold or detained any (...) ornaments,
Bells, Rents, or implements of the Church?

7. Whether do you the Churchwardens and Sidesmen about the midst of Divine
Service, usually walk out of the Church, and see who are abroad in any
alehouse, or elsewhere absent, or evil employed, and have you presented all
such to the Ordinary?

8. Whether do you know, or have heard a fame of any offense, committed, or
duty omitted by any of your Parish before your time, and heretofore not
presented to the Ordinary, or as yet not reformed, and have you presented the
same?

9. Finally, do you know of any matter or cause which is a breach of the laws
Ecclesiastical here not expressed, and have you presented the same?

FINIS.

