A New Ballad against unthrifts.
When raging louts with feeble brains,
most wilfully will spend away:
And eke consume more the^ their gains,
in riotyng all the long day.
And spend with him that will spend most:
yet of their gain they need not boste.
When drunken Drunkerds will not spare,
the Alehous daily for to plye:
But sit and tipple there full square,
and to their gains will have no eye.
Nor will not cease I warrant ye:
so long as they have one penny.
When rufling roisters will bestow,
upon their backs such fine array:
And be not wurth that which they owe,
falling thereby in to decay.
Yet will they set thereon a face:
and brag and crake it out a pace.
When lively lads will plye the dice,
consuming there away their good:
No man will count them to be wice,
but rather to be mad or wood.
For when that all their money is gone:
then are they dressed like a mome.
When lasie loiterers will not wurk:
and honestly their livings get:
But had rather in corners lurk,
then that they would with labor swet.
Therefore no wealth they can attain:
but live in trouble and in pain.
When doting doltes will enterprise,
to wurk such feats as I have told:
Not ceassing for to exercise,
worse deeds then those with courage bold.
Then some do lay their cotes to gage:
til that they have received their wage.
Then some the Counter often do kiss,
if that the money be not paid:
Or if that they their day do miss,
for which to gage their Cote was laid.
Yet will they not by this take heed:
but still continue to proceed.
Then some thereby their credit lose
so that no wise man will them trust:
Wherefore they can no longer gloss,
but rub and revel not they must.
For whersoeuer they become:
they are not so well trust as known.
Then some at length do beg their bread,
who if in time they had been wise:
Might well have had enough to fed,
them selves, their children and their wives:
But when that all is gone and spent:
it is to late then to repent.
Then some to pilfer do begin,
but as soon as they be espied:
With whips they are laid on the skin,
at a carts ars being well tied.
But all this can not those amend:
that will do mischefe to the end.
Then some proceed to rob and kyl,
counting al fish that comes to net:
And if that they might have their will,
for right or wrong they wuld not let.
Til at the they last fall in bands:
and can not escape out of hands.
Then some at Newgate do take ship,
sailing full fast up holborne hill:
And at Tiborn their anckers piche,
full sore in deed against their will.
But then it is to late I say:
to call again the yesterday.
Wherefore al ye that use this trade,
leave of betimes if ye be wise:
Lest that perchance this way ye wade,
full sore against your own devise.
For here ye see the end of such:
as little have and will spend much.
Finis.
quoth. W. F.
Imprinted at London at the long shop adioining unto Saint mildreds Church in
the Poultry, by John Alde.


