PLEASANT Quippes for Vpstart Nevvfangled Gentlevvomen.



Imprinted at London by Richard Iohnes* 1596.

A Glass, to vievve the pride of vaineglorious Women.
A PLEASANT INVECTIVE AGAINST the Fantastical Forreigue Toys, daily used in
Women's apparel.
THese fashions fond of country strange,
which English heads so much delight
Through town and country which do range,
and are embraced of every wight.
So much I wonder still to see,
That naught so much amazeth me.
If they by Painters cunning skill,
were pricked on walls, to make them gaye:
If glass in windows they did fill,
or trimd-vp-puppets, childrens play,
I would repute them Antickes old,
They should for me, go vncontrolde
If they on stage, in stately sort
might set, to please the Idles eye:
If Maie-game maiets-for summer sport,
by them in dance, disguisde might be,
They would not then deserve such blame,
Nor work the wearers half the shame.
But when as men, of lore and wit
and guiders of the wekaer kind:
Do judge them for their mate so fit,
that nothing more, can please their mind.
I know not what to say to this,
But sure I know, it is amiss.
And when sage Parents breeds in child,
the greedy lust of hellish toys,
Whereby in manners, they grow wild,
and lose the bliss of lasting joys.
I pity much to see the case
That we thus fail of better grace.
And when proud princoks, Rascals bratte,
in fashions will be Princes mate:
And every Gyll that keeps a catte,
in raiment will be like a state.
If any cause be to complain,
In such excess who can refrain.
And when young wiskers fit for work,
in no good sort will spend the day:
But be profane, more then a Turk,
intending naught but to be gay.
If we were bent to praise our time,
Of force we must condemn this crime.
And when grave Matrones honest thought,
with light heels trash will credit crack:
And following after fashions naught,
of name and fame, will make a wrack.
Might love, and lip, a fault conceal,
yet act and fact, would filth reveal.
And when old Beldames, withered hagges,
whom hungry Dogs cannot require:
Will whinnie stiil, like wanton nagges,
And sadled be with such attire.
A patient heart cannot but rage,
To see the shame of this our age.
These Holland smockes so white as snow,
and gorgets brave with drawn-work wrought:
A tempting ware they are you know,
wherewith (as nets) vain youths are caught,
But many times they rue the match,
when pox and pyles by whores they catch.
These flaming heads with staring hair,
these Wyers turnde, like horns of Ram:
These painted faces, which they wear,
can any tell from whence they came.
(Don Satan,) Lord of feigned lies,
All these new fangeles did devise.
These glittering cawles, of golden plate,
wherewith their heads are richly dect:
Makes them to seem an Angels mate,
in judgment of the simple sect.
To Peacockes I compare them right,
That glories in their feathers bright.
These Perriwigges ruffes, armed with pinnes,
these spangles, chains, and laces all:
These naked paps, the Devils ginnes,
to work vain gazers painful thrall.
He Fowler is, they are his nets,
Wherewith of fools great store he gets,
This starch, and these rebating props,
as though ruffes were some rotten house:
All this new pelf, now sold in shops,
in value true, not worth a Louse.
They are his dogs, he hunter sharp,
By them a thousand he does warpe,
This cloth of price, all cut in rags,
these monstrous bones that compass arms:
These buttons, pinches, fringes, iagges,
with them he weaueth woeful harms,
He fisher is, they are his baytes,
Wherewith to hell, he draws huge heaps.
Wear masks for vailes to hide and hold,
as Christians did, and Turks do use
To hide the face, from wantons bold,
small cause then were, at them to muse,
But barring only wind and Sun,
Of very pride they were begun.
But on each wight, now are they seen,
the tallow-pale the browning-bay,
The swarthy-blacke, the grassie green,
the pudding-red, the dapple-graie,
So might we judge them toys aright,
to keep sweet beauty still in plight.
What else do maskes, but maskers show,
and Maskers can both dance and play:
Our masking Dames can sport you know,
Sometime by night, sometime by day,
Can you hit it, is often their dance,
Deuse-ace falls still to be their chance.
Were fannes, and flappes of feathers fond,
to flit away the flisking slies:
As tail of Mare that hangs on ground,
when heat of summer does arrise,
The wit of women we might praise,
For finding out, so great an ease.
But seeing they are still in hand,
in house, in field, in Church, in street:
In summer, winter, water, land,
in cold, in heat, in dry, in weet.
I judge they are for wives such tools,
As bables are in plays for fools.
The baudie Buske, that keeps down flat,
the bed wherein the babe should breed:
What does it else but point at that,
which feign would have somewhat to feed.
Where belly want might shadow vale,
The Buske sets belly all to sale.
Were buskes to them, as stakes to gappes,
to bar the beasts from breaking in,
Or were they shields to bear off flaps,
when friend or foe would fray begin.
Who would the buskers forte assail,
Against their sconce, who could prevail.
But seeing such, as whom they arm,
of all the rest do soonest yield:
And that by shot, they take most harm,
when lusty gamesters, come in field.
I guess, Buskes are but signs to tell,
Where Launderers for the camp do dwell.
These privy coats, by art made strong,
with bones, with past, and such like ware:
Whereby their back and sides grow long,
and now they harvest, gallants are.
Were they for use against the foe,
Our Dames for Amazones might go.
But seeing they do only stay
the course that nature does intend:
And mothers often by them slay
their daughters young, and work their end.
What are they else but armours stout:
Wherein like Giants, Jove thy flout.
These hoopes that hippes and haunch do hide,
and heave aloft the gay hoyst-traine.
As they are now in use for pride,
so did they first begin of pain.
When whore in stews had gotten pox,
This Fench devise, kept coats fom smocks.
I not gainsay, but bastards sprout,
might Arses great at first begin:
And that when paunch of whore grew out,
These hoopes did help to hide their finne.
And therefore tub-tailes all may rue,
That they came from so vile a crew.
If barreld bummes were full of Ale,
they might well serve Tom Tapsters turn:
But yielding naught but filth and stale,
no loss it were if they did burn.
Their liquors does so smell and stink,
That no man can it use for drink.
These Adornes white of finest third,
so choicelic tide, so dearly bought:
So finely fring, so nicelie spread
so quaintlie cut, so richly wrought.
Were they in work to save their cotes,
They neeed not cost so many grotes.
When shooters aim at buttes and pricks,
they set up whites to show the pin:
It may be, Adornes are like trciks,
to teach where rouers game may win.
Brave archers soon will find the mark,
But bunglers hit it in the dark.
These worsted stocks of brauest die,
and silken garters fringed with gold:
These corked shoes to bear them hie,
makes them to trip it on the molde.
They mince it then with pace so strange
Like untamed heifers, when they range,
To carry all this pelf and trash,
be cause their bodies are unfit,
Our wantons now in coaches dash,
from house to house, from street to street,
Were they of state, or were they lame,
To ride in coach they need not shame.
But being base, and sound in health,
they teach for what they coatches make:
Some thinks perhaps to show their wealth,
nay, nay, in them they penance take.
As poorer truls, must ride in carts,
So coatches are for prouder hearts.
You silly men, of simple sense,
what joy have you, old-Cookes to be:
Your own dear flesh, thus to dispense,
to please the glance of lusting eye.
That you should coutch your meat in dish,
And others feel, it is no fish.
Of very love you them array,
in silver, gold, and jewels brave:
For silk and velvet still you pay,
so they be trim, no cost you save.
But think you such as joy in these,
Will covet none, but you to please.
When they for gawdes, and toys do wrangle,
pretending state and neighbors guise,
Then are they bent, to trap and tangle,
Unskillful brains, and heads unwise:
I never yet saw, bayted hook,
But fisher then for game did look.
They say they are of gentle race,
and therefore must be finely decked,
It were for them a great disgrace,
to be as are the simple sect.
Fine Gentles must be finely clad,
All them beseemes, that may be had.
They gentle are both borne and bred,
they gentle are in sport and game:
They gentle are at board and bed,
they gentle are in wealth and name.
Such gentles nice, must needs be trim,
From head to foot in every limme.
But husbands you, mark well my sawes,
when they pretend their gentle blood.
Then they intend to make you dawes,
in vain to spend your wealth and good.
You better were the clown to cloth,
Then Gentles which do virtue loath.
True Gentles should be lights and guides,
in modest path to simple rank
But these that straye so far aside,
themselves that thus unseemly pranke.
They are but puppets richly dight,
True Gentry they have put to flight.
You dainty Minious, tell me sooth,
dissemble not, but utter plain:
Is not this thus of very troth,
think you I slander, lie or feign:
When you have all your trinkets fit,
Can you alone in chamber sit.
You are not then to card and spinne,
to brue or bake I dare well say:
No thriftie work you can begin,
you have naught else to do but play.
To play alone were for a sot,
It Is known, you minions, use it not.
You think (perhaps) to win great same.
by uncouth suits, and fashions wild
All such as know you, think the same,
but in each kind, you are beguilde.
For when you look for praises sound,
Then are you so light fisgiggs crownde*
The better sort, that modest are,
whom garish pomp does not infect:
Of them Dame honor, has a care,
with glorious fame, that they be decked:
Their praises, will for aie remain,
When bodies rot, shall virtue gain.
Thou Poet rude if thou be scorned,
disdain it not, for Preachers grave
Are still dispisd, by faces hornde,
when they for better manners crave.
That hap which falls, on men divine,
If thou it feel, do not repine.
I know some think, my terms are gross,
too plain thou art some others deem:
Be not aghast, thy foes are dross,
full well does rudnesse them beseem.
Who thee mislike, are but a mess,
And here their kinds I will express.
First, a simple swain, that nothing knows,
next, curtaile-flurt, as rank as beast:
Then peacocke proud, that stately goes,
last, roisting knaves, of virtue least.
None else but these will thee disdain,
Contemn them all as causes vain.
Good men of skill, do know it well,
that these our days require such speech:
Who often are moved with threats of hell,
whom Preachers still in vain beseech.
Is any knife too sharp for such
Or any word for them too much.
Let fearful Poets, pardon crave,
that seek for praise, at every lips:
Do thou not favor, nor yet rave,
the golden mean is free from trips.
This lesson old was taught in schools,
It Is praise to be dispraisde of fools.
FINIS.

