Love and Obedience OR, Christ's Precept and Promise.

Being a Sermon Preached on Whitsunday last, 28. of May, 1637. in Guild Hall
chapel, before the right Honorable the Lord Major of this City of London.

By William Freake Minister of the Word of God.

1 Samuel, 15.22. Behold, to Obey is better then sacrifice, and to hearken is
better then the fat of Rams.

LONDON: Printed by John Oaks dwelling in little-Saint Bartholmewes. 1637.

To the Right Honorable Sir Edward Bromfield Knight, Lord Major of this
honorable City; and to the rest of the right Worshipful Court of Aldermen, with
the right Worshipful William Abell, and James Garrard, Esquires, Shriefes of
this Honorable City for this year.
William Freake Minister of Gods Word, wishes in the Dedication of this his
service, all real happiness, conducing to this life and a better.
Right honorable and right Worshipful:
TO show reasons for my Dedication of this Sermon, and my service therein to
your Honor, and to this City, may be expected by some that have not known me
and my course; but they are well known almost to all that know me, to be such,
and of that Nature, that if I should neglect this duty, the World might well
cry shame upon me. I have been above thirty four years employed here wholly,
and within the Verge of this City: I have received the greatest good that I
enjoy in my present course from the reverend Ministry of this City. I have had
my first encouragement in this way, from a worshipful Society of this City.
What I hope to enjoy during life, has been the free gift of this honorable
Court of Aldermen, and of this City. All which are just incentives to a
respective thankfulness from me.

But I must add one reason more, in respect of you my much honored Lord, your
Honors free goodness to me at my first coming to Saint Georges in
Southwarke, now five years since complete. The free continuation of your love
in some distresses fallen upon me in the interim. And lately your Honors
undeserved favor in appointing me to this Service. All these have enjoined me
to this Dedication; which I humbly beseech your Honor to accept of, as
proceeding from him, whose daily prayers, and constant endeavors, in the way
of all thankfulness and dutiful observance are, and shall be during life,
ever yours, as obliged,

Your Honors, and the Cities Chaplain, to be commanded, William Freake.

Love and Obedience.
JOHN 14. verse. 15.16. If ye love me, keep my Commandments: and I will pray
unto the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide
with you for ever.


Our Text is Verbum Dei, and Verbum diei, as a Father sometimes said in the
like case; as the Word of God, so a Word in season, even a word for the very
day; being the first words of that portion of sacred Scripture, which the pious
care of our Church has selected to be read unto you, as the Gospel for this
day. In which without any dilatory Preambles, we have only these 2. generals
propounded to our consideration: 1. A Precept. 2. A Promise.
The precept seeming to be propounded conditionally, as a man would collect
from the words at the first sight thereof, Si me diligatis, If ye love me: But
being indeed (as Ferus has observed) a charge enforced by way of Argument
drawn Ex concessis, from the general and frequent confession of all the
Apostles in their professed love to Christ, as their Lord and Master, If ye
love me, keep my Commandments: As if our blessed Lord had said, Ye all
profess to love me, and that ye are desirous to indeare your service by some
real testimonies thereof unto me: If then ye love me as ye profess, ye can
no way better show it than by keeping my Commandments; If ye love me, keep my
Commandments.

As touching the second general, it is a promise of the sending down of the
Holy Ghost, whose descending gave occasion to this Festival which now we
celebrate; this being the day, by the Churches account, whereon the Holy Ghost
came down in the form of cloven tongues of fire, and sat upon the Apostles
at Jerusalem, as ye have it delivered in the second of the Acts. A Day to be
celebrated with a religious observance in a double respect:

First, as it is the day (if we understand things aright) whereon the Law was
delivered to the Israelites from Mount Sinai, the fiftieth day after their
departure out of Egypt, which gave name to the Feast of Pentecost, Levit.
23.15, 16. Deuteronomy. 16.9. Exodus 13.4.

Secondly, as it is the day upon which the Gospel proceeded from Mount Sion,
by the coming down of the Holy Ghost, the third person in Trinity, according
to the promise of the second person in Trinity, our blessed Lord here in my
Text, If ye love me, etc. Et ego rogabo Patrem, and ille dabit vobis alium
paracletum.

You have the second general propounded: the precept of our blessed Lord, and
his gracious promise, which together with the particulars therein considerable,
are like to be the subject of my discourse, and your attention at this time:
Wherein that our joint endeavors may tend to the glory of our good God, and
our mutual comforts both here and hereafter, may it please our heavenly Father
to assist me in speaking, and you in hearing, and to second our weak and
worthless undertakings by the sacred influence and holy operation of his
gracious Spirit, the Comforter in our Text, even for his sake, who in this Text
has promised to pray for us, saying, Ego rogabo Patrem, etc If ye love me,
keep my Commandments; and I will pray, etc. and of these two Generals in
their order, beginning with the first, the Precept, Si me me diligatis, etc.

Many Observations may be made from this first General, profitable for
instruction, for direction comfortable, which I will run over with what
brevity I can: As first, from the scope and maine intention of the words, I
observe with Ferus, Probatio dilectionis est exhibitio operis. The best
testimony of man's love to Almighty God is collected from the sincerity of man's
obedience to Gods revealed Will.

God is faithful, (says Moses) keeping covenant and mercy with them that love
him, and keep his Commandments, Deuteronomy. 7.9. as intimating that no profession
of love to Almighty God is acceptable in his sight, where there wants a pious
respect to his holy Commandments. For what is it (says he) o Israel that God
requires of thee, but to love the Lord thy God, and to serve him with all
thine heart, and with all thy soul, and that thou keep the Commandments of
the Lord, and his Ordinances which I command thee this day? Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13. As
if he should say, God requires nothing of thee but Love, and Obedience.
Therefore in the 11. Chap. of the same Book, ver. 22. he comprehends the
whole sum of Religion in these two branches, Love and Obedience; where having
said, Keep diligently all the Commandments which I command you to do, he
explaineth his meaning in the words following, that is, To love the Lord your
God, and to walk in all his ways. Deuteronomy. 11.22. Whereunto agrees that speech
of the beloved Disciple to the full, I John 5.3. This is the love of God, that
we keep his Commandments: Plainly showing the truth of this assertion,
observed from the scope of the words, that the best Testimony of man's love to
God, is the sincerity of man's obedience to Gods revealed Word.

Which if it be so, then wretched is that error of multitudes of men and
women, who contenting themselves in this case with a verbal profession, take
liberty to shame the same by a disorderly conversation: whose Religion can not
better be expressed, than by comparing it to that language which the Jewish
children spoke in the days of Nehemia, Nehem. 13. ver. 24. For as they spoke
their Hebrew in a broken manner, half the speech of Ashdod, and half of
Ammon, and half of Moab, and could not speak in the Jews Language, but
according to the language of each people: So too many amongst us, when they are
put to it, to speak out their Religion in their practice, utter it in such a
broken manner, so mingled with the practice of a profane life, that they
appear to be merely Hybridae, of a mixed race, as were Jewish children; half
Christian, half worldling; whose profession and practice being laid together,
miserably shame each other.

Should a man demand this question of the veryest Epicure and dissolute liver,
of the griping oppressor, or profane Sabbath-breaker, of the blasphemous
swearer, or time-serving Atheist, if he love God, or not? he will answer, that
it were pity of his life else: I would then gladly know, what evidence such a
person can have in his heart, what testimony he can give unto the world, that
there is any love of God in him at all, while so contemptuously and wilfully he
continues to break Gods Commandments. Assuredly men do not gather Grapes
off Thorns, nor Figs off Thistles, says our blessed Redeemer, Math. 7.6. The
tree is known by his fruit, and by their fruits ye shall know them. ibid.
ver. 20.

Men's love to God is best discerned by their lives and if they love God truly,
they will keep his Commandments conscionably. It is a good note of Musculus in
his Comment upon my Text: Observatio preveptorum Dei, omnibus Christi fidelibus
eo loco habenda est, ut si illa desit, in ipsam Christi dilectionem peccasse
convincamur. The conscionable observance of Gods Commandments, is so material
and absolute a mark of a true Christian, as that, where this is wanting, the
lives of men convince them to their faces, that the love of Christ dwells not
in them. I will conclude this observation therefore with that saying of St.
John 1. Ioh. 2.4. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his
Commandments, the same is a liar, and the truth is not in him. Testify
therefore, my beloved, I humbly beseech you, your love to our blessed Lord and
Redeemer, by yielding a careful and quick obedience to his holy Commandemen:
for he loves me not, that keeps not my word, says our Savior in this chap.
ver. 24. But if any man love me he will keep my word, ibid. v. 23. and he
that has my Commandments and keeps them, is he that loves me. ibid. v. 21.

2. Which thing we might the rather be induced to do, if we would but duly
consider the force of Christ's argument, as it is couched in that form of
eloquution which he is pleased here to use: si me diligatis, for he says not,
si in me credatis; if ye believe in me that I am the Son of God, and Redeemer
of the World, then keep my Commandaments: He says not, quoniam mihi serviatis,
because ye here professed your selves my servants and Disciples, seeing ye call me
Lord and Master, therefore keep my command ments: he says not, quoniam
potestatem meam cognoscatis, because ye know I have power to kill, and power to
make alive, therefore keep my Commandments; though any of these had been an
argument strong enough to have convinced them: but si me diligatis, if ye love
me, etc. as if he had said: ye have seen what love I have expressed to all of
you, how freely I have chosen you, how tenderly respected you, and what care I
have to instruct you in the knowledge of the things that belong to your
salvation; and I shall shortly give you a full and unanswerable demonstration
of my unparaleld love, in giving my life for you, if then ye love me, as ye
profess to do, by that love ye profess to bear me, I adjure and charge ye,
thatye keep my Commandments: An argument (I confess) of small force and
validity to a base and servile nature; but to a freeborn and ingenuous
disposition, to a sanctified soul, it is an argument of that force, that none
can be more persuasive, none so fully prevailent, Dilectio fortis ut mors,
says the Spouse in the Canticles 8.6. and where that is the object of our
respect, it draws us most effectually; I lead them with the cords of a man,
even with the bonds of love, says the Lord, concerning Israel, Hos. 11.4. as
intimating plainly unto us, that as nothing but death can divert that soul
which truly loves God from a cheerful and conscionable obedience to his
revealed will. So, no obligation in this world tyeth the soul of a true
Christian to so strict an obedience, as the serious considerations of Gods
undeserved love: when a man shall consider truly, (as St. Bernard expresses
it) that Prior Deus dilexit nos, antus, tantum and gratis, tantillos and tales:
That God should love mankind, and love him first; so infinite a Majesty, such
abject creatures, so freely, so exceedingly, with such large expression
thereof, to those who are every way so unworthy, so undeserving of the least
jot, if considered in our selves. And seeing it is true, that nulla major ad
amorem provocatio quam praevenire amando, as says holy St. Augustine divinely,
There is no more kindly attracting of love, than in loving to prevent. We must
needs acknowledge this argument of our blessed Lord to be most forcible, if
rightly understood: si me diligatis, if ye love me, keep my Commandments: And
conclude with Augustine in his own words in the same place, Nimis durus est
qui amorem etiamsi nolebat impendere, nolit rependere, That man is composed of
too hard a metal, who though he like not to love first, will not requite it
and love again, either first or second.

3. And yet it were some diminution to the strength of this argument; if our
Blessed Lord in this his love to mankind should any way appear to respect his
own benefit. But see the freedom of his love, and thence observe yet a
further force in Christ's argument: Christus non sibi utilitatem quaerit, sed
nobis: nos illi non incommodamus praecepta ejus negligendo, sed nobis ipsts,
says Musculus upon this place: As our blessed Lord in backing this precept by
an argument drawn from his love, does no way aim at his own benefit, but at
ours: So we, by detracting our obedience from his commandment, can no way
disadvantage him, but our selves only, and theharme that grows thereof
reflects upon us, and the loss will, undoubtedly, be set upon our score. That
which moved our blessed Lord to take our nature upon him, to fulfill the Law
for us, and yet to suffer as a transgressor of the Law, was nothing else (as
Bishop Anselm well observed) but amor and sitis salutis humanae, Christ Jesus,
his loving and thirsty desire to rescue falling mankind from eternal
perdition: Which occasioned that Father thus to express his admiration: O
charitas divina, quam magnum est tuum vinoulum, O most blessed and loving Lord,
how strict was that bond wherewith thy divine love did voluntarily oblige thee
in the redemption of perishing mankind: Tu Deu^ ad terram traxisti, tu aed
columna^ ligasti, tu cruci afixisti, tu in sep ulchro claeusisti, tu ad inferos
detrusisti. It was thy love oh blessed Lord, that drew thee the Son of God to
come down from heaven to earth, that tied thee to the Pillar, that nailed thee
to the Cross, that shut thee for a while into the grave, that exposed thee to
suffer the pains of hell for us in thy drooping agony. That the love of Christ,
whereby he purchased us to himself might appear in all respects to be free
and spontaneous, and become an indissoluble tie and obligation upon us for a
constant and conscionable retribution of love to him in keeping his
Commandments. Give me leave then so far as I can, to strike this nail to
the head in the words of the same Father. O long graviores saxo and plumbo,
quos tanti amoris vinculum, non trahit sursum ad Deum, ex quo prius traxit Deu^
deorsu^ ad homines. Those souls are undoubtedly, more senseless than stones,
more ponderous than lead, whom the tie of so free and unparaleld a love, cannot
lift upwards to God, which formerly drew God downwards to man. Those (...)
strangely froze^ in their dregs Zeph. 1.12. upon who^ this mo^ived^^h not work,
who^ the consideration of Christ's love, so amply demonstrated, does not
persuade to a full resolution of soul to testify a full retribution of love
to him, by a (...) observance of his holy will.

4. And that so much the rather too, because (as a grave Expositor upon this
place well observes) our Savior Christ says not, si timeatis, if ye fear
me, but si diligatis, if ye love me, keep my Commandments. Talem enim
Christus exigit observantia^ non quae a timore servili extorqueatur sed ab
amore filiali ultro nascatur, says the same Expositor: for our blessed Savior
exacts no such an obedience to his Laws, as has need to be extorted from a
servile fear; such an obedience as the Spanish Clergy forces from their
people by the power of their inquisition, but such an obedience as flows
freely and spontaneously from the fountain of a filial and sonne-like fear.
Christus non probat obedientiam coactam, says Musculus upon this place very
well to our purpose: Christ never approved of any constrained obedience, which
had need to be wrested from the unwilling hand of the performer: he has done
enough to win the world, and to draw all men to him by love, if he had not to
do with a stiff-necked people, and a stony-hearted generation. His word and
Gospel where it is truly and powerfully preached in the liberty thereof, has
no need of any Jesuitical insinuations, or rules drawn from Matchievel for
the establishing of his kingdom: If therefore that disloyal brood of Inigo
Loiola that lame Spanish Soldier, which in this last Century of years has so
much troubled all Christendom, and almost the whole world about the erecting
of a fifth Monarchy, covering all their lawless designs under the most sacred
name of Jesus, shall in Gods good time, find the all-ruling providence to
turn their Councels into foolishnes, as as he sometimes did Achitophels,
because as he would have set up a rebellious Absalom against David; so they
would plant a politic Hierarchy, under the name of Jesus, but in flat
opposition to Christ the Son of David and our blessed Lord; let it appear no
strange thing to those that fear God, however it seem improbable to flesh and
blood: Our blessed Lord never warranted nor approved of such a course to fetch
in all Nations to a formal profession of Christianity only, without the
lively practice of it, or to force men to an approbation of that Religion
outwardly, which inwardly they abhor, if they durst but to despute the same,
or could be admitted to receive better instruction without loss of life and
goods: Fieri non potest ut mandatis divinis rite obsecu^detur, nisi animo
spontaneo ex spirita dilectionis obtemporetur. Man's obedience to Gods command
can never be sincere, except it proceed freely from the spirit of love; and
where this motive of our blessed Savior will not work, the power and policy of
all the world will prove but lost labor. Our Savior, without all question,
knew what would draw his chosen people to the obedience of his blessed will,
and that is a sad and due consideration of his unparaleld love to mankind; and
therefore he said not, si timeatis, but si diligatis, if ye love me, keep my
commandments.

5. But here again, it is not unworthy your consideration, that our blessed
Savior says not servate praecepta hominum, if ye love me, keep the
commandments of men; but if ye love me, keep my Commandments: For, in vain
do they worship God, says our Savior, who teach for Doctrines the traditions
of men. It was that, for which God complained of the Jewish Nation in the days
of Jsaiah, Isaiah 29.13. That their fear toward him was taught by the
precepts of men; which practice, what fruit it produced in that people, the
Lord tells us plainly in the former verses of that Chapter: For vision
becomes in a short time, to such, among whom this course is taken as the
words of a book that is sealed up, which they deliver to one that can read
saying, Read this I pray thee, verse 11. who makes answer, I cannot read,
because it is sealed. So in a while it comes to pass, that the book is
delivered to one that cannot read, saying, Read this I pray thee, and he shall
answer plainly, I cannot read. ver. 12. An entermingling of (...) mane
precepts with divine truths, breeds a neglect of the sacred Scripture, and
then grows up quickly superstition and will worship, which produces in time
palpable and gross ignorance, not in the people only, but also in the
Priests: So that the complaint may be taken up, which the same Prophet makes
in the same chapter, touching their teachers; Stay your selves and wonder, they
are blind and make you blind; they are drunk, but not with wine; they
stagger, but not with strong drink, for the Lord has covered them with the
spirit of slumber. verse. 10. And as concerning both Priests and people
together, that word may be pronounced which follows, chapter 13. They come
near unto God with their mouths, but their hearts are far from him, mere
formallity eating out all reallity in the course of religion, where humane
inventions are taught for doctrines, and men's fear toward God is taught by
the precepts of men: Therefore our blessed Lord says not, seruate praecepta
hominum, but if ye love me, keep my Commandments.

6. And as Musculus observes further; Servate praecepta mea non disputate
tantum, Make not religion the subject of your discourse and dispute only, but
of your life and practice, not the fuel only of faction by way of argument
and controversy, but the rule and square of your religious and Christian
performances. It was sometimes the complaint of a reverend Divine of Germany,
concerning the Prelates of his time: Hodie praelati multa disputant de
authoritate and potestate Ecclesiae, parum de obedientia Deo praestanda
solliciti: His meaning was, that many of their greatest Churchmen, spent their
time almost wholly in acute and subtle disputations touching the power and
authority of the Church, but seldom, or never, took care to instruct their
people in their obedience to Almighty God. Brethren, I could wish our own
times had not a touch of this fault, wherein we have too many, who too much
trusting to their own acuteness, make a practice to broach nice and
disputable questions, that therein they may imbroile men's faith and religion,
and in troubled waters fish out their own ends, with their Lapwing cries
calling men away from keeping Christ's Commandments in their lives and actions,
to a fruitless jangling, that serves to no other end, but to stir up passion
without edification. For the stopping of which unnecessary and unprofitable
disputes, our blessed Lord says not, if ye love me, obey my will: for then
says Musculus, the Disciples might have replied, quae tua voluntas Domine?
Lord what is thy will? but Servate praeceptamea, keep my Commandments, show
your selves my Disciples by your obedience to the revealed will of my Father:
therein taking away all pretenses of doubting, all occasions of of dispute
concerning his will and pleasure: so that whosoever shall raise any
controversy touching that obedience which our Savior requires in this divine
charge, has his mouth fully stopped by that answer which our blessed Lord
sometimes gave to the young man. Matthew. 10.18. Nosti praecepta, Thou know
the Commandments: And if ye love me, keep my Commandments. I will end
therefore all that I have to say of this first General, with that of the acute
French man Ardentius, Effectus verae dilectionis Dei, est observatio
mandatorum: The most infallible effect of the love of God in the heart of man,
is a conscionable observance of Gods Commandments; proceeding from love not
forced by any politic compulsion, arising merely from a sense and
acknowledgment of the unspeakable love which God has showed to us first, and
expressed in a religious observation not of humane traditions, but of Gods
revealed Will; not disputing thereof only, but expressing the power of it in
our lives and conversations. And this is that love which our blessed Lord
requires, when he says in our Text, If ye love me, etc. And so from the first
general the Precept, I proceed to the second, the Promise, Et ego rogabo
Patrem.

The substance whereof is the promise of our blessed Lord to his Disciples,
touching the mission or sending of the Holy Ghost, which as upon this day being
performed, occasioneth this Festival. Wherein are sundry particulars
considerable, which I will touch briefly, lest the time outstrip me. And first
of all these two words Rogabo, and Dabit, that Christ will pray, and his Father
will give, do apparently evince to each understanding soul, that the Apostles
were short in their condition, as no way able to have pleaded the promise Iure
meriti, upon the reality of their own performance; for so they might have
fallen short of their expectations.

It is the free gift of God the Father to give another Comforter, no due debt
upon performance of the propounded condition; and therefore says our blessed
Lord Dabit, He shall give it; and Dabit roganti, He shall give it to Christ's
prayer, rather for his rogation and intercession in this case, than for any
work or merit in them. Our best love and services are not able to weigh it
down pondere meriti, in the weight of desert: it must come Rogatu Christi, at
Christ's entreaty, or it cannot come at all. Lean not then upon merits; Christ
it is, and his intercession that we must stand unto in this our condition and
covenant. And not understand this Text thus: (be not mistaken) as if the sense
were, You shall love me, and keep my Commandments, and then my Father shall
be bound to give you his holy Spirit: But you shall love me, and keep my
Commandments, and then I will pray, and the Father shall give when I pray:
None otherwise; let the Synagogue of Rome gloss upon it as they can, the words
can bear no other sense. But here is a doubt cast by some: How can a man love
Christ, and keep his Commandments, before he has received the Holy Ghost,
without whom first had, certainly we can do neither. It is God that works
in us both the will and the deed, Phil. 2.13. and that of his own good
pleasure.

I answer, this scruple is easily removed, if you take heed to what you read.
Matthew. 13.12. Whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have
abundance. A promise may be made tam habenti, quam non habenti; As Well to him
that has a thing already, as to him that has it not at all. To him that has
it in a lower or lesser measure, it may be promised that he shall have it in a
more ample and fuller degree than yet he has: or to him that has it in one
kind, a promise may be made, that he shall have it in some other, or better
kind. For the Spirit is given to all (excepting only Christ) according to
measure: It was he only that was anointed with the oil of gladness above
all his fellows. Psalm. 45. It is he only, of whose fullness we all receive.
John 1.16. And where there is measure, there are degrees; where there be
degrees of more or less, the more may be well promised to him that has the
less: To him who as yet has it but in a still warm breath, it may well be
promised in cloven tongues of fire: To him who has it as the first fruits
which is an handful, it may well be promised in the whole sheafe, which
fills the bosom. And thus the holy Apostles had it from the time that Christ
breathed on them, saying, Receive ye the holy Ghost, John 20.22. in some
measure; and so they might well love him in some sort, and in some sort might
keep his Commandments, and yet be capable of the promise of the Comforter in
some more ample measure for all that: so that now the doubt is answered, and
Christ may proceed to his Prayer, and we to the consideration of the further
particulars therein comprised, Ego rogabo Patrem, and ille dabit, etc.

In which words is a most material observation, touching our faith in the
blessed Trinity: Here is the Article offered, and set down in the three
Persons, 1. Ego, 2. Ille, 3. Altum.

Ego rogabo, there is Christ the Son: Jlle dabit, He shall give there is God
the Father personally named: Ego rogabo Patrem, and ille dabit: And alium
Paracletum, another Comforter, a third person, the Holy Ghost. Here is then one
Person praying, the other prayed unto, the third prayed for. Filius orans,
Pater donans, Spiritus consolans: A most plain ground for the point of the
holy Trinity, and a most evident distinction of the Persons. And here this
prayer of Christ sets us to seek his other Nature: Here he entreats as
inferior to his Father, which shows him perfectly man: But in the 26. verse.
of the next Chapter, as equal to his Father in the nature of God, he joyneth
in this giving with like Authority: Rogabo as Man, Dabo as God: when that
Comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from the Father: And thus
finding the Father giving here, and the Son sending there, we have an
infallible proof of the proceeding of the Holy Ghost from the Father, and from
the Son.

And lastly, the Deity of the Holy Ghost, and his equality to the Father, and
to the Son, are herein plainly demonstrated. For our Savior Christ in
sending and procuring a Comforter in his absence, must needs send and procure
them one equal to himself; one every way as good, or else they had changed
for the worse, and so might well have prayed him to let his prayer alone; they
were better as they were: and if he did not send them an equal Comforter, they
were like to be at a loss. But our Savior meant not so; therefore he says
Another Comforter, which shall abide with you for ever; an everlasting
Comforter from the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. Isaiah 9.6. These
things thus cleared, I proceed to some doctrinall observations.

1. That the Holy Ghost is not given but from the Father, whose absolute gift
he is; for Ille dabit says my Text, according to that Luke 11.13. It is our
heavenly Father that gives the holy Ghost to them that ask it of him. And
therefore is he called, The promise of the Father. Luke 24.49. And that Spirit
of Truth which proceeds from the Father John 15.26. And in this Chapter, ver.
26 our Savior styles him The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father, says he) will send in my Name.

2. With a grave Expositor I here observe, Non dari Spiritum sanctum, nisi
interventu Christi Mediatoris: That the Father gives not the holy Spirit unto
any, but through the intercession of our blessed Lord, the Son of the Father.
For Ego rogabo Patrem, says my Text, and ille dabit. Therefore does he style
himself the Door, beside whom there is no right entrance to the participation
of this divine donation, Ioh. 10.9. and Mat. 11.29. the easer of those that are
weary and heavy laden, who never find true rest but in this comforter promised
in the words of this Text: therefore does he style himself, the way, the
truth, and the life, in this chapter verse the sixth, to show us that there is
no way to true life eternal, but by this spirit of truth, which proceeds
from the Father and the Son, no way to attain this spirit, but by the Sons
intercession to the Father.

3. It is worth your noting to whom this comforter is promised; it is only
those who love Jesus Christ, and keep his Commandments, for so much the
connection of the two generals in my Text does evidently demonstrate: If ye love
me, etc. J will pray. Therefore says our Savior in the verses after my Text:
If any man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we
will come in unto him, and dwell with him. How? my Father will love him, and we
will come, etc. O quanta dignitas, quantus honor Deum diligentibus and mandata
ejus observantibus, says an ancient Father of the Church: What a dignity, what
an honor does accuree to those who love God truly and keep his
Commandments? What sweetness of comfort can be comparable to this, by
retaining the true love of God, as a resident guest in the heart, to have the
blessed Comforter in my Text, to have the blessed Trinity it self dwelling
within us? says Arden acutely. This is to have God the Father, by the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the sacred influence of his sanctifiing Spirit
ruling, and reigning, and residing in our hearts. This is truly to make our
souls and bodies Temples of the holy Ghost, as St. Paul speak, 1. Cor. 6.19.
This is to acquire an infallible testimony to our own souls, that we are in
Christ, and Christ in us; that the benefit of our Saviors prayer is extended
to us, as touching the comforter promised in my Text: For, he that keeps his
Commandments (says St. Iohu) dwells in him, and he in him, and and hereby
shall we know that he abides in us, even by that spirit of love and obedience;
even by that spirit which he has given us. 1. Ioh. 3.24.

4. We may not omit to take notice, that this blessed Spirit is called, (...),
a comforter, to intimate Christ's intention in se^ding him. In the world ye
shall have affliction, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the World, Ioh.
16.33. and in the mean while I will pray unto the Father, and he shall give
you another comforter. Indeed the word (...), in the original, as the learned
in the Greek Language well understand, does in the genuine etymology thereof
signify, an advocate, qui accusatis and in necessitate constitutis adsit, and
opem ferat proijs loquendo, says the Etymologist: one that may assist, and
plead for such as are accused before a Judge, and stand in danger of a censure.
Therefore does our Savior exhort his Disciples, when after his death they
should be called before Kings and Princes for his name sake, to fly to the
advice and assistance of this holy Advocate, for it is not ye that speak, but
the Spirit of God which speaks in you, says our Savior, Mat. 10.18, 19, 20.
That we might learn thence, when in our supplications to almighty God, we shall
find our hearts to be straighted, and our tongs defective in expressio^ of our
desires, to fly for assistance to this heavenly advocate, and to invocate him,
for he it is alone that helps our infirmities, he makes requests for the
Saints according to the will of God, says St. Paul, Romans 8.26, 27. And in this
case, doubtless, shall the faithful soul, find the benefit of this promise
of our blessed Lord in my Text, Ego rogabo patrem, when the blustering storms
of adversity, or affront of temptation shall winnow us as wheat, as our
blessed Lord told St. Peter, Luke 22.31. Let us adhere in faith and obedience
to this heavenly advocate; as remembering that he which prayed for St. Peter,
has prayed also for us, and this his holy advocate shall speak in us, and with
us, and for us, and fides non deficiet, and our faith shall not fail: when that
accuser of the brethren, which is cast down into the earth, shall serve thee
with a subpoena in the court of thy own conscience, and shall set all thy sins
in order before thee thereby raising within thee those tempestates mentis, as
Nazianzen styles them, those tempests in thy soul, which shall shake the very
foundation of thy faith and religion: cast out this shoot anchor, and thou
may ride out this storm, have recourse to this heavenly advocate the
comforter in my Text, and thou shall overcome all oppositions by the blood of
the Lamb, Rev. 12.10, 11. He that said rogabo patrem, I will pray unto the
Father; even he shall send thee help by this holy comforter, whose presence
shall appease all storms; as it was said of our blessed Savior, Mark. 4.39.
He shall rebuke the wind, and say unto the waves peace and be still, and the
storm shall cease, and a great calm shall follow, Et ille dabit alium
paracletum, and he shall give thee another comforter, that he might abide with
thee for ever. But may some man say, quare aliuu^ paracletum, why another
comforter; for is not this the same Spirit of God whereby the Patriarchs were
taught to believe, the Prophets were inspired, and the Apostles guided in their
Ministry while our Savior lived amongst them? I answer, he is doubtless the
very same: for He is the Lord that changes not. Mal. 3.6.

But this distinction is added, (as the Fathers have well observed) as to
distinguish the Persons in Trinity, so to prove the Deity of the Holy Ghost:
He is Alius Paracletus, another Comforter, because he is not the Father, nor
the Son, but the Holy Ghost, the third person in Trinity. And yet it is also
added, to prove the Unity of the Deity, God, equal with the Father, and with
the Son; therefore it is said in the last words of my Text, Manebit in
aeternum, He shall abide for ever. But it is also said, Vobiscum manebit, He
shall abide with you for ever; ut intelligant Discipuli, (says Musculus upon
this place) esse eum Consolatorem non temporarium, sed aeternum. That his
Disciples might conceive of him as a Comforter not to abide with them for a
while, but with the Church of Christ for ever. Ecce, ego sum vobiscum omnibus
diebus usque ad consummationem saeculi, as Saint Jerome renders it: Behold, I
am with you unto the end of the world. Matthew. 28. last verse. What always art
thou with us, even unto the end of the world blessed Savior? Oh suffer us to
speak unto thee, who are but dust and ashes. Thy Apostle St. Peter has taught
us, that the Heavens must contain thee until that all things be restored.
Acts 3.21. It is true, Oh blessed Jesus, as thy holy Apostle has taught us,
and Lord teach us ever to believe, and retain this truth, that the Heavens
shall contain thy body till the restoration of all things, that so we may be
preserved from that Antichristian error of adoring thy bodily presence in a
Wafer-cake. But thou art still with us, we acknowledge it, and make good thy
promise until this day. For except thou (oh Lord) had been present with me,
to inspire my weak meditations in the preparation of my self for the weighty
employment of this day and hour, through the gracious influence of that
blessed Comforter in our Text; neither had my heart been able to conceive, nor
my tongue to utter any thing for the glory of thy great Name, the edification
of thy people, or the discharge of my duty. And had not thou by thine
especial providence and mercy assembled these thy people in thy Name, by the
powerful persuasion of the same most blessed Comforter: Neither had they been
hearers of thy Word at this time.

We humbly praise thy holy Name for all thy mercies, and particularly for that
of this day and hour, beseeching thee to add the operation of thy blessed
Spirit to these outward means in such free favor affoorded us, and to
persuade all our hearts, that as we profess to love thee as thy Disciples, so
we may ever be careful to express our love unto thee in a conscionable
observance of thy holy Commandments, that so we may be partakers of the
comforts of thy gracious promise, thy blessed Spirit of grace, which may abide
with us for ever, Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus. And so I have done with the
Text, one word only for the occasion of our meeting, and so an end.

The memorial of the just shall be blessed, says the wise man, Prove. 10.7
as whose good deeds deserve to be had in everlasting remembrance. I can not
therefore in this grave and honored assembly, without a sinful oversight and
neglect of my duty, omit the memorial of that Honorable and worthy Citizen
Sir Thomas Row, whose piety and religious care occasioned this Sermon, and
this meeting this day. For in the Chronicles of this City I read lately, that
in the year 1569. Sir Thomas Row, Citizen and Merchant-taylor, and at that
time Lord Major of this honorable City in a pious care to accommodate a great
number of Parishes, then in his government touching the decent and orderly
burial of their dead, did of his own free charge and bounteous liberality,
enclose a parcel of ground near the Hospital of Bethlem, and caused the same
to be consecrated for a place of Burial for such Parishes as in that case were
straightened. A motion, (doubtless) proceeding from the sacred direction of this
heavenly Comforter.

For seeing the men of Iabesh Gilead have that pious act of theirs registered by
the Pen of the Holy Ghost, in that they took with much danger the body of Saul,
and the bodies of his Sons from the wall or street of Bethshan, and were
careful to bury them in the land of Israel. 1. Sam. last Chap. 3. last verses.
I see no reason but why this pious Act of this honorable Citizen should be
yearly remembered as upon this day and occasion, by such as shall be called to
the duty of this Day, to the glory of God, whose holy Spirit moved him to this
work of mercy, for the honor of this City, and of this grave Senate, that
among innumerable others has been honored with this religious example: and
for the encouragement of others to follow his steps in good works of this
nature: which that it may be so, it is, and shall be my daily prayer, as your
unworthy Chaplain, that God will continue his mercies to this honorable City,
in a happy succession of good, discreet, and religious Governors, under whose
pious and godly care we may enjoy in succeeding times the comfort of a quiet
and happy peace, and live thereby before him in all godliness and honesty: and
that it may please our heavenly Father to bless the present Magistrates, and
all that shall succeed them; giving them grace to execute Justice, and to
maintain truth: and herein We beseech thee to hear us good Lord. And to
this end let us pray as the Church has piously instructed us, in the Collect
for this day.

Almighty God, which as upon this day have taught the hearts of thy faithful
people, by sending unto them the light of thy holy Spirit, grant us by the same
Spirit to have a right judgment in all things, and evermore to rejoice in his
holy comfort, through the merits of Jesus Christ our Savior, who lives and
reigns with thee in the Unity of the same ever one God.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.

