ARTICLES to be enquired of within the Dioces of Norwiche, in the
Metropoliticall visitation of the most Reverend father in God, MATTHEW, by the
providence of God, Archebyshop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and
Metropolitan,

In the year of our Lord GOD, M.D.LXVII.



M. C.
insignia of the Master of the (Stationers') Company

Imprinted at London by Reginalde Wolf. Anno Domini M.D.LXVII.

Instructions to the Commssioners for the dioces of Norwiche.












God save the Queen.
Articles to be inquired of.
IN primis, whether Divine service

Item, whether you have in your paryshe churches

Item, whether your Prestes, Curates, or ministers prayer. And whether they do
celebrate the same divine service in the chauncell or in the Church, and do
use all Rites and orders prescribed in the book of Common prayer, etc. and none
other.





down, according to the order prescribed: and of the partition between the
Chauncell and the Church be kept. Whether your Churchyardes be well fensed
and cleanly kept. Whether any sale have been made of your Church goods, by
whom and to whom, and what has been don with the monye thereof coming.
Whether your Chauncels and Parsonages be well and sufficiently repaired:
Whether any man have pulled down or discovered any Church, Chauncel, Chapel,
Alms house, or such like, or have plucked down ye bells, or have felled or
spoiled any wood or timber in any Church yard.

Item, whether there be any Parsons that intrude

Item, whether your Parsons and Vicars be residente releaue the poor
charitably to their hability, according to the Queens Injunctions. Whether
they pray for the prosperous estate of the Queen's Majesty, as is prescribed in
her graces Injunctions.





of life, or in unwont and unseemly apparel.

Item, whether any of your benefices be vacant,

Item, whether your Ministers keep their registers

Item, whether your Parsons and Vicars have

Item, whether the lay people be diligent in coming to the Church on the
holy days, and with all humblenes, reverently and deuoutelye do give
themselves to the hearing of Commune prayer in the time thereof, and otherwise
occupy themselves in private prayers, readinge of Scriptures, or other
virtuous exercise. If any be negligente or wilful. Whether the forfaiture be
leued on their goods to the use of the poor, according to the laws of this
Realm in ye behalf provided. And what money has been gathered by the
Churchewarde^s of the forfets.





commonly absente them selves from their own Church: or otherwise idely or
lewdlye prophaneth the Sabbath day. Any that keep any secret co^uenticles,
preachings, lectures or readings, contrary to ye laws. Any suspected of
heresy, or that maintain any erroneous opinions contrary to the laws of
almighty God and good religion, by public authority in this Realm set forth.

Item, whether there be in these parties which minister

Item, whether there be any which of late have bequeathed

Item, whether there be any money or stoke appertaininge hands, that refuse or
differreth to pay the same: or that uses fraud, deceit or delay to make
any account in the presence of the Honestye in the parish, for the same.
Whether your Church wardens and others, before time, have given the yearly
account, according unto the custom as it has been aforetime used. Whether
the store of the poor men's box be openly and indifferently given where
need is, without parciall affection. Whether any stock of cattle or grain
appertaining to your churches, be decayed: by whose negligence, and in whose
haddes.





live not together, but slau^derouslie live a part: Any that have married out of
the parish church, where they ought to have the same solemnised.

Item, whether any your Ordinaries within this

Item, whether have any of them at any time wittingly

Generally, whether there be any evil livers or offenders of the laws of
almighty God: Any suspected of any notorious sin, fault or crime, to the
offense of Christian people committed: Any that stubburnlie refuse to conform
them self to unity and good religion: Any that bruteth abroad rumors of the
alteration of the same, or otherwise that disturbeth good orders, and the
quietness of Christ's Church and Christian congregation.


Imprinted at London by Reginald Wolf.

Anno Domini. M.D.LXVII.


