The Shape of, ii, Mo^sters. M.D.Lxij
pig monsters

THis present year of our Lord God a thousand five hundred three score and
two, one Mark Finkle a Ioiner dwelling beside Charing cross by Westminster
had a Sow that brought forth one Pigge only, upon the seventh of May being
Ascension day, the which Pigge had a head much like unto a Dolphines head
with the left ear standing up forked like as ye see in this picture above, and
the right ear being like as it were half a little leaf being divided in the
mids sharp toward thend lying downward flat to the head without any holes
into the headward. The two fore feet, like unto hands, each hand having three
long fingers and a thumb, both the thumbes growinge on the out sides of the
hands, the hinder legs growing very much backwarde otherwise then the common
natural form has been seen, being of no good shape, but smaller from the body
to the middle Joint then they be from the same Joint toward the foot. And the
tail growing an Inche near unto the back then it does of any that is of right
shape. These strange sights, the Allmighty God sends unto us that we should
not be forgetful of his mighty power: nor unthankful for his so great
mercies. The which he shows specially by giving unto us his holy word whereby
our lives ought to be guided and also his wonderful tokens whereby we are most
gentilly warned.

But if we will not be warned, neither by his word, nor yet by his wonderful
works: then let us be assured that these strange monstrous sightes do
premonstrate unto us that his heavy indignacion will shortly come upon us for
our monstrous lyuinge. Wherefore let us earnestly pray unto God that he will
give us grace earnestly to repent our wickedness, faithfully to believe his word:
and sincerely to frame our lives after the doctrine of the same,

An Admonition unto the Reader.
LEt us know by these ugly sights,
and eke consider well:
That our God is the Lord of mights,
who rules both heaven and hell.
By whose strong hand these monsters here,
were formed as ye see:
That it might to the world appers,
almighty him to be.
Who might also us men have formde,
after a strange devise:
As by the Child of late deformde,
appears in plain wise.
what might these monsters to us teach?
which now are sent so rife:
But that we have Gods wurd well preached,
and will not mend our life.
At which strange sightes we meruel much,
when that we do them see:
Yet can there not be found one such,
That so will warned be.
And look what great deformity,
In bodies ye behold:
Much more is in our minds truly,
an hundredth thousand fold.
So that we have great cause in deed,
Our sins for to confess:
And eke to call to God with speed,
The same for to redress.
Which if we will not fail to do,
and purely to repent:
He will no doubt, us comfort so,
as shall our souls content.
Now since our God so loving is,
and ready to forgive:
Why do we not abhor all vice,
and only to him cleave.
Since he also his hand can shake,
And sone destroy us all,
Why do we not then fear and quake,
And down before him fall.
Why do we not amend I say,
Either for love or fear:
why drive we of from day to day,
And sinning not forbear.
Good laws of lats renewde we see,
Much sin for to suppress:
God grant that they fulfilde may be,
To overthrow excess.
O Lord grant us also thy grace,
That by repentance pure:
In heaven to have a dwelling place,
For ever to endure.
Amen.
quod. W. F.
Imprinted at London at the Long Shop in the Pultry by John Alde


