modern bookplate HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE
CAVENDO TUTUS
Spencer Compton, VIII Duke of Devonshire, K.G. CHATSWORTH. BOOKCASE SHELF



THE FLYTING betwixt MONTGOMERY and POLVVART.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by ANDRO HEART. 1621.

TO THE READER.
NO cankring Envy, Malice, nor Despite,
Stirred up these men so eagerly to flyte,
But generous Emulation; so in Plays
Best Actors flyte and rail, and thousand ways
Delight the itching Ear; So want^n Curres
Waked with the gingling of a Courteours spurs,
Bark all the night, and never seek to bite:
Such bravery these Versers moved to write.
Would all that now do flyte would flyte like Those,
And Laws were made that none durst flyte in Prose;
How calm were then the World? perhaps this Law
Might make some madding Wives to stand in aw,
And not in filthy Prose out-roare their Men:
But read those Roundelayes to them till then.
Flyting no Reason has, and at this time
Here it not stands by Reason, but by Ryme;
Anger t'asswage, make Melancholy less,
This flyting first was wrote, now tholes the Press.
Who will not rest content with this Epistle,
Let them sit down and flyte, or stand and whistle.
POLVVART and MONTGOMERIES flytting.
Montgomerie to Polwart.
POlwart ye peip like a Mouse amongst thorns,
Na cunning ye keip, Polwart ye peip:
Ye look like a Sheip, and ye had two horns,
Polwart ye peip like a Mouse amongst thorns.
Beware what thou speiks little foul earth Tade,
With thy Cannigate breiks, beware what thou speiks,
Or there salbe wat cheiks, for the last that thou made,
Beware what thou speiks, little foul earth Tade.
Foul mismade mytting, borne in the Merse,
By word and by wrytting, foul mismade mytting
Leave off thy flytting, come kiss my Erse,
Foul mismade mytting, borne in the Merse.
And we mell thou sall yell, little cultroun Cuist,
Thou salt tell, even thy sell, and we mell thou salt yell,
Thy smell was sa fell, and stronger than Muist,
And we mell, thou sall yell, little cultroun Cuist.
Thou art doeand and dridland like ane foul beast,
Fykand, and fidland, thou art doeand, and dridland,
Strydand, and stridland, like Robin red-brest,
Thou art doeand, and dridland, like ane foul beast.
Polwarts Reply to Montgomerie.
DEspitefull spider, poor of spreit,
Begins with babbling me to blame,
Gowke wit me not to gar thee greit,
Thy tratling, truiker, I sall tame,
When thou believes, to win ane name,
Thou sall be banished of all beild,
And syne receive both skaith and shame,
And sa beforc'd to leave the field.
Thy ragged roundels, raveand Royt,
Some short, some lang, some out of line,
With scabrous colors, fulsome floyt,
Proceidand from ane pint of wine,
Quhilk halts for laike of feet like mine,
Yet fool thou thought na shame to write them,
At men's command that laikes ingyne,
Quhilk doytted Dyvours, gart thee dyte them.
But gooked goose, I am right glaide,
Thou art begun, in write to flyte,
Sen Lowne thy language I have laid,
And put thee to thy pen to write:
Now dog I sall thee sa dispyte,
With pricking put thee to sik speid,
And cause thee (Curre) that warkloome quite,
Syne seik ane hole to hide thy heid.
Yel knave acknawledge thy offense,
Or I grow crabbed, and sa clair thee,
Ask mercy, make obedience,
In time for fear leist I forfair thee:
Ill spreit I will na langer spair thee,
Blaide bleck thee, to bring in a gyse,
And to drey penance soon prepare thee,
Syne pass forth as I sall devyse.
First fair threed-bair, with fundred feit,
Recanting thy unseemly sawes,
In pilgrimage to Allarit,
Syne be content to quite the cause,
And in thy teeth bring me the Tawes,
With becks my bidding to abide,
Whether thou will let belt thy bawes,
Or kiss all cloffes that stands beside.
And of their two take thou thy chose,
For thy awin profit I procure thee,
Or with a prick into thy nose,
To stand content, I sall conjure thee.
But at this time think I forbuir thee,
Because I can not treat thee fairer,
Sit thou this charge, I will assure thee,
The second salbe something sairer.
Montgomerie to Polwart.
FAlse fecklesse foulmart, lo heir a defyance,
Ga sey thy science, do Droigh what thou dow,
Trot tyke to a Tow, Mandrag but myance,
We will heir tydance, peil'd Polwart of thy pow,
Many yeald yew have thou called over a know,
Syne hid them in a how, stark thief when thou staw them,
Mensweiring thou saw them, and made but a mow,
Syne fylde in the Row, when the man came that awe them.
Thy dittay was death, thou dare not deny it,
Thy trumperie was tried, thy falset they fand,
Burreau the band, Cor mundum thou cried,
Condemned to be dried and hung up fra hand:
While thou paid a pand, in that stowre thou did stand,
With a willie wand thy skin was weill scourged,
Syne feinedly forged, how thou left the land,
Now Sirs I demand, how this Pod can be purged.
Yet wanshapen shit, thou shupe sik a sunie,
As proud as ye prunie, your pens sall be plucked,
Cum kiss where I cuckied, and change me that cunie,
Your gryses grunie is graceless and gowked,
Your mouth most be mucked, while ye be instructed,
Foul flirdome, wanfucked, terfell of a Taide,
Thy meter mismade, has lousilie lucked,
I grant thou conducted thy terms in a slaide.
Little angry Attercop, and auld vnsell Aipe,
Ye grein for to gaipe upon the gray meir,
Play with thy Peir, or I Will pull thee like a Paipe,
Go ride in a raipe, for this noble new yeir:
I promise thee heir, to thy chafts ill cheir,
Except thou go leir, to lick at the louder,
With Potingars powder, thy self thou ouersmeir
The Castle ye weir weill seiled on your shoulder.
This twice sealed trumper, with his tratling he trowes,
Making vain vows, to match him with me,
With the print of a key, weill brunt on thy brows
Now God salbe crows, wherefra come ye
For all your bombill, ye'r war'd a little we:
I think for to see you hing by the heilis.
For terms that thou steilis of auld Poetry,
Now wha sold trow thee, that is past both the seilis.
Proud poisond'd pykthanke, perverse and perjured,
I dow not endure it, to be bitten with a duik,
I's fell thee like a Fluik, flatlings on the flure,
Thy scrowes obscure are borrowed frasome buik,
Fra Lindsay thou tuik, you are Chaucers Cuik,
Ay lying like a Ruik, gif men wald not skar thee:
But beast I debar thee, the Kings Chimney nuik,
Thou flees for a look, but I shall ride nar thee.
False strydand stickdirt, I's gar thee stink,
How durst thou mint, with thy Master to mell,
On sik as thy sell, little prattling pink
Could thou not wair ink, thy tratling to tell,
Hoy hurson to hell, amang the fiends fell,
To drink of that well, that poisoned thy pen,
Where devils in their den, dois yammer and yell,
Heir I thee expel from all Christian men.
Polwart to Montgomerie.
BLeird babbling bystour, baird obey
Learn sky bald knave to know thy sell,
Vile vagabond, or I invoy,
Custroun with cuffes thee to compel:
Yet, tratling truiker, truth to tell,
Stoup thou not at the second charge,
Mischievous mishant, we sall mell
With laidly language, loud and large,
Where Lowne as thou loves thy life,
I both command, and counsel thee,
For to eschew this sturtsome strife,
And with thy manly Master gree,
To this effect, I summond thee
By public Proclamation,
Gowke to compeir upon thy knee,
And kiss my foull foundation.
But Lord I laugh to see thee bluiter,
Gloir in thy ragments, rash to raill.
With mighty manked, magled meiter,
Tratland, and tumbland, top over taill,
As Carlings compts their farts doyl'd snaill,
Thy roustie ratrymes, made but matter.
I could weill follow, wald I seaill,
Or preasse to fish within thy water.
Only because Owl thou dois use it,
I will write verse of common kind,
And Swingeour for thy sake, refuse it,
To crabe thee bumbler, by thy mind,
Peddler, I pity thee sa pined,
To buckell him thar bears the bell,
Iackstro be better, anes ingyn'd,
Or I sall flyte against my sell.
But breiflie, beist, to answer thee,
In sermon short, I am content,
And says thy similitudes, vnslie,
Are nawayes, very pertinent,
Thy tired comparisons a sklent,
Are monstrous, like the Mule that made them,
Thy borrowed barkings violent,
Yet were they worse, let men out war them,
Also I may be Chaucers man,
And yet thy Master, not the less:
But wolf that wastes on Cup and Kan,
In Gluttony, thy grace I guess;
Ga drunken Dyvour, thee address,
And borrow thee, am bassed breiks,
To hear me now, thy praise express,
Knave gif thou can, without wat cheiks.
First of thy just Genealogy,
Tyke I sall tell, the truth I trow,
Thou was begotten, some says me,
Betwixt the Devil and a dun Kow,
Ane night when that the fiend was fow,
At banquet birland at the beir,
Thou sowked syne, ane sweit brod sow*
Amang the middings, many a yeir.
On ruites and runches, in the field,
With nolt, thou nourished was a yeir,
Whill that thou past both poor and peild,
Into Argyle, some lair to leir,
As the last night, did weill appeir,
When thou stood fidgeing at the fire,
Fast fykand, with thy Heiland cheir,
My flyting forced thee sa to flyre.
Into the Land, where thou was borne,
I read of noght but it was skant,
Of Cattle, Cleithing, and of Corn,
Where wealth, and weilfair both does want,
Now Tade-face, take this for na tant,
I hear your housing is right fair,
Where howlring howlets, ay does hant,
With Robin red-brest, but repair.
The Lords and Lairds within that Land,
I know are men of meikill rent,
And living as I understand,
Quhilk in ane Innes, we be content
To leiue and let their house in Lent:
In Lentron month, and the lang Summer,
Where twelve Knights kitchins has a vent
Quhilk for to furnish dois them cumber.
For store of Lambs, and lang-tail'd wedders
Thou knawes where many couples gaes
For stealing tied fast in tedders,
In fellon flocks of anes and twaes,
Abroad athort your banks and braes,
Ye do abound in Coal and Calke,
And thinks like fools to fley all faes,
With Targets, tulies and toome talk.
Alace poor hood-pikes, hunger-bitten
Accustomed with scurrilitie:
Rydand like boystures, all beshitten
In fields, without fertility:
Bare, barren, with sterilitie,
For fault of cattle, corn and gerse,
Your banquets of most nobility,
Dear of the Dog brawne in the Merse.
Witless vanter, were thou wife,
Custroun thou wald, Cor mundum cry,
Ou'r-laiden lowne, with lang-tail'd lyce,
Thy doytit dytings soon deny,
Trouker, or I thy trumperie try
And make a legend of thy life:
For flyte I anes, folk will cry fie,
Then thou'll be war'd with every wife.
Polwarts Medicine to Montgomerie being sick.
SIr Swingeour seeing I want wares,
And salues to slake thee of thy saires,
This present from the Pothecares,
Me think meet to amend thee.
First for thy fever feid on folly,
With fasting stomach take oyld-oly,
Mixed with a mouthfull of Melancholy,
From fleame for to defend thee.
Syne pass ane space, and smell a flower,
Thy inward parts to purge and scowre,
Tak thee three bites of an black hour,
And Ruebarb, bache and bitter.
This duly done but any din,
Sup syne sex sops, but something thin,
Of the Devil scald thy guts within,
To heal thee of thy skitter.
Unto thy bed, syne make thee bown,
Take ane sweit Syrop worth a Crown,
And drink it with the Devil gadowne
To recreat thy spreit.
And last of all, craig in a Cord,
Send for a powder and pay for'd,
Called the vengeance of the Lord,
For thy mug mouth most meit.
Gif this preserve thee not fra pain,
Pass to the Pothingars again,
Some recipies does yet remain,
To heal bruik, byle, or blister.
As diadragma when ye dine,
Or diabolicon wat in wine,
With powder, I drait fellon fine,
And mair yet when ye mister.
Montgomeries answer to Polwart.
Vile venomous viper, wanthriftiest of things,
Half an Elf, half an Aip, of Nature deny it,
Thou flait with a country, the quhilk was the Kings,
But that bargan vnbeast, dear sall thou buy it,
The cuff is weill waired, that two hame brings,
This Proverb foull Pelt, to thee is apply it,
First Spider of spyte, thou spewes out springs,
Yet wanshapen woubet, of the weirds invy it,
I can tell thee, how, when, where, and quha gat thee.
The quhilk was neither man nor wife,
Nor humane creature on life,
Thou stink and steirar up of strife,
False howlat have at thee.
In the hinder end of harvest, on Alhallow even,
When our good neighbors dois ride, gif I read right,
Some buckled on a bunewand, and some on a been,
Ay trottand in troops, from the twylight,
Some sa leand a shoe Aipe, all graithed into green,
Some hobland on ane hempstalk, hove and to the hight,
The King of Pharie, and his court, with the Elfe Queen,
With many Elrich Incubus, was rydand that night,
There an Elf on ane Aipe, ane vnsell begat,
Into ane pot, by Pomathorne,
That bratchart, in ane busse was borne,
The fand ane monster on the morn,
War faced nor a Cat.
The weird sisters wandering, as they were wont then,
Saw Reavens rugand, at that ratton, be a Ron ruit,
They mused at the Mandrake, unmade like a man,
A Beast bund with a bonevand, in an old buit,
How that gaist had bein gotten, to guess they began,
Weill swyl'd in a Swynes skin, and smeirit over with suit,
The belly that it first bair, full bitterly they ban,
Of this mismade Mowdewart, mischief they muit,
That cruiked, camschoche, croyll, vncristned they curse.
They bade that baiche sold not be but
The glengoir, gravel, and the gut,
And all the plagues that first were put
Into Pandoraes purse.
The cogh, and the connogh, the colic, and the called,
The cords, and the cout-euill, the clasps and the cleiks,
The hunger, the hart-ill, and the hoist still thee hald,
The botch, and the barbles, with the Cannigate breiks,
With bockblood, and beanshaw, speven sprung in the spald,
The fersie, the falling-euill, that fells many freiks,
Ouergane all with Angleberries as thou grows ald,
The kinkhost, the Charbuckle, and worms in the cheiks,
The snuff and the snoir the chaud piece, and the chanker.
With the blaids and the belly thraw,
The bleiring bats, and the beanschaw,
With the mischief of the melt and maw,
The clape and the canker.
The frencie, the fluxes, the fyk, and the felt,
The fevers, the fearcie, with the speinie flees,
The doyt, and the dismal, indifferently dealt,
The powlings, the palsay, with pocks like pees,
The swerf, and the sweiting, with sounding to swelt,
The weame-ill, the wildfire, the vomit, and the vees,
The mair, and the migrame, with meathes in the melt,
The warbles, and the wood-worme, whereof dogs dies,
The teasick, the tooth-aik, the tirtes and the tirles.
The painful poplesse and pest,
The rot, the roup, and the auld rest,
With parles and plurisies oppressed,
And nip'd with the nirles.
Woe worth (quoth the weirds) the wights that thee wroght
Threed-bare be their thrift, as thou art wanthreivin,
Als hard be their handsell, that helps thee to ought,
The rotten rim of thy womb with Rookes salbe reivin,
All bounds where thou bides, to baill salbe brought,
Thy Gall, and thy Guisserne, to Glaids sall be given,
Ay short be thy solace, with shame be thou sought,
In hell mot thou haunt thee, and hide thee fra Heavin,
And ay as thou auld grows, swa eikand be thy anger.
To live with limmers, and out laws,
With hurcheons, eatand hips and hawes,
But when thou comes, where the Cock crawes,
Tarry there na langer.
Shame and sorrow on her snout, that suffers thee to sowke,
Or shoe that cares for thy cradill cauld be her cast,
Or brings any bedding, for thy blae bowke,
Or louses off thy lingals, sa lang as they may last,
Or offers thee any thing, all the lang owke,
Or first refreshes thee with food, how beit thou sold fast,
Or when thy duddes are bedirten, that gives them ane dowk,
All grooms when thou greits, at thy ganting be aghast,
Als froward be thy fortune, as foul is thy form.
First seven yeirs, be thou dumb, and deiff,
And after that a common theiff,
Thus art thou marked for mischeiff,
Foul unworthy worm.
Outrow'd be thy tongue, yet tratling all times,
Ay the langer that thou lives, thy luck be the less,
All countries where thou comes, accuse thee of crimes,
And false be thy fingers, but leath to confess,
Ay raving, and rageing, in rude rat rymes,
All ill be thou vseand, and ay in excess,
Ilk Moon be thou mad, fra past be the primes,
Still plagued with poverty, thy pride to oppress.
With warwolfes, and wild Cats, thy weird be to wander,
Draglit throw dirtie dubs and dykes,
Tousled and tuggled, with town Tykes,
Say lousie liar what thou lykes,
Thy tongue is na sclander.
Fra the sisters had feene, the shape of that shit
Little luck be thy lot, there where thou lies,
Thy fowmard face, quoth the first, to flyt salbe fit,
Nicneuen quoth the next, sall nourish thee twyse,
To ryd Post to Elphin, naneabler nor it,
To drive dogs but to dryt, the third can devyse,
All thy days sall thou be, of ane body but a bit,
Als such is this sentence, as sharp is thy syse,
Syne duly they deemed, what death it sold die:
The first said, surely of a shot,
Thee second of a running knot,
The third be through wing of the throt,
Like a tyke over ane tree.
When the weird sisters, had thus voted all in ane voice,
The deid of the dablet, and syn they withdrew,
To let it ly all allaine, they thought it littill loss,
In a den be a dyke, or the day dew:
Than a cleir company, came soon after closse,
Nicneuen with her nymphs, in number anew,
With charms from Caitnes, and Chanrie of Rosse,
Whose cunning consists in casting of a Clew,
They seeing this sairie thing, said to them self,
This thriftles thing is meit for us,
And for our craft commodious,
Ane ugly Ape, and Incubus,
Gotten with an Elf.
Their venerable Virgins, whom the world call witches,
In the time of their triumph, tirr'd me the Taide,
Some backward raid on brodsowes, and some on black bitches,
Some in steid of a staig, over a stark Monk straid,
Fra the how to the hight, some hobles, some hatches,
With their mouths to the Moon, murgeons they maid,
Some be force in effect, the four winds fetches,
And nine times withershins, about the thorn raid,
Some glowring to the ground, some grievously gaipes.
Be craft conjureand fiends perforce
Forth of a Cairne, beside a croce,
Their Ladies lighted fra their horse,
And band them with raipes.
Syne barefoot, and bare-leg'd to baptize that bairne,
Till a water they went, be a wood side,
They sand the shit, all beshitten in the awin shearne,
On three headed Hecatus, to heir them they cryde,
As we have found in the field, this findling forfairne,
First his faith he forsakes in thee to confyde,
Be virtue of their words, and this raw yearne,
And whill this thrice thretty knots, on this blew thread bid,
And of their men's members, weill sowed to a shoe,
Whilk's we have taken, fra top to rae,
Even of ane hundredth men and mae,
Now grant us goddess or we gae,
Our duties to do.
Be the hight of the hevins, and be the hownesse of hell,
Be the winds and the weirds, and the Charlewaine,
Be the horns, the handstaff and the kings ell,
Be thunder, be fyreflaughts, be drouth and be rain,
Be the Poles and the Planets, and the Signs all twell,
Be the mirknes of the Moon, let mirknes remain,
Be the Elements all, that our crafts can compel,
Be the fiends infernal, and the furies in pain,
Gar all the Gaists of the deid, that dwells there down,
In Lethe and Styx thae stinkand strands,
And Pluto that your Court commands,
Receive this howlat aff our hands,
In name of Mahowne.
That this worm in our work, some wonders may wirk,
And through the poison of this Pod, our pratiques prevaill,
To cut aff our cumber, fra coming to the Kirk,
For the half of our help, and hes it heir haill,
Let never this vndoght, of ill doing irk,
But ay blyth to begin, all barret and baill,
Of all blis let it be, als bair as the birk,
That tittest the taidrell may tell ane ill taill,
Let no vice in this world, in this wanthrift be wanted.
Be they had said, the fireflaughts flew,
Both thunder, rain, and winds blew,
Wherebe their coming, comers knew
Their asking was granted.
When thae Dames devotely had done their devore,
In heauing this hurcheon, they hasted them hame,
Of that matter to make, remained no more,
Saving nixt how thae Nuns, that working sold name,
They kow'd all the kytrall, the face of it before,
And nipp'd it sa doones neir to see it was shame,
They called it peil'd Polwart, they pulled it so sore,
Where we clip, quoth the comers, there needs na kame,
For we have heght to Mahoun for handsell this hair,
They made it like ane scraped swyne,
And as they Cowed, they made it whryne,
It shaved the self, ay on sensyne
The beard of it sa bair.
Fra the Kummers that Crab, had with Pluto contracted,
They promeist as parents, syne for their own part,
A mover of mischief, and they might for to make it,
As ane Imp of all ill, may apt for their Art,
Nicneuen as nurish, to teach it, gart take it,
To saill sure in a seiff, but compass or Cairt,
And milk of ane haird tedder, thought wives sold be wrackit,
And the Kow gif a chopin, was wont to give a quart,
Many babes, and bairnes, sall bliss thy bair banes,
When they have neither milk nor meill,
Compelled for hunger for to steill,
Than sall they give thee to the Deill,
Able ofter nor anes.
Be ane after midnight, their office was ended,
At that tyd, was na time, for troumpers to tarry,
Syne backward on horseback, bravely they bended,
That cammosed Cocatrice, they quite with them carry,
To Kait of Creif in ane creill soon they gar'd send it,
Where seuin yeir it sat, both singed and sarie,
The kin of it be the cry, incontinent kend it,
Syne fetched food for to feid it, forth fra the Pharie,
Ilk Elf of them all brought an almous house Oster.
Indeid it was a dainty dish,
A foull phlegmatic foulsome fish,
In steid of sauce, on it they pish,
Sik food, feed sik a foster.
Syne fra the fathers side, finely had fed it,
Many monks and marmasits, came with the mother,
Black botch fall the breist, and the belly that bred it.
Ay offered they that vndoght, fra ane to another,
Where that smatched had sowked, sa sair it was to shed it,
But belyue it began, to buckie the brother,
In the bark of ane bourtree, whylome they bed it.
All talking with their tongues, the ane to the other,
With flirting, and flyring, their Physnome they flype.
Some luikand lyce, in the crown of it keeks,
Some choppes the kiddes into heir cheeks,
Some in their oxster hard it cleeks,
Like an auld bag-pipe.
With mudyones, and murgeons, and moving the brain,
They lay it, they lift it, they louse it, they lace it,
They graip it, they grip it It greets and they grane,
They bed it, they baw it, they bind it, they brace it,
It skittered, and skar^ed, they skirl'd ilk ane,
All the Ky in the country they skarred, and chaced,
That roaring, they wood-ran, and routed in a reane,
The wild dear fra their den, their din hes displaced,
The cry was sa ouglie, of Elfes Aipes and Owls,
That geise and gaisling, cries and craikes,
In dubs douks down, Duikes and draikes,
All beasts for feir, the fields forsakes,
And the town Tykes yowles.
Sik a mirthlesse Music their menstralls did make,
Whill Ky kest caprels, behind with their heels,
Littill tent to their time, the Toone leit them take,
But ay rammeist red wood, and ravel'd in their reeles,
Then the cummers that ye ken came all with a clak.
To conjure that coidyoch, with clewes in their creeles,
Whill all the bounds them about, grew blaikned and black,
For the din of their daiblets, raised all the deils,
To concur in the cause they were come sa far,
For they their god-bairne gifts wald give,
To teach the child, to steal and reiue.
And ay the langer that it live,
The world sold be the war.
Polwarts third flytting against Montgomerie.
Infernal frawart, feaming furies fell,
Cursed, cankered, crabed (Clotho) help to quell,
Yon Caribald, yone catiue execrabill,
Provyde my pen profoundly to distell,
Some dure despite to daunt yon devil of hell,
And dryve with doole, to death detestabill,
This mad malicious monster miserabill,
Ane tyke tormented, trotting out of toone,
That rymes red wood at ilk mids of the Moon.
Renew your roaring rage, and eager Ire,
Inflamed with fearful thundering, thuddes of fire,
To plague this poisoned pykthank, pestilent,
With flying fire flaughts, burning bright and shyre,
Devoir yon de vilish dragon, I desire,
And waste his wearied venom violent,
Conjure this beastly beggar impotent,
Suppress all power of this evil spirit,
That bydes and barks in him als black as Ieit.
But reekie Rookes and Ravens or ye ryue him,
Desist, delay his death, whill I descriue him,
Syne rypely to his rauing rude reply,
To dreadful dolor, dearfly or ye dryve him,
Throw Plutoes power, pleasure to depryue him,
The Lown may lick his vomit, and deny
His shameless sawes, like Satan's slavish smy.
Whose manners, with his mismade members heir,
Do correspond, as plainly does appeir.
His peilled pallat, and unpleasant pow,
The fulsome flocks of flies dois ouerflow,
With wames and wounds all blaikned full of blaines,
Out over the neck, athort his nitty now,
Ilke louse lies linkand, like a large lint bow,
That hurts his harnes, and pearse them to his pains.
Whill wit and virtue vanished fra the veins,
With scarts and scores, athort his frozen front,
In rankels run within the stews all brunt.
His lugs both lang and lean, wha can but lack,
That to the Tron hes taken so many a tacke,
With blasted bowels, bowdon with bruised blude,
And happening hairs, blawin widthersuns aback,
Foot foundred beasts, for fault of food, full weak,
Hes not their hair sa snod as other good,
The bleared Bucke and boystrous to conclude,
Hes right trim teeth some what set in a thraw,
Ane topped turde, right teughly for to taw.
With laidly lips, and lyning side turned out,
His nose weill lit in Bacchus blood about,
His stinking end, corrupted as men knawes,
Contagious cankers, carues his snafling snout,
His shaven shoulders, shawes the marks no dout,
Of teugh tarledders, tyres and other tawes,
And girds of Galeyes growand now in gawes,
Swa all his fousome form thereto effeirs,
The quhilk for filth, I will not fyle your eirs.
The second part of Polwarts third flytting.
But of his conditions to carp for a while,
And count you his qualities, compast with cair,
Appardon me Poets, to alter my style,
And wissle my verse, for fyling the air,
Returning directly again to Argyle,
Where last that I left him, both barefoot and bair,
Where rightly I reckoned, his race very vile,
Discending of Devils, as I did declair,
But quhilk of the Gods, will guide me aright:
Abhorring, so abominable,
Sa doolefull, and detestable,
Sa knauish cankered, execrable,
And waried a wight.
In Argyle amang Gaits, he gead within glennes,
Ay there using offices, of a bruit beast,
Whill blislesse was banished, for handling of hens,
Syne forward to Flanders, fast fled or he ceast,
From poor anes the pultrie, he plucked be the pens,
Delighting in theft, the heart of his breast,
And courage inclined, to knauerie men kennes,
To pestilent purposes plainly he preast,
But truly to tell all the truth unto you.
In nowayes was he wise,
He used both Cairts and Dyce,
And fled no kind of vice,
Or few as I trow.
He was ane false Schismatic, notoriously named,
Both whoredom, and homicide, vnsell he used,
With all the seven sins, the smatched was shamed,
Pride, Ire, and envy, this vndoght abused,
For greedy covetousnes, bitterly blamed
For bawdrie, and bordelling, lucklesse he loved,
Thrist, drynes, and drunkenness, the dyvour defamed,
False, feneit, with flyting, and flattery infused,
May sinful, and sensual, shame to rehearse,
Whose feckles foolishnes,
And beastly bruklenes,
Can no man as I guess,
Weill put into verse.
Ane warloch, ane warwolfe, ane woubet but hair,
Ane deill, and a Dragon, ane deid Dromadarie,
Ane counterfoot custroun, that clarks dois not cair
Ane clavering cohooby, that cracks of the Pharie,
Whose favourles Phisnome, does dewly declair,
His vices, and viciousnes, although I wald vary,
Arcandam's Astrology, ane lantern of lair,
Affirms his bleardnes, to wisdom contrary,
Betaikning, both babbling and beldnes of age,
Great fraud, and foull deceit,
Cappit, with quiet conceit,
Witness some verse he wreit,
Half daft in a rage.
His Anagrame also, concerning that case,
Says surely, it is a sign of a lecherous Lowne,
His palenes next partly, with brown in the face,
Arcandam ascriues, to babbling ay bowne,
And tratling intemperat, tymeles, but place,
A cowart yet choleric, and drunk in ilk town,
And als his ass ears, they sign in short space,
The frantic fool sall grow mad like Mahowne,
But yet sall he live long, whilk alas were a loss.
For sik a tried traitor,
And babbling blasphematour,
Was never formed of Nature,
Sa gooked a Goose.
Whose origin noble the note of his name
Called Etimologie, beirs rightly record,
His surname does flow, fra two terms of diffame,
From Mont and Gomora, where devils be the Lord,
His kinsmen was cleinly cast out to his shame,
That is of their clan, whom Christ has abhorred,
And beiris of the birth place, their horrible name,
Where Sodomite sinners, with stinking were smor'd.
Now sen all is suith that is said of this smy,
Unto that capped Clark,
And pretty piece of wark,
That bitterly does bark,
I may this reply.
Polwarts last flytting against Montgomerie.
Vile villain vain, and war nor I have tauld thee.
Thy withered wame, is damnified and cried,
Beshitten boystour, baldly I forbad thee,
To mell with me, or else thou sold dear buy it,
Thy speech but purpose, sporter is espied,
That wrytes of witches, warlocks, wraiths, and wratches,
But Invectiues against him well defied,
Rob Stevin thou raues, forgetting whom thou matches,
Leave boggles, brownies, Gyre-carlings, and Gaists,
Dastard thou daffes, that with such devilrie mels,
Thy peil'd preambles over prolixly lasts,
Thy reasons savors of reek and nothing else,
Thy sentences, of suit sa sweitly smells,
Thou sat sa neir the chimney nuik that made them,
Fast be the Ingle, amang the Oyster shells,
Dreidand my danger, durst not weill debate them.
Thy tratling, Truiker, wald gar Taides spew,
And Carle Cats, weep vinegar with their eine,
Thou said I borrowed, blad's that is noght true,
The contrary falls smatched salbe seen,
I never had of that making ye meine
A verse in write, in print, or yet perqueir,
Quhilk I can prove, and cleanse me wonder cleine,
Though single words no writer can forbeir,
To prove my speeches probable, and plain,
Thou must confess, thou used my invention,
I reckoned first thy race, syne thou again,
In that same sort, made of thy Master mention,
Thy wit is weak, with me to have dissension,
For to my speech thou never made reply,
At liberty to lie is thy intention,
I answer ay, quhilk thou can not deny.
Thy friends are fiends, of Apes thou fenies mine;
With my assistance saying all thou can,
I count sik kindred, better yet nor thine,
Chiefly of beasts, that most resemble man,
Grant gif that my invention wars thine then,
Without the whilk, thou might have barked waist
I laid the ground, whereon thou best began,
To big the brig, whereof thou brags may.
Thy lack of Judgment, may be als perceived,
Thirtwa chief points of reason wants in thee,
Thou attributes to Aipes, where thou hes reaved,
The ills of horse, ane monstrous sight to see.
Na marvel though ill won, ill waired be,
For all these ills, thou staw I am right certain,
From Semples dytements, of ane horse did die,
Of Porterfields, that dwelt into Dumbartan.
Amang the ills of Aipes, that thou hes tauld,
Though to ane horse, perteining properly,
Thou puts the spaven, in the forder spauld,
That uses in the hinder hogh to be,
Fra horsemen anes thy cunning hear and see,
I fear auld Allane get na mair ado,
A llace poor man he may lie down and die,
Syne thou's succeed to wear the silver shoe.
Farther thou flies with other fowls wings,
Ouer-cled with cleiter colors than thy awin,
But specially with some of Semples things,
Or for an plucked goose, thou had been knawin,
Or like ane Cran, in mounting soon o'rethrowen,
That must take ay, nyn steps before shoe fly,
So in the gout, thou might have stand and blown,
As long as thou lay gravelled, like to die.
I speak not of thy vicious divisions,
Where thou pronounces, and yet propones but part
Encumbered with sa many tried confusions
Quhilk shawes thy rhyme but rhetoric or ^^rt,
Thy memory is short, be shrew thy heart,
Telling ane thing over twyse or thryse at anes,
And can not from ane proper place depart,
Except I were to frig thee with whin stanes.
The things I said gif that thou wald deny,
Meaning to wry the verity with wyles,
Lick where I laid, and pickle of that pie,
Thy knavery, credence fra thee quite exyles,
Thy feckles folly, all the air defyles,
I find sa many faults, ilk ane over other,
First I must tell thee all thy stately styles,
And syne bequeath thee to thy birken brother.
Fond flytter, shit shyter, bacon bitter, all defyl'd,
Blunt bleit^ar, paddock pricker puddin eiter, perverse,
Hen plucker, closet mucker, house cucker, very vyld,
Tauny cheeks, I think thou speiks, with thy breeks, foul erse,
Woodtyk, hoodpyk, ay like, to live in lack,
Flower the pin, scabbed skin, eat it in, that thou spoke.
Gume gade, bald skade, foull fa'd, why flait thou fool,
Steill You, fill tow, thou dow, not defend thee,
Quha kend, thy end, false fiend, fantastic mule,
Thief smy, they wald cry, fie fie, to gar end thee,
Sweir sow, doyl'd kow, ay fow, foull fall thy banes,
Very wyld, defyl'd, ay wood wyld, ilk month anes.
Tarry tade, thou's defate; now debate, if thou dow,
Hush padle, lick ladle, shyte sadle, do thy best,
Creishie soutter, shoe cloutter, minch moutter, dar thou mow,
Ragged railer, sheep stealer, double dealer, thou's be dressed.
Falls preif, lean theif, mischief, fall thy lips,
Blaird beard, thy reward, is prepared, for thy hippes.
Erse slaiker, gle^^^ glaiker, room raiker, for releif,
Lunatic, frenatick, schismatic, Swingeour sob,
Turd faced, ay chased, almaist, fyld for a theif,
Misly kyt, and thou flyt, I Will dryt in thy gob,
Tait mow, wild sow, soon bow, or I wand thee,
Hell ruik, with thy buik, leave the nuik, I command thee.
Land lowper, light skowper, ragged rowper, like a Raven,
Halland shaker, draught raiker, bannock-baiker, all beshitten
Craig in peril, toom the barrel, quyt the quarrel, or be shaven
Rude ratler, common tratler, poor pratler, out flitten,
Hell spark, scabbed Clark, and thou bark, I sall belt rhee,
Skade scald, ouerbald, soon fald, or I melt thee.
Lousy lugs, leap jugs, toome the mugs, on the midding,
Tanny flank, redshank, pykthank, I must pay thee,
Spew bleck, widdie neck, come and beck, at my bidding,
False Lowne, make thee bowne, Mahowne, mon have thee,
Rank ruittour, scurlie wittour, and Iuitour, nane four,
Decrest, oppressed, possessed, with Plutoes power.
Capped knave, proud slave, ye rave, ay vnrocked,
Whiles slaverand, whiles taverand whiles wavera^d, with wine
Greedy gouked, poor and pluked, il instructed, ye's be knoked,
Gley'd gangrell, auld mangrell, to the hangrell, and sa pyne,
Calumniatour, blasphematour, vile creature untrue,
Thy cheiping, and peiping, with weiping, thou salt rue.
Mad manter, vain vaunter, ay haunter in slavery,
Pudding pricker, bang the bicker, nane quicker, in knavery,
Kailly lips, kiss my hips, into grips, thou's behind,
Baill brewer, poison spewer, money trewer, hes bein pind,
Swyne keiper, land leiper, tuird steiper, from the drouth,
Lean limmer, steal gimmer, I sall skimmer in thy mouth.
Fley'd fool, mad muile, die with doole, on ane aike,
Knave kend, Christ send, ill end, on thee now
Pudding wright, out of sight, thou's be d^rt^^, like a draike,
Iock blunt, thrawin frunt, kiss the cunt, of the Kow,
Purse peiller, hen steiller, Cat killer, now I quell thee.
Rubiatour fornicatour, by nature, foull befall thee.
Tyk stickar, poisoned Viccar, pot lickar, I mon pay thee,
Feared flyar, loud liar, gooked gleyar, on the gallows,
Iock blunt, deid runt, I sall dunt, whill I slay thee,
Buttrie bag, fill knag, thou will rag, with thy fellows,
Tired clatterer, skin batterer, and flatterer of friends,
Vyld widdered, misordered, confedered with fiends.
Blind brock, loose dock, bored block, banished towns,
Alace, theifes face, na grace, for that grunie,
Beld bisset, marmissed, lanspreed, to the lownes,
Deid dring, dried sting, thou will hing, but a sunie,
Lick butter, throat cutter, fish gutter, fill the fetter,
Come bleitand, and greitand, fast eitand, thy laidley letter,
FINIS.

