DE SECTORE and RADIO.

The description and use of the Sector in three books.

The description and use of the Crosse-Staffe in other three books.

For such as are studious of Mathematical practice.

geometric illustration

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES. and are to be sold by JOHN TAP at Saint
Magnus corner. 1623.

THE DESCRIPTION AND USE OF THE SECTOR, For such as are studious of
Mathematical practice.

geometric illustration

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES. 1623.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE SECTOR.
CHAP. I.
The Description, the making, and the general use of the Sector.
A Sector in Geometry, is a figure comprehended of two right lines containing
an angle at the center, and of the circumference assumed by them. This
Geometrical instrument having two legs containing all variety of angles, and
the distance of the feet, representing the subtenses of the circumference, is
therefore called by the same name.

It contains 12 several lines or scales, of which 7 are general, the other
5 more particular. The first is the scale of Lines divided into 100 equal
parts, and numbered by 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.

The second, the lines of Superficies divided into 100 unequal parts, and
numbered by 1.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.

The third, the lines of Solids, divided into 1000 unequal parts, and numbered
by 1. 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.

The fourth, the lines of Sines and Chords divided into 90 degrees, and numbered
with 10. 20. 30. unto 90.

These four lines of Lines, of Superficies, of Solids, and of Sines, are all
drawn from the center of the Sector almost to the end of the legs. They are
drawn on both the legs, that every line may have his fellow. All of them are
of one length, that they may answer one to the other: And every one has his
parallels, that the eye may the better distinguish the divisions. But of the
parallels those only which are inward most contain the true divisions.

There are three other general lines, which because they are infinite are
placed on the side of the Sector. The first a line of Tangents, numbered with
10.20.30.40.50.60. signifying so many degrees from the beginning of the line,
of which 45 are equal to the whole line of Sines, the rest follow as the
length of the Sector will bear.

The second, a line of Secants, divided by pricks into 60 degrees, whose
beginning is the same, with that of the line of Tangents, to which it is joined.

The third, is the Meridian line, or line of Rumbs, divided unequally into
degrees, of which the first 70 are almost equal to the whole line of Sines,
the rest follow unto 84 according to the length of the Sector.

Of the particular lines inserted among the general, because there was void
space, the first are the lines of Quadrature placed between the lines of
Sines, and noted with 10.9.8.7. S. 6.5.90. Q.

The second, the lines of Segments placed between the lines of Sines and
Superficies, divided into 50 parts, and numbered with 5.6.7.8.9.10.

The third, the lines of Inscribed bodies in the same Sphere, placed between
the scales of Lines, and noted with D. S. I. C. O. T.

The fourth, the lines of Equated bodies, placed between the lines of Lines and
Solids, and noted with D. I. C. S. O. T.

The fifth, are the lines of Mettalls, inserted with the lines of Equated bodies
(there being room sufficient) and noted with these Characters........

There remain the edges of the Sector, and on the one I have set a line of
Inches, which are the twelth parts of a foot English: on the other a lesser
line of Tangents, to which the Gnomon is Radius.

2 Of the making of the Sector.
LEt a Ruler be first made either of brass or of wood, like unto the former
figure, which may open and shut upon his center. The head of it may be about
the twelth part of the whole length, that it may bear the moveable foot, and
yet the most part of the divisions may fall without it. Then let a moveable
Gnomon be set at the end of the moveable foot, and there turn upon an Axis,
so as it may sometime stand at a right angle with the feet, and sometimes be
enclosed within the feet. But this is well known to the workman.

For drawing of the lines. Upon the center of the Sector, and semidiameter
somewhat shorter then one of the feet, draw an occult arc of a circle,
crossing the closure of the inward edges of the Sector about the letter T.

In this arc, at one degree on either side from the edge, draw right lines
from the Center, fitting them with Parallels and divide them into an hundred
equal parts, with subdivisions into 2.5. or 10. as the line will bear, but
let the numbers set to them, be only 1.2.3.4. etc. unto 10. as in the example.
These lines so divided, I call the lines or scales of Lines; and they are the
ground of all the rest.

In this Arc at 5 degrees on either side, from the edge near T, draw other
right lines from the Center, and fit them with Parallells. These shall serve
for the lines of Solids.

Then on the other side of the Sector in like manner, upon the Center and
equal Semidiameter, draw another like Arc of a circle: and here again at
one near degree on either side from the edge near the letter Q draw right
lines from the Center, and fit them with parallells. These shall serve for the
lines of Sines.

At 5 Degrees on either side from the edge near Q draw other right lines from
the center, and fit them with parallels: these shall serve for the lines of
Superficies.

These four principal lines being drawn, and fitted with parallels, we may
draw other lines in the middle between the edges and the lines of Lines,
which shall serve for the lines of inscribed bodies, and others between the
edges and the Sines for the lines of quadrature. And so the rest as in the
example.

3 To divide the lines of Superficies.
SEeing like Superficies do hold in the proportion of their homologall sides
duplicated, by the 29 Pro. 6 lib. Euclid. If you shall find mean proportionals
between the whole side, and each hundred part of the like side, by the 13 Pro.
6 lib. Euclid. all of them cutting the same line, that line so cut shall
contain the divisions required. wherefore upon the center A and Semidiamiter
equal to the line of Lines, describe a Semicircle ACBD, with AB perpendicular
to the diameter CD. And let the Semidiameter AD he divided as the line of Lines
into an hundred parts, and AE the one half of AC divided also into an hundred
parts, so shall the divisions in AE be the centers from whence you shall
describe the Semicircles C 10. C 20. C 30. etc. dividing the lin AB into an
hundred unequal parts: and this line AB so divided shall be the line of
Superficies, and must be transferred into the Sector. But let the numbers set
to them be only 1.1.2.3. unto 10, as in the example,

geometric illustration

4 To divide the lines of Solids.
Seeing like Solids do hold in the proportion of their homologall sides
triplicated, if you shall find two mean proportionalls between the whole side
and each thousand part of the like side: all of them cutting the same two right
lines, the former of those lines so cut, shall contain the divisions required.

Wherefore upon the center A and Semidiameter equal to the line of Lines.
describe a circle and divide it into 4 equal parts CEBD, drawing the cross
diameters CB, ED. Then divide the semidiameter AC, first into 10 equal parts,
and between the whole line AD and AF the tenth part of AC, seek out two mean
proportional lines AI and AH. again between AD and AG being two tenth parts
of AC, seek out two mean proportionals AL and AK, and so forward in the rest.
So shall the line AB be divided into 10 unequal parts.

geometric illustration

Secondly, divide each tenth part of the line AC into 10 more, and between the
whole line AD, and each of them, seek out two mean proportionalls as before:
So shall the line AB be divided now into an hundred unequal parts.

Thirdly, If the length will bear it, subdiuide the line AC once again, each
part into ten more: and between the whole line AD and each subdiuision, seek
two mean proportionalls as before. So should the line AB be now divided into
1000 parts. But the ruler being short, it shall suffice, if those 10 which are
nearest the center be expressed, the rest be understood to be so divided,
though actually they be divided into no more then 5 or 2. and this line AB so
divided shall be the line of Solids, and must be transferred into the Sector:
But let the numbers set to them be only 1.1.1.2.3. etc. unto 10. as in the
example.

5 To divide the lines of Sines and Tangents on the side of the Sector.
Upon the center A, and semidiameter equal to the line of Lines, describe a
semicircle ABCD, with AB, perpendicular to the diameter CD. Then divide the
quadrants CB, BD, each of them into 90. and subdiuide each degree into 2 parts:
For so,if straight lines be drawn parallel to the diameter CD, through these
90, and their subdiuisions they shall divide the perpendicular AB unequally
into 90.

geometric illustration

And this line AB so divided shall be the line of Sines; and must be
transferred into the Sector. The numbers set to them are to be 10.20.30. etc.
unto 90 as in the example.

If now in the point D, unto the diameter CD, we shall raise a perpendicular
DE, and to it draw straight lines from the center A, through each degree of
the quadrant DB. This perpendicular so divided by them shall be the line of
Tangents, and must be transferred unto the side of the Sector. The numbers set
to them, are to be 10.20.30. etc. as in the example.

If between A and D, another straight line GF, be drawn parallel to DE, it
will be divided by those lines from the center in like sort as DE is divided,
and it may serve for a lesser line of Tangents, to be set on the edge of the
Sector.

These lines of Sines and Tangents, may yet otherwise be transferred into the
Sector out of the line of Lines, (or rather out of a diagonall Scale equal to
the line of Lines) by tables of Sines and Tangents. In like manner may the
lines of Superficies, be transferred by tables of square roots; and the line
of Solids, by tables of cubique roots: which I leave to others to extract at
leisure.

6 To show the ground of the Sector.
LEt AB, AC, represent the legs of the Sector: then seuering these two AB, AC,
are equal, and their sections AD, AE, also equal, they shall be cut
proportionally: and if we draw the lines BC, DE, they will be parallel by the
second Pro. 6 lib. of Euclid, and so the Triangles ABC, ADE, shall be equiangle;
by reason of the common angle at A, and the equal angles at the base, and
therefore shall have the sides proportional about those equal angles, by the
4 Pro. 6 lib. of Euclid.

geometric illustration

The side AD, shall be to the side AB, as the basis DE, unto the parallel basis
BC, and by conversion AB, shall be unto AD, as BC, unto DE: and by permutation
AD, shall be unto DE, as AB, to BC. etc. So that if AD, be the fourth part of
the side AB, then DE, shall also be the fourth part of his parallel basis BC,
The like reason holds in all other sections.

7 To show the general use of the Sector.
THere may some co^clusions be wrought by the Sector, even then when it is
shut, by reason that the lines are all of one length: but generally the use
hereof consists in the solution of the Golden rule, where three lines being
given of a known denominaton, a fourth proportional is to be found. And this
solution is diverse in regard both of the lines, and of the entrance into the
work.

The solution in regard of the lines is sometimes simple, as when the work is
begun and ended upon the same lines. Sometimes it is compound, as when it is
begun on one kind of lines, and ended on another. It may be begun upon the
lines of Lines; and finished upon the lines of Superficies. It may begin on the
Sines, and end on the Tangents.

The solution in regard of the entrance into the work, may be either with a
parallel or else laterall on the side of the Sector, I call it parallel
entrance, or entering with a parallel, when the two lines of the first
denomination are applied in the parallells, and the third line, and that which
is sought for, are on the side of the Sector. I call it laterall entrance, or
entering on the side of the Sector, when the two lines of the first denomination
are one the side of the Sector, and the third line and that which is to be
found out, do stand in the parallells.

geometric illustration

As for example, let there be given three lines A, B, C, to which I am to find
a fourth proportional. let A, measured in the line of lines, be 40, B 50, and
C 60, and suppose the question be this. If 40 Months give 50 pounds, what shall
60? Here are lines of two denominatio^s, one of months, another of pounds, and
the first with which I am to enter must be that of 40 months. If then I would
enter with a parallel, first I take A, the line of 40, and put it over as a
parallel in 50, reckoned in the line of lines, on either side of the Sector
from the center, so as it may be the Base of an Isoscheles triangle BAC, whose
sides AB, AC are equal to B, the line of the second denomination.

Then the Sector being thus opened, I take C the line of 60, between the feet
of the compasses, and carrying them parallel to BC, I find them to cross the
lines AB, AC, on the side of the Sector in D and E, numbered with 75, wherefore
I conclude the line AD, or AE, is the fourth proportional and the
correspondent number 75 which was required.

But if I would enter on the side of the Sector, then would I dispose the lines
of the first denomination A and C, in the line of Lines, on both sides of the
Sector, in AB, AC, and in AD, AE, so as they should all meet in the center A,
and then taking B the line of the second denomination put it over as a
parallel in BC, that it may be the Basis of the Isocheles triangle BAC, whose
sides AB, AC, are equal to A, the first line of the first denomination, for so
the Sector being thus opened, the other parallel from D to E, shall be the
fourth proportional which was required, and if it be measured with the other
lines, it shall be 75, as before.

In both this manner of operations, the two first lines do serve to open the
Sector to his due angle, the difference between them is especially this, that
in parallel entrance, the two lines of the first denomination, are placed in
the parallells B, C, D, E, and in latterall entrance they are placed on both
sides of the Sector, in AB, AD and in AC, AE.

geometric illustration

Now in simple solution which is begun and ended, upon the same kind of lines,
it is all one which of the two latter lines be put in the second or third
places. As in our example we may say, as 40 are to 50, so 60 unto 75, or else
as 40 are to 60, so 50 unto 75. And hence it comes that we may enter both
with a parrallell, and on the sides two manner of ways at either entrance, and
so the most part of questions may be wrought 4 several ways, though in the
propositions following, I mention only that which is most convenient. Thus
much for the general use of the Sector, which being considered and well
understood, there is nothing hard in that which follows.

CHAP. II. The use of the Scale of Lines.
1. To set down a Line, resembling any given parts or fraction of parts.
numbered line segment
THe lines of Lines are divided actually into 100 parts, but we have put only
10 numbers to them. These we would have to signify either themselves alone, or
ten times themselves, or an hundred times themselves, or a thousand times
themselves, as the matter shall require. As if the numbers given be no more
then 10, then we may think the lines only divided into 10 parts according to
the numbers set to them. If they be more then 10, and not more then 100, then
either line shall contain 100 parts, and the numbers set by them shall be in
value 10.20.30. etc. as they are divided actually. If yet they be more then
100, then every part must be thought to be divided into 10, and either line
shall be 1000 parts, and the numbers set to them shall be in value 100.200.300,
and so forward still increasing themselves by 10. This being presupposed, we
may number the parts and fraction of parts given in the line of lives; and
taking out the distance with a pair of compasses, set it by, for the line so
taken shall resemble the number given.

In this manner may we set down a line resembling 75, if either we take 75 out
of the hundred parts, into which one of the line of lines is actually divided,
and note it in A, or 7. of the first 10 parts, and note it in B, or only. of
one of those hundred parts, and note it in C. Or if this be either to great or
to small, we may run a Scale at pleasure, by opening the compass to some small
distance, and running it ten times over, then opening the compass to these
ten, run them over nine times more, and set figures to them as in this example,
and out of this we may take what parts we will as before.

To this end I have divided the line of inches on the edge of the Sector, so as
one inch contains 8 parts, another 9, another 10, etc. according as they are
figured, and as they are distant from the other end of the Sector, that so we
might have the better estimate.

2 To increase a line in a given proportion. 3 To diminish a line in a given
proportion.
TAke the line given with a pair of compasses, and open the Sector, so as the
feet of the compasses may stand in the points of the number given, then
keeping the Sector at this angle, the parallel distance of the points of the
number required, shall give the line required.

line segment

Let A, be a line given to be increased in the proportion of 3 to 5. First I
take the line A, with the compasses, and open the Sector till I may put it over
in the points of 3 and 3, so the parallel between the points of 5 and 5, does
give me the line B, which was required.

In like manner, if B, be a line given to be diminished in the proportion of 5
to 3, I take the line B and to it open the Sector in the points of 5, so the
parallel between the points of 3, does give me the line A, which was required.

If this manner of work does not suffice, we may multiply or divide the
numbers given by 1, or 2, or 3, etc. And so work by their numbers
equimultiplices, as for 3 and 5, we may open the Sector in 6 and 10, or else
in 9 and 15, or else in 12 and 20, or in 15 and 25, or in 18. and 30. etc.

4 To divide a line into parts given.
TAke the line given, and open the Sector according to the length of the said
line in the points of the parts, whereunto the line should be divided, then
keeping the Sector at this angle, the parallel distance between the points of
1 and 1 shall divide the line given into the parts required.

line segment

Let AB, be the line given to be divided into five parts, first I take this
line AB, and to it open the Sector in the points of 5 and 5, so the parallel
between the points of 1 and 1, does give me the line AC, which does divide it
into the parts required.

line segment

Or let the like line AB, be to be divided into twenty three parts. First I
take out the line and put it upon the Sector in the points of 23, then may I by
the former proposition diminish it in AC, CD, in the proportion of 23, to 10,
and after that divide the line AC into 10, etc. As before.

5 To find a proportion between two or more right lines given.
TAke the greater line given, and according to it open the Sector in the points
of 100 and 100, then take the lesser lines severally, and carry them parallel
to the greater, till they stay in like points, so the number of points wherein
they stay, shall show their proportion unto 100.

line segment

Let the lines given be AB, CD, first I take the line CD, and to it open the
Sector in the points of 100, and 100, then keeping the Sector at this angle, I
enter the lesser line AB, parallel to the former, and find it to cross the
lines of Lines in the points of 60. Wherefore the proportion of AB to CD, is as
60 to 100.

Or if the line CD, be greater then can be put over in the points of 100, then
I admit the lesser line AB, to be 100, and cutting off CE equal to AB, I find
the proportion of CE, unto ED, to be as 100, almost to 67; wherefore this way
ye proportion of AB unto CD, is as 100 unto almost 167.

This proposition may also not unfitly be wrought by any other number, that
admits several divisions, and namely, by the numbers of 60. And so the lesser
line will be found to be 36, which is as before in lesser numbers, as 3 unto 5.
It may also be wrought without opening the Sector. For if the lines between
which we seek a proportion, be applied to the lines of Lines, (or any other
Scale of equal parts) there will be such proportion found between them, as
between the lines to which they are equal.

6 Two lines being given to find a third incontinuall proportion.
FIrst place both the lines given, on both sides of the Sector from the Center,
and mark the terms of their extension, then take out the second line again,
and to it open the Sector, in the term of the first line, so keeping the
Sector at this angle, the parallel distance between the terms of the second
line, shall be the third proportional.

geometric illustration

Let the two lines given be AB, AC, which I take out and place on both sides of
the Sector, so as they all meet in the center A, let the terms of the first
line be B and B, the terms of the second C and C. Then do I take out AC the
second line again, and to it open the Sector in the terms BB. So the
parallel between C and C does give me the third line in continual
proportion. For as AB is unto AC, so BB, equal to AC, is unto CC.

7 Three lines being given to find the fourth in discontinuall proportion.
HEre the first line and the third are to be placed on both sides of the Sector
from the center, then take out the second line, and to it open the Sector in
the terms of the first line. For so keeping the Sector at this angle, the
parallel distance between the terms of the third line, shall be the fourth
proportional.

Let the three lines given be A, B, C.

geometric illustration

First I take out A and C, and place them on both sides of the Sector, in AB,
AC, and AD, AE, laying the beginning of both lines at the center A, then do I
take out B the second line, according to it I open the Sector in B and C, the
terms of the first line: so the parallel between D and E, does give me the
fourth proportional which was required.

As in Arithmetique, it suffices if the first and third number given be of one
denomination, the second and the fourth which is required be of another. For
one and the same denomination is not required necessarily in them all. So in
Geometry, it suffices if the sides AB, AD, resembling the first and third
lines given be measured in one Scale, and the parallells BC, DE be measured in
another. Wherefore knowing the proportion of A the first line, and C the third
line, by the fifth prop. before. Which is here as 8 to 12, and desce^ding in
lesser numbers is as 4 to 6, or as 2 to 3, or ascending in greater numbers, as
16 unto 24, or 18 to 27, or 20 to 30, or 30 to 45, or 40 to 60 etc. If the
Sector be opened in the points of 8 and 8, to the quantity of B, the second
line given, then a parallel between 12 and 12, shall give DE, the fourth line
required. So likewise if it be opened in 4 and 4, then a parallel between 6
and 6, or if in 16 and 16, then a parallel between 24 and 24 shall give the
same DE. And so in the rest.

8 To divide a line in such sort as another line is before divided.
FIrst take out the line given, which is already divided, and laying it on both
sides of the Sector from the center, mark how far it extends. Then take
out the second line which is to be divided, and to it open the Sector in the
terms of the first line. This done, take out the parts of the first line, and
place them also on the same side of the Sector from the center. For the
parallells taken in the terms of these parts, shall be the correspondent parts
in the line which is to be divided.

Let AB, be a line divided in D and E, and BC, the line which I am to divide in
such sort, as AB is divided.

First I take out the line AB, and place it on the line of Lines in AB, AC,
both from the center A, then take I out the second BC, and to it open the
Sector in B and C, the terms of the first line. The Sector thus opened to his
due angle, I take out AD and AE, the parts of the first line AB, and place them
also on both the sides of the Sector in AD, AE, so the parallel DD, gives me
BF, and the parallel EE, gives me BG, and now the line BC, is divided in F
and G, as is the other line AB, in D and E, which is that which (...) geometric
illustration required.

If the line AB, were longer then one of the sides of the Ruler, then should I
find what proportion it has to his parts AD, AE, and that known I may work
as before in the former proposition.

9 Two numbers being given to find a third in continual proportion.
FIrst reckon the two numbers given on both sides of the lines of Lines from
the center, and mark the terms to which either of them extends, then take
out a line resembling the second number again, and to it open the Sector in
the terms of the first number, for so keeping the Sector at this angle, the
parallel distance between the terms of the second laterall number, being
measured in the same Scale, from whence his parallel was taken, shall give the
third number proportional.

Let the two numbers given be 18, 24, these being resembled in lines, the work
will be in a manner all one, with that in the sixth Prop. and so the third
proportional number will be found to to be 32.

10. Three numbers being given to find a fourth in discontinuall proportion.
THe solution of this proposition, is in a manner all one with that before in
the seventh Prop. only there may be some difficulty in placing of the numsers.
To avoid this, we must remember that three number being given, the question is
annexed but to one, and this must always be placed in the third place, that
which agrees with this third number in denomination, shall be the first number,
and that which remains the second number. This being considered, reckon the
first, and third numbers, which are of the first denomination on both sides of
the lines of Lines from the center, and mark the terms to which either of
them extends, then take out a line resembling the second number, and to it
open the Sector in the terms of the first number, for so keeping the Sector at
this angle, the parallel distance between the terms of the third laterall
number, being measured in the same Scale from whence his parallel was taken,
shall give the fourth number proportional.

As if a question were proposed in this manner, 10 yards cost 8 l, how many
yards may we buy for 12 l? here the question is annexed to 12; and therefore
it shall be the third number, and because 8 is of the same denomination, it
shall be the first number, then 10 remaining, it must be the second number, so
will they stand in this order, 8, 10, 12. These being resembled in lines, the
work will be in a manner the same, with that in the seventh Prop. and the
fourth proportional number will be found to be 15. For as 8 are to 10, so 12
unto 15.

And this holds in direct proportion, where, as the first number is to the
second, so the third to the fourth. So that if the third number be greater then
the first, the fourth will be greater then the second, or if the third number
be less then the first, the fourth will be less then the second, but it^
reciprocal proportion, commonly called the Back rule, where by how much the
first number is greater then the third, so much the second will be less then
the fourth, or by how much the first number is less then the third, so much
the second will be greater then the fourth. The manner of working must be
contrary, that is; the Sector is to be opened in the terms of the third
number, and the parallel resembling the number required, is to be found
between the terms of the first number, the rest may be observed as before, as
for example.

If twelve men would raise a frame in ten days, in how many days would eight
men raise the same frame? Here, because the fewer men would require the longer
time, though the numbers be 12, 10, 8, yet the fourth proportional will be
found to be 15.

So if 60 yards, of three quarters of a yard in breadth, would hang round about
a room, and it were required to know how many yards of half a yard in breadth,
would serve for the same room. The fourth proportional would be found to be
90.

So if to make a foot superficial, 12 inches in breadth do require 12 inches
in length, and the breadth being 16 inches, it were required to know the
length. Here, because the more breadth, the less length, the fourth
proportional will be found to be 9.

So if to make a Solid foot, a base of 144 inches, require 12 inches in
height, and a base given being 216 inches, it were required to know how many
inches it shall have in height. The fourth proportional would be found to be 8.

This last proposition of finding a fourth proportional number, may be wrought
also by the lines of Superficies, and by the lines of Solids.

CHAP, III. The use of the lines of Superficies.
1 To find a proportion between two or more like Superficies.
TAke one of the sides of the greater Superficies given, and according to it
open the Sector in the points of 100 and 100, in the lines of Superficies, then
take the like sides of the lesser Superficies severally, and carry them
parallel to the former, till they stay in like points, so the number of points
wherein they stay, shall show their proportion unto 100.

line segment

Let A and B, be the sides of like Superficies, as the sides of two squares, or
the diameters of two circles, first I take the side A, and to it open the
Sector in the points of 100, then keeping the Sector to this angle, I enter the
lesser side B, parallel to the former, and find it to cross the lines of
Superficies in the points of 40, wherefore the proportion of the Superficies,
whose side is A, to that whose side is B, is as 100 unto 40, which is in lesser
numbers, as 5 unto 2.

This proposition might have been wrought by 60, or any other number that
admits several divisions. It may also be wrought without opening the Sector,
for if the sides of the Superficies given, be applied to the lines of
Superficies beginning always at the center of the Sector, there will be such
proportion found between them, as between the number of parts whereon they
fall.

2 To augment a Superficies in a given Proportion. 3 To diminish a Superficies
in a given Proportion.
TAke the side of the Superficies, and to it open the Sector in the points of
the numbers given; then keeping the Sector at that angle, the parallel
distance between the points of the number required, shall give the like side of
the Superficies required.

line segments

Let A be the side of a Square to be augmented in the proportion of 2 to 5.
First I take the side A, and put it over in the lines of Superficies, in 2 and
2; so the parallel between 5 and 5, does give me the side B, on which if I
should make a Square, it would have such proportion to the square of A, as 5
unto 2.

In like manner if B were the semidiameter of a circle to be diminished in the
proportion of 5 unto 2, I would take out B, and put it over in the lines of
Superficies, in 5 and 5; so the parallel between 2 and 2, would give me A; on
which Semidiameter if I should make a circle, it would be less then the circle
made upon the Semidiameter B, in such proportion as 2 is less then 5.

For variety of work the like caution may be here observed to that which we
gave in the third Prop. of Lines.

4 To add one like Superficies to another. 5 To subtract one like Superficies
from another.
FIrst, the proportion between like sides of the Superficies given, is to be
found by the first Prop. of Superficies, then add or subtract the numbers of
those proportions, and accordingly augment or diminish by the former Prop.

line segments

As if A and B were the side of two Squares, and it were required to make a
third Square equal to them both. First the proportion between the squares of
A and B, would be found to be as 100 unto 40, or in the lesser numbers as 5 to
2; then because 5 and 2 added do make 7, I augment the side A in the proportion
of 5 to 7, and produce the side C, on which if I make a square, it will be
equal to both the squares of A and B, which was required.

In like manner A and B being the sides of two Squares, if it were required to
subtract the square of B out of the square of A, and to make a square equal to
the remainder, here the proportion being as 5 to 2, because 2 taken out of 5,
the remainder is 3, I would diminish the side A in the proportion of 5 to 3,
and so I should produce the side D, on which if I make a square, it will be
equal to the remainder when the square of B is taken out of the square of A,
that is, the two squares made upon B and D, shall be equal to the first square
made upon the side A.

4 To find a mean proportional between two lines given.
FIrst find what proportion is between the lines given, as they are lines, by
the fifth Prop. of Lines, then open the Sector in the lines of Superficies,
according to his number, to the quantity of the one, and a parallel taken
between the points of the number belonging to the other line shall be the
mean proportional.

line segments

Let the lines given be A and C. The proportion between them as they are lines
will be found by the fifth Prop. of Lines to be as 4 to 9. Wherefore I take the
line C, and put it over in the lines of Superficies between 9 and 9, and
keeping the Sector at this angle, his parallel between 4 and 4 does give me B
for the mean proportional. Then for proof of the operation I may take this
line B, and put it over between 9 and 9: so his parallel between 4 and 4, shall
give me the first line A. Whereby it is plain that these three lines do hold
in continual proportion; and therefore B is a mean proportional between A
and C the extremes given.

Upon the finding out of this mean proportion depend many Corollaries, as

To make a Square equal to a Superficies given.
IF the Superficies given be a rectangle parallellogram, a mean proportional
between the two unequal sides shall be the side of his equal square.

If it shall be a triangle, a mean proportion between the perpendicular and
half the base shall be the side of his equal square. If it shall be any other
right-lined figure, it may be resolved into triangles, and so a side of a
square found equal to every triangle; and these being reduced into one equal
square, it shall be equal to the whole right-lined figure given.

To find a proportion between Superficies, though they be unlike one to the
other.
IF to every Superficies we find the side of his equal square, the proportion
between these squares, shall be the proportion between the Superficies given.

geometric illustration

Let the Superficies given, be the oblonge A, and the triangle B. First between
the unequal sides of A, I find a mean proportional, and note it in C: this
is the side of a square equal unto A. Then between the prependicular of B,
and half his base, I find a mean proportional, and note it in B: this is
the side of a Square equal to B: but the proportion between the squares of C
and B, will be found by the first Prop. of Superficies to be as 5 to 4: and
therefore this is the proportion between those given Superficies.

To make a Superficies like to one Superficies and equal to another.
LEt the one Superficies given be the triangle A, and the other the Rhomboides
B; and let it be required to make another geometric illustration Rhomboides
like to B, and equal to the triangle A.

First between the perpendicular and the base of B, I find a mean
proportional, and note it in B, as the side of his equal square: then
between the perpendicular of the triangle A, and half his base, I find a
mean proportional, and note it in A, as the side of his equal square.
Wherefore now as the side B is to the side A, so shall the sides of the
Rhomboides given be to C and D, the sides of the Romboides required, and his
pendicular also to E, the perpe^dicular required.

Having the sides and the perpendicular, I may frame the Rhomboides up, and it
will be equal to the triangle A.

If the Superficies given had been any other right-lined figures, they might
have been resolved into triangles, and then brought into squares as before.

Many such Corollaries might have been annexed, but the means of finding a
mean proportional being known, they all follow of themselves.

7 To find a mean proportional between two numbers given.
FIrst reckon the two numbers given on both sides of the Lines of Superficies,
from the center, and mark the terms whereunto they extend; then take a line
out of the Line of Lines, or any other scale of equal parts resembling one of
those numbers given, and put it over in the terms of his like number in the
lines of Superficies; for so keeping the Sector at this angle, the parallel
taken from the terms of the other number and measured in the same scale from
which the other parallel was taken, shall here show the mean proportional
which was required.

Let the numbers given be 4 and 9. If I shall take the line A, in the Diagram
of the sixth Prop. resembling 4 in a scale of equal parts, and to it open the
Sector in the terms of 4 and 4, in the lines of Superficies, his parallel
between 9 and 9 does give me B for the mean proportional. And this measured
in the scale of equal parts does extend to 6, which is the mean proportional
number between 4 and 9.

For as 4 to 6, so 6 to 9.

In like manner if I take the line C, resembling 9 in a scale of equal parts,
and to it open the Sector in the terms of 9 and 9, in the lines of
Superficies, his parallel between 4 and 4 does give me the same line B, which
will prove to be 6, as before, if it be measured in the same scale whence D was
taken.

8 To find the square root of a number. 9 The root being given to find the
square number of that root.
IN the extraction of a square root it is usual to set pricks under the first
figure, the third, the fifth, the seventh, and so forward, beginning from the
right hand toward the left, and as many pricks as fall to be under the square
number given, so many figures shall be in the root: so that if the number
given be less then 100, the root shall be only of one figure; if less then
10000, it shall be but two figures; if less then 1000000, it shall be three
figures, etc.

Thereupon the lines of Superficies are divided first into an hundred parts,
and if the number given be greater then 100, the first division (which before
did signify only one) must signify 100, and the whole line shall be 10000
parts: if yet the number given be greater then 10000, the first division must
now signify 10000, and the whole line be esteemed at 1000000 parts: and if
this be too little to express the number given, as often as we have recourse to
the beginning, the whole line shall increase it self an hundred times.

By this means if the last prick to the left hand shall fall under the last
figure, which will be as often as there be odd figures, the number given shall
fall out between the center of the Sector and the tenth division: but if the
last prick shall fall under the last figure but one, which will be as often as
there be even figures, then the number given shall fall out between the tenth
division and the end of the Sector.

This being considered, when a number is given and the square root is
required, take a pair of compasses and setting one foot in the center, extend
the other to the term of the number given in one of the lines of Superficies;
for this distance applied to one of the Lines of Lines, shall show what the
Square root is, without opening the Sector.

Thus 64 does give a root of 8, and 860 a root of almost 19, and 1296 a root
of 36, and 7056 a root of 84, and 62500 a root of 250, and 714000 a root of
about 845, and so in the rest.

On the contrary, a number given may be squared, if first we extend the
compasses to the number given in the lines of Lines, and then apply the
distance to the Lines of Superficies, as may appear by the former examples.

10 Three numbers being given to find the fourth in a duplicated proportion.
IT is plain by the 19 and 20 Prop. 6. Lib. of Euclid, that like Superficies
do hold in a duplicated proportion of their homologall sides, whereupon a
question being moved concerning Superficies and their sides. It is usual in
Arithmeticke that the proportion be first duplicated before the question be
resolved, which is not necessary in the use of the Sector, only the numbers
which do signify Superficies must be reckoned in the lines of Superficies, and
they which signify the sides of Superficies, in the lines of Lines, after this
manner.

If a question be made concerning a Superficies, the two numbers of the first
denomination must be reckoned in the lines of Lines, and the Sector opened in
the terms of the first number to the quantity of a line out of the scale of
Superficies resembling the second number; so his parallels taken between the
terms of the third number, being measured in the same scale of Superficies,
shall give the Superficial number which was required.

As if a Square, whose side is forty perches in length, shall contain ten
acres in the Superficies, and it be required to know how many acres the Square
should contain, whose side is sixty perches.

Here if I took 10 out of the line of Superficies, and put it over in 40 in
the lines of Lines, his parallel between 60 and 60 measured in the line of
Superficies, would be 22; and such is the number of acres required. For Squares
do hold in a duplicated proportion of their sides; wherefore when the
proportion of their sides is as 4 to 6, and 4 multiplied into 4 become 16, and
6 multiplied into 6 become 36, the proportion of their squares shall be as 16
to 36; and such is the proportion of 10 to 22.

If a field measured with a statute perch of 16 foot, shall contain 288
acres, and it be required to know how many acres it would contain if it were
measured with a woodland perch of 18 foot.

Here because the proportion is reciprocal, if I took 288 out of the line of
Superficies, and put it over in 18, in the lines of Lines, his parallel
between 16 and 16 measured in the line of Superficies, would be 242; and such
is the number of acres required.

For seeing the proportion of the sides is as 16 to 18, or in lesser numbers as
11 to 12, and that 11 multiplied into 11 become 121, and 12 into 12 become 144,
the proportion of these Superficies shall be as a 121 to 144, and so have 288
to 242, in reciprocal proportion.

On the contrary, if a question be proposed concerning the side of a
Superficies, the two numbers of the first denomination must be reckoned in the
lines of Superficies, and the Sector opened in the terms of the first number,
to the quantity of a line, out of the line of Lines, or some Scale of equal
parts, resembling the second number; so his parallel taken between the terms
of the third number being measured in the same scale with the second number,
shall give the fourth number required.

As if a field contained 288 acres when it was measured with a statute perch of
16, and being measured with another perch, was found to contain 242 acres, it
were required to know what was the length of the perch with which it was so
measured.

Here because the proportion is reciprocal, if I took 16 out of the line of
Lines, and put it over in 242 in the lines of Superficies, his parallel
between 288 and 288, being measured in the line of Lines, would be 18, and
such is the length of the perch in foot whereby the field was last measured.

For seeing the proportion of the acres is as 288 unto 242, or in the least
numbers as 144 to 121, and that the root of 144 is 12, and the root of 121 is
11, the proportion of roots and consequently of the perches shall be as 12 to
11, and so are 16 to 18, in reciprocal proportion.

If 360 men were to be set in form of a long square, whose sides shall have
the proportion of 5 to 8; and it were required to know the number of men to be
placed in front and file: if the sides were only 5 and 8, there should be but
40 men; but there are 360: therefore working as before, I find that As 40 to
the square of 5,

so 360 to the square of 15.

As 40 to the square of 8,

so 360 to the square of 24.

and so 15 and 24 are the sides required.

If 1000 men were lodged in a square ground, whose side were 60 paces, and it
were required to know the side of the square wherein 5000 might be so lodged,
here working as before, I should find that As 1000 are to the square of 60:

so 5000 to the square of 134.

And such very near is the number of paces required*

CHAP. IV. The use of the lines of Solids.
To find a proportion between two or more like Solids.
IN the Sphere, in regular, parallel, and other like bodies, whose sides next
the equal angles are proportional, the work is in a manner the same, with
that in the first Prop. of Superficies, but that it is wrought on other lines.

Take one of the sides of the greater Solid, and according to it open the
Sector in the points of 1000 and 1000, in the lines of Solids, then take the
like sides of the lesser Solids severally, and carry them parallel to the
former, till they stay in like points, so the number of points wherein they
stay, shall show their proportion to 1000.

line segments

Let A and B, be the like sides of like Solids, either the diameters, or
semidiameters of two spheres, or the sides of two cubes, or other like. First I
take the side A, and to it open the Sector in the points of 1000, then keeping
the Sector at this angle, I enter the lesser side B, parallel to the former,
and find it to cross the line of Solids in the points of 400, and such is the
proportion between the Solids required, which in lesser number is as 5 to 2.

This proposition might have been wrought by 60, or any other number that
admits several divisions.

It may also be wrought without opening the Sector, for if the sides of the
Solids given, be applied to the lines of Solids, beginning always at the
center of the Sector, there will be such proportion between them, as between
the numbers of parts whereon they fall.

2 To augment a Solid in a given proportion. 3 To diminish a Solid in a given
proportion.
TAke the side of the Solid given, and to it open the Sector, in the points of
the number given: then keeping the Sector at that angle, the parallel distance
between the points of the number required, shall give the like side of the
Solid required.

If it be a paralleleopipedon, or some irregular Solid, the other like sides
may be found out in the same manner, and with them the Solids required, may be
made up with the same angles.

line segments

Let A be the side of a cube, to be augmented in the proportion of 2 to 3.
First I take the side A, and put it over in the lines of Solids in 2 and 2, so
the parallel between 3 and 3, does give me the side B, on which if I make a
cube, it will have such proportion to the cube of A, as 3 to 2.

In like manner, if B were the diameter of a Sphere, to be diminished in the
proportion of 3 to 2. I would take out B, and put it over in the lines of
Solids, in 3 and 3, so the parallel between 2 and 2, would give me A: to
which diameter if I should make a Sphere, it would be less then the Sphere,
whose diameter is B, in such proportion as 2 is less then 3.

Here also for variety of work, may the like caution be observed to that which
we gave in the third Prop. of Lines.

4 To add one like Solid to another. 5 To subtract one like Solid from another.
FIrst the proportion between the sides of the like Solids given, is to be
found by the first Prop. of Solids: then add or subtract those proportions,
and accordingly augment or diminish by the former Prop.

line segments

As if A and B were the sides of two cubes, and it were required to make a
third cube equal to them both: first the proportion between the sides A and
B, would be found to be as 100 to 40, or in lesser terms as 5 to 2. Then
because 5 and 2 being added do make 7, I augment the side A in the proportion
of 5 to 7, and produce the side C, on which if I make a cube, it will be equal
to both the cubes of A and B, which was required.

In like manner A and B being the fides of two cubes, if it were required to
subtract the cube of B out of the cube of A, and to make a cube equal to the
remainder. Here the proportion being as 5 to 2, because 2 taken out of 5, the
remainder is 3, I should diminish the side A in the proportion of 5 to 3, and
so I should have the side D, on which if I make a cube, it will be equal to
the remainder when the cube of B is taken out of the cube of A, that is the two
cubes made upon B and D, shall be equal to the first cube made upon the side A.

6 To find two mean proportional lines between two extreme lines given.
FIrst I find what proportion is between the two extreme lines given as they
are lines, by the fifth Prop. of Lines, then open the Sector in the lines of
Solids, to the quantity of the former extreme, and a parallel between the
points of the number belonging to the other extreme, shall be that mean
proportional which is next the former extreme. This done, open the Sector
again to this mean proportional in the points of the former extreme, and the
parallel distance between the points of the latter extreme, shall be the
other mean proportional required.

line segments

Let the two extreme lines given be A and D, the proportion between them, as
they are lines, will be found to be as 27 to 8. Wherefore I take the line A,
and put it over in the lines of Solids between 27 and 27, and keeping the
Sector at this angle, his parallel between 8 and 8, does give me B, the mean
proportional next unto A. Then put I over this line B, between the aforesaid
27 and 27, and his parallel between 8 and 8 does give me the line C, the
other mean proportional which was required.

Again, for proof of the operation I put over this line C in the aforesaid 27
and 27, and his parallel between 8 and 8 does give me the very line D: whereby
it is plain that these four lines do hold in continual proportion; and so B
and C are found to be the mean proportionals between A and D the extremes
given.

7 To find two mean proportional numbers between two extreme numbers given.
FIrst reckon the numbers given on both sides of the lines of Solids, beginning
from the center, and marking the terms whereto they extend: then take a line
out of the line of Lines, or any other scale of equal parts resembling the
former of those numbers, and put it over in the lines of Solids, between the
points of his like number, and a parallel between the points belonging to the
other extreme, measured in the scale from whence the other parallel was taken,
shall give that mean proportional number which is next the former extreme.
This done, open the Sector again to this mean proportional in the points of
the former extreme, and the parallel distance between the points of the
latter extteame, measured in the same scale as before, shall there show the
other mean proportional required.

line segments

Let the two extreme numbers given be 27 and 8; if I shall take the line A,
resembling 27 in a scale of equal parts, and to it open the Sector in 27 and
27, in the line of Solids, his parallel between 8 and 8 does give me B for
his next mean proportional, and this measured in the former scale does extend
to 18. Then put I over this line B between the aforesaid 27 and 27, and his
parallel between 8 and 8 does give me C for the other mean proportional, and
this measured in the former scale does extend to 12. Again, for proof of my
work, I put over this line C between 27 and 27, as before, and his parallel
between 8 and 8 does give me D, which measured in the former scale does extend
to 8, which was the latter extreme number given; whereby it is plain that
these four numbers do hold in continual proportion: and therefore 18 and 12
are mean proportionals between 27 and 8, which was required.

8 To find the cubique root of a number. 9 The root being given to find the
cube number of that root.
IN the extraction of a cubique root, it is usual to set prick^ under the
first figure, the fourth, the seventh, the tenth, and so forward, omitting two,
and pricking the third from the righthand toward the left; and as many pricks
as fall to be under the cubique number, so many figures shall be in the root.
So that if the number given be less then 1000, the root shall be only of one
figure; if less then 1000000, it shall be but of two figures; if above these,
and less then 1000000000, it shall be but three figures; etc. whereupon the
lines of Solids are divided, first into 1000 parts, and if the numbers given be
greater the^ 1000, the first division (whcih before did signify only one)
must signify 1000, and the whole line shall be 1000000: if yet the number
given be greater then 1000000, the first division must now signify 1000000,
and the whole line be esteemed at 1000000000 parts, and if these be to little
to express the numbers given, as often as we have recourse to the beginning, the
whole line shall increase it self a thousand times.

By these means, if the last prick, to the left hand, shall fall under the
last figure, the number given shall be reckoned at the beginning of the lines
of Solids, from 1 to 10, and the first figure of the root shall be always
either 1, or 2. If the last prick shall fall under the last figure but one,
then the number given shall be reckoned in the middle of the line of Solids,
between 10 and 100, and the first figure of the root shall be always either
2, or 3, or 4. But if the last prick shall fall under the last figure but two,
then the number given, shall be reckoned at the end of the line of Solids,
between 100, and 1000.

This being considered when a number is given, and the cubique root required:
Set one foot of the compasses in the center of the Sector, extend the other in
the line of Solids, to the points of the number given: for this distance
applied to one of the line of Lines, shall show what the cubique root is,
without opening the Sector.

So the nearest root of 8490000, is about 204.

The nearest root of 84900000, is about 439.

The nearest root of 849000000, is about 947.

On the contrary, a number may be cubed, if first we extend the compasses to
the number given, in the line of Lines, and then apply the distance to the
lines of Solids; as may appear by the former examples.

10 Three numbers being given to find a fourth in a triplicated proportion.
AS like Superficies do hold in a duplicated proportion, so like solids in a
triplicated proportion of their homologall sides: and therefore the same work
is to be observed here on the lines of Solids, as before in the lines of
Superficies; as may appear by these two examples.

If a cube whose side is 4 inches, shall be 7 pound weight, and it be required
to know the weight of a cube whose side is 7 inches; here the proportion would
be, As 4 are to a cube of 7:

so 7 to a cube of 37.



And if I took 7 out of the lines of Solids, and put it over in 4 and 4, in
the lines of Lines, his parallel between 7 and 7 measured in the lines of
Solids, would be 37; and such is the weight required.

If a bullet of 27 pound weight have a diameter of 6 inches, and it be required
to know the diameter of the like bullet, whose weight is 125 pounds; here the
proportion would be, As the cubique root of 27 is unto 6:

so the cubique root of 125 is unto 10.



And if I took 6 out of the line of Lines, and put it over in 27 and 27 of the
lines of Solids, his parallel between 125 and 125 measured in the line of
Lines, would be 10; and such is the length of the diameter required.

The end of the first book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE SECTOR, Containing the use of the Circular Lines.
CHAP. I. Of the nature of Sines, Chords, Tangents and Secants, fit to be
known before hand in reference to right-line Triangles.
IN the Canon of Triangles, a circle is commonly divided into 360 degrees, each
degree into 60 minutes, each minute into 60 seconds.

geometric illustration

A semicircle therefore is an arc of 180 gr.

A quadrant is an arc of 90 gr.

The measure of an angle is the arc of a circle, described out of the angular
point, intercepted between the sides sufficiently produced.

So the measure of a right angle is always an arc of 90 gr. and in this
example the measure of the angle BAD is the arc BC of 40 gr; the measure of
the angle BAG, is the arc BF of 50 gr.

The complement of an arc or of an angle does commonly signify that arc
which the given arc does want of 90 gr: and so the arc BF is the co^plement
of the arc BC; and the angle BAF, whose measure is BF, is the complement of
the angle BAC; and on the contrary.

The complement of an arc or angle in regard of a semicircle, is that arc
which the given arc wants to make up 180 gr: and so the angle EAH is the
complement of the angle EAF, as the arc EH is the complement of the arc FE,
in which the arc CE is the excess above the quadrant.

The proportions which these arkes (being the measures of angles) have to the
sides of a triangle, cannot be certain, unless that which is crooked be
brought to a straight line; and that may be done by the application of Chords,
Right Sines, versed Sines, Tangents and Secants, to the semidiameter of a
circle.

A Chorde is a right line subtending an arc: so BE is the chorde of the arc
BCE, and BF a chorde of the arc BF.

A right Sine is half the chorde of the double arc, viz. the right line which
falls perpendicularly from the one extreme of the given arc, upon the
diameter drawn to the other extreme of the said arc.

So if the given arc be BC, or the given angle be BAC, let the diameter be
drawn through the center A unto C; and a perpendicular BD be let down from
the extreme B, upon AC; this perpendicular BD shall be the right sine both of
the arc BC, and also of the angle BAC: and it is also the half of the chord
BE, subtending the arc BCE, which is double to the given arc BC. In like
manner, the semidiameter FA, is the right sine of the arc FC, and of the right
angle FAC; for it falls perpendicularly upon AC, and it is the half of the
chord FH.

This whole Sine of 90 gr. is hereafter called Radius; but the other Sines take
their denomination from the degrees and minutes of their arks.

Sinus versus, the versed sine is a segment of the diameter, intercepted
between the right sine of the same arc, and the circumference of the circle.
So DC is the versed sine of the arc CB, and GF the versed sine of the arc BF,
and GH the versed sine of the arc BH.

A Tangent is a right line perpendicular to the diameter, drawn by the one
extreme of the given arc, and terminated by the secant drawn from the center
through the other extreme of the said arc.

A Secant is a right line drawn from the center, through one extreme of the
given arc, till it meet with the tangent raised from the diameter at the
other extreme of the said arc.

So if the given arc be CE, or the given angle be CAE, let the diameter be
drawn through the center A to C, and in C to AC, be raised a perpendicular CI.
Then let another line be drawn from the center A through E, till it meet with
the perpendicular CI in I; the line CI is a Tangent, and AI is the Secant both
of the arc CE, and of the angle CAE.

CHAP. II. Of the general use of Sines and Tangents.
1 The Radius being known to find the right sine of any arc or angle.
IF the Radius of the circle given be equal to the laterall Radius, that is,
to the whole line of Sines on the Sector, there needs no farther work, but to
take the other sines also out of the side of the Sector. But if it be either
greater or lesser, then let it be made a parallel Radius, by applying it over
in the lines of Sines, between 90 and 90; so the parallel taken from the like
laterall sines, shall be the sine required.

As if the given Radius be AC, and it were required to find the sine of 50 Gr.
and his complement agreeable to that radius.

geometric illustration

Let AB, AB represent the lines of sines on the Sector, and let BB, the
distance between 90 and 90, be equal to the given radius AC. Here the lines A
40, A 50, A 90, may be called the laterall sines of 40, 50, and 90; in regard
of their place on the sides of the Sector. The lines between 40 and 40,
between 50 and 50, between 90 and 90, may be called the parallel sines of
40, 50, and 90; in regard they are parallel one to the other. The whole sine
of 90 Gr. here standing for the semidiameter of the circle, may be called the
Radius. And therefore if AC be put over in the line of Sines in 90 and 90, and
so made a parallel radius, his parallel sine between 50 and 50, shall be BD,
the sine of 50 required. And because 50 taken out of 90, the complement is 40;
his parallel sine between 40 and 40, shall be BG, the sine of the complement
which was required.

2 The right sine of any arc being given to find the Radius.
TVrne the sine given into a parallel sine, and his parallel Radius shall be
the Radius required.

As if BD were the given sine of 50 Gr. and it were required to find the
Radius: let BD be made a parallel sine of 50 Gr. by applying it over in the
lines of Sines, between 50 and 50; so his parallel Radius between 90 and 90
shall be AC, the Radius required.

3 The Radius of a circle, or the right Sine of any arc being given, and a
straight line resembling a Sine, to find the quantity of that unknown Sine.
LEt the Radius or right sine given be turned into his parallel; then take the
right line given, and carry it parallel to the former, till it stay in like
Sines: so the number of degrees and minutes where it stays, shall give the
quantity of the Sine required.

As if BD were the given sine of 50 Gr. and BG the straight line given: first I
make BD a parallel sine of 50 Gr; then keeping the Sector at this angle, I
carry the line BG parallel, and find it to stay in no other but 40 and 40; and
therefore 40 gr. is his quantity required.

4 The Radius or any right Sine being given, to find the versed sine of any
arc.
IF the arc, whose versed sine is required, be less then the quadrant, take
the sine of the complement out of the radius, and the remainder shall be the
sinus versus, the versed sine of that arc.

As if AB being the laterall Radius, it were required to find to find the
versed line of 40 gr; here the sine of the complement is A 50, and therefore B
50 is the versed sine required. Or if I reckon from B, at the end of the
Sector, toward the center, the distance from 90 to 80, is the versed sine of 10
gr; from 90 to 70, the versed sine of 20 gr; from 90 to 60, is the versed sine
of 30 gr; and so in the rest.

If AD be the given sine of 50 gr. and it be required to find the versed sine
of 50 gr; here because AD is unequal to the laterall sine of 50 gr, I make it
a parallel. And first I find the radius AC; then the sine of the complement A
40, which being taken out of AC, leaves C 40 for the versed sine of 50 gr.
which was required.

But if the arc, whose versed sine is required, be greater then the quadrant,
his versed sine also is greater then the Radius, by the right sine of his
excess above 90 gr.

As if AC being the Radius given, it were required to find the versed sine of
130 gr: here the excess above 90 gr. is 40 gr; and therefore the versed sine
required is equal to the Radius AC and A 40, both being set together.

5 The Diameter or Radius being given to find the Chords of every arc.
The sines may be fitted many ways to serve for chords.

1 A sine being the half of the chord of the double arc, if the sine be
doubled, it gives the chord of the double ark, a Sine of 10 gr. doubled gives
a Chord of 20 gr; and a Sine of 15 gr. being doubled gives a Chord of 30 gr;
and so in the rest. As here BD, the sine of BC, an arc of 40 gr. being doubled
gives BE the chord of BCE, which is an arc of 80 gr. Wherefore if the Radius
of the circle given be equal to the laterall Radius, let the Sector be opened
near unto his length, so that both the lines of Sines may make but one direct
line: so the distance on the sines between 10 and 10, shall be a chord of 20;
the distance between 20 and 20, shall be a chord of 40; and the distance
between 30 and 30, shall be a chord of 60; and so in the rest.

2 Because a sine is the half of the chord of the double arc, the proportion
holds.

geometric illustration

As the diameter FH unto the radius AH, so the chord BE unto the sine DE, or
the chord GL unto the sine AL: and then if the radius AH, be put for the
diameter, which is a chord of 180 gr, the sine DE or AL shall serve for a chord
of 80 gr, and the semiradius which is the sine of 30 gr, shall serve for a
chord of 60 gr, and go for the semidiameter of a circle, and so in the rest. So
that by these means we shall not need to double the lines of Sines as before,
but only to double the numbers. And to this purpose I have subdivided each
degree of the sines into two, that so they might show how far the half degrees
do reach in the sines, and yet stand for whole degrees when they are used as
chords.

Wherefore if the Radius of the circle given be equal to the lateral
semiradius (the sine of 30 Gr. and chord of 60 Gr.) there needs no farther work
then to take the sine of 10 Gr. for a chord of 20 Gr. and a sine of 15 Gr. for
a chord of 30 Gr. etc.

But if the Radius of the circle given be either greater or lesser then the
laterall semiradius, take the diameter of it, and make it a parallel chord of
180 Gr. by applying it over the lines of Sines between 90 and 90: or take the
Radius or Semidiameter which is equal to the chord of 60 Gr. and make it a
parallel Radius of 60 Gr. by applying it over in the sines of 30 and 30, and
keep the Sector at this angle. The parallels taken from the laterall chords
shall be the chords required.

As if the diameter of a circle given were the line AB, and it were required to
find the chord of 80 gr: first, I make AB a parallel chord of 180 Gr. or the
half of it a parallel chord of 60 Gr; so his parallel LG does give me FG the
chord of 80 Gr. which was required.

3 Seeing that as the sine of the complement of the half arc is unto the
Radius, so the sine of the same whole arc is unto the chord of it: if we seek
but for one single chord, we may find it without either doubling the sines, or
doubling the number. For applying over the Radius given in the sine of the
complement of half the arc required, his parallel sine shall be the chord
required.

As if the semidiameter of the circle given were AC, and it were required to
find the chord of 40 Gr: the half of 40 Gr. is 20 Gr. the complement of 20 Gr.
is 70 Gr. Wherefore I make AC a parallel sine of 70 Gr. and his parallel sine
GL does give me FG the chord of 40 Gr. agreeable to the semidiameter AC.

geometric illustration

6 The chord of any arc being given to find the diameter and Radius.
TVrne the chord given unto a parallel chord, and his parallel semiradius
shall be the semidiameter, and the parallel radius shall be the diameter.

As if FG be the chord of 80 gr. I put this over in G and L, the sine of 40,
and chord of 80 gr. and the parallel chord of 180 gr. gives me AB the
diameter required.

Or if I turn the chord given into a parallel sine of the same quantity, his
parallel sine of the complement of half the arc, does give me the
semidiameter.

As if FG be the given chord of 40 gr. I put it over in G and L, the sines of
40 gr; then because the half of 40 gr. is 20 gr. and the complement of 20 gr.
is 70 gr. I take out the parallel sine of 70 gr. and it gives me AC for the
semidiameter, agreeable to that chord of 40 gr.

7 To open the Sector to the quantity of any angle given.
8 The Sector being opened, to find the quantity of the angle.
IT is one thing to open the edges of the Sector to an angle, and another thing
to open the lines on the Sector to the same angle. For the lines of lines on
the one side, and the lines of sines on the other side, do make an angle of 2
gr. when the Sector is close shut, and the edges do make no angle at all. So
likewise the lines of Superficies and the lines of Solids do make an angle of
10 gr, which are to be allowed to the edges.

The lines of lines may be opened to a right angle, if the whole line of 100
parts be applied over in 80 and 60.

The lines of sines may be opened to a right angle, if the large secant of 45
gr. be applied over in the sines of 90 gr. or if the sine of 90 gr. be applied
over in the sines of 45 gr. or if the sine of 45 gr. be applied over in the
sines of 30 gr.

If it be required to open those lines to any other angle, take out the chord
thereof, and apply it over in the semiradius, and those lines shall be opened
to that angle.

As if it were required to open the Sector in the lines of sines to an angle of
40 gr, take out the chord of 40 gr, and to it open the Sector in the chord of
60 gr; so shall the lines of sines be opened to the angle required. Or if the
same chord of 40 Gr. be applied over between 50 and 50, in the lines of lines,
they shall also be opened to the same angle. If it be applied over in 25 of the
lines of Superficies, or 125 in the lines of Solids, they also shall be opened
to the same angle: because the chord of 60 Gr. or sine of 30 Gr. and 50 in the
lines of lines, and 25 in the lines of Superficies, and 125 in the Solids, are
all of the same length with the semiradius.

Or if the Semiradius be applied over between ^he sine of 30 Gr. and the sine
of the complement of the angle required, it will open the lines of Sines to
that angle.

As if the semiradius be applied over in the sines of 30 Gr. and the sine of 50
Gr. it shall open the lines of Sines to an angle of 40 Gr.

On the contrary, if the Sector be opened to an angle, and it be required to
know the quantity thereof, open the compasses to the semiradius, and setting
one foot in the sine of 30 Gr. turn the other toward the other line of sines,
and it shall fall there in the complement of the angle; if it fall on 50 Gr.
the angle is 40 Gr; if on 60 Gr. the angle is 30 Gr. etc.

Or take over the parallel chord of 60 Gr. and measure it in the laterall
chord, and it shall there show the quantity of the angle. As if the Sector
being opened to an angle, I should take over the parallel of 30 Gr. of the
sines, and 60 Gr. of the chords, and measure it in the laterall chords, find it
to be 40 Gr; the angle comprehended between the lines of Sines is 40 Gr. but
the angle between the edges of the Sector is 2 Gr. less, and therefore but 38
Gr.

9 To find the quantity of any angle given.
IF out of the angular point, to the quantity of the Semiradius, be described
an occult arc that may cut both sides of the angle, the chord of this arc
measured in the laterall chord, shall give the quantity of the angle.

Let the angle given be BAC: first I take the Semiradius with the compasses,
and setting one foot in A, I cut the sides of the angle in B and C; then I
take the chord BC, and measure it in the laterall chord, and I find it to be 11
Gr. and 15 M. and such is the quantity of the angle given.

geometric illustration

Or if the arc be described out of the angular point at any other distance,
let the semidiameter be turned into a parallel chord of 60 Gr. then take the
chord of this arc, and carry it parallel till it cross in like chords: so
the place where it stays shall give the quantity of the angle.

As in the former example, if I make the semidiameter AB a parallel chord of
60 Gr. and then keeping the Sector at that angle, carry the chord BC
parallel, till it stay in like chords; I shall find it to stay in no other
but 11 Gr. 15 M and such is the angle BAC.

10 Upon a right line and a point given in it, to make an angle equal to any
angle given.
FIrst out of the point given describe an arc, cutting the same line: then by
the 5. Prop before, find the chord of the angle given agreeable to the
semidiameter, and inscribe it into this arc: so a right line drawn through
the point given, and the end of this chord, shall be the side that makes up the
angle.

Let the right line given be AB, and the point given in it be A, and let the
angle given be 11 gr. 15 m. Here I open the compasses to any semidiameter AB,
(but as often as I may conveniently to the laterall semiradius) and setting one
foot in A, I describe an occult arc BC; then I seek out the chord of 11 gr.
15 m. and taking it with the compasses, I set one foot in B, the other
crosses the arc in C, by which I draw the line AC, and it makes up the angle
required.

11 To divide the circumference of a circle into any parts required.
IF 360 the measure of the whole circumference be divided by the number of
parts required, the quotient gives the chord, which being found will divide
the circumference.

So a chord of 120 gr. will divide the circumference into 3 equal parts; a
chord of 90 gr. into 4 parts; a chord of 72 gr, into 5 parts; a chord of 60 gr.
into 6 parts; a chord of 51 gr. 26. into 7 parts; a chord of 45 gr. into 8
parts; a chord of 40 gr. into 9 parts; a chord of 36 gr. into 10 parts; a chord
of 32 gr. 44 m. into 11 parts; a chord of 30 gr. into 12 parts.

In like manner if it be required to divide the circumference of the circle,
whose semidiameter is AB, into 32: first I take the semidiameter AB, and make
it a parallel chord of 60 gr; then because 360 gr. being divided by 32, the
quotient will be 11 gr. 15 m. I find the parallel chord of 11 gr. 15 m. and
this will divide the circumference into 32.

But here the parts being many, it were better to divide it first into fewer,
and after to come over it again. As first to divide the circumference into 4,
and then each 4 parts into 8, or otherwise, as the parts may be divided.

12 To divide a right line by extreme and mean proportion.
THe line to be divided by extreme and mean proportion, has the same
proportion to his greater segment, as in figures inscribed in the same circle,
the side of an hexagon a figure of six angles, has to a side of a decagon a
figure of ten angles: but the side of a hexagon is a chord of 60 gr. and the
side of a decagon is a chord of 36 gr.

Let AB be the line to be divided: if I make AB a parallel chord of 60 gr. and
to this semidiameter find AC a chord of 36 gr. this AC shall be the greater
segment, dividing the whole line in C, by extreme and mean proportion. So
that, As AB the whole line is unto AC the greater segment:

so AC the greater segment unto CB the lesser segment.



Or let AC be the greater segment given: if I make this a parallel chord of 36
gr. the correspondent semidiameter shall be the whole line AC, and the
difference CB the lesser segment.

line segment

Or let CB be the lesser segment given: if I make this a parallel chord of 36
gr. the correspondent semidiameter shall be greater segment AC, which added to
CB, gives the whole line AB.

To avoid doubling of lines or numbers, you may put over the whole line in the
Sines of 72 gr. and the parallel sine of 36 gr. shall be the greater segment.

Or if you put over the whole line in the sines of 54 gr. the parallel sine of
30 gr. shall be the greater segment, and the parallel sine of 18 gr. shall be
the lesser segment.

CHAP. III. Of the proiection of the Sphere in Plano.
1 THe Sphere may be proiected in Plano in straight lines, as in the Analemma,
if the semidiameter of the circle given be divided in such sort as the line of
Sines on the Sector.

As if the Radius of the circle given were AE, the circle thereon described may
represent the plane of the general meridian, which divided into four equal
parts in E, P, AE, S, and crossed at right angles with EAE and PS, the diameter
EAE shall represent the equator, and PS the circle of the hour of 6. And it is
also the axis of the world, wherein P stands for the North pole, and S for the
South pole. Then may each quarter of the meridian be divided into 90 gr. from
the equator toward the poles. In which if we number 23 gr. 30 m. the greatest
declination of the Sun from E to 69 Northwards, from AE to Southward, the line
drawn from 69 to shall be the ecliptique, and the lines drawn parallel to the
equator through and shall be the tropiques.

Having these common sections with the plane of the meridian, if we shall
divide each diameter of the Ecliptique into 90 gr. in such sort as the Sines
are divided on the Sector. The first 30 gr. from A toward 69, shall stand for
the sine of. The 30 gr. next following for. The rest for... etc. in their
order. So that by these means we have the place of the Sun for all times of
the year.

geometric illustration

If again we divide AP, AS, in the like sort, and set to the numbers 10. 20.
30. etc. unto 90 gr. the lines drawn through each of these degrees parallel
to the equator, shall show the declination of the Sun, and represent the
parallels of latitude.

If farther we divide AE, AAE, and his parallels in the like sort, and then
carefully draw a line through each 15 gr. so as it makes no angles; the lines
so drawn shall be ellipticall and represent the houre-circles. The meridian
PES the hour of 12 at noone; that next unto it drawn through 75 gr. from the
center the hours of 11 and 1, that which is drawn through 60 gr. from the
center the hours of 10 and 2. etc.

Then having respect unto the latitude, we may number it from E Northward unto
Z, and there place the zenith: by which and the center the line drawn ZAN
shall represent the vertical circle, passing through the zenith and nadir East
and West, and the line MAH crossing it at right angles shall represent the
horizon.

These two being divided in the same sort as the ecliptique and the equator,
the line drawn through each degree of the semidiameter AZ, parallel to the
horizon, shall be the circles of altitude, and the divisions in the horizon and
his parallels shall give the azimuth.

Lastly, if through 18 gr. in AN, be drawn a right line IK parallel to the
horizon, it shall show the time when the day breaks, and the end of the
twilight.

For example of this proiection, let the place of the Sun be the last degree
of, the parallel passing through this place is LD, and therefore the meridian
altitude ML, and the depression below the horizon at midnight HD: the
semidiurnall arc LC, the seminocturnall arc CD, the declination AB, the
ascentionall difference BC, the amplitude of ascenon AC. The difference
between the end of twilight and the day break is very small; for it seems
the parallel of the Sun does hardly cross the line of twilight.

If the altitude of the Sun be given, let a line be drawn for it parallel
to the horizon; so it shall cross the parallel of the Sun, and there show
both the azimuth and the hour of the day. As if the place of the Sun being
given as before, the altitude in the morning were found to be 20 gr. the line
FG drawn parallel to the horizon through 20 gr. in AZ, would cross the
parallel of the Sun in. Wherefore F shows the azimuth, and L the quantity
of hours from the meridian. It seems to be about half an hour past 6 in the
morning, and yet more then half a point short of the East.

The distance of two places may be also showed by this proiection, their
latitudes being known, and their difference of longitude.

For suppose a place in the East of Arabia, having 20 gr. of North latitude,
whose difference of longitude from London is found by an eclipse to be 5 ho..
Let Z be the zenith of London, the parallel of latitude for that other place
must be LD, in which the difference of longitude is L. Wherefore representing
the site of that place, I draw through a parallel to the horizon MH, crossing
the vertical AZ near about 70 gr. from the zenith, which multiplied by 20,
shows the distance of London, and that place to be 1400 leagues. Or
multiplied by 60, to be 4200 miles.

2 The Sphere may be proiected in plano by circular lines, as in the general
astrolabe of Gemma Frisius, by the help of the tangent on the side of the
Sector.

For let the circle given represent the plane of the general meridian as
before; let it be divided into four parts, and crossed at right angles with
EAE the equator, and PS the circle of the hour of 6, wherein P stands for the
North pole, and S for the South pole. Let each quarter of the meridian be
divided into 90 gr. and so the whole into 360, beginning from P, and setting to
the numbers of 10, 20, 30. etc. 90 at AE, 180 at S, 270 at E, 360 at P. The
semidiameters AP, AAE, AS, A E, may be divided according to the tangents of
half their arkes, that is a tangent of 45 gr. which is always equal to the
Radius, shall give the semidiameter of 90 gr; a tangent of 40 gr. shall give 80
gr. in the semidiameter: a tangent of 35 gr. shall give 70. etc. So that the
semidiameters may be divided in such sort as the tangent on the side of the
Sector, the difference being only in their numbers.

Having divided the circumference and the semidiameters, we may easily draw the
meridians and the parallels by the help of the Sector.

geometric illustration

The meridians are to be drawn through both the poles P and S, and the degrees
before graduated in the equator. The distance of the center of each meridian
from A the center of the plane, is equal to the tangent of the same meridian,
reckoned from the general meridian PAESE, and the semidiameter equal to the
secant of the same degree.

As for example, if I should draw the meridian PBS, which is the tenth from
PAES, the tangent of 10 gr. gives me AC, and the secant of 10 gr. gives me
SC, whereof C is the center of the meridian PBS, and CS his semidiameter: so AF
a tangent of 20 gr. shows F to be the center of PDS, the twentieth meridian
from PAES, and AG a tangent of 23 gr. 30 M. shows G to be the center of P 69
S. etc.

The parallels are to be drawn through the degrees, in AP, AS, and their
correspondent degrees in the general meridian. The distance of the center of
each parallel from A the center of the plane, is equal to the secant of the
same parallel from the pole, and the semidiameter equal to the tangent of the
same degree. As if I should draw the parallel of 80 gr. which is the tenth
from the pole S, first I open the compasses unto AC the tangent of 10 gr. and
this gives me the semidiameter of this parallel, whose center is a little from
S, in such distance as the secant SC is longer then the radius SA.

The meridians and parallels being drawn, if we number 23 gr. 30 m. from E to
Northward, from AE to Southward, the line drawn from to shall be the
ecliptique: which being divided in such sort as the semidiameter AP, the first
30 gr. from A to shall stand for the sine of; the 30 gr. next following for;
the rest for... etc. in their order.

If farther we have respect unto the latitude, we may number it from E
Northward unto Z, and there place the zenith, by which and the center, the line
drawn ZAN shall represent the vertical circle, and the line MAH crossing it
at right angles, shall represent the horizon; and these divided in the same
sort as AP, the circles drawn through each degree of the semidiameter AZ,
parallel to the horizon, shall be the circles of altitude: and the circles
drawn through the horizon and his poles, shall give the azimuths.

For example of this proiection, let the place of the Sun be in the beginning
of, the parallel passing through this place is L; and therefore the meridian
altitude ML, and the depression below the horizon at midnight H, the
semidiurnall arc L, the seminocturnall arc O, the declination AR, the
ascensionall difference R, the amplitude of ascension A.

Or if A be put to represent the pole of the world, then shall PAESE stand for
the equator, and P S for the ecliptique, and the rest which before stood for
meridians, may now serve for particular horizons, according to their several
eleuations. Then suppose the place of the Sun given to be 24 gr. of, his
longitude shall be PI, his right ascension PH, his declination HI. And if the
place given be 19 gr. of, his longitude shall be PK, his right ascension PN, his
declination NK. Again, the declination brought to the horizon of the place,
shall there show the ascentionall difference, amplitude of ascension, and the
like conclusions of the globe. But I intend not here to show the use of the
Astrolabe, but the use of the Sector in proiection.

And after this manner may a nocturnall be proiected to show the hour of the
night, whereof I will set down a type for the use of Seamen.

geometric illustration

It consists as you see of two parts, the one is a plane, divided equally
according to the 24 hours of the day, and each hour into quarters or minutes,
as the plane will bear: the line from the center to XII, stands for the
meridian, and XII stands for the hour of 12 at midnight. The other part is a
rundle for such stars as are near the North pole, together with the twelve
months, and the days of each month fitted to the right ascension of the
stars. Those that have occasion to see the South pole, may do the like for
the Southern constellations, and put them in a rundle on the back of this
plane, and so it may serve for all the world.

The use of this nocturnall is easy and ready. For look up to the pole, and
see what stars are near the meridian, then place the rundle to the like
situation, so the day of the month will show the hour of the night.

3 The Sphere may be proiected in plano by circular lines, as in the particular
Astrolabe of Ioh. Stophlerin, by help of the tangent, as before.

For let the circle given represent the tropique of, let it be divided into
four parts, and crossed at right angles with AC the equinoctial colure, and
MB the solstitiall colure, and general meridian, the center P representing the
pole of the world. Let each quarter be divided into 90 gr. and so the whole
into 360, beginning from A toward B. The meridian PM, or PB, may be divided
according to the tangent of half his arc. So as the arc from the North pole
to the tropique of, being 90 gr. and 23 gr. 30 m. that is 113 gr. 80 m. and the
half arc 56 gr. 45 m. the meridian shall be divided into 90 gr. and 23 gr. 30
m. in such sort as the tangent of 56 gr. 45 m. on the side of the Sector is
divided into degrees and half degrees; of which PAE the arc of the equator 90
gr. from the pole, shall be given by the tangent of 45 gr. And P 69 the arc of
the Summer tropique 66 gr. 30 m. from the pole, shall be given by the tangent
of 33 gr. 15 m. And the circles drawn upon the center P through AE and, shall
be the equator, and the Summer tropique.

Having the equator and both the tropiques, the ecliptique shall be drawn from
the one tropique to the other, through the intersection of the equator and the
equinoctial colure. And it may be divided first into the twelve Signs after
this manner: PE the arc of the pole of the ecliptique 23 gr. 30 m. from the
pole of the world, shall be given by the tangent of 11 gr. 45 m. The center of
the circle of longitude passing through this pole E and, shall be found at D
(somewhat below B) by the tangent of 66 gr. 30 m. Then through D draw an occult
line parallel to AC, and divide it on each side from D, in such sort as the
tangent is divided on the side of the Sector, allowing 45 gr. to be equal to
DE. So the thirtith degree from D toward the right hand, shall be the center of
the circle of longitude passing through E and. The sixtith degree, the center
of E. The thirtith degree from D toward the left hand, the center of E. The
sixtith, the center of E. And the other intermediate degrees shall be the
centers to divide each Sign into 30 gr.

If farther we have respect unto the latitude, we may (the meridian being
before divided) number it from P Northward unto H, and there place the North
intersection of the meridian and horizon: then the complement of the latitude
being numbered from P Southward unto Z, shall there give the zenith; and 90 gr.
from Z Southward unto F, shall there give the South intersection of the
meridian and horizon. The middle between F and H shall be G the center of the
horizon H F, passing through the beginning of and, unless there be some former
error.

All parallels to the horizon may be found in like sort by their intersections
with the meridian, and the middle between those intersections is always the
center.

The azimuths may be drawn as the circles of longitude were before. For the
center of the first vertical Z will be found at I (somewhat near unto B) by
the tangent of the latitude. And if through I we draw an occult line parallel
to AC, and divide it on each side from I, in such sort as the tangent is
divided on the side of the Sector, allowing 45 gr. to be geometric illustration
equal to IZ; these divisions shall be the centers, and the distance from these
divisions unto Z, shall be the semidiameters whereon to describe the rest of
the azimuths.

For example of this proiection, let the place of the Sun given be 10 gr. of: a
right line drawn from P through this place unto the equator, shall there show
his right ascension K, and his declination K. Then may we on the center P and
semidiameter P, draw an occult parallel of declinatio^, crossing the horizon
in L and M, the meridian in G and N. So the right lines PL and PM produced,
shall show the time of the Suns rising and setting, Q the difference of
ascension, R the difference of descension, L the amplitude of his rising, and M
the amplitude of his setting. LGM shows the length of the day, LN M the
length of the night. ZG shows his distance from the zenith at noone, HN his
depression below the horizon at midnight. And then having the altitude of the
Sun at any time of the day, the intersection of the parallel of altitude
with the parallel of declination, shows the azimuth, and a right line drawn
from P through this intersectio^, gives the hour of the day.

4 The Sphere may be proiected in plano by circular lines, after the manner of
the old concaue hemisphere, by the help of the tangent on the side of the
Sector.

For let the circle given represent the plane of the horizon, let it be divided
into four parts, and crossed at right angles with SN the meridian, and EV the
vertical; so as S may stand for the South, N for the North, E the East, V the
West part of the horizon, and the center Z represents the zenith. Let each
quarter of the horizon be divided into 90 gr. and so the whole into 360 gr.
beginning from N, and setting to the numbers of 10. 20. 30. etc. 90 at E, 180
at S, 270 at V, 360 at N.

The semidiameters ZN, ZS, may be divided according to the tangent of half
their arkes: So as the arc from the zenith to the horizon being 90 gr. and the
half arc 45 gr. the semidiameters are to be divided in such sort as the
tangent of 45 gr. as was showed before in the second proiection. And if from Z
we draw circles through each of these divisions, they shall be parallels of
altitude.

Then having respect unto the latitude, we may (the meridian being before
divided) number it from Z to AE, and there place the intersection of the
meridian and equator. The complement of the latitude from Z unto P, shall there
give the pole of the world, and 90 further from P shall there give the other
intersection of the meridian and equator. geometric illustration The middle
between these intersections shall be A, the center of the equator, passing
through E and V, unless there be some former error. The intersections of the
tropiques depend on the equator. From AE 23 gr. 30 m. farther shall be, the
intersection of the meridian and the Southern tropique. From AE 23 gr. 30 m.
nearer shall be, the intersection of the meridian and the Northern tropique.
The intersections of the other intermediat parallels, shall be given in like
sort, by their degrees of distance from the equator, and the middle between
those intersections is always the center.

The hour circles may be here drawn as the azimuths in the third proiection.
For the center of EPV, the hour of 6 will be found at B (somewhat near unto
N) by the tangent of the latitude. And if through B we draw an occult line
parallel unto EV, and divide it on each side from B, in such sort as the
tangent is divided on the side of the Sector, allowing 45 gr. to be equal to
BP, and 15 gr. for every hour: those divisions shall be the centers, and the
distance from these divisions unto P, shall be the semidiameters, whereon to
describe the rest of the hour circles.

The ecliptique may be drawn as the equator. For the center of that half
which has Southern declination, shall be given by the tangent of the
altitude, which the Sun has in his entrance into. And the center of the other
half, by the tangent of his altitude, at his entrance into. And it may be
divided, as in the former proiection, or else by tables calculated to that
purpose.

To these circles thus drawn, if we shall add the months of the year, and
the days of each month, as we may well do, at the horizon, on either side
between the tropiques; this proiection shall be fitted for the most useful
conclusions of the globe.

For the day of the month being given, the parallel that shoots on it, does
show what declination the Sun has at that time of the year. And where this
parallel crosses the ecliptique, there is the place of the Sun. Or the
place of the Sun being first given, the parallel which crosses it shall at
the horizon show the day of the month. Either of these then being given, or
only the parallel of declination, we may foll^w it first unto the horizon,
there the distance of (...) of the parallel from E or V, shows the ampli^
(...) same among the hour circles shows the time (...) ^^e rises or
sets. Then having the altitude (...) any time of the day, the intersection
of the (...) on with the parallel of altitude, shows (...) ^ay; and a right
line drawn from Z through this intersection to the horizon, gives the azimuth.

Thus in either of these proiections, that which is otherwise most troublesome,
is easily done by the help of the tangent line: and what I have said of this
line, the same may be wrought by scale and numbers out of the table of Tangents.

CHAP. IV. Of the resolution of right-line Triangles.
IN all Triangles there being six parts, viz. three angles and three sides, any
three of them being given, the rest may be found by the Sector.

As in a Rectangle triangle, 1 To find the base, both sides being given.
Let the Sector be opened in the lines of Lines to a right angle, (as before
was showed Cap. 2. Prop. 7.) then take out the sides of the triangle, and lay
them, one on one line, the other on the other line, so as they meet in the
center, and mark how far they extend. For the line taken from the terms of
their extension, shall be the base required, viz. the side opposite to the
right angle.

Or add the squares of the two sides (as in Prop. 4. Superf.) and the side of
the compound square shall be the base.

2 To find the base by having the angles, and one of the sides given.
Take the side given, and turn it into the parallel sine of his opposite
angle; so the parallel Radius shall be the base.

3 To find a side by having the base, and the other side given.
Let the Sector be opened in the lines of lines to a right angle, and the side
given laid on one of those lines from the center; then take the base with a
pair of compasses, and setting one foot in the term of the given side, turn
the other to the other line of the Sector, and it shall there show the side
required.

Or take the square of the side out of the square of the base (as in Prop. 4.
Superf.) and the side of the remaining square shall be the side required.

4 To find a side having the base and the angles given.
Take the base given, and make it a parallel Radius, so the parallel sines of
the angles, shall be the opposite sides required.

5 To find a side by having the other side and the angles given.
Take the side given, and turn it into his parallel sine of his opposite
angle; so the parallel sine of the complement shall be the side required.

6 To find the angles by having the base and one of the sides given.
First takeout the base given, and laying it on both sides of the Sector, so as
they may meet in the center, and mark how far it extends. Then take out
the laterall Radius, and to it open the Sector in the terms of the base. This
done, take out the side given, and place it also on the same lines of the
Sector from the center. For the parallel taken in the terms of this side,
shall be the sine of his opposite angle.

Or take the base given, and make it a parallel Radius; then take the side
given, and carry it parallel to the base, till it stay in like sines: so they
shall give the quantity of the opposite angle.

7 To find the angles by having both the sides given.
Take out the greater side, and lay it on both sides of the Sector, so as they
meet in the center, and mark how far it extends. Then take the other
side, and to it open the Sector in the terms of the greater side; so the
parallel Radius shall be the tangent of the lesser angle. The third angle is
always known by the complement.

8 The Radius being given, to find the tangent, and secant of any arc. 9 The
tangent of any arc being given, to find the tangent thereof, and the Radius.
10 The secant of any arc being given, to find the tangent thereof, and the
Radius.
The tangent, and the secant, together with the Radius of every arc, do make a
right angle triangle; whose sides are the Radius and tangent, and the base
always the secant; and the angles always known by reason of the given arkes.
Wherefore the solution is the same with those before.

In any right-lined triangle whatsoever, 11 To find a side by knowing the other
two sides, and the angle contained by them.
Let the Sector be opened in the lines of lines to the angle given, then take
out the sides of the triangle, and laying them the one on the one line, the
other on the other, so as they meet in the center, mark how far they extend.
For the line taken between the terms of their extension, shall be the third
side required.

12 To find a side by having the other two sides, and one of the adjacent
angles, so it be known which of the other angles is acute or oblique.
Let the Sector be opened in the lines of lines to the angle given, and the
adjacent side laid on one of those lines from the center; then take the other
side with a pair of compasses, and setting one foot in the term of the
former given side, turn the other to the other line of the Sector which here
represents the side required, and it shall cross it in two places; but with
which of them is the term of the side required, must be judged by the angle.

As if in the triangle following, the side AC being given, and the side CD and
the angle CAD 18 gr. 40 m. it were required to find the side AD.

First I open the Sector in the lines of lines to an angle of 18 gr. 40 m. and
laying the adjacent side from the center A, it extends to 800 in C. Then I
take the other side CD with the compasses, and setting one foot in C, and
turning the other to the other line of the Sector, I find that it does cross
it both in B and D; so that it is uncertain whither the side required be AB or
AD, only it may be judged by the angle. For if the inward angle where they
cross be obtuse, the side required is the lesser; if it be acute, it is the
greater.

13 To find a side by having the angles and one of the other sides given.
Take the side given, and turn it into the parallel sine of his opposite
angle; so the parallel sines of the other angle shall be the opposite sides
required.

14 To find the proportion of the sides by having the three angles.
Take the laterall sines of the angles, and measure them in the line of lines.
For the numbers belonging to those lines do give the proportion of the sides.

15 To find an angle by knowing the three sides.
Let the two containing sides be laid, on the lines of the Sector from the
center, one on one line, and the other on the other; and let the third side,
which is opposite to the angle required, be fitted over in their terms: so
shall the Sector be opened in those lines to the quantity of the angle
required.

The quantity of this angle is found as in Cap. 2. Prop. 8.

16 To find an angle by having two sides and one adjacent angle.
First take out the side opposite to the angle given, and laying it on both
sides of the Sector, so as they meet in the center, mark how far it
extends; then take out the laterall sine of the angle, and to it open the
Sector in the terms of the first side: this done, take out the other side
given, and place it also on the same lines of the Sector from the center, for
the parallels taken in the terms of this side, shall be the sine of the angle
opposite to the second side.

Or take out the side opposite to the angle given, and make it a parallel sine
of that angle; then take the other side given and carry it parallel to the
former, till it stay in like sines, so they shall give the quantity of the
angle opposite to the second side.

17 To find an angle by having two sides, and the angle contained by them.
First find the third side by the 11. Prop. and then the angles may be found by
the 15. or 16. Prop.

For practice in each of these cases, we may use the examples following,
wherein CEA, CEB, CED are rectangle in E; the rest consist of oblique angles.

CAB 18 gr. 40 m. ABC 126 52 ACB 34 28 ACD 108 12 ADC 53 8 BCD 73 44

geometric illustration

For observation of angles, the Sector may have sights set on the moveable
foot; so that by looking through them, the edges of the Sector may be applied
to the sides of the angle.

For measuring of the sides of lesser triangles, any scale may suffice, either
of feet, or inches, or lesser parts. But for greater triangles, especially for
plotting of grounds, I hold it fit to use a chain of four perches in length,
divided into an hundred links. For so the length being multiplied into the
breadth, the five last figures give the content in roods and perches by this
Table; the other figures toward the left hand, do show the number of acres
directly.

Links R P 100000 4 0 90000 3 24 80000 3 8 70000 2 32 60000 2 16 50000 2 0
40000 1 24 30000 1 8 20000 32 10000 16 9375 15 8750 14 8125 13 7500 12 6875 11
6250 10 5625 9 5000 8 4375 7 3750 6 3125 5 2500 4 1875 3 1250 2 625 1

As if in the former tria^gle ACD, the length AD be 9 chains and 50 links, the
breadth CE be 2 chains and 56 links; these multiplied give the content for the
long square 2.43200, the half whereof for the triangle is 1.21600, that is 1
acre, 21600 parts of 100000, of which last five figures, 20000 give 32 perches,
and the remainder 1600 give better then two perches more.

CHAP. V. Of the resolution of sphericall triangles.
FOr our practice in sphericall triangles, let A be the equinoctial point, AB
an arc of the ecliptique representing the longitude of the Sun in the
beginning of, BC an arc of the declination from the Sun to the equator, and
AC an arc of the equator representing the right ascension.

geometric illustration

Let BD be an arc of the horizon representing the amplitude of the Suns
rising from the East, and BE an arc of the horizon for his setting from the
West: so DC shall be the difference of ascension, and CE the difference of
descension; AD the oblique ascension, and AE the oblique descension of the same
place of the Sun in our latitude at Oxford of 51 gr. 45 m. whose complement
38 gr. 15 m. is the angle at E and D. The triangles ACB, D CB, ECB, are
rectangle in C: the other AD B, AEB, consist every way of oblique angles.

geometric illustration

Or to fit an example nearer to the latitude of London. Let ZPS represent the
zenith pole and Sun, ZP being 38 gr. 30 m. the complement of the latitude, PS
70 gr. the complement of the declination, and ZS 40 gr. the complement of the
Suns altitude. The angle at Z shall show the azimuth, and the angle at P, the
hour of the day from the meridian. Then if from Z to PS we let down a
perpendicular ZR, we shall reduce the oblique triangle into two rectangle
triangles ZRP, ZRS. Or if from S to ZP we set down a perpendicular SM, we
shall reduce the same ZPS into two other triangles, SMZ, SMP, rectangle at M:
whatsoever is said of any of these triangles, the same holds for all other
triangles in the like cases.

For the resolution of each of these, there be several ways. I only choose
those which are fittest for the Sector, wherein if that be remembered which
before is showed in the general use of the Sector concerning laterall and
parallel entrance, it may suffice only to set down the proportion of the
three parts given to the fourth required, and so I show first by the sines
alone.

In a rectangle triangle 1 To find a side by knowing the base, and the angle
opposite to the required side.
As the Radius

is to the sine of the base:

So the sine of the opposite angle

to the sine of the side required.

As in the rectangle ACB, having the base AB, the place of the Sun 30 gr.
from the equinoctial point, and the angle BAC of 23 gr. 30 m. the greatest
declination, if it were required to find the side BC the declination of the
Sun.

Take either the laterall sine of 23 gr. 30 m. and make it a parallel Radius;
so the parallel sine of 30 gr. taken and measured in the side of the Sector,
shall give the side required 11 gr. 30 m. Or take the sine of 30 gr. and make
it a parallel Radius; so the parallel sine of 23 gr. 30 m. taken and measured
in the laterall sines, shall be 11 gr. 30 m. as before.

So in the triangle ZPS having ZP 38 gr. 30 m. and the angle P 31 gr. 34 m.
given, we shall find the perpendicular Z R to be 19 gr. 1 m; or having PS 70
gr. and the said angle P 31 gr. 34 m. given, we may find the perpendicular SM
to be 29 gr. 28 m.

2 To find a side by knowing the base and the other side.
As the sine of the complement of the side given

is to the Radius:

So the sine of the complement of the base

to the sine of the complement of the side required.

So in the rectangle ACB, having AB 30 gr. and BC 11 gr. 30 m. given, the side
AC will be found 27 gr. 54 m.

Or in the rectangle ZRP having ZP 38 gr. 30 m. and Z R 29 gr. 1 m. given, the
side RP will be found 34 gr. 7 m.

3 To find a side by knowing the two oblique angles.
As the sine of either angle

to the sine of the complement of the other angle:

So is the Radius

to the sine of the complement of the side opposite

to the second angle.

So in the rectangle ACB, having CAB for the first angle 23 gr. 30 m. and ABC
for the second 69 gr. 21 m. the side AC will be found 27 gr. 54 m. Or making
ABC the first angle, and CAB the second, the side BC will be found 11 gr. 30 m.

4 To find the base by knowing both the sides.
As the Radius

to the sine of the complement of the one side:

So the sine of the complement of the other side,

to the sine of the complement of the base required.

So in the rectangle ACB having AC 27 gr. 54 m. and BC 11 gr. 30 m. the base AB
will be found 30 gr.

5 To find the base by knowing the one side, and the angle opposite to that
side.
As the sine of the angle given,

to the sine of the side given:

So is the Radius

to the sine of the base required.

So in the rectangle BCD, knowing the latitude and the declination, we may find
the amplitude; as having BC the side of the declination 11 gr. 30 m. and BDC
the angle of the complement of the latitude 38 gr. 15 m. the base BD which is
the amplitude, will be found to be 18 gr. 47 m.

6 To find an angle by the other oblique angle, and the side opposite to the
inquired angle.
As the Radius

to the sine of the complement of the side:

So the sine of the angle given,

to the sine of the complement of the angle required.

So in the rectangle ACB, having the angle BAC 23 gr. 30 m. and the side AC 27
gr. 54 m. the angle ABC will be found 69 gr. 21 m.

7 To find an angle by the other oblique angle, and the side opposite to the
angle given.
As the sine of the complement of the side

to the side of the complement of the angle given:

So is the Radius

to the sine of the angle required.

So in the rectangle ACB, having BAC 23 gr. 30 m. and BC 11 gr. 30 m. the angle
ABC will be found 69 gr. 21 m.

8 To find an angle by the base, and the side opposite to the inquired angle.
As the sine of the base

is to the Radius:

So the sine of the side

to the sine of the angle required.

So in the rectangle BCD, having BD 18 gr. 47 m. and BC 11 gr. 30 m. the angle
BDC will be found 38 gr. 15 m.

These eight Propositions have been wrought by the sines alone; those which
follow require joint help of the tangent.

And forasmuch as the tangent could not well be extended beyond 63 gr. 30 m. I
shall set down two ways for the resolution of each Proposition; if the one
will not hold, the other may.

9 To find a side by having the other side, and the angle opposite to the
inquired sine.
1 As the Radius

to the sine of the side given:

So the tangent of the angle,

to the tangent of the side required.

2 As the sine of the side given,

is to the Radius:

So the tangent of the complement of the angle,

to the tangent of the complement of the side required.

So in the rectangle ACB, having the right side AC 27 gr. 54 m, and the angle
BAC 23 gr. 30 m. the side BC will be sound to be 11 gr. 30 m.

10 To find a side, by having the other side, and the angle adjacent next to
the inquired side.
1 As the tangent of the angle,

to the tangent of the side given:

So is the Radius

to the sine of the side required.

2 As the tangent of the complement of the side,

to the tangent of the complement of the angle:

So is the Radius

to the sine of the side required.

This and the like, where the tangent stands in the first place, are best
wrought by parallel entrance. And so in the rectangle BCD, having BC the side
of declination 11 gr. 30 m. and BDC the angle of the complement of the latitude
38 gr. 15 m. the side DC, which is the ascensionall difference, will be found
14 gr. 57 m.

By the ascensionall difference is given the time of the Suns rising and
setting, and length of the day; allowing an hour for each 15 gr. and 4 minutes
of time for each several degree. As in the example the difference between the
Suns ascension in a right sphere, which is always at 6 of the clock, and
his ascension in our latitude being 14 gr. 57 m. it shows that the Sun
rises very near an hour before 6, because of the Northern declination; or
after 6, if the Sun be declining to the Southward.

11 To find a side by knowing the base, and the angle adjacent next to the
inquired side.
1 As the Radius

to the sine of the complement of the angle:

So is the tangent of the base,

to the tangent of the side required.

2 As the sine of the complement of the angle

is to the Radius:

So the tangent of the complement of the base,

to the tangent of the complement of the side required.

So in the rectangle ACB, knowing the place of the Sun from the next
equinoctial point, and the angle of his greatest declination, we may find his
right ascension: viz. the base AB 30 gr. and the angle BAC 23 gr. 30 m. being
given, the right ascension AC will be found 27 gr. 54 m.

12 To find the base by knowing the oblique angles.
As the tangent of the one angle,

to the tangent of the complement of the other angle:

So is the Radius

to the sine of the complement of the base.

So in the rectangle ACB, having BAC 23 gr. 30 m. and ABC 69 gr. 21 m. the base
AB will be found 30 gr.

13 To find the base, by one of the sides, and the angle adjacent next that
side.
1 As the Radius

is to the sine of the complement of the angle:

So the tangent of the complement of the side,

to the tangent of the complement of the base.

2 As the sine of the complement of the angle

is to the Radius:

So the tangent of the side given,

to the tangent of the base required.

So in the rectangle ACB, having AC 27 gr. 54 m. and BAC 23 gr. 30 m. the base
AB will be found 30 gr. 0 m.

14 To find an angle, by knowing both the sides.
1 As the Radius

is to the sine of the side next the inquired angle:

So the tangent of the complement of the opposite side,

to the tangent of the complement of the angle required.

2 As the sine of the side next the inquired angle,

is to the Radius:

So the tangent of the opposite side,

to the tangent of the angle required.

So in the rectangle ACB, having AC 27 gr. 54 m. and BC 11 gr. 30 m. the angle
at A will be found 23 gr. 30 m. and the angle at B 69 gr. 21 m.

15 To find an angle, by the base, and the side adjacent to the inquired angle.
1 As the tangent of the complement of the side,

to the tangent of the complement of the base:

So is the Radius

to the sine of the complement of the angle required.

2 As the tangent of the base,

to the tangent of the side:

So is the Radius,

to the sine of the complement of the angle required.

So in the rectangle BCD, having the base BD 18 gr. 47 m. and the side BC 11
gr. 30 m. the angle DBC between them will be found 53 gr. 15 m.

16 To find an angle, by knowing the other oblique angle, and the base.
1 As the Radius,

to the sine of the complement of the base:

So the tangent of the angle given,

to the tangent of the complement of the angle required.

2 As the sine of the complement of the base,

is to the Radius:

So the tangent of the complement of the angle given,

to the tangent of the angle required.

So in the rectangle ACB, having the angle at A 23 gr. 30 m. and the base AB 30
gr. the angle ABC will be found 69 gr. 21 m.

These sixteen cases are all that can fall out in a rectangle triangle: those
which follow do hold

In any sphericall triangle whatsoever 17 To find a side opposite to an angle
given, by knowing one side, and two angles, whereof one is opposite to the
given side, the other to the side required.
As the sine of the angle opposite to the side given,

is to the sine of that side given:

So the sine of the angle opposite to the side required,

to the sine of the side required.

So in the triangle ABE, having the place of the Sun, the latitude, and the
greatest declination, we may find the amplitude. As having AB 30 gr. BAE 23
gr. 30 m. and AEB 38 gr. 15 m. the side BE which is the amplitude, will be
found 18 gr. 47 m.

18 To find an angle opposite to a side given, by having one angle and two
sides, the one opposite to the given angle, the other to the angle required.
As the sine of the side opposite to the angle given,

is to the sine of that angle given:

So the sine of the side opposite to the angle required,

to the sine of the angle required.

So in the triangle ZPS, having the azimuth, and latitude, and declination, we
may find the hour of the day. As having PZS 130 gr. 3 m. PS 70 gr. and ZS 40
gr. the angle ZPS, which shows the hour from the meridian shall be found 31
gr. 34 m.

19 To find an angle by knowing the three sides.
This proposition is most useful, but most difficult of all others: as in
Arithmetique, so by the Sector, yet may it be performed several ways.

1 According to Regiomontanus and others.

As the sine of the lesser side next the angle required,

to the difference of the versed sines of the base and difference of the sides*

So is the Radius

to a fourth proportional.

Then as the sine of the greater side next the angle required

is to that fourth proportional:

So is the Radius

to the versed sine of the angle required.

So in the triangle ZPS, having the side PS, the co^plement of the declination
70 gr. 0 m. the side ZP the complement of the latitude 38 gr. 30 m. and the
base ZS the complement of the altitude 40 gr. the angle of the hour of the day
ZPS will be found 31 gr. 34 m. which is 2 h. 6 m. from the meridian.

For the base being 40 gr. 0 m. and the difference of the sides 38 gr. 30 m.
and 70 gr. 0 m. being 31 gr. 30 m. the difference of their versed sines will be
the same with the distance between the right sine of 50 gr. and 58 gr. 30 m.
This difference I take out, and make it a parallel sine of the lesser side 38
gr. 30 m. so the parallel Radius will be the fourth proportional. Then coming
to the second operation, I make this fourth proportional, a parallel sine of
the greater side of 70 gr. 0 m. and take out his parallel Radius. For this
measured from 90 gr. toward the center, will be the versed sine of 31 gr. 34 m.

In the like sort in the same triangle Z PS, having the same complements given,
the angle PZ S which is the azimuth from the North part of the meridian, will
be found 130 gr. 3 m. For here the base opposite to the angle required being 70
gr. and the difference of the sides 38 gr. 30 m. and 40 gr. being 1 gr. 30 m.
the difference of their versed sines will be the same with the distance
between the right sines of 20 gr. and 88 gr. 30 m. This difference I take, and
make it a parallel sine of the lesser side 38 gr. 30 m. so the parallel Radius
will be the fourth proportional. Then coming to the second operation, I make
this fourth proportional a parallel sine of the greater side 40 gr. and take
out his parallel Radius. For this measured from 90 gr. beyond the center in
the lines of sines stretched forth at their full length, will be the versed
sine of 130 gr. 3 m.

2 I may find an angle by knowing three sides, by that which I have elsewhere
demonstrated upon Barth. Pitiscus, and that at one operation in this manner.

As the sine of the greater side

is to the secant of the complement of the other side:

So the difference of sines of the complement of the base, and the arc
compounded of the lesser side with the complement of the greater,

to the versed sine of the angle required.

So in the same triangle ZPS, having the same complements given, the angle at
P, which shows the hour from the meridian, will be found as before 31 gr. 34
m.

For the sides being 38 gr. 30 m. and 70 gr. 0 m. I take the secant of the
complement of 38 gr. 30 m. and make it a parallel sine of 70 gr; then keeping
the Sector at this angle, I consider that the complement of 70 gr. being 20 gr.
added unto 38 gr. 30 m. the compounded side (which is here the meridian
altitude) will be 58 gr. 30 m; and that the base being 40 gr. the difference of
sines of the compounded side and the complement of the base will be (as before)
the distance between the sines of 50 gr. and 58 gr. 30 m. Wherefore I take out
this difference, and lay it on both the lines of sines from the center: so the
parallel taken in the terms of this difference, and measured from 90 gr.
toward the center, does give the versed sine of 31 gr. 34 m.

The other angles PZ S, PSZ, may be found in the same sort; but having the
sides and one angle, it will be sooner done by that which we showed before in
the 18. Prop.

20 To find a side by knowing the three angles.
If for the greater angle we take his complement to 180 gr. the angles shall be
turned into sides, and the sides into angles, and the operation shall be the
same, as in the former Prop.

21 To find a side, by having the other two sides, and the angle comprehended.
This proposition being the converse of the nineteenth, may be wrought
accordingly; but the best way both for it and those which follow, is to resolve
them into two rectangles, by letting down a perpendicular, as was showed in
the first Prop.

So in the triangle Z PS, having Z P the complement of the latitude, and PS the
complement of the declination, with Z PS the angle of the hour from the
meridian, we may find Z S the complement of the altitude of the Sun.

For having let down the perpendicular Z R by the first Prop. we have two
triangles, Z RP, Z RS, both rectangle at R. Then may we find the side PR,
either by the second, or tenth, or eleventh Prop; which taken out of PS,
leaves the side RS: with this RS and Z R we may find the base Z S by the
fourth Prop.

Or having let down the perpendicular SM, we have two rectangle triangles SMZ,
SMP. Then may we find MP, from which if we take Z P, there remains MZ: but
with MZ and SM, we may find the base Z S.

22 To find a side, by having the other two sides, and one of the angles next
the inquired side.
So in the triangle ZPS, having Z P the complement of the latitude, and PS the
complement of the declination, with PZ S the angle of the azimuth, we may find
Z S the complement of the altitude of the Sun.

For having Z P, and the angle at Z, we may to SZ produced, let down a
perpendicular PV. Then we have two rectangle triangles, PVZ, PVS, wherein if we
find the sides VZ, US, and take the one out of the other, there will remain the
side inquired Z S.

23 To find a side, by having one side, and the two angles next the inquired
side.
So in the triangle ABD, having AB the place of the sun, and BAD the angle of
the greatest declination, and ADB the angle of the equator with the horizon, we
may find AD the oblique ascension.

For having let down BC the perpendicular of declination, we have two
rectangle triangles, ACB, DCB. Then may we find AC the right ascension, and DC
the ascentionall difference; and comparing the one with the other, there
remains AD.

24 To find a side, by having two angles, and the side enclosed by them.
So in the triangle ZPS, having the angles at Z and P, with the side
intercepted ZP, we may find the side PS. For having let down the perpendicular
PV, we have two rectangles PVZ, PVS. Then may we find the angle VPZ, ei- by the
seventh, or fifteenth, or sixteenth Prop. which added to ZPS, makes the angle
VPS: with this VPS and PV, we may find the base PS, according to the 13 Prop.

25 To find an angle by having the other two angles and the side enclosed by
them.
So in the triangle ZPS, having the angles at Z and P, with the side
intercepted ZP, we may find the other angle Z SP. For having let down the
perpendicular ZR, we have two rectangles ZRP, ZR S. Then may we find the angle
PZR by the sixteenth Prop. and that compared with PZ S, leaves the angle RZ S:
with this RZS and ZR we may find the angle required ZSR, according to the sixth
Prop.

26 To find an angle, by having the other two angles, and one of the sides
next the inquired angle.
So in the triangle ABD, having the angles at A and D, with the side AB, we may
find the angle ABD. For having let down the perpendicular BC, we have two
rectangles, ACB, DCB. Then may we find the angles ABC, DBC, and take DBC out of
ABC; for so there remains the angle required ABD.

27 To find an angle, by knowing two sides, and the angle contained by them.
So in the triangle ZPS, having the sides ZP, PS, with the angle comprehended
ZPS, we may find the angle PZS. For having let down the perpendicular SM, we
have two rectangles SMZ, SMP. Then may we find the side MP, and taking ZP out
of MP, there remains MZ: with this MZ and the perpendicular MS, we may find
the angle MZS, by the fourteenth Prop. This angle MZ S, taken out of 180 gr.
there remains PZ S.

28 To find an angle by knowing the two sides next it, and one of the other
angles.
So in the triangle ZPS, having the sides ZP and PS, with the angle PZS, we may
find the angle Z PS. For having let down the perpendicular PV, we have two
rectangles PVZ, PVS. Then may we find the angles VPZ, VPS; and taking UP Z out
of VPS, there remains ZPS, which was required.

These 28 cases are all that can fall out in any sphericall triangle: if any do
not presently understand them, let them once more read over the use of the
globes, and they shall soon become easy unto them*

CHAP. VI. Of the use of the Meridian line in Navigations.
THe Meridian line is here set on the side of the Sector, stretched forth at
full length, on the same plane with the line of lines and Solids, and is
divided unequally toward 87 gr. (whereof 70 gr. are about one half) in such
sort as the Meridian in the cart of Mercators proiection. The use of it may be

1 To divide a sea-chart according to Mercators proiection.
If a degree of the equator on the sea-chart be equal to the hundred part of
the line of lines in the Sector, the degrees of the Meridian upon the Sector,
shall give the like degrees upon the sea-chart: if otherwise they be unequal,
then may the meridians of the sea-chart be divided in such sort as the line of
Meridians is divided on the Sector, by that which we showed before in the 8
Prop. of the line of lines.

But to avoid error, I have here set down a Table, whereby the Meridian line
may be divided out of the degrees of the equator, supposing each degree to be
subdivided into a thousand parts. By which Table, and the usual Table of
Sines, Tangents and Secants, the proportions following may be also resolved
arithmetically. For the manner of division, let the equator (or one of the
parallels if it be a particular chart) be drawn, and divided, and crossed with
parallel meridians, as in the common sea-chart: then look into the Table, and
let the distance of 40 gr. in the meridian, from the equator, be equal to 43
gr. 711 parts of the equator; let 50 gr. in the meridian from the equator, be
equal to 57 gr. 909 parts of the equator; and so in the rest.

M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par 0 0 0 3 3 001 6 6 011 9 9 037 12
12 088 100 3 101 6 111 9 138 12 190 200 3 201 6 212 9 239 12 293 300 3 301 6
312 9 341 12 395 400 3 402 6 413 9 442 12 497 500 3 502 6 514 9 543 12 600 600
3 602 6 614 9 645 12 702 700 3 702 6 715 9 746 12 805 800 3 803 6 816 9 848 12
907 900 3 903 6 916 9 949 13 010 1 1 000 4 4 003 7 7 017 10 10 051 13 13 112 1
100 4 103 7 118 10 152 13 215 1 200 4 204 7 219 10 254 13 318 1 300 4 304 7 319
10 355 13 421 1 400 4 404 7 420 10 457 13 523 1 500 4 504 7 521 10 559 13 626 1
600 4 605 7 622 10 661 13 729 1 700 4 705 7 723 10 762 13 832 1 800 4 805 7 824
10 864 13 935 1 900 4 906 7 925 10 966 14 038 2 2 000 5 5 006 8 8 026 11 11 068
14 14 141 2 100 5 106 8 127 11 170 14 244 2 200 5 207 8 228 11 272 14 347 2 300
5 307 8 329 11 374 14 450 2 400 5 408 8 430 11 476 14 553 2 500 5 508 8 531 11
578 14 656 2 601 5 609 8 632 11 680 14 760 2 701 5 709 8 733 11 782 14 863 2
801 5 810 8 834 11 884 14 967 2 901 5 910 8 936 11 986 15 070 3 3 001 6 6 011 9
9 037 12 12 088 15 15 174

M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr part M Gr part 15 15 174 18 18 303 21 21 486
24 24 734 27 28 058 15 277 18 408 21 593 24 844 28 171 15 381 18 513 21 701 24
953 28 283 15 485 18 619 21 808 25 063 28 396 15 588 18 724 21 915 25 173 28
508 15 692 18 830 21 023 25 282 28 621 15 796 18 935 22 130 25 392 28 734 15
900 19 041 22 238 25 502 28 847 16 004 19 146 22 345 25 613 28 959 16 107 19
251 22 453 25 723 29 072 16 16 211 19 19 356 22 22 561 25 25 833 28 29 186 16
316 19 463 22 669 25 943 29 299 16 420 19 569 22 777 26 054 29 413 16 524 19
675 22 885 26 164 29 526 16 628 19 781 22 993 26 275 29 640 16 732 19 887 23
101 26 386 29 753 16 836 19 993 23 210 26 497 29 867 16 941 20 100 23 318 26
608 29 981 17 045 20 206 23 427 26 719 30 095 17 150 20 312 23 535 26 830 30
300 17 17 255 20 20 419 23 23 643 26 26 941 29 30 324 17 359 20 525 23 752 27
052 30 438 17 464 20 632 23 861 27 164 30 553 17 568 20 738 23 970 27 275 30
667 17 673 20 845 24 079 27 387 30 782 17 778 20 952 24 188 27 499 30 897 17
883 21 059 24 297 27 610 31 012 17 988 21 165 24 406 27 722 31 127 18 093 21
272 24 515 27 834 31 242 18 198 21 379 24 624 27 946 31 357 18 18 303 21 21 486
24 24 734 27 28 058 30 31 473

M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par 30 31 473 33 34 992 36 38 633 39
42 415 42 46 362 31 588 35 111 38 757 42 544 46 496 31 704 35 231 38 880 42 673
46 631 31 820 35 350 39 004 42 802 46 766 31 936 35 470 39 129 42 931 46 902 32
052 35 590 39 253 43 061 47 037 32 168 35 710 39 377 43 191 47 173 32 284 35
830 39 502 43 320 47 309 32 400 35 950 39 627 43 451 47 445 32 517 36 071 39
752 43 581 47 581 31 32 633 34 36 191 37 39 877 40 43 711 43 47 718 32 750 36
312 40 002 43 842 47 855 32 867 36 433 40 128 43 973 47 992 32 984 36 554 40
253 44 104 48 129 33 101 36 675 40 379 44 235 48 267 33 218 36 796 40 505 44
366 48 404 33 336 36 917 40 631 44 498 48 542 33 453 37 039 40 757 44 630 48
681 33 571 37 161 40 884 44 762 48 819 33 688 37 283 41 011 44 894 48 958 32 33
806 35 37 405 38 41 137 41 45 026 44 49 097 33 924 37 527 41 264 45 159 49 236
34 042 37 649 41 392 45 292 49 375 34 161 37 771 41 519 45 425 49 515 34 279 37
894 41 646 45 558 49 655 34 397 38 017 41 774 45 691 49 795 34 516 38 140 41
902 45 825 49 935 34 635 38 263 42 030 45 959 50 076 34 754 38 386 42 158 46
093 50 217 34 873 38 509 42 287 46 227 50 358 33 34 992 36 38 633 39 42 415 42
46 362 45 50 499

M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr part M Gr part 45 50 499 48 54 860 51 59 481
54 64 412 57 69 711 50 641 55 010 59 640 64 582 69 895 50 783 55 160 59 800 64
753 70 080 50 925 55 310 59 960 64 924 70 263 51 068 55 460 60 120 65 096 70
449 51 210 55 611 60 280 65 268 70 635 51 353 55 762 60 441 65 440 70 821 51
496 55 913 60 602 65 613 71 008 51 639 56 065 60 763 65 786 71 195 51 783 56
217 60 925 65 960 71 383 46 51 927 49 56 369 52 61 088 55 66 134 58 71 572 52
071 56 522 61 250 66 308 71 761 52 215 56 675 61 413 66 483 71 950 52 360 56
828 61 577 66 659 72 140 52 505 56 981 61 740 66 835 72 331 52 650 57 135 61
904 67 011 72 522 52 795 57 289 62 069 67 188 72 714 52 941 57 444 62 234 67
365 72 906 53 087 57 598 62 399 67 543 73 099 53 233 57 754 62 564 67 721 73
292 47 53 380 50 57 909 53 62 730 56 67 900 59 73 486 53 526 58 065 62 897 68
079 73 680 53 673 58 221 63 063 68 258 73 875 53 821 58 377 63 231 68 438 74
071 53 968 58 534 63 398 68 618 74 267 54 116 58 691 63 566 68 799 74 464 54
264 58 848 63 734 68 981 74 661 54 413 59 006 63 903 69 163 74 859 54 562 59
164 64 072 69 345 75 057 54 711 59 322 64 242 69 528 75 256 48 54 860 51 59 481
54 64 412 57 69 711 60 75 456

M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr. Par 60 75 450 63 81 749 66 88 725 69
96 575 72 105 579 75 656 81 970 88 971 96 854 105 904 75 857 82 191 89 219 97
135 106 230 76 059 82 413 89 467 97 418 106 558 76 201 82 635 89 716 97 701 106
888 76 464 82 860 89 967 97 986 107 220 76 667 83 084 90 218 98 272 107 553 76
871 83 310 90 470 98 560 107 888 77 076 83 536 90 723 98 849 108 226 77 281 83
763 90 978 99 139 108 565 61 77 487 64 83 990 67 91 232 70 99 431 73 108 906 77
694 84 219 91 489 99 724 10 249 77 901 84 448 91 746 100 018 109 594 78 109 84
678 92 005 100 314 109 941 78 317 84 909 92 264 100 612 110 290 78 526 85 141
92 525 100 910 110 641 78 736 85 374 92 787 101 211 110 994 78 947 85 607 93
050 101 513 111 349 79 158 85 842 93 314 101 816 111 707 79 370 86 077 93 579
102 121 112 066 62 79 583 65 86 313 68 93 846 71 102 427 74 112 428 79 796 86
550 94 113 102 735 112 792 80 010 86 788 94 382 103 044 113 158 80 225 87 027
94 652 103 356 113 526 80 441 87 267 94 923 103 668 113 897 80 657 87 508 95
195 103 983 114 270 80 874 87 749 95 468 104 299 114 645 81 091 87 992 95 743
104 616 115 023 81 310 88 235 96 019 104 936 115 403 81 529 88 480 96 296 105
257 115 786 63 81 749 66 88 725 69 96 575 72 105 579 75 116 171

M Gr. Par M Gr. Par M Gr. Par M Gr. Par M Gr. part 75 116 171 78 129 075 81
145 650 84 168 947 87 208 705 116 559 129 558 146 292 169 912 210 649 116 949
130 045 146 942 170 893 212 668 117 342 130 536 147 600 171 891 214 745 117 737
131 031 148 265 172 907 216 909 118 135 131 530 148 937 173 941 219 158 118 536
132 034 149 618 174 994 221 498 118 939 132 542 150 307 176 067 223 938 119 345
133 055 151 003 177 160 226 486 119 755 133 572 151 709 178 275 229 153 76 120
160 79 134 094 82 152 423 85 179 411 88 231 950 120 581 134 620 153 147 180 569
234 891 121 000 135 151 153 878 181 752 237 991 121 420 135 687 154 620 182 960
241 268 121 843 136 228 155 372 184 194 244 744 122 270 136 775 156 132 185 454
248 445 122 700 137 326 156 903 186 743 252 402 123 133 137 883 157 685 188 062
256 652 123 570 138 445 158 478 189 411 261 243 124 009 139 012 159 281 190 793
266 235 77 124 452 80 139 585 83 160 096 86 192 210 89 271 705 124 898 140 164
160 922 193 661 277 753 125 348 140 748 161 761 195 151 284 517 125 801 141 339
162 612 196 680 292 191 126 258 141 936 163 475 198 251 301 058 126 718 142 538
164 352 199 867 311 563 127 182 143 147 165 242 201 529 324 455 127 649 143 763
166 146 203 240 341 166 128 121 144 385 267 065 205 005 365 039 128 596 145 014
167 999 206 825 408 011 78 129 075 81 145 650 84 168 947 87 208 705 90 Infinite

geometric illustration

geometric illustration

If any desire to have his chart to agree with his Sector, he may make each
degree of longitude equal to the tenth part of the line of lines, and divide
the meridian of his chart out of the Sector: so shall each degree of the chart,
be ten times as large as the like degree on the Sector, and the work be easy
from the one to the other.

2 To find how many leagues answer to one degree of longitude in every several
latitude.
In sailing by the compass, the course holds sometime upon a great circle,
sometime upon a parallel to the equator; but most commonly upon crooked lines
winding toward one of the poles, which lines are well known by the name of
Rumbs.

If the course hold upon a great circle, it is either North or South, under
some meridian, or East or West, under the equator. And in these cases, every
degree requires an allowance of twenty leagues, every twenty leagues will
make a degrees difference in the sailing: so that here needs no further precept
then the rule of proportion in the Chapter of lines.

But if the course hold East or West, on any of the parallels to the equator;
As the Radius

is to twenty leagues, the measure of one degree at the equator:

So the sine of the complement of the latitude

to the measure of leagues answering to one degree in that latitude.



Wherefore I take 20 leagues out of the line of lines, and make it a parallel
Radius, by fitting it over in the sines of 90 and 90: so his parallel sine
taken out of the complement of the latitude, and measured in the line of lines,
shall show the number of leagues required.

Thus in the latitude of 18 gr. 12 m. we shall find 19 leagues answering to one
degree of longitude, and 18 leagues in the latitude of 25 gr. 15 m. and as in
this Table.

Gr. 1 Lg 0 0 20 18 12 19 25 15 18 31 48 17 36 52 16 41 25 15 45 34 14 49 28 13
53 8 12 56 38 11 60 0 10 63 15 9 66 25 8 69 30 7 72 32 6 75 31 5 78 28 4 81 23
3 84 15 2 87 8 1

This may be done more readily without opening the Sector, by doubling the sine
of the complement of the latitude, as may appear in the same example.

It may also be done by the line of meridians, either upon the Sector, or upon
the chart. For if we open a pair of compasses to the quantity of one degree
of longitude in the equator, and measure it in the meridian line, setting one
foot as much above the latitude given, as the other falls beneath it, so that
the latitude may be in the middle between the feet of the compasses, the
number of leagues intercepted shall be that which was required.

But if the course hold upon any of the rumbs, between a parallel of the
equator and the meridian, we are to consider besides the quarter of the world
to which we tend, which must be always known.

1 The difference of longitude at least in general.

2 The difference of latitude, and that in particular.

3 The rumb whereon the course holds.

4 The distance upon the rumb, which is the distance, which we are here to
consider, and is always somewhat greater then the like distance upon a greater
circle. And for these first I show in general this third Prop.

3 To find how many leagues do answer to one degree of latitude in every
several Rumb.
As the sine of the complement of the rumb from the meridian,

is to 20 leagues the measure of one degree at the meridian:

So the Radius

to the leagues answering to one degree upon the Rumb.

Wherefore I take 20 leagues out of the line of lines, and make it a parallel
sine of the complement of the Rumb from the meridian; so his parallel Radius
taken and measured in the line of lines, shall show the number of leagues
required.

Thus in the first Rumb from the meridian, we shall find 20 lgs 39 parts
answering to one degree of latitude, and 21 lgs 65 parts in the second Rumb,
etc. as in this Table, where we subdiuide each league into a hundred parts, and
show besides what inclination the rumb has to the meridian.

This may be done more readily without opening the Sector, by doubling the
secant of the latitude, as may appear in the same example.

It may also be done upon the chart, if we take the distance upon the Rumb
between two parallels, and measure it in the meridian line, as far above the
greater latitude as beneath the lesser. For so the number of leagues
intercepted, shall be that which was required.

This considered in general, I show more particularly in twelve Prop.
following, how of these four any two being given, the other two may be found,
both by Mercators chart, and by this Sector.

Rumbs. Inclination to the meridian Number of leags. Gr. Mi. Lgs Par 2 49 20 02
5 37 20 10 8 26 20 22 1 11 15 20 39 14 4 20 62 16 52 20 90 19 41 21 24 2 22 30
21 65 25 19 22 12 28 7 22 68 30 56 23 32 3 33 45 24 05 36 34 24 90 39 22 25 87
42 11 26 99 4 45 0 28 28 47 49 29 78 50 37 31 52 53 26 33 57 5 56 15 36 00 59 4
38 90 61 52 42 43 64 41 36 78 6 67 30 52 26 70 19 59 37 73 7 68 90 75 56 82 31
7 78 45 102 52 81 34 136 30 84 22 205 24 87 11 407 60 8 90 0 Infinita.

1 By one latitude Rumb and distance to find the difference of latitudes.
As the Radius

to the sine of the complement of the Rumb from the meridian:

So the distance upon the Rumb,

to the difference of latitudes.

Let the place given be A in the latitude of 50 gr. C in a greater latitude,
but unknown, the distance upon the Rumb being 6 gr. between them, and the
Rumb the third from the meridian.

First I take 6 gr. for the distance upon the Rumb, out of the line of lines,
and make it a parallel Radius, by putting it over in the sines of 90. and 90.
Then keeping the Sector at this angle, I take out the parallel sine of 56 gr.
15 m. which is the sine of the complement of the third Rumb from the meridian,
and measuring it in the line of lines, I find it to be 5 gr. and such is the
difference of latitude required.

Or I may take out the sine of 56 gr. 15 m. for the complement of the third
Rumb from the meridian, make it a parallel Radius; then keeping the Sector at
this angle, I take 6 gr. for the distance, either out of the line of lines, or
any other scale of equal parts, or else out of the meridian line, and lay it
on both sides of the Sector from the center, either on the line of lines or
sines: so the parallel taken from the terms of this distance, and measured in
the same scale wherein the distance was measured, shall show the difference of
latitude to be 5 gr. as before.

But in shorter distances, such as fall within the compass of a days sailing,
this work will hold much better. As may appear by comparing the work with
the Table following where the numbers in the front do signify the leagues;
those in the side, the Rumb; and the rest in the middle, the difference of
latitude.

Lgs 100 80 60 40 20 19 18 17 16 15 Rum. G. M G. M G. M G. M M M M M M M 5 0 4
0 3 0 2 0 60 57 54 51 48 45 4 59 3 59 2 59 1 59 60 57 54 51 48 45 4 58 3 58 2
59 1 59 60 57 54 51 48 45 4 56 3 57 2 58 1 58 59 56 53 50 47 44 1 4 54 3 55 2
56 1 57 59 56 53 50 47 44 4 51 3 53 2 55 1 56 58 56 52 50 47 43 4 47 3 50 2 52
1 55 57 55 52 49 46 43 4 42 3 46 2 49 1 53 56 54 51 48 45 42 2 4 37 3 42 2 46 1
51 55 53 50 47 44 41 4 31 3 37 2 43 1 48 54 52 49 46 43 40 4 25 3 32 2 39 1 46
53 50 48 45 42 39 4 17 3 26 2 34 1 43 51 49 46 44 41 38 3 4 10 3 20 2 30 1 40
50 47 45 42 40 37 4 1 3 13 2 25 1 36 48 46 43 41 39 36 3 52 3 5 2 19 1 32 46 44
42 39 37 35 3 42 2 58 2 13 1 28 44 42 40 38 36 33 4 3 32 2 50 2 7 1 25 42 40 38
36 34 32 3 22 2 41 2 1 1 21 40 38 36 34 32 30 3 10 2 32 1 54 1 16 38 36 34 32
30 28 2 59 2 23 1 47 1 12 36 34 32 30 29 27 5 2 47 2 14 1 40 1 7 33 32 30 28 27
25 2 34 2 3 1 32 1 2 31 29 28 26 25 23 2 22 1 53 1 25 0 57 28 27 25 24 23 22 2
8 1 43 1 17 0 52 26 24 23 22 21 19 6 1 55 1 32 1 8 0 46 23 22 21 20 18 17 1 41
1 20 1 0 0 40 20 19 18 17 16 15 1 27 1 9 0 52 0 35 17 16 16 15 14 13 1 13 0 58
0 44 0 30 15 14 13 12 12 11 7 0 59 0 47 0 35 0 24 12 11 11 10 9 9 0 44 0 36 0
26 0 18 9 8 8 7 7 7 0 30 0 24 0 18 0 12 6 6 5 5 5 4 0 15 0 12 0 9 0 9 3 3 3 3 2
2 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Lg M M M M M M M M M M M M M M Rum. 40 39 36
33 30 27 24 21 18 15 12 9 6 3 42 39 36 33 30 27 24 21 18 15 12 9 6 3 42 39 36
33 30 27 24 21 18 15 12 9 6 3 42 39 36 33 30 27 24 21 18 15 12 9 6 3 41 38 35
32 29 26 24 21 18 15 12 9 6 3 1 41 38 35 32 29 26 23 20 17 15 12 9 6 3 40 37 34
32 29 26 23 20 17 14 11 9 6 3 40 37 34 31 28 25 23 20 17 14 11 8 6 3 39 36 33
31 28 25 22 19 17 14 11 8 6 3 2 38 35 33 30 27 24 22 19 16 14 11 8 5 3 37 34 32
29 26 24 21 19 16 13 11 8 5 3 36 33 31 28 26 23 21 18 15 13 10 8 5 3 35 32 30
27 25 22 20 17 15 12 10 7 5 2 3 34 30 29 26 24 22 19 17 14 12 10 7 5 2 33 30 28
26 23 21 19 16 14 12 9 7 5 2 31 29 27 24 22 20 18 16 13 11 9 7 4 2 30 28 25 23
21 19 17 15 13 11 8 6 4 2 4 28 26 24 22 20 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 27 25 23 21
19 17 15 13 11 10 8 6 4 2 25 23 21 20 18 16 14 13 11 9 7 5 4 2 23 22 20 18 17
15 13 12 10 8 7 5 3 2 5 22 20 18 17 15 14 12 11 9 8 6 5 3 2 20 18 17 16 14 13
11 10 8 7 6 4 3 1 18 17 15 14 13 12 10 9 8 6 5 4 3 1 16 15 14 13 11 10 9 8 7 6
5 3 2 1 6 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 12 11 10 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 3 2 1 10 9
9 8 7 7 6 5 4 4 3 2 1 1 8 8 7 6 6 6 5 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 7 6 6 5 5 4 5 4 3 3 2 2 1 1
1 4 4 4 3 3 3 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 0 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 8

In the Chart let a meridian AB be drawn through A, and in A with AB make an
angle of the Rumb BAC. Then open the compasses, according to the latitude of
the places, to OF the quantity of 6 gr. in the meridian, transferring them
into the Rumb from A to C, and through C draw the parallel BC, crossing the
meridian AB in B: so the degrees in the meridian from A to B, shall show the
difference of latitude to be 5 gr.

2 By the Rumb and both latitudes to find the distance upon the Rumb.
As the sine of the complement of the Rumb from the meridian,

is to the Radius:

So the difference of latitudes,

to the distance upon the Rumb.

As if the places given were A in the latitude of 50 gr. C in the latitude of
55 gr. and the Rumb the third from the meridian.

Here I may take 5 gr. for the difference of latitude out of the line of lines,
and put it over in the sine of 56 gr. 15 m. for the complement of the third
Rumb from the meridian. Then keeping the Sector at this angle, I take out the
parallel Radius, and measuring it in the line of lines, I find it to be 6 gr.
and such is the distance upon the Rumb, which was required.

Or I may take the laterall Radius, and make it a parallel sine of 56 gr. 15
m. the complement of the Rumb from the meridian: then keeping the Sector at
this angle, I take 5 gr. for the difference of latitude, either out of the line
of lines, or out of some other scale of equal parts, and lay it on both sides
of the Sector from the center, either on the line of lines or of sines: so the
parallel taken from the terms of this difference, and measured in the same
scale with the difference, shall show the distance upon the Rumb to be 6 gr. or
120 leagues.

Or keeping the Sector at this angle, I may take the difference between 50 gr.
and 55 gr. out of the Meridian line, and measuring it in the equator, I shall
find it to be equal to 8 gr. 22 p. of the equator. Wherefore I take the
parallel between 822 and 822 out of the line of lines, and measuring it in
the line of lines I shall find it to be 989; which shows that according to
this proiection, the distance upon this third Rumb, answerable to the former
distance of latitudes, will be equal to 9 gr. 89 p. of the equator.

Or the Sector remaining at this angle, I may take the difference between 50
gr. and 55 gr. out of the Meridian line, and lay it from the center on both
sides of the Sector, either on the line of lines or of sines: so the parallel
taken from the terms of this difference, shall be the very line of distance
required, the same with AC or OF upon the chart; which may serve for the better
pricking down of the distance upon the Rumb, without taking it forth of the
Meridian line, as in the former Prop.

Or if the Rumb fall nearer to the equator, that the laterall Radius cannot be
fitted over in it, this proposition may be wrought by parallel entrance.

For if I first take out the sine of 56 gr. 15 m. and make it a parallel
Radius, by fitting it over in the sines of 90 and 90, or in the ends of the
lines of lines, and then take 5 gr. for the difference of latitudes out of the
line of lines, and carry it parallel to the former, I shall find it to cross
both lines of lines in the points of 6: and so it gives the same distance as
before.

Or if the distance be small, it may be found by the former Table. For the Rumb
being found in the side of the Table, and the difference of latitude in the
same line; the top of the column wherein the difference of latitude was found,
shall give the number of leagues in the distance required.

Or we may find this distance in the Table of Rumbs in the fifth Prop.
following. For according to the example look into the Table of the third Rumb
for 5 gr. of latitude, and there we shall find 6 gr. 01 parts under the title
of distance. So if the difference of latitude upon the same Rumb were 50 gr.
the distance would be 60 gr. 13 parts. If the difference of latitude upon the
same Rumb were only of a degree, the distance would be only 60 parts, such as
100 do make a degree.

In the chart let a Meridian AB be drawn through A, and parallels of latitude
through A and C; and then in A with AB make an angle of the Rumb BAC: so the
distance taken from A to C, and measured in the Meridian line, according to the
latitude of the places, shall be found to be 6 gr. or 120 leagues. And such is
the distance required.

3 By the distance and both latitudes to find the Rumb.
As the distance upon the Rumb,

to the difference of latitudes:

So is the Radius

to the sine of the complement of the Rumb from the Meridian,

As if the places given were A in the latitude of 50 gr. C in the latitude of
55 gr. the distance between them being 6 gr. upon the Rumb. First I take 6 gr.
for the distance upon the Rumb, and lay it on both sides of the Sector from the
center; then out of the same scale I take 5 gr. for the difference of latitude,
and to it open the Sector in the terms of the former distance: so the
parallel Radius taken and measured in the sines, does give 56 gr. 15 m. the
complement whereof 33 gr. 45 m. is the angle of the Rumbs inclination to the
Meridian, which was required.

In the chart let a meridian AB be drawn through A, and parallels of latitude
both through A and C; then open the compasses according to the latitude of the
places to OF the quantity of 6 gr. in the meridian, and setting one foot in
A, turn the other till it cross the parallel BC in C, and draw the right
line AC: so the angle BAC shall show the inclination of the Rumb to the
Meridian to be 33 gr. 45 m. as before.

These three last Prop. depend one on the other, and may be wrought as truly by
the common sea-chart as by this of Mercators proiection: and therefore in
working them by the Sector, the distance and the difference of latitudes may as
well or better be taken out of the line of lines (which here represents the
equator) or any other line of equal parts, as out of the enlarged degrees in
the meridian line. But in the propositions following, the difference of
longitude must be taken out of the equator; the difference of latitudes and
distance upon the Rumb, must always be taken out of the meridian line; which I
therefore call the proper difference, and proper distance.

4 By the longitude and latitude of two places to find the Rumb.
As if the places given were A in the latitude of 50 gr. C in the latitude of
55 gr. and the difference of longitude between them were 5 gr. 30 m.

In the chart let meridians and parallels be drawn through A and C, and a
straight line for the Rumb from A to C; then by that we showed Cap. 2. Prop. 9.
inquire the quantity of the angle BAC, and it shall be found to be 33 gr. 45
m. which is the third Rumb from the Meridian. Wherefore the proportion holds
for the Sector, As AB the proper difference of latitude,

is to BC the difference of longitude:

So AB as Radius,

to BC the tangent of the Rumb from the Meridian.



According to this I take the proper difference of latitude from 50 gr. to 55
gr. out of the line of meridians, and lay it on both sides of the Sector from
the center; then I take the difference of longitude 5 gr. out of the line of
lines, and to it open the Sector in the terms of the former difference of
latitudes: so the parallel Radius taken from between 90 and 90, and measured
in the greater tangent on the side of the Sector, does give 33 gr. 45 m. for
the Rumb required.

But if the Rumb fall nearer to the equator; As AD the difference of longitudes,

is to DC the proper difference of latitudes:

So AD as Radius,

to DC the tangent of the rumb from the equator.



According to this I take the former difference of latitudes from 50 gr. to 55
gr. out of the line of Meridians, and to it open the Sector in the terms of
the difference of longitude reckoned in the line of lines from the center: so
the parallel Radius taken and measured in the tangent, does give 56 gr. 15 m.
for the rumb from the equator; which is the complement to the former 33 gr. 45
m: and so both ways it is found to be the third rumb from the Meridian.

But if this rumb were to be found in the common sea-chart, it should seem to
be above 47 gr. which is more then the fourth rumb from the meridian.

5 By the Rumb and both latitudes to find the difference of longitude.
As if the places given were A in the latitude of 50 gr. and C in the latitude
of 55 gr. and the rumb the third from the meridian.

In the chart, let a meridian be drawn through A, and a parallel of latitude
through C; then in A with AB make the angle of the rumb from the meridian BAC,
(as was showed Cap. 2. Prop. 10.) So the degrees in the parallel between B
and C, shall be found to be 5 gr., the difference of longitude which was
required. Wherefore the proportion holds for the Sector.

As AB the Radius,

to BC the tangent of the rumb from the meridian:

So AB as proper difference of the latitudes,

to BC the difference of longitude.

According to this we may take the tangent of the Rumb which is here 33 gr. 45
m. from the meridian, out of the greater tangent on the side of the Sector; and
putting it over between 90 and 90, make it a Radius: then keeping the Sector
at this angle, take the proper difference of latitudes from 50 gr. to 55 gr.
out of the line of Meridians, and lay it on both sides of the Sector from the
center: so the parallel taken from the terms of this difference, and measured
in the line of lines, shall show the difference of longitude to be 5 gr..

Or if the Rumb fall nearer the equator.

As DC the tangent of the Rumb from the equator,

to AD the Radius:

So DC as proper difference of the latitudes,

to AD the difference of longitude.

According to this we may best work by parallel entrance, first taking 56 gr.
15 m. for the angle of the Rumb from the equator, out of the greater tangent,
and make it a parallel Radius: then take the proper difference of latitudes
out of the line of meridians, and carry it parallel to the former: so we
shall find it to cross the line of lines in 5 gr.. And this is the difference
of longitude required, the same as before.

But if this difference were to be found by the common sea-chart, it should
seem to be only 3 gr. 20 m. which is more then 2 gr. less then the truth. And
yet this error would be greater, if either the latitude be greater, or the Rumb
fall nearer the equator: as may appear by comparing the common sea-chart with
the Tables following.

The first Rumbe from the Meridian. North and by East, South and by East, North
and by West, South and by West. La Long. Did. La Long. Did. (...) Long. Did.
Gr Gr. P Gr. P Gr Gr. P. Gr. P. G ^r P. Gr. P. 0 0 0 30 6 26 30 5^ 60 15 01 61
18 1 20 1 02 31 6 49 31 61 61 15 41 62 20 2 40 2 04 32 6 72 32 63 62 15 83 63
21 3 60 3 06 33 6 96 33 65 63 16 26 64 23 4 80 4 08 34 7 20 34 67 64 16 71 65
25 5 1 00 5 10 35 7 44 35 69 65 17 17 66 27 6 1 20 6 12 36 7 68 36 71 66 17 65
67 29 7 1 40 7 14 37 7 92 37 73 67 18 15 68 31 8 1 60 8 16 38 8 17 38 75 68 18
67 69 33 9 1 80 9 18 39 8 43 39 77 69 19 21 70 35 10 2 00 10 20 40 8 70 40 78
70 19 78 71 37 11 2 20 11 22 41 8 96 41 80 71 20 37 72 39 12 2 40 12 24 42 9 22
42 82 72 21 00 73 41 13 2 61 13 25 43 9 50 43 84 73 21 66 74 43 14 2 81 14 27
44 9 76 44 86 74 22 36 75 45 15 3 02 15 29 45 10 04 45 88 75 23 10 76 47 16 3
22 16 31 46 10 33 46 90 76 23 90 77 49 17 3 43 17 33 47 10 62 47 92 77 24 75 78
51 18 3 64 18 35 48 10 91 48 94 78 25 67 79 53 19 3 85 19 37 49 11 21 49 96 79
26 67 80 55 20 4 06 20 39 50 11 52 50 98 80 27 76 81 57 21 4 27 21 41 51 11 83
52 0 81 28 97 82 59 22 4 49 22 43 52 12 15 53 2 82 30 32 83 61 23 4 70 23 45 53
12 47 54 4 83 31 84 84 63 24 4 92 24 47 54 12 81 55 6 84 33 61 85 62 25 5 14 25
49 55 13 16 56 8 85 35 69 86 67 26 5 36 26 51 56 13 50 57 10 86 38 24 87 69 27
5 58 27 53 57 13 86 58 12 87 41 52 88 71 28 5 80 28 55 58 14 23 59 14 88 46 15
89 73 29 6 03 29 57 59 14 62 60 16 89 54 06 90 75 30 6 26 30 59 60 15 01 61 18
90

The second Rumbe from the Meridian. North North-east. South South-east. North
North-west South South-west La Long. Did. La Long. Did. La Long. Did. Gr Gr.
P Gr. P. Gr Gr. P Gr. P Gr Gr. P. Gr. P. 0 0 0 30 13 03 32 47 60 31 25 64 94 1
0 42 1 08 31 13 51 33 5^ 61 32 09 66 03 2 0 83 2 16 32 14 00 34 64 62 32 96 67
11 3 1 24 3 25 33 14 49 35 72 63 33 86 68 19 4 1 65 4 33 34 15 00 36 80 64 34
79 69 27 5 2 07 5 41 35 15 50 37 88 65 35 7^ 70 35 6 2 49 6 49 36 16 00 38 97
66 36 75 71 44 7 2 91 7 57 37 16 51 40 05 67 37 80 72 52 8 3 32 8 66 38 17 03
41 13 68 38 88 73 60 9 3 74 9 74 39 17 56 42 21 69 40 00 74 68 10 4 16 10 82 40
18 10 43 30 70 41 19 75 77 11 4 59 11 90 41 18 65 44 38 71 42 43 76 85 12 5 01
12 99 42 19 20 45 46 72 43 74 77 93 13 5 43 14 07 43 19 76 46 54 73 45 11 79 01
14 5 85 15 15 44 20 33 47 62 74 46 57 80 10 15 6 28 16 23 45 20 92 48 71 75 48
12 81 18 16 6 71 17 32 46 21 50 49 79 76 49 78 82 26 17 7 14 18 40 47 22 11 50
87 77 51 55 83 34 18 7 58 19 48 48 22 72 51 95 78 53 46 84 42 19 8 01 20 56 49
23 35 53 03 79 55 54 85 51 20 8 45 21 65 50 23 98 54 12 80 57 82 86 59 21 8 90
22 73 51 24 63 55 20 81 60 33 87 67 22 9 34 23 81 52 25 30 56 28 82 63 13 88 76
23 9 79 24 89 53 25 98 57 37 83 66 32 89 84 24 10 24 25 98 54 26 68 58 45 84 69
99 90 92 25 10 70 27 06 55 27 39 59 53 85 74 32 92 00 26 11 16 28 14 56 28 12
60 61 86 79 63 93 09 27 11 62 29 22 57 28 87 61 70 87 86 46 94 17 28 12 08 30
31 58 29 64 62 78 88 96 10 95 25 29 12 55 31 39 59 30 44 63 86 89 112 57 96 33
30 13 03 32 47 60 31 25 64 94 90

The third Rumbe from the Meridian. North-east by North, South-east by South,
North-west by North, South-west by South. La Long. Did. La Long. Did. La
Long. Did. Gr Gr. P. Gr. P. Gr Gr. P. Gr. P. Gr Gr. P. Gr. P. 0 0 0 30 21 03
36 08 60 50 42 72 16 1 0 66 1 20 31 21 80 37 28 61 51 78 73 36 2 1 33 2 40 32
22 58 38 49 62 53 18 74 56 3 2 00 3 61 33 23 38 39 69 63 54 63 75 77 4 2 67 4
81 34 24 18 40 89 64 56 12 76 97 5 3 34 6 01 35 25 00 42 09 65 57 68 78 17 6 4
01 7 22 36 25 82 43 30 66 59 29 79 37 7 4 68 8 42 37 26 64 44 50 67 60 96 80 58
8 5 36 9 62 38 27 48 45 70 68 62 71 81 78 9 6 03 10 82 39 28 34 46 90 69 64 53
82 98 10 6 71 12 03 40 29 21 48 11 70 66 44 84 19 11 7 39 13 23 41 30 09 49 31
71 68 45 85 39 12 8 07 14 43 42 30 98 50 51 72 70 55 86 59 13 8 76 15 64 43 31
88 51 71 73 72 77 87 79 14 9 44 16 84 44 32 80 52 92 74 75 12 89 00 15 10 13 18
04 45 33 74 54 12 75 77 62 90 20 16 10 83 19 24 46 34 69 55 32 76 80 30 91 40
17 11 53 20 45 47 35 67 56 52 77 83 15 92 61 18 12 23 21 65 48 36 66 57 73 78
86 25 93 81 19 12 93 22 85 49 37 67 58 93 79 89 60 95 01 20 13 64 24 05 50 38
69 60 13 80 93 27 96 22 21 14 35 25 26 51 39 74 61 33 81 97 32 97 42 22 15 07
26 46 52 40 82 62 54 82 101 85 98 62 23 15 80 27 66 53 41 91 63 74 83 106 97 99
82 24 16 53 28 86 54 43 03 64 94 84 112 90 101 03 25 17 26 30 07 55 44 19 66 15
85 119 90 102 23 26 18 00 31 27 56 45 37 67 35 86 128 45 103 43 27 18 75 32 47
57 46 58 68 55 87 139 47 104 64 28 19 50 33 67 58 47 82 69 75 88 155 00 105 84
29 20 26 34 88 59 49 11 70 96 ^9 181 58 107 04 30 21 03 36 08 60 50 42 72 16 90

The eight Rumbe of East and West, with the Longitude answering to one degree
of distance, and the distance belonging to one degree of Longitude. La Long.
Did. La Long. Did. La Long. Did. Gr Gr. P. Parts. Gr Gr. P. Parts. Gr Gr. P.
Parts. 0 0 100 00 30 1 25 86 60 60 2 00 50 00 1 1 00 99 98 31 1 17 85 71 61 2
06 48 48 2 1 00 99 94 32 1 18 84 80 62 2 13 46 94 3 1 00 99 86 33 1 19 83 86 63
2 20 45 40 4 1 00 99 75 34 1 21 82 90 64 2 28 43 83 5 1 00 99 62 35 1 22 81 91
65 2 37 42 26 6 1 01 99 45 36 1 24 80 90 66 2 46 40 67 7 1 01 99 25 37 1 25 79
86 67 2 56 39 07 8 1 01 99 02 38 1 27 78 80 68 2 67 37 46 9 1 01 98 76 39 1 29
77 71 69 2 79 35 83 10 1 02 98 48 40 1 31 76 60 70 2 92 34 20 11 1 02 98 16 41
1 33 75 47 71 3 07 32 55 12 1 02 97 81 42 1 35 74 31 72 3 24 30 90 13 1 03 97
43 43 1 37 73 13 73 3 42 29 23 14 1 03 97 03 44 1 39 71 93 74 3 63 27 56 15 1
03 96 59 45 1 41 70 71 75 3 86 25 88 16 1 04 96 12 46 1 44 69 46 76 4 13 24 19
17 1 04 95 63 47 1 47 68 20 77 4 44 22 49 18 1 05 95 10 48 1 49 66 91 78 4 81
20 79 19 1 06 94 55 49 1 52 65 60 79 5 24 19 08 20 1 06 93 97 50 1 55 64 28 80
5 76 17 36 21 1 07 93 35 51 1 59 62 93 81 6 39 15 64 22 1 08 92 72 52 1 62 61
56 82 7 18 13 91 23 1 09 92 05 53 1 66 60 18 83 8 20 12 18 24 1 09 91 35 54 1
70 58 77 84 9 57 10 45 25 1 10 90 63 55 1 74 57 35 85 11 47 8 71 26 1 11 89 88
56 1 79 55 92 86 14 33 6 97 27 1 12 89 10 57 1 84 54 46 87 19 11 5 23 28 1 13
88 29 58 1 89 52 99 88 28 65 3 49 29 1 14 87 46 59 1 94 51 50 89 57 30 1 74 30
1 15 86 60 60 2 00 50 00 90 0

These tables are calculated for each of the Rumbs.

The first seven have three columns, and of them the first ^^^^^neth the
degrees of Latitude, from the Equinoctial to the Pole: the second does give
the difference of Longitude; and the third the distance, both of them belonging
to that ^^mb and latitude.

As in the Table of the third Rumb; at the latitude of 50 Gr. I f^nd under the
title of Longitude 38 Gr. 69 parts, and under the title of Distance 60 Gr. 13
parts. This shows that if the course held constantly on the third Rumb from
the Equinoctial to the Latitude of 50 Gr. the difference of Longitude would be
38 Gr 69 parts of a 100, and the distance upon the Rumbe 60 Gr. 13 parts. For
here I reckon the distance by degrees, rather then by leagues or miles, and
subdiuide each degree into 100 parts, rather then it to 60 minutes, for the
more ease in calculation, and withal to make the calculation to agree the
better, both with this, and my Crosse-staffe, and other instruments.

The use of these Tables, for the finding of the difference of Longitude, is
this. Turn to the table of the Rumb, and there see what longitude belongs to
either latitude, then take the one longitude out of the other, the remainder
will be the difference of longitude required.

As in the former example, where the places given were A, in the latitude of 50
Gr. C in the latitude of 55 Gr. and the Rumb the third from the meridian: I
look into the table of the third Rumb and there find, Latitude 50 gr.
Longitude 38 gr. 69 parts. Latitude 55. Longitude 44. 19. Therefore the diff.
of Longitude 5 50

There is another use of these tables, for the describing of the Rumbs both on
the Globe, and all sorts of Charts. For having drawn the circles of longitude
and latitude, and finding by the tables, the difference of longitude belonging
to each Rumb and latitude: If we make a prick in the chart, at every degree of
latitude, according to that difference of longitude, and draw lines through
those pricks, so as they make no angles, the lines so drawn shall be the
Rumbs required.

The use of the eight Rumb is something different from the rest. For there
being here no change of latitude, I have set to each latitude, the difference
of longitude, belonging to one degree of distance, and the distance belonging
to one degree of longitude.

As if two places shall be 20 leagues, or one degree distant one from the
other, in the latitude of 50 gr. the difference of longitude between them will
be 1 gr. 55 parts. But if they differ one degree in longitude, the distance
between them will be only 64 parts, which fall short of 13 leagues, or at the
most 6428 parts, such as 10000 do make a degree.

6 By the difference of longitude, Rumb, and one latitude, to find the other
latitude.
As if the places given were A, in the latitude of 50 gr. C in a greater
latitude but unknown, the difference of longitude 5 gr., and the Rumb the
third from the Meridian.

In the chart let AB, D C, meridians, be drawn through A and C, according to
the difference of longitude, one 5 gr. from the other; and a parallel of
latitude through A, crossing the meridian CD in D: then in A, with AB, make an
angle of the Rumb BAC: so the degrees in the meridian between D and C, shall
be found to be 5 gr. the proper difference of latitude which was required.
Wherefore the proportion holds for the Sector, As AD the Radius,

to DC the tangent of the Rumb from the equator:

So AD as difference of longitude,

to DC the proper difference of latitude.



According to this, I take 56 gr. 15 m. for the angle of the Rumb from the
equator, out of the greater Tangent, and make it a parallel Radius. Then I
reckon 5 gr. in the line of lines from the center, for the difference of
longitude. So the parallel taken from the terms of this difference, and
measured in the line of meridians, shall reach from 50 gr. the latitude given,
to 55 gr. which is the latitude required.

Or if the Rumb fall nearer to the meridian.

As BC the tangent of the Rumb from the meridian,

is to AB the Radius:

So BC as difference of longitude,

to AD the proper difference of latitude.

According to this we may best work by parallel entrance; first take 33 gr. 45
m. for the angle of the Rumb from the meridian, out of the greater Tangent, and
make it a parallel Radius; then take 5 gr. for the difference of longitude out
of the line of lines, and carry it parallel to the former, till the feet of
the compasses stay in like points: so the line between the center and the place
of this stay, being taken and measured in the line of meridians from 50 gr.
forward, shall show the latitude required to be 55 gr. as in the former way.

The like may be found by the tables of Rumbs. For in the table of the third
Rumb, at the latitude of 50 gr. I find the longitude of 38 gr. 69 p; to this
if I add 5 gr. 50 p. for the difference of longitude given, the compound
longitude will be 44 gr. 19 p. and this answers to the latitude of 55 gr.

But if this difference of latitude were to be found by the common sea-chart,
it should seem to be 8 gr. 13 m; and so the second latitude should be 58 gr.
13 m. which is above 3 gr. more then the truth.

7 By one latitude, rumb, and distance, to find the difference of longitude.
As if the places given were A in the latitude of 50 gr. C in a greater
latitude but unknown, the distance upon the Rumb being 6 gr. between them,
and the Rumb the third from the meridian.

In the chart, let a meridian AB, and a parallel AD be drawn through A; and
in A, with AB, make an angle BAC for the Rumb from the meridian; then open the
compasses aceording to the latitude of the places to OF, the quantity of 6 gr.
in the meridian, transferring them into the Rumb from A to C, and through C
draw another meridian DC, crossing the parallel drawn through A in D: so the
degrees intercepted in the parallel from A to D, shall show the difference of
longitude required to be about 5 gr.. Wherefore the proportion holds for the
Sector.

As AC the Radius,

is to AD, equal to BC, the sine of the Rumb from the meridian:

So AC as proper distance upon the Rumb,

to AD the difference of longitude.

According to this I take the sine of 33 gr. 45 m. for the angle of the Rumb
from the meridian, and make it a parallel Radius; then keeping the Sector at
this angle, I take 6 gr. for the distance out of the meridian line, according
to the estimated latitudes of both places, and lay it on both sides of the
Sector from the center: so the parallel taken from the terms of this
distance, and measured in the lines of lines, shall show the difference of
longitude to be about 5. gr..

In this, and some of the Prop. following, where there is but one latitude
known, there may be sometimes an error of a minute or two, in the estimation
of the proper distance, yet it may be rectified at a second operation.

This proposition may also be wrought by the Tables of Rumbs. For according to
the example, in the Table of the third Rumb, at the latitude of 50 gr. I find
the longitude of 38 gr. 69 p. and the distance of 60 gr. 13 p. to this I a de 6
gr. for the distance given; so the compound distance will be 66 gr. 13 p. and
this answers to the longitude of 44 gr. 19 p; then if I take the one longitude
out of the other, the difference will be 5 gr. 50 p. as before.

But if this difference were to be found by the common sea-chart, it should
seem to be only 3 gr. 20 m. which is more then 2 gr. less then the truth.

8 By one latitude, Rumb, and difference of longitudes, to find the distance.
As if the places given were A, in the latitude of 50 gr. C in a greater
latitude but unknown, the difference of longitude between them being 5 gr.,
and the Rumb the third from the meridian.

In the chart let AB, DC, meridians be drawn through A and C, according to the
difference of longitude, and a parallel of latitude through A, crossing the
meridian DC in D; then in A, with AB, make an angle of the Rumb BAC: so the
distance on the Rumb from A to C taken and measured in the meridian, according
to the estimated latitude of the places, shall be found to be 6 gr. Wherefore
the proportion holds for the Sector.

As AD, equal to BC, the sine of the Rumb from the meridian,

is to AC the Radius:

So AD as difference of longitudes,

to AC the proper distance upon the Rumb.

According to this, I take the laterall Radius, and make it a parallel sine of
33 gr. 45 m. which is here the angle of the Rumb from the meridian; then I
reckon 5 gr. in the lines of lines from the center, for the difference of
longitude: so the parallel taken from the terms of this difference, and
measured in the line of meridians, according to the latitudes of the places,
shall there show the distance required to be about 6 gr. which are 120 leagues.

Or if the Rumb fall nearer to the meridian, that the lateral Radius cannot be
fitted over in his sine, this Prop. must be wrought by parallel entrance, and
so also it gives the same distance as before.

Or we may find this distance by the Table of Rumbs. For in the table of the
third Rumb, at the latitude of 50 gr. I find the longitude of 38 gr. 69 p. and
the distance of 60 gr. 13 p. To this longitude here found, I add 5 gr. 50 p.
for the difference of longitude given: so the compound longitude will be 44 gr.
19 p. and this answers to the distance of 66 gr. 15 p. Then if I take the one
distance out of the other, the remainder will be 6 gr. 02 p. for the distance
required.

But if this distance were to be measured on the common sea-chart, it should
seem to be almost 10 gr. or at the least 197 leagues, above 77 leagues more
then the truth.

9 By one latitude, distance, and difference of longitudes, to find the Rumb.
As if the places given were A, in the latitude of 50 gr. C in a greater
latitude but unknown, the difference of longitude between them being 5 gr.,
and the distance 6 gr. upon the Rumb.

In the chart let AB, DC, meridians, be drawn through A and C, and a parallel
of latitude through A; then open the compasses according to the latitudes of
the places, to OF the quantity of 6 gr. in the meridian, and setting the one
foot in A, the other foot shall cross the other meridian in C; and if we
draw the right line AC, the angle BAC shall show the inclination of the Rumb to
the meridian to be about 33 gr. 45 m. Wherefore the proportion holds for the
Sector.

As AC the proper distance upon the Rumb,

is to AD the difference of longitude:

So AC as Radius,

to AD, equal to BC, the sine of the Rumb from the meridian.

According to this, I take the proper distance 6 gr. out of the line of
meridians, and lay it on both sides of the Sector from the center; then I take
the difference of longitude 5 gr. out of the line of lines, and to it open the
Sector in the terms of the former distance: so the parallel Radius taken from
between 90 and 90, and measured in the sines, does give about 33 gr. 45 m. for
the Rumb required.

But if this Rumb were to be found by the common sea-chart, it should seem to
be above 66 gr. and so almost the sixth Rumb from the meridian.

10 By the longitude and latitude of two places, to find their distance upon
the Rumb.
Let the Sector be opened in the lines of lines, unto a right angle (as was
showed before Cap. 2. Prop. 7;) then take out the proper difference of
latitude, and lay it on the one line, and the difference of longitude, and lay
it on the other line, so as they may both meet in the center, marking how far
they extend. For the line taken from the terms of their extension, and
measured in the meridian, according to their latitudes, shall show the distance
required.

So if the places given were A and C, A in the latitude of 50 gr. C in the
latitude of 55 gr. the proper difference of latitude shall be the line AB, and
let BC the difference of longitude be 5 gr., we shall find that AC the distance
upon the Rumb is about 6 gr. which make 120 leagues.

For in the chart, let an occult meridian be drawn through A, and a parallel
of latitude through C, crossing the former meridian in B, and a right line for
the Rumb from A to C, so have we a rectangle triangle ABC, whose base AC, taken
and measured in the meridian from E below 50 gr. to F, as much above 55 gr.
does contain the quantity of 6 gr.

In the same manner the Sector being opened to a right angle, in the lines of
lines: if we take the difference of latitude out of the line of meridians, in
his proper place from 50 gr. to 55 gr. and place it on one of the sides from
the center, to resemble AB, then reckon the difference of longitude on the
other perpendicular line from the center to 5 gr., in stead of BC, we shall
have the like rectangle triangle on the Sector, to that which we had before on
the chart; and if we take out the base of it, and measure it in the line of
meridians from below 50 gr. to as much above 55 gr. we shall find as before,
that it contains about 6 gr. or 120 leagues.

But if this distance were to be measured on the common sea-chart, it should
seem to be almost 7 gr., or 145 leagues; which is 25 leagues more then the
truth.

11 By the latitude of two places, and the distance upon the Rumb, to find the
difference of longitude.
Let the Sector be opened in the lines of lines to a right angle, then take out
the proper difference of latitudes, and lay it on one of the lines from the
center, then take the proper distance with a pair of compasses, and setting
one foot in the terms of the difference, turn the other foot to the other
line of the Sector, and it shall there show the difference of longitude
required.

So if the places given were A, in the latitude of 50 gr. C in the latitude of
55 gr. with 6 gr. of distance one from another, we shall find their difference
of longitude to be about 5 gr..

For in the chart let a meridian AB be drawn for the one, and BC, AD,
parallels of latitude for them both. Then open the compasses according to the
latitude of the places, to OF the quantity of 6 gr. in the meridian, and
setting one foot in A, having latitude of 50 gr. turn the other to the
parallel of 55 gr. and it shall there cut off the required difference of
longitude BC 5 gr..

In the same manner, the Sector being opened to a right angle, in the lines of
lines: if we take the difference of latitude out of the line of meridians in
his proper place from 50 gr. unto 55 gr. and place it on one of the lines from
the center; then take 6. gr. the distance upon the Rumb out of the same line of
meridians, according to the latitudes of the places, and set the one foot in
the term of the former difference, turning the other foot to the other
perpendicular line, we shall find that it will cross it about 5 gr. from the
center: which is the difference of longitude required.

But if this difference of longitude were to be found by the common sea-chart,
it would seem to be only 3 gr. 20 m. which is more then 2 gr. 10 m. less then
the truth.

12 By one latitude, distance and difference of longitudes, to find the
difference of latitudes.
Let the Sector be opened in the line of lines to a right angle and let the
difference of longitude be reckoned in one of those lines from the center; then
take the proper distance with a pair of compasses, and setting the one foot
in the term of the former difference, turn the other foot to the other line
of the Sector, and it shall thence cut off a line, equal to the proper
difference of latitude required.

So if the places given were A and C, A in the latitude of 50 gr. C in a
greater latitude but unknown, the difference of longitude between them 5 gr.,
and the distance upon the Rumb 6 gr. or 120 leagues, we shall find the
difference of latitude to be 5 gr.

For in the chart, let occult meridians be drawn through A and C, and a
parallel of latitude through A; then open the compasses according to the
estimated latitudes of the places to OF the quantity of 6 gr. in the meridian,
and setting the one foot in A, turn the other to the meridian drawn through
C, and it shall there cut off the line DC, which is the difference of latitude
required.

In the same manner, the Sector being opened to a right angle, in the lines of
lines, if in the one line we reckon the difference of longitude from the center
to 5 gr., then taking 6 gr ^or the distance out of the line of Meridians,
according to the latitude of the places, we set the one foot in the term of
the given difference, and turn the other foot to the other perpendicular
line, we shall find that it cuts a line from it, which taken and measured in
the line of meridians, from 50 gr. on forward, does show the difference of
latitude to be as before 5 gr.

But if this difference of latitude were to be found by the common sea-chart,
it would seem to be only 2 gr. 25 m. which is 2 gr. 35 m. less then the
truth. Such is the difference between both these charts.

THE THIRD BOOK Containing the use of the particular Lines.
THE lines of lines, of superficies, of solids, of sines, with the laterall
lines of tangents and meridians, whereof I have hitherunto spoken, are those
which I principally intended: that little room on the Sector which remains,
may be filled up with such particular lines as each one shall think convenient
for his purpose. I have made choice of such as I thought might be best pricked
on without hindering the sight of the former, viz. lines of Quadrature, of
Segments, of Inscribed bodies, of Equated bodies, and of Metals.

CHAP. I. Of the lines of Quadrature.
THe lines of quadrature may be known by the letter Q, and by their place
between the lines of sines. Q signifies the side of a square; 5 the side of a
pentagon with five equal sides, 6 of an hexagon with six equal sides, and so
7, 8, 9, and 10. S stands for the Semidiameter of a circle, and 90 for a line
equal to 90 gr. in the circumference. The use of them may be

1 To make a square equal to a circle given. 2 To make a circle equal to a
square given.
If the circle be first given, take his semidiameter, and to it open the Sector
in the points at S: so the parallel taken from between the points at Q, shall
be the side of the square required.

geometric illustration

If the square be given take his side, and to it open the Sector, in the points
at Q: so the parallel taken from between the points at S, shall be the
Semidiameter of the circle required.

Let the Semidiameter of the circle given be AB, the side of the square equal
unto it shall be found to be CD.

3 To reduce a circle given, or a square into an equal pentagon, or other like
sided and like angled figure.
Take the side of the figure given, and fit it over in his due points: so the
parallels taken from between the points of the other figures, shall be the
sides of those figures: which being made up with equal angles, shall be all
equal one to the other.

Let the Semidiameter of the circle given be AB, the side of an hexagon equal
to this circle, shall by these means be found to be GH; and the sides of an
octagon to be IK. Other planes not here set down, may first be reduced into a
square, by the sixth Prop. Superf. and then into a circle, or other of these
equal figures, as before.

4 To find a right line, equal to the circumference of a circle, or other part
thereof.
Take the Semidiameter of the circle given, and to it open the Sector in the
points at S; so the parallel taken from between the points at 90 in this
line, shall be the fourth part of the circumference: which being known, the
other parts may be found out by the second and third Prop. of lines.

Thus if the Semidiameter of the circle given be AB, the right line OF shall be
found to be the fourth part of the circumference. Therefore the double of OF
shall be equal to the circumference of 180 gr; and the half of OF shall be the
circumference of 45 gr. and so in the rest.

CHAP. II. Of the lines of Segments.
THe lines of segments which are here placed between the lines of sines and
superficies, and are numbered by 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, do represent the diameter of
a circle, so divided into a hundred parts, as that a right line drawn through
these parts, perpendicular to the diameter, shall cut the circle into two
segments, of which the greater segment shall have that proportion to the whole
circle, as the parts cut have to 100. The use of them may be

1 To divide a circle given into two segments, according to a proportion given.
2 To find a proportion between a circle and his segments given.
Let the Sector be opened in the points of an 100, to the diameter of the
circle given: so a parallel taken from the points proportional to the greater
segment required, shall give the depth of that greater segment.

Or if the segments be given, let the Sector be opened as before; then take the
depth of the greater segment, and carry it geometric illustration parallel to
the diameter: so the number of points wherein they stay, shall show the
proportion to 100.

As if the diameter of the circle given were BL, the depth of the greater
segment LO being 75, does show the proportion of the segment OMLN to the circle
to be as 75 to 100. viz. three parts of four.

Hence I might show, if there were any use of it,

To find the side of a square, equal to any known segment of a circle.
The side of a square equal to the whole circle, may be found by the former
Cap. and then having the proportion of the segment to the circle, we may
dimmish the square in such proportion, by that which has been showed Lib. 1.
Cap. 3. Prop. 3.

CHAP. III. Of the lines of Inscribed bodies.
THe lines of inscribed bodies are here placed between the lines of lines, and
may be known by the letters, D, S, I, C, O, T; of which D signifies the side
of a dodecahedron, I of an Icosahedron, C of a cube, O of an octahedron, and T
of a tetrahedron, all inscribed into the same sphere, whose semidiameter is
here signified by the letter S.

The use of these lines may be,

1 The semidiameter of a sphere being given, to find the sides of the five
regular bodies, which may be inscribed in the said sphere. 2 The side of any of
the five regular bodies being given, to find the semidiameter of a sphere, that
will circumscribe the said body.
If the sphere be first given, take his semidiameter, and to it open the Sector
in the points at S: if any of the other bodies be first given, take the side of
it, and fit it over in his due points: so the parallel taken from between the
points of the other bodies, shall be the sides of those bodies, and may be
inscribed into the same sphere.

line segments

So if the semidiameter of the sphere be AC, the side of the dodecahodron
inscribed shall be DE.

CHAP. IIII. Of the lines of Equated bodies.
THe lines of equated bodies are here placed between the l^n^s of lines (...)
solids, noted with these letters, D, I, C, S, ^, T, of which D stands for the
side of a dod^cahedron, I for the ^^de of ^n Icos^hedron, C for the side of a
cube, S for the diameter of a sphere, O for the side of an octahedron, and T
for the side of a tetrahed on, all equal one to the other. The use of these
lin^s may be

1 The diameter of a sphere being given, to find the sides of ^he five regular
bodies equal to that sphere. 2 The side of any of the five regular bodies
being given, to find the diameter of a sphere, and the sides of the other
bodies, equal to the first body given.
If the sphere be first given, take his diameter, and to it open the Sector in
the points at S: if any of the other bodies be first given, take the side of
it, and fit it over in his due points: so the parallels taken from between the
points of the other bodies, shall be the sides of those bodies equal to the
first body given.

Thus in the last diagram, if the diameter of a sphere given be BC, the side of
the dodecahedron equal to this sphere, would be found to be FG.

CHAP. V. Of the Lines of Mettalls.
THe lines of Mettalls are here joined with those before of equated bodies, and
are noted with these characters....... of which stands for gold, for
quicksiluer, for lead, for silver, for copper, for iron, and for tin. The use
of them is to give a proportion between these several mettalls, in their
magnitude and weight, according to the experiments of Marinus Ghetaldus, in his
book called Promotus Archimedes.

1 In like bodies of several mettalls and equal weight, having the magnitude
of the one, to find the magnitude of the rest.
Take the magnitude given out of the lines of Solids, and to it open the Sector
in the points belonging to the metal given: so the parallells taken from
between the points of the other mettalls, and measured in the lines of Solids,
shall give the magnitude of their bodies.

Thus having cubes or spheres of equal weight, but several mettalls, we shall
find that if those of tin contain 10000 D, ^he others of iron will contain
9250, those of copper 8222, those of silver 7161, those of lead 6435, those
full of quicksiluer 5453, and those of gold 3895.

2 In like bodies of several mettalls and equal magnitude, having the weight
of one to find the weight of the rest.
This proposition is the converse of the former, the proportion not direct, but
reciprocal, wherefore having two like bodies, take the given weight of the one
out of the lines of Solids, and to it open the Sector in the points belonging
to the metal of the other body: so the parallel taken from the points
belonging to the body given, and measured in the lines of Solids, shall give
the weight of the body required.

As if a cube of gold weighed 38 l. and it were required to know the weight of
a cube of lead having equal magnitude. First I take 38 l. for the weight of the
golden cube, out of the lines of Solids, and put it over in the points of
belonging to lead: so the parallel taken from between the points of standing
for gold, and measured in the lines of Solids, does give the weight of the
leaden cube required to be 23 l.

Thus if a sphere of gold shall weigh 10000, we shall find that a sphere of
the same diameter full of quicksiluer shall weigh 7143, a sphere of lead 6053,
a sphere of silver 5438, a sphere of copper 4737, a sphere of iron 4210, and a
sphere of tin 3895.

3 A body being given of one metal, to make another like unto it, of another
metal, and equal weight.
Take out one of the sides of the body given, and put it over in the points
belonging to his metal: so the parallel taken from between the points
belonging to the other metal, shall give the like side, for the body
required. If it be an irregular body, let the other like sides be found out in
the same manner.

line segments

Let the body given be a sphere of lead containing in magnitude 16 D, whose
diameter is A, to which I am to make a sphere of iron, of equal weight: If I
take out the diameter A, and put it over in the points of belonging to lead,
the parallel taken from between the points of standing for iron, shall be B,
the diameter of the iron sphere required. And this compared with the other
diameter, in the lines of solids will be found to be 23 d. in magnitude.

4 A body being given of one metal, to make another like unto it of another
metal, according to a weight given.
First find the sides of a like body of equal weight, then may we either
augment or diminish them according to the proportion given by that which we
showed before in the second and third Prop. of Solids.

As if the body given were a sphere of lead, whose diameter is A, and it were
required to find the diameter of a sphere of iron, which shall weigh three
times as much as the sphere of lead: I take A, and put it over in the points
of, his parallel taken from between the points of, shall give me B for the
diameter of an equal sphere of iron: if this be augmented in such proportion
as 1 unto 3, it gives C for the diameter required.

geometric illustration
CHAP. VI. Of the lines on the edges of the Sector.
Having showed some use of the lines on the flat sides of the Sector, there
remain only those on the edges. And here one half of the outward edge is
divided into inches, and numbered according to their distance from the ends of
the Sector. As in the Sector of fourteen inches long, where we find 1 and 13,
it shows that division to be 1 inch from the nearer end, and 13 inches from
the farther end of the Sector.

The other half contains a line of lesser tangents, to which the gnomon is
Radius. They are here continued to 75 gr. And if there be need to produce them
farther, take 45 out of the number of degrees required, and double the
remainder: so the tangent and secant of this double remainder being added,
shall make up the tangent of the degrees required.

As if AB being the Radius, and BC the tangent line, it were required to find
the tangent of 75 gr. If we take 45 gr. out of 75 gr. the remainer is 30 gr.
and the double 60 gr. whose tangent is BD, and the secant is AD: if then we
add AD to BD, it makes BC the tangent of 75 gr. which was required. In like
sort the secant of 61 gr. added to the tangent of 61 gr. gives the tangent of
75 gr. 30 m. and the secant of 62 gr. added to the tangent of 62 gr. gives the
tangent of 76 gr. and so in the rest. The use of this line may be

To observe the altitude of the Sun.
Hold the Sector so as the tangent BC may be vertical, and the gnomon BA
parallel to the horizon; then turn the gnomon toward the Sun, so that it
may cast a shadow upon the tangent, and the end of the shadow shall show the
altitude of the Sun. So if the end of the gnomon at A, do give a shadow unto
H, it shows that the altitude is 38 gr., if unto D, then 60 gr. and so in the
rest.

There is another use of this tangent line, for the drawing of the hour lines
upon any ordinary plane, whereof I will set down these propositions.

1 To draw the hour lines upon an horizontall plane. 2 To draw the hour lines
upon a direct vertical plane.
First draw a right line AC for the horizon and the equator, and cross it at
the point A about the middle of the line with AB another right line, which may
serve for the meridian and the hour of 12; then take out 15 gr. out of the
tangents, and prick them down in the equator on both sides from 12: so the
one point shall serve for the hour of 11, and the other for the hour of 1.
Again, take out the tangent of 30 gr. and prick it down in the equator on
both sides from 12: so the one of these points shall serve for the hour of 10,
and the other for the hour of 2. In like manner may you prick down the tangent
of 45 gr. for the hours of 9 and 3, and the tangent of 60 gr. for the hours
of 8 and 4, and the tangent of 75 gr. for the hours of 7 and 5.

Or if any please to set down the parts of an hour, he may allow 7 gr. 30 m.
for every half hour, and 3 gr. 45 m. for every quarter. This done, you are to
consider the latitude of the place, and the quality of the plane: For the
secant of the latitude shall be the semidiameter in a vertical plane, and the
secant of the complement of the latitude in an horizontall plane.

geometric illustration

For example, about London the latitude is 51 gr. 30 m. and let the plane be
vertical. If you take AV the secant of 51 gr. 30 m. out of the Sector, and
prick it down in the meridian line from A unto V, the point V shall be the
center: and if you draw right lines from V unto 11, and 10, and the rest of the
hour points, they shall be the hour lines required.

But if the plane be horizontall, then you are to take out AH the secant of 38
gr. 30 m. for the semidiameter, and prick it down in the meridian line from A
unto H: so the right lines drawn from the center H unto the hour points,
shall be the hour lines required; only the hour of 6 is wanting, and that
must always be drawn parallel to the equator, through the center V in a
vertical, through the center H in an horizontall plane.

3 To draw the hour lines on a polar plane. 4 To draw the hour lines on a
meridian plane.
In a polar plane the equator may be also the same with the horizontall line,
and the hour points may be pricked on as before, but the hour lines must be
drawn parallel to the meridian.

In a meridian plane, the equator will cut the horizontall line with an angle
equal to the complement of the latitude of the place; then may you make choice
of the point A, and there cross the equator with a right line, which may serve
for the hour of 6: so the tangent of 15 gr. being pricked down in the equator
on both sides from 6, shall serve for the hours of five 5 and 7; and the
tangent of 30 gr. for the hours of 8 and 4; and the tangent of 45 gr. for the
hours of 3 and 9; and the tangent of 60 gr. for the hours of 2 and 10; and
the tangent of 75 gr. for the hours of 1 and 11. And if you draw right lines
through these hour points, crossing the equator at right angles, they shall be
the hour lines required.

geometric illustration

5 To draw the hour lines in a vertical declining place.
First, draw AV the meridian, and AE the horizontal line, crossing one the
other at right angles in the point A.

2 Then take out AV, the secant of the latitude of the place, which you may
suppose to be 51 gr. 30 m. and prick it down in the meridian line from A unto
V.

3 Because it is a declining plane, and you may suppose it to decline 40 gr.
Eastward, you are to make an angle of the declination upon the center A, below
the horizontall line, and to the left hand of the meridian line, because the
declination is Eastward, for otherwise it should have bin to the right hand, if
the declination had bin Westward.

4 Take AH, the secant of the complement of the latitude out of the Sector, and
prick it down in the line of declination from A unto H, as you did before for
the semidiameter in the horizontall plane.

5 Draw a line at full length through the point A, which must be perpendicular
unto AH, and cut the horizontall line according to the angles of declination,
and it will be as the equator in the horizontall plane.

6 Take the hour points out of the Tangent line in the Sector, and prick them
down in this equator on both sides from the hour of 12 at A.

7 Lay your ruler, and draw right lines through the center H, and each of these
hour points: so have you all the hour lines of an horizontall plane, only
the hour of 6 is wanting, and that may be drawn through H perpendicular to HA.

Lastly you are to observe and mark the intersections, which these hour lines
do make with AE the horizontall line of the plane: and then if you draw right
lines through the center V, and each of these intersections, they shall be the
hour lines required.

6 To prick down the hour points another way.
Having drawn a right line for the equator as before, and made choice of the
point A, for the hour of 12: you may at pleasure cut of two equal lines A 10,
and A 2. Then upon the distance between 10 and 2, make an equilaterall
triangle, and you shall have B for the center of your equator, and the line AB
shall give the distance from A to 9, and from A to 3. That done take out the
distance between 9 and 3, and this shall give the distance from B unto 8, and
from 8 unto 7, and from 8 unto 1: and again from B unto 4, and from 4 unto 5,
and from 4 unto 11. So have you the hour points, and if you take out the
distance B 1, B 3, B 5, etc. You may find the points not only for the half
hours, but also for the quarters.

But if it so fall out, that some of these hour points fall out of your plane,
you may help your self by the larger tangent, both in the vertical, and
horizontall planes.

For if at the hour points of 3 and 9, you draw occult lines parallel to the
meridian; the distances DC, between the hour line of 6, and the hour points
of 3 and 9, will be equal to the semidiameter AV in a vertical, and AH in a
horizontall plane, and if they be divided in such sort as the line AC is
divided, you shall have the points of 4, and 5, and 7, and 8, with their halfes
and quarters.

As in the horizontall plane, take out the semidiameter AH, and make it a
parallel Radius by fitting it over in the sines of 90 and 90: Then take 15 gr.
out of the larger tangent, and lay them on the lines of sines, where they will
reach from the center unto the sines of 15 gr. 32 m. therefore take out the
parallel sine of 15 gr. 32 m. and it shall give the distance from 6 unto 5,
and from 6 unto 7, in your horizontall plane. That done take out 30 gr. out of
the larger tangent, and lay them on the sines, from the center unto the sines
of 35 gr. 16 m. and the parallel sine of 35 g. 16 m. shall give you the
distance from 6 unto 4, and from 6 unto 8, in your horizontall plane. The like
may be done for the half hours and quarters.

So also in the vertical declining plane. If you first take out the secant of
the declination of the plane, and prick it down in the horizontall line from A
unto E, and through E draw right lines parallel to the meridian, which will
cut the former hour lines of 3 and 9, or one of them in the point C: then take
out the semidiameter AV, and prick it down in those parallells from C unto D,
and draw right lines from A unto C, and from V unto D; the line VD shall be the
hour of 6, and if you divide these lines AC and DC, in such sort as you
divided the like line DC in the horizontall plane, you shall have all the hour
points required.

Or you may find the point D, in the hour of 6, without knowledge either of H
or C. For having pricked down AV in the meridian line, and AE in the
horizontall line, and drawn parallels to the meridian through the points at E,
you may take the tangent of the latitude out of the Sector, and fit it over in
the sines of 90 and 90: so the parallel sine of the declination measured in
the same tangent line, shall there show the complement of the angle DVA, which
the hour line of 6 makes with the meridian; then having the point D, take out
the semidiameter VA, and prick it down in those parallels from D unto C: so
shall you have the lines DC and AC to be divided as before.

The like might be used for the hour lines upon all other planes. But I must
not write all that may be done by the Sector. It may suffice that I have wrote
something of the use of each line, and thereby given the ingenuous Reader
occasion to think of more.

The conclusion to the Reader.
IT is well known to many of you, that this Sector was thus contrived, the
most part of this book written in latin, many copies transcribed and dispersed
more then sixteen years since. I am at the last contented to give way that it
come forth in English. Not that I think it worthy either of my labor or the
public view, but partly to satisfy their importunity, who not understanding
the Latin, yet were at the charge to buy the instrument, and partly for my own
ease. For as it is painful for others to transcribe my copy, so it is
troublesome for me to give satisfaction herein to all that desire it. If I
find this to give you content, it shall encourage me to do the like for my
Crosse-staffe, and some other Instruments. In the mean time bear with the
Printers faults, and so I rest.

Gresham Coll. 1. Maij. 1623. E. G.

FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE CROSSE-STAFFE.
CHAP. I. Of the description of the Staff.
THe Crosse-Staffe is an instrument well known to our Seamen, and much used by
the ancient Astronomers and others, serving Astronomically for observation of
altitude and angles of distance in the heavens, Geometrically for perpendicular
heights and distances on land and sea.

The description and several uses of it are extant in print, by Gemma Frisius
in Latin, in English by Dr. Hood. I differ something from them both, in the
proiection of this Staff, but so, as their rules may be applied unto it, and
all their propositions be wrought by it: and therefore referring the Reader to
their books, I shall be brief in the explanation of that which may be applied
from theirs unto mine, and so come to the use of those lines which are of my
addition, not extant heretofore.

The necessary parts of this Instrument are five: the Staff, the Cross, and
the three sights. The Staff which I made for my own use, is a full yard in
length, that so it may serve for measure.

The Cross belonging to it is 26 inches between the two outward sights. If
any would have it in a greater form, the proportion between the Staff and
the Cross, may be such as 360 unto 262.

The lines inscribed on the Staff are of four sorts. One of them serves for
measure and protraction: one for observation of angles: one for the Sea-chart;
and the four other for working of proportions in several kinds.

The line of measure is an inch line, and may be known by his equal parts.
The whole yard being divided equally into 36 inches, and each inch subdivided,
first into ten parts, and then each tenth part into halfes.

The line for observation of angles may be known by the double numbers set on
both sides of the line, beginning at the one side at 20, and ending at 90: on
the other side at 40, and ending at 180: and this being divided according to
the degrees of a quadrant, I call it the tangent line on the Staff.

The next line is the meridian of a Sea-chart, according to Mercators
proiection from the Equinoctial to 58 gr. of latitude, and may be known by
the letter M, and the numbers 1. 2. 3. 4. unto 58.

The lines for working of proportions, may be known by their unequal
divisions, and the numbers at the end of each line.

1 The line of numbers noted with the letter N, divided unequally into 1000
parts, and numbered with 1. 2. 3. 4. unto 10.

2 The line of artificial tangents is noted with the letter T, divided
unequally into 45 degrees, and numbered both ways, for the Tangent and the
complement.

3 The line of artificial sines, noted with the letter S, divided unequally
into 90 degrees, and numbered with 1. 2. 3. 4. unto 90.

4 The line of versed sines for more easy finding the hour and azimuth, noted
with V, divided unequally into about 164 gr. 50 m. numbered backward with 10.
20. 30. unto 164.

Thus there are seven lines inscribed on the Staff: there are five lines more
inscribed on the Cross.

1 A Tangent line of 36 gr. 3 m. numbered by 5. 10. 15. ^ledge^nto 35: the midst
whereof is at 20 gr; and therefore I call it ^ledge^he tangent of 20; and this
has respect unto 20 gr. in the Tangent on the Staff.

2 A Tangent line of 49 gr. 6 m. numbered by 5. 10. 15. vn^ledge^o 45; the midst
whereof is at 30 gr. and has respect unto ^ledge^0 gr. in the Tangent on the
Staff, whereupon I call it the ^ledge^angent of 30.

3 A line of inches numbered with 1. 2. 3. unto 26; each inch ^ledge^qually
subdivided into ten parts, answerable to the inch line ^ledge^pon the Staff.

4 A line of several chords, one answerable to a circle of ^ledge^welue inches
semidiameter, numbered with 10. 20. 30. unto ^ledge^0: another to a semidiameter
of a circle of six inches; and ^ledge^he third to a semidiameter of a circle of
three inches; both ^ledge^umbred with 10. 20. 30. unto 90.

5 A continuation of the meridian line from 57 gr. of la^ledge^tude unto 76 gr;
and from 76 gr. to 84 gr.

For the inscription of these lines. The first for measure is ^ledge^qually
divided into inches and tenth parts of inches.

The tangent on the Staff for observation of angles, with ^ledge^e tangent of
20 and the tangent of 30 on the Cross, may ^ledge^l three be inscribed out of
the ordinary table of tangents. The ^ledge^affe being 36 inches in length; the
Radius for the tangent ^ledge^ the Staff will be 13 inches and 103 parts of
1000: so the ^ledge^hole line will be a tangent of 70 gr. and must be numbered
^ledge^ their complements, and the double of their complements, ^ledge^e
tangent of 10 gr. being numbered with 80 and 160.

The Radius for the tangent of 20 on the Cross, will be 6 inches, and the
whole line between the sights a tangent 36 gr. 3 m. according as it is
numbered. The Radius for the ^ledge^ngent of 30 gr. on the Cross, will be 22
inches and 695 ^ledge^rts of 1000: so the whole line between the sights will
con^ledge^ine a tangent of 49 gr. 6 m. in such sort as they are num^ledge^ed.

The meridian line may be inscribed out of the Table ^ledge^hich I set down
for this purpose in the use of the Sector.

The line of numbers may be inscribed out of the first Chiliad of Mr. Briggs
Logarithmes: and the rest of the lines of proportion out of my Canon of
artificial sines and tangents; and in recompense thereof this book will serve
as a comment to explane the use of my Canon.

CHAP. II. The use of the lines of inches for perpendicular heights and
distances.
IN taking of heights and distances, the Staff may be held in such sort, that
it may be even with the distance, and the Cross parallel with the height: and
then if the eye at the beginning of the Staff shall see his marks by the
inward sides of the two first sights, there will be such proportion between
the distance and the height, as is between the part intercepted on the Staff
and the Cross. Which may be farther explaned in these propositions.

geometric illustration

1 To find an height at one station, by knowing the distance.
Set the middle sight unto the distance upon the Staff the height will be
found upon the Cross. For As the segment of the Saffe

unto the segment on the Cross:

So is the distance given,

unto the height.



As if the distance AB being known to be 256 feet, it were required to find
the height BC: first I place the mid^le sight at 25 inches and 6 parts of 10;
then holding the Staff level with the distance, I raise the Cross, parallel
unto the height, in such sort, as that my eye may see from A the beginning of
the inches on the Staff by the sight E, at the beginning of the inches on the
Cross unto the mark C: which being done, if I find 19 inches and 2 parts of 10
intercepted on the Cross between the sights at E and D, I would say the
height BC were 192 feet.

Or if the observation were to be made before the distance were measured, I
would set the middle sight either unto 10 inches, or 12, or 16, or 20, or 24,
or some such other number as might best be divided into several parts, and
then work by proportion. As if in the former example the middle sight were at
24 on the Staff, and 18 on the Cross, it should seem that the height is of
the distance; and therefore the distance being 256, the height should be 192.

2 To find an height, by knowing some part of the same height.
As if the height from G to C were known to be 48, and it were required to
find the whole height BC: either put the third sight or some other running
sight upon the Cross between the eye and the mark G. For then As the
difference between the sights,

unto the whole segment of the Cross:

So is the part of the height given,

unto the whole height.



If then the difference between the sights E and F, shall be 45, and the
segment of the Cross ED 180, the whole height BC will be found to be 192.

3 To find an height at two stations, by knowing the difference of the same
stations.
As the difference of segments on the Staff,

unto the difference of stations:

So is the segment of the Cross,

unto the height.

Suppose the first station being at H, the segment of the Cross ED were 180,
and the segment of the Staff HD 300: then coming 64 feet nearer unto B, in a
direct line, unto a second station at A, and making another observation;
suppose the segment of the Cross ED were 180 as before, and the segment of the
Staff AD 240; take 240 out of 300, the difference of segments will be 60
parts. And As 60 parts unto 64 the difference of stations:

So DE 180 unto BC 192 the height required.



In these three Prop. there is a regard to be had of the height of the eye. For
the height measured, is no more then from the level of the eye upward.

4 To find a distance, by knowing the height.
As the segment of the Cross,

unto the segment of the Staff:

So is the height given,

unto the distance.

So the segment ED being 18, and DA 24, the height CB 192, will show the
distance AB to be 256.

5 To find a distance, by knowing part of the height.
As the difference between the sights,

unto the segment of the Staff:

So is the part of the height given,

unto the distance.

And thus the difference between E and F being 45, and the segment DA 240; the
part of the height GC 48, will give the distance AB to be 256.

6 To find a distance at two stations, by knowing the difference of the same
stations.
As the difference of segments on the Staff,

unto the difference of stations:

So is the whole segment,

unto the distance.

And thus the segment of the Cross being 180, the segment of the Staff at the
first station 240, at the second 300, the difference of the segments 60, and
the difference of stations 64, the distance AB at the first station will be
found to be 256, and the distance HB at the second station 320.

7 To find a breadth by knowing the distance perpendicular to the breadth.
This is all one with the first Prop. For this breadth is but an height turned
sidewayes: and therefore As the segment of the Staff,

unto the segment of the Cross:

So is the distance

unto the breadth.



And thus the segment of the Staff being 24, and the segment of the Cross 18,
the distance AB 256, will give the breadth BC to be 192.

8 To find a breadth at two stations in a line perpendicular to the breadth, by
knowing the di^ference of the same stations.
This is also the same with the third Prop: and therefore As the difference of
segments on the Staff,

unto the difference of stations:

So the segment on the Cross between the two sights,

unto the breadth required.



And thus the difference between the stations at A and H being 64, the
difference of segments on the Staff 60, the segment of the Cross 180, the
breadth BC will be found to be 192.

In like manner may we find the breadth GC for having found the breadth BC the
proportion will hold.

As DE is unto FE, so B C unto GC. Or otherwise,

As H a unto HA, so FE unto GC.

Neither is it material whether the two stations be chosen at the one end of
the breadth proposed, or without it, or within it, if the line between the
stations be perpendicular unto the breadth: as may appear if in stead of the
stations at A and H, we make choice of the like stations at I and K.

There might be other ways proposed to work these Prop. by holding the Cross
even with the distance, and the Staff parallel with the height: but these
would prove more troublesome, and those which are delivered are sufficient, and
the same with those which others have set down under the name of the Jacobs
staff.

CHAP. III. The use of the Tangent lines in taking of Angles.
geometric illustration

1 To find an angle by the Tangent on the Staff.
LEt the middle sight be always set to the middle of the Cross, noted with 20
and 30, and then the Cross drawn nearer the eye, until the marks may be
seen close within the sights. For so if the eye at A (that end of the Staff
which is noted with 90 and 180) beholding the marks K and N, between the two
first sights, C and B, or the marks K and P between the two outward sights,
the Cross being drawn down unto H, shall stand at 30 and 60, in the Tangent
on the Staff: it shows that the angle KAN is 30 gr. the angle KAP 60 gr. the
on^ double to the other; which is ^he r^ason of the double numbers on this line
of the Staff: and this way will serve for any angle from 20 gr. toward 90 gr.
or from 40 gr. toward 180 gr. But if the angle be less then 20 gr. we must
then make use of the Tangent upon the Cross.

2 To find an angle by the Tangent of 20 upon the Cross.
Set 20 unto 20, that is, the middle sight to the midst of the Cross at the
end of the Staff, noted with 20: so the eye at A, beholding the marks L and N,
close between the two first sights, C and B, shall se^ them in an angle of 20
gr.

If the marks shall be nearer together, as are M and N, then draw in the Cross
from C unto E: if they be farther asunder, as are K and N, then draw out the
Cross from C unto F; so the quantity of the angle shall be still found in the
Cross in the Tangent of 20 gr. at the end of the Staff; and this will serve
for any angle from 0 gr. toward 35 gr.

3 To find an angle by the Tangent of 30 upon the Cross.
This Tangent of 30 is here put the rather, that the end of the Staff resting
at the eye, the hand may more easily remove th Cross: for it supposes the
Radius to be no longer then AH, which is from the eye at the end of the Staff
unto 30 gr. about 22 inches and 7 parts. Wherefore here set the middle sight
unto 30 gr. on the Staff, and then either draw the Cross in or out, until
the marks be seen between the two first sights; so the quantity of the angle
will be found in the Tangent of 30, which is here represented by the line GH;
and this will serve for any angle from 0 gr. toward 48 gr.

4 To observe the altitude of the Sun backward.
Here it is fit to have an horizontall sight set to the beginning of the
Staff, and then may you turn your back toward the Sun, and your Cross
toward your eye. If the altitude be under 45 gr. set the middle sight to 30 on
the Staff, and look by the middle sight through the horizontall unto the
horizon, moving the Cross upward or downward, until the upper sight do
shadow the upper half of the horizontall sight: so the altitude will be found
in the Tangent of 30.

If the altitude shall be more then 45 gr. set the middle sight unto the midst
of the Cross, and look by the inward edge of the lower sight through the
horizontall to the horizon, moving the middle sight in or out, until the upper
sight do shadow the upper half of the horizontall sight: so the altitude will
be found in the degrees on the Staff between 40 and 180.

5 To set the Staff to any angle given.
This is the converse of the former Prop. For if the middle sight be set to his
place and degree, the eye looking close by the sights as before, cannot but see
his object in the angle given.

6 To observe the altitude of the Sun another way.
Set the middle sight to the middle of the Cross, and hold the horizontall
sight downward, so as the Cross may be parallel to the horizon, then is the
Staff vertical; and if the outward sight of the Cross do shadow the
horizontall sight, the complement of the altitude will be found in the tangent
on the Staff.

7 To observe an altitude by thread and plummet.
Let the middle sight be set to the midst of the Cross, and to that end of
the Staff which is noted with 90 and 180; then having a thread and a plummet
at the beginning of the Cross, and turning the Cross upward, and the Staff
toward the Sun, the thread will fall on the complement of the altitude above
the horizon. And this may be applied to other purposes.

8 To apply the lines of inches to the taking of angles.
If the angles be observed between the two first sights, there will be such
proportion between the parts of the Staff and the parts of the Cross, as
between the Radius and the Tangent of the angle.

As if the parts intercepted on the Staff were 20 inches, the parts on the
Cross 9 inches. Then by proportion as 20 unto 9, so 100000 unto 45000 the
tangent of 24 gr. 14 m.

But if the angle shall be observed between the two outward sights, the parts
being 20 and 9 as before, the angle will be 48 gr. 28 m. double unto the former.

In all these there is a regard to be had to the parallax of the eye, and his
height above the Horizon in observations at Sea; to the Semidiameter of the
Sun, his parallax and refraction, as in the use of other staves. And so this
will be as much, or more then that which has been heretofore performed by the
Crosse-staffe.

CHAP. IIII. The use of the lines of equal parts joined with the lines of
Chords.
THe lines of equal parts do serve also for protraction, as may appear by the
former Diagrams; but being joined with the lines of Chords, which I place upon
one side of the Cross, they will farther serve for the protraction and
resolution of right line triangles; whereof I will give one example in finding
of a distance at two stations otherwise then in the second Cap.

geometric illustration

Let the distance required be AB. At A the first statio^ I make choice of a
station line toward C, and observe the angle BAC by the tangent lines, which
may be 43 gr. 20 m; then having gone an hundred paces toward C, I make my second
station at D, where suppose I find the angle BDC to be 58 gr. or the angle BDA
to be 122 gr; this being done, I may find the distance AB in this manner.

1 I draw a right line AC, representing the station line.

2 I take 100 out of the lines of equal parts, and prick them down from A
the first station unto D the second.

3 I open my compasses to one of the chords of 60 gr. and setting one foot in
the point A, with the other I describe an occult arc of a circle intersecting
the station line in E.

4 I take out of the same line of chords a chord of 43 gr. 20 m. (because such
was the angle at the first station) and this I inscribe into that occult arc
from E unto F, which makes the angle FAD equal to the angle observed at the
first station.

5 I describe another like arc upon the center D, and inscribe into it a chord
of 58 gr. from C unto G, and draw the right line DG, which does meet with the
other line AF in the point B, and makes the angle BDC equal to the angle
observed at the second station. So the angles in the Diagram being equal to
the angles in the field, their sides will be also proportional: and therefore,

6 I take out the line AB with my compasses, and measuring it in the same line
of equal parts, from which I took AD, I find it to be 335, and such is the
distance required.

CHAP. V. The use of the Meridian line.
1 THe Meridian line, noted with the letter M, may serve for the more easy
division of the plane sea-chart, according to Mercators proiection. For if you
shall draw parallel meridians, each degree being half an inch distant from
other, the degrees of this meridian line on the Staff, shall give the like
degrees for the meridians on the chart, from the Equinoctial toward the Pole:
and then if through these degrees you draw straight lines perpendicular to the
meridians, they shall be parallels of latitude.

If any desire to have the degrees of his chart larger then those which I have
put on the Staff, he may take these and increase them in a double, or treble,
or a decuple proportion at his pleasure.

2 This meridian line being joined with the line of chords, may serve for the
protraction and resolution of such right line triangles as concern latitude,
longitude, rumb and distance in the practice of navigations. As may appear by
this example.

Suppose two places given, A in the latitude of 50 gr. D in the latitude of 52
gr., the difference of longitude between them being 6 gr. and let it be
required to know, first what Rumb leads from the one place to the other;
secondly how many degrees distant they are asunder.

1 I draw a right line AE, representing the parallel of the place from whence
I depart.

2 I take 6 gr. for the difference of longitude ^^th^r out of the line of
inches, allowing half an inch for e^^^y de^ree, o^ out of the beginning of the
meridian line; (for there the meridian degrees d ffer very little from the
equinoct^all degrees) and these 6 gr. I prick down in the parallel from A to
E.

3 In A and E, I erect two perpendiculars, AM and ED, representing the
meridians of both places.

geometric illustration

4 I take the difference of latitude from 50 gr. to 52 gr. 30 m. out of the
meridian line, and prick it down in the meridians from A unto M, and from E
to D, and draw the right line MD for the parallel of the second place, and the
right line AD for the line of distance between both places: so the angle MAD
shall give the Rumb that leads from the one place to the other.

5 To find the quantity of this angle MAD, I may either make use of the
Protractor, or else of a line of chords, and so I open my compasses unto one of
the chords of 60 gr. and setting one foot in the point A, with the other I
describe an occult arc of a circle, intersecting the meridian in F, and the
line of distance in G; then I take the chord FG with my compasses, and
measuring it in the same line of chords as before, I find it 56 gr.: and such
is the inclination of the Rumb to the meridian, which is the first thing that
was required.

6 To find the quantity of the line of distance AD, I take it out with my
compasses, and measuring it in the meridian line, setting one foot beneath the
lesser latitude, and the other foot as much above the greater latitude, I find
about 4 gr. intercepted between both feet: and such is the distance upon the
Rumb, which is the second thing that was required.

But if this example were protracted according to the common Sea-chart, where
the degrees of the equinoctial and meridian are both alike; the Rumb MAD would
be found to be above 67 gr. and AD the distance upon the Rumb about 6 gr..

Suppose farther, that having set forth from A toward D, upon the former Rumb
of 56 gr. 15 m. NEbE, after the ship had run 36 leagues, the wind changing,
it ran 50 leagues more upon the seventh Rumb of EbN, whose inclination to the
meridian is 78 gr. 45 m. And let it be required to know what longitude and
latitude the ship is in, by pricking down the way thereof upon the Chart.

Having drawn a blanke chart as before, with meridians and parallels,
according to the latitude of the places proposed.

1 I would make an angle MAD of 56 gr. 15 m. for the Rumb of NEbE, which is
done after this manner: I open my compasses to one of the chords of 60 gr. and
setting one foot in the point A, with the other I describe an occult ark of a
circle, intersecting the meridian in F; then I take 56 gr. 15 m. out of the
same line of chords, and prick them down from F unto G: so the right line AG
shall be the Rumb of NEbE.

2 I would take 36 leagues out of the meridian line, extending my compasses
from 50 gr. to 51 gr. 48 m. or rather from as much below 50 as above 51, and
prick them down upon the Rumb from A unto I; so the point I, shall represent
the place wherein the ship was when the wind changed. And this is in the
latitude of 51 gr. 0 m. and in the longitude of 2 gr. 21 m. Eastward from the
meridian AM.

3 By the same reason, I may draw the right line IK for the Rumb of EbN, and
prick down the distance of 50 leagues from I unto K: so the point K shall
represent the place whither the ship came, after the running of these 50
leagues and this is in the latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. and in longitude 6 gr. 16
m. Eastward from the first meridian AM, and therefore 16 m. Eastward from the
second meridian ED.

But if these two courses were to be pricked down by the common sea-chart, the
point I would fall in the latitude of 51 gr. 0 m. and the point K in the
latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. But the longitude of I would be only 1 gr. 30 m. and
the longitude of K only 3 gr. 57 m. which is 33 m Westward from the meridian
of the place to which the ship was bound.

Such is the difference between both these charts.

CHAP. VI. The use of the line of Numbers.
1 Having two numbers given to find a third in continual proportion, a fourth,
a fifth, and so forward.
EXtend the compasses from the first number unto the second; then may you turn
them, from the second to the third, and from the third to the fourth, and so
forward.

Let the two numbers given be 2 and 4. Extend the compasses from 2 to 4, then
may you turn them from 4 to 8, and from 8 to 16, and from 16 to 32, and from
32 to 64, and from 64 to 128.

Or if the one foot of the compasses being set to 64, the other fall out of
the line, you may set it to another 64 nearer the beginning of the line, and
there the other foot will reach to 128, and from 128 you may turn them to 256,
and so forward.

Or if the two first numbers given were 10 and 9: extend the compasses from 10
at the end of the line, back unto 9, then may you turn them from 9 unto 8.1,
and from 8.1 unto 7.29. And so if the two first numbers given were 1 and 9, the
third would be found to be 81, the fourth 729, with the same extent of the
compasses.

In the same manner, if the two first numbers were 10 and 12, you may find the
third proportional to be 14.4, the fourth 17.28. And with the same extent of
the compasses, if the two first numbers were 1 and 12, the third would be found
to be 144, and the fourth to be 1728.

2 Having two extreme numbers given, to find a mean proportional between them.
Divide the space between the extreme numbers into two equal parts, and the
foot of the compasses will stay at the mean proportional. So the extreme
numbers given being 8 and 32, the mean between them will be found to be 16,
which may be proved by the former Prop. where it was showed, that as 8 to 16,
so are 16 to 32.

3 To find the square root of any number given.
The square root is always the mean proportional between 1 and the number
given, and therefore to be found by dividing the space between them into two
equal parts. So the root of 9 is 3, and the root of 81 is 9, and the root
of 144 is 12.

4 Having two extreme numbers given, to find two mean proportionals between
them.
Divide the space between the two extreme numbers given, into three equal
parts. As if the extreme numbers given were 8 and 27, divide the space between
them into three equal parts, the feet of the compasses will stand in 12 and 18.

5 To find the cubique root of a number given.
The cubique root is always the first of two mean proportionals between 1
and the number given, and therefore to be found by dividing the space between
them into three equal parts.

So the root of 1728 will be found to be 12. The root of 17280 is almost 26:
and the root of 172800 is almost 56.

6 To multiply one number by another.
Extend the compasses from 1 to the multiplicator; the same extent applied the
same way, shall reach from the multiplicand to the product.

As if the numbers to be multiplied were 25 and 30: either extend the compasses
from 1 to 25, and the same extent will give the distance from 30 to 750; or
extend them from 1 to 30, and the same extent shall reach from 25 to 750.

7 To divide one number by another.
Extend the compasses from the divisor to 1, the same extent shall reach from
the dividend to the quotient.

So if 750 were to be divided by 25, the quotient would be found to be 30.

8 Three numbers being given to find a fourth proportional.
This golden rule, the most useful of all others, is performed with like ease.
For extend the compasses from the first number to the second, the same extent
shall give the distance from the third to the fourth.

As for example, the proportion between the diameter and the circumference, is
said to be such as 7 to 22: if the diameter be 14, how much is the
circumference? Extend the compasses from 7 to 22, the same extent shall give
the distance from 14 to 44: or extend them from 7 to 14, and the same extent
shall reach from 22 to 44.

Either of these ways may be tried on several places of this line; but that
place is best, where the seete of the compasses may stand nearest together.

9 Three numbers being given to find a fourth in a duplicated proportion.
This proposition concerns questions of proportion between lines and
superficies; where if the denomination be of lines, extend the compasses from
the first to the second number of the same denomination: so the same extent
being doubled, shall give the distance from the third number unto the fourth.

The diameter being 14, the content of the circle is 154: the diameter being
28, what may the content be? Extend the compasses from 14 to 28, the same
extent doubled will reach from 154 to 616. For first it reaches from 154 unto
308; and turning the compasses once more, it reaches from 308 unto 616: and
this is the content required.

But if the first denomination be of the superficial content, extend the
compasses unto the half of the distance, between the first number and the
second of the same denomination: so the same extent shall give the distance
from the third to the fouth.

The content of a circle being 154, the diameter is 14: the content being 616,
what may the diameter be? Divide the distance between 154 and 616 into two
equal parts, then set one foot in 14, the other will reach to 28 the diameter
required.

10 Three numbers being given to find a fourth in a triplicated proportion.
This proposition concerns questions of proportion between lines and solids;
where if the first denomination be of lines, extend the compasses from the
first number to the second of the same denomination: so the extent being
tripled, shall give the distance from the third number unto the fourth,

Suppose the diameter of an iron bullet being 4 inches, the weight of it was 9
l: the diameter being 8 inches, what may the weight be? Extend the compasses
from 4 to 8, the same extent being tripled, will reach from 9 unto 72. For
first it reaches from 9 unto 18; then from 18 to 36; thirdly from 36 to 72.
And this is the weight required.

But if the first denomination shall be of the Solid content, or of the weight,
extend the compasses to a third part of the distance between the first number
and the second of the same denomination: so the same extent shall give the
distance from the third number unto the fourth.

The weight of a cube being 72 l, the side of it was 8 inches: the weight being
9 l, what may the side be? Divide the distance between 72 and 9, into three
equal parts; then set one foot to 8, the other will reach to 4, the side
required.

CHAP. VII. The use of the lines of artificial Sines.
THis line of sines has such use in finding a fourth proportional, as the
ordinary Canon of Sines: and the manner of finding it, is always such as in
this example.

As the sine of 30 gr. unto the sine of 52 gr.

So the sine of 38 gr. to a fourth sine.

Extend the compasses in the line of sines from 30 gr. unto 52 gr; the same
extent shall give the distance from 38 gr. unto 76 gr. Or extend them from 30
gr. unto 38 gr. the same extent will reach from 52 gr. unto 76 gr. which is the
fourth proportional sine required.

And thus may the rest of all sinical proportions be wrought two ways. The
minutes which are wanting in the first degree, may be supplied by the line of
Numbers.

CHAP. VIII. The use of the line of artificial Tangents.
THis line of Tangents has like use, but commonly joined with the line of
sines: the manner of working by it, may appear by this example.

As the Tangent of 38 gr. 30 m.

is to the Tangent of 23 gr. 30 m.

So the Sine of 90 gr.

to a fourth Sine.

This Prop. and such others upon two lines, may be wrought two ways. For
extend the compasses from the Tangent of 38 gr. 30 m. to the Tangent of 23 gr.
30 m; the same extent shall give the distance from the sine of 90 gr. to the
sine of 33 gr. 8 m. Or else extend them from 38 gr. 30 m. in the Tangents unto
90 gr. in the line of sines; the same extent from the Tangent of 23 gr. 30 m.
shall reach to the sine of 33 gr. 8 m. which is the fourth proportional sine
required.

And this crossework in many cases is the better, in regard the tangents which
should pass on from 40 gr. to 50 gr. and so forward, do turn back at 45 gr.
These two lines of Sines and Tangents, may serve for the resolution of all
sphericall triangles, according to those Canons which I have set down in the
use of the Sector.

Or if at any time one meet with a secant, let him account the sine of 80 gr.
for a secant of 10 gr. and the sine of 70 gr. for a secant of 20 gr. and so
take the sine of the complement in stead of the secant. As if the proposition
were, As the Radius to the secant of 51 gr. 30 m.

So the sine of 23 gr. 30 m. to a fourth sine.



Extend the compasses from the Radius that is the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of
38 gr. 30 m. the same extent will give the distance from the sine of 23 gr. 30
m. both to the sine of 14 gr. 22 m. and to the sine of 39 gr. 50 m. But in this
case, the sine of 39 gr. 50 m. is the fourth required. For the first number
being less then the second, that is, the Radius less then the secant, the
sine of 23 gr. 30 m. which is the third, must also be less then the fourth.

CHAP. IX. The use of the line of Sines and Tangents joined with the line of
numbers.
THe lines of sines and tangents have another like use joined with the line of
numbers, especially in the resolution of right line triangles, where the angles
are measured by degrees and minutes, and the sides measured by absolute
numbers, whereof I will set down these propositions.

1 Having three angles and one side, to find the two other sides.
As the side of the angle opposite to the side given,

is to the number belonging to that side given:

So the sine of the angle opposite to the side required,

to the number belonging to the side required.

As in the example of the fourth Cap. of this book, where knowing the distance
between two stations at A and D to be 100 paces, the angle BAC to be 43 gr. 20
m. and the angle BDC to be 58 gr. it was required to find the distance AB.

First having these two angles, I may find the third angle ABD to be 14 gr. 40
m. either by substraction or by complement unto 180. Then in the triangle BAD,
I have three angles, and one side, whereby I may find both AB and DB. I know
the angle ABD opposite to the measured side AD to be 14 gr. 40 m. and the angle
ADB opposite to the side required, to be 122 gr: wherefore I extend the
compasses in the line of sines from 14 gr. 40 m. unto 122 gr. or (which is all
one) to 58 gr. (for after 90 gr. the sine of 80 gr. is also the sine of 100 gr.
and the sine of 70 gr. the sine of 100 gr. and so in the rest) so shall I find
the same extent to reach in the line of numbers, from 100 unto 335. And such is
the distance required between A and B.

geometric illustration

In like manner if I extend my compasses from the sine of 34 gr. 40 m. to the
sine of 43 gr. 20 m. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from 100
to 271. And such is the distance between D and B.

Or in cross work, I may extend the compasses from 14 gr. 40 m. in the sines,
unto 100 parts in the line of numbers: so the same extent will give the
distance from 58 gr. to 335 parts, and from 43 gr. 20 m. to 271 parts.

2 Having two sides given, and one angle opposite to either of these sides, to
find the other two angles and the third side.
As the side opposite to the angle given,

is to the sine of the angle given:

So the other side given,

to the sine of that angle to which it is opposite.

So in the former triangle, having the two sides AB 335 paces and AD 100 paces,
and knowing the angle ADB, which is opposite to the side AB, to be 122 gr. I
may find the angl^ ABD, which is opposite to the other side AD. For if I extend
the compasses from 335 to 100 in the line of numb^rs, I shall find the same
extent to reach in the line of sines from 122 gr. to 14 gr. 40 m; and therefore
such is the angle ABD.

Then knowing these two angles ABD and ADB, I may find the third angle BAD
either by subtraction or by complement to 180, to be 43 gr. 20 m; and having
three angles and two sides, I may well find the third side DB, by the former
Prop.

This may be done more readily by cross work. For if I extend the compasses
from 335 parts, in the line of numbers, to the sine of 122 gr. the same extent
will reach from 100 parts to the sine of 14 gr. 40 m. and back from 43 gr. 20
m. to 271 parts; and such is the third side DB.

3 Having two sides and the angle between them, to find the two other angles
and the third side.
If the angle contained between the two sides be a right angle, the other two
angles will be found readily by this canon.

As the greater side given,

is to the lesser side:

So the tangent of 45 gr.

to the tangent of the lesser angle.

So in the rectangle triangle AIB, knowing the side AI to be 244, and the side
IB to be 230: if I extend the compasses from 244 to 230 in the line of numbers,
the same extent will reach from 45 gr. to about 43 gr. 20 m. in the line of
tangents; and such is the lesser angle BAI, and the complement 46 gr. 40 m.
shows the greater angle ABI. The angles being known, the third side AB may be
found by the first Prop.

So likewise in the example of the third Cap. of this book, concerning taking
of angles by the line of inches, where the parts intercepted on the Staff
being 20 inches, and the parts on the Cross 9 inches, it was required to find
the angle of altitude. For I may extend the compasses in the line of numbers,
from 20 unto 9, the same extent will reach in the line of tangents, from 45 gr.
to 24 gr. 14 m. Or in the cross work, I may extend the compasses from 20
parts in the line of numbers to the tangent of 45 gr; the same extent shall
give the distance from 9 parts unto the tangent of 24 gr. 14 m. And such is the
angle of altitude required.

But if it be an oblique angle that is contained between the two sides given,
the triangle may be reduced into two rectangle triangles, and then resolved as
before.

As in the triangle ADB, where the side AB is 335, and the side AD 100, and the
angle BAD 43 gr. 20 m: if I let down the perpendicular DH upon the side AB, I
shall have two rectangle triangles, AHD, DHB; and in the rectangle AHD, the
angle at A being 43 gr. 20 m. the other angle ADH will be 46 gr. 40 m; and with
these angles and the side AD, I may find both AH and D H, by the first Prop.
Then taking AH out of AB, there remains HB for the side of the rectangle DHB;
and therefore with this side HB and the other side DH, I may find both the
angle at B, and the third side DB, as in the former part of this Prop.

Or I may find the angles required, without letting down any perpendicular.
For As the sum of the sides,

is to the difference of the sides:

So the tangent of the half sum of the opposite angles,

to the tangent of half the difference between those angles.



As in the former triangle ADB, the sum of the sides AB, AD, is 435, and the
difference between them 235; the angle contained 43 gr. 20 m; and therefore
the sum of the two opposite angles 136 gr. 40 m. and the half sum 68 gr 20
m. Hereupon I extend the compasses in the line of numbers from 455 to 235, and
I find them to reach in the line of tangents from 68 gr. 20 m. unto 53 gr. 40
m; and such is the half difference between the opposite angles at B and D.
This half difference being added to the half sum, does give 122 gr. for the
greater angle ADB: and being subtracted, it leaves 14 gr. 40 m. for the lesser
angle ABD. Then the three angles being known, the third side BD may be found
by the first Prop.

4 Having the three sides of a right line triangle, to find the perpendicular
and the three angles.
Let one of the three sides given be the base, but rather the greater side,
that the perpendicular may fall within the triangle; then gather the sum, and
the difference of the two other sides, and the proportion will hold.

As the base of the triangle,

is to the sum of the sides:

So the difference of the sides

to a fourth, which being taken forth of the base, the

perpendicular shall fall on the middle of the remainder.

As in the former triangle ADB, where the base AB is 335, the sum of the
sides AD and DB 371, and the difference of them 171. If I extend the compasses
in the line of numbers from 335 unto 371, I shall find the same extent to reach
from 171 unto 189.4. This fourth number I take out of the base 335.0, and the
remainder is 145.6, the half whereof is 72.8, and does show the place H, where
the perpendicular shall fall, from the angle D, upon the base AB, dividing the
former triangle ADB into two right angle triangles, DHA and DHB, in which the
angles may be found by the former part of the third Prop. And this may suffice
for right line triangles. But for the more easy protraction of these
triangles, I will set down one proposition more concerning chords.

5 Having the semidiameter of a circle, to find the chords of every arc.
As the sine of 30 gr.

to the sine of half the arc proposed:

So is the semidiameter of the circle given,

to the chord of the same arc.

As if in protracting the former triangle ADB, it were required to find the
length of a chord of 43 gr. 20 m. agreeing to the semidiameter AE, which is
known to be 3 inches. The half of 43 gr. 20 m. is 21 gr. 40 m; wherefore I
extend the compasses from the sine of 30 gr. to the sine of 21 gr. 40 m. and I
find the same extent to reach in the line of numbers from 3.000 parts to
2.215; which shows, that the semidiameter being 3 inches, the chord of 43 gr.
20 m. will be 2 inches and 215 parts of 1000.

In like manner the chord of 58 gr. agreeing to the same semidiameter, would be
found to be 2 inches and 909 parts. For the half of 58 being 29; if I extend
the compasses in the line of sines from 30 gr. to 29 gr. the same extent will
reach in the line of numbers from 3.000. unto 2.909.

Or in cross work, if I extend the compasses from the sine of 30 gr. to 3.000
in the line of numbers, I shall find the same extent to reach from 21 gr. 40 m.
to 2.215 parts, and from 29 gr. to 2.909 parts, and from 7 gr. 20 m. to 765
parts; for the chord of 14 gr. 40 m. for the third angle ABD.

CHAP. X. The use of the line of versed sines.
THis line of versed sines is no necessary line. For all triangles, both right
lined and sphericall, may be resolved by the three former lines of numbers,
sines and tangents; yet I thought good to put it on the Staff for the more
easy finding of an angle having three sides, or a side having three angles of
a sphericall triangle given.

Suppose the three sides to be, one of them 110 gr. the other 78 gr. and the
third 38 gr. 30 m. and let it be required to find the angle, whose base is 110
gr.

I first add them together, and from half the sum subtract the base, noting
the difference after this manner.

The base 110 gr. 0 m. The one side 78 0 The other side 38 30 The sum of all
three 226 30 The half sum 113 15 The difference 3 15

This done, I come to the Staff, and extend the compasses from the sine of 90
gr. to the sine of 78 gr. which is one of the sides; and applying this extent
from the sine of the other side 38 gr. 30 m. I find it to reach to a fourth
sine, about 37 gr. 30 m. From this fourth sine of 37 gr. 30 m. I extend the
compasses again, to the sine of the half sum 113 gr. 15 m. (which is all one
with the sine of 66 gr. 45 m.) and this second extent will reach from the sine
of the difference 3. gr. 15 m. to the sine of 4 gr. 54 m. Over against this
sine you shall find 146 gr. in the line of versed sines; and such is the angle
required.

THE SECOND BOOK. geometric illustration
Of the use of the former lines of proportion, more particularly exemplified in
several kinds.
THe former book containing the general use of each line of proportion, may
be sufficient for all those which know the rule of Three, and the doctrine of
triangles.

But for others, I suppose it would be more difficult to find either the
declination of the Sun, or his amplitude, or the like, by that which has
been said in the use of the line of sines, unless they may have the particular
proportions, by which such propositions are to be wrought. And therefore for
their sakes I have adjoined this second book, containing several proportions
for propositions of ordinary use, and set them down in such order, that the
Reader considering which is the first of the three numbers given, may easily
apply them to the Sector, and also resolve them by Arithmetique, beginning with
those which require help only of the line of numbers.

CHAP. I. The use of the line of Numbers in broad measure, such as board,
glass, and the like.
THe ordinary measure for breadth and length are feet and inches, each foot
divided into 12 inches, and every inch into halues and quarters, which being
parts of several denominations, does breed much trouble both in arithmetique
and the use of instruments.

For the avoiding whereof, where I may prevail I give this counsel, that such
as are delighted in measure would use several lines, first a line of inch
measure, wherein every inch may be divided into 10 or 100 parts; secondly a
line of foot measure, wherein every foot may be divided into 100 or 1000
parts, both which lines may be set on the same side of a two foot ruler, after
this or the like manner.

two foot ruler

Then if they be to give the content of any superficies or solid in inches,
they may measure the sides of it by the line of inches and parts of inches; but
if they be to give the content in feet, it would be more easy for them to
measure those sides by the foot line and his parts.

For example, let the length of a plane be 30 inches, and the breadth 21 inches
and 6/10 of an inch; this length multiplied into the breadth, would give the
content to be 648 inches: but if I were to find the content of the same plane
in feet, I would measure the sides of it by the foot line and his parts; so
the length would prove to be 2 feet 50/100, and the breadth 1 foot 80/100, and
the length multiplied by the breadth, cutting off the four last figures, for
the four figures of the parts, would give the content to be 4.5000, which is 4
foot and 5000 parts, of a foot being divided into 10000 parts.

21.6 2.50 30.0 1.80 648.00 20000 250 4.5000

The like reason holds for yards and elnes, and all other measures divided
into 10, 100, or 1000 parts.

This being presupposed, the work will be more easy both by arithmetique and
the line of numbers, as may appear by these propositions.

1 Having the breadth and length of any oblong superficies given in
inch-measure, to find the content in inches.
As 1 inch unto the breadth in inches:

So the length in inches unto the content in inches.

geometric illustration

Suppose in the plane AD, the breadth AC to be 30 inches, and the length AB to
be 183 inches; extend the compasses from 1 unto 30, the same extent will reach
from 183 unto 5490; or extend them from 1 unto 183, the same extent will reach
from 30 unto 5490. So both ways the content required is found to be 5490
inches.

As 1 unto 30: so are 183 unto 5490. 2 Having the length and breadth of any
oblong superficies given in inches, to find the content in feet.
As 144 inches unto the breadth in inches:

So the length in inches unto the content in feet.

And thus in the former plane AD, working as before, the content will be found
to be 38.125, which is 38 foot and of a foot.

As 144 unto 30: so are 183 unto 38.125. 3 Having the length and breadth of any
oblong superficies given in foot measure, to find the content in feet.
As 1 foot unto the breadth in foot measure:

So the length in feet unto the content in feet.

And thus in the former plane AD, the breadth will be 2 foot 50 parts, and the
length 15 foot 25 parts; then working as before, the content will be found to
be 38.125.

As 1 unto 2.50: so are 15.25 unto 38.125. 4 Having the breadth of any oblong
superficies given in inches, and the length in foot measure, to find the
content in feet.
As 12 inches to the breadth in inches:

So the length in feet to the content in feet.

So also in the former plane, the content will be found to be 38.125.

As 12 unto 30: so are 15.25 unto 38.125. 5 Having the breadth of an oblong
superficies given in inches, to find the length of a foot superficial in inch
measure.
As the breadth in inches, unto 144 inches:

So 1 foot unto the length in inch measure.

So the breadth being 30 inches, the length of a foot will be found to be 4
inches 80 parts.

As 30 unto 144: so are 1 unto 4.80. 6 Having the breadth and length of an
oblong superficies given in feet, to find the length of a foot superficial in
foot measure.
As the breadth in foot measure to 1 foot:

So the number of feet to the length in foot measure.

So the breadth being 2 foot 50 parts, the length of a foot will be found to be
40 parts, the length of 2 feet 80 parts, and the length of 3 feet 1 foot 20
parts, etc.

As 250 unto 1: so are 1 unto 0.40. 7 Having the length and breadth of an oblong
superficies, to find the side of a square equal to the oblong.
Divide the space between the length and the breadth into two equal parts, and
the foot of the compasses will stay at the side of the square.

So the length being 183 inches, and the breadth 30 inches, the side of the
square will be found to be almost 74 inches and 10 parts of 100.

Or the breadth being 2 foot and 50 parts, the length 15 foot and 25 parts, the
side of the square will be found to be about 6 feet and 17 parts.

As 30 unto 74.10: so are 74.10 unto 183.027.

And as 2.50 unto 6.174: so are 6.174 unto 15.247.

8 Having the diameter of a circle, to find the side of a square equal to that
circle.
As 10000 to the diameter:

So 8862 unto the side of the square.

So the diameter of a circle being 15 inches, the side of the square will be
found about 13 inches and 29 parts.

As 10000 unto 8862: so are 15 unto 13.29. 9 Having the circumference of a
circle to find the side of a square equal to the same circle.
As 10000 to the circumference:

So 2821 to the side of the square.

So the circumference of a circle being 47 inches 13 parts, the side of the
square will be about 13 inches 29 parts.

As 10000 unto 2821: so are 47.13 unto 13.29. 10 Having the diameter of a
circle, to find the circumference. 11 Having the circumference of a circle, to
find the diameter.
As 1000 to the diameter:

So 3142 to the circumference.

So the diameter being 15 inches, the circumference will be found about 47
inches 13 parts: or the circumference being 47.13, the diameter will be 15.

CHAP. II. The use of the line of Numbers in the measure of land by perches and
acres.
1 Having the breadth and length of an oblong superficies given in perches, to
find the content in perches.
As 1 perch to the breadth in perches:

So the length in perches to the content in perches.

So in the former plane AD, if the breadth AC be 30 perches, and the length AB
183 perches, the content will be found to be 5490 perches.

2 Having the length and breadth of an oblong superficies given in perches, to
find the content in acres.
As 160 to the breadth in perches:

So the length in perches to the content in acres.

So in the former plane AD, the content will be found to be 34 acres, and 31
centesms or parts of an 100.

As 160 unto 30: so are 183 unto 34.31. 3 Having the length and breadth of an
oblong superficies given in chains, to find the content in acres.
It being troublesome to divide the content in perches by 160, we may measure
the length and breadth by chains, each chain being 4 perches in length, and
divided into 100 links, then will the work be more easy in arithmetique. For
As 10 to the content in chains:

So the length in chains to the content in acres.



And thus in the former plane AD, the breadth AC will be 7 chains 50 links, and
the length AB 45 chains 75 links; then working as before, the content will be
found as before, 34 acres 31 parts.

4 Having the perpendicular and base of a triangle given in perches, to find
the content in acres.
If the perpendicular go for the breadth, and the base for the length, the
triangle will be the half of the oblong. As the triangle CED is the half of
the oblong AD, whose content was found in the former Prop. Or without halfing,
As 320 to the perpendicular:

So the base to the content in acres.



So in the triangle CED, the perpendicular being 30, and the base 183, the
content will be found to be about 17 acres and 15 parts.

5 Having the perpendicular and base of a triangle given in chains, to find
the content in acres.
As 20 to the perpendicular:

So the base to the content in acres.

And so in the triangle CED, the perpendicular OF being 7.50, and the base CD
45.75, the content will be found as before to be about 17 acres 15 parts.

6 Having the content of a superficies after one kind of perch, to find the
content of the same superficies according to another kind of perch.
As the length of the second perch

to the length of the first perch:

So the content in acres to a fourth number;

and that fourth to the content in acres required.

Suppose the plane AD measured with a chain of 66 feet, or with a perch of 16
feet and an half, contained 34 acres 31 parts; and it were demanded how many
acres it would contain if it were measured with a chain of 18 foot to the
perch: these kind of propositions are wrought by the backward rule of three,
after a duplicated proportion. Wherefore I extend the compasses from 16.5 unto
18.0, and the sam^redge^ extent does reach backward, first from 34.31 to 31.45,
and then from 31.45 to 28.84, which shows the content to be 28 acres 84 parts.

7 Having the plot of a plane with the content in acres, to find the scale by
which it was plotted.
Suppose the plane AD contained 34 acres 31 centesines if I should measure it
with a scale of 10 in the inch, th^redge^ length AB would be 38 chains and
about 12 centesmes, and the breadth AC 6 chains and 25 centesmes; and the
conten^redge^ would be found by the third Prop. of this Chapter, to be about 23
acres 82 parts, whereas it should be 34 acres 31 parts

Wherefore I divide the distance between 23.82, and 34 31, upon the line of
numbers into two equal parts; then setting one foot of the compasses upon 10,
my supposed scale, I find the other to extend to 12, which is the scale required

CHAP. III. The use of the line of Numbers in solid measure, such as stone,
timber, and the like.
geometric illustration

1 Having the side of a square equal to the base of any solid given in inch
measure, to find the length of a foot solid in inch measure.
THe side of a square equal to the base of a solid, may be found by dividing
the space between the length and breadth into two equal parts, as in the 7
Prop. of broad mea^ledge^ure. Then As the side of the square in inches to 41.57:

So is 1 foot to a fourth number;

and that fourth to the length in inches.



So in the solid AH, the side of the square equal to the ^ledge^as^ EC, being
about 25 inches 45 parts, the length of a foot ^ledge^olid will be found about
2 inches 67 parts, and the length of ^wo foot solid 5 inches 33 parts.

As 25.45 unto 41.57: so 1.00 unto 1.63:

and so are 1.63 unto 2.67.

2 Having the side of a square equal to the base of any solid given in foot
measure, to find the length of a foot solid in foot measure.
As the side of the square in feet unto 1:

So is 1 unto a fourth number;

And that fourth to the length in foot measure.

So in the solid AH, the side of the square equal to the base EC, being about
2 foot 120 parts, the length of a foot solid will be found about 222 parts of
a foot.

As 2.120 unto 1.000: so 1.000 unto 0.471:

and so are 471 unto 222.

3 Having the breadth and depth of a squared solid given in foot measure, to
find the length of a foot solid in foot measure.
As 1 unto the breadth in foot measure:

So the depth in feet to a fourth number;

which is the content of the base in foot measure. Then

As this fourth number unto 1:

So 1 unto the length in foot measure.

So in the solid AH, the breadth being 2 foot 50 parts, the depth 1 foot 80
parts, the content of the base EC will be found 4 foot 50 parts, and the length
of one foot solid about 222 parts, the length of two foot solid about 444 parts
of 1000.

As 1.00 unto 2.50: so are 1.80 unto 4.50.

As 4.50 unto 1.00: so 1.000 unto 0.222.

4 Having the breadth and depth of a squared solid given in inches, to find the
length of a foot solid in inch measure.
As 1 has to the breadth in inches:

So the depth in inches to a fourth number;

which is the content of the base in inches. Then

As this fourth number unto 1728:

So 1 unto the length of a foot in inch measure.

So in the solid AH, the breadth AC being 30 inches, and the d pth AE 21 inches
60 parts, the content of the base EC will be found to be 648 inches, and the
length of a foot solid about 2 inches 67 parts.

As 1 unto 21.6: so 30 unto 648:

As 648 unto 1728: so 1 unto 2.667.

Or as 12 to the breadth in inches:

So the depth in inches to a fourth number.

As this fourth number to 144:

So 1 unto the length of a foot solid in inch measure.

So in the solid AH, the breadth being 30 inches, the depth 21 inches 6 parts,
the fourth number will be found to be 54, and the depth of a foot solid 2
inches 67 parts.

As 12 unto 21.6: so 30 unto 54.

As 54 unto 144: so 1 unto 2.667.

5 Having the side of a square equal to the base of any solid, and the length
thereof given in inch measure, to find the content thereof in feet.
As 41.57 to the side of the square in inches:

So the length in inches to a fourth number;

and that fourth to the content in foot measure.

So in the solid AH, the length AB being 183 inches, and the side of the square
equal to the base EC about 25 inches 45 parts, the fourth number will be found
about 112, and the whole solid content about 68 feet 62 parts.

As 41.57 unto 25.45: so 183 unto 112:

and so are 112 unto 68.62.

6 Having the side of a square equal to the base of any solid, and the length
thereof given in foot measure, to find the content thereof in feet.
As 1 to the side of the square in foot measure:

So the length in feet to a fourth number;

and that fourth to the content in foot measure.

So in the former solid AH, the side of the square equal to the base AE, being
about 2 foot 12 parts, and the length AB 15 foot 25 parts, the conent will be
found to be about 68 foot 62 parts.

As 1 unto 2.12: so 15.25 unto 32.35:

and so are 32.35 unto 68.62.

7 Having the side of a square equal to the base of any solid given in inch
measure, and the length of the solid given in foot measure, to find the content
thereof in feet.
As 12 to the side of the square given in inches:

So the length in feet to a fourth number;

and that fourth to the content in foot measure.

So in the former solid AH, the side of the equal square being 25 inches 45
parts, the content will be found to be aabout 68 feet 62 parts.

As 12 unto 25.45: so 15.25 unto 32.35:

and so are 32.35 unto 68.62.

8 Having the length, breadth and depth of a squared solid given in inches, to
find the content in inches.
As 1 unto the breadth in inches:

So the depth in inches unto the base in inches. Then

As 1 unto the base:

So the length in inches unto the solid content in inches.

So in the solid AH, whose breadth AC is 30 inches, the depth AE 21 inches and 6
parts of 10, and length AB 183, the content of the base EC will be found 648
inches, and the whole solid content about 118500 inches.

As 1 unto 21.6: so are 30 unto 648:

As 1 unto 648: so are 183 to 118584.

9 Having the length, breadth and depth of a squared solid given in inches, to
find the content in feet.
As 1 to the breadth in inches:

So the depth in inches to the base in inches.

As 1728 to that base:

So the length in inches to the content in feet.

So in the solid AH, the content will be found to be about 68 feet 62 parts.

As 1 unto 21.6: so 30 unto 648:

As 1728 unto 648: so 183 to 68.62.

Or as 12 to the breadth in inches:

So the depth in inches to a fourth number.

As 144 to that fourth number:

So the length in inches to the content in feet.

And so also in the same solid AH, the content will be found to be about 68
feet 62 parts.

As 12 unto 21.6: so 30 unto 54:

As 144 unto 54: so 183 unto 68.62.

10 Having the length, breadth and depth of a squared solid given in foot
measure, to find the content in feet.
As 1 unto the breadth in foot measure:

So the depth in feet to the base in feet.

As 1 unto that base:

So the length in feet to the content in feet.

And thus in the former solid AH, the breadth AC will be 2 foot 50 parts, the
depth AE 1 foot 80 parts, and the length AB 15 foot 25 parts; then working as
before, the content of the base AF will be found 4 feet 50 parts, and the whole
solid content about 68 foot 62 parts, which of all others may very easily be
tried by arithmetique.

As 1 unto 2.50: so 1.80 unto 4.50.

As 1 unto 4.50: so 15.25 unto 68.625.

11 Having the breadth and depth of a squared solid given in inches, and the
length in foot measure, to find the content thereof in feet.
As 1 unto the breadth in inches:

So the depth in inches unto a fourth number:

which is the content of the base in inches.

As 144 has unto that fourth number:

So the length in feet to the content in feet.

And so in the same solid AH, the content will be found to be about 68 feet 62
parts.

As 1 unto 21.6: so 30 unto 648.

As 144 unto 15.25: so 648 unto 68.62.

Or as 144 unto the breadth in inches:

So the depth in inches unto a fourth number:

which is the content of the base in feet.

As 1 has unto that fourth number:

So the length in feet to the content in feet.

And so in the same solid AH, the content will be found to be about 68 feet 62
parts.

As 144 unto 21.6: so 30 unto 4.50:

As 1 unto 4.50: so 15.25 unto 68.62.

Or as 12 unto the breadth in inches:

So the depth in inches unto a fourth number.

As 12 unto this fourth number:

So the length in feet to the content in feet.

And so also in the same solid AH, the content will be found to be about 68 feet
62 parts.

As 12 unto 21.6: so 30 unto 54.

As 12 unto 54: so 15.25 unto 68.62.

All these varieties (and such like not here mentioned) do follow upon making
of the base of the solid, to be EC; there would be as many more if any shall
begin with the base EH, and so likewise if they make the base to be FD.

12 Having the diameter of a cylinder given in inch measure, to find the length
of a foot solid in inches.
As the diameter in inches unto 46.90: cylinder


So is 1 unto a fourth number:

and that fourth to the length in inches.

So the diameter of a cylinder being 15 inches, the fourth number will be about
3.12, and the length of a foot solid 9 inches 78 parts.

As 15 unto 46.90: so 1 unto 3.127:

and so are 3.127 unto 9.778.

13 Having the diameter of a cylinder given in foot measure, to find the length
of a foot solid in foot measure.
As the diameter in feet unto 1.128:

So is 1 unto a fourth number;

and that fourth to the length in foot measure.

So the diameter being 1 foot 25 parts, the length of a foot solid will be found
about 8.14 parts of 1000.

As 1.25 unto 1.128: so 1.00 to 0.9027:

and so are 9027 unto 8148.

14 Having the circumference of a cylinder given in inches, to find the length
of a foot solid in inch measure.
As the circumference in inches to 147.36:

So is 1 to a fourth number;

and that fourth to the length in inches.

So the circumference being 47 inches 13 parts, the length of a foot solid will
be found about 9 inches 78 parts.

As 47.13 unto 147.36: so 1.00 to 3.13:

and so are 3.13 unto 9.78.

15 Having the circumference of a cylinder given in foot measure, to find the
length of a foot solid in foot measure.
As the circumference in feet to 3.545:

So is 1 to a fourth number;

and that fourth to the length in foot measure.

So the circumference being 3 foot 927 parts, the length of a foot solid will
be found to be about 815 parts.

As 3.927 unto 3.545: so 1.000 unto 0.903:

and so are 903 unto 815.

16 Having the side of a square equal to the base of a cylinder, to find the
length of a foot solid.
The side of a square equal to the circle, may be found by the eighth Prop. of
broad measure, and then this Prop. may be wrought by the first and second Prop.
of solid measure.

17 Having the diameter of a cylinder, and the length given in inches, to find
the content in inches.
As 1.128 unto the diameter in inches:

So the length in inches to a fourth number;

and that fourth number to the content in inches.

So the diameter being 15 inches, and the length 105, the content of the
cylinder will be found to be about 18560 inches.

As 1.1284 unto 15: so are 105 unto 1395.87:

and so are 1395.87 unto 18555.34.

18 Having the diameter and length of a cylinder in foot measure, to find the
content in feet.
As 1.128 to the diameter in feet:

So the length in feet to a fourth number;

and that fourth to the content in feet.

So the diameter being 1 foot 25 parts, and the length 8 foot and 75 parts,
the content of the cylinder will be found about 10 foot 74 parts.

As 1.128 unto 1.25: so 8.75 unto 9.69:

and so are 9.69 unto 10.737.

19 Having the diameter of a cylinder, and the length given in inches, to find
the content in feet.
As 46.90 to the diameter in inches:

So the length in inches to a fourth number;

and that fourth to the content in feet.

So the diameter being 15 inches, and the length 105, the content will be found
about 10 foot 74 parts.

As 46.906 unto 15: so 105 unto 33.58:

and so are 33.58 unto 10.737.

20 Having the diameter of a cylinder given in inches and the length in feet,
to find the content in feet.
As 13.54 to the diameter in inches:

So the length in feet to a fourth number;

and that fourth to the content in feet.

So the diameter being 15 inches, and the length 8 foot 75 parts, the content
will be found about 10 foot 74 parts.

As 13.54 unto 15: so 8 75 unto 9.69:

and so are 9.69 unto 10.74.

21 Having the circumference and the length of a cylinder given in inches, to
find the content in inches.
As 3.545 to the circumference in inches:

So the length in inches to a fourth number;

and that fourth to the content in inches.

So the circumference being 47 inches 13 parts, and the length 105 inches, the
content will be found about 18560 inches.

As 3.545 unto 47.13: so 105 unto 1396:

and so are 1396 unto 18555.

22 Having the circumference and length of a cylinder given in inches, to find
the content in feet.
As 147.36 to the circumference in inches:

So the length in inches to a fourth number;

and that fourth to the content in feet.

So the circumference being 47 inches 13 parts, and the length 105 inches, the
content will be found about 10 foot 74 parts.

As 147.36 unto 47.13: so 105 unto 33.58:

and so are 33.58 unto 10.74.

23 Having the circumference and length of a cylinder given in foot measure, to
find the content in feet.
As 3.545 to the circumference in feet:

So the length in feet to a fourth number;

and that fourth to the content in feet.

So the circumference being 3 foot 927 parts, and the length 8 foot 75 parts,
the content will be found to be 10 foot 74 parts.

As 3.545 unto 3.927: so 8.75 unto 9.69:

and so are 9.69 unto 10.74.

24 Having the circumference of a cylinder given in inches and the length in
foot measure, to find the content in feet.
As 42.54 to the circumference in inches:

So the length in feet to a fourth number;

and that fourth to the content in feet.

So the circumference being 47 inches 13 parts, and the length 8 foot 75 parts,
the content will be found as before, 10 foot 74 parts.

As 42.54 unto 47.13: so 8.75 unto 9.69:

and so are 9.69 unto 10.74.

CHAP. IIII. The use of the line of Numbers in gaugeing of vessels.
THe vessels which are here measured, are supposed to be cylinders, or reduced
unto cylinders, by taking the mean between the diameter at the head and the
diameter at the bongue, after the usual manner.

1 Having the diameter and the length of a vessel with the content thereof, to
find the gauge point.
Extend the compasses in the line of numbers to half the distance between the
content and the length of the vessel, the same extent will reach from the
diameter to the gauge point.

I put this proposition first, because these kind of measures are not alike in
all places. Here at London it is said that a wine vessel being 66 inches in
length, and 38 inches the diameter, would contain 324 gallons: which if it be
true, we may divide the space between 324 and 66 into two equal parts, and
the middle will fall about 146, and the same extent which reaches from 324 to
146, will reach from the diameter 38 unto 17.15 the gauge point for a gallon of
wine or oil after London measure. The like reason holds for the like
measures in all other places.

2 Having the mean diameter and the length of a vessel, to find the content.
Extend the compasses from the gauge point to the mean diameter, the same
extent being doubled, shall give the distance from the length to the content.

So the mean diameter of a wine vessel being 20 inches, and the length 25
inches, the content will be found to be 34 gallons after London measure. For
extend the compasses from 17.25 unto 20, the same extent will reach from 25 unto
29.15, and from 29.15 unto 34.

In like manner if the mean diameter were 16 inches, and the length 23, the
content would be found to be about 20 gallons. For the same extent which
reaches back from 17.15 unto 16, will reach from 23 to 21.45, and from 21.45
unto 20.

So that if the mean diameter shall be 17 inches and 15 centesmes or parts of
100, the number of inches in the length of the vessel, will give the number of
gallons contained in the same vessel: if the diameter shall be more or less
then 17.15, the content in gallons will be accordingly more or less then the
length in inches.

3 Having the diameter and content, to find the length.
Extend the compasses from the diameter to the gauge point, the same extent
being doubled shall give the distance from the content to the length of the
vessel.

So the gauge point standing as before, if the diameter shall be 38 inches, and
the content 324 gallons wine measure, the length of the vessels will be found
about 66 inches.

4 Having the length of a vessel and the content, to find the diameter.
Extend the compasses to half the distance between the length and the
content, the same extent shall reach from the gauge point to the diameter.

So the length being 66 inches, and the content 324 gallons wine measure, the
gauge point standing as before, the diameter of the vessel will be found to be
about 38 inches.

CHAP. V. Containing such Astronomicall propositions as are of ordinary use in
the practice of Navigations.
1 To find the altitude of the Sun by the shadow of a gnomon set
perpendicular to the horizon.
As the parts of the shadow

are to the parts of the gnomon:

So the tangent of 45 gr.

to the tangent of the altitude.

Extend the compasses in the line of numbers, from the parts of the shadow to
the parts of the gnomon; the same extent will give the distance from the tangent
of 45 gr. to the tangent of the Suns altitude.

So the gnomon being 36, and the shadow 27, the altitude will be found to be 36
gr. 32 m. Or the gnomon being 27, and the shadow 36, the altitude will be found
to be 53 gr. 8 m. Or the shadow being 20, and the gnomon 9, the altitude will
be found to be 25 gr. 14 m. as in the eighth Prop. of the use of the tangent
line.

2 Having the distance of the Sun, from the next equinoctial point, to find
his declination.
As the Radius is in proportion

to the sine of the Suns greatest declination:

So the sine of the Suns distance from the next equinoctial point,

to the sine of the declination required.

Extend the compasses in the line of sines, from 90 gr. to 23 gr. 30 m. the
same extent will give the distance from the Suns place unto his declination.

So the Sun being either in 29 gr. of, or 1 gr. of, or 1 gr. of, or 29 gr.
of, that is 59 gr. distant from the next equinoctial point, the declination
will be found about 20 gr.

If the Sun be so near the equinoctial point that his declination fall to
be under 1 gr. it may be found by the line of numbers. As if the Sun were in
2 gr. 5 m. of, that is, 125 m. from the equinoctial point, the former extent
of the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of 23 gr. 30 m. will reach
in the line of numbers from 125 unto 50, which shows the declination to be
about 50 m.

3 Having the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, to find
the time of the Suns rising and setting.
As the cotangent of the latitude

to the tangent of the Suns declination:

So is the Radius

to the line of the ascensionall difference between the

hour of 6 and the time of the Suns rising or setting.

Extend the compasses from the tangent of the complement of the latitude, to
the tangent of the declination: the same extent will reach from the sine of 90
gr. to the sine of the ascensionall difference.

Or extend the compasses from the cotangent of the latitude to the sine of 90
gr. the same extent will reach from the tangent of the declination to the sine
of the ascensionall difference.

So the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. Northward, and the decl^nation 20 gr. the
difference of ascension will be found to be 27 gr. 14 m. which resolved into
hours and minutes, does give 1 hour and almost 49 m. for the difference
between the Suns rising or setting, and the hour of 6, according to the
time of the year.

4 Having the latitude of the place, and the distance of the Sun from the next
equinoctial point, to find his amplitude.
As the cosine of the latitude

to the sine of the Suns greatest declination:

So the sine of the place of the Sun,

to the sine of the amplitude.

So the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. and the place of the Sun in 1 gr. of, that
is 59 gr. distant from the next equinoctial point, the amplitude will be found
about 33 gr. 20 m. For extend the compasses in the line of sines, from 38 gr.
30 m. the sine of the complement of the latitude, unto 23 gr. 30 m. the sine of
the Suns greatest declination; the same extent will reach from 59 gr. unto 33
gr. 20 m. Or extend them from 38 gr. 30 m. unto 59 gr. the same extent will
reach from 23 gr. 30 m. unto 33 gr. 20 m. as before.

5 Having the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, to find
his amplitude.
As the cosine of the latitude

is to the Radius:

So the sine of the declination,

to the sine of the amplitude.

Extend the compasses from the cosine of the latitude to the sine of 90 gr. the
same extent will reach from the sine of the Suns declination to the sine of the
amplitude.

Or extend them from the cosine of the latitude to the sine of the declination,
the same extent will reach from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the amplitude.

So the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. and the declination 20 gr. the amplitude
will be found to be 33 gr. 20 m.

6 Having the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, to find
the time when the Sun comes to be due East or West.
As the tangent of the latitude,

is to the tangent of the declination:

So the Radius

to the cosine of the hour from the meridian.

Extend the compasses from the tangent of the latitude to the tangent of the
declination; the same extent will reach from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of
the complement of the hour.

Or extend them from the tangent of the latitude to the sine of 90 gr; the same
extent will reach from the tangent of the declination to the sine of the
complement of the hour.

So the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. and the declination 20 gr. the Sun will
be 73 gr. 10 m: that is 4 hours and 53 m. from the meridian, when he comes to
be in the East or West.

7 Having the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, to find
what altitude the Sun shall have, when he comes to be due East or West.
As the sine of the latitude

is to the sine of the declination:

So the Radius

to the sine of the altitude.

Extend the compasses in the line of lines from the latitude to the sine of the
declination, the same extent will reach from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of
the altitude.

Or extend them from the sine of the latitude to the sine of 90 gr; the same
extent will reach from the sine of the declination to the sine of the altitude.

So the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. and the declination 20 gr. the altitude
will be found about 25 gr. 55 m.

8 Having the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, to find
what altitude the Sun shall have at the hour of six.
As the Radius is in proportion

to the sine of the sine of the declination:

So the sine of the latitude

to the sine of the altitude.

Extend the compasses in the line of sines, from 90 gr. to the declination; the
same extent will reach from the latitude to the altitude.

Or extend them from 90 gr. to the latitude, the same extent will hold from the
declination to the altitude.

So the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. and the declination of the Sun 20 gr. the
altitude of the Sun will be found to be about 15 gr. 30 m.

9 Having the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, to find
what azimuth the Sun shall have at the hour of six.
As the cosine of the latitude

is to the Radius:

So the cotangent of the Suns declination,

to the tangent of the azimuth from the North part

of the meridian.

So the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. and the declination 20 gr. the azimuth will
be found to be 77 gr. 14 m. For extend the compasses in the line of sines, from
38 gr. 30 m. to 90 gr. the same extent will reach from the tangent of 70 gr. to
the tangent of 77 gr. 14 m.

10 Having the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, and the
altitude of the Sun, to find the azimuth.
First consider the declination of the Sun, whether it be toward the North or
the South, so have you his distance from your pole: then add this distance,
the complement of his altitude, and the complement of your latitude, all three
together, and from half the sum subtract the distance from the pole, and
note the difference.

1 As the Radius is in proportion

to the cosine of the altitude:

So the cosine of the latitude,

to a fourth sine.

2 As this fourth sine

is to the sine of the half sum:

So the sine of the difference,

to a seventh sine.

Then find a mean proportional between this seventh sine and the Radius,
this mean shall be the sine of the complement of half the azimuth from the
North part of the meridian.

Suppose the declination of the Sun being known by the time of the year to be
20 gr. Southward, the altitude above the horizon found by observation 12 gr.
and the latitude Northwards 51 gr. 30 m. it were required to find the azimuth.
The declination is Southward, and therefore the distance from the pole 110 gr;
then turning the altitude and latitude unto their complements, I add them all
three together, and from half the sum subtract the distance from the pole,
noting the difference after this manner.

Declin. South 20 gr. 0 m. The distance 110 gr. 0 m. Altitude 12 0 The
complement 78 0 Latitude N. 51 30 The complement 38 30 The sum of all three
226 30 The half sum 113 15 The difference 3 15

This done, I come to the Staff, and extend the compasses from the sine of 90
gr. to the sine of 78 gr. and find the same extent to reach from the sine of 38
gr. 30 m. unto 37 gr. 30 m Or if I extend them from 90 gr. to 38 gr. 30 m. the
same extent does reach from 78 gr. unto 37 gr. 30 m. which is the fourth sine
required.

Then I extend the compasses again, from this fourth sine of 37 gr. 30 m. unto
the sine of the half sum 113 gr. 15 m. that is to the sine of 66 gr. 45 m.
(for after 90 gr. the sine of 80 gr. does stand for a sine of 100 gr. and the
sine of 70 gr. for a sine of 110 gr. and so the rest for those which are their
complements to 180 gr.) and this second extent does reach from the sine of the
difference 3 gr. 15 m. to the sine of 4 gr. 54 m. Or if I extend them from the
fourth sine of 37 gr. 30 m. to the sine of the difference 3 gr. 15 m. the same
extent will reach from the sine of the half sum 113 gr. 15 m. unto 4 gr. 54
m. which is the seventh sine required.

Lastly, I divide the space between this seventh sine of 4 gr. 54 m. and the
sine of 90 gr. into two equal parts, and I find the mean proportional sine
to fall on 17 gr. whose complement is 73 gr; the double of 73 gr. is 146 gr.
and such is the azimuth required.

Or having found the seventh sine to be 4 gr. 54 m. I might look over against
it, in the line of versed sines, and there I should find 146 gr. for the
azimuth from the North part of the meridian; and the complement of 146 gr. to a
semicircle being 34 gr. will give the azimuth from the South part of the
meridian.

But if it were required to find the azimuth in the same latitude of 51 gr. 30
m. Northward, with the same altitude of 12 gr. and like declination of 20 gr.
to the Northward, it would be found to be only 72 gr. 52 m. though the manner
of work be the same as before.

Declin. North 20 gr. 0 m The distance is 70 gr. 0 m. Altitude 12 0 The
complement 78 0 Latitud. North 51 30 The complement 38 ^0 The sum of all
three 186 30 The half sum 93 15 The difference 23 15

Here as the Radius is to the sine of 78 gr: so the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. to the
sine of 37 gr. 30 m. which is the fourth sine, and the same as before.

Then as this fourth sine of 37 gr. 30 m. is to the sine of 93 gr. 15 m: so the
sine of 23 gr. 15 m. to the sine of 40 gr. 20 m. which is the seventh sine.

The half way between this seventh sine and the sine of 90 gr. does fall at
53 gr. 34 m. whose complement is 36 gr. 26 m; and the double of that is 72 gr.
52 m. the azimuth required.

Or I may find this same azimuth in the line of versed sines, over against the
seventh sine of 40 gr. 20 m.

11 Having the latitude of the place, the declination of the Sun, and the
altitude of the Sun, to find the hour of the day.
Add the complement of the Suns altitude, and the distance of the Sun from the
pole, and the complement of your latitude, all three together, and from half
the sum subtract the complement of the altitude, and note the difference.

1 As the Radius is in proportion

to the sine of the Suns distance from the pole:

So the sine of the complement of the latitude,

to a fourth sine.

2 As this fourth sine

is to the sine of the half sum:

So the sine of the difference

to a seventh sine.

The mean proportional between this seventh sine and the sine of 90 gr. will
be the sine of the complement of half the hour from the meridian.

Thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. the declination of the Sun being 20 gr.
Northward, and the altitude 12 gr. I might find the Sun to be 95 gr. 52 m. from
the meridian.

Altitude 12 gr. 0 m. The complement is 78 gr. 0 m. Declin. North 20 0 the
did. from the pole 70 0 Latitude 51 30 the complement is 38 30 The sum of
all three 186 30 The half sum 93 15 The difference 15 15

Here as the Radius is to the sine of 70 gr.

So the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. to the sine of 35 gr. 48 m.

As this sine of 35 gr. 48 m. is to the sine of 93 gr. 15 m.

So the sine of 15 gr. 15 m. to the sine of 26 gr. 40 m.

The half may between this seventh sine of 26 gr. 40 m. and the sine of 90 gr.
does fall at 42 gr. 4 m. whose complement is 47 gr. 56 m. and the double of
that, 95 gr. 52 m. which converted into hours, does give 6 hours and almost
24 m. from the meridian.

Or I might find these 95 gr. 52 m. in the line of versed sines, over against
the seventh sine of 26 gr. 40 m.

12 Having the azimuth, the Suns altitude, and the declination, to find the
hour of the day.
As the cosine of the declination

is to the sine of the azimuth:

So the cosine of the altitude

to the sine of the hour.

Thus the declination being 20 gr. Southward, the altitude 12 gr. and the
azimuth found by the tenth Prop. 146 gr. I might find the time to be 35 gr. 36
m. that is 2 hours 22 m. from the meridian.

13 Having the hour of the day, the Suns altitude, and the declination, to
find the azimuth.
As the cosine of the altitude

is to the sine of the hour:

So the cosine of the declination,

to the sine of the azimuth.

So the altitude of the Sun being 12 gr. and the declination 10 gr. Southward,
and the angle of the hour 35 gr. 36 m. I should find the azimuth to be 34 gr.
And so it is if it be reckoned from the South; but 146 gr. if it be taken from
the North part of the meridian.

14 Having the distance of the Sun from the next equinoctial point, to find
his right ascension.
As the Radius

to the cosine of the greatest declination:

So the tangent of the distance,

to the tangent of the right ascension.

So the Sun being in the first degree of, that is 59 gr. distant from the next
equinoctial point, and the greatest declination 23 gr. 30 m. the right
ascension will be found to be 56 gr. 46 m. short of the beginning of, and
therefore 303 gr. 14 m.

15 Having the declination of the Sun, to find his right ascension.
As the tangent of the greatest declination

it to the tangent of the declination given:

So the Radius

to the sine of the right ascension.

So the greatest declination being 23 gr. 30 m. and the declination of the Sun
given 20 gr. the right ascension will be found about 56 gr. 50 m.

These are such Astronomicall propositions as I take to be useful for Seamen.
For the first and second will help them to find their latitude; the third to
find the Suns rising and setting; the 4.5.6.7.8.9.10.13. Prop. to find the
variation of their compass; the 11 and 12 Prop. to find the hour of the day;
and the two last toward the finding of the hour of the night. For having the
latitude of the place, with the declination and altitude of any star, they
may find the hour of the star from the meridian, as in the 11 Prop. Then
comp^ring the right ascension of the star with the right ascension of the
Sun, they may have the hour of the night.

All these propositions and such others may be wrought ^^so by the tables of
sines and tangents. For where four numbers do hold in proportion; as the first
to the second, so the third to the fourth; there if we multiply the second into
the third, and divide the product by the first, the quotient will give the
fourth required. As in the example of the last Prop. where the delination being
given, it was required to find the right ascension. The tangent of 20 gr. the
declination given is 3639702, which being multiplied by the Radius, the product
is 36397020000000, and this divided by 4348124 the tangent of 23 gr. 30 m. the
quotient is 8370741 the sine of 56 gr. 50 m. for the right ascension required.

Or if any will use my tables of artificial sines and tangents, they may add
the second and the third together, and from the sum subtract the first, the
remainder will give the fourth required. And so my tangent of 20 gr. is
9561.0638, which being added to the Radius, makes 19561.0658; from this if they
subtract 9638.3019 the tangent of 23 gr. 30 m. they shall find the remainder to
be 9922.7639, which in my Canon is the sine of 56 gr. 49 m. 56 seco^ds; and
such is the right ascension required, if it be reckoned from the next
equinoctial point.

The like reason holds for all other Astronomicall propositions, as I will
farther show by those two examples which I gave before for the finding of the
azimuth in the 10 Prop. because they are thought to be harder then the rest,
and require three operations.

In the first example.

Declin. South 20 gr. 0 m. The distance 110 gr. 0 m. Altitude 12 0 the
complement 78 0 Latitude Nor. 51 30 the complement 38 30 The sum of all three
226 30 The half sum 113 15 The difference 3 15

The first operation will be to find the fourth sine; and that is done by
adding the sine of the complement of the altitude to the sine of the complement
of the latitude, and subtracting the Radius: so adding 9990.4044 the sine of 78
gr. unto 9794.1495 the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. the sum wll be 19784.5539. And
the Radius being subtracted, the remainder 9784.5539 is the fourth sine, and
belongs to 37 gr. 30 m.

The second operation will be to find the seventh sine; and that is done by
adding the sine of the half sum to the sine of the difference, and
subtracting the fourth sine. So the half sum being 113 gr. 15 m. I take his
complement to a semicircle, and so find his sine to be 9963.2168, to which I
add 8753.5278, the sine of the difference 3 gr. 15 m; and the sum is
18716.7446. From this I take the fourth sine 9784.5539, and the remainder will
be 8932.1907, which is the seventh sine, and belongs to 4 gr. 54 m.

The third operation will be to find the mean proportional sine between the
seventh sine and the Radius. This in common arithmetique is done by multiplying
the two extremes, and taking the square root of the product. As in finding a
mean proportional between 4 and 9, we multiply 4 into 9, and the product is
36, whose square root is 6, the mean proportional between 4 and 9. But here
it is done by adding the sine and the Radius, and taking the half of them. So
the sum of the last seventh sine and the Radius is 18932.1907 and the half
of that 9466.0953, which is the mean proportional sine required, and
belongs to 17 gr. whose complement is 73 gr. and the double of that 146 gr.
the same azimuth as before.

In the second example.

Declin. North 20 gr. 0 m. The distance 70 gr. 0 m. Altitude 12 0 the
complement 78 0 Latitud. North 51 30 the complement 38 30 The sum of all
three 186 30 The half sum 93 15 The difference 23 15

The first operation will be to find the fourth sine; and ^ledge^hat is here
9784.5539, as in the former example.

The second operation will be to find the seventh sine; and ^ledge^o here the
sine of the half sum 93 gr. 15 m. being the ^ledge^ame with the sine of 86
gr. 45 m. his complement to 180 gr. I ^ledge^nd it to be 9999.3009, to which I
add 9596.3153 the sine ^ledge^f the difference 23 gr. 15 m. and the sum is
19595.6162. ^ledge^rom this I take the fourth sine 9784.5539, and the
remain^ledge^er will be 9811.0623 for the seventh sine, and belongs to
^ledge^0 gr. 20 m.

The third operation will be to find the mean proportio^ledge^all sine
between the seventh sine and the Radius. And so ^ledge^ere the Radius being
added to the seventh sine, the sum ^ledge^ill be 19811.0623, and the half of
that 9905.5311 does ^ledge^iue the mean proportional sine belonging to about
53 gr. 4 m. whose complement is 36 gr. 26 m. and the double of that ^2 gr. 52
m. the same azimuth as before.

I have set down these three examples thus particularly, ^ledge^hat I might
show the agreement between the Staff and the ^ledge^anon. But otherwise I
might deliver both the precept and the work, for the two last, more
compendiously. For generally in all sphericall triangles, where three sides are
known, and an angle required, make that side which is opposite to the angle
required, to be the base; and gather the sum, the half sum, and the
difference as before.

As the rectangle contained under the sines of the sides,

is to the square of the whole sine:

So the rectangle contained under the sines of the half sum and the
difference,

to the square of the cosine of half the angle.

Then for the work, we may for the most part leave out the two last figures;
and if they be above 50, put an unity to the sixth place, after this manner.

The second example.

70 gr. 0 m 78 0 9990 40 38 30 9794 15 186 30 19784 55 93 15 9999 30 23 15 9596
32 20000 00 39595 62 19811 07 36 26 9905 53 72 52 53 gr. 34 m. 107 8

Or for such numbers as are to be subtracted, I may take them out of the
Radius, and write down the residue, and then add them together with the rest.
As in the same second example, the sines of 78 gr. and of 38 gr. 30 m. being
the numbers to be subtracted; if I take 9990.4044 the sine of 78 gr. out of the
Radius 10000 0000, the residue is 9.5956: and so the residue of 9794.1495 is
205.8505 Wherefore in stead of subtracting those sines, I may add these
residues after this manner: 70 gr. 0 m. 78 0 38 30 186 30 93 15 23 15 36 26 72
52 9 59 205 85 9999 30 9596 32 19811 06 9905 53 53 gr. 34 m. 107 8

Having these means to find the Suns azimuth, we may compare it with the
magneticall azimuth, and so find the variation of the needle.

geometric illustration

For let the circle AMB, drawn on the center Z, be a plane, parallel to the
horizon; A the point whereon the Sun bears from us, M the North point of the
magneticall needle, and the angle AZM the magneticall azimuth. If we find the
Suns azimuth as before, to be 72 gr. 52 m. from the North to the Westward, we
may allow so many degrees from A unto N, and so we have the true North point
from the meridian, and consequently the East, South, and West points of the
horizon; and the distance between N and M shall be the variation of the
needle. So that if the magneticall azimuth AZM shall be 84 gr. 7 m. and the
Suns azimuth AZN 72 gr. 52 m. then must NZM the difference between the two
meridians, give the variation to be 11 gr. 15 m. as Mr. Bourough heretofore
found it by his observations at Limehouse in the year 1580. But if the
magneticall azimuth AZM shall be 79 gr. 7 m. and the Suns azimuth AZN 72 gr. 52
m. then shall the variation NZM be only 6 gr. 15 m. as I have sometimes found
it of late. Hereupon I enquired after the place where Mr. Bourough observed,
and went to Limehouse with some of my friends, and took with us a quadrant of
3 foot semidiameter, and two needles, the one above 6 inches, and the other 10
inches long, where I made the semidiameter of my horizontall plane AZ 12
inches: and toward night the 13 of June 1622, I made observation in several
parts of the ground, and found as follows.

Alt. AZM AZN Variat Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. 19 0 82 2 75 52 6 10 18 5 80
50 74 44 6 6 17 34 80 0 74 6 5 54 17 0 79 15 73 20 5 55 16 18 78 12 72 32 5 40
16 0 77 50 72 10 5 40 20 10 71 2 64 49 6 13 9 52 70 12 64 25 5 47

CHAP. VI. geometric illustration

Containing such nauticall questions, as are of ordinary use, concerning
longitude, latitude, Rumb, and distance.
1 To keep an account of the ships way.
THe way that the ship makes, may be known to an old seaman by experience,
by others it may be found for some small portion of time, either by the log
line, or by the distance of two known marks on the ships side. The time in
which it makes this way, may be measured by a watch, or by a glass. Then as
long as the wind continues at the same stay, it follows by proportion, As
the time given is to an hour:

So the way made, to an hours way.



Suppose the time to be 15 seconds, which make a quarter of a minute, and the
way of the ship 88 feet: then because there are 3600 seconds in an hour, I may
extend the compasses in the line of numbers, from 15 unto 3600, and the same
extent will reach from 88 unto 21120.

Or I may extend them from 15 unto 88, and this extent will reach from 3600
unto 21120; which shows that an hours way came to 21120 feet.

But this were an unnecessary business, to hearken after feet or fadoms. It
suffices our seamen to find the way of their ship in leagues or miles. And
they say that there are 5 feet in a pace, 1000 paces in a mile, and 60 miles in
a degree, and therefore 300000 feet in a degree. Yet comparing several
observations, and their measures with our feet usual about London, I find
that we may allow 352000 feet to a degree; and then if I extend the compasses
in the line of numbers from 352000 unto 21120, I shall find the same extent to
reach from 20 leagues the measure of one degree, to 1.2, and from 60 miles to
3.6; which shows the hours way to be 1 league and 2 tenths of a league, or 3
miles and 6 tenths of a mile.

But to avoid these fractions and other tedious reductions, I suppose it would
be more easy to keep this account of the ships way (as also of the difference
of latitude, and the difference of longitude) by degrees and parts of degrees,
allowing 100 parts to each degr^e, which we may therefore call by the name of
centosmes. Neither would this be hard to conceive. For if 100 such parts do
make a degree, then shall 50 parts be equal to 30 minutes, as 30 minutes are
equal to 10 leagues. And 5 parts shall be equal to 3 minutes, as 3 minutes
are equal to 1 league. And so the same extent as before, will reach from 100
parts unto 6; which shows that the hours way required is 6 cent. such as 100
do make a degree, and 5 do make an ordinary league.

This might also be done at one operation. For upon these suppositions, divide
44 feet into 45 lengths, and set as many of them as you may conveniently
between two marks on the ships side, and note the seconds of time in which
the ship goes these lengths: so the lengths divided by the time, shall give
the cent. which the ship goes in an hour.

Suppose the distance between the two marks to be 60 lengths (which are 58
feet and 8 inches) and let the time be 12 seconds: extend the compasses from 12
to 1, in the line of numbers; so the same extent will reach from 60 unto 5. Or
extend them from 12 unto 60, and the same extent will reach from 1 unto 5. This
shows that the ships way is according to 5 cent. in an hour.

This may be found yet more easily, if the log line shall befitted to the time.
As if the time be 45 seconds, the log line may have a knot at the end of every
44 feet; then does the ship run so many cent. in an hour, as there are knots
vered out in the space of 45 seconds. If 30 seconds do seem to be a more
convenient time, the log line may have a knot at the end of every 29 feet and 4
inches; and then also the centesmes will be as many as the knots. Or if the
knots be made to any set number of feet, the time may be fitted unto the
distance. As if the knots be made at the end of every 24 feet, the glass may
be made 24 seconds and somewhat more then an half of a second; and so these
knots will show the cent. If there be 5 knots vered out in a glass, then 5
cent; if 6 knots, then the ship goes 6 cent. in the space of an hour; and so
in the rest. For upon this supposition, the proportion between the time and the
feet will be as 45 unto 44. But according to the common supposition it should
seem to be as 45 unto 37, or in lesser terms as 6 unto 5. Those which are
upon the place, may make proof of both, and follow that which agrees best with
their experience.

2 By the latitude and difference of longitude, to find the distance upon a
course of East and West.
Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of the complement
of the latitude; the same extent shall reach in the line of numbers from the
difference of longitude to the distance.

So the measure of one degree in the equator, being 100 cent. the distance
belonging to one degree of longitude in the latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. will be
found about 62 cent. and. Or if the measure of a degree be 60 miles, the
distance will be found about 37 miles and. If the measure be 20 leagues, then
almost 12 leagues and. If the measure be 17, as in the Spanish charts, then
somewhat less then 11 leagues sailing upon this parallel, will give an
alteration of one degree of longitude.

geometric illustration

3 By the latitude and distance upon a course of East or West, to find the
difference of longitude.
Extend the compasses from the sine of the complement of the latitude, to the
sine of 90 gr; the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from the
distance to the difference of longitude.

So the distance upon a course of East or West, in the latitude of 51 gr. 30 m.
being 100 cent. the difference of longitude will be found 1.60, which make one
degree and 60 centesmes or 1 gr. 36 m.

Or if it be 60 miles, the difference of longitude will be 96, which also make 1
gr. 36 m. as before.

4 The longitude and latitude of two places being given, to find the Rumb
leading from the one to the other.
Extend the compasses in the line of numbers from the difference of latitudes
to the difference of longitudes; the same extent will give the distance from
the tangent of 45 gr. unto the tangent of the Rumb, according to the proiection
of the common sea-chart.

So the latitude of the first place being 50 gr. the latitude of the second 52
gr. 30 m. and the difference of longitude 6 gr. the Rumb will be found to be
about 67 gr. 23 m. which is near the inclination of the sixth Rumb to the
meridian. But this Rumb so found, is always greater then it should be, and
therefore to be limited; which may be done sufficiently for the Sea-mans use,
after this manner:

Extend the compasses either from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of the
complement of the middle latitude, the same extent will reach from the tangent
of the Rumb before found, to the tangent of the Rumb limited.

Or else extend them from the sine of 90 gr. unto the tangent of the Rumb
before found; the same extent will reach from the sine of the complement of the
middle latitude, unto the tangent of the Rumb limited.

So the middle latitude between 50 gr. and 52 gr. 30 m. being 51 gr. 15 m. and
the Rumb before found 67 gr. 23 m. the Rumb limited will be found to be about
56 gr. 20 m. which is but five minutes more then the inclination of the fifth
Rumb to the meridian.

2 This Rumb may be found by the help of the meridian line upon the Staff. For
if I take the difference of latitude out of the meridian line from 50 gr. unto
52 gr. 30 m. and measure it in his equinoctial, or at the beginning of the
meridian line, I shall find it there to be equal to 4 gr. Wherefore I work as
if the difference of latitude were 4 gr. and extend the compasses in the line
of numbers from 4 unto 6: so shall I find the same extent to reach from the
tangent of 45 gr. unto the tangent of 56 gr. 20 m. and this is the inclination
of the Rumb required.

5 By the Rumb and both latitudes, to find the distance upon the Rumb.
Extend the compasses from the sine of the complement of the Rumb, unto the
sine of 90 gr. the same extent in the line of numbers shall reach from the
difference of latitude unto the distance upon the Rumb.

So the latitude of the first place being 50 gr. the latitude of the second 52
gr. 30 m. and the Rumb the fifth from the meridian. If I extend the compasses
from 33 gr. 45 m. unto the sine of 90 gr. I shall find the same extent in the
line of numbers to reach from 2 gr. 50 cent. to 4 gr. 50 cent. and such is the
distance required.

6 By the distance and both latitudes to find the Rumb.
Extend the compasses in the line of numbers from the distance unto the
difference of latitudes; the same extent will reach in the line of sines, from
90 gr. unto the complement of the Rumb.

So the one place being in the latitude of 50 gr. the other in the latitude of
52 gr. 30 m. and the distance between them 4 gr. 50 cent. If I extend the
compasses from 4.50 unto 2.50 in the line of numbers, I shall find the same
extent to reach from the sine of 90 gr. unto the complement of 56 gr. 15 m. and
such is the inclination of the Rumb required.

7 By one latitude, Rumb, and distance, to find the difference of latitudes.
Extend the compasses in the line of sines, from 90 gr. unto the complement of
the Rumb; the same extent in the line of numbers, will reach from the distance,
unto the difference of latitudes.

So the lesser altitude being 50 gr. and the distance 4 gr. 50 cent. upon the
fifth Rumb from the meridian: if I extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr.
to 33 gr. 45 m. I shall find the same extent to reach from 4.50 in the line of
numbers, unto 2.50; and therefore the second latitude to be 52 gr. 30 m.

8 By the Rumb and both latitudes, to find the difference of longitude.
Extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. unto the tangent of the Rumb;
the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from the difference of
latitudes unto the difference of longitude, according to the proiection of the
common sea-chart.

So the first latitude being 50 gr. and the second 52 gr. 30 m. and the Rumb
the fifth from the meridian: if I extend the compasses from the tangent of 45
gr. unto 56 gr. 15 m. I shall find the same extent to reach from 2.50 in the
line of numbers to about 3.75, which make 3 gr. 45 m. But this difference of
longitude so found, is always lesser then it should be, and therefore to be
enlarged, which may be done sufficiently for the sea-mens use, after this manner:

Extend the compasses from the sine of the complement of the middle latitude,
unto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from
the difference of longitude before found, unto the difference of longitude
enlarged.

So the middle latitude in this example being 51 gr. 15 m. and the difference
of longitude before found 3 gr. 75 cent. the difference of longitude enlarged
will be found about 5 gr. 99 cent. which are near 6 gr.

2 This difference of longitude may be found by help of the meridian line upon
the Staff. For if I take the proper difference of latitude out of the meridian
line, and measure it in his equinoctial, or at the beginning of the meridian
line, I shall find it to be equal to four of those degrees. Wherefore having
extended the compasses as before from the tangent of 45 gr. unto the tangent of
56 gr. 15 m. the same extent will reach from 4.00 in the line of numbers, unto
5.99: which shows the difference of longitude to be about 5 gr. 99 cent. or
about half a minute short of six degrees.

9 By the Rumb and both latitudes, to find the distance belonging to the chart
of Mercators proiection.
Take the proper difference of latitudes out of the meridian line of the chart,
and measure it in his equinoctial, or one of the parallels, and it will there
give the difference of latitudes enlarged. Then extend the compasses from the
sine of the complement of the Rumb unto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will
reach in the line of numbers, from the latitude enlarged, unto the distance
required. Or extend them from the complement of the Rumb to the latitude
enlarged, the same extent will reach from 90 gr. unto the distance.

For example, let the place given be A in the latitude of 50 gr. D in the
latitude of 52 gr. 30 m. AM the difference of latitudes, and the Rumb MAD the
fifth from the meridian. First I take out AM the difference of latitudes, and
measure it in AE one of the parallels of the equinoctial; I find it to be very
near 4 gr: this is the difference of latitudes enlarged. Then if I extend the
compasses from the sine of 33 gr. 45 m. the complement of the fifth Rumb unto
the sine 90 gr. I shall find the same extent to reach in the line of numbers
from 4.00 unto 7.20. And this is the distance belonging to the chart. Wherefore
I take out these 7 gr. 20 cent. out of the scale of the parallel AE, and
prick it down upon the Rumb from A unto D, where it meets with the
parallel of the second latitude. Lastly, I measure it in the meridian line,
setting one foot of the compasses as much below the lesser latitude as the
other above the greater latitude, and find it to be 4 gr. 50 cent. which is the
same distance that I found before in the 5. Prop.

10 By the way of the ship, and two angles of position, to find the distance
between the ship and the land.
The way of the ship may be known as in the first Prop. The angles may be
observed either by the Staff, or by a needle set on the Staff. For example,
suppose that being at A, I had sight of the land at B, the ship going East
Northeast from A toward C, and the angle of the ships position BAC being 43 gr.
20 m: and after that the ship had made 10 cent. or 2 leagues of way from A unto
D, I observed again, and found the second angle of the ships position BDC to
be 58 gr. or the inward angle BDA to be 122 gr. then may I find the third
angle ABD to be 14 gr. 40 m. either by subtraction or by complement unto 180 gr.

geometric illustration

In this and the like cases, I have a right line triangle, in which there is
one side and three angles known, and it is required to find the other two
sides and the Canon for it, is this: As the sine of the angle opposite to the
known side,

is to that known side:

So the sine of the angle opposite to the side required,

is to the side required.



Wherefore I extend the compasses from 14 gr. 40 m. in the fines, to 10 in line
of numbers, and this extent does reach from 58 gr. to 33, and such is the
distance between A and B, and it reaches from 43 gr. 20 m. unto 27 in the line
of numbers; and such is the distance from D to B.

These two distances being known, I may set out the land upon the chart. For
having set down the way of the ship from A to D by that which I showed before
in the use of the meridian line, I may by the same reason set off the distance
AB and DB, which meeting in the point B, shall there resemble the land required.

11 By knowing the distance between two places on the land, and how they bear
one from the other, and having the angles of position at the ship to find the
distance between the ship and the land.
If it may be conveniently, let the angle of position be observed at such time
as the ship comes to be right over against one of the places. As if the places
be East and West, seek to bring one of them South or North from you, and then
observe the angle of position: so shall you have a right line triangle, with
one side and three angles, whereby to find the two other sides. First you have
the angle of position at the ship; then a right angle at the place that is over
against you; and the third angle at the other place is the complement to the
angle of position. Wherefore As the sine of the angle of position,

is to the distance between the two places:

So the cosine of the angle of position,

to the distance between the ship and the nearer place.

And so is the sine of 90 gr.

to the distance from the ship to the farther place.



So the places being 15 cent. or three leagues one from the other, and the
angle of position 29 gr; the nearer distance will be found about 27 cent. and
the farther distance about 31 cent.

Or howsoever the angle of position were observed, the distance between the
ship and the land may be found generally as in this example:

Suppose A and D were two head lands known to be East Northeast, and West
Southwest, 10 cent. or two leagues one from the other; and that the ship being
at B, I observed the angle of the ships position DBA, and found it to be 14 gr.
40 m. and that D did bear 9 gr. 30 m. and A 24 gr. 10 m. from the meridian BS,
this example would be like the former. For if the angle SBD be 9 gr. 30 m. from
the South to the Westward, then shall NDB be 9 gr. 30 m. from the North to the
Eastward. Take these 9 gr. 30 m. out of the angle NDE which is 67 gr. 30 m.
because the two head lands lie East Northeast, and there will remain 58 gr.
for the angle BDE, and the inward angle BDA shall be 122 gr. Take these two
angles ABD and BDA out of 180 gr. and there will remain 43 gr 20 m. for the
third angle BAD. Wherefore here also are three angles and one side, by which I
may find the two other sides, as in the last Prop.

These propositions thus wrought by the Staff, are such as I thought to be
useful for seamen, and those that are skillful may apply the example to many
others. Those that begin, and are willing to practice, may busy themselves
with this which follows.

Suppose four ports, L, N, O, P; of which L is in the latitude of 50 gr. N is
North from L 200 leagues or 1000 centesmes; O West from L 1000 cent. and P West
from N 1000 cent: so that L and O will be in the same latitude of 50 gr. N and
P both in the latitude of 60 gr. Then let two ships depart from L, the one to
touch at O, the other at N, and then both to meet at P, there to lade, and from
thence to return the nearest way unto L. Here many questions may be proposed.

1 What is the longitude of the port at O? 2 What is the longitude of P? And
why O and P should not be in the same longitude? 3 What is the Rumb from O unto
P? 4 What is the distance from O unto P? And why the way should be more from L
unto P, going by O, then by N? 5 What is the Rumb from P unto L? 6 What is the
distance from P unto L? 7 What is the Rumb from N unto O? 8 What is the
distance from N unto O? And why it should not be the like Rumb and distance
from N unto O, as from P unto L?
These questions well considered, and either resolved by the Staff, or pricked
down on the chart, and compared with the globe and the common Sea-chart, will
give some light to the direction of a course, and reduction of places to their
due longitude, which are now foully distorted in the common Sea-charts.

An Appendix concerning The description and use of an instrument, made in form
of a Crosse-bow, for the more easy finding of the latitude at Sea.
THe former Prop. suppose the latitude to be known, I will here show how it
may be easily observed.

Upon the center A, and semidiameter AB, describe an ark of a circle SBN. The
same semidiameter will set of 60 gr. from B unto S for the South end, and other
60 gr. from B unto N for the North end of the Bow: so the whole Bow will
contain 120 gr. the third part of a circle. Let it therefore be divided into
so many degrees, and each degree subdivided into six parts, that each part may
be ten minutes: but let the numbers set to it be 5. 10. 15. unto 90 gr. and
then again 5. 10. 15. unto 25. that 55 may fall in the middle, as in this
figure.

geometric illustration

The Bow being thus divided and numbered, you may se^ the months and days of
each month upon the back, and such stars as are fit for observation upon
the side of the Bow.

If you desire to make use of it in North latitude, you may number 23 gr. 30 m.
from 90 toward the end of the Bow at N, and there place the tenth day of
June. And 23 gr. 30 m. from 90 toward S; and there at 66 gr. 30 m. place the
tenth day of December. And so the rest of the days of the year, according to
the declination of the Sun at the same days. The stars may be placed in
like manner according to their declinations.

Arcturus at 21 gr. 10 m. The Bulls eye 15 42 The Lions heart 13 45 The Vultures
heart 7 58 The little dog 6 9 from 90 toward the North end of the Bow at N.
Then for Southern stars, you may number their declination from 90 toward the
South end of the Bow at S. As first the three stars in Orions girdle, The
first at 0 gr. 37 m. The second 1 28 The third 2 11 The Hydra's heart 7 5 The
virgins spike 9 10 The great dog 16 12 The Scorpions heart 25 30 Fomahant 31 30
And so the South crown, the triangle, the clouds, the crosiers, or what other
stars you think fit for observation. This I call the fore side of the Bow.

If you desire to make use of it in South latitude, you may turn the Bow, and
divide the back side of it, and number it in like manner; and then put on the
months and days of the year, placing the tenth of December at the South end,
and the tenth of June toward the middle of the Bow, and the rest of the days
according to the Suns declination as before.

The chiefest of the North^rne stars may here be placed in like manner
according to their declination, Anno 1625.

The pole star at 87 gr. 20 m. The first guard 75 45 The second guard 73 25
The great Bears back 63 45 In the great Bears tail first second third
58 2 57 55 51 15 The side of Perseus 48 28 The goat 45 33 The tail of the
swan 44 0 The head of Medusa 39 30 The harp 38 30 Castor 32 38 Pollux 28 52 The
North crown 28 0 The Rams head 21 40 Arcturus 21 10 The Bulls eye 15 42 The
Lions heart 13 45 The Vultures heart 7 58 Orions right shoulder 7 17 Orions
left shoulder 5 57

And so any other star, whose declination is known unto you, which being
done. The use of this Bow may be

1 The day of the month being known, to find the declination of the Sun. 2
The declination being given, to find the day of the month.
These two Prop. depend on the making of the Bow. If the day be known, look
it out in the back of the Bow: so the declination will appear in the side. Or
if the declination be known, the day of the month is set over against it. As
if the day of the month were the 14 of July: look for this day in the back
of the Bow, and you shall find it over against 20 gr. of North declination. If
the declination given be 20 gr. to the Southward, you shall find the day to be
either the eleventh of November, or the eleventh of January.

3 To find the altitude of the Sun or stars.
Here it is fit to have two running sights, which may be easily moved on the
back of the Bow. The upper sight may be set either to 60 gr. or to 70 gr. or
to 80 gr. as you shall find to be most convenient: the other sight may be set
on, to any place between the middle and the other end of the Bow. Then with
the one hand hold the center of the Bow to your eye, so as you may see the
Sun or star by the upper sight, and with the other hand move the lower
sight up or down until you have brought one of the edges of it to be even
with the horizon (as when you observe with the Crossestaffe:) so the degrees
contained between that edge and the upper sight, shall show the altitude
required.

Thus if the upper sight shall be at 80 gr. and the lower sight at 50 gr. the
altitude required is 30 gr.

4 To find any North latitude, by knowing either the day of the month, or the
declination of the Sun.
As often as you are to observe in North latitude, place both the sights on the
foreside of the Bow, the upper sight to the declination of the Sun, or the
day of the month at the North end, and the lower sight toward the South end.
Then when the Sun comes to the meridian, turn your face to the South, and
with the one hand hold the center of the Bow to your eye, so as you may see the
Sun by the upper sight; with the other hand move the lower sight, until you
have brought one of the edges of it to be even with the horizon: so that edge
of the lower sight shall show the latitude of the place in the fore side of the
Bow.

Thus being in North latitude upon the ninth of October: if I set the upper
sight to this day, at the fore side and North end of the Bow, I shall find it
to fall to the Southward of 90 upon 80 gr. and therefore at 10 gr. of South
declination. Then the Sun coming to the meridian, I may set the center of the
Bow to mine eye, as if I went to find the altitude of the Sun, holding the
North end of the Bow upward, with the upper sight between mine eye and the
Sun, and moving the lower sight, until it come to be even with the horizon.
If here the lower sight shall stay a^ 50 gr. I may well say, that the latitude
is 50 gr. For the meridian altitude of the Sun is 30 gr. by the last Prop.
and the Sun having 10 gr. of South declination, the meridian altitude of the
equator would be 40 gr; and therefore the observation was made in 50 gr. of
North latitude.

By the same reason, if the lower side had stayed at 51 gr. 30 m. the latitude
must have been 51 gr. 30 m. and so in the rest.

5 To find any North latitude, by the meridian altitude of the stars to the
Southward.
Let the upper sight be set to the star, which you intend to observe, here
placed in the fore side of the Bow. Then hold the North end of the Bow upward,
and turning your face to the South, observe the meridian altitude as before: so
the lower sight shall show the latitude of the place in the fore side of the
Bow.

Thus if in observing the meridian altitude of the great Dog-starre, the lower
sight shall stay at 50 gr. it would show the latitude to be 50 gr. For this
star being here placed at 73 gr. 48 m. if we take thence 50 gr. his meridian
altitude would be 23 gr. 48 m. to this if we add 16 gr. 12 m. for the South
declination of this star, it would show the meridian altitude of the equator
to be 40 gr. and therefore the latitude to be 50 gr.

6 To find any North latitude, by the meridian altitude of the stars to the
Northward.
Let the upper sight be set to the star which you intend to observe, here
placed on the back side of the Bow. Then hold the North end of the Bow upward,
and turning your face to the North, observe the altitude of the star when he
comes to be in the meridian and under the pole: so the lower sight shall show
the altitude of the pole in the back side of the Bow.

Thus the former guard coming to be in the meridian under the pole, if you
observe and find the lower sight to stay at 50 gr. such is the elevation of the
pole, and the latitude of the place to the Northward. For the distance between
the two sights will show the altitude to be 35 gr. 45 m. and the star is 14 gr.
15 m. distant from the North pole. These two do make up 50 gr. for the
elevation of the North Pole, and therefore such is the North latitude.

7 To find any South latitude, by knowing either the day of the month, or the
declination of the Sun.
When you are come into South latitude, turn both your sights to the backside
of the Bow: the upper sight to the declination of the Sun, or the day of the
month at the South end, and the lower sight toward the North end of the Bow.
Then the Sun coming to the meridian, turn your face to the North, and
holding the South end of the Bow upward, observe the meridian altitude as
before: so the lower sight shall show the latitude of the place in the back
side of the Bow.

Thus being in South latitude, upon the tenth of May if you observe and find
the lower sight to stay at 30 gr. on the back side of the Bow, such is the
latitude. For the declination is 20 gr. Northward, the altitude of the Sun
between the two sights 40 gr. the altitude of the equator 60 gr. and therefore
the latitude 30 gr.

8 To find any South latitude, by the meridian altitude of the stars to the
Northward.
Let the upper sight be set to the star which you intend to observe, here
placed on the back side of the Bow. Then hold the South end of the Bow upward,
and turning your face to the North, observe the meridian altitude as before: so
the lower sight shall show the latitude of the place in the back side of the
Bow.

Thus being in South latitude, and the former guard coming to be in the
meridian over the pole. If you observe and find the lower sight to stay at 5
gr. such is the latitude. For this star is 14 gr. 15 m. from the North pole,
the altitude of the star between the two sights 9 gr. 15 m. the North pole
depressed 5 gr. and therefore the latitude 5 gr. to the Southward.

9 To observe the altitude of the Sun backward.
Set the upper sight either to 60, or 70, or 80 gr. as you shall find it to be
most convenient, the lower sight on any place between the middle and the other
end of the Bow, and have an horizontall sight to be set to the center. Then may
you turn your back to the Sun, and the back of the Bow toward your self,
looking by the lower sight through the horizontall sight, and moving the lower
sight up and down, until the upper sight do cast a shadow upon the middle of
the horizontall sight: so the degrees contained between the two sights on the
Bow, shall give the altitude required.

Thus if the upper sight shall be at 80 gr. and the lower sight at 50 gr. the
altitude required is 30 gr. as in the third Prop.

10 To find any North latitude by a back observation, knowing either the day
of the month, or the declination of the Sun.
When you observe in North latitude, place your three sights on the fore side
of the Bow: the upper sight to the declination of the Sun, or the day of the
month, at the North end; the lower sight toward the South end of the Bow; and
the horizontall sight to the center. Then the Sun coming to the meridian,
turn your face to the North, and holding the North end of the Bow upward, the
South end downward, with the back of it toward your self, obs^rue the shadow
of the upper sight as in the former Prop. so the lower sight shall show the
latitude of the place in the fore side of the Bow.

Thus being in North latitude upon the ninth of October, if you observe and
find the lower sight to stay at 50 gr. on the fore side of the Bow, such is the
latitude. For the declination is 10 ^r. Southward, and the altitude of the
Sun between the two sights 30 gr. the altitude of the equator 40 gr. and
therefore the latitude 50 gr. as in the fourth Prop.

11 To find any South latitude by a back observation, knowing either the day of
the month, or the declination of the Sun.
When you observe in South latitude, place your three sights on the back side
of the Bow: the upper sight to the declination of the Sun, or the day of the
month at the South end; the lower sight towar^ the North end of the Bow, and
the horizontall sight to the c^nter. Then the Sun coming to the meridian, turn
your face to the South, and holding the South end of the Bow upward, with the
back of it toward your self, observe the shadow of the upper sight as before:
so the lower sight shall show the latitude of the place in the back side of the
Bow.

Thus being in the South latitude upon the tenth of May, if you observe and
find the lower sight to stay at 30 gr. on the ^ledge^acke of the Bow, such is
the altitude. For the declination ^ledge^ 20 gr. Northward, the altitude of the
Sun between the ^ledge^wo sights 40 gr. the altitude of the equator 60 gr.
and there^ledge^re the latitude 30 gr. as in the seventh Prop.

12 To find the day of the month, by knowing the latitude of the place, and
observing the meridian altitude of the Sun.
Place your three sights according to your latitude; the ho^ledge^zontall sight
to the center, the lower sight to the latitude, ^ledge^d the upper sight among
the months. Then when the ^ledge^nne comes to the meridian, observe the
altitude, looking ^ledge^ the lower sight through the horizontall, and keeping
the ^ledge^wer sight still at the latitude, but moving the upper sight
^ledge^til it give shadow upon the middle of the horizontal sight: ^ledge^ the
upper sight shall show the day of the month requi^ledge^d.

Thus in our latitude if you set the lower sight to 51 gr. 30 ^ledge^ and
observing find the altitude of the Sun between ^ledge^at and the upper
sight to be 28 gr. 30 m. this upper sight ^ledge^ll ^all upon the ninth of
October, and the twelfth of Fe^ledge^uar^e. And if yet you doubt which o^ them
two is the day, ^ledge^u may expect another meridian altitude; and then if you
^ledge^d the upper sight upon the tenth of October, and the ele^ledge^nth of
February, the question will be soon resolved.

13 To find the declination of any unknown star, and so to place it on the
Bow, by knowing the latitude of the place, and observing the Meridian altitude
of the Star.
When you find a star in the Meridian that is fit for ob^ledge^uation. Set
the center of the Bow to your eye, the lower ^ledge^ht to the latitude, and
move the upper sight up or down ^ledge^till you see the horizon by the lower
sight, and the star by the upper sight, then will the upper sight stay at the
declination and place of the star.

Thus being in 20 gr. of North latitude, if you observe an^redge^ find the
meridian altitude of the head of the Crosier to b^redge^ 14 gr. 50 m. The upper
sight will stay at 34 gr. 50 m. and ther^redge^ may you place this star. For
by this observation the distance o^redge^ this star from the South pole
should be 34 gr. 50 m. and th^redge^ declination from the equator 55 gr. 10 m.
And so for the res^redge^

The stars which I m^ntione^ be^^re, do come to the meridian in this order,
after the first point of Aries.

Ho. Mi. The pole star at 0 29 The rams head 1 46 The head of Medusa 2 44 The
sid^ of Perseus 2 58 The Bulls eye. 4 15 The goat 4 49 Orions left shoulder 5 5
Orions girdle the first the second the third.
5 13 5 17 5 22 Orions right shoulder 5 35 The great dog 6 29 Castor 7 10 The
little dog 7 20 Pollux 7 22 The Hydra's heart 9 9 The lions heart 9 48 The great
bears back 10 40 First in gr. bears tail 12 37 The Virgins spike 13 5
Second in gr. bea^ tail 13 9 Third in gr. bears tail 13 33 Arcturus 13 58
The foremost gu rd 14 52 The North crown 15 19 The h^ dmost guard 15 25
Scorpions heart 16 7 The harp 18 24 Vulturs heart 19 33 Swans tail 20 29
Fomahant 22 36

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK. Of the use of the lines of Numbers, Sines and Tangents for
the drawing of Houre-lines on all sorts of Planes.
THere are ten several sorts of Planes, which take their denomination from
those great circles to which they are parallels, and may sufficiently for our
use be represented in this one fundamental Diagram described before in the use
of the Sector, and be known by their horizontall and perpendicular lines, of
such as know the latitude of the place, and the circles of the sphere.

1 An horizontall plane parallel to the horizon, here represented by the
outward circle ESWN.

2 A vertical plane parallel to the prime vertical circle which passes
through the zenith and the points of East and West in the horizon, and is right
to the horizon and the meridian; that is, makes right angles with them both.
This is represented by EZW.

3 A polar plane parallel to the circle of the hour of 6, which passes
through the pole and the points of East and West, being right to the
Equinoctial and the Meridian, but inclining to the horizon, with an angle
equal to the latitude. This is here represented by EPW.

4 An equinoctial plane parallel to the Equinoctial, which passes through
the points of East and West, being right to the Meridian, but inclining to the
Horizon, with an angle equal to the complement of the latitude. This is here
represented by EAW.

5 A vertical plane inclining to the horizon, parallel to any great circle,
which passes through the points of East and West, being right to the meridian,
but inclining to the horizon, and yet not passing through the pole, nor
parallel geometric illustration to the equinoctial. This is here represented
either by EIW, or EYW, or ELW.

6 A meridian plane parallel to the meridian, the circle of the hour of 12,
which passes through the zenith, the pole, and the points of South and North,
being right to the horizon, and the prime vertical. This is here represented
by SZN.

7 A meridian plane inclining to the horizon, parallel to any great circle,
which passes through the points of South and North, being right to the prime
vertical, but inclining to the horizon. This is here represented by SGN.

8 A vertical declining plane, parallel to any great circle, which passes
through ye zenith, being right to the horizon, but inclining to the meridian.
This is represented by BZD.

9 A polar declining plane, parallel to any great circle, which passes
through the pole, being right to the equinoctial, but inclining to the
meridian. This is here represented by HPQ.

10 A declining inclining plane, parallel to any great circle, which is right
to none of the former circles, but declining from the prime vertical, and
inclining both to the horizon and the meridian, and all the hour circles. This
may be here represented either by BMD, or BFD, or BKD, or any such great
circle, which passes neither through the South and North, nor East and West
points, nor through the zenith nor the pole.

Each of these planes (except the horizontall) has two faces whereon
houre-lines may be drawn; and so there are 19 planes in all. The meridian
plane has one face to the East, and another to the West: the other vertical
planes have one to the South, and another to the North, and the rest one to the
zenith, and another to the nadir: but what is said of the one, may be
understood of the other.

To find the inclination of any Plane.
For the distinguishing of these Planes we may find wheth^r they be
horizontall, or vertical, or inclining to the horizon, and how much they
incline, either by the usual inclinatorie quadrant, or by fitting a thread and
plummet unto the Sector.

For let the Sector be opened to a right angle, the lines of Sines to an angle
of 92 gr. the inward edges of the Sector to 90 gr. and let a thread and plummet
be hanged upon a line parallel to the edges of one of the legs, so that leg
shall be vertical, and the other leg parallel to the horizon.

If the plane seem to be vertical (like the wall of an upright building with
angles marked building) you may try it by holding the Sector, so that the
thread may fall upon his plummet line. For then if the vertical edge of the
Sector shall lie close to the plane, the plane is erect, and therefore said to
be vertical; and if you d^aw a line by that edge of the Sector, it shall be a
vertical line.

If the plane seem to be level with the horizon, you may try it by setting
the horizontall leg of the Sector to the plane, and holding the other leg
upright: for then if the thread shall fall on his plummet line, which way
soever you turn the Sector, it is an horizontall plane.

If the one end of the plane be higher then the other, and yet not vertical,
it is an inclining plane, and you may find the inclination in this manner.

First hold the vertical leg of the Sector upright, and turn the horizontall
le^ about, until it lie close with the plane, and the thread fall on his
plu^met line: so the line drawn by the edge of that horizontall leg, shall be
an horizontall line.

Suppose the plane to be BGED, and that BD were thus found to be the
horizontall line upon the plane; then may you cross the horizontall line at
right angles with a perpendicular CF: that done, if you set one of the legs of
the Sector upon the perpendicular line CF, and make the other leg with a thread
and plummet to become vertical, you shall have the angle between the vertical
line and the perpendicular on the Plane, as before in the use of the Sector,
page 50. and the complement of this angle is the inclination of the plane to
the horizon.

To find the declination of a Plane.
The declination of a Plane is always reckoned in the horizon between the
line of East and West, and the horizontall line upon the Plane. As in the
fundamental Diagram, the prime vertical line (which is the line of East and
West) is ECW; if the horizontall line of the plane proposed shall be BCD, the
angle of declination is ECB.

But because a Plane may decline diverse ways, that we may the better
distinguish them, we consider three lines belonging to every Plane: the first
is the horizontall line; the second the perpendicular line, crossing the
horizontall at right angles; the third the axis of the plane, crossing both the
horizontall line, and his perpendicular, and the plane it self at right angles.

The perpendicular line does help to find the inclination of the plane as
before, the horizontall to find the declination, the axis to give denomination
unto the plane.

For example, in a vertical plane here represented by EZW, the horizontall
line is ECW, the same with the line of East and West, and therefore no
declination; the perpendicular crossing it, CZ the same with the vertical
line, drawn from the center to the zenith, right unto the horizon, and
therefore no inclination. The axis of the plane is SCN, the same with the
meridian line, drawn from the South to the North, and accordingly gives the
denomination to the plane. For the plane having two faces, and the axis two
poles, S and N; the pole S falling directly into the South, does cause that
face to which it is next to be called the South face; and the other pole at N,
pointing into the North, does give the denomination to the other face, and make
it to be called the North face of this plane.

In like manner in the declining inclining plane here represented by BFD, the
horizontall line is BCD, which crosses the prime vertical line ECW, and
therefore it is called a declining plane, according to the angle of declination
ECB or WCD. The perpendicular to this horizontall line is CF, where the point F
falls in the plane QZH perpendicular to the plane proposed, between the
zenith and the North part of the horizon, and therefore it is called a plane
inclining to the Northward, according to the arc FQ, or the angle FCQ. The
axis of the plane is here represented by the line CK, where the pole K is 90
gr. distant from the plane, and so is as much above the horizon at H, and the
other pole as much below the horizon at Q, as the plane at F is distant from
the zenith: and this pole K here falling between the meridian and the prime
vertical circle into the Southwest part of the world, this upper face of the
plane is therefore called the Southwest face, and the lower the Northeast face
of the plane.

The declination from the prime vertical may be found by the needle in the
usual inclinatorie Quadrant, or rather by comparing the horizontall line
drawn upon the plane with the azimuth of the Sun and the meridian line, in
such sort as before we found the variation of the magneticall needle. For take
any board that has one side strait, and draw the line HO parallel to that
side, and the line ZM perpendicular unto it, and on the center Z make a
semicircle HMO: this done, hold the board to ye plane, so as HO may be parallel
to BD the horizontall line on the plane and the board parallel to the horizon;
then the Sun shining upon it, hold out a thread and plummet, so as the thread
being vertical, the shadow of the Sun may fall on the center Z, and draw the
line of shadow AZ representing the common section, which the azimuth of the
Sun makes with the plane of the horizon, and let another take the altitude of
the Sun at the same instant: so by resolving a triangle, as I showed before
page 65. you may find what azimuth the Sun was in when he gave shadow upon AZ.

Suppose the azimuth to be (as before page 64.) 72 gr. 52 m. from the North to
the Westward, and therefore 17 gr. 8 m. from the West, we may allow these 17
gr. 8 m. from A unto V, and draw the line ZV, and so we have the true West
point of the prime vertical line: then allowing 90 gr. from V unto S, we have
the South point of the meridian line ZS, and the angle HZV shall give the
declination of the plane from the vertical, and the angle OZS the declination
of the plane from the meridian.

Or we may take out only the angle AZH, which the line of shadow makes with
the horizontall line of the plane, and compare it with the angle AZV, which the
line of shadow makes with the prime vertical. And so here if AZV the Suns
azimuth shall be 17 gr. 8 m. past the West, and yet the line of shadow AZ 7 gr.
12 m. short of the plane, the declination of the plane shall be 24 gr. 20 m. as
may appear by the site of the plane and the circles.

If the altitude of the Sun be taken at such time as the shadow of the thread
falls on BD or HO, and then a triangle resolved, the declinat^on of the plane
will be such as the azimuth of the Sun from the prime vertical.

If at such a time as the shadow falls on MZ, the declination will be such as
the azimuth of the Sun from the meridian.

If it be a fair Summers day you may first find what altitude the Sun will
have when he comes to be due East or West, and then expect until he come to
that altitude; so the declination of the plane shall be such as the angle
contained between the line HO and the line of the shadow.

Having distinguished the Planes, the next care will be for the placing of the
style and the drawing of the houre-lines.

The style will be as the axis of the world, sometimes parallel to the plane,
sometimes perpendicular, sometimes cut the plane with oblique angles.

The houre-lines will be either parallel one to the other, or meet in a
center with equal angles, or meet with unequal angles. If the style be
perpendicular to the plane, the angles at the center will be equal; and this
falls out only in the South and North face of an equinoctial plane: if the
style be parallel to the plane, the houre-lines will be also parallel one to
another; and this falls out in all polar planes; as in the East and West
meridian planes parallel to the circle of the hour of 12, in the upper and
lower direct polars parallel to the circles of the hour of 6, and in the
upper and lower declining polars which are parallel to any of the other hour
circles.

But in the horizontall and all other planes, the style will cut the plane with
an acute angle, and the hour lines will meet at the root of the style, and
there make unequal angles.

CHAP. I. To draw the houre-lines in an equinoctial Plane.
AN equinoctial plane is that which is parallel to ye equinoctial circle
here represented by EAW, wherein the spaces between the hour circles being
equal, there is no need of further precept, but only to draw a circle and to
divide it into 24 equal parts for the 24 hours, and subdiuide each hour into
halues and quarters, and then to set up geometric illustration the style
perpendicular to the plane in the center of the circle. The help which these
lines of proportion do here afford us, is only in the division of the
circle, which may be done readily by that which I showed before, Page 29.

For example, suppose the semidiameter of the equinoctial circle to be six
inches, and that it were required to know the distance of the houre-points each
from other: here each hour being 15 gr. distant from other, I extend the
compasses from the sine of 30 gr. unto the sine of 7 gr. 30 m. the half of 15
gr. and I find the same extent to reach in the line of numbers from 6.00 unto
1.56.

Or in cross work I extend them from the sine of 30 gr. unto 6.00 in the line
of numbers, the same extent will reach from the sine of 7 gr. 30 m. unto 1.56
in the line of numbers; which shows that in a circle of six inches
semidiameter, the geometric illustrationdistance of the houre-points each from
other will be about 1 inch and 56 centesmes or parts of 100. The like reason
holds for the inscribing of all other chords in the Prop. following.

CHAP. II. To draw the houre-lines in a direct polar plane.
A Direct polar plane is that which is parallel to the hour of 6, here
represented by EPW, wherein the style will be parallel to the plane, and the
houre-lines parallel one to the other, and therefore may be best drawn by
that which I have showed in the use of the Sector. They may be also drawn by
the help of these lines of proportion, in this manner.

First draw a right line WE for the horizon and the equator, and cross it at
the point C, about the middle of the line with CB another right line, which may
serve for the meridian and the hour of 12, and must also be the substylar line
wherein the style shall stand. Then, to proportion the style unto the plane,
consider the length of the horizontall line, and what houre-lines you would
have to fall on your plane.

For the distance of any one houre-line from the meridian being known, we may
find both the length of the style and the distance of the rest: because As the
tangent of the hour given,

is to the distance from the meridian:

So the tangent of 45 gr.

to the height of the style.





Suppose the length of the horizontall line to be 12 inches, and that it were
required to put on all the houre-lines from 7 in the morning unto 5 in the
evening. Here we have 5 hours and 6 inches on either side the meridian.
Wherefore I allow 15 gr. for an hour, and extending the compasses the
compasses from the tangent of 75 gr. the measure of 5 hours unto the tangent
of 45 gr. I find the same extent to reach in the line of numbers from 6.00 to
about 1.61. This shows both the height of the style, and the distance of the
houre-points of 9 and 3 from the meridian to be 1 inch, 61 parts.

To find the length of the Tangent between the substylar and the houre-points.
As the tangent of 45 gr.

to the tangent of the hour:

So the height of the style

to the length of the tangent line between the substylar and the houre-points.

Thus having found the length of the style in our example to be 1.61, if I
exend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. unto the tangent of 15 gr. the
measure of the first hour from the substylar, I shall find the same extent to
reach in the line of numbers from 1.61 unto 0.43 for the length of the tangent
between the substylar and the houre-points of 11 and 1. If I extend them from
the tangent of 45 gr. unto the tangent of 75 gr. the measure of the fifth hour,
I shall find them to reach in the line of numbers from 1.61 unto 6.00 for the
length of the tangent from the substylar to the houre-points of 7 and 5. For
howsoever it be the same distance in the line of tangents from 45 unto 75, as
from 45 unto 15; yet because 75 are more, and 15 less then 45, the tangent
lines that answer to them will be accordingly more or less then the length of
the style.

Ho. An. Po Tang. Gr. M. In. Par 12 0 0 0 0 11.1 15 0 0 43 10.2 30 0 0 93 9.3
45 0 1 61 8.4 60 0 2 79 7.5 75 0 6 0 6.6 90 0 Infin

Again, if I extend them from 45 gr. in the tangents unto 30 gr. the measure
of the second hour, I shall find them to reach in the line of numbers from
1.61 unto 0.93 for the hour of 10 and 2: if I extend them from the tangent of
45 gr. unto the tangent of 60 gr. for the fourth hour, I shall find them to
reach in the line of numbers from 1.61 unto 2 79, and such is the length of the
tangent line from the substylar unto the hour of 8 and 4. And the like reason
holds for the inscribing of all other tangent lines in the propositions
following.

But for such tangents as fall under 45 gr. I may better use cross work, and
extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. unto 1.61 in the line of
numbers, so shall I find the same extent to reach from 30 gr. in the tangents,
to 93 parts in the line of numbers, for the distance of the second hour, and
from 15 gr. in the tangents to 43 parts for the distance of the first hour
from the meridian.

Or if this extent from 45 gr. backward to 1.61 be too large for the compasses,
I may extend forward from the tangent of 5 gr. 43 m. to 1.61 parts in the line
of numbers, and the same extent shall reach from 15 gr. in the tangents, to 43
parts in the line of numbers, for the distance of the first hour; and from 30
gr. to 93 parts, for the distance of the second hour, as before.

Having found the length of the tangent lines in inches and parts of inches,
and pricked them in the equator on both sides of the meridian, from the center
C; if we draw right lines through each of those points, crossing the equator
at right angles, they shall be the houre-lines required; and if we set a style
over the meridian, so as the edge of it be parallel to the plane, and the
height of it be as much above the meridian as the distance between the meridian
and the houre-points of 3 or 9, it shall represent the axis of the world, and
be truly placed for the casting of the shadow upon the houre-lines in a polar
plane.

Horae Ang. Po Tang Gr. M. In. Pa 6 0 0 3 45 165 7 30 1 32 11 15 1 99 7 15 0 2
68 18 45 3 39 22 30 4 14 26 15 4 93 8 30 0 5 77 33 45 6 68 37 30 7 67 41 15 8
77 9 45 0 10 00 48 45 11 40 52 30 13 03 56 15 14 97 10 60 0 17 32 63 45 20 28
67 30 24 14 71 15 29 46 11 75 0 37 32 78 45 50 27 82 30 75 96 86 15 152 57 12
90 0 Infin.

CHAP. III. To draw the houre-lines in a meridian plane.
A Meridian plane is that which is parallel to the meridian circle here
represented by SZN; it has two faces, one to the East, and the other to the
West; in each of them the style will be parallel to the plane, and the
houre-lines parallel one to the other, as in a polar plane, the difference
being only in the placing of the equator and in numbering of the hours.

For in these meridian planes having drawn an occult vertical line CZ, and an
occult horizontall line CN, crossing one the other at right angles in the point
C, the equator AC will cut the vertical with an angle ZCA, equal to the
latitude of the place: then may we cross the equator at right angles with the
line CB for the hour of 6, and from this set off the geometric illustration
houre-points in the equator as in the former Prop.

For supposing the length of the style CB to be ten inches, the length of the
tangent line belonging to the first hour will be 2 in. 68 p. the length of the
second 5 in. 77 p. as in the Table. Then the tangent of 15 gr. being pricked
down in the equator on both sides from 6, shall serve for the hours of 5 and
7, and the tangent of 30 gr. for the hours of 4 and 8, and so in the rest.
This done, if we draw right lines through each of these points, crossing the
equator at right angles, they shall be the houre-lines required: and if we set
a style over the hour of 6, so as the edge of it may be parallel to the
plane, and the height of it may be equal to the distance between the hours
of 6 and 9 in the equator, it shall represent the axis of the world, and be
truly placed for the casting of the shadow upon the houre-lines in a meridian
plane.

CHAP. IIII. To draw the houre-lines in an horizontall plane.
AN horizontall plane is that which is parallel to the horizon, here
represented by the outward circle ESWN, in which the diameter SN drawn from
the South to the North, may go both for the meridian line and the meridian
circle, Z for the zenith, P for the pole of the world, and the circles drawn
through P for the houre-circles of 1.2.3.4. etc. as they are nu^bred from the
meridian. These houre-circles considered with the meridian and the horizon, do
make diverse triangles, PN 1, PN 2, PN 3, in which we have known first the
right angle at N, the North intersection of the meridian and the horizon;
secondly the side PN, the arc of the meridian between the pole and the
horizon, which is always equal to the latitude of the place; thirdly the
angles at the pole, made by the meridian and the houre-circles, the angle NP 1
being 15 gr. NP 2 30 gr. each hour 15 gr. more then other, each half hour 7
gr. 30 m. each quarter 3. gr. 45. m. And these three being known, we may find
the arks of the horizon between the meridian and the houre-circles N 1, N 2, N
3, etc. For As the sine of 90 gr.

is to the sine of the latitude:

So the tangent of the hour

to the tangent of the houre-line

from the meridian.



Ho. Ang. Po Arc. Pla Gr. M. Gr. M. 12 0 0 0 0 3 45 2 56 7 30 5 52 11 15 8 51 1
15 0 11 50 18 45 14 52 22 30 17 57 26 15 21 6 2 30 0 24 20 33 45 27 36 37 30 31
0 41 15 34 28 3 45 0 38 3 48 45 41 45 52 30 45 34 56 15 49 30 4 60 0 53 35 63
45 57 47 67 30 62 6 71 15 66 33 5 75 0 71 6 78 45 75 45 82 30 80 25 86 15 85 13
6 90 0 90 0

geometric illustration

Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the latitude, so
the same extent shall reach from the tangent of the hour, to the tangent of
the houre-line from the meridian. Thus the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. I extend
the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of 51 gr. 30 m. and find the
same extent to reach from the tangent of 3 gr. 45 m. unto the tangent of 2 gr.
56 m. for the distance of the first quarter from the meridian; and from the
tangent of 7 gr. 30 m. unto the tangent of 5 gr. 52 m. for the half hour; and
from the tangent of 11 gr. 15 m. to the tangent of 8 gr. 51 m. for the third
quarter; and from the tangent of 15 gr. 0 m. unto 11 gr. 50 m. for the first
hour: and so in the rest.

Only when I come to set one foot of the compasses to geometric illustration
48 gr. 45 m. for the finding of a quarter past 3, the other foot will fall out
of the line, and then I may either take out so much as is out of the line
beyond 45 gr. and turn it back into the line, and it will reach from 45 gr.
to 41 gr. 45 m: or I may use cross work, extending the compasses from the
sine of 90 gr. to the tangent of 48 gr. 45 m. so the same extent will reach from
the sine of 51 gr. 30 m. to the tangent of 41 gr. 45 m. And such is the
distance of the line of 3 ho. from the meridian, as in this table of the Arks
of the plane.

This done, I come to the Plane, and there according as the lines do fall in
the fundamental diagram,

1 I draw a right line SN serving for the meridian, the hour of 12 and the
substylar.

2 In this meridian I make choice of a center at C, and there describe an
occult circle representing the horizon.

3 I find a chord of 11 gr. 50 m. and inscribe it into this circle on either
side of the meridian for the hours of 11 and 1; in like manner a chord of 24
gr. 20 m. for the hours of 10 and 2; and a chord of 38 gr. 3 m. for the hours
of 9 and 3; and so for the rest of the hours, their halues and quarters.

4 I draw right lines through the center and the terms of these chords, and
these lines so drawn are the houre-lines required.

Lastly I set up the style over the meridian, so as it may cut the plane in the
center, and there make an angle with the meridian equal to the latitude of the
place, so it shall represent the axis of the world, and be truly placed for
casting of the shadow upon the houre-lines in an horizontall plane.

CHAP. V. To draw the houre-lines in a vertical plane.
A Vertical plane is that which is parallel to the prime vertical circle here
represented by EZW. It has two faces, one to the North, the other to the
South; in each of them the substylar will be the same with the meridian line,
and the angle of the style above the plane will be equal to ZP the complement
of the latitude.

The triangles here considered are made by the vertical, the meridian, and the
houre-circles, in which we know the side ZP, the angles at the pole, and the
right angle at the zenith, and therefore may find the arks of the vertical,
between the meridian and the houre-circles after this manner: As the sine of 90
gr.

is to the cosine of the latitude:

So the tangent of the hour

to the tangent of the houre-line from the meridian.



Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the complement of
the latitude, so the same extent shall reach from the tangent of the hour, to
the tangent of the houre-line from the meridian.

Thus in the latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. I extend the compasses from the sine of
90 gr. to the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. and find the same extent to reach from the
tangent of 15 gr. to the tangent of 9 gr. 28 m for the distance of the first
hour from the meridian: and from the tangent of 75 gr. unto the tangent of 66
gr. 42 m. for the fifth hour; and so in the rest as in the Table following.

geometric illustration

These arks being known, I may come to the plane, and there by help of a
thread and plummet draw a vertical line serving both for the meridian and the
hour of 12, and the substylar; then may I draw an occult vertical circle, and
therein inscribe the chords of those former arks, and draw the houre-lines, and
set up the style, as before in the horizontall plane.

Ho. Ang. Po Arc. Pla Gr. M. Gr. M. 12 0 0 0 0 3 45 2 20 7 30 4 41 11 15 7 3 1
15 0 9 28 18 45 11 56 22 30 14 27 26 15 17 4 2 30 0 19 46 33 45 22 35 37 30 25
32 41 15 28 38 3 45 0 31 54 48 45 35 22 52 30 39 3 56 15 42 58 4 60 0 47 9 63
45 51 36 67 30 56 20 71 15 61 23 5 75 0 66 42 78 45 72 17 82 30 78 3 86 15 84 0
6 90 0 90 0

If it be the South face of the plane, the center will be upward, and the style
must point downward; if the North face, the center must be in the lower part of
the meridian line, and the style-point upward in all such places as are to the
Northward of the equinoctial line, as it may appear by considering how the
lines do fall in the fundamental Diagram.

CHAP. VI. To draw the houre-lines in a vertical inclining plane.
ALl those Planes that have their horizontall line lying East and West, are in
that respect said to be vertical; if they be also upright and pass through
the zeni^h, they are direct verticals; if they incline to the pole-they are
direct polars: if to the equinoctial, they are properly called equinoctial
planes, and are described before: if to none of these three points, they are
then called by the general name of inclining verticals.

These may incline either to the North part of the horizon, or to the South;
and each of them has two faces, one to the zenith, the other to the nadir, in
which we are first to consider the height of the pole above the plane, by
comparing the inclination of the plane to the horizon, with the latitude of the
place.

As in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. if the inclination of the plane EIW shall
be 13 gr. Northward, that is, if IN the ark of the meridian between the plane
and the North part of the horizon shall be 13 gr. we may take these 13 gr. out
of PN 51 gr. 30 m. the elevation of the pole above the horizon, and there will
remain PI 38 gr. 30 m. for the eleuatio^ of the North pole above the upper face
of the plane, and therefore 38 gr. 30 m. for the height of the South pole above
the lower face of the plane.

Or if the inclination of the plane shall be found to be 62 gr. to the
Southward, we may number them in the meridian from S the Southpart of the
horizon unto L, and there draw the arc ELW representing this plane; so the
arc of the meridian PL shall give the height of the North pole above the upper
face of this plane to be 66 gr. 30 m. and therefore the height of the South
pole above the lower face of the plane is also 66 gr. 30 m.

In like manner if the inclination of the plane EYW shall be 15 gr. Southward,
that is, if SY the arc of the meridian between the South part of the horizon
and the plane, shall be 15 gr. The height of the North pole above the upper
face of the plane, and the height of the South pole above the lower face of the
plane, will be also found to be 66 gr. 30 m.

But if the plane shall fall between the zenith and the North pole, then will
the North pole be elevated above the lower face, and the South pole above the
upward face of the plane, as may appear by the proiection of the sphere in the
fundamental Diagram.

Then in the triangles made by the plane, the meridian, and the houre-circles,
we have the side which is the height of the pole above the plane, together with
the angles at the pole, and the right angle at the intersection of the meridian
with the plane, by which we may find the arks of the plane between the
meridian and the houre-circles, after this manner: As the sine of 90 gr.

is to the sine of the pole above the plane:

So the tangent of the hour

to the tangent of the houre-line from the meridian.



Thus in the former example, where PI the height of the pole above the plane
was found to be 38 gr. 30 m. if you shall extend the compasses from the sine of
90 gr. to the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. the same extent will reach from the tangent
of 15 gr. unto the tangent of 9 gr. 28 m. for the distance of the first hour
from the meridian, and from 30 gr. unto 19 gr. 46 m. for the second hour, and
so forward as in the direct vertical.

And for the two last examples, you may extend the compasses from the sine of
90 gr. unto the sine of 66 gr. 30 m: so the same extent shall reach in the line
of tangents from 15 gr. unto 13 gr. 48 m. for the first hour, from 75 gr. unto
73 gr. 43 m. for the fifth hour, from 30 gr. unto 27 gr. 54 m. for the second
hour, from 60 gr. unto 57 gr. 48 m. for the fourth hour, and from 45 gr. unto
42 gr. 31 m. for the third hour from the meridian.

These arks being known, you may first draw the horizontall line, and cross
it in the middle with a perpendicular that may serve both for the meridian and
the hour of 12, and the substylar; then knowing which pole is elevated above
the plane, you may accordingly make choice of a fit point in the meridian for
the center of your houre-lines, and thence describe an occult arc of a circle,
inscribe the chords of those former arks, and draw the hour lines, and set up
the style, as I showed before in the horizontall plane.

CHAP. VII. To draw the houre-lines in an vertical declining Plane.
ALl upright planes whereon a man may draw a vertical line, are in this
respect said to be vertical; if they shall also stand directly East and West,
they are direct verticals; if directly North and South, they are properly
called meridian planes, and are described before: if they behold none of these
four principal parts of the world, but shall stand between the prime
vertical and the meridian, they are then called by the general name of
declining verticals.

These have two faces, one to the South, the other to the Northward, which may
be distinguished in these Northern parts of the world after this manner. If the
Sun coming to the meridian shall shine upon the plane, it is the South face;
if not, it is the North face of that plane. Again, if the Sun shall shine
upon the plane at high noone, and yet longer in the forenoone then in the
afternoon, it is the Southeast face; if longer in the afternoon then in the
forenoone, it is the Southwest face of the plane. But how much the declination
comes to, is best found as before.

When the declination is found, there be four things more to be considered
before we can come to the drawing of the houre-lines, and all four represented
in the fundamental Diagram.

1 The meridian of the plane and his inclination to the meridian of the place.
Let the arc EZW represent the prime vertical, and BZD a declining vertical,
according to the angle of declination EZB, the meridian of the place is
represented by PZS, crossing the vertical EZW at right angles at the zenith in
the point Z: but the proper meridian of the plane will be PR, which is a
perpendicular let down from the pole unto the declining vertical, and
crossing it with right angles in the point R, so the angle RPZ shall show the
inclination of the two meridians, and may thus be found.

In the triangle PRZ we know the angle at R to be a right angle, and the angle
at Z, for it is the complement of the declination, and the base PZ, for it is
the complement of the latitude. And therefore geometric illustration As the
sine of the latitude

is to the sine of 90 gr.

So the tangent of the declination

to the tangent of the inclination required.



2 The height of the style above the plane.
This is here represented by the perpendicular arc PR, and may be found by
that which we have known in the former triangle PRZ. For As the sine of 90 gr.

to the cosine of the latitude:

So the cosine of the declination

to the sine of the height of the style.



Or if you please to make use, of the angle of the inclination of the two
meridians, the proportion will hold.

As the sine of 90 gr.

to the cosine of the inclination of meridians:

So the cotangent of the latitude

to the tangent of the height of the style.

3 The distance of the substylar from the meridian.
This is here represented by the arc ZR, and may be found by that which we
have known in the former triangle PRZ.

As the sine of 90 gr.

to the sine of the declination:

So the cotangent of the latitude

to the tangent of the substylar from the meridian.

4 The distance of each houre-line from the substylar.
The distances of the houre-lines from the substylar, are here represented by
those arks of the declining vertical belonging to the plane, which are
intercepted between the proper meridian of the plane and the houre-circles.

To this purpose we have diverse triangles made by the declining plane, together
with his proper meridian and the houre-circles. In these we have known, first
the right angle at the intersection of the proper meridian with ye plane; then
the side which is the height of the pole above the plane; and thirdly the
angles at the pole. For knowing the angle of inclination between the meridian
of the plane and the meridian of the place, which is always the hour of 12,
we may find the angle between the meridian of the plane and the hour of 1,
by allowing in 15 gr. and the angle between the meridian of the plane and the
hour of 2, by allowing in 30 gr. and so for the rest, which being known, we
may find the arks of the plane from the substylar to the houre-circles, in this
manner.

As the sine of 90 gr.

to the sine of the height of the pole above the plane:

So the tangent of the hour from the proper meridian,

to the tangent of the houre-line from the substylar.

Thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. if the declination of an upright plane
shall be found to be 24 gr. 20 m. from the prime vertical, the one face open
to the Southwest, the other to the Northwest, I may number these 24 gr. 20 m.
in the horizon of the fundamental Diagram, from E unto B, according to the
situation of the plane, and there draw the vertical BZD, which shall represent
the plane proposed.

Then taking the compasses into my hand,

1 I may extend them from the sine of the latitude 51 gr. 30 m. unto the sine
of 90 gr. the same extent will reach in the line of tangents from 24 gr. 20 m.
the declination given, to about 30 gr. and such is ZPR the angle of inclination
between the meridia^ of the place and the meridian of the plane; and therefore
the meridian of the plane will here fall upon the circle of the second hour
from the meridian of the place, (as it may also appear by opening the
compasses to the nearest extent, between the pole and the plane) and there I
place the letter R to make this rectangle triangle PRZ.

2 I extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of 38 gr. 30 m.
the complement of the latitude, and the same extent will reach from the sine of
65 gr. 40 m. the complement of the declination, unto the sine of 34 gr. 33 m.

Or I may extend them from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of 60 gr. the
complement of the inclination of the meridians, and the same extent will reach
from the tangent of 38 gr. 30 m. the complement of the latitude, unto the
tangent of 34 gr. 33 m. and such is the arc PR, the height of the pole above
the plane.

3 I may extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of 24 gr.
20 m. the declination given, and the same extent will reach from the tangent of
38 gr. 30 m. the complement of the latitude, unto the tangent of 38 gr. 8 m.
and such is the arc ZR, the distance of the substylar from the meridian.

4 That I may find the distance of each houre-line from the substylar, I
consider the angle of inclination of the meridians RPZ, and there see how that
PZ the meridian of the place, which is the hour of 12, being 30 gr. distance
from PR the meridian of the plane, and that one face of the plane being open to
the Southwest, and the other to the Northeast, this meridian of the plane
falls to be the same with the hour of 2, (otherwise with the hour of 10:)
therefore allowing 15 gr. for an hour, the hour of 1, RPO will be 15 gr. and
RFX the hour of 11, 45 gr. distant from PR the proper meridian of the plane:
and so I gather the inclination of the rest of the houre-circles toward this
meridian, according to their angles at the pole, as in this Table.

Then taking my compasses in my hand, I extend them from the sine of 90 gr.
unto the sine of 34 gr. 33 m. the height of the pole above the plane, and find
them to reach in the line of tangents from 15 gr. the inclination of the hour
of 1, to 8 gr. 38 m. for the arc of 1, from the substylar, and from 30 gr.
unto 18 gr. 8 m. for the hour of 12, agreeable to the third Prop. and from 45
gr. unto 29 gr. 33 m. for the hour of 11, and so the rest, which I also set
down in a Table.

Hor. Ang. Po Ar. Pla. Gr. M. Gr. M. 8 90 0 90 0 9 75 0 64 42 10 60 0 44 30 11
45 0 29 33 12 30 0 18 8 1 15 0 8 38 2 Merid substyl 3 15 0 8 38 4 30 0 18 8 5
45 0 29 33 6 60 0 44 30 7 75 0 64 42 8 90 0 90 0

These arks being thus found, will serve for the drawing of the houre-lines,
both on the Southwest face, and the Northwest face of the plane.

For coming to the plane,

1 By the help of a thread and plummet I draw a vertical line, serving both
for the meridian of the place and the hour of 12.

2 In this meridian line I make choice of a center at C, in the upper part of
the line, if it be the South face, as here we suppose it, that the style may
have room to point downward; but in the lower part of the line, if it be the
North face of the plane; for there the style must point upward: and upon this
center I describe an occult circle, representing the declining vertical
belonging to the plane.

3 I find a chord of 18 gr. 8 m. the distance of the substylar from the
meridian of the place, and inscribe it into this circle, geometric illustration
from the meridian unto A toward the right hand, because in this example the
meridian of the plane falls among the hours after noone, (for otherwise it
must have been inscribed toward the left hand) and there I draw the line C A
serving for the substylar.

4 According to the Table of the arkes of the plane from the substylar, I find
a chord of 8 gr. 38 m. and inscribe it into this circle, from the substylar
toward the meridian, for the hour of 1. In like manner a chord of 29 gr. 23 m.
for the hour of 11, and a chord of 44 gr. 30 m. for the hour of 10, and so
for the rest of the hours, their halues and quarters.

5 I draw right lines through the center and the terms of these chords, and
these lines so drawn are the houre-lines required.

Lastly, I set up the style over the substylar, so as it may cut the plane in
the center, and there make an angle with the substylar of 34 gr. 33 m.
according to the height of the pole above the plane; so it shall represent the
axis of the world, and be truly placed for casting of the shadow upon the
houre-lines in this declining plane.

A second example.

After the like manner if in our latitude an upright plane shall decline 85 gr.
from the prime vertical, the one face of it being open to the Northwest, and
the other to the Southeast, we may in some sort represent it by the vertical
QZH, and then working as before.

1 The angle ZPT, the inclination of the two meridians will be found to be 86
gr. 5 m. so that PT the meridian of this plane, will here fall between the
houre-circles of 6 and 7 from the meridian.

2 The arc PT the height of the pole above the plane will be only 3 gr. 6 m.

3 The arc ZT the distance of the substylar from the meridian 38 gr. 23 m.

4 The Table of the angles at the pole will be also gathered, by comparing the
meridian of the plane with the rest of the houre-circles. For the angle TPZ
between PT the meridian of the plane, PZ the meridian of the place, and the
hour of 12, being 86 gr. 5 m. allowing 15 gr. for an hour, the hour of 11
will be 78 gr. 35 m. and the hour of 11 71 gr. 5 m. distant from the meridian
of the plane; and so the rest of the hours, as in the second column of this
Table.

Hor. Ang. Po Ar. Pla. C F C G Gr. M. Gr. M. In. Par. In. Par. 12 86 5 38 23 91
08 79 21 78 35 15 3 30 92 26 89 11 71 5 9 6 18 42 16 02 63 35 6 13 12 52 10 89
10 56 5 4 36 9 25 8 05 9 41 5 2 42 5 43 4 72 8 26 5 1 31 3 05 2 65 7 11 5 0 36
1 20 1 05 Merid. Substyl 0 0 0 0 6 3 55 0 13 0 44 0 38 5 18 55 1 4 2 15 1 86 4
33 55 2 5 4 18 3 64 3 48 55 3 33 7 13 6 20 2 63 55 6 20 12 77 11 10 71 25 9 10
18 56 16 14 1 78 55 15 28 31 82 27 67 86 25 40 55 99 67 86 68

Then having the height of the pole above the plane, and these angles at the
pole; the arkes of the plane, between the substylar and the houre-circles,
will be found as in the third column.

These arks being found, will serve for the drawing of the houre-lines on
either face of this plane.

1 By the help of a thread and plummet I draw ZC a vertical plane, serving
both for the meridian of the place and the hour of 12.

2 In this meridian line I make choice of a center in the upper part of the
line, if it had been the Southern face of the plane, but here in C the lower
part of the line, because we supposed it to be the Northwest face of the plane,
and the style must point upward; and upon this center I describe an occult
circle representing the declining vertical belonging to this plane.

3 I find a chord of 38 gr. 23 m. the distance of the substylar geometric
illustration from the meridian of the place, and inscribe it into this circle,
from Z in the meridian, unto T toward the left hand, acording as the proper
meridian PT falls in the fundamental Diagram; and here I draw the line CT
serving for the substylar.

4 The substylar being drawn, I may inscribe the chords of the arks of the
plane from the substylar, and draw the houre-lines, and set up the style as in
the former plane.

Or the arks of the plane from the substylar being found as before, we may draw
the houre-lines upon the plane otherwise then by chords. For having drawn the
houre-lines as in the last figure, upon paper or paist-boord, we shall find the
most part of them, in this and such like planes that have greater declination,
to fall so close together, that they can hardly be discerned: wherefore to draw
them at large to the best advantage of the plane, I leave out the center, and
draw them by tangents, as in the polar plane.

1 I consider the length and breadth of the plane whereon I am to draw the
houre-lines, which I suppose to be a square, whose side is 36 inches, and find
that the little square ABDE will contain both the substylar and all those
houre-lines which are required in the great square AZCQ.

2 I draw two parallel lines FN, GM, crossing the substylar at right angles in
the points F and G, so as they may best cross all the houre-lines, and yet the
one be distant from the other as far as the plane will give me leave; and I
find by the sight of the figure that if AB the side of the lesser square shall
be 36 inches, the line CF will be about 115 inches, and the line CG about 100
inches, and therefore FG 15 inches. Again, that the point F will fall about 6
inches below the upper horizontall side AB, and about 12 inches from the next
vertical side BD; for I need not here stand upon parts.

3 Because these two parallel lines are tangent lines in respect of circles
drawn upon the semidiameters CF, CG, and such tangents as belong to the arkes
of the plane, between the substylar and the houre-lines, the proportion will
hold, As the tangent of 45 gr.

to the tangent of the arc of the plane:

So the length of the semidiameter

to the length of the tangent line.



As for example, the arc of the plane between the substylar and the hour of
1, is 15 gr. 28 m. in the former Table, the semidiameter CF 115 inches, and the
semidiameter CG 100 inches: wherefore I extend the compasses from the tangent
of 45 gr. unto the tangent of 15 gr. 28 m. the same extent will reach from 115
in the line of numbers unto 31, 82, which shows the length of the tangent line
between F in the substylar and the houre-line of 1, to be 31 inches, 82 cent.
or parts of 100. Again, the same extent will reach from 100 unto 27, 67; and
such is the length of the lesser tangent from G to the hour of 1.

The like reason holds for the length of the other tangents from the substylar
to the rest of the hours, as in the Table; as also for the height of the style
above these tangent lines; and so the angle of the style above the plane being
3 gr. 6 m. the height FK will be found to be 6 inches 23 cent. and the height
GL 5 inches 42 cent.

Where the Reader may observe, that if the extent from the tangent of 45 gr. to
the tangent of 3 gr. 6 m. or to 115 in the line of numbers, be too large for
his compasses, he may use the tangent of 5 gr. 43 m. in stead of the tangent of
45 gr. as I noted before Page 100.

4 Having found these lengths and heights, and set them down in a Table, I
come to the plane here resembled by the lesser square ABDE, where I begin with
an occult vertical FH, about 12 inches from the side BD, and upon the center
F, about 6 inches below the side AB describe an occult arc of a circle.

5 Into this arc I first inscribe a chord of 38 gr. 23 m. the distance of the
substylar from the meridian, to make the angle HFG equal to the ZCT; so the
line FG shall be the substylar: and then another chord of 51 gr. 37 m. the
complement of this distance, to make up the right angle GFN; so the line FN
shall be the greater of the two tangent lines before mentioned.

6 I set off 15 inches from F unto G, toward the center, and through G draw the
lesser tangent line GM parallel to the former.

7 These two occult tangent lines being thus drawn, I look unto the former
Table for the hour of 1, and there find the arc of the plane between the
substylar and the hour of 1, to be 15 gr. 28 m. and the length belonging to it
in the greater tangent line to be 31 inches 82 cent. in the lesser tangent line
27 inches 67 cent: wherefore I take out 31 inches 82 parts, and prick them
down in the greater tangent from F to N, and then 27 inches 67 parts, and
prick them down in the lesser tangent from G to M, and draw the MN for the
hour of 1, which if it were produced would cross the substylar FG in the
center C, and there make the angle FCN 15 gr. 28 m. The like reason holds for
the drawing of all the rest of the houre-lines.

Lastly I set up the style right over the substylar, so as the height FK may be
6 inches 23 cent. and the height GL 5 inches 42 cent. then shall KL represent
the axis of the world, and if it were produced would cross the substylar FG in
the center C, and there make the angle FCK to be 3 gr. 6 m. and so be truly
placed for casting of the shadow upon the houre-lines in this declining plane.

CHAP. VIII. To draw the houre-lines in a meridian inclining plane.
ALl those planes wherein the horizontall line is the same with the meridian
line, are therefore called meridian planes: if they be right to the horizon,
they are called by the general name of meridian planes without farther
addition, and are described before: if they lean to the horizon, they are then
called meridian incliners.

These may incline either to the East part of the horizon, or to the West, and
each of them has two faces, the upper toward the zenith, the lower toward the
Nadir, wherein knowing the latitude of the place, and the inclination of the
plane to the horizon, we are to consider.

1 The inclination of the meridian of the plane to the meridian of the place. 2
The height of the pole above the plane. 3 The distance of the substylar from
the meridian. 4 The distance of each houre-line from the substylar.
And all these four are represented in the fundamental Diagram, as in this
example.

In our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. a meridian plane inclines Eastward 50 gr;
these 50 gr. I number in the vertical circle from E unto G, according to the
inclination of the plane, and there draw the arc SGN representing the plane
proposed. Then I let down a perpendicular arc PV from the pole to the plane,
serving for the meridian of the plane, so have I a rectangle triangle PVN,
wherein the base PN is the height of the pole above the North part of the
horizon, and the angle PNV the complement of the inclination to the horizon;
and these being known,

1 I may find the angle NPV of inclination of the two meridians. For As the
cosine of the latitude

is to the sine of 90 gr.

So the tangent of inclination to the horizon,

to the tangent of inclination of meridians.



Extend the compasses from the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. the complement of the
latitude, unto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will reach from the tangent
of 50 gr. 0 m. the inclination of the plane to the horizon, unto the tangent of
62 gr. 25 m. and such is the inclination of the meridian of the plane to the
meridian of the place; which being resolved into time, does give about 4 hours
and 10 m. from the meridian, for the place of the substylar among the
houre-lines.

2 The height of the pole above the plane is here represented by the quantity
of the arc of the proper meridian PV, between the pole and the plane, and may
be known by that which we have given in the former triangle PVN. For As the
sine of 90 gr.

to the sine of the latitude:

So the cosine of the inclination to the horizon,

to the sine of the height of the pole above the plane.



Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto 51 gr. 30 m. the sine of the
latitude, the same extent will reach from the sine of 40 gr. the complement of
the inclination of the plane to the horizon, unto the sine of 30 gr. 12 m.

Or as the sine of 90 gr.

to the cosine of inclination of meridians:

So the tangent of the latitude

to the tangent of the height of the pole above the plane.

Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the tangent of 51 gr. 30 m.
the latitude of the place, the same extent will reach from the sine of 27 gr.
35 m. the complement of the inclination of the two meridians, unto the tangent
of 30 gr. 12 m. And such is PV the height of the pole above the plane, and such
must be the height of the style above the substylar.

3 The distance of the substylar from the meridian is here represented by NV
the arc of the plane between the two meridians, and may be found by that
which we have given at the first in the former triangle PVN. For As the sine of
90 gr.

to the sine of the inclination to the horizon:

So the tangent of the latitude

to the tangent of the substylar from the meridian.



Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the tangent of 51 gr. 30 m.
the latitude of the place, the same extent will reach from the sine of 50 gr.
the inclination of the plane to the horizon, unto 43 gr. 55 m. And such is the
arc NV the distance of the substylar from the meridian.

4 The distances of the houre-lines from the substylar, are here also
represented by those arkes of the plane, which are here intercepted between
the proper meridian and the houre-circles, and may be found by that which we
have given in the triangles made by the plane, with his proper meridian and the
houre-circles. For the angle at V, between the plane and the proper meridian,
is well known to be a right angle, and the side PV is the height of the pole
above the plane, and the angles at the pole between the proper meridian and
the houre-circles are easily gathered into a Table. The angle VPN between UP
the proper meridian of the plane, and PN the general meridian of the place
being 62 gr. 25 m. the angle between the proper meridian and the circle of the
hour of 11, will be 77 gr. 25 m. and the angle belonging to the hour of 1, 47
gr. 25 m, and so the rest of the angles at the pole. Then As the sine of 90 gr.

to the sine of the pole above ye plane:

So the tangent of the angle at the pole,

to the tangent of the houre-line

from the substylar.



Hor. Ang. Po. Arc. Pla. Gr. M. Gr. M. 11 77 25 66 4 12 62 25 43 55 1 47 25 28
41 2 32 25 17 43 3 17 25 8 58 4 2 25 1 13 Merid Substyl 5 12 35 6 26 6 27 35 14
44 7 42 35 24 48 8 57 35 38 23 9 72 35 58 3 10 87 35 85 12

Wherefore I extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of 30
gr. 12 m. the height of the pole above the plane, and I find the same extent
to reach in the line of tangents from 77 gr 25 m. unto 66 gr. 4 m. for the
distance belonging to the hour of 11; and from the tangent of 62 gr. 25 m. to
43 gr. 55 m. for the hour of 12. as when I found the distance of the substylar
from the meridian. And so for the rest of the arks of plane between the
substylar and the houre-circles, as in the Table.

These arks being thus found, will serve to draw the houre-lines on either side
of this plane: but supposing it to be the upper side,

1 I draw the horizontall line CN, serving for the meridian and hour of 12.

2 In this line I make choice of a center at C, and thence describe an occult
arc of a circle representing the plane proposed.

3 I find a chord of 43 gr. 55 m. the distance of the substylar from the
meridian, and inscribe it into this circle from N unto A, according as I find
the proper meridian PV to fall in the fundamental diagram, and there I draw the
line CA serving for the substylar.

geometric illustration

4 The substylar being drawn, I may inscribe the chords of the arkes of the
plane from the substylar, and draw the houre-lines, and set up the style, as in
the former planes.

CHAP. IX. To draw the houre-lines in a polar declining Plane.
THose planes wherein a line may be drawn parallel to the axis of the world,
are called polar planes, because that line points unto the poles, and these
planes are always parallel to some one of the houre-circles. If they be
parallel to the hour of 6, they are called direct polar planes; if to the
hour of 12, they are called meridian planes; and both these are described
before: if to any other of the houre-circles, they are then called by the name
of polar declining planes, because of their inclining to the pole, and
declining from the vertical.

These kind of planes may be known in this sort: First consider the
inclination of the plane to the horizon, which in these parts of the world must
always be Northward, and more then the latitude of the place. Then find the
declination from the vertical. These two being known, if the proportion hold,
As the sine of 90 gr.

to the cosine of the declination:

So the tangent of the inclination

to the tangent of the latitude;

it is then a polar declining plane, otherwise not.

For example, in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. a plane is proposed declining
from the vertical 65 gr. 40 m. and inclining Northward 71 gr. 51 m. the upper
face being open to the Southeast, and the lower to the Northwest. If I number
those 65 gr. 40 m. in the horizon of the fundamental diagram from E unto Q, and
draw the line HCQ, it shall represent the horizontall line of the plane; then
crossing it at right angles with the plane BZD drawn through the zenith, I
number 71 gr. 51 m. for the inclination from D unto R, and there draw the
circle HRQ, this circle so drawn shall represent the plane proposed; and
because it also passes through the pole, it is therefore a polar plane. But
for farther trial I extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine
of 24 gr. 20 m. the complement of the declination, and I find the same extent
to reach from the tangent of 71 gr. 51 m. the inclination proposed, unto the
tangent of 51 gr. 30 m. which is the true latitude of the place, and therefore
it is a polar plane.

Here then the style will be parallel to the plane, and the houre-lines
parallel one to the other, as in the meridian and direct polar planes. But
that we may know how to draw the houre-lines, and where to place the style, we
are to consider

1 The arc of the plane between the horizon and the houre-lines.
In a meridian plane the arc between the horizon and the hourelines, is
always equal to the latitude of the place; in a direct polar it is an arc of
90 gr; in these declining polars it is greater then the latitude, and yet less
then 90 gr. and may be known in this manner.

As the sine of 90 gr.

to the cosine of the latitude:

So the sine of the declination

to the cosine of the arc between the horizon and the houre-lines.

Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. the
complement of the latitude, the same extent will reach from the sine of 65 gr.
40 m. the declination proposed, unto the sine of 34 gr. 34 m. whose complement
55 gr. 26 m. the arc of the plane between the horizon and the substylar, to
which all the houre-lines must be parallel.

2 The inclination of the meridian of the plane to the meridian of the place.
The substylar in a direct polar plane is always the same with the hour of
12: in a meridian plane it is the same with the houre-line of 6: in these
declining polars it must be placed between 12 and 6, according to the
inclination of the meridian of the plane to the meridian of the place, which is
thus known.

As the sine of 90 gr.

to the sine of the latitude:

So the tangent of the declination of the plane,

to the tangent of the inclination of meridians.

Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of 51 gr. 30 m. the
latitude of the place, the same extent will reach from the tangent of 65 gr. 40
m. the declination proposed, unto the tangent of 60 gr. and such is the angle
of inclination between the meridian of the place and the proper meridian of
the plane, which resolved into time does make four hours; and so the
substylar must here be placed upon the hour of 8 in the morning.

This angle being known, the rest of the angles at the pole are easily
gathered. For if the hour of 12 be 60 gr. distant from the meridian of the
plane, the hour of 1 will be 75 gr. and the hour of 11, will be 45 gr.
distant, and the rest of the hours, as in the Table following. Then coming to
the plane,

1 I draw an occult horizontall line HQ, wherein I make choice of a center H,
and describe an occult circle for the horizon of the plane.

2 I find a chord of 55 gr. 26 m. and inscribe it into this circle, from Q unto
B, according to the situation of the plane; so the line HB shall be the
meridian of the plane: and therefore the substylar and the line AC crossing it
at right angles, shall be the equator.

3 I consider the length of the plane, and how many hours I am to draw upon
it, that so I may proportion the height of the style; and I find by the
fundamental diagram and the former table, that it will contain all the hours
from Sun rising until 1 afternoon: and therefore the meridian of the plane
falling on the hour of 8 in the morning, there will be four hours on the one
side, and five on the other side of the substylar. But in all polar planes the
height of the style above the substylar must be equal to the distance of the
third hour from the substylar, or about 4/7 of the fourth hour, or little
more then of the fifth hour, and thereupon I allow the height of this style to
be equal to CB, which you may suppose to be ten inches.

geometric illustration

4 Because the equator AC is a tangent line in respect of the Radius BC, and
the parts thereof are such as belong to the angles between the meridian of the
plane and the hourelines, which angles are set down in the table following, I
may find the length of each several tangent in this manner.

As the tangent of 45 gr.

is to the tangent of the hour:

So the parts of the Radius,

to the parts of the tangent line.

The angle ABC between the meridian of the plane and the hour of 12, the
meridian of the place is 60 gr. in the former table, and the Radius BC is
supposed to be ten inches; whereupon I extend the compasses from the tangent of
45 gr. unto the tangent of 60 gr. the same extent will reach from 10 in the
line of numbers, unto 17. 32, which shows the length of the tangent AC
between the substylar and the hour of 12, to be 17. 32 cent. The like reason
holds for the rest of the hours.

Hor. An. Po. Tangent Gr. M. In. Par. 4 60 0 17 32 5 45 0 10 00 6 30 0 5 77 7
15 0 2 68 8 Merid Substyl 3 45 65 7 30 1 32 11 15 1 99 9 15 0 2 68 18 45 3 39
22 30 4 14 26 15 4 93 10 30 0 5 77 33 45 6 68 37 30 7 67 41 15 8 77 11 45 0 10
00 48 45 11 40 52 30 13 03 56 15 14 97 12 60 0 17 32 63 45 20 28 67 30 24 14 71
15 29 46 1 75 0 37 32 78 45 50 27 82 30 75 96 86 15 152 57 2 90 0 Infinite

5 These lengths being thus found and set down in the table, I take out 17
inches 32 cent. and prick them in the equator from C unto A for the hour of
12, and 37 inches 32 cent. and prick them down for the hour of 1. And so the
rest of the houre-points.

6 This done, if I draw right lines through each of these points, crossing the
equator at right angles, they shall be the houre-lines required: and if I set
the style over the substylar, so as the edge of it may be parallel to the
plane, and the height of it be ten inches equal to the former Radius BC, it
shall represent the axis of the world, and be truly placed for casting of the
shadow upon the houre-lines in this declining polar plane.

CHAP. X. To draw the houre-lines in a declining inclining plane.
IF a plane shall decline from the prime vertical, and incline to the horizon,
and yet not lie even with the poles of the world, it is then called a declining
inclining plane.

Of these there are several sorts; for the inclination being Northward, the
plane may fall between the horizon and the pole, as the circle BMD in the
fundamental Diagram; or between the zenith and the pole, as BFD: or the
inclination may be Southward, and so be represented by BKD, it may also fall
either below the intersection of the meridian and the equator, or above it; and
each of these have two faces, the upper toward the zenith, and the lower toward
the nadir; wherein having the latitude of the place with the declination and
inclination of the plane, we are farther to consider, 1 The arc of the
meridian between the pole and the plane. 2 The inclination of the plane to the
meridian. 3 The arc of the plane between the horizon and the meridian. 4 The
angle of inclination between both meridians. 5 The height of the pole above
the plane. 6 The distance of the substylar from the meridian. 7 The distances
of each houre-line from the substylar.


And all these seven may be represented in the fundamental diagram, as in this
example.

In our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. a plane is proposed, declining from the
vertical 24 gr. 20 m. and inclini^g Northward 36 gr. the upper face lying open
to the Southwest, the lower to the Northeast. If I number these 24 gr. 20 m. in
the horizon from E to B, and there draw the line BCD, it shall represent the
horizontall line of the plane: then crossing it at right angles with the plane
HZQ drawn through the zenith, I number 36 gr. for the inclination from Q unto
M, and there draw the circle BMD, crossing the meridian in the point a; this
circle so drawn shall represent the plane proposed; and because it does not
pass through the pole, is therefore no polar, but an ordinary declining
inclining plane.

1 The arc of the meridian of the place between the pole and the plane, is
here represented by Pa, and may be found by resolving the triangle DN a,
wherein the angle at N is known to be a right angle, the angle at D is the
angle of inclination, the side D N the complement of the declination, which
being known, As the sine of 90 gr.

to the cosine of declination:

So the tangent of inclination to the horizon,

to the tangent of the meridian between the horizon and the plane.



Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of 65 gr. 40 m. the
complement of the declination, the same extent will reach from the tangent of
36 gr. the inclination proposed, unto the tangent of 33 gr. 30 m. and such is
the ark of the meridian Na between the horizon and the plane. This arc Na
being compared with the arc NP, which is the elevation of the pole above the
horizon, and is here supposed to be 51 gr. 30 m. the difference N a comes to
18 gr. and such is the arc of the meridian required between the pole and the
plane.

2 The inclination of the plane to the meridian is here represented by the
angle N aD, and may be found by that which we have given in the former triangle
DN a. For As the sine of 90 gr.

to the sine of the declination from the vertical:

So the sine of inclination to the horizon,

to the cosine of the inclination to the meridian.



Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of 24 gr. 20 m. the
declination of the plane, the same extent will reach from the sine of 36 gr.
the inclination given, unto the cosine of 76 gr. And such is N aD the angle of
inclination between the plane D a, and N a the meridian of the place. Or As
the sine of the arc of the meridian between the horizon and the plane,

is to the sine of 90 gr.

So the cotangent of the declination

to the tangent of the inclination to the meridian.



Extend the compasses from the sine of 33 gr. 30 m. the ark of the meridian
between the horizon and the plane, unto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent
will reach from the tangent of 65 gr. 40 m. the complement of the declination
unto the tangent of 76 gr. And such is the inclination of the plane to the
meridian, the same as before.

3 The arc of the plane between the horizon and the meridian, is here
represented by D a, and may also be found by that which we have given in the
former triangle DN a.

As the sine of 90 gr.

to the cosine of inclination to the horizon:

So the cotangent of the declination

to the tangent of the plane required.

Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of 54 gr. the
complement of the inclination of the plane to the horizon, the same extent will
reach from the tangent of 65 gr. 40 m. the complement of the declination, unto
the tangent of 69 gr. 54 m. And such is D a the arc of the plane, between the
horizon and the meridian of the place.

4 The inclination of meridians is here represented by the angle aPb. For if I
let down a perpendicular Pb from the pole unto the plane, this perpendicular
shall be the meridian of the plane; and we shall have another triangle abP,
wherein the angle at b is a right angle, because of the perpendicular, the
angle at a is the inclination of the plane to the meridian of the place, and
the side P a is the arc of the meridian between the pole and the plane, which
being known, As the cosine of the arc of the meridian between the pole and
the plane

is to the sine of 90 gr.

So the cotangent of the inclination to the meridian, to the tangent of
inclination of the meridian of the plane to the meridian of the place.



Extend the compasses from the sine of 72 gr. the complement of the arc Pa,
between the pole and the plane, unto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will
reach from the tangent of 14 gr. the complement of the inclination of the plane
to the meridian, unto the tangent of 14 gr. 41 m. And such is the angle aPb of
inclination between the meridian of the place and the proper meridian of the
plane, which resolved into time, does make about 59 minutes, and so the
substylar must here be placed near the hour of 1 after noone.

5 The height of the pole above the plane is here represented by Pb, the arc
of the proper meridian between the pole and the plane, and may be found by that
which we have given in the triangle abP. For As the sine of 90 gr.

to the sine of the meridian of the place between the pole and the plane:

So the sine of the inclination to the meridian,

to the sine of the height of the pole above the plane.



Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of 18 gr. the arc
Pa of the meridian of the place from the pole to the plane, the same extent will
reach from the sine of baP the inclination of the plane to the meridian of the
place, unto the sine of 17 gr. 26 m. Or As the sine of 90 gr.

to the cosine of inclination of meridians:

So the tangent of the meridian of the place between the pole and the plane,

to the tangent of the height of the pole above the plane,



Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of 75 gr. 19 m. the
complement of aPb the inclination of the two meridians, the same extent will
reach from the tangent of 18 gr. the arc Pa of the general meridian between
the pole and the plane, unto the tangent of 17 gr. 26 m. And such is Pb the
height of the pole above the plane; and such must be the height of the style
above the substylar.

6 This distance of the substylar from the meridian of the place, is here
represented by ab the arc of the plane between the two meridians, and may be
found by that which we had given at the first in the former triangle abP. For
As the sine of 90 gr.

to the sine of the inclination to the meridian:

So the tangent of the meridian of the place between the pole and the plane,

unto the tangent of the substylar from the meridian of the place.



Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of 14 gr. the
complement of baP, the inclination of the plane to the meridian, the same
extent will reach from the tangent of 18 gr. the arc of the general meridian
between the pole and the plane, unto the tangent of 4 gr. 30 m. And such is
the arc of the plane between the two meridians; and such must be the distance
from the hour of 12 to the substylar.

Hor. Ang. Po. Arc. Pla. Gr. M. Gr. M. 7 89 41 88 57 8 74 41 47 35 9 59 41 27 9
10 44 41 16 31 11 29 41 9 41 12 14 41 4 30 M^rid. Substyl 1 0 19 0 6 2 15 19 4
42 3 30 19 9 56 4 45 19 16 52 5 60 19 27 45 6 75 19 48 51

7 The distances of the houre-lines from the substylar, are here also
represented by those arks of the plane, which are intercepted between the
proper meridian and the houre-circles. For in these triangles the angle at b
between the plane and the proper meridian is a right angle, the side P b is
the height of the pole above the plane, and then the angles at the pole between
the proper meridian and the houre-circles being gathered into a table.

As the sine of 90 gr.

to the sine of the pole above the plane:

So the tangent of the angle at the pole,

to the tangent of the houre-line from the substylar.

Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of 17 gr. 26 m. the
height of the pole above the plane, the geometric illustration same extent will
reach from the tangent of 14 gr. 41 m. the angle at the pole belonging to the
hour of 12, unto the tangent of 4 gr. 30 m. for the arc of the plane between
the substylar and the hour of 12; and from the tangent of 29 gr. 41 m. unto
the tangent of 9 gr. 41 m. for the hour of 11, and so for the rest of the arks
of the plane between the substylar and the houre-lines, as in the former table.

These arkes being thus found, will serve for the drawing of the houre-lines on
either side of the plane: but supposing it to be the upper side, I consider how
the lines do fall in the fundamental diagram, and accordingly

1 I draw an occult horizontall line DD, wherein I make choice of the center C,
and thence draw an occult circle for the horizon of the plane.

2 I find a chord of 69 gr. 54 m. the arc of the plane between the horizon
and the meridian, and inscribe it into this circle from D unto a, and there
draw the line Ca for the hour of 12.

3 I find a chord of 4 gr. 30 m. the arc of the plane between the two
meridians, and inscribe it into this circle from a unto b, and there draw the
line Cb for the substylar.

4 The substylar being drawn, I may inscribe the chords of the arkes of the
plane from the substylar, and draw the houre-lines, and set up the style as in
the former planes.

A second example of a Plane falling between the pole and the zenith.
In like manner if in our latitude a plane be proposed declining from the
vertical 24 gr. 20 m. as before, but inclining to the horizon 75 gr. 40 m.
Northward, the upper face being open to the Southwest, the lower to the
Northeast, this plane shall be here represented by the circle BFD, crossing the
meridian in the point d, between the pole and the zenith, and the proper
meridian of this plane, by the pe^^endicular arc P e.

Then in this triangle DN d kn^wing the side DN the complement of the
declination, with the angle of inclinanation to the horizon at D, and the right
angle at N, these former Canons will give Nd the arc of the meridian between
the horizon and the plane to be 74 gr. 20 m; and therefore Pd the arc of the
meridian between the pole and the plane will be 22 gr. 50 m. the angle DdN of
the inclination of the plane to the meridian, will be found to be 66 gr. 29 m.
and Dd the arc of the plane between the horizon and the meridian 83 gr. 36 m.

Again, in the triangle Ped knowing the side Pd the arc of the meridian
between the pole and the plane, with the angle of inclination to the meridian
at d, and the right at e, the angle dPe of the inclination of the two meridians
will be found to be 25 gr. 17 m. and Pe the height of the pole above the plane
to be 20 gr. 50 m. and de the distance of the substylar from the meridian about
9 gr. 32 m.

Declinatio^ 24 20 Inclination 75 40 Diff. meri. 83 36 did. substy 9 32 Alti.
Still. 20 50 Hor. Ang. Po. Arc. Pla. Gr. M. Gr. M. 8 85 17 76 56 9 70 17 44 47
10 55 17 27 11 11 40 17 16 43 12 25 17 9 32 1 10 17 3 41 Merid Substyl 2 4 43 1
40 3 19 43 7 16 4 34 43 13 50 5 49 43 22 46 6 64 43 37 0 7 79 43 62 58

Lastly, having found the height of the pole above the plane, and gathered the
angles at the pole, the arks of the plane from the substylar to the houre-lines
will be as in this table.

This done, if we consider how the lines do fall in the fundamental diagram,
we may there see how the North pole is elevated above the lower face, and the
South pole above the upper face of the plane, and accordingly make choice of a
center, draw the horizontall, ye meridian, the substylar, and the houre-lines,
and set up the style as in the other planes.

A third example of a Plane inclining to the Southward.
If in our latitude a plane were proposed declining from the vertical 24 gr.
20 m. as before, but inclining to the horizon 14 gr. 20 m. Southward, the upper
face being open to the Northeast, the lower to the South-west, this plane shall
be here represented by the circle BKD crossing the meridian in the point f
between the equator and the horizon, and the proper meridian of this plane by
the perpendicular arc Pg let down from the pole to the plane, near the hour
of 11, at the North part of the horizon, as may partly appear by the nearest
extent of the compasses.

Then in the triangle BSf, knowing the side BS the co^plement of the
declination, with the angle of inclination to the horizon at B, and the right
angle at S, we may find Sf the ark of the meridian between the horizon and the
plane to be 13 gr. 6 m. And therefore Pf the arc of the meridian between the
pole and the plane to the Southward 115 gr. 24 m. but 64 gr. 36 m. to the
Northward, the angle B fS or D fN of the inclination of the plane to the
meridian, will be found 84 gr. 9 m; and B f or D f the arc of the plane
between the horizon and the meridian 66 gr. 20 m.

Declinatio^ 24 20 Inclination 14 20 diff. merid 13 27 did. substy 12 8 Alt.
Still. 64 0 Hor. Ang. Po Arc. Pla. Gr. M. Gr. M. 6 76 33 75 6 7 61 33 58 56 8 46
33 43 30 9 31 33 28 55 10 16 33 14 58 11 1 33 1 25 Merid Substyl 12 13 27 12 8
1 28 27 25 57 2 43 27 40 23 3 58 27 55 38 4 73 27 71 41 5 88 27 88 15

Again, in the triangle Pgf knowing the side Pf the arc of the meridian
between the pole and the plane, with the angle of inclination to the meridian
at f, and the right angle at g, the angle fPg of the inclination of the two
meridians will be found to be 13 gr. 27 m. and Pg the height of the pole above
the plane, about 64 gr. and fg the distance of the substylar from the meridian
12 gr. 8 m.

Having found the height of the pole above the plane, and gathered the angles
at the pole, the arkes of the plane from the substylar to the houre-lines will
be found as in this table.

This done, if we consider how the lines do fall in the fundamental diagram,
we may there see how the North pole is elevated above the upper face, and the
South pole above the lower face of this plane, and accordingly make choice of
the center, draw the horizontall, the meridian, the substylar, and the
houre-lines, and set up the style as in the former planes.

CHAP. XI. To describe the Tropiques and other circles of declination in an
equinoctial Plane.
SVch circles as are parallel to the equinoctial, and yet fall within the
tropiques, may be described on any plane by help of these lines of proportion,
but after a different manner, according as the style shall be either
perpendicular, or parallel to the plane, or cut the plane with oblique angles.

In an equinoctial plane where the style is perpendicular to the plane, the
tropiques and other circles of declination will be perfect circles: wherefore
consider the length of the style in inches and parts, and the declination of
the circle which you intend to describe in degrees and minutes, the proportion
will hold, As the tangent of 45 gr.

to the length of the style:

So the cotangent of the parallel,

to the semidiameter of his circle.



Suppose the length of the style above the plane to be 10 inches, and that it
were required to find the semidiameter of the tropique, whose declination is
known to be 23 gr. 30 m: extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. unto
the tangent of 66 gr. 30 m. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers
from 10 unto 23, which shows the semidiameter of the tropique to be 23 inches.
So if the declination be 20 gr. the semidiameter will be 27 inches 47. cent; if
geometric illustration 15 gr. then 37.32; if 10 gr. then 56.71; if 5 gr. then
114.30; and so in the rest.

Or if it were required to proportion the style to the plane, As the tangent of
45 gr.

to the tangent of the declination:

So the semidiameter of the plane,

to the length of the style.



As if the semidiameter of the greatest parallel upon the plane were but six
inches, and that parallel should be the fifth degree of declination: extend the
compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. unto the tangent of 5 gr. the same extent
will reach in the line of numbers from 6.00 unto about 0.53, which shows that
the length of the style must be 53 parts of an inch divided into 100; then the
length of the style being known, the semidiameter of the other circles will be
found as before.

I begin here with the fifth parallel, and thence proceed unto the tropique,
because the shadow of the rest near the equinoctial, would be ouerlong, and
the equinoctial it self cannot be described. The parallels of North
declination are to be set on the North face, and the parallels of South
declination on the South face of the plane. Neither need these parallels to be
drawn in full circles, but only to the horizontall line, which shall be
described in Cap. xviij.

Having by these means set up the style to his true height, and drawn the
circles of declination, if we shall place the plane so as it shall make an
angle with the horizon equal to the co^plement of the latitude, and then turn
it until the top of the style cast the shadow upon the parallel of declination
belonging to ye time, the meridian of the plane will show the meridian of the
place, and the shadow of the style the hour of the day, without the help of a
magneticall needle.

CHAP. XII. To describe the Tropiques and other circles of declination in a
polar plane.
IN all polar planes, whether the be parallel to the meridian or to the circle
of the hour of 6, or otherwise declining, the equinoctial will be a right
line, but the tropiques and other circles of declination will be sections
hyperbolicall, and be thus described.

Consider the length of the style, the declination of the parallel, and the
angle at the pole between the substylar and the houre-line, whereon you mean
to describe the parallel.

If you would find where the parallels do cross the substylar; As the tangent
of 45 gr.

to the tangent of declination:

So is the length of the style,

to the distance of the parallel from the equinoctial.



geometric illustration

As in the example of the polar plane, where the length of the style BC was
found to be 1 inch 61 cent. if you desire to know the distance between the
equinoctial and the tropique upon the substylar line: extend the compasses
from the tangent of 45 gr. unto the tangent of 23 gr. 30 m. the same extent
will reach in the line of numbers from 1.61 unto 0.70; and therefore the
distance required is 70 parts of an inch divided into 100. The like reason
holds for all other parallels of declination crossing the substylar.

But if you would find where the parallels do cross any other of the
houre-lines, first find the distance between the axis of the style and the
houre-line, then the distance between the equinoctial and the parallel, both
these may be represented in this manner.

On the center B and any semidiameter BD describe an occult arc of a circle,
and therein describe a chord of 23 gr. 30 m. from D unto T, with such other
intermediate declinations as you intend to describe on the plane, so the line
BD shall be the equator, and BT the tropique, and the other intermediate lines
the lines of declination.

geometric illustration

That done, consider your plane, which for example may be either the meridian
or ye declining polar plane, wherein having drawn both the equator, and the
houre-lines as before, first take out the height of the style, and prick that
down in this equator from B unto C; then take out all the distances, between
B the top of the style and the several points wherein the houre-lines do
cross the equator, transfer them into this equator BD from the center B, and
at the terms of these distances erect lines perpendicular to the equator,
crossing the lines of declination, and note them with the number of the hour
from whence they were taken: so these perpendiculars shall represent those
houre-lines, and the several distances between the equator and the lines of
declination, shall give the like distances between the equator and the
parallels of declination upon your plane. Upon this ground it follows,

To find the distance between the axis and the houre-lines.
As the cosine of the hour from the substylar,

is to the sine of 90 gr.

So the length of the style,

to the distance between the axis and the houre-line.

geometric illustration

As if in the former example of the meridian plane, where BC the height of the
style is supposed to be 10 inches, it were required to find the distance
between B the top of the style and the point wherein the hour of 11 in the
morning does cross the equator, which is here represented by B 5, because it
is the fifth hour from the substylar, whose angle at the pole is 75 gr. Extend
the compasses from the sine of 15 gr. the complement of the fifth hour from the
substylar, unto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will reach from 10.00 in the
line of numbers unto 38.64; and therefore the distance B 5 between the axis and
the houre-line, is 38 inches and 64 cent. and may be called the secant of the
hour. Then in the rectangle B 5 T, having the side B 5, and the angle of
declination at B.

To find the distance between the equinoctial and the parallel.
As the tangent of 45 gr.

to the tangent of the declination:

So the distance between the axis and the houre-line,

to the distance between the equinoctial and the parallel.

Extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. unto the tangent of 23 gr. 30
m. the declinatio^ of the tropique, so the same extent will reach in the line
of numbers from 38.64, the distance between the axis and the fifth houre-line
unto 16.80; and therefore the distance is 16 inches and 80 cent. The like
reason holds for all the rest, which may be gathered and set down in such a
Table as this which follows.

Wherein I have set down these distances for several declinations, for 11 gr.
30 m. for 16 gr. 55 m. for 20 gr 12 m. for 21 gr 41 m. and for the declination
of the Tropique 23 gr. 30 m. which may be applied to the like declinations in
all meridian and direct polar planes.

As in the former example of the polar plane, where BC the height of the style
is found to be 1 inch 61 cent. if it were required to find the distance
between B the top of the style and the points wherein the houre-lines of 7 in
the morning or 5 after noon, do cross the equator (which distances, I called
the secants of those hours.) either you may extend the compasses from the sine
of 15 gr. the complement of the hour from the substylar unto the sine of 90
gr. so the same Hor. Ang. Po Tangent Secant. 11 30 16 55 20 12 21 41 23 30 Gr.
M. In. Pat. In. Pa. In. Pa. In. Pa. In. Pa In. Pa. In. Pa 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 2 3 3
4 3 68 3 98 4 35 3 45 0 65 10 02 2 04 3 05 3 69 3 99 4 36 7 30 1 32 10 09 2 05
3 07 3 71 4 01 4 39 11 15 1 99 10 20 2 07 3 10 3 75 4 05 4 43 1 15 0 2 68 10 35
2 10 3 15 3 81 4 12 4 50 18 45 3 39 10 56 2 15 3 21 3 89 4 20 4 59 22 30 4 14
10 82 2 20 3 29 3 99 4 30 4 70 26 15 4 93 11 15 2 26 3 39 4 10 4 43 4 85 2 30 0
5 77 11 55 2 34 3 51 4 24 4 60 5 02 33 45 6 68 12 03 2 44 3 66 4 42 4 78 5 23
37 30 7 67 12 60 2 56 3 83 4 64 5 02 5 48 41 15 8 77 13 30 2 70 4 05 4 89 5 29
5 78 3 45 0 10 00 14 14 2 87 4 30 5 20 5 63 6 15 48 45 11 40 15 17 3 08 4 62 5
58 6 03 6 00 52 30 13 03 16 43 3 34 5 00 6 04 6 54 7 14 56 15 14 97 18 00 3 66
5 48 6 62 7 00 7 83 4 60 0 17 32 20 00 4 07 6 08 7 36 7 95 8 70 63 45 20 28 22
61 4 60 6 88 8 32 9 00 9 83 67 30 24 14 26 13 5 31 7 95 9 61 10 39 11 36 71 15
29 46 31 11 6 33 9 47 11 45 12 37 13 53 5 75 0 37 32 38 64 7 86 11 74 14 20 15
36 16 80 78 45 50 27 51 26 10 43 15 60 18 89 20 38 22 28 82 30 75 96 76 61 15
58 23 32 28 19 30 47 33 31 86 15 152 57 152 90 31 10 46 54 56 26 60 81 66 48 6
90 0 Infin. Infin. Infin. Infin. Infin. Infin. Infin. extent will reach in the
line of numbers from 1.61 the length of the style, unto 6.21, according to the
former Canon. Or else you may make use of the former Table, extending the
compasses in the line of numbers from 10.00 the length of the style in the
Table, unto 1.61 the length of the style belonging to your plane, so the same
extent shall reach from from 38.64 the secant in the Table, unto 6.21, and such
is your secant required, the distance between the top of the style and the
point of intersection, wherein the fifth hour line from the substylar does
cross the equator.

Again, the same extent will reach from 16.80 the distance in the Table
belonging to the fifth houre-line between the equator and the parallel of 23
gr. 30 m. declination, unto 2.70 for the like distance upon your plane; and so
for the rest, which may be gathered and set down in a Table.

Hor. An. Po Tang Secant Trop. Gr. M. In. P. In. P. In P. 12 0 0 0 0 1 61 0 70
11 1 15 0 0 43 1 63 0 72 10 2 30 0 0 93 1 85 0 80 9 3 45 0 1 61 2 27 0 99 8 4
60 0 2 79 3 22 1 40 7 5 75 0 6 00 6 21 2 70

That done, and the equator drawn as before, if you would draw the tropiques
in the polar plane, look into the Table, and take 70 cent. out of the line of
inches, and prick them down in the substylar on either side of the equator,
and so 72 cent. on the first hour, and 80 on the second hour, and 2 inches 70
cent. on the fifth hour from the substylar, and the rest of these distances on
their several houre-lines, and then draw a crooked line through all these
points, so as it makes no angles, the line so drawn shall be the Tropique
required. In like manner you may draw any other parallel of declination.

CHAP. XIII. To describe the Tropiques and other circles of declination in such
a Plane as is neither equinoctial nor polar.
IN Planes neither equinoctial nor polar, the equator will be a right line,
the tropiques and other parallels of declination will be conicall sections,
some of them parabolicall, some ellipticall, but the most of them hyperbolicall.

To find the points of intersection of these parallels with the houre-lines,
we are to consider, first the length of the axis of the style in inches and
parts of inches; secondly the height of the style above the plan^; ^hirdly the
angles at the pole between the proper meridian and the houre-circles. These
being known, will help us to find, first the angle between the axis and the
houre-lines on the plane; and then the distance between the center and the
parallels: both these may be represented in this manner.

geometric illustration

Let the triangle ABC be made equal to the style belonging to your plane, AC
the substylar, BC the axis of the style, AB the length of the style
perpendicular to the plane. Then having drawn the line BD perpe^dicular to the
axis on the ce^ter B, and any semidiameter BD describe an occult ark of a
circle, and therein inscribe a chord of 23 gr. 30 m. from D unto T, on either
side of the line, with such other intermediate declinations as you intend to
describe on the plane, so the perpendicular BD shall be the equator, and BT the
tropiques, and the other intermediate lines the parallels of declination.
Wherefore you may take out the distance C from the center to the equator, and
prick it down on the substylar of your plane from the center at C unto, so
the line drawn through perpendicular to your substylar, shall be the equator of
your plane.

That done, take the distance of each houre-line between the center and the
equator of your plane, and prick them down in the equator of this figure,
from the center at C, noting the place, where they cross the equator, with the
number belonging to the hour, and drawing the houre-lines from C through the
lines of declina^ion.

Or having the Sector you may draw an occult line CE perpendicular to the axis
BC, and therein prick down the tangent of the height of the style above the
plane, from C unto E. Then draw the line OF parallel to the axis, crossing the
substylar produced in the point F, this line OF will be the line of sines upon
the Sector, and therein you may prick down the sines of the complement of the
angles at the pole from E toward F, and draw the houre-lines by those points
through the lines of declination, so the angles at C between the axis BC and
those houre-lines, shall be the angles between the axis of your style and the
houre-lines on your plane, and the several distances between the point C and
the lines of declination, shall give you the like distances between the
center, and the parallels of declination upon the houre-lines in your plane.
Upon this ground it follows,

1 To proportion the style unto the plane.
Consider the height of the style above the plane, and the length of the
substylar between the center and the place which you intend for the tropique.
If it be the tropique which is farthest from the center, add 113 gr. 30 m: if
the nearer tropique, add 66 gr. 30 m. unto the height of the style, the
remainder unto 180 gr. shall give you the altitude of the Sun above the plane
when he comes to that tropique. As in our latitude the height of the style
above an horizontall plane is 51 gr. 30 m. add unto this 113 gr. 30 m. the
sum is 165 gr. which being taken out of 180 gr. the remainder will be 15 gr.
and such is the altitude of the Sun above this plane when he comes to be in
the Winter tropique: but if you add 66 gr. 30 m. unto 51 gr. 30 m. the
remainder to 180 gr. will be 62 gr. And such is the altitude of the Sun in
the Summer Tropique. Then As the sine of 66 gr. 30 m.

to the sine of the Suns altitude:

So the length of the substylar line,

to the length of the axis of the style.



geometric illustration

As in the first example of the declining vertical, where the height of the
style was found to be 34 gr. 33 m. and is here represented before page 150. by
the angle BC; add to this height 113 gr. 30 m. for the angle CB, the sum will
be 148 gr. 3 m. and the remainder to 180 gr. will be 31 gr. 57 m. and such is
the angle B C of the altitude of the Sun above the plane, when he comes to be
in the tropique of, which is here the farthest tropique from the center.

Then supposing the length of the substylar line between the center and the
place which is fit for the farthest tropique to be about 21 inches, extend the
compasses from the sine of 66 gr. 30 m. unto the sine of 31 gr. 57 m. the same
extent will reach in the line of numbers from 21 unto 12.11, and so the length
of the axis of the style should be 12 inch. 11 cent. Or it may suffice to make
it just 12 inches, as a more easy ground for the rest of the work.

But if it were required to proportion the style unto the plane, so as it may
cast the shadow to the full length of the substylar line at all times of the
year, you may then consider the Sun in the tropique, which is to be set
nearest unto the center, and add 66 gr. 30 m. unto 34 gr. 33 m. so the
remainder unto 180 gr. will be 78 gr. 57 m. And if you extend the compasses
from the sine of 66 gr. 30 m. unto the sine of 78 gr. 57 m. the same extent
will reach in the line of numbers from 21 unto 22.47 for the length of the axis
of the style.

2 Having the length of the axis, and the height of the style above the plane,
to find the length of the sides of the style.
The style of a plane neither equinoctial nor polar, may be either a small rod
of iron set parallel to the axis of the world, or perpendicular to the plane,
or else a thin plate of iron or brass made in form of a rectangle triangle
BAC, with the base BC parallel to the axis of the world, the side AB
perpendicular to the plane, and the side AC the same with the substylar line,
wherein knowing BC, and the angle BAC, As the sine of 90 gr.

to the length of the axis:

So the sine of the height of the style,

to the length of the perpendicular side:

And so the cosine of the height of the style,

to the length of the substylar side.



Thus in the former example, the length of the axis being supposed to be 12
inches, and the height of the style 34 gr. 33 m. Extend the compasses from the
sine of 90 gr. (or else from the sine of 5 gr. 45 m.) unto 12 in the line of
numbers, the same extent will reach from the sine of 34 gr. 33 m. unto 6.80 in
the line of numbers for the length of the perpendicular side, and from the sine
of 55 gr. 27 m. unto 9.88 for the length of the substylar side.

3 To find the distance between the center and the equator upon the substylar
line.
This is here represented by C, and may be found by resolving the rectangle
triangle CB.

As the cosine of the height of the style,

is to the sine of 90 gr.

So the length of the axis,

to the distance of the equator from the center.

Extend the compasses from the sine of 55 gr. 27 m. unto the sine of 90 gr. the
same extent will reach in the line of numbers from 12 unto 14.57. Wherefore if
you take 14 inch. 57 cent. and pricking them down on your substylar line from C
unto, draw a line through, crossing the substylar at right angles, the line so
drawn shall be the equator.

4 To find the angles contained between the equator and the houre-lines upon
your plane.
These angles made by B and the houre-lines, are complements of those which are
at C, between BC the axis and those several houre-lines, and depend upon the
angles at the pole, between the proper meridian and the houre-circles.

As the sine of 90 gr.

to the cosine of the angle at the pole:

So the cotangent of the height of the style,

to the tangent of the angle between the equator and the houreline.

In our example the height of the style is 34 gr. 33 m. and the proper meridian
falls to be the same with the circle of the second hour after noone,
whereupon the angle at the pole, between this proper meridian, and the circles
of the hour of 1 on the one side, and 3 on the other side, will be 15 gr; so
between this meridian and the houre-circles of 12 and 4, the angle will be 30
gr. etc. as in the Table.

Ho. An. Po Arc. Pla. An. Equ C C C Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. In. P. In. P. In. P.
substy 0 0 0 0 55 27 14 57 20 80 11 21 1 3 15 0 8 38 54 30 14 74 21 36 11 25 12
4 30 0 18 8 51 30 15 33 23 44 11 40 11 5 45 0 29 33 45 45 16 75 29 06 11 76 10
6 60 0 44 30 36 0 20 00 50 84 12 77 9 7 75 0 64 42 20 36 34 10 Infin. 15 82 8 8
90 0 90 0 0 0 Infinite 27 60

If then it be required to find the angle, which the houre-line of 4 after
noone does make with the plane of the equator, that is the angle C 4 B
contained between the houre-line C 4 and the line B 4, drawn from the top of
the style unto the intersectio^ of the houre-line of 4 with the equator.

Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of 60 gr. the
complement of the angle at the pole, the same extent will reach from the tangent
of 55 gr. 27 m. the complement of the height of the pole, unto the tange^t of
51 gr. 30 m. and such is the angle C 4 B in the diagram Page 150.

Or in crosse-worke, if it were required to find the angle C 9 B, look into
the Table for the hour of 9, and there you shall find the angle at the pole.
to be 75 gr; and if you extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the
tangent of 55 gr. 27 m. the same extent will reach from the sine of 15 gr. the
complement of 75 gr. unto the tangent of 20 gr. 36 m. and such is the angle C 9
B, made at the equator between the line B 9 drawn from the top of the style,
and the houre-line C 9 drawn from the center. The like reason holds for the
rest, which may be found and set down in a table: then may you either draw
these angles at C in the former figure more perfectly, and thence finish your
work, or else proceed

5 To find the distance between the center and the parallels of declination.
The distances between the center and the parallels of declination, may be
found by resolving the triangles made by the axis BC, the lines of declination,
and the houre-lines. For having the angles at the equator, and knowing the
declination of the parallel, if the parallel shall fall between the equator
and the center, add the declination unto the angle at the equator; or if it
shall fall without the equator, take the declination out of the angle at the
equator, so shall you have the angle at the parallel. Then As the sine of the
angle at the parallel, to the cosine of the declination:

So the length of the axis of the style, to the distance between the center and
the parallel.



Thus in our example, the angle at the equator belonging to the hour of 4
after noone, was found before to be 51 gr. 30 m: if you would find the distance
between the center and the equator, extend the compasses from the sine of 51
gr. 30 m. unto the sine of 90 gr. the complement of the declination, the same
extent will reach in the line of numbers, from 12 unto 15.33, and such is the
distance upon the houre-line of 4 between the center and the equator.

If you would find the distance upon this houre-line, between the center and
the inner tropique, whose declination is known to be 23 gr. 30 m. add the
declination to the angle at the equator, so the angle at the parallel will be
75 gr. wherefore extend the compasses from the sine of 75 gr. unto the sine of
66 gr. 30 m. the complement of the declination, the same extent will reach in
the line of numbers, from 12 unto 11.40, and such is the length of the
houre-line of 4 between the center and the tropique of.

If you would find the distance upon this houre-line between this center and
the tropique of, which is here the farthest from the center, take the
declination out of the angle at the equator, so the angle at the parallel will
be 28 gr. unto wherefore extend the compasses from the sine of 28 gr. unto the
sine of 66 gr. 30 m. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers, from 12
unto 23.44, and such is the distance between the center and the tropique of
upon this houre-line of 4. The like reason holds for all the rest, which may
be gathered and set down in a table.

That done and the equator drawn as before, if you would draw the tropique of,
look into the table, and there finding under the title C the distance of the
substylar between the center and the parallel of to be 20 inch. 80 cent. take
20 inch. 80 cent. out of the line of inches, and prick them down in the
substylar of your plane from C unto.

Or if either the center fall without your plane, or the extent be too large
for your compasses, you may prick down the difference between C and C. As
here the distance C between the center and the equator is 14.57, the distance C
20.80, the difference 6.23, therefore taking 6 inch. 23 cent. prick them down
on the substylar from unto, and you shall have the same intersection of the
tropique and the substylar, as before; and the like reason holds for pricking
down of the rest of these distances on their several houre-lines.

Then having the points of intersection between the houre-lines and the
parallel, you may join them all in a crooked line without making of any
angles, the line so drawn shall be the tropique required. And after this manner
may you draw any other parallel of declination, whereof you have examples in
the most of the former Diagrams.

CHAP. XIIII. To describe the parallels of the Signs in any of the former
Planes.
THe equator and the tropiques before described, do show the Suns entrance into
4 of the Signs, the equator into and, the one tropique into, and the other
into, the rest of the intermediate Signs will be described in the same manner
as the tropiques, if first we know their declination.

The manner of finding the declination not only of the beginning of the Signs,
but of all other points of the ecliptique, is before set down in 2. Prop.
Astronomicall, page 52. by which you may find the declination of the beginning
of,,, and to be 11 gr. 30 m. and of,, and to be 20 gr. 12 m. If then you
inscribe the chords of 11 gr. 30 m. and of 20 gr. 12 m. into the former figure
BDT Page 145. from D toward T, the lines drawn from B through the terms of
those chords shall be the Signs required.

And with these declinations, the height of the style, and the length of the
axis, you may find the angles at the parallel, and then the distances between
the center and the parallel, which being pricked down upon their several
houre-lines shall give you the points of intersection, by which you may draw
the parallels of the Signs, as in the figures belonging to the polar planes.

CHAP. XV. To describe the parallels of the length of the day in any of the
former Planes.
THe length of the day will always be 12 hours long when the Sun comes to
be in the equator, and this holds in all latitudes; but at other times of the
year the same place of the Sun, will not give the same length of the day in
another latitude; wherefore the latitude being known, we are first

To find the declination of the Sun agreeing to the length of the day.
Consider the difference between the length of an equinoctial day and the day
proposed, and turn the time into degrees and minutes.

As the sine of 90 gr. is to the sine of half the difference:

So the cotangent of the latitude, to the tangent of the declination.

As if the length of the day proposed were 15 hours, the difference between
this and an equinoctial day (whose length is always 12 hours) would be three
hours, which make 45 gr. and the half difference is 22 gr. 30 m: wherefore
extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the tangent of 38 gr. 30 m.
the complement of the latitude, the same extent will reach from the sine of 22
gr. 30 m. unto the tangent of 16 gr. 55 m. for the declination of the Sun at
such time as the length of the day is either 9 or 15 hours; and from the sine
of 30 gr. unto the tangent of 21 gr. 40 m. for the declination belonging to 8
or 16 hours, and from the sine of geometric illustration 15 gr. unto the
tangent of 11 gr. 38 m. for the declination belonging to 10 or 14 hours, and
from the sine of 7 gr. 30 m. unto the tangent of 5 gr. 56 m. for the
declination of the Sun when the length of the day is either 11 or 13 hours.

If then you inscribe the chords of these arks into the former figure BDT, the
lines drawn from B through the terms of these arks, shall be the lines
belonging to the diurnall arkes, and the several distances between them and
the point C give the like distances between the center and the parallels of
the length of the day upon the houre-lines in your plane.

Or comparing these angles of declination with the angles at the equator, you
may have the angles at the parallel, and then find the distances between the
center and the parallel, which being pricked down upon the several
houre-lines, geometric illustration shall give you the points of intersection,
by which you may draw the parallels of the length of the day, whereof you have
another example in the diagram belonging to an horizontal plane, page 105. And
by the same reason you may draw the parallels of those circles to which the
Sun is vertical, the parallels of the principal feasts, or what else
depends on the declination of the Sun.

CHAP. XVI. To draw the old unequal hours in the former Planes.
IT was the manner of the Ancients to divide the day into twelve equal hours,
and the night into twelve other equal hours, and so the whole day and night
into 24 hours. Of these 24, those which belonged unto the day, were either
longer or shorter (excepting the two equinoctial days) then those which
belonged unto the night; and the Summer hours always longer then the hours
in the Winter, according to the lengthening of the days, whereupon they are
called the old unequal (and by some the Planetary) hours.

geometric illustration

To express these in the former Planes: first draw the common houre-lines, the
equator, and the tropiques, as before: then describe two occult parallels of
the length of the day, one for 9 hours, the other for 15 hours; for so you
may draw a straight line for the first unequal hour through 5 ho. 45 m. in
the parallel of 15, and through 8 ho. 15 m. in the parallel of 9. This
straight line shall pass directly through 7 ho. 0 m. in the equator, and so cut
off a twelfth part of the arks above the horizon, both from these two parallels
and the equator: and being continued unto the tropiques, it shall also cut off
about a twelfth part from them, and all the rest of the parallels of
declination, without any sensible error.

In like manner may you draw the second unequal hour through 7 ho. in the
parallel of 15, through 8 ho. in the equator, and through 9 ho. in the
parallel of 9, and so in the rest, as in this Table.

Horae 15 Aeq 9 Ho. M. Ho Ho. M. 0 4 30 6 7 30 1 5 45 7 8 15 2 7 0 8 9 0 3 8 15
9 9 45 4 9 30 10 10 30 5 10 45 11 11 15 6 12 0 12 12 0 7 1 15 1 0 45 8 2 30 2 1
30 9 3 45 3 2 15 10 5 0 4 3 0 11 6 15 5 3 45 12 7 30 6 4 30

And of these unequal hours you have a farther example in the diagram
belonging to the polar declining plane, Page 130.

CHAP. XVII. To draw the hours from Sun rising and sun setting in the former
Planes.
TO know how many hours are past since the Sun rising, or how many remain to
the Sun setting; first draw the common houre-lines, the equator, and the
tropiques, as before: then describe two occult parallels of the length of the
day, one for 8 hours, and the other for 16 hours. For so you geometric
illustration may draw the first hour from the Sun rising through the common
hours of 5 in the parallel of 16, of 7 in the equator, and of 9 in the
parallel of 8. In like manner the second hour from Sun rising through the
common hours of 6 in the parallel of 16, of 8 in the equator, and of 10 in
the parallel of 8. And so the rest in their order.

The first hour before Sun setting, or the 23 hour from the last Sun setting,
may be drawn in like sort through the common hours of 3 after noone in the
parallel of 8, of 5 in the equator, and of 7 in the parallel of 16. The
second hour before Sun setting, or the 22 hour after the last Sun setting
through the common hours of 2 in the parallel of 8, of 4 in the equator, and
of 6 in the parallel of 16. And so the rest in the like order, whereof you
have another example in the Diagram belonging to the declining vertical, Page
116.

CHAP. XVIII. To draw the horizontall line in the former planes.
THe common houre-lines do commonly depend on the shadow of the axis, but the
parallels of the Signs, and of the length of the day, the houre-lines from Sun
rising and Sun setting, with many others, depend on the shadow of the top of
the style, or some one point in the axis, which here signifies the center of
the world, and is represented by the point B. And these lines so depending, are
then only useful when they fall between the two tropiques, and within the
horizon.

There may be several horizontall lines drawn upon every plane, as I showed
before in finding the inclination of a plane; but the proper horizontall line
which is here meant, must always be in the same plane with B the top of the
style; so that in an horizontall plane there can be no such horizontall line,
but in all other planes it may be found by applying the horizontall leg of the
Sector unto the top of the style, and then working as before; and the
intersection of this line with the meridian or substylar line, may be found by
proportion.

1 To find the intersection of the horizon with the meridian, in an
equinoctial plane.
As the tangent of 45 gr.

to the tangent of the latitude:

So is the height of the style,

to the distance between the style and the horizontal line.

As in the example of the former equinoctial plane, Page 142. extend the
compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. unto 51 gr. 30 m. the tangent of the
latitude, the same extent will reach in the line of numbers, from 52 the length
of the style unto 66, and such is the distance between the style and the
horizontall line; wherefore I take 66 parts out of a line of inches, and prick
them down in the meridian line from C unto H above the style in the upper
face, but below the style in the lower face of the plane, so a right line
drawn through H, parallel to the hour of 6, shall be the horizontall line.

2 To find the intersection of the horizon with the meridian, in a direct polar
plane.
As the tangent of 45 gr.

to the cotangent of the latitude:

So the length of the style,

to the distance between the style and the horizontal line.

As in the example of the former polar plane, Page 144. extend the compasses
from the tangent of 45 gr. unto tangent of 38 gr. 30 m. the complement of the
latitude, the same extent will reach in the line of numbers, from 1.61 the
length of the style, unto 1.28, and such is the distance upon the meridian
between the style and the horizontall line.

In all upright planes, whether they be direct vertical, or declining, or
meridian planes, the horizontall line must always be drawn through A the foot
of the style, as may appear in the examples before, Page 102.107.116.

And generally in all planes whatsoever, the horizontal line must be drawn
through the intersection of the equator with the hour of 6. Or if that
intersection fall without the plane, yet if any arks of the length of the day
be drawn on the plane, the horizontall line may be drawn through their
intersections, with the hours of the Suns rising or setting.

CHAP. XIX. To describe the vertical circles in the former Planes.
THe vertical circles commonly called Azimuths, are great circles drawn
through the zenith, by which we may know in what part of the heaven the Sun
is, how far from the East or West, and how near unto the meridian.

In all upright planes, whether they be direct verticals, or declining, or
meridian planes, the semidiameter of the horizon will be the same with AB the
perpendicular side of the style, and these Azimuths will be parallels one to
the other, and the distance of each Azimuth, from the foot of the style upon
the horizontall line, may be found in this manner.

Consider the length of the style in inches and parts of inches, and the
distance of each Azimuth from the style, according to the angle at the zenith
in degrees and minutes.

As the tangent of 45 gr.

to the tangent of the azimuth:

So the length of the style,

to the length of the horizontall line between the style and the azimuth.

geometric illustration

As if it were required to draw the common azimuths on the South face of the
vertical plane before described, where AB the length of the style may be
supposed to be 10 inches. Here the plane having no declination, the style is in
the plane of the meridian, and so points directly into the South. The point
of SbE is 11 gr. 15 m. distant from the style, and SSE 22 gr. 30 m. and the
rest in their order: wherefore extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr.
unto 10 in the line of numbers, the same extent will reach from the tangent of
11 gr. 15 m. unto 1.99 in the line of numbers for the length of the tangent
line, between the style and the point SbE, and from the tangent of 22 gr. 30
m. unto 4.14 for SSE, and so for the rest, as in this Table.

Azimuths. An. Zen. Tangen Gr. M. In. Pa. South 0 0 0 0 SbE 11 15 1 99 SSE 22
30 4 14 SEbS 33 45 6 68 SE 45 0 10 00 SEbb 56 15 14 97 ESE 67 30 24 14 EbS 78
45 50 27 East 90 0 Infin.

In like manner in the first example of the declining plane, where the style
stands according to the declination 24 gr. 20 m. distant from the South
toward the West. The next point of SbW is but 13 gr. 5 m. distant from the
style; and the second of SSW only 1 gr. 50 m. and the third of SWbS is again
9 gr. 25 m. and the rest in their order. Wherefore having before found the
length of the style to be 6 inches 80 parts, extend the compasses from the
tangent of 45 gr. unto 6.80 parts in the line of numbers, the same extent will
reach from the tangent of 24 gr. 20 m. unto 3.07 in the line of numbers for the
length of the tangent line between the style and the South, and from the
tangent of 13 gr. 5 m. unto 1.58 for the point of SbW; and so for the rest, as
in this Table.

Azimuths. An. Zen. Tangen Gr. M In. Pa. SEbE 80 35 41 00 SE 69 20 18 03 SEbS
58 5 10 91 SSE 46 50 7 25 SbE 35 35 4 86 South 24 20 3 07 SbW 13 5 1 58 SSW 1
50 0 22 The foot of the still SWbS 9 25 1 13 SW 20 40 2 57 SWbW 31 55 4 24 WSW
43 10 6 37 WbS 54 25 9 50 West 65 40 15 02 WbN 76 55 29 26 WNW 88 10 212 45

That done, if you take these parts out of a line of inches, and prick them
down in the horizontall line on either side of the style, drawing right lines
perpendicular to the horizon through these intersections, but so as they may be
contained between the horizontall and the tropiques, the lines so drawn shall
be the azimuths required.

In an horizontall plane these azimuths are drawn more easily. For here the
perpendicular side of the style is the same with the axis of the horizon, and
the foot of the style is the vertical point, in which all the azimuth lines
do meet as their circles do in the zenith: wherefore let any circle described
on the center A, at the foot of the style, be divided first into four parts,
beginning at the meridian, and then each quarter subdivided either into eight
equal parts, according to the points of the Mariners compass, or into 90 gr.
according to the Astronomical division; if you draw right lines through the
center and these divisions, the lines so drawn shall be the azimuths required.

In all other planes inclining to the horizon, these vertical circles will
meet in a point, but that vertical point being more or less distant from the
foot of the style, the angles at this point will be unequal.

1 To find the distance between the foot of the style and the vertical point.
The vertical point wherein all the vertical lines do meet, will be always
in the meridian, directly under or over the top of the style; and the angle
between the perpendicular side of the style and the vertical line, will be
equal to the inclination of the plane to the horizon. Wherefore As the tangent
of 45 gr.

to the tangent of the inclination of the plane:

So is the length of the style,

to the distance between the foot of the style and the vertical point.



Thus in the first example of the declining inclining planes, where the upper
face of the plane looking Southwest, the declination was 24 gr. 20 m. the
inclination 36 gr; and you may suppose AB the length of the style to be 6
inches: if you extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. unto geometric
illustration the tangent of 36 gr. the same extent will reach in the line of
numbers from 6.00 unto 4.36, for the distance AV between A the foot of the
style and V the vertical point.

2 To find the distance between the foot of the style and the horizontall line.
As the tangent of the inclination of the plane,

is to the tangent of 45 gr.

So the length of the style,

to the distance between the foot of the style and the horizontall line.

So the same extent of the compasses as before, will reach in the line of
numbers from 6.00 unto 8.26 for the distance AH between the foot of the style
and the horizontall line.

Then may you take 4 inches 36 cent. and pricking them down from A the foot of
the style unto V the vertical point in the meridian, draw the line VA, which
being produced shall cut the horizon in the point H with right angles, and be
that particular azimuth which is perpendicular to the plane.

Or you may take 8 inches 26 cent. and prick them down in the former line VA
produced from A unto H, and so draw the horizontall line through H
perpendicular unto VH, which horizontall line being produced will cross the
equator in the same point wherein the equator crosses the houre-line of 6,
unless there be some former error.

3 To find the angles made by the azimuth lines at the vertical point.
The angles at the zenith depend on the declination of the plane, as in our
example, where the style stands according to the declination 24 gr. 20 m.
distant from the South toward the West, the azimuth of 10 gr. from the meridian
Eastward will be 34 gr. 20 m. the azimuth of 10 gr. Westward will be only 14
gr. 20 m. distant from the style, and so the rest in their order.

Or if you would rather describe the common azimuths, the point of SbE will be
35 gr. 35 m. the point of SbW 13 gr. 5 m. distant from the style, and so the
rest in their order. Then As the sine of 90 gr.

to the cosine of the inclination of the plane:

So the tangent of the angle at the zenith,

to the tangent of the angle at the vertical point between the line drawn
through the foot of the style and the azimuth required.



Wherefore the inclination of the plane in our example being 36 gr. extend the
compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the sine of 54 gr. the same extent shall
reach in the line of tangents, from 24 gr. 20 m. unto 20 gr. 5 m. for the angle
HVa at ye vertical point, between the line VH drawn through A the foot of the
style and the South. Again, the same extent will reach from the tangent of 13
gr. 5 m. unto 10 gr. 38 m. for the angle belonging to SbW; and so for the rest,
as in this table.

Azimuths. Ang. Ze. Ang. Ve. Gr. M. Gr. M. SEbE 80 35 78 25 SE 69 20 65 0 SEbS
58 5 52 25 SSE 46 50 40 46 SbE 35 35 30 3 South 24 20 20 5 SbW 13 5 10 39 SSW 1
50 1 29 Style. 0 0 SWbS 9 25 7 38 SW 20 40 16 58 SWbW 31 55 26 45 WSW 43 10 37
11 WbS 54 25 48 30 West 65 40 60 48 WbN 76 55 73 58 WNW 88 10 87 44

These angles being known, if on the center V, at the vertical point, you
describe an occult circle, and therein inscribe the chords of these angles from
the line VH, and then draw right lines through the vertical point, and the
terms of those chords, the lines so drawn shall be the azimuths required.

The like reason holds for the drawing of the azimuths upon all other
inclining planes, wheof you have another example in the Diagram belonging to
the meridian incliner, Page 126.

Or for further satisfaction you may find where each azimuth line shall cross
the equator.

As the sine of 90 gr.

to the sine of the latitude:

So the tangent of the azimuth from the meridian,

to the tangent of the equator from the meridian.

Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto the line of our latitude 51
gr. 30 m. the same extent will reach in the line of tangents from 10 gr. unto
7. gr. 50. m. for the intersection of the equator with the azimuth of 10 gr.
from the meridian. Again, the same extent will reach from 20 gr. unto 15 gr.
54 m. for the azimuth of 20 gr. And so the rest, as in these tables.

Azim. Equat. Gr. M. Gr. M. 10 0 7 50 20 0 15 54 30 0 24 20 40 0 43 18 50 0 13
0 60 0 53 35 70 0 65 3 80 0 77 18 90 0 90 0 Azim. Equat. Gr. M. Gr. M. 11 15 8
51 22 30 17 58 33 45 27 36 45 0 38 2 56 15 49 30 67 30 62 6 78 45 75 44 90 0 90
0

By which you may see that the azimuth 90 gr. distant from the meridian, which
is the line of East and West, will cross the equator at 90 gr. from the
meridian in the same point, with the horizontall line and the hour of 6. And
that the azimuth of 45 gr. will cross the equator at 38 gr. 2 m. from the
meridian, that is, the line of SE will cross the equator at the hour of 9 and
28 m. in the morning, and the line of SW at 2 ho. 32 min. in the afternoon;
and so for the rest, whereby you may examine your former work.

CHAP. XX. To describe the parallels of the horizon in the former planes.
THe parallels of the horizon, commonly called Almicanters, or parallels of
altitude (whereby we may know the altitude of the Sun above the horizon) have
such respect unto the horizon, as the parallels of declination unto the
equator, and so may be described in like manner.

In an horizontall plane, these parallels will be perfect circles; wherefore
knowing the length of the style in inches and parts, and the distance of the
parallel from the horizon in degrees and minutes.

As the tangent of 45 gr.

is to the length of the style:

So the cotangent of the parallel,

to the semidiameter of his circle.

Thus in the example of the horizontall plane, Page 164. if AB the length of
the style shall be 5 inches, and that it were required to find the
semidiameter of the parallel of 62 gr. extend the compasses from the tangent
of 45 gr. unto 5.00 in the line of numbers, the same extent will reach from the
tangent of 28 gr. the complement of the parallel unto 2.65, and if you
describe a circle on the center A to the semidiameter of 2 inches 65 cent. it
shall be the parallel required.

In all upright planes, whether they be direct verticals, or declining, or
meridian planes, these parallels will be conicall sections, and may be drawn
through their points of intersection, with the azimuth lines, in the same manner
as the parallels of declination, through their points of intersection with the
houre-lines. To this end you may first find the distance between the top of
the style and the azimuth; and then the distance between the horizon and the
parallel, both which may be represented in this manner.

On the center B and any semidiameter BH, describe an occult arc of a circle,
and therein inscribe the chords of such parallels of altitude as you intend to
draw on the plane, (I have here put them for 15. 30. 45 and 60 gr.) then draw
right lines through the center and the terms of those chords, so the line BH
shall be the horizon, and the rest the lines of altitude, according to their
distance from the horizon.

geometric illustration

That done, consider your plane (which here for example is the South face of
our vertical plane, p. 168) wherein having drawn both the horizontall and
vertical lines, as I showed before, first take out AB the length of the style,
and prick that down in this horizontall line from B unto A; then take out all
the distances between B the top of the style and the several points wherein
the vertical lines do cross the horizontal, transfer them into this
horizontal line BH, from the center B, and at the terms of these distances
erect lines perpendicular to the horizon, noting them with the number or letter
of the azimuth from whence they were taken, so these perpendiculars shall
represent those azimuths, and the several distances between the horizon and
the lines of altitude shall give the like distances, between the horizontall
and the parallels of altitude upon the azimuths in your plane. Upon this ground
it follows,

1 To find the distance between the top of the style, and the several points
wherein the azimuths do cross the horizontall line.
Having drawn the horizontall and azimuth lines as before, look into the
table by which you drew them, and there you shall have the angles at the
zenith. Then As the cosine of the angle at the zenith,

is to the sine of 90 gr.

So the length of the style,

to the distance required.



geometric illustration

Azimuths. Ang Ze Tangent Secant Par. 15. Par. 30. Gr. M Inch P. Inch P. Inch.
P. Inch. P. South. 0 0 0 0 10 00 2 68 5 77 SbE 11 15 1 99 10 20 2 73 5 90 SSE
22 30 4 14 10 82 2 90 6 24 SEbS 33 45 6 68 12 03 3 23 6 94 SE 45 0 10 00 14 14
3 80 8 16 SEbE 56 15 14 97 18 00 4 82 10 40 ESE 67 30 24 14 26 13 7 02 15 08
EbS 78 45 50 27 51 26 13 73 29 60 East. 90 0 Infinite Infinite Infinite Infinite

As in our example of the vertical plane, where AB the length of the style was
supposed to be 10 inches, extend the compasses from the sine of 78 gr. 45 m.
(the complement of 11 gr. 15 m. the angle at the zenith, belonging to SbE and
SbW) unto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will reach from 10.00 the length of
the style, unto 10.20 for the distance between the top of the style and the
intersection of the azimuth SbE with the horizontall line, which distance may
be called the secant of the azimuth, and may serve for the drawing of the
parallel of 45 gr. from the horizon. The like reason holds for the rest of
these distances here represented in the line BH.

2 To find the distance between the horizon and the parallels.
As the tangent of 45 gr.

to the tangent of the parallel:

So the secant of the azimuth,

to the distance required.

As if it were required to draw the parallel of 15 gr. from the horizon, upon
this vertical plane; extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. unto the
tangent of 15 gr. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from 10. 00
the secant of the South azimuth unto 2.68, and therefore the distance between
the horizon and the parallel of 15 gr. is 2 inches 68 cent. upon the South
azimuth. Again, the same extent will reach from 10.20 the secant of SbE unto
2.73 for the like distance belonging to SbE and SbW; and so for the rest, which
may be gathered and set down in the table.

That done, and the horizon and azimuths being drawn, prick down 10 inches
from the horizontall line upon the South azimuth, and 10 inches 20 cent. on the
azimuths of SbE and SbW, and 10 inches 82 cent. on the azimuths of SSE and SSW,
and 12 inches 3 cent. on the azimuth of SEbS and SWbS, and so the rest of these
distances on their several azimuths: then if you draw a crooked line through
all these points, that may make no angles, the line so drawn shall be the
parallel of 45 gr. from the horizon. In like manner may you draw the parallel
of 15 gr. or any other parallel of altitude upon any vertical plane.

If the plane incline to the horizon, after we have found the vertical point,
and drawn the horizontall line, we are farther to find the length of the axis
of the horizon, then the angles betwixt this axis and the azimuth lines, and so
the several distances between the parallels and the vertical point, all
which may be represented in this manner.

On the center B, and any semidiameter, describe an occult quadrant of a
circle, and therein inscribe the chords of such parallels of altitude as you
intend to draw on the plane, drawing right lines through the center and the
terms of these chords, so the line BH shall be the horizon, and his
perpendicular BV the axis of the horizon, and the rest the lines of altitude,
according to their distance from the horizon.

That done, consider your plane, which here for example is the first of our
three declining inclining planes, wherein having drawn both the horizontall
and vertical lines as I showed before, first take out the axis of the horizon,
which geometric illustration is the line between B the top of the style and V
the vertical point, and prick that down in this figure from B unto V; then
take out both the line VH and all the rest of the distances between V the
vertical point and the several points wherein the vertical lines do cross
the horizontall line of this figure, from the point V, noting the place where
they cross the horizontall line with the number or letter of the azimuth from
whence they were taken, and drawing the azimuth lines from V through the lines
of altitude.

Or having the Sector you may draw an occult line VE perpendicular to the axis
VB, and therein prick down the tangent of the complement of the inclination of
the plane from V unto E: then draw the line OF parallel to the axis, crossing
the line VH produced in the point F, so this line OF will be as the line of
sines upon the Sector, and therein you may prick down the sines of the
complement of the angles at the zenith from E toward F, and draw the vertical
lines by those points through the lines of altitude, so the angles at V,
between the axis VB and those azimuth lines, shall be the angles between the
axis of the horizon and the azimuth lines on your plane, and the several
distances between the point V and the lines of altitude, shall give the like
distances between the vertical point and the parallels of altitude upon the
azimuths in your plane. Upon this ground it follows,

1 To find the length of the axis of the horizon.
The vertical point is always either directly over or under the top of the
style, and the distance between them is that which I call the axis of the
horizon, which may thus be found, As the cosine of the inclination,

to the sine of 90 gr.

So the length of the style,

to the length of the axis of the horizon.



For example in the first of the three declining inclining planes, the
inclination to the horizon is 36 gr. the length of the style AB six inches,
extend the compasses from the sine of 54 gr. the complement of the inclination
unto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from
6.00 unto 7.42, and such is VB the length of the axis required.

2 To find the angles contained between the horizon and the vertical lines
upon your plane.
The angles at the vertical point between the axis of the horizon and the
azimuth lines upon your plane are represented in this figure by those at V,
betwee^e VB and the azimuths. The angles between the horizon and the azimuth
lines being complements to the former, are represented either by those which
are made by VE or by BH, and the azimuth lines which are drawn from V.

That you may find them, look into the Table, by which you drew the azimuth
lines, there shall you find the angles at the zenith. Then geometric
illustration As the sine of 90 gr.

to the cosine of the angle at the zenith:

So the tangent of the inclination to the horizon,

to the tangent of the angle between the horizon and the vertical line.



In our example where the inclination to the horizon is 36 gr. and the angle at
the zenith between the azimuth at the style and the meridian, is according to
the declination 24 gr. 20 m. extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. unto
the tangent of 36 gr. the same extent will reach from the sine of 65 gr. 40 m.
the complement of the angle at the zenith, unto the tangent of 33 gr. 30 m. for
the angle contained between the horizon and the South part of the meridian
line. Again, the same extent will reach from the cosine of 35 gr. 35 m. the
angle at the zenith belonging to SbE unto the tangent of 30 gr. 3 m. for the
angle between the horizon and the azimuth line of SbE. The like reason holds
for the rest, which may be found and set down in the Table.

Azimuths. Ang. Ze. Ang. V. Ang. Ho Horizon 11 18 26 34 45 0 Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr.
M. Inch. P. Inch. P Inch. P. Inch. P. East. 114 25 119 12 16 40 Infinite. 38 60
11 05 EbS 103 5 106 2 19 20 210 24 22 40 9 00 E SE 91 50 92 16 1 20 41 98 15 57
7 60 SE bE 80 35 78 25 6 47 62 82 23 44 12 07 6 68 SE 69 20 65 0 14 23 29 87 16
79 10 12 6 00 SE bS 58 5 52 25 21 0 20 70 13 61 8 99 5 79 SSE 46 50 40 46 26 25
16 68 11 90 8 31 5 53 SbE 35 35 30 3 30 35 14 58 10 90 7 90 5 42 South 24 20 20
5 33 30 13 44 10 32 7 66 5 35 SbW 13 5 10 39 35 17 12 84 10 02 7 55 5 33 SSW 1
50 1 29 35 59 12 62 9 90 7 47 5 31 Style. 0 0 36 0 12 62 9 90 7 47 5 31 SWbS 9
25 7 38 35 37 12 74 9 96 7 50 5 32 SW 20 40 16 58 34 12 13 20 10 20 7 59 5 34
SWbW 31 55 26 45 31 40 14 13 10 67 7 81 5 39 WSW 43 10 37 11 27 55 15 85 11 50
8 15 5 49 WbS 54 25 48 30 22 55 19 05 12 94 8 73 5 66 West 65 40 60 48 16 40 25
87 15 51 9 60 5 96 W bN 76 55 73 58 9 20 45 75 20 64 11 32 6 46 W NW 88 10 87
44 1 20 318 88 33 27 14 18 7 25 NWbW 99 25 101 35 6 47 Infinite. 92 40 19 60 8
48 NW 110 40 115 0 14 23 31 44 10 30

Then may you either draw these angles at V in the former figure more
perfectly, and thence finish your work, or else proceed.

3 To find the distance between the vertical point and the parallels of the
horizon.
These distances may be found by resolving the triangles in the last figure
made by the axis, the lines of altitude, and the azimuth lines. For having the
length of the axis and the angles at the horizon, if you add the distance of
the parallel from the horizon unto the angle at the horizon, you shall have the
angle at the parallel. Then As the sine of the angle at the parallel,

to the cosine of the altitude:

So the length of the axis,

to the distance between the vertical point and the parallel.



Thus in our example if it were required to find the distance upon the stylar
azimuth VH, between the vertical point and the horizon, you have the
rectangle triangle VBH, wherein the angle at the horizon here represented by
BHV is (equal to the inclination of the plane) 36 gr. and BV the axis of the
horizon between the plane and the top of the style, is 7 inches 42 cent.
Wherefore extend the compasses from the sine of 36 gr. unto the sine of 90 gr.
the complement of the altitude, the same extent will reach in the line of
numbers from 7.42 unto 12 62, and such is the distance of the pe^pendicular
azimuth line VH between the vertical point and the horizon.

In like manner if you would find the distance upon the meridian between the
vertical point and the horizon, extend the compasses from the sine of 33 gr.
30 m. the angle at the horizon, to the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will
reach in the line of numbers from 7.42 unto 13.44, and such is Va the distance
between the vertical point and the horizon upon the line of the South
a^imuth, that is, upon the meridian line.

But if you would find the distance upon the meridian between the vertical
point and any other parallel of the horizon, as upon the parallel of 26 gr.
34 m. then add these 26 gr. 34 m. unto 33 gr. 30 m. the angle at the horizon,
so shall you have 60 gr. 4 m. for BDV the angle at the parallel. And if you
extend the compasses from the sine of 60 gr. 4 m. unto the sine of 63 gr. 26 m.
the complement of the parallel from the horizon, the same extent will reach in
the line of numbers from 7.42 the length of the axis, unto 7.66, and such is
the distance VD between the vertical point and the parallel of 26 gr. 34 m.
upon the meridian line. The like reason holds for all the rest, which may be
gathered and set down in ye table.

That done, and the horizon drawn as before, if you would draw the parallel of
26 gr. 34 m. from the horizon, look into the table, and there finding under
the title of the parallel of 26.34, the distance on ye South azimuth line to be
7.66, take 7 inches 66 cent. out of a line of inches, and prick them down on
the meridian of your plane, from the vertical point at V.

Or if either the vertical point fall without your plane, or the extent at any
time be too large for your compasses, you may prick down the distance
between the horizon and the parallel. As here the distance between the
vertical point and the parallel is 7.66, between the vertical point and the
horizon 13.44, the difference between them 5.78 is the distance from the
horizon to the parallel, which being pricked down upon the meridian, shall
give the same intersection as before. And the like reason, holds for the
pricking down the rest of these distances on their several azimuths.

Having the points of intersection between the azimuths and the parallel, you
may join them all in a crooked line without making of angles, the line so
drawn shall be the parallel required. And upon this ground it follows,

To describe such parallels on the former planes, as may show the proportion of
the shadow unto the gnomon.
The proportion of a man's shadow unto his height, or other shadow to his gnomon
set perpendicular to the horizon, may be showed by parallels to the horizon, if
they be drawn to a due altitude, which may thus be found: As the length of the
shadow, to the length of the gnomon:

So the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of the altitude.



As if it were required to find the altitude of the Sun when the shadow of a
man shall be decuple to his height, extend the compasses from 10 unto 1 in the
line of numbers, the same extent will reach in the tangent of 45 gr. unto the
tangent of 5 gr. 42 m; which shows that when the Sun comes to the altitude
of 5 gr. 42 m. your shadow, upon a level ground, will be ten times as much as
your height. In the same manner you may find that at 7 gr. 7 m. of altitude
your shadow will be octuple, at 9 gr. 27 m. sextuple, at 11 gr. 18 m. quintuple,
at 14 gr. 2 m. quadruple, at 18 gr. 26 m. triple, at 26 gr. 34 m. double to
your height, at 33 gr. 41 m. as 3 unto 2, at 36 gr. 52 m. as 4 unto 3, at 38
gr. 40 m. as 5 unto 4, at 45 gr. equal, at 51 gr. 20 m. as 4 unto 5, at 53 gr.
7 m. as 3 unto 4, at 56 gr. 19 m. as 2 unto 3, at 59 gr. 2 m. as 3 unto 5, at
63 gr. 26 m. as 1 unto 2, etc.

If then you draw a parallel to the horizon at 5 gr. 42 m. another at 7 gr. 7
m. and so the rest, when ^he shadow o^ the style falls on the parallel, you
have the proportion, and thereby may you know the shadow by the height, and the
height by the shadow, whereof you have examples Page 126. and 137.

I might here proceed to show the description of the ^^^cles of position, the
Signs of the Zodiac in the merid^^n, the Signs ascending and descending,
with such o^^er gnomonicall conclusions; but these would prove superfluous to
such as understand the doctrine of the Sphere; and for others, that which is
delivered may suffice for ordinary use, it being my intention not so much to
explane the full use of shadows (whereof I have lately given a large example
in an other place) as the use of these lines of proportion, that were not
extant heretofore.

An Appendix concerning The description and use of a small portable Quadrant,
for the more easy finding of the hour and Azimuth.
CHAP. I. Of the description of the Quadrant.
Having described these standing planes, I will now show the most of these
conclusions by a small Quadrant. This might be done generally for all
latitudes, by a quarter of the general Astrolabe, described before in the use
of the Sector, page 58; and particularly for any one latitude, by a quarter of
the particular Astrolabe, there also described, page 63. which if it be a foot
semidiameter, may show the azimuth unto a degree, and the time of the day unto
a minute; but for ordinary use this smaller Quadrant may suffice, which may be
made portable in this manner.

1 Upon the center A, and semidiameter AB, describe the arc BC: the same
semidiameter will set of 60 gr. and the half of that will be 30 gr. which
being added to the former 60 gr. will make the arc BC to be 90 gr. the fourth
part of the whole circle, and thence comes the name of a Quadrant.

2 Leaving some little space for the inscription of the months and days, on
the same center A, and semidiameter AT, describe the arc TD, which shall serve
for either tropique.

3 Divide the line AT in the point E, in such proportion, as that AT being
10000, AE may be 6556, and there draw another arc OF, which shall serve for
the Equator.

4 Divide AF the semidiameter of the equator in the point G, so as AF being
10000, the line AG may be 4343, geometric illustration and on the center G and
semidiameter GD describe the arc ED, which shall serve for a fourth part of
the ecliptique.

5 This part of the ecliptique may be divided into three Signs, and each Sign
into 30 A Table of right Ascensions.
Gr. Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. 0 0 0 27 54 57 48 5 4 35 32 42 63 3 10 9 11 37 35 68
21 15 13 48 42 31 73 43 20 18 27 47 33 79 7 25 23 9 52 38 84 32 30 27 54 57 48
90 0 gr. by a table of right ascensions, made as before page 60. As the right
ascension of the first point of being 27 gr. 54 m. you may lay a ruler to the
center A and 27 gr. 54 m. in the Quadrant BC, the point where the ruler
crosses the Ecliptique, shall be the first point of. In like manner the right
ascension of the first point of being 57 gr. 48 m. if you lay a ruler to the
Gr. Parts. 1 176 2 355 3 537 4 723 5 913 6 1106 7 1302 8 1503 9 1708 10 1917 11
2130 12 2348 13 2571 14 2799 15 3032 16 3270 17 3514 18 3763 19 4019 20 4281 21
4550 22 4825 23 5108 Tro 5252 center A, and 57 gr. 48 m. in the quadrant, the
point where the ruler crosses the ecliptique, shall be the first point of. And
so for the rest: but the lines of distinction between Sign and Sign, may be
best drawn from the center G.

6 The line ET between the equator and the tropique, which I call the line of
declination, may be divided into 23 gr. out of this Table.

For let AE the semidiameter of the equator be 10000, the distance between the
equator and 10 gr. of declination may be 1917 more; between the equator and 20
gr. 4281; the distance of the tropique from the equator 5252.

7 You may put in the most of the principal stars between the equator and
the tropique of, by their declination from the equator, and right ascension
from the next equinoctial point. As the declination of the wing of Pegasus,
being 13 gr. 7 m. the right ascension 358 gr. 34 m. from the first point of, or
1 gr. 26 m. short of it. If you draw an occult parallel through 13 gr. 7 m. of
declination, and then lay the ruler to the center A, and 1 gr. 26 m. in the
quadrant BC, the point where the ruler crosses the parallel shall be the
place for the wing of Pegasus, to which you may set the name and the time when
he comes to the South, in this manner, W. Peg. * 23 Ho. 54 M. and so for the
rest of these five, or any other stars.

Ho. M. R. Ascen Decl. M Pegasus wing * 23 54 1 26 13 7 Arcturus * 13 58 29 37
21 10 Lions heart * 9 48 32 58 13 45 Bulls eye * 4 15 63 33 15 42 Vultures heart
* 19 33 66 56 7 58

8 There being space sufficient between the equator and the center, you may
there describe the quadrat, and divide each of the two sides farthest from the
center A into 100 parts, so shall the Quadrant be prepared generally for any
latitude.

But before you draw the particular lines, you are to fit four tables unto
your latitude.

First a table of meridian altitudes for division of the circle of days and
months, which may be thus made: Consider the latitude of the place and the
declination of the Sun for each day of the year. If the latitude and
declination be alike both North or both South, ad the declinatio^ to the
complement of the latitude; if they be unlike, one North, and the other South,
substract the declination from the complement of the latitude, the remainder
will be the meridian altitude belonging unto the day.

Thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. Northward, whose complement is 38 gr. 30
m. the declination upon the tenth day of June will be 23 gr. 30 m. Northward,
wherefore I add 23 gr. 30 m. unto 38 gr. 30 m. the sum of both is 62 gr. for
the meridian altitude at the tenth of June. The declination upon the tenth of
December will be 23 gr. 30 m. Southward, wherefore I take these 23 gr. 30 m.
out of 38 gr. 30 m. there will remain 15 gr. for the meridian altitude at the
tenth of December; and in this manner you may find the meridian altitude for
each day of the year, and set them down in a table.

Dies. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Mo Gr. M Gr. M. Gr. M Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M Gr. M.
January 16 31 17 24 18 26 19 37 20 57 22 24 23 58 February 24 17 25 59 27 45 29
35 31 29 33 25 March 34 35 36 33 38 32 40 30 42 27 44 22 46 15 April 46 37 48
26 50 11 51 50 53 25 54 53 56 15 May 56 15 57 29 58 35 59 33 60 22 61 2 61 31
June 61 36 61 54 62 0 61 58 61 45 61 22 60 49 July 60 49 60 6 59 14 58 13 57 4
55 48 54 24 August 54 7 52 36 50 59 49 17 47 31 45 41 43 49 September 43 26 41
30 39 33 37 36 35 38 33 41 31 46 October 31 46 29 53 28 3 26 16 24 35 22 59 21
29 November 21 12 19 51 18 39 17 36 16 43 16 0 15 28 December 15 28 15 7 15 0
15 2 15 17 15 44 16 22

The Table being made, you may inscribe the months, and days of each month
into your quadrant, in the space left below the tropique. For lay the ruler
unto the center A, and 16 gr. 31 m. in the quadrant BC, there may you draw a
line for the end of December and beginning of January; then laying your ruler
to the center A, and 24 gr. 17 m. in the quadrant, there draw the end of
January and beginning of February, and so the rest, which may be noted with I,
F, M, A, M, I, etc. the first letters of each month, and will here fall
between 15 gr. and 62 gr.

The second Table which you are to fit, may serve for the drawing and dividing
of the horizon. For drawing of the horizon.

As the cotangent of the latitude,

to the tangent of the greatest declination:

So the sine of 90 gr.

to the sine of intersection, where the horizon shall cross the tropiques.

So in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. we shall find the horizon to cut the
tropique in 33 gr. 9 m: wherefore if you lay the ruler to the center A, and 33
gr. 9 m. in the quadrant, the point where the ruler crosses the tropique shall
be the point where the horizon crosses the tropique. And if you find a point
at H, in the line AC, whereon setting the compasses, you may bring the point at
E, and this point in the tropique both into a circle, the point H shall be the
center, and the ark so drawn shall be the horizon. Then for the division of
this horizon.

As the sine of 90 gr.

to the sine of the latitude:

So the tangent of the horizon,

to the tangent of the arc in the quadrant, which shall divide the horizon.

So in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. we shall find 7 gr. 52 m. belonging to 10
gr. in the horizon, and 15 gr. 54 m. belonging to 20 gr. And so the rest, as in
this Table.

Ho Gr. M Ho Gr. M Ho Gr. M. Ho Gr. M. Ho Gr. M. Ho Gr. M. 0 0 0 15 11 51 30 24
19 45 38 2 60 53 35 75 71 5 0 47 12 39 25 11 39 1 54 41 72 19 1 34 13 27 26 4
40 0 55 48 73 33 2 21 14 16 26 57 41 0 56 56 74 48 3 8 15 4 27 50 42 0 58 4 76
3 5 3 55 20 15 54 35 28 43 50 43 0 65 59 13 80 77 18 4 42 16 43 29 37 44 1 60
22 78 33 5 29 17 33 30 32 45 3 61 31 79 49 6 17 18 22 31 27 46 5 62 41 81 5 7 4
19 12 32 22 47 8 62 52 82 21 10 7 52 25 20 2 40 33 18 55 48 11 70 65 3 85 83 37
8 39 20 53 34 14 49 14 66 15 84 53 9 27 21 44 35 10 50 19 67 27 86 10 10 14 22
36 36 7 51 24 68 39 87 26 11 2 23 27 37 4 52 29 69 52 88 43 15 11 51 30 24 19
45 38 2 60 53 35 75 71 5 90 90 0

Wherefore you may lay the ruler to the center A, and 7 gr. 52 m. in the
quadrant BC, the point where the ruler crosses the horizon shall be 10 gr. in
the horizon; and so for the rest: but the lines of distinction between each
fifth degree, will be best drawn from the center H.

The third Table for drawing of the houre-lines, must be a Table of the
altitude of the Sun above the horizon at every hour, especially when he
comes to the equator, the tropiques, and some other intermediate declinations.

If the Sun be in the equator, and so have no declination.

As the sine of 90 gr.

to the cosine of the latitude:

So the cosine of the hour from the meridian,

to the sine of the altitude.

Thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. at six hours from the meridian the Sun
will have no altitude, at five the altitude will be 9 gr. 17 m; at four 18 gr.
8 m; at three 26 gr. 7 m; at two 32 gr. 37 m. at one 36 gr. 58 m; at noone it
will be 38 gr. 30 m. equal to the complement of the latitude.

If the Sun have declination, the meridian altitude will be found as before,
for the Table of days and months.

If the hour proposed be six in the morning or six at night.

As the sine of 90 gr.

to the sine of the latitude:

So the sine of the declination,

to the sine of the altitude.

Thus in our latitude the declination of the Sun being 23 gr. 30 m. the
altitude will be found to be 18 gr. 11 m: the declination being 11 gr. 30 m.
the altitude will be 9 gr.

If the hour proposed be neither twelve nor six.

As the cosine of the hour from the meridian,

to the sine of 90 gr.

So the tangent of the latitude,

to the tangent of a fourth arc.

So in our latitude and one hour from the meridian, this fourth ark will be
found to be 52 gr. 28 m. at two 55 gr. 26 m. at three 60 gr. 39 m. at four 68
gr. 22 m. and at five hours from the meridian 78 gr. 22 m.

Then consider the declination of the Sun and the hour proposed; if the
latitude and declination be both alike, as with us in North latitude, North
declination, and the hour fall between noone and six, take the declination out
of the fourth arc, the remainer shall be your fifth arc.

But if either the hour fall between six and midnight, or the latitude and
declination shall be unlike, add the declination unto the fourth arc, and the
sum of both shall be your fifth arc: or if the sum shall exceed 90 gr. you
may take the complement unto 180 gr. This fifth arc being known: As the sine
of the fourth arc,

to the sine of the latitude:

So the cosine of the fifth arc,

to the sine of the altitude.



Thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. Northward, the Sun having 23 gr. 30 m.
of North declination, if it shall be required to find the altitude of the
Sun for seven in the morning; here because the latitude and declination are
both alike to the Northward, and the hour proposed falls between noone and
six, you may take 23 gr. 30 m. the arc of the declination out of 78 gr. 22 m.
the fourth arc belonging to the fifth hour from the meridian, so there will
remain 54 gr. 52 m. for your fifth arc. Then working according to the Canon,
you shall find, As the sine of 78 gr. 22 m. your fourth arc,

to the sine of 51 gr. 30 m. for the latitude:

So the sine of 35 gr. 8 m. the co^plement of your fifth ark,

to the sine of 27 gr. 17 m. the altitude required.



If in the same latitude and declination, it were required to find the
altitude for five in the morning, here the hour falling between six and
midnight; if you add 23 gr. 30 m. unto 78 gr. 22 m. the sum will be 101 gr.
52 m. and the complement to 180 gr. will be 78 gr. 8 m. for your fifth arc.
Wherefore As the sine of 78 gr. 22 m.

to the sine of 51 gr. 30 m.

So the cosine of 78 gr. 8 m.

to the sine of 9 gr. 32 m. for the altitude required.



If in the same latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. Northward, the Sun having 23 gr. 30
m. of South declination, it were required the altitude for nine in the morning;
here because the latitude and declination are unlike, the one North, and the
other South, you may add 23 gr. 30 m. the arc of declination, unto 60 gr. 39
m. the fourth arc belonging to the third hour from the meridian, so shall you
have 84 gr. 9 m. for your fifth arc. Wherefore As the sine of 60 gr. 39 m.

to the sine of 51 gr. 30 m.

So the cosine of 84 gr. 9 m.

to the sine of 5 gr. 15 m. for the altitude required.



And so by one or other of these means you may find the altitude of the Sun
for any point of the ecliptique at all hours of the day, and set them down in
such a Table as this.

A Table for the altitude of the Sun in the beginning of each Sign at all
hours of the day, calculated for 51 gr. 30 m. of North latitude.
Ho. Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. 12 62 0 58 42 50 0 38 30
27 0 18 18 15 0 11 1 59 43 56 34 48 12 36 58 25 40 17 6 13 52 10 2 53 45 50 55
43 12 32 37 21 51 13 38 10 30 9 3 45 42 43 6 36 0 26 7 15 58 8 12 5 15 8 4 36
41 34 13 27 31 18 8 8 33 1 15 7 5 27 17 24 56 18 18 9 17 0 6 6 6 18 11 15 40 9
0 0 0 5 7 9 32 6 50 11 37 4 8 1 32 21 40

Lastly, you may find what declination the Sun has when he rises or
sets at any hour.

As the sine of 90 gr.

to the sine of the hour from six:

So the cotangent of the latitude,

to the tangent of the declination.

And so in the latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. you shall find that when the Sun
rises, either at five in the Summer, or seven in the Winter, his declination
is 11 gr. 37 m: when he rises at four in the Summer, or eight in the Winter,
his declination is 21 gr. 40 m. which may be also set down in the Table.

That done, you may there see that in this latitude the meridian altitude of
the Sun in the beginning of is 62 gr. in 58 gr. 42 m. in 50 gr. in 38 gr. 30
m. etc. But the beginning of and is represented by the tropiques TD, drawn at
23 gr. 30 m. of declination, and the beginning of and, by the equator OF. If
you draw an occult parallel between the equator and the tropique, at 11 gr.
30 m. of declination, it shall represent the beginning of,,, and; if you draw
another occult parallel though 20 gr. 12 m. of declination, it shall represent
the beginning of,,, and.

Then you may lay a ruler to the center A, and 62 gr. in the quadrant BC, and
note the point where it crosses the tropique of then move the ruler to 58 gr.
52 m. and note where it crosses the parallel of; then to 50 gr. and note
where it crosses the parallel of; and again to 38 gr. 30 m. noting where it
crosses the equator; so the line drawn through these points shall show the
hour of 12 in the Summer, while the Sun is in,,,,, or. In like manner if you
lay the ruler to the center A, and 27 gr. in the quadrant, and note the point
where it crosses the parallel of, then move it to 18 gr. 18 m. and note where
it crosses the parallel of; and again to 15 gr. noting where it crosses the
tropique of; the line drawn through these points shall show the hour of 12 in
the Winter, while the Sun is in,,,, and, and so may you draw the rest of
these houre-lines: only that of 7 from the meridian in the Summer, and 5 in
the Winter, will cross the line of declination at 11 gr. 37 m. and that of 8
in the Summer, and 4 in the Winter at 21 gr. 40 m.

The fourth table for drawing of the azimuth lines, must likewise be fitted for
the altitude of the Sun above the horizon at every azimuth, especially when
he comes to the equator, the tropiques, and some other intermediat
declinations.

If the Sun be in the equator, and so have no declination: As the sine of 90
gr.

to the cosine of the azimuth from the meridian:

So the cotangent of the latitude,

to the tangent of the altitude at the equator.



Thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. at 90 gr. from the meridian, the Sun
will have no altitude; at 80 gr. the altitude will be 7 gr. 52 m; at 70 gr. it
will be 15 gr. 30 m; at 60 gr. it will be 21 gr. 41 m.

If the Sun have declination, the meridian altitude will be easily found as
before, for the table for days and months. And for all other azimuths.

As the sine of the latitude,

to the sine of the declination:

So the cosine of the altitude at the equator,

to the sine of a fourth arc.

When the latitude and declination are both alike in all azimuths from the
prime vertical unto the meridian, add this fourth arc unto the arc of
altitude at the equator.

When the latitude and declination are both alike, and the azimuth more then 90
gr. distant from the meridian, take the altitude at the equator out of this
fourth arc.

When the latitude and declination are unlike, take this fourth arc out of the
arc of altitude at the equator, so shall you have the altitude of the Sun
belonging to the azimuth.

Thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. Northward, if it were required to find
the altitude of the Sun in the azimuth of 60 gr. from the meridian, when the
declination is 23 gr. 30 m. Nothward, you may find the altitude at the equator
belonging to this azimuth to be 21 gr. 41 m. by the former Canon, and by this
last Canon you may find the fourth arc to be 28 gr. 15 m. Then because the
latitude and declination are both alike to the Northward, if you add them both
together, you shall have 49 gr. 56 m. for the altitude required.

If the declination had been 23 gr. 30 m. to the Southward, you should then
have taken this fourth ark out of the ark at the equator, which because it
cannot here be done, it is a sign that the Sun is not then above the
horizon. But if you take the arc at the equator out of this fourth arc, you
shall have 6 gr. 34 m. for the altitude of the Sun when he is in the azimuth
of 60 gr. from the North, and 120 gr. from the South part of the meridian. The
like reason holds for the rest of these altitudes, which may be gathered and
set down in a table.

Lastly when the Sun rises or sets upon any azimuth, to find his
declination.

As the sine of 90 gr.

to the cosine of the latitude:

So the cosine of the azimuth from the meridian,

to the sine of the declination.

And thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. when the azimuth is 80 gr. from the
meridian, the declination will be found to be 6 gr. 12 m; if the azimuth be 70
gr. the declination will be found 12 gr. 18 m; if 60 gr. then 18 gr. 8 m. And
so for the rest, which may be also set down in the Table.

A Table for the altitude of the Sun in the beginning of each Sign for every
tenth azimuth, in 51 gr. 30 m. of North latitude.
Az. Gr. M Gr. M Gr. M. Gr. M Gr. M Gr. M. Gr. M. 0 62 0 58 42 50 0 38 30 27 0
18 18 15 0 10 61 43 58 24 49 38 38 4 26 30 17 45 14 25 20 60 51 57 28 48 33 36
46 25 0 16 5 12 41 30 59 52 55 52 46 40 34 34 22 27 13 15 9 45 40 57 10 53 29
43 55 31 21 18 48 9 14 6 34 50 54 3 50 12 40 11 27 5 13 58 3 57 0 6 60 49 56 45
53 35 23 21 41 8 0 70 44 40 40 25 29 27 15 13 1 0 80 38 11 33 46 21 29 7 52 90
30 38 26 10 14 45 0 0 100 22 27 18 2 6 45 6 12 110 14 14 9 58 12 18 120 6 34 2
30 18 8

That done, if you would draw the line of East or West, which is 90 gr. from
the meridian, lay the ruler to the center A, and 30 gr. 38 m. numbered in the
quadrant from C toward B, and note the point where it crosses the tropique of;
then move the ruler to 26 gr. 10 m. and note where it crosses the parallel of
then to 14 gr. 45 m. and note where it crosses the parallel of then to 0 gr.
0 m. and you shall find it to cross the equator in the point F; so a line
drawn through these points, shall show the azimuth belonging to East and West.
The like reason holds for all the rest.

These lines being thus drawn, if you set two sights upon the line AC, and
hang a thread and plummet on the center A, with a bead upon the thread, the
foreside of the quadrant shall be fully finished.

Or in stead of the five stars before mentioned, you may place the Nocturnall
(described before in the use of the Sector, page 60.) on the backside of the
Quadrant, and so also it will be fitted both for day and night.

CHAP. II. Of the use of the Quadrant in taking the altitude of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars.
THe Quadrant is the fourth part of a circle, divided equally into 90 gr. and
here numbered by 10.20.30. etc. unto 90 gr. each degree being subdivided into 4.

Lift up the center of the Quadrant, so as the thread with the plummet may play
easily by the side of it, and the Sun beams may pass through both the
sights; so shall the degrees cut by the thread, show what is the altitude at
the time of observation, as may appear by this example.

Upon the 14 day of April, about noone, the Sunbeams passing through both the
sights, the thread fell upon 51 gr. 20 m. and this was the true meridian
altitude of the Sun for that day in this our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. for which
this Quadrant was made.

Again, toward three of the clock in the afternoon, the thread fell upon 38
gr. 40 m. and such was the Suns altitude at that time.

CHAP. III. Of the Ecliptique.
1 The place of the Sun being given to find his right ascension.
THe Ecliptique is here represented by the arc, figured with the characters of
the twelve Signs,,,, etc. each Sign being divided unequally into 30 gr. and
they are to be reckoned from the character of the Sign.

Let the thread be laid on the place of the Sun in the Ecliptique, and the
degrees which it cutteth in the Quadrant shall be the right ascension required.

As if the place of the Sun given be the fourth degree of, the thread laid on
this degree shall cut 62 degrees in the Quadrant, which is the right ascension
required.

But if the place of the Sun given be more then 90 gr. from the beginning of,
there must be more then 90 gr. allowed to the right ascension; for this
instrument is but a quadrant: and so if the Sun be in 26 gr. of, you shall
find the thread to fall in the same place, and yet the right ascension to be
118 gr.

2 The right ascension of the Sun being given, to find his place in the
Ecliptique.
Let the thread be laid on the right ascension in the Quadrant, and it shall
cross the place of the Sun in the Ecliptique, as may appear in the former
example.

CHAP. IIII. Of the line of declination.
1 The place of the Sun being given to find his declination.
THe line of declination is here drawn from the center to the beginning of the
Quadrant, and divided from the beginning of downward into 23 gr. 30 m.

Let the thread be laid, and the beade set on the place of Sun in the
ecliptique; then move the thread to the line of declination, and there the bead
shall fall upon the degrees of the declination required.

As if the place of the Sun given be the fourth degree of, the beade first
set to this place, and then moved to the line of declination, shall there show
the declination of the Sun at that time to be 21 gr. from the equator.

2 The declination of the Sun being given, to find his place in the
Ecliptique.
Let the thread and beade be first laid to the declination, and then moved to
the Ecliptique.

As if the declination be 21 gr. the beade first set to this declination, and
then moved to the ecliptique, shall there show the fourth of, the fourth of,
the 26 of, and the 26 of; and which of these four is the place of the Sun,
may appear by the quarter of the year.

CHAP. V. Of the circle of Months and Days.
THis circle is here represented by the arc, figured with these letters, I, F,
M, A, M, etc. signifying the months January, February, March, April, etc. each
month being divided unequally, according to the number of the days that are
therein.

1 The day of the month being given, to find the altitude of the Sun at
noone.
Let the thread be laid to the day of the month, and the degrees which it
cutteth in the Quadrant shall be the meridian altitude required.

As if the day given be the 15 of May, the thread laid on this day shall cut 59
gr. 30 m. in the quadrant, which is the meridian altitude required.

2 The meridian altitude being given, to find the day of the month.
The thread being set to the meridian altitude, does also fall on the day of
the month.

As if the altitude at noone be 59 gr. 30 m. the thread being set to this
altitude, does fall on the 15 day of May and the 9 of July; and which of these
two is the true day, may be known by the quarter of the year, or by another
days observation. For if the altitude prove greater, the thread will fall on
the 16 day of May and the 8 of July: or if it prove lesser, the thread will
fall on the 14 of May and the 10 of July; whereby the question is fully
answered.

CHAP. VI. Of the Houre-lines.
THat arc which is drawn upon the center of the quadrant by the beginning of
declination, does here represent the equator: that arc which is drawn by 23
gr. 30 m. of declination, and is next above the circle of months and days,
represents the tropiques: those lines which are between the equator and the
tropiques, being undivided and numbered at the equator by 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
12. at the tropique by 1. 2. 3. 4. etc. do represent the houre-circles: that
which is drawn from 12 in the equator to the middle of June, represents the
hour of 12 at noone in the Summer; and those which are drawn with it to the
right hand, are for the hours of the day in the Summer, and the hours of the
night in the Winter. That which is drawn from 12 in the equator to the middle
of December, represents the hour of 12 in the Winter; and those which are
drawn with it to the left hand, are for the hours of the day in the Winter,
and the hours of the night in the Summer; and of both these, that which is
drawn from 11 to 1, serves for 11 in the forenoone, and 1 in the afternoon.
That which is drawn from 10 to 2, serves for 10 in the forenoon, and 2 in the
afternoon: for the Sun on the same day is about the same height two hours
before noon, as two hours after noone. The like reason holds for the rest of
the hours.

1 The day of the month, or the height at noone being known, to find the
place of the Sun in the Ecliptique.
The thread being laid to the day of the month, or the height at noone, (for
one gives the other by the former proposition) mark where it crosses the
hour of 12, and set the bead to that intersection; then move the thread till
the bead fall on the ecliptique, and it shall fall on the place of the Sun.

As if the day given be the 15 of May, or the meridian altitude 59 gr. 30 m.
lay the thread accordingly, and put the bead to the intersection of the thread
with the hour of 12; then move the thread till the bead fall on the
ecliptique, and it shall there show the fourth of, the fourth of, the 26 of,
and the 26 of; and which of these is the place of the Sun, may appear by the
quarter of the year, or another days observation.

2 The place of the Sun in the Ecliptique being known, to find the day of the
month, etc.
Let the thread and beade be first laid on the place of the Sun in the
Ecliptique, and then moved to the line of 12.

As if the place of the Sun given be the fourth of, the bead being laid to
this degree, and then moved to the hour of 12, in the Summer, the thread will
fall on the 15 day of May, and the 9 of July; or if it be moved to the hour of
12 in the Winter, the thread will sall on the 6 of January and the 16 of
November; which of these is the day of the month required, may appear by the
quarter of the year.

In this and the former propositions, you have two ways to rectify the bead,
by the place of the Sun, and by the day of the month; the better way is by
the place of the Sun, for in the other the Leap-yeare may breed some small
difference.

There is yet a third way. For the Seamen having a table for the declination
on each day of the year, may set the bead thereto in the line of declination.

3 The hour of the day being given to find the altitude of the Sun above the
horizon.
The bead being set for the time by either of the three ways, let the thread be
moved from the hour of 12 toward the line of declination, till the bead fall
on the hour given; and the degrees which it cuts in the Quadrant, shall show
the altitude of the Sun at that time.

As if the time given be the tenth of April, the Sun being then in the
beginning of, the bead being rectified, you shall find the height at noone 50
gr. 0 m. at 11 in the morning 48 gr. 12 m. at 10 but 43 gr. 12 m. at 9 but 36
gr. at 8 but 27 gr. 30 m. at 7 but 18 gr. 18 m. at 6 but 9 gr. at 5 it meets
with the line of declination, and has no altitude at all, and therefore you
may think it did rise much about that hour.

Then if you move the thread again from the line of declination toward the
hour of 12, you shall find that the Sun is 8 gr. 33 m. below the horizon at 4
in the morning, and near 16 gr. at 3, and 21 gr. 51 m. at 2, and 25 gr. 40 m.
at 1, and 27 gr. at midnight.

4 The altitude of the Sun being given, to find the hour of the day.
The altitude being observed as before, let the bead be set for the time, then
bring the thread to the altitude, so the bead shall show the hour of the day.

As if the 10 of April having set the bead for the time, you shall find by the
quadrant, the altitude to be 36 gr. the bead at the same time will fall upon
the houre-line of 9 and 3: wherefore the hour is 9 in the forenoone, or 3 in
the afternoon. If the altitude be near 40 gr. you shall find the bead at the
same time to fall half way between the houre-line of 9 and 3, and the
houre-line of 10 and 2: wherefore it must be either half an hour past 9 in
the morning, or half an hour past 2 in the afternoon; and which of these is
the true time of the day, may be soon known by a second observation: for if
the Sun rise higher, it is the forenoone; if it become lower, it is the
afternoon.

5 The hour of the night being given, to find how much the Sun is below the
horizon.
The Sun is always so much below the horizon at any hour of the night, as
his opposite point is above the horizon at the like hour of the day; and
therefore the beade being set, if the question be made of any hour of the
night in the Summer, then move it to the like hour of the day in the Winter;
if of any hour of the night in Winter, then move it to the like hour of the
day in Summer; so the degrees which the thread cutteth in the Quadrant shall
show how much the Sun is below the horizon at that time.

As if it be required to know how much the Sun is below the horizon the 10 of
April at 4 of the clock in the morning; the bead being set to his place
according to the time in the Summer hours, bring it to 4 of the clock in the
afternoon in the Winter hours, and so shall you find the thread to cut 8 gr.
and about 30 m. in the quadrant; and so much is the Sun below the horizon at
that time.

6 The depression of the Sun supposed, to give the hour of the night with
us, or the hour of the day to our Antipodes.
Here also because the Sun is so much above the horizon at all hours of the
day, as his opposite point is below the horizon at the like hour of the night;
therefore first set the bead according to the time, then bring the thread to
the degree of the Suns depression below the horizon, so shall the bead fall on
the contrary houre-lines, and there show the hour of the night in regard of
us, which is the like hour of the day to our Antipodes.

As if the 10 of April the Sun being then in the beginning of, and by
supposition 8 gr. 30 m. below the horizon in the East, it be required to know
what time of the night it is; first set the bead according to the day in the
Summer hours, then bring the thread to 8 gr. 30 m. in the quadrant, so shall
the bead fall among the Winter hours, on the line of 4 of the clock in the
afternoon: wherefore to our Antipodes it is 4 of the clock in their
afternoon, and to us it is then 4 of the clock in the morning.

7 The time of the year or the place of the Sun being given, to find the
beginning of day-breake, and end of twilight.
This proposition differs little from the former: for the day is said to
begin to break, when ye Sun comes to be but 18 gr. below our horizon in the
East, and twilight to end when it is gotten 18 gr. below the horizon in the
West: wherefore let the bead be set for the time, and then bring the thread to
18 gr. in the quadrant, so shall the bead fall on the contrary houre-lines, and
there show the hour of twilight as before.

So if it be required to know at what time the day begins to break on the
tenth of April, the Sun being then in the beginning of; first set the bead
according to the time in the Summer hours, and then bring the thread to 18 gr.
in the quadrant, so shall the bead fall among the Winter hours a little more
then a quarter before 3 in the morning; and that is the time when the day
begins to break upon the tenth of April.

CHAP. VII. Of the Horizon.
THe Horizon is here represented by the arc drawn, from the beginning of
declination toward the end of February, divided unequally, and numbered by 10.
20. 30. 40.

1 The day of the month, or the place of the Sun being known, to find the
amplitude of the Suns rising and setting.
Let the bead rectified for the time, be brought to the horizon, and there it
shall show the amplitude required.

As if the day given be the 15 of May, the Sun being in the fourth degree of,
the bead rectified and brought to the horizon, shall there fall on 35 gr. 8 m.
such is the amplitude of the Suns rising from the East, and of his setting
from the West; which amplitude is always Northward when the Sun is in the
Northern Signs, and when he is in the Southward Signs always Southward.

2 The day of the month, or the place of the Sun being given, to find the
ascensionall difference.
Let the bead rectified for the time, be brought to the horizon, so the degrees
cut by the thread in the quadrant, shall show the difference of ascensions.

As if the day given be the 15 of May, the Sun being in the fourth degree of,
let the bead be rectified and brought to the horizon; so shall the thread in
the quadrant show the ascensionall difference to be 28 gr. and about 50 m.

Upon the ascensionall difference depends this Corollarie.

To find the hour of the rising and setting of the Sun, and thereby the length
of the day and night.
The time of the Suns rising may be guessed at by the 3 of the last Cap. but
here by the ascensionall difference it may be better found, and that to a
minute of time. For if the ascensionall difference be converted into time,
allowing an hour for 15 gr. and 4 minutes of an hour for each degree, it
shows how long the Sun rises before six of the clock in the Summer, and
after six in the Winter.

As if the day given be the 15 of May, the Sun being in the fourth of, and
his ascensionall difference found as before 28 gr. 50 m; this converted into
time, makes 1 ho. and somewhat more then 55 m. of an hour: wherefore the Sun
at that time, in regard it was Summer, rose 1 ho. and full 55 m. before 6 of
the clock; and so having the quantity of the semidiurnall arc, the length of
the day and night need not be unknown.

CHAP. VIII. Of the five Stars.
I Might have put in more Stars, but these may suffice for the finding of the
hour of the night at all times of the year: and first I make choice of Ala
Pegasi, a star in the extremity of the wing of Pegasus, in regard it wants
but 6 minutes of time of the beginning of; but because it is but of the second
magnitude, and not always to be seen, I made choice of four more, one for
each quarter of the Ecliptique, as of Oculus the Bulls eye, whose right
ascension converted into time, is 4 ho. 15 m; then of Cor the Lions heart,
whose right ascension is 9 ho. 48 m; next of Arcturus, whose right ascension is
13 H. 58 m; and lastly of Aquila, or the Vultures heart, whose right ascension
is 19 H. 33 m. These five stars have all of them Northern declination; and if
any others, some of these will be seen at all times of the year. The use of
them is,

The altitude of any of these five Stars being known, to find the hour of
the night.
First put the beade to the star which you intend to observe, take his
altitude, and find how many hours he is from the meridian by the fourth Prop.
of the sixth Chap; then out of the right ascension of the star, take the right
ascension of the Sun converted into hours, and mark the difference; for this
difference being added to the observed hour of the star from the meridian,
shall show how many hours the Sun is gone from the meridian, which is in
effect the hour of the night.

As if the 15 of May, the Sun being in the fourth of, I should set the beade
to Arcturus, and observing his altitude should find him to be in the West about
52 gr. high, and the beade to fall on the houre-line of 2 afternoon, the hour
would be 11 bo. 50 m. past noone, or 10 m. short of midnight.

For 62 gr. the right ascension of the Sun, converted into time, makes 4 ho.
8 m. which if we take out of 13 ho. 58 m. the right ascension of Arcturus, the
difference will be 9 ho. 50 m. and this being added to 2 ho. the observed
distance of Arcturus from the meridian, shows the hour of the night to be 11
ho. 50 m. Another example will make all more plain.

If the 9 of July the Sun being then in 26 gr. of, I should set the beade to
Oculus, and observing his altitude should find him to be in the East about 12
gr. high, and the bead to fall on the houre-line of 6 before noone, which is 18
ho. past the meridian, the hour of the night would be better then a quarter
past 2 of the clock in the morning.

For 118 gr. the right ascension of the Sun, converted into time, makes 7 ho.
52 m; this taken out of 4 ho. 15 m. the right ascension of Oculus, adding a
whole circle, (for otherwise there could be no substraction) the difference
will be 20 ho. 23 m. and this being added to 18 ho. which was the observed
distance of Oculus from the meridian, shows that the Sun (abating 24 ho. for
the whole circle) is 14 gr. 23 m. past the meridian, and therefore 23 m. past 2
of the clock in the morning.

CHAP. IX. Of the Azimuth lines.
THose lines which are drawn between the equator and the tropiques, on that
side of the quadrant which is nearest unto the sights, and are numbered by 10.
20. 30. etc. do represent the azimuths, the uttermost to the left hand
represents the meridian, that which is numbered with 10 the tenth azimuth from
the meridian, and that which is numbered with 20 the twentieth, and so the rest.
Those lines which are drawn from the equator to the left hand, do show the
azimuth in the Summer; and those other to the right hand, do show the same in
the Winter. The use of them is,

1 The azimuth whereon the Sun bears from us being known, to find the
altitude of the Sun above the horizon.
First let the bead be set for the time, as in the former Chapter, then move
the thread until the bead fall on the azimuth; so the degrees which the thread
cutteth in the quadrant, shall show the altitude of the Sun at that time. Where
you are to observe, that seeing the azimuths are drawn on the right side of
the quadrant, you are also to begin to number the degrees of the Suns
altitude from the right hand toward the left. As if the sights had been set on
the line AB, and you had turned your right hand toward the Sun in observing
of his altitude, contrary to our practice in the former Chapter.

As if the time given were the 2 of August, when the Sun has about 15 gr. of
North declination, you may set the bead for the time, so you shall find the
height at noone when the Sun is in the South, to be 53 gr. 30 m. when he is
10 gr. from the South 53 gr. 10 m. when 20 gr. then about 52 gr. 8 m. when 30
gr. then 50 gr. 20 m. when 40 gr. then 47 gr. 48 m. when 50 gr. then 44 gr. 12
m. when 60 gr. then 39 gr. 35 m. when 70 gr. then 33 gr. 50 m. when 80 gr. then
27 gr. when he is in the East or West 90 gr. from the meridian, then is the
height near 19 gr. 20 m; when he comes to be 100 gr. then 11 gr. 15 m. when
110 gr. then 3 gr. 20 m; and before he comes to the azimuth of 120 gr. he
has no altitude. For the Sun having 15 gr. of North declination, will rise
and set at 114 gr. 34 m. from the meridian.

2 The altitude of the Sun being given, to find on what azimuth he bears
from us.
Let the beade be set for the time, and the altitude observed as before; then
bring the thread to the complement of that altitude, so the bead shall show the
azimuth required.

As if the second of August, having set the beade for the time, you shall find
the altitude of the Sun to be 19 gr. 20 m. remove the thread unto 70 gr. 40 m.
the complement of the altitude; or, which is all one, to 19 gr. 20 m. from the
right hand toward the left, and the bead will fall on the line of 90 gr. from
the meridian. And therefore the point whereon the Sun bears from us, is one
of these two, either due East or due West. And which of these is the true point
of the compass, may be soon known by a second observation: for if the Sun
rise higher, it is the forenoone; if it be lower, it is the afternoon.

By knowing the azimuth or point of the compass whereon the Sun bears from
us, it is easy to find, A meridian line; and thereby

The coasting of the Country.

The site of a building.

The variation of the Compass.



As if the second of August in the afternoon, I should find by the height of
the Sun that he bears from me 60 gr. from the meridian toward the West; then
there being 90 gr. belonging to each quarter, the West will be 30 gr. to the
right hand, the East is opposite to the West, the North and South lie equally
between them.

CHAP. X. Of the Quadrat.
THe Quadrat has two sides divided, the other two sides next the Center may be
supposed to be divided, each of them into 100 equal parts: of the sides
divided, that which is next the horizontall line contains the parts of right
shadow, the other next the sights, the parts of contrary shadow. The use of the
Quadrat is,

1 Any point being given, to find whether it be level with the eye.
Lift up the center of the quadrant, so as the thread with the plummet may play
easily by the side of it; then look through the sights to the place given: for
now if the thread shall fall on AB the horizontall line, then is the place
given leuel with the eye: but if it shall fall within the said line on any of the
divisions, then it is higher; if without, then it is lower then the level of
the eye.

2 To find an height above the level of the eye, or a distance at one
observation.
Look through the sights to the place, going nearer or farther from it, till
the thread fall on 100 parts in the quadrat or 45 gr. in the quadrant, so shall
the height of the place above the level of the eye, be equal to the distance
between the place and the eye.

If the thread fall on 50 parts of a right shadow, the height geometric
illustration measuring shadow cast by a tower is but half the distance: if it
fall on 25, it is a quarter of the distance: if on 75, it is three quarters of
the distance. For as often as the thread falls on the parts of right shadow, As
100 to the parts on which the thread falls:

So is the distance to the height required.



And on the contrary, As the parts cut by the thread are to 100:

So the height unto the distance.



But when the thread shall fall on the parts of contrary shadow: if it fall on
50 parts, the height is double unto the distance; if on 25, it is four times
as the distance. For as often as the thread falls on the parts of contrary
shadow, As the parts cut by the thread are unto 100:

So is the distance unto the height.



And on the contrary, As 100 are unto the parts cut by the thread:

So is the height unto the distance.



And what is here said of the height and distance, the same may be understood
of the height and shadow.

3 To find a height or a distance at two observations.
As if the place which is to be measured might not otherwise be approached, and
yet it were required to find the height BC, and the distance: first if I make
choice of a station at A, where the thread may fall on 100 parts in the
quadrat, and 45 gr. in the quadrant, the distance AB will be equal to the
height BC; then if I go farther in a direct line with the former distance, and
make choice of a second station at D, where the thread may fall on 50 parts of
right shadow, the distance BD would be double to the height BC: wherefore I may
measure the difference between the two stations A and D, and this difference
AD will be equal both to the distance AB and the height BC.

Or if I cannot make choice of such stations, I take such as I may, one at D,
where the thread falls at 50 parts of right shadow; the second at E, where it
falls on 40 parts: and supposing the height BC to be 100, I find that As 50
parts are unto 100, the side of the quadrat:

So 100 the supposed height, unto 200 the distance BD.

And as 40 parts, at the second station, unto 100:

So 100 the supposed height, unto 250 the distance BE.



Wherefore the difference between the stations D and E should seem to be 50;
and then if in measuring of it, I should find it to be either more or less,
the proportion will hold, as from the supposed difference to the measured
difference, so from height to height, and from distance to distance.

As if the difference between the two stations D and E being measured, were
found to be 30.

As 50 the supposed difference, unto 30 the true difference:

So 100 the supposed height, unto 60 the true height.

And 200 the supposed distance, unto 120 the true distance:

And 250 at the second station, unto 150 the distance BE.

The like reason holds in all other examples of this kind: and if an Index
with sights were fitted to turn upon the Center, it might then serve by the
same reason for the finding of all other distances.

FINIS.

