Fire from Heaven.

Burning the body of one John Hittchell of Holne-hurst, within the parish of
Christ-church, in the County of South-hampton the 26. of June last 1613. who by
the same was consumed to ashes, and no fire seen, lying therein smoking and
smothering three days and three nights; not to bequenched by water, nor the
help of man's hand.

With the lamentable burning of his house and one child, and the grievous
scorching of his wife: with the birth of a Monster, and many other strange
things happening about the same time: the like was never seen nor heard of.

Written by John H^lliard Preacher of the word of life in Sopley.

Read and tremble. With the fearful burning of the town of Dorchester upon
friday the 6. of August last 1613.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London for John Trundle, and are to be sold at his shop in Barby
can at the sign of Nobody. 1613.

To The Worshipful his very loving Cosen Mr. Nicholas Hillyard, his Majesty's
servant in ordinary. Io: H. wishes all the graces of this life, and the glory
of the life to come.
Worshipful and worthy Cosen,
my end in publishing this Pamphlet, is not popular ostentation: for you well
know, it becomes neither the season, nor the subject: The only purpose I
have, is to rouse up the sloathfull careless, and instruct the filthy
forgetful, to behold the wonderful works of the Lord, and thereby to grow
more thankful for his great mercy, in sparing them: And to the end that we
may all in true humility, embrace these merciful warnings of our gracious God,
and speedily appeal to the Throne of mercy, preparing our selves to meet the
Bridegroom of our souls, who comes in majesty to judge both quick and
dead. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.10.
that every man may receive the things which are done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or evil.

For the plainness and rudenes of my style, if you duly consider the manner
of my writing: I trust you will acknowledge that the power of the spirit is
best seen in weakness, and that plain lines do best ans^ere a straight
level: the evidence of the spirit is best seen in plainenes: Wherefore if our
Gospel be hid, it is hid in them that perish. But I persuade my self better
things of you, even such as accompany salvation. If you accept of these my
pains according to mine intent you shall happily ease your self of the Mother
and the Daughters forgetfullnesse, and unthankfulness, and burden me willingly
with greater labor, for the further building you up in Christ Jesus. To whose
protection I commit you.

Christ-church this 10. of July. 1613. Your loving kins-man, John Hilliard.


Fire from Heaven: or A TRVMPET SOVNDING TO IVDGEMENT, CALLING US TO
REPENTANCE, BY THE FEAREFVL and lamentable burning of John Hitchell, carpenter
to ashes: together with his house and one child, and the grievous scorching of
his wife by lightning, as also by the burning of another house sithence, and
the birth of a Monster. All within the Town and Parish of Christ-church in
Hampshire.
IT was the saying of Cambises, that Cities would flourish well in prosperity,
if the Inhabitants were watchefull, and still imagined their enemies to be at
hand. That which he said for the prosperous estate of a commonweal, our
Savior said for the happy success of all Christians. And both tend to show
that whether we respect the saftie of our bodies here on earth, or the
salvation of our souls in the kingdom of Christ, we may not be in our
callings either idle, careless, or secure. But yet such is our nature, we
rather respect the words of Cambises, for temporal prosperity, then the
warning of Christ, for eternal felicity. Whereby it comes to pass, that we
have commonly fayrs bodies, but soul souls: much goods, but little goodness:
seeming glorious in the sight of men outwardly, but odious inwardly in the
sight of God. According to that of the Psalmist. Psalm. 10.6.
The ungodly has said in his heart, tush, I shall never be cast down, there
shall no evil happen unto me. But the fairest Oak is soonest cut down: the
fattest Ox is readiest for the slaughter, and the felicity of fools, is their
own destruction. Pro. 1. Psalm. 73.
For how soon do they consume, perish, and come to fearful end? Yea even
as a dream are they when one awaketh. Annos 6.8.9,
Though the Lord has sworn by himself that he does abhor the excellency of
Jacob, and hate his Palaces, and therefore will deliver up the City, with all
that is therein, and if there remain ten men in one house, they shall all dye.
Yet still such is our security that we say with the unthrifty servant tardat
Dominus Venire: Our Lord does defer his coming, thinking we may repent when
we please, and that we shall have leisure enough, not remembering with our
selves, That like as God is merciful, Eccl, 5.6.
so goes wrath from him also, and his indignation comes down upon sinners.
Therefore let us make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and not put of from day
to day, for suddenly does his wrath come, and in the time of vengeance he will
distroy us. Semper vigilemus been viuendo, ne nouissimus dies cuiusque nostrum
inueniat nos imparatos. Let us watch and wait for his coming in honest
conversation of life, that the latter day of every one of us find us not
unprepared. For he is not slack, as they count slackenesse, 2. Pet. 3.9.
but he is patient to usward, because he would have mercy of all and none to
perish. There is not one among us so just as Jacob was, nor scarce one on whom
the Lord will pronounce the like sentence, so lamentable is our time, and so
detestable our iniquities. Our eyes have beheld such signs as Jerusalem did:
but we esteem them as fantasies, descanting whence they come, but not
remembering wherefore they were sent. Our ears have heard many Ionasses,
threatening death, destruction, and damnation to Niniui, crying over us with
tears for our abomination, yet we rather desire silks then sackecloth: and
when we should repent, we study to increase our pride. We have them which cry
daily with the prophet Esaias woe is me, Esaias 16.
woe is me, the transgressors grievously have offended, threatening that fear,
the Pit, and the snare, is upon the inhabiters of the earth, he that flies
from the noise of the fear, shall fall into the Pit: and he that comes out
of the Pit, shall be taken in the snare, for the windows of Heaven are open, and
the foundations of the earth do shake etc. Can we read this of our selves?
can we learn this of others? can we see the daily proof of these Prophesies
come to effect: and dare we continue still rocked in the cradell of Security?
like Epicures caring for naught but the belly? O monstrous time full of
deformity! O reprobate people deleting in impiety, and more brutish then
beasts forgetting their duty: else how durst the usurer devour the body and
thirst for the blood of his brother, when he reads how the rich man burned in
Hell? Luke 16.
How durst the Adulterer persist in his lascivious enterprises, when he sees
the sin of David so seuearely punished, the incest of Lot so grievously
lamented, and the wisdom of Solomon so foulely obscured? How durst the
couetuous person heap up riches for other, when he hears our Savior call him
fool, that so provided for his soul? How gracelessely dare the Glutton
maintain his delicacie, when he remembers how Iobes children were flayne at
their banquet? How dare the Tyrant continue his cruelty, if he regard the
revenge of the rigorous debtor? How dare our worldlings continue their pride
considering the fall of Lucifer? How dare the Idolater do reverence to Images,
when he hears the heavy curse that the God of truth pronunceth against him?
How dare we swear and forswear our selves, when we remember the wretched end
of Nabal? How dare greedy Man to covet his neighbors house, when he thinks
how hungerly the dogs licked the blood of King Ahab? How dare the most base
swynish gormondizing drunkard, sit all the day, and night, and week, swilling,
sing, and profanely abusing Gods Creatures, when he hears the holy Ghost
pronounce woe unto them that rise early to be drunken? How dare all foul
offenders but to tremble and quake, when they hear the fearful noise of the
Thunder, and see the dreadful blasts of is lightning to descend from the
heavens, and sent from an angry God as tokens of his fearful indignation? In
a word, how dares every obstinate sinner to delight and boaste of his
wickedness, when he knows that upon the ungodly shall rain Snares, Psalm. 11.7.
Fire, and Brimstone, and stormy, tempest: this shall be their portion to
drink. But such is our ungodliness, that what we should do, we slide back
from, forgetting God, and calling vengeance upon our selves, haling sorrow upon
sorrow, envying those that live well and loving those that hate goodness. Who
ever read of more Royalty in a King, then we may justly write of our learned,
gracious and godly King James? whose blessed, peaceful, and happy reign, the
Lord for his mercy long continue over us. What land had evermore plenty of all
things then this Realm of England? and yet what country under the Sun may be
compared with it for unthankfulness? We have the light of the glorious
Gospel set upon an hill, and yet too many rather then they will see it, will
sit blindfold in the valley of ignorance. Can any Cronicles make report of a
more worthy, wise, virtuous, godly, and religious Prince, then the late Prince
Henry? in whom the worthiness of all the eight Henry's before him met as in
their confluence: I may speak of him as the Apostle spoke of those (with whom
he is now in company) The world was not worthy of him: And although our sins
no doubt were the cause why he was taken from us, yet who is the more
sorrowful? And whereas God (blessed be his name) has left unto us not only
the Sun and Moon of our firmament, but also Charles-wayne to remain in one
Horizon: D. P.
A Prince, if Stars be of any truth, like to be of long life, and great
learning, most hopeful for his time, most fruitful for his hopes: so that I
hope God has said to our Jacob, as Jacob said to his Judah. Sceptrum non
auferetur a Judah, the Scepter shall not be taken from our Jacob till Shiloah
come again into the world: yet who I say is the more thankful? Our gracious
King has made many good laws to cut of Malefactors, but some esteem little
of Gods ordinances, less of his Majesty's authority, and least of all of his
decrees: for proof whereof we have seen (such is our gracelessnes) how
wickedly some have grown to rebellion, whom the earth has swallowed, as
Corath, Dathan, and Abiram. Many have conspired the death both of his Majesty
and his posterity, but the sword has, and I trust ever shall cut them of
before their wicked fruit come to devilish ripenes. Yea, their own tongues
shall make them fall. And let us beseech the Lord of hosts to look down
always upon his anointed, and to cloth his enemies with shame, but upon him
and his (good Lord) let his Crown flourish upon, till thou Crown us all in
heaven.

Let us learn by the consuming of Sodom and Gomorrah, to fly from their
sins, and let us leave the wickedness of the old world, least God devise a
worse end for us, let us be warned by the sins of Jerusalem, to be armed with
the word of truth, at the preaching of Jonas to Niniui, let the ignorant leave
to be obstinate, and the learned cease to be slothful, and labor by all
means to make the world know that the fearful day of the Lords coming is at
hand, exhorting therefore to watch, continuing in prayer. For assuredly this
fearful accident (I mean) the burning of this man and child by fire from
Heaven, ought not to be attributed to any natural cause, but it is even the
Finger of God, threatening greater plagues to ensue, without our earnest and
hearty repentance. Neither may we think that this judgment lighted upon them
for their own proper sins which might be greater then ours, but rather that
our sins are far greater then were theirs, and God whose mercy is greater
then all, has sent this for our example to call us to repentance: wherefore
let us not think that those one whom the Tower in Siloam fell, were greater
sinners then all those that dwell in Jerusalem, but rather let us assure our
selves, that unless we repent, we shall also perish. And to speak of the life
and conversation of the man. I cannot find or by any means understand, no not
by reports of the nearest or the worst affected of his neighbors, but that he
behaved himself every way in the judgment of the world as an honest poor
man, and a painful laborer in his vocation. The manner of the accident is as
follows: He having been on Saturday the 26. of June last, at work at the
house of one John Deane of Parly-Court, where he truly and painefully labored
at his trade being a Carpenter, and having ended his dayes-worke went home to
his house as an honest man, to comfort his Family with the money which he had
painefully gotten, and went not (as too many Tradesmen use to do) to be
drunken and careless of their poor households at home, wherein he showed and
gave testimony to the world, of a Religious care. And after his coming home,
betook himself to his rest, and being in bed with his wife and child, in the
deep of the night, the lightning came on so fiercely, that an old woman named
Agnes Russell mother to the wife of the said John Hitchell having received a
terrible blow on her cheek (by what means I know not) was therewith
awakened and cried to the said John Hitchell and his wife to help her, but
they not answering, the poor old woman start out of the bed and went unto the
bed where they lay, and awakened her daughter, who was upon the sudden most
lamentably burnt all one side of her, and her husband and child dead by her
side: yet nevertheless, his poor wife when she saw her husband and child had
thus strangely finished their days, she (as it seems) thought not so much
of the hurt she had received her self, as she was careful to have preserved
the life of her husband if by any means possibly she could: and therefore
(notwithstanding all her grievous wounds, she dragd him out of the bed into
the street, and there by reason of the vehemence of the fire, she was
enforced to her no small greese to forsake him, where he lay burning upon the
ground for the space of three days after or thereabouts, not that there was
any appearance of Fire outwardly to be seen on him, but only a kind of smoke
ascending upwards from the Carcas, until it was consumed to ashes, except only
some small show of part of his bones which were cast into a pit made by the
place. O fearful judgment! Hearken to this O ye that forget God, least he
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

If this happened unto a man of so upright a conversation, who labored
painefully all day in a lawful calling, O what may befall you which fit day
and night at the Tavern, whose profane mouths are filled with impious oaths
and filthy Ridawdrie, whose whole lives and conuersations are nothing else but
sinkes of impiety. What Christian heart can choose but grieve to see the
horrible wickedness, which not only before, but every day sithence this woeful
spectacle, has been used in the very next adioyning-Towne where it happened. O
you that bear office and have the government of the place, I beseech you look
into your selves, that no filthy conversation ofts, may give into you
aragement to the meaner sort, to commit the ugly sins wherewith our gracious
God is so highly offended. O remember remember I say, the soul taynt wherewith
Jeroboam is branded in the book at God, namely, that his example made Israel
to sin: your painful Pastor has even worn out as his days, so his
strength and body, in exhorting you to repentance, and persuading you to fly
from the Vengeance to come. I assure you it shall be easier for Sodom and
Gomorrah in the great day of the Lord, then for those Towns, and persons,
which have heard remission of sins preached in Jesus, and yet have not
repented. For The servant that knows his Masters will and does it not shall
be beaten with many stripes. If the reverend, and childish fear of God cannot
win us to eschew evil and to the good, yet let the servile, and slavish
fear of punishment, stay and make us afraid to persevere in our evil, least
according to the righteousness of the same in our selves, at last we receive
double damnation in our bodies. But to our purpose, if I say this happened in a
green tree, what shall become of us, that are dry and withered: and since it
lighted upon some of vprighter conversation then our selves, O what shall
become of us vile wretched creatures, that delight in nothing but sin, and
have as it were sold our selves to work wickedness in the sight of God? The
Lord give us grace to judge our selves, that we be not judged of the Lord.

Now let us consider the Time when this fearful judgment happened, surely
about Midnight. The like we may read in the book of Exodus where the Lord
says, at Midnight he will go forth into the midst of Egypt, and all the
first borne in the land of Egypt shall die.

but that we may learn how as well in the Night as in the Day the Lord
executes both Judgment and mercy: Judgment as we see in Joshua his direction
against Ai, Joshua 8.5.
whereby their fearful overthrow followed: many thousands of them being
devoured by the sword, and their City consumed with fire: So when they slept,
the wrath of God awaked and marched toward them speedily. So again the five
Kings came upon them suddenly, and destroyed them with a great slaughter.

Thou fool, the Night shall they take away thy Soul, and in the Night God
directed his servant against them, Who then whose are all these? etc. Other
Kingdoms and Countries about us, what fearful Night-cries they have had when
we slept in peace, wisdom and thankfulness should consider.

Then for mercies received, in like manner you see the Scriptures: ^. Reg. 3.5.
Solomon had that comfortable conference with God in the Night, wherein God
granted him the thing he sought for, appearing to him in a dream. Daniel in
the Night found mercy with God, Dan. 2.19. ^cts 18, 8.
to have the Kingsdreame revealed unto him. Peter in the Night, was delivered
from danger: Paul and Silas in the Night singing Psalms, sound the comfort
there spoken of. So both Judgment and Mercy wake and walk in the Night. The
use whereof, unto us should be ever to stir us up, both to go to bed as we
ought, and to use the night as the godly have done: For the first, we may take
David's example. I will lay me down and take my rest, for it is thou Lord only
that make me dwell in safety. ^salme 4.8.
and for the second, he also in many Psalms may instruct us, for every night
says he, wash I my bed, and water my couch with tears: ^alme 6 6.
which David did not for any pusillanimitie, or weakness: (for we know he was
a man of a valiant courage) but only out of a sweet feeling that he had in his
night Meditation, of the great goodness of God toward him many ways, and his
owns to great inability to do to him again for the same, as he desired. And
what better time can we take to plow up the fallow ground of our hearts before
him, and to consider his favors and our faults, opening even all our woes and
griefs unto him? that as the night naturally, is moist and shewry more then
the day, so we likewise, may rain down abundance of tears, praying for our
sins, and thanking him for his goodness, knowing it is a most assured truth,
that no dew of the night can so glad the earth, as this sweet moisture of thy
wet eye in these respects does please thy God. Psalm. 119.62.
At Midnight says David will I rise to give thanks to thee, because of thy
righteous judgments: In the night I commune with mine own heart, Psalm 77.6.
and search out my spirits. Therefore I say again, since mercy (...) judgment
thus stir in the night, the one for Gods children, ye other for his enemies,
awake thou that sleep in most dull security, going to the bed as the dog
to his kennell, without any thought either of God, or Devil. Full little do
thou know what may happen to thee before it be day. It may be with thee, as
with the first borne of Egypt, with the five Kings, with the City Ai, with
this poor (though now rich) man and his Child, thy self may be dead as he is,
thy house on fire as his was, thy goods spoiled and Children destroyed as his
were, and as many woeful miseries upon thy wife and friends as there are upon
his. Wherefore go to bed with prayer, awake with prayer, and rise with prayer.
Let God and grace be in thy first thoughts, and not malice and wrath, not
Sheep and Oxen, not money and mucke, which all perish with thee when God is
angry. We see what has happened before our eyes, God give us all grace to be
warned. What, shall we now be unmindful of these things? unthankful to God
and unfaithful to our own souls? shall we continue in lies, lusts, oaths,
aspiring proiects, or malicious trappes? No, we will make and observe this vow,
We will not suffer our eyes to sleep, nor our eielids to slumber, we will
neither continue our tongue to betray our brother, nor our bodies to betray our
souls: we will endeavor to lead a just, and holy, and sober life, this we
desire, for this we hunger and thirst, this we vow, for this we pray the Lord
hear and grant us this petition.

Eze. 9.4.
O then let us mourn and weep for our offenses and for all the abominations,
so shall we be marked in the foreheads to be preserved from the evil to come,
nay, so shall we be blessed, for so the mouth of truth has pronounced, we
shall be comforted. Mat. 7.
Our sins are the unfruitful thorns that choke the good seed of virtue
and grace, the corrupters of Judgment, the seducers of will, the betrayers of
virtue, the flatterers of vice, the underminers of courage, slaves to weakness,
infection of youth, madness of age, the curse of life, and the reproach of
death: the least of our bosome-sinnes is fire in the hand, and a Serpent in the
heart, a Cancer, a Spider, ^sa. 3.
an evil Spirit, and the fruit thereof is death. O ye then that with those
Mincing dames in Jerusalem, are loath that the soles of your feet should
tread upon the earth, ye may be hurryed between Heaven and Earth, but never
willbe carried as Elias, unless in a fiery-Chariot. Ye that set more by Agar
then Sara, more esteem your bodies then your souls, fear and tremble at the
Lords Judgments. O that blindenes of man's mind, and that mad doubting of
Gods divine promises of eternal life! O that hardened and flynty heart of
ours, which is not moved, no not with these horrible threats of Gods heavy
displeasure, but continuing securely in all impiety, never asks pardon for
his wilful offending, and amendeth even as though the Scripture were but
lies, and the divine Oracles profane fables! For by those things which have
come to pass, and by true demonstration of Gods holy spirit, it is apparent
that nothing is more certain, then that the end of all things hangs on our
shoulders. Truly great is the force of sin, and marvelous is the rage of
Satan in these latter days, who endeuoreth by all means that possibly he
can, to bring the whole world into a desperate security of li^e, that so he may
have many partakers of his torments in Hell, from whence there is no
redemption. But how much better had it been for us we had either never been
borne, or at the least been void of reason with beast and Serpents, or been
dispatched so soon as we were horn, if either we ^^i^ not that place, for
which we were created, or come not to the celestial Paradise, and to the
marriage of our spouse, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, where shallbe the
full abundance of all delights, and perfection of all pleasure?

Wherefore let us cast from us our careless security and mistrust of the
promises of God: Let us renounce the devil, and all the works of the flesh,
which are not sufferable by the word of God, and let us listen to the freindly
admonition of our Savior, Christ warning us to be watchful at all times,
Luke. 21. Mat. 25.
because we know not the hour when our Lord will come praying that we may
escape al these things which are to come, and may stand before the son of
man. For if the coming of Theiues and stealers of our earthly goods be to be
feared, with how great diligence and watchefulnes, should we seek to escape
those enemies, which would spoil us of our eternal riches, and kingdom of
Heaven? Here we use great heed and wisdom to preserve our mortal bodies from
hurt and danger: but to save our souls which are immortal from eternal
pains in Hell, we are altogether careless and nothing circumspect.

And yet more would it beseem the children of light, to be more careful in
seeking and keeping those things which are Celestial, then the worldlings are
painful in enriching themselves with such thing as they are neither sure to
enjoy while they are alive, nor can assure them of any joy when they are dead.
Yea let us think and persuade our selves, that in the sight of God it is not
shameful, but abominable, that the elect or chosen people of God, which
should be wise and circumspect, shall in this care be surpassed of wicked
worldlings: and the more highly we displease our God, by how much the things
which we so little esteem, are more excellent then that which they so hunt
after, between which (so surpassing is the treasure prepared for the godly)
there is no comparison.

This erhortation though it pertain to all men at all times, yet now
specially in these dangerous days, in which we see so many by sudden and
strange death to be taken out of the world: and because every man shall die
(though the certain time none knows) and shall either woefullie be sent
among the Devils to Hell, or joyfully to be received into the fellowship of
the faithful in Heaven.

And to come a little nearer unto our selves, has not the Lord shaken once
more, near our Town, his rod of Correction sithence this lamentable accident?
namely by the burning of one Edward Burtons house and all his substance whilst
they were in their beds? it is an old saying, that when our neighbors house is
on fire, it is high time to look to our own. Gods Judgments we see have
lighted on both sides of us already, and shall we be still careless?
Moreover it is not unworthy the noting, that as on both sides of the Town
these fearful judgments have happened, so likewise upon the first day of May
last within the Town was borne a Monster, which may well teach us that
although these things have happened without the Town, yet the Monsters for whose
ugly sins sake these judgments have come to pass (may seem) to remain
within the Town. God open our eyes that we may behold these things aright, and
mollify our hearts (good Lord) we beseech thee that we may repent as we ought?

And although I will not particularize the vnaturall proportions of that
Monster, yet I observe that it wanted lips, to teach us (as I suppose) that
we want sanctified lips to glorify the powerful name of our gracious God.
Moreover it wanted the place of euacuation, by means whereof the body could
not be exonerate or cleansed of the excrements. To teach that whatsoever
pretense or show we make of Religion outwardly, yet the filth of sin remains
still within because there wants true Repentance in us whereby our souls
might be cleansed in the blood of Jesus Christ.

Truly I am persuaded that in this Town and the parts adjoining, where these
Judgments fell, there is as much sin reigning, as there is in a greater
part of the kingdom besides: but I beseech God of his infinite mercy, that
his long suffering of our sins be not an occasion that we pluck his feirce
wrath upon our heads, which we daily go about, provoking him to anger that
will not be tempted, so ungrateful are we, and so gracious is he. I doubt the
same sentence will be pronounced against us, which our Savior used, saying Woe
unto Carazaine, woe unto Bethsaida, it is better for Tire and Sidon then for
them, at the dreadful day of the Lord.

A seueare sentence pronounced by a merciful Judge, who will doubtless in a
more dreadful time, not only utter the like words against us, but will cast
us into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: except
that of his infinite goodness and great mercy, he call us home to repentance.

Could the people of Israel tremble at the voice of the Lord when he talked
with Moses, insomuch that they accorded to all his laws and ordinances which
were given them, so that they might not endure his presence? and dare we the
off-scum of the earth, rebel against our Creator so obstinately, that neither
signs, the word, nor wonders, can convert us? do we not remember the benign
blessings which he promises, that our land shall be fertile, our fruits shall
increase, our foes shall fly before us etc. if we please him, serve him, and
keep his commandments: neither do we fear his heavy wrath and horrible
curse which he threatens to the contrary, if we transgress his precepts and
break his ordinances, saying, thy Wife shall be widow, thy land barren: thou
shall fly, when none follow thee, and fear without cause: famine shall
confound thee, war shall waste thy country, and hunger so assail thee, that
the afterbirth of thy wife shall serve for thy food. O terrible, dreadful
and heavy wrath of God, but more monstrous, filthy and ugly hearts have we
that embrace the blessings, when we deserve cursings: reap good, where we sow
evil, and yet cannot afforde thanks to the sender of all things, who gives
liberally and casts no man in the teeth. Do we not know that he is of power
to turn our Heaven into brass, and our earth into Iron? or are we ignorant
that if it please him not to bring foraine force upon us? yet he can plague us
by our friends, send Grasshoppers to spoil our grounds, Frogs to fellow us
whethersoeuer we fly, Caterpillars to consume our fruit in the blossom, or
Rain to rot our Corn and Grass when it is ready for the harvest, or that he
can send Lice to live by our flesh, and Mice in such multitudes, that neither
power nor policy can keep them from us, for thereby he shows his
omnipotency, not in a huge army of enemies: but in a mighty arm with the
weakest of his creatures. Has he not sent famine to Samaria, so that a little
Doves doung was worth five pence, an Asses head sold for fourscore shillings:
destruction to Jerusalem so sharp, that the mother was feign to eat her Babe
to satisfy her hunger.

Fire and Brimstone to Sodom and Gomorrah, a deluge over the old world, with
infinite other Cities that he has justly plangued for their iniquities: and
we think to escape that have not only practiced to be perfect in their
sins, but daily study to devise new offenses.

The times we see have almost changed their natures and our Summer become even
a Winter, yet nothing can provoke us to repent.

O stife-necked people put on sackcloth with Nineuie, leave pride, and fall to
prayers, let Saul become Paul cease to oppress, and turn to preach, let
every man amend one, so shall we all do well at the last, and seeing the
spirit in the faithful is willing, but the flesh weak and blind in heavenly
things, let us beseech our heavenly Father in continual prayers, that by his
holy spirit he will daily more and more increase and strengthen our weak and
feeble faith.

And therefore we heartely desire thee O eternal Father, that thou will not
utterly break us, though we bow not as we should, neither deal with
Justice, though we do not our duties, according to thy will, but keep us good
Lord in thy well beloved son, illuminate our minds with thy holy spirit, by
which we may be prepared to all good works in the holiness, and newenesse of
life: that so with Paul we may desire to leave this wicked world, and to be
with Christ, and so in the coming of the Lord, being found ready with. Oil
in our Lamps, and adorned with our wedding garments, we may find entrance
into the Lords marriage, which thou for thy dear son and his beloved spouse
the Church, have prepared and appointed from the beginning of the world. To
thee therefore O holy Father, and to thine only begotten Son Jesus Christ,
and to the Holy Spirit our comforter, be all praise, honor, and glory, for
ever and ever Amen.

LAVS DEO.
Hereunto is anexed, THE LAMENTABLE AND FEAREFVLL BVRNING OF THE TOWN OF
DORchester, upon the 6. of August last. 1613.
IF this dolorous discourse aforesaid, of Gods fiery judgment (written by
master Hilliard) late happening in Hampshire, have any whit penetrated the reader
with remorse, I am here presumingly bold (without disparagement to the
Author,) to add unto his book a second sorrow to our country, a sudden
calamity late befalne upon the town of Dorchester in the West of England: the
heavy news whereof, even strikes trembling hearts of people, that so famous a
Town, and the only storehouse of those parts for Marchantly commodities,
should in less then four and twenty hours be ruinated by this great
commanding Element, cosuming fire.

Dorchester, (as it is well known,) is one of the principal places of
traffic for western merchants, by which means it grew rich and populous,
beautified with many stately buildings, and fair streets, flourishing full of
all sorts of tradesmen and artificers, plenty with abundance reuelled in her
boasom, maintained with a wise and civil government, to the well deserving
commendation of the inhabitants: but now mark how their golden fortunes faded,
and their cheerful sun of prosperity, eclipsed with the black vale of
mournful adversity: for upon the sixth of August last, being Friday, this then
flourishing Town of Dorchester, about the midday flourisht in her greatest
state, but before three of the clock in the afternoon, she was covered with a
garment of read flaming fire, and all their Iolity turned into lamentation.

This Instrument of Gods wrath, began first to take hold in a Trades-mans
worke-house: for a Tallow Chandler there dwelling, making too great a fire
under his kettle or lead, took hold upon the melted and boiling tallow, in
such violent manner, that without resistance it fiered the worke-house, and
immediately one room after another, till the Chandlers whole dwelling was all
on a light burning flame.

Then began the cry of fire to be spread through the whole Town: man, woman
and child, ran amazedly up and down the streets, calling for water, water:
so fearfully, as if deaths trumpet had sounded a command of present
destruction. Many were the affrights of the inhabitants; amongst which, next
unto the Chandlers house (then all on a fire flaming) was a Warehouse of
Gunpowder filled into barrells belonging to a merchant of the town, which to
preserve they much adventured, and with wet sheets and other linen, saved the
house from burning till they had carried the powder safe into the fields,
otherwise taking fire it had been sufficient, with one blast to have blown up
a whole town, with all the inhabitants therein remaining, but God be praised,
it was preserved, and not one living creature therein perished.

The fire, as I said before begun between the hours of two and three in the
afternoon, the wind blowing very strong, and incresed so mightily that in
very short space, the most part of the was, town fiered, which burned so
extremely, the weather being hot and the houses dry, that help of man grew
almost past, but yet as in such extremities, people will show their endeavors,
so these amazed townsmen striued to succor one another, but to small purpose,
for the tyranous fire had taken too great a head, and likewise there was too
much want of water.

The reason, the fire at the first prevailed above the strength of man, was,
that it unfortunately happened in the time of harvest, when people were most
busied in reaping of their Corn, and the Town most emptyest: but when this
burning Beacon of ruin, gave the harvest men light into the field, little
booted it them to stay, but in more then reasonable have, poasted they homeward
not only for the safeguard of their goods and houses, but for the preservation
of their wives and children, more dearer then all temporal estate or worldly
abundance.

In like manner, the inhabitants of the neighboring towns and villages at the
fearful sight red blazing eliment, ran in multitudes to assist them, proferring
the dear adventure of their lives to oppress the rigor of the fire if
posiible it might be, but all to late they came, and to small purpose, showed
they their willing minds, for almost every street was filled with flame,
every house covered with the robe of destruction, every place borning beyond
help and recovery, their might they in woeful manner behold merchants
Warehouses full of riches commodities, being shops of silks and velluets on a
flaming fire, garners of bread Corn consuming, multitudes of Linen and
Woollen clothes burned into ashes, Gold and Silver melted, with Brass Pewter,
and Copper, Tronkes and Chestes of Damaskes and fine Linnens with all manner of
rich Stuffes made fuel to increase this universe sole conqueror, which
leueld and made wast of all things it laid hold of, the fiercenes of the fire
was such that it even burnet and scortht trees as they grew, and converted
their green liueries into black burned Garments, not so much as Herbs and
Flowers flourishing in Gardayns but were in a moment withered with the heat of
the fire, many living creatures as house, Suine, pollayne and such like at this
woeful time were consumed into ashes to the great grief of the beholders, was
it not a sorrow for a tradesman to see all his estate burning at one instant,
which he had labored for twenty years before, was it not a sorrow for a man
to rise rich in the morning, and to be brought unto poverty before night and
was it not a sorrow for parents, to see the portion of their children thus
consumed, oh grief, upon grief: When t^^ burning inuader comes, he shows no
pity, he spares neither rich nor poor: the rich he makes poor, and the
poor most miserable. Dorchester was a famous Town, now a heap of ashes for
travelers that pass by to sigh at: oh Dorchester well may thou mourn for
those thy great losses: for never had English Town the like unto thee: the
value, by the Judgment of the inhabitants, without partiallity, is reckoned
to come to two hundred thousand pounds, besides well near three hundred houses,
all ruynated and burned to the ground: only a few dwelling houses that stand
about the Church was saved, and withal the Church by Gods providence
preserved for people therein to magnify his name: All the rest of the town
was consumed and converted into a heap of ashes: a loss so unrecoverable,
that unless the whole land in pity set to their devotions, it is like never
to reobtaine the former estate, but continue like ruinated Troy, or decayed
Carthage. God in his mercy raise the inhabitants up again, and grant that by
the mischance of this Town, both us, they, and all others may repent us of our
sins. Amen.

FJNJS.

