A SHORT TREATISE, Against the profanation of the LORD'S DAY, Especially By
Salmond Fishing thereon, In time of Divine Service*

MATH. xxij. 21. Give unto GOD that which is God's.

EZEKIEL. xxiij. 38. Moreover, this they have done unto me, -- they have
profaned my Sabbath.

By WILLIAM GUILD, D. D. Minister in ABERDENE, and Chaplane to his Majesty.

Printed in Aberdene, by Edward Raban, 1637.

BON ACCORD Insignia Vrbis abredoniae


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, RELIGIOUS, AND TRVE PATTERN OF VERTVE, Sr THOMAS
BVRNET OF LEYES KNIGHT, etc. And to his most Religious and worthy Lady, Dame
IEANE MONCRIEF, Grace and Blessings here, Glory and Beatitude hereafter.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
IT is not without cause, that the observation of the LORDS Day is called, THE
KEY OF RELIGION; which being neglected, the same should quickly decay, and
quyte perish out of the hearts of men: and, so, they should turn Athiestes,
and become without GOD in the World. For preventing whereof, the LORD praefixed
a special Memento to the fourth Precept of His Moral Law, enjoining men, to
Remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day; and subjoyning a most pithie reason
thereof. But (alace!) men now under the Gospel, are come to such a degree of
impiety with us, that, tho they have a more forcible reason to observe the
LORRS DAY, whereon our Savior rose, and brought us from Death, to Life again;
and which from the beginning hitherto the Christian Church also, every where,
has so religiously observed. Yet these, not through oblivion, nor ignorance,
but against known light, and wilfully, as also both peartlie, and publicly,
to the high offense of GOD, and scandal of His People, profane that Holy
Day, consecrated to His Worship, by Salmond-Fishing thereon, in time of Divine
Service; whereby GOD is depryved of His Honor, the Church of Reverence, the
Commonwealth of Order, the Body of Rest, the Soul of Edification, the Life
of Direction, GOD'S Word of Audience, and His Law of Obedience: counting only
their Gain to be Godliness, and not (as the Apostle says) Godliness to
be great Gain: 1. Tim. 6.^.
and esteeming the Word of GOD in the mouths of His Servantes, (because it
crosses their commodity, as it did Alexander the Copper-smith's) even as
Pharao called it in the mouth of MOSES, for the like cause, Exodus 5.9.
Vain words only, not to be regarded; tho one day they know they shall be
judged thereby.

Yea, some are come to that hight of impiety, hating to be reformed, Psalm.
50.27.
that they dare call in question the very Institution, and lawfulness, of the
observation thereof, which Augustine declares, Aug. Epist. 118. ad Ian.
Insolentissmae esse insaniae; or, an expression, and a fit, of a most
insolent, and audacious madness; not worthy of any modest answer.

For due informing and reclayming of whom, (if they be not like Babell, which
would not be cured) I have taken these pains, in all love, and care of their
salvation; and shall count it my greatest joye, and most happy bestowed
travells, if hereby (besides my preaching, and daily prayers for them) I may
fish, by the Net of the Gospel, but one Soul amongst them, to be obedient
to the LORD; and like Noah, in his age, by their practice, to oppose the speat
of wicked and common Example. But, if not, we that are their Pastoures, must
not be quyte discowraged, because we see neither our pains nor preaching to
prevayle; seeing that Noah, in cxx years, both by preaching and building the
Arc likewise, converted not one soul of the whole world to faith and
repentance; and that the Lord's Prophets have been commanded to preach, and
yet it has been told them beforehand, Ezekiel. 3.4.
that they should not be heard; yea, moreover, Isai 6.10.
that their doctrine should harden the hearts of the hearers. But this we
shall do; 1. Sam. 15.35.
As Samuel mourned for Saull, whom he could not mende, and as the Apostle
bewailed those that sinned, 2. Cor. 12.21.
and had not repented; So our souls shall not cease to mourn for them in
secret; and, in the mean while, our work shall be with our God: And whether
our labors be unto life or death to our hearers, to convert or convince them,
we shall be unto God, a sweet savor in Christ, 2. Cor. 2.15.
both in them that are saved, and in them that perish.

These pains, then, (Sir) I have dedicated to Your Worship, for sundry
respects, and diverse obliegementes mooving me; but especially, in regard
of that religious disposition, and zealous affection, Ye have to the Truth,
and hatered against such enormous abuses as this, or any like wilful and
gross violation of Gods holy Commandments: with which disposition, both
evidently and eminently is conjoined a pattern in Your person of an assiduous
and virtuous inclination: that so for Religion and Policy, your W. is famous
both in Church and Commonwealth; even as it was wished of Boaz, that he might
do worthily in Ephratha, and be famous in Bethlehem. With the constancy of
which worthy and imitable parts, Ruth 4.1.
I shall also wish the continuance of all true happiness, both with your self,
your most religious Lady, honorable House, and all Your hopeful Posterity;
as one who shall ever approve himself

Your Worships, in all due and addebted affection, WILLIAM GUILD.

THE CONTENTS.
Chapter I. Of the occasion of this short Treatise. Page 1 Chapter II. Of the
state of the Question: and first, That the Lord's public Worship is Moral;
oblieging all men: and, That a certain day has been observed holy for the
same in all ages. Page 5 Chapter III. The many reasons, first, taken from
Christ's honoring the Lord's day; Why all true Christians have ever, and still
should, honor the same. Page 13 Chapter IV. The Apostles their observation of
the Lord's day in like manner: and the like practice of all Christian
Churches, both in their time, and after. Page 19 Chapter V. The holy speeches,
and religious exhortations, of the ancient Fathers, both Greek and Latin; or,
of the Eastern and Western Church, for the due keeping holy of the LORD'S
Day. Page 25 CHAP. VI. The Decrees of Councels, as also of Godly Emperors and
Princes, for the due observation of the Lord's Day. Page 28 CHAP. VII. The
Ancient and Modern Constitutions, both of our own Church and Kingdom of
Scotland, for due observation of the LORD'S DAY Page 33 CHAP. VIII. The Ancient
and Modern Constitutions, both of the Church and Kingdom of ENGLAND, for due
observation of the LORD'S DAY. Page 36 Chapter IX. How the Lord's day is to
be observed, and what works are permissible, or not permissible, thereon: And
specially, That the Salmond-fishing thereon is no ways permissible, or
lawful. Page 39 CHAP. X. What are the many and great evils, which the
profaning of the LORD'S DAY, by Salmond-Fishing, produces. Page 49 CHAP. XI.
The CONCLUSION, by way of a faithful Warning from the head of the Watch-Towre,
for exoneration at least of our own Souls, whom GOD has set over them, who
so profane the LORD'S DAY. Page 57
FINIS.
Of the profanation of the Lord's Day; Especially, By Salmond-Fishing thereon.
CHAP. I. Of the occasion of this short Treatise.
THE LORD (as He testifies by His Prophet) has set His Servants, as
watchmen upon the head of the watchtower, Ezekiel. 3^.7.
to hear the word at His Mouth, and to warn His People from Him. And if they
speak not, to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his
iniquity, but his blood will the Lord require at their hands. Therefore (said
the Lord to JEREMY) Speak unto this people all that I command thee, Ier.
15.10.
and be not dismayde at their faces, lest I confound thee before them. And to
ISAI, Cry aloude, Isai 58.1.
and spare not; lift up thy voice as a trumpet, and show my people their
transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.

The like necessity of obedience and straytnesse of injunction lying in
lyke-manner upon us, who are the LORD'S Rememberancers in the City of
ABERDENE, moves us (as we are commanded also) Not to hold our peace, Isai
62.6.
not keep silence: but as we would avoid that Woe which is denounced agayns^
them who doethe work of the LORD negligentlie, and eschew that dreadful
punishment of unfaithful servants, a^ we would not lykwyse betray the souls
of men by our fraudful silence, and draw the guilt of their blood upon our own
heads; knowing therefore the weight of our Charge, the terror of the LORD, and
straytnesse of our account; and seeing men wilfully against clear light,
walk in a bold way of wicked transgression, and an open profanation of the
LORD'S day, by Salmond-fishing thereon, in the time of divine Service; we are
enforced, and by the conscience of our Calling, Ier. 20.8.
constrained to cry out with JEREMY, upon violence and spoil; even the
violent spoiling of the Lord of the Day of His solemn and public worship,
although the word of the Lord should be unto us, as it was to him, a reproach,
and in derision daily.

For true it is, that tho we have prevailed with some who have promised to
forbear this profanation, yet of others hitherto we have had the like cause
to cry our with ISAI, Who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of
the LORD revealed? And to regrate that sundry come unto us, Ezekiel. 33.31.
(as in EZEKIELS time they did to him) and sit before us, as GODS people, and
hear our words, but they will not do them, for their heart goes after their
covetousness. Ier. 44.16
It is true likewise, that others are so bold, as to say plainly in this with
those rebellious JEWS which dwelt in EGYPT and PATHROS, as they answered
JEREMY, saying, As for the word that thou have spoken to us in the Name of the
LORD, we will not hearken to thee: and like the people in AMOS time, Amos 5.10.
that they hate him that rebukes in the gate, and they abhor him that
speaks vprightlie. Yet this shall be our comfort, that tho we plow upon the
rock, and the bellows be burnt, the lead consumed in the fire, and the
founder have melted in vain; notwithstanding, Ezekiel. 2.5.
our work shall be with our GOD. And they whether they will hear, or whether
they will forbear, yet shall they know, that there has been Prophets amongst
them; and we shall have this for our joy, that we may say with the Apostle,
and take men and Angels to record, Act. 24.26.
that we are free from the blood of all men.

And which thing the more amply also to witness to the world, and for evidenc^
to future posterity, as by voice we hau^ frequentlie cried out against the
haynousnesse of this bold iniquity; so now by writ I have intended to clear
the equity of our Challenge, detect the greatness of this sin, fore-warne
faithfully of the danger, enforce obedience on the conscience, use all means
of reclayming, and approve our selves to the conscience of all men, but
especially to our own, and to Him who is greater than the conscience, that
we may have joy in the day of our account.

CHAP. II. Of the state of the Question; and first, That the LORDS public
worship is Moral, oblieging all men; and, That a certain day has been
observed holy for the same in all Ages.
FIrst, then, for stating the Question aright, it is to be observed, that we
urge not upon any such a strict observation of the Lords Day, as the rigid
tenets of some would exact, nor as was the observation formerlie of the Jewish
Sabbath, Exodus 35.3.16.27.
whereon they might not kindle fire throughout their Generations, Luke 23.56.
neither bake nor seethe, nor bury or imbalme their dead: but only thus
far we affirm, (according to the general equity of Gods Commandment,
Apostolical observetion, practice of the Church in all Ages, and the
vnanimious consent of all judicious Divines) that all servile labor, intended
meerlie for Gain, whereby Gods People are hindered, and with-drawne from His
public worship, and such religious exercises, which ought to be performed by
them upon the Lords Day, for the spiritual edification and salvation of their
souls, is altogether unlawful, and damnable. And whosoever inforceth and
imployeth the irservantes so to transgress, they despise God, contemn His
Church, rob Christ of His honor, poor souls of instruction, the word of
attendance, the Ministry of reverence, give scandal and offense, and make
themselves guilty of the greatest blood-guiltinesse that can be, which is the
blood of souls; so that as the Apostle speaks of some, that their glory,
was their shame: so I may say justly of these, that their Gain, is their
detriment.

Now, to prove the truth of our former Assertion, and to remove all weak
shifts that might be pretended for helpless evasion, these ensuing Positions
are to be considered.

First, by the consent of all, this is a maxim in Religion, that the public
worship of GOD, is a thing Moral, and eternae veritatis, perpetually hitherto
observed, and to be observed to the worlds end: so that whosoever would deny
this, were to proclayme himself a profane Athest, unworthy of the name or
society of Christians; as also an over-thrower of the public Ministry and
orders of the Church, which for the edification of His body Christ has
appointed, and an enemy to that solemn homage, which is the Lords due in the
assembly of His Saints.

Next, this being granted, it will follow, then, that a certain day, or set
time, should be ordinarily observed, whereon the exercises of the said public
worship ought to be performed; and therefore the very law of nature requires
the sanctification of times no less than of persons and places. For which
cause, as of the rest, so also of times the Lord has ever exacted some part,
by way of perpetual homage: therefore also says AQUINAS, Aquinas in ^cunda
seu^dae quast. 21. art. 4.
that as there is a natural inclination in man to depute a time for every
necessary thing, as meat and sleep, or the like which concerns his body;
even so, seeing he has a soul also, natural reason would dyte, that he
should also depute a time for the refreshment of his soul. And therefore the
deputing a time for attending divyne Worship, and holy exercises only,
falls under the Precept of the Moral Law.

In like manner, (says AUREOLUS) it is the law of nature, Aureolus, in 3.
Did. 37. artic.
that sometime we should rest from servile work, that we may serve GOD; and
this is evident hereby, because I am as much obliedged to GOD, as to my self:
but the law of nature and reason also dytes, that I should take a certain time
to procure my own welfare, and those things that are necessary for me.
Therefore I ought also take a time to attend GODS Worship, and to remember His
benefits which He has bestowed on me.

Now, as for the proportion of this time which should be so bestowed, none (I
think) can doubt, but that proportion is fittest that can be imagined, which
the Lord made choice of for His own people; to wit, the seventh day. And
nature informed by God, can not but acknowledge His goodness and wisdom in
this His choice and appointment, that He has so tempered it, that neither the
long space between, should suffer us to forget our duty to Him, nor the too
quick return thereof should hinder us in our provyding the necessities of
Nature for our selves. Therefore says learned HOOKER, that we are bound to
to account the sanctification of one day in the seven, Hooker. Eccles. Pol. P.
379.
a duty which GODS immutable law does exact for ever. And this we see to
have been practiced, before the Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel.

First, before the Law was give^ on Sinai, and before the seventh day was
indicted by way of the fourth Precept of the first Table, as the Lords Sabbath,
in memory of the Creation, we find that the same day was observed, as a day
of holy rest unto the LORD (EXODUS 16.22.26.) while the people were in the
Wilderness of SIN, which is between ELIM and SINAI; and so consequently before
they came to SINAI, where the Law was given, in that, they did gather upon the
sixth day, (by the LORDS command) twyse as much MANNA, as they did upon any
former day; that so they might rest upon the seventh, as a Sabbtah consecrate
to the LORD, who also did rest Himself from the work of Creation that day;
and so from the beginning did sanctify and halow it. Therefore says Saynct
CHRYSOSTOM, Chrysostom. in Genesis 2.3.
upon these words in GENESIS, GOD blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.
From the beginning God intimates unto us this doctrine, (says he)
instructing us to separate and lay aside one whole day to Himself, in the
compass of every week, and to destinate it for spiritual and holy
exercises.

Secondly, under the Law, that the seventh day after the creation was
appointed to be the Lord's Sabbath, none can deny, Deuteronomy. 5.14
who knows the ten Precepts of the moral Law, Levit. 23.3
which the LORD ordained straytlie to be observed by all persons: First, Exodus
34.21.
by a cessation from all servile work whatsoever, tho in Seed-time and Harvest;
to obviate thereby (as seems) a pretended necessity at sometimes, importing
great prejudice, or danger, if they labored not upon the Sabbath, as in
Harvest especially, because of an irrecoverable season. Secondly, the Lord
appointed it to be hallowed, Aug. de temp. sermon. 251. Athanas. in Math. 11.27.
by a religious application of themselves to the works of His public worship:
and for the more peremptory observation whereof, He prefixed a Note of
special rememberance, (beyond all the rest) foreseeing as it were, that some
irreligious persons would either more carelessly neglect, or audaciouslie
break this Commandment.

Neither can any but most clearlie see, a no less necessary duty, incumbent
upon Christians, to observe a seventh day holy to the Lord, than was on the
JEWS of old, of whom the LORD requires, 1. No less proportion of service
and thankfulness, for a far greater benefit, than that of the Creation: 2.
In respect of the Christian Church, which requires no less proportion of
order and comeliness: 3. In regard of our souls, which need no less
proportion of time, and means to be instructed and sanctified: and 4, In
respect of the bodies of servants and cattle, (which being inferior in
strength to those of former ages) need no less proportion of rest and
refreshment.

Therefore, under the Gospel, from the very Apostles days hitherto
(according to VINCENTIUS rule of CATHOLICISME, semper, vbique and ab omnibus)
the whole Christian Church every where, and ever hitherto, has kept, as a
Catholic observation, a seventh day holy to the LORD; to wit, the day of
the Lords Resurrection, which was the first day of the JEWISH week: that as
the Sabbath under the Law, was a note of difference between the JEWS and the
GENTILES; so the Lords day under the Gospel, should be a note of difference
between Christians, who believe the Resurrection of Christ, and incredulou^
JEWS, who deny the same. And tha^ this observation of the Lords day, for the
exercise of His public worship, was Apostolical, and Christianly Catholic,
without controversy, in all Ages, none (I hope) is so bold as once to deny.
So that now (as AUGUSTINE says) Hoc quin ita faciendum sit disputare, Aug.
Epist. 118. ad Iannar.
insolentissimae insaniae est: that is, To dispute now whether this were to be
observed or no, it were nothing else but most insolent madness.

CHAP. III. The many reason's, first, taken from Christ's honoring the LORDS
day, why all true Christians have ever, and still should honor the same.
THE first and main reason, then, why our moral duty, commanded in the
fourth Precept, does now chiefelie appertain to the LORDS Day, and
consequently why all Christians have ever, and still should, observe the Lords
Day, is, Because our Savior, the Lord Jesus, rose from death to life that day;
and so, victoriously triumphed over His and our enemies: by virtue of which
His Resurrection, we are raised spirituallie from sin, to grace here, and
shall be raised corporally from the grave, to glory hereafter. Therefore said
IGNATIUS, Bishop of ANTIOCH, who lived in Saint JOHN'S time, Ignat. ad
Magnesian. epist. 3.
Let every one who loves CHRIST, keep holy the LORD'S Day, renowned by His
Resurrection, which is the Queen of days wherein Death was overcome, and
Life sprang up in Christ again. And again (says AUGUSTINE) Domini
resuscitatio promisit nobis aeternum diem, Aug. de verb. Apostoli, sermon. 15.
and consecravit nobis Dominicum diem: that is, The LORDS rising from dead,
has promised unto us an eternal Day of rest, and has consecrated unto us the
LORDS Day. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 118. and sermon. 5. de resurr. See also Aug. l. 22.
de civit. Dei cap. 30.
Qui propterea quod Dominus in eo ad vitam a morte redierit, Dominicus
appellatur (says CHRYSOSTOM:) that is, Which for this cause is called the
LORDS Day, because on it the LORD Himself returned from death to life again.
So that as the Lords own resting the seventh day which the JEWS kept,
Athanasius in Matthew. 11.27.
recommended their Sabbath to be kept by them; so the Lords own rising from
death this seventh day which Christians observe, Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2.
recommends justly the Lords Day to be kept by us: Sozom. l. 1. cap. 8.
and whosoever wilfully prophaneth the same, (as our Salmond-fishers do in
time of Divyne Service) preferring Gain to Godliness, they show that they
neither love Christ (as Ignatius says) nor celebrate, as they ought,
thankfully the memory of His blessed Resurrection.

Next, as it is renowned by the Lords Resurrection, so it is honored by His
Name, which as an honorable stamp and impression, the Spirit of GOD and Pen
of the beloved Apostle has fixed and set thereon, Revel. 1.10.
calling it THE LORDS DAY. So that as the Jewish Sabbath under the Law, and
which was consecrated to the Lords worship then, was called by the Prophet, HIS
HOLY DAY. Isai 18.1^.
So justly may the Lords Day under the Gospel, which is now consecrated to
His worship, be called, CHRIST'S HOLY DAY. Wherefore says AUGUSTINE, Qui
vocatur Dominicus, Aug. Sermon. 15. de verbis Apostoli.
ipse videtur proprie ad Dominum pertinere, quia in eo Dominus resurrexit: that
is, That day which is called the LORD'S DAY, appears properly to belong to
the LORD Himself, because on it the LORD did arise. And again says
PROCOPIVS, Procopius in Genes. 1.
Ab ipso DOMINO cognomen desumpturus erat, ut diceretur dies Dominicus, tanquam
soli DOMINO consecratus: that is, It was to take the denomination from the LORD
Himself, to be called the LORD'S Day, because it is consecrated only unto
the LORD. And therefore, whosoever prophaneth the same, neglecting His worship
thereon, and only give themselves to their filthy Lucre, whereas they should
give unto GOD, that which is GOD'S, on the contrary they are sacrilegious
robbers of GOD, (which is the worst sort of Athiest.) And if they say with the
Jews in MALACHIE, Whereof have we robbed Him? Malac. 3.8
He^ will tell them in the day of their dreadful account, Of My Day, dedicated
to My holy Worship, and of the solemn honor and worship due to Me thereon;
and so of that which is most sacred ^n the highest degree, as all things are,
which are so stamped with His Name and Superscription.

Thirdly; He honored that Day also by His first apparition thereon, (after
His victorious Resurrection) unto His Disciples, being assembled together; John
20.19.
at what time also He blessed them, and by breathing upon them, He gave them
the holy Ghost. And in like manner, upon the same day, (being the Pentecost)
after His glorious Ascension into Heaven, Act. 8.4.
when His Apostles were all assembled together in one place, He sent down the
holy Ghost, in shape of ^eloven fyrie Tongues, plentifully upon them, whereby
they were enabled miraculouslie to speak to every nation, according to their
language: And upon which day also they first began the public exercise of
their holy Ministry, which was crowned that day with the conversion of three
thousand souls. Who-so-ever, then, will profane wilfully that day, and spend
the same only and wholly in persuing their unlawful gain thereon, it is
evident, that they are not led by that Spirit, which came down on the Apostles
that day. Romans 8.14
And whosoever are not led by the Spirit of GOD, they are not the sons of
GOD, as testifies the Apostle.

Fourthlie; Our Savior graced that day of His Resurrection, in like manner, by
revealing thereon unto His beloved Disciple saynct JOHN, those high and
heavenly Mysteries, which make up the prophetical part of the New Testament,
and are contained in that transcendant Book of the APOCALYPSE, and Clausule of
the whole Scripture.

From all which several sorts of our Savior's honoring His own Day,
therefore did the ancient Fathers give it such honorable Titles, Ignat. ad
Magnes. Chrysostom. Hom. 5. de Resurr. Gregor. Nazianz. oration 43. August. de
Temp. sermon. 251.
as Ignatius calls it the Queen of Days; Saynct Chrysostom, the Royal
Day; Gregory Nazianzene, Higher than the highest; and, with admiration,
wonderful amongst days, (even as the Virgin MARIE was blessed amongst Women)
And Augustine applies these words of the Psalm unto it, This is the Day
which the LORD has made: Psalm. 118.24.
let us be glad and rejoice in it. So that as the Palmist said of JERUSALEM,
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of GOD: So, in some sort, we may
say the like of this Day; Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou Day of
the LORD.

CHAP. IV. The Apostles their observation of the LORD'S Day in like manner; and
the like practice of all Christian Churches, both in their time, and after.
AS we have seen, how the LORD JESUS did honor this Day of His
Resurrection, so likewise we may see, how religiously the holy Apostles did
observe the same: First, By the forenamed practice of Saynct Peter, Act. 2.41.
the Apostle of the Jews, who upon that day, immediately after the descending
of the holy Ghost, began the public exercise of the holy Ministry; which
was crowned with so happy and a plentiful success.

Likewise, By the practice of saynct Paull, the Apostle of the Gentiles, as may
be clearlie seen in that Story of the Acts, Act. 20, 6.7.
where it is said, that having stayed seven days at Troas, he is reported
to have assembled the Disciples and Faithful together, on the seventh day
only, which was the first day of the week, (and the LORD'S Day) for hearing
the Word, and participating the Sacrament.

In like manner, By Apostolical direction unto all Churches, (1. COR. 16.) we
may see, that the Apostle ordained, every first day of the week, That there
be a Collection for the Saynctes. The reason whereof that he appointed this
Collection to be on the LORD 'S Day, saynct Chrysostom gives; to wit, That
the memory of the benefits which on that day they obtained by CHRIST'S
Resurrection, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 16.
might make them the more liberally to contribute to the necessities of their
Brethren. To which Sedulius joyneth this, Sedul. in 1. Cor. 16.
Quia non est opus servile (says he) elemosynam congregare: that is, It is
not a servile work to collect Alms on that day. And which also implies, That
no servile work for gain is to be used thereon.

That this Collection was usual also to be ever amongst all Christians
thereafter upon the LORDS day, when His religious worship, and public
meetinges were, Iustine Martyr (who lived shortly after the Apostles) shows,
saying, That upon Sundaye, Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2. pro Christianis, in sine.
when Christians, both in the Town and Country, do assemble together, after the
reading of the word, public exhortation by the Pastor, and after Prayer, and
celebration of the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood; then those who are
able, pro sua quisque voluntate conferunt, (says he) and collecta deponuntur
apud praepositum, isque subvenit pupillis, viduis and propter morbum aliamve
necessitatem egentibus: that is, Then every one, as he pleases, contributeth:
and what is collected, is laid down beside him who has the charge thereof, who
helps the Orphans, and Widows, and others, who by sickness, or any other
necessity, are poor and indigent. And he subjoyneth, saying, Conventus autem
bos die Solis facimus, quoniam hac die primum DEVS depulsis tenebris,
formataque materia mundum creavit, JESUS CHRISTVS quoque noster Servator, eadem
die resurrexit a mortuis: that is, These Assemblies we make them on Sunday,
because on that day the Lord driving away darkness, and having formed a
matter, He created the world; as also our Savior JESUS CHRIST on that same
day arose from the dead. So that we see our Christian, or Lord's Day,
abrogateth not the memory of the Creation* but being the first of the
Creation, and the day of CHRIST'S Resurrection, it puts us in mind, both of
the making of the World, and the redeeming of the same; Justin. Martyr. Apol.
2. Aug. de tempor. sermon. 251.
or of a visible old creation, and an invisible new one; as witnesses both
Iustine Martyr, as also holy Augustine.

The same observation of the day of the Lord's Resurrection, we may see also
to have been the constant and catholic practice of all Christian Churches,
after the Apostolic times, by the witnessing of other ancient Fathers:
Therefore says Clemens Romanus, Clem. Romans Co^stit. Ap. l. 2. c. 63.
We Christians assemble our selves together, with great diligence, upon the
LORD'S Day, to praise Him, etc. And Tertullian; Tertull. apol. c. 39. and 16.
etc. 14. de Idolo^atr^a.
Upon that day (says he) we who are Christians, meet together, carefully,
in the holy Assemblies. And again, in his Apologeticke, he shows, That the
honoring of this day, (being called after the Heathnish denomination, Dies
Solis) and assembling together for public worship thereon, was the occasion
why the Paganes gave it out, That Christians did worship the Sun. So likewise
says Basil and Isichius, Basil. de Sp. Sancto. c. 27 Et Isichius, in Levit.
cap. 9. See Aug. de tempore, sermon. 151.
That following the doctrine and direction of the Apostles, the Christians
every, where did sequester the LORD'S Day, for their holy Assemblies.

Those, therefore, who contrary to Apostolical observation, and direction,
and contrary also to the constant practice of the whole Christian Church, ever
there-after, will so boldly and irreligiouslie contemn such Authority, and
holy examples, and profane the Lord's day, for their filthy lucre; as they
depart herein from so holy a practice here, so they may justly fear
(except they repent, and amend) a dreadful departure from Him who is Lord of
that day, and a separation from the society of those Saynctes heere-after.

CHAP. V. The holy speeches, and religious exhortations, of the ancient
Fathers, both Greek and Latin; or, of the Eastern and Western Church, for
the due keeping holy of the LORD'S Day.
FIrst, then, to begin with the Grecian Fathers; and intending, for brevities
cause, to bring but a few: Ignatius Martyr, who lived in the Apostles own
time, adjureth every one, Ignatius, (...) Magnes.
by the love of CHRIST, to halow that day, saying; Let every one who loves
CHRIST, keep holy the LORD'S Day, renowned by His Resurrection, which is the
Queen of days. So that the profanation of this day, and the love of CHRIST,
can not consist together, and are always incompatible.

Next, Saynct Chrysostom, a most famous and holy Bishop, Chrysostom. hom. 10.
in Genes. 2.
shows, That from the very beginning the LORD has required, that one day in
every week, constantly and wholly, should be set apart, by His Church, to
be entierlie appropriated and applied for Spiritual exercyses, tending to the
good of the souls; as the rest of the days of the week are applied by us,
for corporal and servile labor, tending to the good of the body, and
mayntaynance of the natural life.

Saynct AUGUSTINE also, that great Light of the Western Church, Aug. sermon. 215.
urges the religious and entiere observation of the Christian Sabbath, by
comparing the same with the observation of the Jewish Sabbath, saying; If the
unhappy Jews do with so great devotion celebrate their Sabbath, so that upon
the same they will do no earthly work; how much more should Christians upon
the LORD'S Day much more attend His Worship, and for the salvation of their
souls, assemble themselves together in the Church of GOD?

GREGORY the Great also, writing to the Citizens of ROME, Greg. l. 11. epist.
3.
shows both where-from we should rest, and how we should wholly employ
our selves on the Lord's day, laying; Upon the LORD'S Day a cessation should
be altogether from earthly labor, and men should wholly give themselves to
insist in Prayer; that what by negligence the six days of the week has
been committed, by Prayer upon the LORD'S Day the same may he expiated.

Seeing, therefore, this day so many ways has been honored by Christ,
stamped with His Name, celebrated by His Apostles, observed by the Church, and
recommended unto us by the Fathers, whosoever with an high hand of rebellion
against God, and His Church, will wilfully profane the same, he sins
grievouslie against his own soul, and the souls of others: and, as learned
Hooker says, The voluntary scandalous contempt of resting from labor on
that Day whereon the LORD is publicly served, can not be too severelie
brydled and corrected.

CHAP. VI. The Decrees of Councels, as also of Godly Emperors and Princes,
for the due observation of the Lord's Day.
FIrst, then, we will set down those Canons of ancient and famous Councels,
which declare what is forbidden on the Lord's day; and next, those which show
what is commanded.

Synod. 6. c^p. 8
The sixth General Council, then, forbids all bodily work, except that
which is for the refreshment of nature that day.

Thus also says the Council of Rhemes (holden in the 8^3 year of CHRIST,
Council. Rhemens. can. 35.
and time of LEO the third) Upon the LORD'S Day, secundum DOMINI Praeceptum?
that is, according to the LORD'S own commandment, let no man do any servile
work.

Next, the Council of Cabilon (holden in the 653 year of CHRIST, and time of
Eugenius) more particularly speaks of such works, as having but a short
season, and are subject to sundry dangers both of wnde and rain, and are for
the sustentation of the whole Country: and yet say the Fathers of this
Council, Council. Cabilen. can. ^^
We ordain upon the LORD'S Day, that landward or countreye labor, such as
plowing, or reaping of Corns, or whatsoever belongs unto Husbandry, no man
presume to do.

The reason whereof the Council of Paris (holden in the 550 year of CHRIST,
Consit. Paris. can. 50*
and time of Pelagius the first) gives thus, saying, that those who do any
servile labor on this day, decus Christianitatis obfuscant. etc. that is, they
obscure the honor of Christianity, and furnish to those who blaspheme the
Name of CHRIST, more matter of blaspheming the same: Wherefore it becomes
(say they) a Christian upon that day, to be exercised in divine praise, and
not in servile works.

Yea, such a cessation should be, says the Council of Arles, (holden in the
805 year of CHRIST, Council. Ar^lat. cap. 1.
and time of LEO the first) His solummodo peractis quae ad DEI cultum, and
fervitium pertinere noscuntur: that is, That those things only be
performed, which are known to belong to GOD'S worship and service.

The reason whereof, why we should only apply our selves on that day to
the LORD'S service allanerlie, Council. Matisc^n. 2. can. 1. celebratum anno 590.
the Council of MATISCON gives, saying. We ought to keep holy the Lord's
day, whereon we were begotten of anew, and delivered from our sins; and
wherein we were made to be, what we were not before. For we were (say they)
the servantes of sin; but are made by it the sons of Righteousness:
Therefore let our eyes, and hands, all that whole day, be lifted up to GOD.

Concerning the religious observation likewise of the Lord's day, Novel. 4.
Leon. c. 54.
thus says the Imperial Constitution, seconding those holy Councels; We
ordain, (as it has also pleased the holy Ghost, and them who are appointed
by Him) that all men upon that holy day, whereon our integrity and liberty
was restored, rest from labors and neither Husbandman, nor any others,
enterprise upon that day any work, the same being unlawful: For if they
who did observe the shadow and figure, so much reverenced this Sabbath, that
thereon they abstayned from all work whatsoever; what equity is it, that they
who profess the truth of those figures, and the light of grace, See Aug.
sermon. de tempore 251. and sermon. 154
should not reverence that day, which was so greatly honored by the LORD
Himself, and delyvered us from shameful destruction.

Sozom. l. 1. cap. 8.
Sozomen also makes mention of a law that Constantin made for the observation
of the LORDS day, rendering this reason; Because the LORD JESUS did rise
thereon, and raised us from our fall in Adam, (says he.)

Pipinus Rex. in Council. For^juliensi, c. 13
Likewise says Pipinus; We command, That on that Day all abstinence be from
sinful works, and all works of the flesh, and from all earthly labor; and,
that men attend nothing else, but Prayer, and to assemble themselves in the
Churches with great devotion of mind, and with charity and love, that they
bless the LORD.

CHAP. VII. The Ancient and Modern Constitutions, both of our own Church and
Kingdom of Scotland, for due observation of the LORD'S DAY.
NExt, from beyond Sea, to come nearer home:

In SCOTLAND we find an ancient Counsel to have been holden in the year
1203, and time of Pope Innocent the third; wherein the manner of the religious
observation of the LORD'S Day was at length set down; as we have the same in
the third Tome of the General Councels, set forth by Binius, the second part,
fol. 668: to wit, That the same shall be by cessation from servile works, and
from selling or buying; and, That men devotelie should continue in Prayers, and
doing of charitable deeds: one Eustachius an Abbot there, giving this as a
reason thereof; Quia CHRISTVS nativitate (says he) and resurrectione sua,
and adventusao, and missione Spiritus Sancti in Discipulos suos, sibi hunc diem
quem Dominicum vocamus illustravit, and celeberrimum dedicavit: that is,
Because CHRIST, by His Birth and Resurrection, also by His coming, and sending
the holy Ghost upon His Disciples, has honored this Day, which we call THE
LORD'S DAY, and dedicated the same unto Himself, as a most excellent and holy
Day.

As also in the late Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, of the Church of
SCOTLAND, it is set down, That The public meetings on the LORDS Day,
Constit. and Can. Eccles. cap. 9.
and other times appointed by the Church, being a special external mean to
entertayne the communion of the Saynctes, it is therefore ordained, that the
same shall be carefully observed by all persons, of what condition soever;
both in haunting to Divine worship, and using all due reverence in time
thereof, and giving all quiet and diligent attendance thereunto.

Likewise for Civil Constitutions, we find it a Statute of King ALEXANDER the
second; as we have in the Book of Majesty, concerning Salmond-Fishing in
particular; That the water should be free: Regiam Majest. Tit. Lex aquarum, c.
16.
So that no man (says the Statute) should take fishes therein, from Saturnday
at night, till Moonday at Sunne-rysing.

And in the most happy Reygne of our late dread Sovereygne, king JAMES, of
ever-blessed memory, Iam. 6. parliam. 6. c. 70
it is statuted in Parliament, That no handie-labour nor working be upon the
LORD'S Day, nor any wilful remaining from divine Worship thereon. In both
which our Salmond-Fishers notoriously transgress: and so are rebellious both
to Divine and Humane Authority; and to the Laws both Ancient and Modern; of
Church, and Commonwealth.

CHAP. VIII. The Ancient and Modern Constitutions, both of the Church and
Kingdom of ENGLAND, for due observation of the LORD'S DAY.
NExt, if we view the Ancient Constitutions of that Famous and
Neyghbour-Church, and Kingdom, of ENGLAND, we shall find, that in a Canon of
a Council holden by Egbert, Archbishop of York, (anno 784) That the Gospel
is ordained to be preached to the people every Lord's day: and, That they
duly convene, of all sorts, to the hearing thereof. The very same being
enacted a few years before, by Cutbbert, Archbishop of Dorobermia, (anno 747)
ordayding, Council. Cloveshoniae, c. 14.
That this day be, Cultui divino tantummodo dicatus: that is, That the same
may be dedicated only unto God's worship.

As also in another Council holden by the commandment of King Ethelred,
Aelfeagus being Archbishop of Dorobermia, C^^il. Aemanense Pambrebritannicum,
c. 15.
and Vulstane Archbishop of York, it was decreed, (anno 1009) That the Lord's
day, and solemnity thereof, should be with great honor celebrated: Nec
quicquam in eadem operis agatur servilis: that is, And that no servile labor
be done thereupon. Constit. Eccles. c. 15. Canutus lege 14.
Which was also decreed in the Church Constitutions of ENGLAND, and in the
reygne of Canutus the Dane, (anno 1026) by a Statute.

Next, from Ancient Ecclesiastical Canons, to come to such as are later,
Constit. and Can. Eccl. cap. 13.
we shall find, that in those which are now in use in the Church of ENGLAND,
all manner of persons are ordained to keep holy the Lord's day, commonly
called SUNDAY, according to God's Will, and Orders of the Church: that is, In
hearing the Word of God read and taught, in private and public Prayers, in
receaving the communion of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, visiting the Poor,
and Sick; and in such holy Exercyses, which are fitting for that day.

And last, if we come from Ecclesiastical Canons, to Civil Constitutions, Ex
Ina regis occid. Sax. lib. cap. 3.
in ENGLAND we shall find in the days of Ina, king of the West Saxons, (anno
688) that it is statuted by him, That if a Servant work on the Sunday at the
commandment of his master, he shall thence-foorth be free, and his master
shall pay for his Fine, thirty shillinges. But if he do so without the
commandment of his master, he shall be scourged, except he redeem
himself, by a price, therefrom.

And again: In the raygne of King EADGAR, about the year of GOD 966, it is
statuted, That every one observe the Sunday wholly, from Saturndaye evening,
to Moondaye morning.

And, lately, Queen Elizabeth her Injunctions, Artic. 34. Anno 27. Henrici 6.
cap. 5. King James proclamation also at Theobalds, 1603. for keeping the LORDS
DAY.
In the Religious Constitutions of that famous young Prince, EDWARD THE SIXTH,
and Queen ELIZABETH; of ever-blessed memory, as in their Statutes of
Parliament amply may be seen, and in the Statutes of HENRY THE SIXTH before
them; wherein whatsoever may with-drawe men, and their servantes, from Divine
Service, is forbidden.

CHAP, IX. How the Lord's day is to be observed, and what works are
permissible, or not permissible, thereon: And specially, That the
Salmond-fishing thereon is no ways permissible, or lawful.
NExt to the former motives for observation of the Lord's day, we are to
consider, how it is to be observed: which is first, By CESSATION (as has
been shown) from all servile and laborious work, intended only for gain.
And therefore in EXODUS this Cessation was appointed both in Seed-tyme, Exodus
34.21
and in Harvest. Next: Because to rest only from our ordinary work, were to
keep the Lord's day rather like a Beast, than a Christian. Therefore we must
know, That this Cessation is commanded, (as Augustine says) Vt paratiores
and promptiores simus ad Divinum Cultum: that is, That we may be the more
ready and fit for GOD'S holy Worship. And labor, or working thereon, is
therefore forbidden; because of impeding, or withdrawing thereby of men from
the Lord's Worship. No action, then, is to be done of that sort, but such as
whereby we either bless GOD, or look therein to receive a Blessing from GOD.
Seeing, therefore, the Salmond-fishing, upon the Lord's day, is a servile and
toylsome work, intended only for gain, and that thereby such a number of
souls are hindered, and withdrawn, from the Lord's Worship; How dare people
do such a thing upon that blessed day, whereupon they can neither look up to
GOD, to seek a Blessing to their use, or expect a Blessing from His Hand? But
rather may justly fear a Curse here, and Condemnation heere-after.

But ye will say; Is no work to be done upon the Lord's Day? I answer;
There are three sorts of works not only permissible, but lawful, upon the
Lord's day: which are, Pietatis, Charitatis, and Necessitatis: Of Piety,
toward God; of Charity, toward our Neighbor; and of Necessity, toward
our selves.

First, then, Works of Piety, are to be done upon the Lord's day, which
either directly concern God's Worship, (tho performed by bodily work) as
the preaching of the Gospel now, and other Ministerial pains, upon the
Lord's day; and the Priests under the Law, their killing and dressing the
Sacrifices on the Jewish Sabbath, burning them on the Altar: concerning whom
our Savior said, that the Priests brake the Sabbath, Matthew. 12. 5.
and yet were blameless: To wit, They brake it, in so far as they rested not
thereon, or, Quoad quiete^; but not in regard of the commandment of halowing
the same, or, Quoad praeceptum. For, such works are not forbidden by that
Precept, whereby we serve GOD only: or else they are such works of Piety,
as indirectlie concern GOD'S Worship, whereby the people are assembled to
divine Worship: as the blowing of Trumpets under the Law, and ringing of
Belles now under the Gospel. The holy end of all which works, does
sanctify the same, as the Temple did the Gold; or the Altar, the Gift thereon.

And, upon the peoples part who assemble together, their preparing of
themselves duly, traveling to their Parish-Churches diligently, hearing the
Word attentively, praying and praising GOD devotelie, and instructing their
Families religiously. All these, and the like, are the works of Piety, which
becomes the LORD'S day suteablie.

Next; Works of Charity, 1. Cor. 16.
are to be done upon the LORD'S Day: and therefore the Apostle appointed, That
the Collection for the Poor, (as is usual amongst us) should be on that
day. In like manner, Mark 3.4.
Our Savior declares, That the life either of Man or Beast, ought to be
preserved upon the Sabbath day; Matthew. 12.1.11.
either by delivering the same from danger, or by necessary support of Food,
or the like. The visiting also of the Sick, Mark 2.28.
relieving the Poor, curing the diseased, and such like, are the works of
Charity, suitable for the LORD'S day: For I will have Mercy, says the
Lord, rather than Sacrifice.

Last; Works of Necessity, may be performed upon the LORD'S day, which are
not for wordlie gain, or acquisition, by servile toil, and labor of things
to be ours, which before the employment in the said servile labor, were not
ours, (as the Salmond-Fishing is) but which are for necessary preservrtion, in
evident and imminent danger, of that which is in our possession, and we have
right unto already: Epist. Decret. l. 2. c. 3.
as to draw our Ox out of the mire, being ready to drown; to flit our
Corns out of the low Valleys, when by inundation of near adjoining Waters,
they are in evident danger to be carried away: to quench, in like manner,
houses that are on fire, and such like. Therefore, beside our own men, so also
says SVAREZ; Causa generalis inducens excusatione^, Suarez. lib. ^. de dicb.
fest. tom. 1. c. 32.
est necessitas imminens quae praeveniri non potuit: that is, The general
cause which imports an excuse, is an imminent necessity only, which could
not be prevented.

In like manner, for some Callings to exercise the practice thereof; as
Physicians, in Pleurisies, to let blood; Chyrurgians, to paunse, and apply
Cures; Mid-wyues, to help Women in travel; Mariners, to govern their Ships
on the Seas, etc. all which are for preservation of lives. Soldiers also, if
they be assaulted upon the LORD'S Day, to defend themselves, and fight; as we
read the MACHABEES did, 1. Machab. 2.41.
when they were set upon, on the Sabbath Day: to entrinch and fortify
themselves, also, upon the approach of the Enemy; stell their Pieces, cut
Bridges, or do the like: all which is lawful; Because, (as SVAREZ says)
Necessitas Reipublicae, and conservationis suae hoc exigit. Suarez. loco quo
supra.
And the Law is, Quod non est licitum in Lege, necessitas facit licitum: that
is; The necessity of the Commonwealth, and of their own preservation,
requires this: and what is not lawful in law, necessity makes lawful
otherwise.

Some actions, also, which tend not to the preservation of lives, in evident
danger otherwise, but to the preservation also of such things as tend to the
necessity of life, and good of the whole Commonwealth, being in imminent and
evident danger otherwise, are lawful, and thought permissible upon the LORD'S
Day; As the keeping of Cole-heughes dry, which might otherwise fill with
water, and perish, to the detriment of a whole Country: The sloaking, or
quenching, of Mosses, that have taken fire in droughtie weather; and are in
peril to be consumed themselves, and to consume the Corns near unto them:
both which are works of necessity: not for acquisition of new gain, (for
Servants work not in Cole-heughes on the LORD'S Day, nor in Peat-mosses) but
for preservation of that which is ours already, being in evident danger; and
the loss whereof would import great prejudice to the Commonwealth, and whole
Country.

As for keeping in of fire only, in Glasse-Fornaces, (but not making any
Glasses on the LORD'S DAY) and also in Salt-pannes, it is accounted, by
sundry, a necessary preservation only: neither is it a toylsome work, nor
Labor multorum, to avocate many from divine Worship. And of such SVAREZ says
this is the Rule: Quando inchoatum opus non potest intermitti sine dispendio
personae and Communitatis in die Festo, Suarez. lib. 2 de Fest. dicb. cap. 32.
licitum putatur: that is; When a begun work can not be left off, without the
hurt of the person, and of a whole Community, such a work is thought lawful
upon the Holy Day.

But of Salmond-Fishing upon the LORD'S DAY, he says expresslie; Piscatio in
die Festo propter lucrum, lib. 2. de fest. dies, cap. 19. page 209.
est opus servile, and prohibitum: that is, But fishing for gain upon the
Holy Day, is a servile work, and altogether forbidden.

Neither can it be any ways accounted a work of Necessity:

1. Being only for making worldly gain, and acquisition by servile and
laborious toil, of things to be theirs, which before the employment in the
said servile work, was not theirs.

2. If the pretense of making gain, or acquyring, were a necessity on the
LORD'S DAY, then no Aartizane, (especially of the poerer sort) but might
allege also his working on the LORD'S DAY, to be a work of necessity. And
those, in like manner, who are Whyte-Fishers, might justly allege their
Fishing on the LORD'S DAY, to be a work of necessiitie, because of their
poverty, for the most part; and, That they have not always Fishing-weather
on the Sea; and, What they slipped that day, they would not attain again.
Others, likewise, might pretend, Their several necessities: and, so, in end,
cast all Religion loose.

3. But the truth is; Without any necessity, it hinders, and with-draweth,
men from a work, which is, indeed, of the greatest necessicie that can be;
which is, The Worship of GOD, and, Salvation of their own Souls. So that I
may say justly, in the words of the PROPHET JEREMY, Ierem. 2.34
That In their Skirts is found the very Blood of the Souls of men: Which
cannot but cry louder against them, than the blood of ABELL did against CAIN.
And which being bought by so precious a price, as the Blood of the Son of
GOD, What may they expect, as their judgment, who make their gain thereby,
and their Houses an Aceldama, or a Field of Blood?

CHAP. X. What are the many and great evils, which the profaning of the
LORD'S DAY, by Salmond-Fishing, produces.
HAving now looked upon this forbidden Tree, let us consider what Fruit it
brings forth: Surely nothing but like the Prophet's wild gourdes, 2. King.
4.40.
which made Death to be in the Pot: or such whereof the LORD complayneth, (
ISAIAH 5.) That His Vine-yarde brought forth even sour Grapes, which will
once set their teeth on edge.

For, 1. This profanation of the LORD'S DAY, robs the LORD of His due
Worship, which those should give unto Him, who are employed in place of GOD'S
Service, to serve man; and, according to NATHAN'S parable, When we have many
days of the week as ours, or for our service, and will not be contented
therewith; but will rob GOD of that one day which He has for His Service
and Worship; what fearful Sentence can such expect, That their own mouth,
(like DAVID'S) shall be made, one day, to pronounce against themselves?

2. Their Servantes (who thus profane the LORD'S DAY, by their servile
employment) are woefully defrauded of their Souls Food, and Spiritual
Edification: So that whiles themselves should be caught, by the Net of the
Gospel, to be brought unto CHRIST, they are catching unlawful Gain, to
bring unto their Masters: Like that Damsel in the ACTS, possessed with a
spirit of Divination, which brought her Masters also much Gain by
Sooth-saying, Act. 16.16.
before her dispossession. Whose case, as it was most woeful, while she was
doing so; So is theirs in like manner, while as sterving in their Souls, and
gayning earthly things to others, they become a prey to that crafty Fisher,
Satan, and lose heavenly things, which they should gain to themselves.

3. Whereas the LORD has appointed a bodily rest to be upon the seventh
day, from all servile work, for refreshing of Man, who has been laboring the
six days of the week, (as He has likewise pity, (and wills us to have)
on the very beast;) yet cruelly, contrary to GOD'S appointment, the bodies
of their Servantes are toylsomlie wrought and wearied upon the LORD'S DAY, as
well as the rest of the days of the week; without any intermission, or
cessation whatsoever: and so are made altogether unfit, all that Season, for
GOD'S Worship, public or private.

4. Through the long dissuetude of resort to GOD'S Service, and profanation of
the LORD'S DAY, those Servantes of theirs (as we find by woeful experience)
become altogether neglectiue of the LORDS DAY at all other times of the year,
when Salmond-Fishing is not; and can neither by Admonition nor Discipline, be
made to halowe the same. And so being endured through their forenamed custom,
they remain altogether ignorant in mind, most profane in life, and utterly
careless of their souls, as if they had none at al. Of which induration,
ignorance, and prophanitie, how fearful a thing it is to be the cause, and
draw upon them such guiltiness, let any sensible Christian seriously
consider.

5. Not only are those their Servantes detayned, by that servile employment,
from GOD'S Holy Worship; but likewise many others are every LORD'S DAY, of
all sorts of people, with-drawne from the same; going thither to be
spectators of those Fishinges, in the very time of GOD'S public Servic, and
assembly of His people: and who, in respect of their multitude, can not be
gotten curbed. As those, then, are happy, who stir up people, saying, (as
DAVID professes) Let us go up to the House of the LORD: and, (as the
Disciples did one the other) who draw Men to GOD: John 1. 41.
So unhappy may they justly judge themselves, who give such an occasion
(for their private gain) of hindering people, and drawing so many from GOD.

6. What Scandal (...), and grievous offense is given to all good Christians,
here, where this profanation is committed, Ierem. 9.
their querimonies which we often hear, bear sufficient witnessing; and what
grief of heart they give to us their Pastors, as the stubbornness of the
Jews gave to their Prophets, HE that knows the heart can bear us record:
So that with Jeremy, We wish our head were waters, and our Eyes a Fountain
of Tears, that we might weep day and night for the gransgression of our
people. How-so-ever, with open impiety, they join not only impenitencie,
but impudency, in sinning.

7. A great stumbling block likewise they are to the weak, who by their
example, think it no transgression to violate and profane the LORD'S DAY
many ways, in the Country especially; and are so hardened in their sin,
that when their Pastors accuse or rebuke them for the same, and command
Abstinencie, they strayght-way replye, Let the Salmond Fishing be as well
discharged then on the Sundaye; and then they shall cease.

8. If also the Angels rejoice at the conversion of a Sinner, how, then, are
they contristated, (as it were) and zealouslie incensed, at such a peart and
public practice of sin, in profaning that Holy Day of their LORD'S
Worship, whereof by those so vngratelie, and sacrilegiouslie, He is robbed?

9. But most, and worst of all; Amongst other crying sins of the Land, which
incense the wrath of the LORD against the same, this, as one of the greatest,
does kindle the Fire of His indignation, procures His judgment, and His hand
to be stretched out still. For, as He for the profanation of His Sabbath,
threatened the Jews before by His Prophet JEREMY, That He should kindle a
Fire in the gates of their chief City Jerusalem, Ierem. 17.2^
which should consume the Palaces thereof; and it should not be quenched. And,
(as good NEHEMIAH declared to the Princes of IVDAH) seeing for this
transgression and guiltiness, the LORD had performed, and put the same to
execution against them, in wasting of their Land, destroying of their City,
and killing and captivating the persons: All which (as to one main cause) he
attributes to the profaning of the LORD'S SABBATH, saying; What evil thing
is this that ye do, Nehem. 13.17.
and profane the SABBATH DAY? Did not your Fathers thus? And did not our GOD
bring all this evil upon us, and upon this City? And yet ye would bring more
wrath upon Israel, by profaning the SABBATH DAY. Much more, then, may
Christians, See Theater of GOD'S Judgments, Tom, 3. of the General Councils,
2. part. p. 669. and Practice of Piety, 368.
who live in a clear Light, and have no less obligation to sanctify the
LORD'S DAY, expect for the profanation thereof, temporal punishments here,
(as sundry have found inflicted) and eternal punishments heere-after, which
are most justly threatened.

CHAP. XI. The CONCLUSION, by way of a faithful Warning from the head of the
Watch-Towre, for exoneration at least of our own Souls, whom GOD has set
over them, who so profane the LORD'S DAY.
AS Reuben said therefore to his Brethren, Genesis 42.2.
Did not I fore-warne you, saying, Do not sin against the Child, and ye
would not hear? Therefore, behold, his blood is required: So we may say,
whom the LORD has set over you, who are guilty of this Sin; Have not we
forewarned you, both by word, and now by writ, That ye sin not against
your own Souls, and the Souls of others, whom ye impede and with-drawe from
the LORD'S Worship, and Means of their Salvation, on the LORD'S DAY? And if ye
will not hear, (as IOSEPH'S Brethren would not REVBEN'S advise) behold,
assuredly, your blood, and the blood of those that perish through your default,
the LORD shall require at your hands.

True it is, that we would often times have taken IEREMIE'S Resolution, Ierem.
20.9.
Not to speak any more of this sin of yours, in the LORD'S Name unto you;
perceaving sundry of you to be so incorrigible; were not that His Word was
within us, as a burning fire, shut up in our bones; and we were weary with
forbearing, and could not stay; except we would have been treacherous both to
GOD, who had entrusted us; and you, whom we should have forewarned.

But seeing we that are PASTORS, have so frequentlie shot IONATHAN'S
Arrows, to fore-warne you to escape from the wrath to come, we are free from
your Blood, if ye perish through your rebellion, and shall find our own
Approbation (we hope) in the DAY of the LORD. And if with SAMVELL we can not
mende you, we shall moan at least, (as he did for rebellious Saul in RAMAH)
and mourn for you in secret, and, with JEREMY, lament, That our Mother has
borne us men of strife and contention, with those, for whose good we power out
our very Souls, in secret, before the LORD, in our daily Prayers; That, To
the Glory of HIS NAME, the joye of our Hearts, and Salvation of your Souls,
we may yet see the Happy Day of your Conversion, and Amendment heere-in:
That so ye may be, in the day of our Common Compearance before the LORD, our
Crown, and our joye; and attain with us, to the happy Rest of that ETERNAL
SABBATH in the HEAVENS, conquessed to us by the Blood of CHRIST: To Whom be
ever all Praise and Glory.

AMEN.
Epitaphium Piscatoris.
HIc recubat dominus vicini gurgitis, auras
Dum traheret, dominus no^ tame^ ipse sui.
Non sibi sed soboli vixit, labor improbus omnis,
Nullaque lux vivo festa vel hora fuit.
Venturi securus erat, coelique penates
Infernasque domos credidit esse pares,
Sunt coelo pisces, sunt orco flumina, praedae
Materiem functo spondet vterque locus.
Arth. Ionstonus, M. R.


