HAEC-VIR: OR The Womanish-Man: Being an Answer to a late Book entitled
Hic-Mulier.

Expressed in a brief Dialogue between Haec-Vir the Womanish-Man, and
Hic-Mulier the Man-Woman.



London printed for I. T. and are to be sold at Christ Church gate. 1620.

HAEC-VIR: OR, The Womanish-Man.
The Speakers.
Haec-Vir; The Womanish-Man. Hic-Mulier; The Man-Woman.
Haec-Vir. MOst redoubted and worthy Sir (for less then a Knight I cannot take
you) you are most happily given unto mine embrace.


Hic-Mul: Is she mad? or does she mock me? Most rare and excellent Lady, I
am the servant of your virtues, and desire to be employed in your service.


Haec-Vir. Pity of patience, what does he behold in me, to take me for a
woman? Valiant and magnanimous Sir, I shall desire to build the Tower of my
Fortune upon no stronger foundation then the benefit of your grace and favor.


Hic-Mul: O! proud ever to be your Servant.


Haec-Vir. No, the Servant of your Servant.


Hic-Mul: The Tithe of your friendship (good Lady) is above my merit.


Haec-Vir. You make me rich beyond expression. But fair Knight, the truth is
I am a Man, and desire but the obligation of your friendship.


Hic-Mul: It is ready to be sealed and delivered to your use. Yet I would have
you understand I am a Woman.


Haec-Vir. Are you a Woman?


Hic-Mul: Are you a Man? O Juno Lucina help me.


Haec-Vir. Yes I am.


Hic-Mul: Your name; most tender piece of Masculine.


Haec-Vir. Haec-Vir. No stranger either in Court, City, or Country. But what
is yours, most courageous counterfeit of Hercales and his Distaffe?


Hic-Mul: Near a kin to your goodness; and compounded of fully as false
Latin. The world calls me, Hic-Mulier.


Haec-Vir. What, Hic-Mulier, the Man-Woman? She that like a Larum-Bell at
midnight has raised the whole Kingdom in Arms against her? Good, stand, and
let me take a full suruay, both of thee, and all thy dependants.


Hic-Mul: Do freely: and when thou have dawbed me over, with the worst colors
thy malice can grind, then give me leave to answer for my self, and I will
say thou art an accuser just and indifferent. Which done, I must entreat you to
sit as many minutes, that I may likewise take your picture, and then refer to
censure, whether of our deformities is most injurious to Nature, or most
effeminine to good men, in the notoriousnes of the example.


Haec-Vir. With like condition of freedom to answer. The Articles are agreed
on: Therefore stand forth, half Birchen-Lane, half St. Thomas Apostles: The
first lent thee a doublet, the later a nether-skirt: Halse Bridewell, half
Blacke-Friers; the one for a scuruy Block, the other for a most profane
Feather; half Mull'd-Sacke the Chimney-sweeper, half Garrat the Fool at a
Tilting; the one for a Yellow Ruff, the other for a Skarseable to put a
Soldier out of countenance; half Bedlam, half Brimendgham, the one for a
base sale Boot, the other for a beastly Leaden gilt Spur: and to conclude,
all Hell, all Damnation. For a shorn, powdered, borrowed Hair, a naked,
lascivious, bawdy Bosom, a Leaden Hall Dagger, a Highway Pistol, and a mind
and behavior suitable or exceeding every repeated deformity. To be brief, I
can but in those few lines deliniate your proportion, for the paraphrase or
compartment, to set out your ugliness to the greatest extent of wonder. I can
but refer you to your God-child that carries your own name, I mean the Book
of Hic-Mulier, there you shall see your character, and feel your shame, with
that palpable plainness, that no Egyptian darkness can be more gross and
terrible.


Hic-Mul: My most tender piece of man's flesh, leave this lightening and
thunder, and come roundly to the matter, draw mine accusation into heads, and
then let me answer.


Haec-Vir. Then thus. In that Book you are arraigned, and found guilty. First
of Baseness, in making your self a slave to nouelty, and the poor invention
of every weak Brain that has but an imbroidered outside, Next, of
Unnaturalness, to forsake the Creation of God, and Customs of the Kingdom,
to be pieced and patched up by a French Tailor, an Italian Baby-maker, and a
Dutch Soldier (beat from the Army for the ill example of Ruffianly
behavior) then of Shamelessness, in casting off all modest softness, and
civility, to run through every desert and wilderness of men's opinions, like
careless untamed Heyfers, or wild Savages. Lastly, of foolishness, in having
no moderation or temper, either in passions or affections: But turning all into
perturbations and sicknesses of the soul, laugh away the preciousnes of your
Time, and at last dye with the flattering sweet malice of an incurable
consumption. Thus Baseness, Unnaturalness, Shamelessness, Foolishness, are
the maine Hatch-ments, or Coat-Armours, which you have taken as rich spoils to
adorn you in the deformity of your apparel: which if you can excuse, I can
pity, and thank Proserpina for thy wit; though no good man can allow of the
Reasons.


Hic-Mul: Well, then to the purpose: First, you say, Not Base.
I am Base, in being a Slave to Nouelty. What slavery can there be in freedom
of election? or what baseness, to crown my delights with those pleasures
which are most suitable to mine affections? What Bondage is.
Bondage or Slavery, is a restraint from those actions, which the mind (of it
own accord) does most willingly desire: to perform the intents and purposes
of another disposition, and that not but by mansuetude or sweetness of
entreaty; but by the force of authority and strength of compulsion. Now for
me to follow change, according to the limitation of mine own will and
pleasure, A defense of change.
there cannot be a greater freedom. Nor do I in my delight of change
otherwise then as the whole world does, or as becomes a daughter of the world
to do. For what is the world, but a very shop or warehouse of change?
Sometimes Winter, sometimes Summer; day and night: they hold sometimes Riches,
sometimes Poverty, sometimes Health, sometimes Sickness: now Pleasure;
presently Anguish; now Honor; then contempt: and to conclude, there is nothing
but change, which does surround and mix withal our Fortunes. And will you
have poor woman such a fixed Star, that she shall not so much as move or
twinkle in her own Sphere? That were true Slavery indeed, and a Baseness
beyond the chains of the worst servitude. Nature to every thing she has
created, has given a singular delight in change, as to Herbs, Plants and
Trees a time to wither and shead their leaves, a time to budde and bring forth
their leaves, and a time for their Fruits and Flowers: To worms and creeping
things a time to hide themselves in the pores and hollowes of the earth, and a
time to come abroad and suck the deaw; To Beasts liberty to choose their
food, liberty to delight in their food, and liberty to feed and grow fat with
their food. The Birds have the air to fly in, the waters to bathe in, and the
earth to feed on. But to man, both these and all things else, to alter, frame
and fashion, according as his will and delight shall rule him. Again, who will
rob the eye of the variety of objects, the ear of the delight of sounds, the
nose of smells, the tongue of tastes, and the hand of feeling? and shall only
woman, excellent woman; so much better in that she is something purer, be only
deprived of this benefit? Shall she be the Bondslaue of Time, the Handmaid of
opinion, or the strict obseruer of every frosty or cold benumbed imagination?
It were a cruelty beyond the Rack or Strapado.

But you will say it is not Change, What novelty is.
but Novelty, from which you deter us: a thing that does euert the good, and
erect the evil; prefer the faithless, and confound desert; that with the
change of Opinions breeds the change of States, and with continual alterations
thrusts headlong forward both Ruin and Subversion. Alas (soft Sir) what can
you christen by that new imagined Title, when the words of a wiseman are; that
what was done, is but done again: all things do change, and under the cope of
Heaven there is no new thing. So that whatsoever we do or imitate, it is
neither Slavish, Base, nor a breeder of Nouelty.

Next, Not unnatural.
you condemn me of Unnaturalness, in forsaking my creation, and contemning
custom. How do I forsake my creation, that do all the rights and offices due
to my Creation? I was created free, born free, and live free: what lets me then
so to spinne out my time, that I may dye free?

To alter creation, were to walk on my hands with my heels upward, to feed my
self with my feet, or to forsake the sweet sound of sweet words, for the
hissing noise of the Serpent: but I walk with a face erected, with a body
clothed, with a mind busied, and with a heart full of reasonable and devout
cogitations; only offensive in attire, in as much as it is a Stranger to the
curiosity of the present times, and an enemy to Custom. Are we then bound to
be the Flatterers of Time, or the dependants on Custom? O miserarable
servitude chained only to Baseness and Folly! for then custom, nothing is
more absurd, nothing more foolish.

It was a custom amongst the Romans, Foolish Customs.
that as we wash our hands before meals, so they with curious and sweet
ointments anointed all their arms and legs quite over, and by success of
time grew from these unguents to bathes of rich perfumed and compound waters,
in which they bathed their whole bodies: holding it the greatest disgrace that
might be, to use or touch any natural water, as appears by these Verses.

She shines with ointments to make hair to fall, Mart. l. 2.

Or with sour Chalk she ouer-couers all.
It was a custom amongst the Ancients to lie upon stately and soft beds, when
either they delivered Embassages, or entered into any serious discourse or
argument, as appears by these Verses: Father Aeneas thus, Virg. Aen. l. 2.
began say,
From stately Couch whereon he lay.


Cato Junior held it for a custom, never to eat meat but sitting on the
ground: the Venetians kiss one another ever at the first meeting: and even at
this day it is a general received custom amongst our English, that when we
meet or overtake any man in our travel or iourneying, to examine him whither
he rides, how far, to what purpose, and where he lodges? nay, and with that
unmannerly boldness of inquisition, that it is a certain ground of a most
insufficient quarrel, not to receive a full satisfaction of those demands
which go far astray from good manners, or comely civility; and will you
have us to marty our selves to these Mymicke and most fantastic customs? It
is a fashion or custom with us to mourn in Black: yet the Argian and Roman
Ladies ever mourned in White; and (if we will tie the action upon the
signification of colors) I see not but we may mourn in Green, Blue, Red or
any simple color used in Heraldry. For us to salute strangers with a kiss, is
counted but civility, but with foreign Nations immodestie: for you to cut the
hair of your upper lips, familiar here in England, every where else almost
thought unmanly. To ride on Side-Saddles at first was counted here abominable
pride, etc. I might instance in a thousand things that only Custom and not
Reason has approved. To conclude Custom is an Idiot; and whosoever depends
wholely upon him, without the discourse of Reason, will take from him his pyde
coat, and become a slave indeed to contempt and censure.

But you say we are barbarous and shameless, Nor shameless.
and cast off all softnes, to run wild through a wilderness of opinions. In
this you express more cruelty then in all the rest, because I stand not with
my hands on my belly like a baby at Bartholomew Fair, that move not my whole
body when I should but only stir my head like Jack of the Clock house
which has no joints, that am not dumb when wantons court me, as if Asse-like
I were ready for all burdens, or because I weep not when injury gripes me,
like a woorried Dear in the fangs of many Curres: am I therefore barbarous or
shameless? He is much injurious that so baptized us: we are as freeborn as
Men, have as free election, and as free spirits, we are compounded of like
parts, and may with like liberty make benefit of our Creations: my countenance
shall smile on the worthy, and frown on the ignoble, I will hear the Wise, and
be deaf to Idiots, give counsel to my friend, but be dumb to flatterers, I
have hands that shall be liberal to reward defert, feet that shall move
swiftly to do good offices, and thoughts that shall ever accompany freedom and
severity. If this be barbarous, let me leave the City, and live with
creatures of like simplicity.

To conclude, you say we are all guilty of most infinite folly and
indiscretion. I confess, Not foolish.
that Disoretion is the true salt which seasoneth every excellency, either in
Man or Woman, and without it nothing is well, nothing is worthy: that want
disgraceth our actions, staineth our Virtues, and indeed makes us most profane
and irreligious, yet it is ever found in excess, as in too much, or too
little: and of which of these are we guilty; do we wear too many clothes or
too few? if too many, we should oppress Nature, if too few, we should bring
sickness to Nature: but neither of these we do, for what we do wear is
warm, thrifty and wholesome, then no excess, and so no indiscretion: where is
then the error? only in the Fashion, only in the Custom. Oh for mercy sake
bind us not to so hateful a companion, but remember what one of our famous
English Poets says: Round-headed Custom the apaplexie is G.C.

Of Bedrid Nature, and lines led amiss,
And takes away all feeling of offense.


Again, another as excellent in the same Art, says, Custom the Worlds
Judgment does blind so far, D'Bart.

That Virtue is often arraigned at Vices Bar.


And will you be so tyrannous then, to compel poor Woman to be a mistrisse
to so unfaithful a Servant? Believe it, then we must call up our Champions
against you, which are Beauty and Frailty, and what the one cannot compel you
to forgive, the other shall enforce you to pity or excuse: and thus my self
imagining my self free of these four Imputations, I rest to be confuted by
some better and grauer Judgment.


Haec. Vir. You have wrested out some wit, to wrangle forth no reason; since
every thing you would make for excuse, approues your guilt still more ougly:
what baser bondage, or what more servile baseness, then for the flattering and
soothing of an unbridled appetite, or delight, to take a wilful liberty to do
evil, and to give evil example? this is to be Hels Prentice, not Heavens
Freewoman. It is disputable amongst our Divines, whether upon any occasion a
woman may put on man's attire, or no: all conclude it unfit; and the most
indifferent will allow it, but only to escape persecution. Now you will not
only put it on, but wear it continually; and not wear it; but take pride in
it, not for persecution, but want on pleasure; not to escape danger, but to
run into damnation; not to help others, but to confound the whole sex by
the euilnesse of so lewd an example. Phalaris (though an extreme tyrant) when
he executed the inuenter of the Brazen Bull in the Bull) did it not so much for
the pleasure he took in the torment, as to cut from the earth a brain so
devilish and full of uncivil and unnatural inventions. And sure had the first
inuenter of your disguise perished with all her cooplements about her, a world
had been preserved from scandal and slander; for from one evil to beget
infinites, or to nourish sin with a delight in sin, is of all habits the
lowest, ignoblest and basest.

Now, who knows not, that to yield to baseness, must needs be folly? (for
what Wisdom will be guilty of its own injury?) To be foolishly base, how
can there be an action more barbarous? and to be base, foolish and barbarous,
how can there appear any spark, twinkle, or but ember of discretion or
judgment? So that notwithstanding your elaborat plea for freedom, your severe
condemnation of custom, your fair promise of civil actions, and your
temperate avoiding of excess, whereby you would seem to hug and embrace
discretion; yet till you wear hats to desend the Sun, not to cover shorn
locks, Caules to adorn the head, not Gregorians to warm idle brains, till
you wear innocent white Ruffes, not jealous yellow iaundis'd bands, well
shapt, comely and close Gowns, not light skirts and French doublets, for
Poniards, Samplers, for Pistols Prayer-bookes, and for ruffled Boots and
Spurs, neat Shoes and cleane-garterd Stockings, you shall never lose the
title of Baseness, Unnaturalness, Shamelessness, and Foolishness, you shall
feed Ballads, make rich shops, arm contempt, and only starve and make poor
your selves and your reputations. To conclude, if you will walk without
difference, you shall live without reverence: if you will conte^ne order, you
must endure the shame of disorder; and if you will have no rulers but your
wills, you must have no reward but disdain and disgrace, according to the
saying of an excellent English Poet: A stronger hand restraines eur wilful
powers, C. M.

A Will must rule above this will of ours;
Not following what our vain desires do woo,
For Virtues sake but what we ought to deo.



Hic-Mul. Sir, I confess you have raysd mine eielids up, but you have not
clean taken away the filme that couers the sight: I feel (I confess) cause
of belief, and would willingly bend my heart to entertain belief, but when
the accuser is guilty of as much or more then that he accuses, or that I see
you refuse the potion, and are as grievously infected, blame me not then a
little to stagger, and till you will be pleased to be cleans'd of that
leprosy which I see apparent in you, give me leave to doubt whether mine
infection be so contagious, as your blind severity would make it.

Therefore to take your proportion in a few lines, The description of a
Womanish Man.
(my dear Feminine Masculine) tell me what Charter, prescription or right of
claim you have to those things you make our absolute inheritance? why do you
curle, frizell and powder your hayres, bestowing more hours and time in
deniding lock from lock, and hair from hair, in giving every thread his
posture, and every curle his true sense and circumpherence then ever Caesar did
in marshalling his Army, either at Pharsalia, in Spain, or Britain? why do
you rob us of our Ruffes, of our Earetings, Carkanets, and Mamillions, of our
Fannes and Feathers, our Busks and French bodies, nay, of our Maskes, Hoods,
Shadows and Shapynas? not so much as the very Art of Painting, but you have so
greedily ingrost it, that were it not for that little fantastical sharp
pointed dagger that hangs at your chins, and the cross hilt which gards your
upper lip, hardly would there be any difference between the fair Mistress and
the foolish Servant. But is this theft the uttermost of our Spoil? Fie, you
have gone a world further, and even ravished from us our speech, our actions,
sports and recreations. Goodness leave me, if I have not heard a Man court
his Mistress with the same words that Venus did Adonis, or as near as the Book
could instruct him; where are the Tilts and Tournies, and lofty Gallyards that
were daunst in the days of old, when men caperd in the air like wanton kids
on the tops of Mountains, and turned above ground as if they had been compact
of Fire or a purer element? Tut all is forsaken, all is vanished, those motions
showed more strength then Art, and more courage then courtship; it was much too
robustious, and rather spent the body then prepared it, especially where any
defect before reigned; hence you took from us poor Women our trauerses and
tourneys, our modest stateliness and curious slidings, and left us nothing but
the new French garb of puppet hopping and letting. Lastly, poor Sheetle-cock
that was only a female invention, how have you taken it out of our hands, and
made your selves such Lords and Rulers over it, that though it be a very
Emblem of us, and our lighter despised fortunes, yet it dare now hardly come
near us; nay, you keep it so imprisond within your Bedde-Chambers and dyning
rooms, amongst your Pages and Panders, that a poor innocent Maid to give but
a kick with her Battle-dore, were more then half way to the ruin of her
reputation. For this you have demolished the noble schools of Hors-manship (of
which many were in this City) hung up your Arms to rust, glued up those
swords in their scabberds that would shake all Christendom with the brandish,
and entertained into your minds such softnes, dullness and effeminate
niceness, that it would even make Heraclitus himself laugh against his nature
to see how pulingly you languish in this weak entertained sin of womanish
softness: To see one of your gender either show himself (in the midst of his
pride or riches) at a Play house, or public assembly how; (before he dare
enter) with the Jacobs Staff of his own eyes and his Pages, he takes a full
suruay of himself, from the highest sprig in his feather, to the lowest
spangle that shines in his Shoo-string: how he prunes and picks himself like a
Hawke set a weathering, calls every several garment to Auricular confession,
making them utter both their mortal great stains, and their venial and less
blemishes, though the moat be much less then an Attome: Then to see him
pluck and tugge every thing into the form of the newest received fashion; and
by Durers rules make his leg answerable to his neck; his thigh
proportionable with his middle, his foot with his hand, and a world of such
idle disdained foppery: To see him thus patcht up with Symetry, make himself
complete, and even as a circle: and lastly, cast himself amongst the eyes of
the people (as an object of wonder) with more niceness, then a Virgin goes to
the sheets of her first Lover, would make patience her self mad with anger,
and cry with the Poet: O Hominum mores, O gens, O Tempora dura,
Quantus in vrbe Dolor; Quantus in Orb Dolus!


Now since according to your own Inference, even by the Laws of Nature, by the
rules of Religion, and the Customs of all civil Nations, it is necessary
there be a distinct and special difference between Man and Woman, both in
their habit and behauiours: what could we poor weak women do less (being
far too weak by force to fetch back those spoils you have unjustly taken
from us) then to gather up those garments you have proudly cast away, and
therewith to cloth both our bodies and our minds; since no other means was
left us to continue our names, and to support a difference? for to have held
the way in which our forefathers first set us, or to have still embraced the
civil modesty, or gentle sweetness of our soft inclinations; why, you had so
far incroacht upon us, and so ouer-brib'd the world, to be dease to any grant
of Restitution, that as at our creation, our whole sex was contained in man
our first Parent, so we should have had no other being, but in you, and your
most effeminate quality. Hence we have preserved (though to our own shames)
those manly things which you have forsaken, which would you again accept, and
restore to us the Blushes we laid by, when first we put on your Masculine
garments; doubt not but chaste thoughts and bashfulnesse will again dwell in
us, and our Palaces being newly gilt, trimmed, and reedified, draw to us all
the Graces, all the Muses; which that you may more willingly do, and (as we
of yours) grow into detestation of that deformity you have purloyn'd, to the
utter loss of your Honors and Reputations? Mark how the brave Italian Poet,
even in the Infancy of your abuses, most lively describes you; About his neck
a Carknet rich he ware Ariost.

Of precious Stones, all set in gold well tried;
His arms that erst all warlike weapons bare,
In golden Bracelets want only were tied:
Into his ears two Rings conuayed are
Of golden Wire, at which on either side, A description Effeminatenesse.

Two Indian Pearls, in making like two Pears,
Of passing price were pendant at his ears.
His Locks bedewed with waters of sweet savor,
Stood curled round in order on his head;
He had such wanton womanish behavior,
As though in Valor he had never been bred:
So changed in speech, in manners and in favor,
So from himself beyond all reason led,
By these enchantments of this amorous Dame;
He was himself in nothing, but in name.


Thus you see your injury to us is of an old and inueterate continuance, having
taken such strong root in your bosoms, that it can hardly be pulled up,
without some offense to the soil: ours young and tender, scarce freed from the
Swaddling clouts, and therefore may with as much ease be lost, as it was with
little difficulty found. Cast then from you our ornaments, and put on your own
armours: Be men in shape, men in show, men in words, men in actions, men in
counsel, men in example: then will we love and serve you; then will we hear
and obey you; then will we like rich Jewels hang at your ears to take our
Instructions, like true friends follow you through all dangers, and like
careful leeches power oil into your wounds: Then shall you find delight in
our words; pleasure in our faces; faith in our hearts; chastity in our
thoughts, and sweetness both in our inward and outward inclinations.
Comeliness shall be then our study; fear our Armor, and modesty our
practice: Then shall we be all your most excellentest thoughts can desire, and
have nothing in us less then impudence and deformity.


Haec-Vir. Enough: You have both raised mine eyelids, cleared my sight, and
made my heart entertain both shame and delight at an instant; shame in my
Follies past; delight in our Noble and worthy Conversion. Away then from me
these light vanities, the only Ensigns of a weak and soft nature: and come
you grave and solid pieces, which arm a man with Fortitude and Resolution: you
are too tough and stubborn for a woman's wearing, we will here change our
attires, as we have changed our minds, and with our attires, our names. I
will no more be Haec-Vir, but Hic Vir, nor you Hic-Mulier, but Haec Mulier:
from henceforth deformity shall pack to Hell: and if at any time he hide
himself upon the earth, yet it shall be with contempt and disgrace. He shall
have no friend but Poverty; no favorer but Folly, nor no reward but Shame.
Henceforth we will live nobly like our selves, ever sober, ever discreet, ever
worthy; true men, and true women. We will be henceforth like well-coupled
Doves, full of industry, full of love: I mean, not of sensual and carnal
love, but heavenly and divine love, which proceeds from God; whose
inexpressible nature none is able to deliver in words, since it is like his
dwelling, high and beyond the reach of humane apprehension; according to the
saying of the Poet, in these Verses following: Of loves perfection perfectly to
speak,
Or of his nature rightly to define,
Indeed does far surpass our reasons reach,
And needs his Priest to express his power divine,
For long before the world he was ybore,
And bred above ith hy'st celestial Sphere,
For by his power the world was made of yore,
And all that therein wondrous does appear.



FINIS.

