THE EXACT AND TRVE RELATION OF THAT BLOODY BATTLE fought between his Royal
Majesty of Swethland, and the Imperial Army the 5 and 6. of November 1632. In
the which Battle his Majesty was killed. Besides Luelzen, two Germane miles
from Leipseich:

Written from Erdfoord by a worthy Captain the 12 of November, who was an eye
witness to the Battle.

Vos populi, moestos lessus, tristesque querelas
Cernite; and arcani pectoris acre malum!
EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Wreittoun. 1633.



THE EXACT AND TRVE RELATION OF THAT BLOODY BATTLE fought between his Royal
Majesty of Swethland, and the Imperial Army the 5 and 6. of November 1632. In
the which Battle his Majesty was killed.
AFter his Royal Majesty of Swethland with his Army was the 30 day of the
last month of October arreard at Naumbrugh, and the enemy being at
Weiszenfolz, there was some probability that he would hold his stand: in
regard there is a strong pass, and he lay in his advantage: his Majesty
presently has a leagure and retrenchments caused to be made before Naumburgh,
to discover and have a watch full eye upon the further intentions of the
enemy, the which upon the 4 of November in a manner fled away from Weiszenfolz
after first having pillaged Town and Castle: and turned himself toward
Luelzen two miles from Leipseich: whereupon his Majesty presently upon the 5.
of November three hours before day, arose with his Army from Naumburg, and
encountered yet the same day the enemy about two of the clock in the
afternoon, with playing of his small pieces upon him; he made give back,
killing some of his men, and got a standard of the enemies dragoners, on which
Fortoun and the Roman Eagle was painted, which on our side was interpreted as
a good omen and token, and if we had had yet 2. hours more day, the enemy
would have been the most part ruined, but night and a thick mist befalling
us, we began to be quiet on both sides.

His Majesty continued this whole night in the field, standing in Battalzie
intending to pursue and continue this happy beginning and to fall on upon the
enemy 2. hours before day: but contrary to our hopes and expectation, there
was again so thick a fogge that nothing to the purpose could be effected, so
that his Majesty was constrained to stay till it was fair day: the mist being
dispersed by the Sun. In the mean while the enemy has caused a trench to
be cast up upon the floate ditch, and expected us in his advantage. And after
his Majesty had caused morning prayer to be said by Doctor Fabritius, and
the Sun by little and little chasing away the mist, and it being likelye to
be a fair day; his Majesty with most mooving words exhorted all his Armies
both horse and foot to fight bravely, and said to the Sweds and Finnis.

My honest Brothers behave your selves well this day, and fight bravely for the
Word of GOD, and for your King: in doing this ye shall obtain grace and
mercy with GOD, and honor before all the World: and I my self will reward
you honorably; but if ye fail in so doing, I protest unto you that none of
your bones shall come into Sweden again.

To the Germans his Majesty said, And you my honest Dutch brothers, I beseech
you in general to behave your selves manfully: fight bravely with me, give no
ground, I for my part set my life and blood at the stake for your good with
you: will you stand to me bravely, without question it is to be hoped, GOD
Almighty will give us the victory: and you and your posterity will enjoy the
fruits thereof. But if you do not so, then is your Religion and liberty
overthrown. After which he said, Now we will go on, GOD Almighty help us
all. And with that cried with a loud voice to the Heavens, saying; Jesus, Jesus,
Jesus, help me this day to fight for the honor of thy Name: and advanced in
this manner with the whole battle fasting, and went receiving either meat or
drink upon the enemy: his Majesty leading the Vanguard himself, and
between 9. and 10. of the clock in the forenoone the fight began, and
caused the enemy at the same instant time the Town Luelzen to be put on fire
in two places, because we might not fall upon him in that place.

The Swedish blew and yellow regiment were advanced, and 5. shot of great Canon
discharged upon the enemy, which had a fine double advantage of us, (we
having but the plain fields) but the float ditch; their parapet, their
musketeers, their currasiers, and their Canon, out of which, he after our 5.
shottes discharged 80. upon us: all which notwithstanding our men did so
bravely, that they took the ditch and their Trench from them, and between and
5. of the clock 7. Pieces of Artillery, as also diverse Colors and Cornets,
and about all this the Encounter has been so fierce on both sides, that a
great many has been slain: after we had recovered the the said 7. Pieces,
the enemy with his carabats fell upon our baggage (which was but a few Wagons
and Coaches, for all the rest were left behind in the Leaguer at Naumburg) but
were repulsed with notable loss to themselves, yet withal this our Dutch
cavallerie lighted in some disorder: but just at the same instant a mist
happening again was the cause the enemy took no notice of this disorder: which
if he had perceaved, he might have charged us again in some other place, and
occasioned greater confusion; but we were at last brought in order again, so
that in my opinion the mist did us more good than harm: with this the enemy
fell with all might and maine upon us again, and took the said 7. Pieces from
us again, and dispersed some regiments of Cavallerie which had given ground;
upon which the charge was received with more earnestness than ever, and some
fresh regiments (the first being weak and faint with so furious a combat) were
by his Majesty's command brought on, which behaved themselves so gallantly,
that not only the 7. Pieces were recovered again between 2. and 3. of the
clock, but also 13. more and all the enemies munition with the loss of a
great number of his people, all his Cavallerie, and especially his Curasiers
remaining dead upon the place and the remainder, except 3. regiments which held
themselves beside a Windmillne in a sconce all began to fly: which made us
imagine the fight had been at an end and that we had absolutely the victory,
and we left off shooting for half an hour, and all was quiet.

After this the enemy turned about again to charge us and as we were
afterward informed by the prisoners, as also by the relation in writing of our
commander at Hall, was Pappinhame just at the same time with sundry regiments
of fresh folk arryved, which the day before Walsten not thinking that we
would a have fallen on him, was gone toward Hall to attempt the same town,
but upon this occasion in all have commanded back.

At this arryvall the fugitives did rely themselves again and charged again
with the rest, where the fight was continued again until night, with such
earnestness of both sides that there was nothing else to be heard or seen,
but the thundering Canon, and the hail shot of Musket bullets, and this last
encounter was more hard and furious then the first: yet at the last throught
the gracious help and assistance of the highest and the Heroical valor of
his excellent Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weimer, which at this time his Majesty
being dangerously and deadly wounded in the first encounter, commanded in
chief, the victory is fallen upon our side, and the enemy took his flight
toward Leipseich at 9. of the clock at night with few of his people, firing
his Leaguer, and leaving behind some of his baggage, and three Pieces of
Artillierie, which indeed he took along with him, but was not able to bring
them forward, in regard of the dark night we were not able to pursue him, and
the more, because it was thought he would stand again the next morning and
expect another charge.

This is indeed a glorious and exceeding great victory, for the which we are
not able to render sufficient thanks to the Almighty GOD: For on the enemies
side by the confession of the prisoners, and the view of the place of the
Battle, where dead men lay half a man's height one at the top of another: does
testify is slain and wounded the two third parts of his Army among them.
Pappenhem himself, and most of the chief commanders, all their whole
artillery and munitions taken from them, and the small remainder put to flight.

Yet in consideration of the death of our most worthy of glory, most
Christian, and in all the world most praised, and famous, nothing to be valved.

His Majesty of most high and blessed memory being in the first encounter,
was shot first of all in his Arm, afterward behind in his back, and lastly
with a Pistol into his head, and also rendered up his soul as a sacrifice to
the LORD JESUS, and spent his Royal blood, and ventred his life and body with
the Protestant Electors, Princes, and States of Germany, for the maintenance of
your Religion, and the recoverie of your lost liberties.

Off our sides as far as I know, is not any great commander slain but
general Major Isler: yet there are a great many hurt, amongst which the Prince
Anhault, Count Neils Colonel: Winchler Colonel, Walstein and others, but not
deadly: but how many be slain of our men, cannot as yet be exactly known
till we come to the general rendevouz: yet the Swedish blew and yellow
regiments of foot, Duke Benherds the Prince of Anhault, the Count
Leuuenstenis, and Colonel Brandestins regiment of Horse have suffered great
damage. After all this his grace Duke Benhard of Weimer being general over the
army which as yet consists of 15000. men, retreated himself with his people
to Weiszenfolz, to rest there a little while, and to expect his highness the
Elector of Saxon and Duke George of Lunenburgh with their forces, which were
not present at this encounter and so jointly with them to pursuethe victory.

The most Highest grant his grace that all the protestaut Electors, Princes,
and States of Germany may take this business to heart, and thankfully
acknowledge the deeds and great faithfulness of the most glorious King, and
that holy work begun for Religion and liberty, which his royal Majesty
of most highly blessed memory has as it were given them into their hands, and
brought to good terms, may in time to come with their wontedly hazarding
together of lives, goods, and blood, and through the assistance of the power of
GOD be brought to perfection; and that they may express themselves thankful
toward the most desolate, most pious, and religious Queen, as also the Crown
of Swedens high and inferior officers, which are resolved to venture all with
them. But if so be (the which God graciously avert) they should separate
themselves, and suffer themselves to be divided by other counsels; then might
that happen, which the most glorious King shortly before his death did
prophecy: namely, that both their religion and liberty were overthrown.

By this relation I cannot omit these ensuing words which his blessed most
royal Majesty many times, and yet but three days before the battle did
speak at Naumburgh to Doctor Fabritius. Good Master Doctor, the business
stands well, aad all succeeds according to our wishes, but I fear me: I
fear me, because that every body does so reverence, and magnify me, and
hold me in a manner for a god, God will punish me one time or another for that
cause: yet God knows that I am not pleased with it. Now let happen to me
what my most loving God will be pleased. Sure I am, that he will perfect and
bring to an end the business, because it concerns the honor of his Name.
Thus much the King.

This I thought good in brief to relate to you, as much as my self could
learn and inform of, which was my self present from the beginning to the end
of this great capital battle, (in comparison of which the former battle of
Leipsich is not to be esteemed) which lasted nine whole hours. I beseech the
most High that he would be pleased to assist my gracious Queen, and all the
Counsel and Officers of the Crown of Sweden with the spirit of comfort and
consolation, that they in a Christian patience may after the loss of so great
a Treasure as their King and Lord receive godly comfort in other ways.

Out of all, this is manifest to perceive, that not we, but GOD Almighty is
absolute master of all our wills, lives, thoughts and spirits: and indeed we
may in so much the more patience comfort our selves, because our King has
ended his course of life in the highest degree of immortal glory, being and
remaining before his death, in his death, and after his death still victorious.
His blessed Majesty his corpse is carried in a Coach with the Army in persute
of the enemy, till further order come at his Queens arrival, and the
Chancellor Oxenstein.

What further will happen I shall hereafter let you know: the royal
Chancellerie is conveyed to Erdfoord, where they attend the Chancellors coming.

This is memorable that his grace Duke Bernhard of Saxon when Colonel
Kniphansen brought him the post of the Kings (now blessed) decease, his grace
very heroically answered then, I desire to live no longer, and with that
charged the enemy with that courage and Heroical valor that it is not to be
expressed.

At the closing and sealing up of these, comes news that the enemy has
quyted Leipseich and left a garrison of two hundredth men in the Castle, takes
his march toward the mountains Zuickaw: whom Duke Bernhard and the Elector of
Saxon his Army follows

FINIS.
And now to conclude this tragical discourse,
SHall Woes want words, shall sad sprung sighs want tears?
Grievd souls deep groans? shall couldie sobs want fears?
Or gushing grief lack source? shall humane eye
Read this disaster, and not destiny:
Nay hearts must melt, true Christian moanes rebound,
From tragic tune, a Mirmidonean sound,
Whilst thus the angry fates, O grim despite!
Have robde stern Europe, of her great-growne light:
That Martial Prince, Sweds North-bred matchless Star,
That thundering Son of Mars, that life of War.
CHRIST'S Champion here on Earth, Religions sword,
That Joshua's type, ADOLPHUS in aword:
Whom cruel Death, by three untimely shots
In fatal field, sealed up best Soldiers lots:
O Heavens! let mortal eyes dissolve in floods,
Hills, Rocks, and Caves, resound with eachoing woods
Our mourning cries, let whistling wyndes transport
Our loves, his praise, to Fames eternal Port:
A Man Monarchick, a conquering Demi-god,
Bellona's stamp, whose hands did weild the Rod
Of divine Justice, Heavens Marishell, and more
Brave Soldiers Chiftane, Soldiers may deplore,
And traile their Pikes, come hang their Muskets down,
Whose loves have lost, the life of true renown.
For whom that sovereign power, his Celia dear,
May thunder sighs, and with sad sighs ateare:
So Swethland may renew old Thebes song,
Like was their grief, their loss, their fatal wrong:
To rouse past Warriors worth, time bears record,
That Castriot was for valor only Lord;
Whose bones the Turks reserve, for a good sign,
But more GUSTAVUS, should be our design,
Whose Corpse, are with his Army still transported,
Till his grim death be on his foes retorted.
Whose heart, whose hand, whose courage, and whose mind
Had never match, nor after times shall find.
FINIS.

