PROGNOSTICACION, Drawn out of the Books of Ipocras, Auicen, and other
notable Auctours of Physycke, showing the danger of diverse syckenesses, that
is to say, whether in peril of death be in them or not, the pleasure of
almighty God reseruyd.

woodcut of old man pointing The Pronosticacion for this year.


woodcut of Hippocrates(?) and Avicenna Ipocras, and Auicen.


Pronosticacion of the Fever or Ague, which is called in laten Febris offimera.
THat fever after Auicen is light to heal, and hard to know. He yt knows
it can say and afferme the same. For the fever I Effirme of his kind duryth
not, but by space of one natural day. And therefore he is named or takyth his
name of Effimeron a word of greek which is a name of a cetayne fysshe in
laten. For that fysshe dies ye same day that he is gendryd. And so it is of
this Fever, for of his nature he endurith but.xxiiij. hours. And then he
ends and goes away with vaperouse sweet, Notwithstanding by occasion of ill
governance, and some nature of the body, he enduryth sometime the space of a
day inclusyue, and if it last longer it is not the effomer Ague. And therefore
if the pulse does not rest soon after. And if the pulse be diverse and the
matyer vndygestyd it is a tokyn that it passes into a putryd Fever esspecially
with stenche of these which comes forth from the body of the person.

Pronosticacion of the Fever or Ague called in laten Febris canson.
THis dissease is very soon endyd and with terryble or ferefull accydentes,
and if all the tokyn apere good fro beginning of the dissease, the pacient
shall be delyueryd in the. 4. day or within. And if they apere ill he shall dye
the.iiij. day or within, but sometime it contynueth till the.vij. day, It can
not be prolongyd farther For nature of the dissease, and molestion of the
accidents does not suffer it to be tedyous or of long contynuaunce. It is not
according necessary to put the good and evil Signs of the Agues here, for we
have put them in another place. Notwithstanding Ipocras would Pronosticque that
Alienacion does dyssolue any trymblynges, either shakynges, that are caused of
the Fever Canson.

Pronosticacion of the Fever Tercian.
A True Tercian is endyd in.7. points or within, and so is endyd the.9.
point or within. And he causes pain and vexacio^.12. hours or within. And
the mean season it is much paynful he vixeth.36. days, In the first point it
is little and weke. In the second point strong. And in the third most
strongest. At the.ix. it is in the last. And there it aresteth with most
daungerouse and wicked actydentes. At the.5. point it begins to wax weak.

Pronosticacion of the blody Fever.
IF yelowe or black whelkes do a pere, or as Auicen says, if the pacient
hard sownde or rumblyng in his belly like thunder, or if his eyes water by
reason of malice of the disease? Or if he can scant draw his breath, or be
stopped, or have impostumes in the ways where as the breath does pass. And if
ye perceive him very paynefull after sleep. All these are tokyns of death.

Pronosticacion of the Fever quartan.
THe fever quartan of blood is sooner heled and shorter then other of other
Humors. Then next that which is of color. Then that which is of flewme.
Then the worst of Melancoly. The fever quartan after his commen course lastyth
a year. For as the sharp Agues follow the monyng of the Moon, so does the
Cronyckes follow mouynge of the Son. And sometime it lasts.2. years, as
Auicen says. And if the pacient use ill diet long, he dies of it.

Pronosticacion of the Cotidian Fever.
IF we may perceive in the beginning wylfull vomet, and in the end of the fyt
sweet, it is a very good token. For that betokens that the syckenes is
curable and short, for of that is sygnified yt the mattier is not very gross
and viscouse and the pores are not thycke. This desease comes lightly with
much nesynges and alteracions with a certain astonyenges, and little thirst
with swellynge and pain of the face, and they falls lightly into sweet, and
have contynuall pain of the stomach.

Pronosticacion of the Fever Ethycke.
THe first kind of it is soon heled, but the third never, but by the power
of GOD. But the mean is of mean manner. So that if it be curyd it is with
great diffycultie, when his nails croketh, then is he in the state certain to
dye, but when his hear falls then is he nere death.

And if he chance to have ye flux or laske, then is he at point of death. For
that destroys of the pacyent very soon, when his legs begins to swell,
then can he live no longer, but commonly they dye within.3. days. And the
pacyentes of the Fever quartan Ethicke, can not well deserve of heat for the
diverse ill compleccion, is made equal, and it is not feled, and when the fever
Ethicke is compounde with the putred mattier, he is hard to be known.

Pronosticacion of Sweet.
THE sweet ryseth from the place where the mattier of the disease is, or nere
it. Where the sweet is, there is the syckenes. The sweet which comes now and
then is naught. Sweet with wekenes of the pulse, is naught. Hot sweet in the
head, in the contynual fever only is naught. And if it be cold, it betokens
death. If the Ague be sharp and slow, it betokens length of the desease.

Pronosticacion of the pockes.
IF they be few and aperyng soon, and that they matter soon, it is token of
good lykelyhod of cure, because the crises or corrupt humors that they are
gendred of, is good to hele. But if they turn toward the color of Violettes,
yelowe or grene, either black. All these are the worst and deadly. If a poysyn
or venomous matier apere, it is deadly? If they apere sometime and sometime are
hyd, that is the worst sign of all. Also if the pacyent can not well draw his
breath it is a very ill sign, but if he may draw his breath, well, and is with
out fever, it is a good sign. But if the Ague be strong with the pockes, and
great anguysshe, and vehement thrust, of weke strength and the breath bound. It
is a token that he shall dye soon. As commonly they dye by stoppynge of their
breath. If pantyng over all, it is very evil. And if his Vryne be black or
grene, and if the egestion be grene. These ar worst and deadly Signs, and so
is laske with Pockes.

Pronosticacion of Poison.
THese are deadly signs, he that receives poison, if the apple of his eye be
hyd, and the white of his eyes does apere only swellyng of his face and
throat, and chaungynge of color into yelowe or black, and grenenes, or
blackenes of tongue, and putting out of it, and very much spyttyng pain of
his guts, the crampe and pantyng. These sygnifyeth death within certain
years.

Pronosticacion of Impostumes.
SOme Impostumes ar ended by in sensyble resolucion, and is very good, and
some be poison matiryng, and that is worst, some by mean laudable matyrynge,
and that is good, and some by gravel and hardenes, and that is ill. Some
Impostumes are of hot matier, and they are ended in a day. And some are of
cold matier and they are ended in the.40. day, also every Impostume of aduste
matier, as Antrax, Cabutulus, and Formica, are worst and mortal, and if these
be with Ague, the pacient escapes but sylde, and if it be in places straight
against the heart, or about it is mortal and if it vanyshe away suddenly it is
deadly, and if the matier turn to the inward parts, than the pacyent bears
does upon his Feet.

Pronosticacion of the Morphewe.
IF the morphewe be new it is curable, or else it is incurable. If the Morphewe
occupy but a little space it is rurable, and if it be of a great space it is
hard of cure. If the place of the Morphewe be prycked with a Nedle in the over
part of the skin only, so that it does not pass farther than through the
skin, and if blood come^ forth it is curable, and if watrenes come, it is
incurable.

Pronosticacion of wounds strokes and strypes.
Wounds of the inward part, or bowelles with snyuyll or perbrekynge, and
laske is very evil, and if the Crampe come with / as happon commenly they
dies, and if they have pantynge with sownynges, death is at hand.

Pronosticacion of whelkes.
ALl whelkes if they be not made clean, but left neclygentlye, they turn to
scabbes, and if it be of a cold cause, it grows to Tetters, Ryngwormes and
other ill accidents. And if it be of flewme after the scabbe, it is turned to
Fistula, and if it be of melancoly, such are of hard cure, and if they be let
pass necligently, they grow to a Canker.

Pronosticacion of the scall.
THe scall that is either new, or old, and if it be new it is lightly heled,
and if it be hold, it is heled with great labor, or in a very long time for
the ill applexcion comes to so great adustion that it will not take healynge.
And therefore if it be healed the hear grows but sylde in that place. And
that place shall be weaker always, and if they be heled it shall be rebuke to
them. For they shall be called pyllardes.

Pronosticacion of the frensy.
GAlyen in his pronostyckes upon that part says mouyng of hands does
sygnyfye that desease. And where he says that frensy is perlous in every kind
of it. That frensy is worst that is in the substance of the mary's, and the
next that is worst which is the meke mother, or fast mother. Then that is in
the hard mother. But that frensy that is of the read and aduste or burnyd
color is worst of all. Then that which is next to the aduste color. Then
that which is of blood. Then that which is of citryne color and so of other.
These are signs of death. When the Vryne is first well colored and after is
of white color and thyn and continually so or other wise alyenated from
perfyte color, and contynuall watchynge. Likewise if Vryne be holden and
syckely, and if the pacyent have the crampe, and if the legs be stratchyd out
and cannot be bowed well / and when they are stratchyd they cannot be well
bowed, and if a blood apere in the thombe and if sownynges chance to the
pacient, and when these signs does apere, then death sytteth at his feet.
Therefore a perhien is necessary.

Pronosticacion of the syckenes called in laten. Scotomia. For these are cosyns
and lovers of the falling syckenes Apolencia and Apoplexia.
Wherefore when they multyplye their evil despossyon they fall in to it.
Therefore every man ought to take heed dylygently for them.

Pronosticacion of litargy or lyghtenes in the head.
Cold sweet in the head sygnyfyeth death. And if a horse leche be put to his
forheade if he cleue not to, it sygnyfyeth death, and if there be none of these
signs, and the accidents begin to metigate contynually and natural virtue to
be strong, it is a token of cure, or health nere at hand.

Pronosticacion of Epyelnsia or of the falling evil.
IF a woman with child chance to have the falling evil. If she be delivered
of the child, she shall be heled and delivered also of the syckenes. And if the
white Morphewe chance to come in her head it is a token of health, and if the
child take any part of ye desease, in the mothers womb and vomete after and
purge him and avoid much superfluouse watery humors it is a token that he is
dlyuered of it, and if not, not if a man doubt whether one be delivered of the
epilence or not, fumigate him with gotes horns, and if he fall not he is heled.
But if he fall, he is not hole.

Pronosticacion of Appoplexio.
AFter Ipocras and Auicen did Pronosticke. I say that I saw many that had that
desease, but of Truth I never saw any escape it. Therefore Lord deliver us
from sudden and everlasting death.

Pronosticacion of the Palsy.
IF grene Vryne apere in a child that has the Ague, it betokens that he
shall have the palsy, or the Crampe. It is hard to hele the palsy in aged
people, or never, if tremblyng come upon the palsy it is good if the palsy
come of much disordring or straynyng of the synewes, or of much byndynge of
the synewes, or brekynge, or brekynge or cuttynge, it takes not cure by the
contrary. And if the membre that has the palsy be much less. It is very
ill, and if not it is to hope of cure.

Pronosticacion of the Crampe.
THe crampe that comes of replenishyng, or fyllyng is curable for it is
lyghter to dry a moist thing, than to make moist a dry thing as is written
in the.7. Chapi. of the Ingony. The crampe of wounds is dedly. The crampe of
inaniton is also dedly. The crampe after fevers is dedly. The crampe after
pryckyng of synewes is curable.

Pronosticacion of Trembling.
Trembling is the way for the crampe and palsy. It is not curable in aged
people. Trembling is worse in the left side, than in ye right side, after
Auicen. Tremblyng in the lower lyppe betokens vomet.

Pronosticacion of bledyng at the nose trylles.
BLedynge at the nose which comes of any cause of the brain, is cured
hardly or never. Bledyng at the nose which enlarges it to.4. li. is ill, and
if it enlarge to, or above.8. it is of most great danger. And if it pass
above.xx. the pacient can live no longer. The bledyng which endures till the
pale, or grene color, or wan, or brown color, is worst and dedly. The
bledyng that causes sownes is dedly. Bledynge with cold of the nether parts
is dedly. Every bledynge that comes suddenly or with great haste is ill. All
bledyng with lyghtenyng of the pacient is good.

Pronosticacion of Nesynge.
NEsynge in the end of syckenesse is a good sign after Galien, nesynge with
rewme is ill, and in a full body and in a hot cause, and in signs that
betokens an evil cause in the head hurtyng the head and ill in reason of the
cause, for over much nesynge fylleth the head, and also causes swymmynge in
the head and the desease called scotomia in laten and other like. If nesynge be
provoked in any syckenes in which it ought to be provoked and if the pacient
does not nese, he shall never be hole. And if he be provoked with things of
strong virtue, as is. Eleborus, Albus, Pepper, Castory, Mustard sede,
Euforbium and other like.

Pronosticacion of the desease of the tongue.
IN the sharp Ague a black whelke aperynge upon the tongue is sign of death.
In the sharp Ague blackenes of the tongue and vlteracion is ill.

Pronosticacion of pain in the teth.
IN the Fevers hurt, greuenes, and blackenes, by reason of the Ague or fevers
is the worst sign. Slymenes in the teth with Ague betokens long syckenes.
In the contynuall fevers if the teth be dry as a stycke it is the worst sign
and it is dedly.

Pronosticacion of the squance.
THese ar ill signs in the squance and they are dangerous and dedly. But when
the squance comes in the continual fevers in a perlous day called in laten.
Dies ceticus. Then chances to the pacyent a vehement entrance, difficulte to
swalowe mete so that he casts drink out again at his nose thrylles, and has
a shyll voice so, that he sowneth to speak with his nose thrylles, he shall
have Foam in his mouth, and put out his tongue, and will move it often in puttyng
out. As apereth in a horse that he is weary his mouth being full of foam he shall
have a wan black color, he shall have the top of his tongue, lyppes, and
eyes cold. He will draw into hy^ his neck, and shall be in such case with
pain that he cannot lie on his back and especially if the squance be in the
ways of the breath, for when it is in ways of the mete, great pain is to
swalowe the mete. Howbeit sometime the both chaunseth. These are signs of the
squance which is hyd within, that cannot be seen. Restraining of the breath,
and when the pacient drynketh water, he auoydeth toward the nose thrylles, and
the eyes are red, the tongue roughe, the neck roughe, and voice shyll. The
Squance comes commenly in the spring time. And that is most perlous that
comes with an Ague, but if the lively signs are well, that is to say rest,
sleep, little pain, good breath, good swalowynge of meat. And if none of the
ill signs apere which are spoken before than it is lightly curable.

Pronosticacion of horsenes of Voice
HOrsenes in old men is never heled, oneles it be very new. Horse takes not
cure after one year. Horse which comes by occasyon of rewme is never heled
except the rewme be first heled. When a man is rewmatycke and horse and if he
be letyn blod when he is horse, scante or never shall he be healed.

Pronosticacion of the coughe coming in Idropysy is evil.
Much Coughynge with pain / and grefe, and with much provoking and horsenes
and rednes of eyes, with little auoydyng is ill. And if it be often it causes
rupture either borstines and then it sygnifieth death. Who so has the Ague and
cough together and if the Ague cease, and the coughe remain it is token of
recordynge, who so has the moist coughe and it cease suddenly with grefe which
remains in the breest. It be tokeneth that they have the putryde ague either
vlteracion of the lunges. For every matyer that is mouyd by reason of the
cough, and has no passage forth the scrinth being weke it is dedly, for it
choketh the way of the breath.

Pronosticacion of Tysycke.
THE old Tysycke takes no cure. For Auicen says that he saw one that had
the Tysycke whose life was prolonged by.20. years, and Auicen says if whelkes
apere upon his shulder blades, he shall dye within.52. days. Tokens that
shows him that has the tysycke which shall dye shortly, is falling of his
hear, crokynge of his nails, going away of his appetyte, hardenes to draw
his breath, holdyng of spyttyll, laske, and swellynge of his legs. And most
co^mynly they which have the Tysycke has it at falling of the lefe, therefore
a man ought to be well ware in pronosticacion of tysycke. For in spekyng they
dye and in dyenge they speak.

Pronosticacion of pantynge.
WHo so suffers trembling of the heart a long time, and if pantynge come
suddenly the besynes is sped. For the cause is proporcionate, if any man suffer
long pantyng and color of his face be changed in to palenes, grenes, or
blackenes, he shall never trede earth. If pantynge come suddenly and without any
manifest cause. And if the pantynge be long. The matter is ended. If a nesyng
medycyne be ministered to him that has pantynge, if the poudre be cast in his
nose thrylles, and if he does not nese, there is no Counseyle, but that the
body need no medycyne.

Pronosticacion of the hasty appetyte called the Dogs appetyte.
THE hasty appetyte comes of rewme but sylde, if the hasty appetyte continue,
it bryngth the pacyent to a desease called in laten bolisinus. And bolisinus
brings him in to a pantynge hunger. And that hunger to death, therefore watch
and pray.

Pronosticacion of thirst.
IF thurst in the ague with drynes of the body. It is very ill, if one that
has the Ague thirst much. And if the thurst cese suddenly, and the Ague
remains, and if the tongue be dry and black. It betokens death without
doubt.

Pronosticacion of the Yockes.
IF the Yockes be in the token called in laten Crisis, with good signs
aperynge it is good. For it betokens crisis by vomete. And if the crampe come
after the yockes or alienacion, it is a very ill toke^. If it come after a
purgacion be mynystred. Yockes after vomet is ill.

Nanse in laten, belchynge in English.
WHo soever has this accustomably, can not avoid the disease called in laten
catochia ydeapsy, swellynge of fete, face, and eyes. etc.

Pronosticacion of Vomete.
VOmete may be a good Sign, and an ill sign. In this wise it may be a good
sign. When vomet chances in the Ague in the dangerous day called dies
cetica. And of tokens of degestion, and with lightening it is always good.
But if it come in a day which is not dangerous and no signs of degestyon
apere and with grefe and pain it is ill.

Pronosticacion of pain in the Bowelles.
First it is to be known that pain in the bowelles is also disease of the
stomach with pryckyng, and anguyshe, with unquietness, vehemente malice, and
chaungynge of beds, by reason of the colere and the humor that is closed in
the bowelles. But if laske come upon this syckenes it is good. And if it come
with byndynge more anguysshe is in it, also it is to understand that they
which have this disease. Or if they have a weke stomach and thyn bowelles, or
not. If it be the first way. And if the syckenes co^tynue long, they fall into
pantyng and so dies and can not escape.

Pronosticacion of the syckenes of the lyghtes called in laten lienteria.
IF the colycke come often it is most worst and deadly. If the disease of the
lyghtes beforesayde come after disease of the disease of the bowelles (which
is with a peryllous Flyxe) it is deadly by reason that the rewme was not at the
beginning, it is good in every flyx of the belly. For things degestine may be
purged and degested sometime by a dangerous way, and therefore it is good.

Pronosticacion of dyssentria which is a peryllous flyx from the bowelles.
EVery flyx of the belly, and every masyege coming of the burned colere, or
burned Melancoly, which is east upon the earth, burns as venygre. Wherefore
flies flies from it If it come in the beginning of the syckenes, it is deadly.

Finis
quod. R. w.

Imprynted by me Robert Wyer.

Cum priuilegio, ad imprimendum solum.

Robert Wyer's device ROBERT WYER.



