An Astrological Discourse upon the great and notable Conjunction of the two
superior Planets, SATVRNE and IVPITER, which shall happen the 28. day of
April, 1583.

With a brief Declaration of the effects, which the late Eclipse of the Sun
1582. is yet hereafter to work.

Written newly by RICHARD HARVEY: partly, to supply that is wanting in common
Prognostications: and partly by praediction of mischiefs ensuing, either to
breed some endeavor of prevention by foresight, so far as lies in us: or at
leastwise, to arm us with patience beforehande.

Seen and allowed.

(...) C^ARISS^^M ET GRATISSIMUS ^IN^VIVS (...)



AT LONDON: Imprinted by Henry Bynneman. Anno Domini. 1583.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JOHN, BISHOP OF London, and his very
good Lord: RICHARD HARVEY wishes long life, with increase of all honorable
virtues.
RIGHT REVEREND, my duty in most humble wise remembered, I am to beseech your
good Lordshippe, to vouchsafe me that favor, (if not for mine own sake, or
the worthiness of the thing it self, yet for Cambridge sake, and that especial
affection, which you have always borne toward University men, and namely
your singular courtesy toward my brother Gabriel, when he should have travailed
to Smalcaldie, which courtesy he does often recognize) that as it has pleased
you already to commit the perusing of the Astrologicall Discourse following,
to your most learned son in law, M. Doctor Squire, who can very well judge,
and has very friendly allowed thereof: so it may now like your Lordshippe, to
admit of the same for the best New years gift, that such a scholar on such a
sudden can bestow. Which albeit in respect of the base handling, it be
nothing worthy either the view, or the handling of such a personage, as I can
not but know your Lordship to be: yet considering the great importance, and
consequence of the argument, I am both persuaded by some friends, who are to
ouerrule me in a greater matter, to adventure the publication thereof,
(insomuch that I have made my good Lord of Rochester, and M. Doctor Lewen
privy thereunto, who like well of the impression) and with all am encouraged
to crave your good leave, that upon your private liking, (which notwithstanding
my self of my self can not greatly hope for) you would suffer it to pass
under the title of your good Lorshippes public maintenance, and patronage. I
may easily presume too much of your accustomed favor, so assuredly known as
well in both the Universities, as abroad in your Lordships Diocese, and other
parts of the Realm: and therefore (notwithstanding the importunity of those
my friends, and the gravity of the argument it self) being loath to be
ouerbold, where I owe so much reverence and duty, I have thought good, not to
use your name without your own license, but wholly to commit the publishing, or
suppressing of this Discourse to your Lordshippes liking or disliking. You may
happily marvel what I mean, either to deal my self in any such matter of
Astrology being shortly to profess Divinity, (so soon as my place in the
College shall call me thereunto) or to dedicate a Treatise of any such
contents unto one, that has both so many years, even in King Edwards, and
Queen Mary's days, (as appears by his own, and others writings) carried so
singular credit for his knowledge, and practice in Divinity, and now by Gods
providence is in place, to benefit and countenance those, that being admitted
to that vocation, shall deserve to be well accepted therein. But for the one,
besides that I might allege for my defense, the examples of Melancthon,
Chytraeus, Iunctinus, Maestlyne, our M. Doctor Fulke, your M. Doctor Squier,
and some other of like credit: who being professed in Divinity to their own
special commendation, and the general benefit of the Church, were not
afterward ashamed both to defend, and to practice Astrology: the very subject
and matter of the Art it self is such, that none, which knows it in deed,
can justly charge it with the least contrariety or repugnancie either to
Divinity it self, or to the soundest parts of Moral and Natural
Philosophy. Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei; and Platoes opinion is, that our eyes
were principally given us, for this use and end, to be occupied in the
contemplation of the heavens; whereunto he attributes so much, that he
thinks Astronomy and wisdom to be so inseparably linked and chained
together, that neither a very wise man can want Astrology, nor a very good
Astrologer want wisdom. To which effect, that notable saying of his, deserves
to be as famous, as your Lordship knows it to be amongst the learned: (...).
Which very saying seems unto me to import some part of that Divinity,
whereof so many ages he has carried so high, and honorable a surname: the
rather because the singular and incomparable wisdom of Solomon, as your
Lordshippe best remembers, is thus particularly described, in the book
entitled, Liber Sapientiae. Deus mihi dedit harum rerum cognitionem veram, vt
sciam dispositionem orbis terrarum, and virtutes, effectionesque elementorum,
initium, and finem, and medium temporum, solstitiorum vicissitudines, and
consummationes temporum, and morum mutationes, annorum orbs, and stellarum
situs, ac dispositiones, and naturas animalium, and iras bestiarum, and
ventorum impecus, and cogitationes hominum, and stirpium differentias, and
radicum virtutes: and quaecunque sunt abscondita, and improuisae didici, cum me
omnium Artifex docuit Sapientia. For which very kinds of knowledge, (albeit I
believe never any had them in that full measure, that it pleased God to bestow
upon Solomon) our chiefest Astrologers, especially the most learned Arabians,
so often as they are occasioned to cite, or mention any of their predecessors:
call them commonly by the name of Sapientes, which some I know merrily
translated Wizardes, but how wizardly, (if they speak generally without
exception of the better sort) let the proverb testify, which says, Scientia
non habet inimicum, nisi ignorantem. What should I speak of Thales Milesius,
who being the first, that among the Graecians was called (...), as Diogenes
Laertius reports* was also the first among them, that searching out the
secrecies, and mysteries of Astrology: both foretold the conuersions, and
eclipses of the Sun, as Eudemus witnesses in his Astrologicall history, and
found out Vrsa minor with her little stars, whereby the Phoenices direct their
navigations, as Callimachus testifies in his Greek verses: and foreseeing a
very great dearth of olives, and thereupon purposing to show, how easy a
matter it was for Philosophers to grow rich, gat into his hands by a reasonable
price, all the olive gardens in Miletum, and Chium, the winter before, whereby
afterward making his own price at his pleasure, he gained exceeding great
sums of money: as is credibly recorded not only by Hieronimus Rhodius, and
Aristotle in Greek, but also by Tullie De Diuinatione, and diverse other in
Latin: Aristotle saying, one while he did it, (...), an other while, (...):
and Solon the wise Lawmaker among the Athenians, following his advise, set
down certain Astrologicall observations of the Aequinoctia, and corrected the
Attique year, as appears by many histories: and finally by the defects of
the Moon and Sun, he prognosticated the defects and subuersions of certain
states and kingdoms in Asia, as out of Plinies Natural history, I have
specially noted in my brief Treatise of the late eclipse. I should be over
tedious unto your Lordship, if I should go about to recite the tenth part of
those testimonies, and auctorities, which I could easily allege to the same
effect: whereby it is certainly evident, that as wise, and worthy men, as
ever were in the world, both made very special account of this study in
other, and travailed exceedingly therein them selves: as namely Julius Caesar,
Octauius Augustus, Ptolomey, Theodosius, one of the best Emperors, Frederick
the second, (who caused Ptolomey, Messahalah, and diverse other principal
Astrologers, to be translated out of the Arabian into Latin: Hos quia
consilijs regum conducere sensit: as Hellerus writes to Ernestus, Prince of
Hennenberg:) Alphonsus the most excellent King of Arragonia, and Naples:
Matthias Coruinus of Hungary: Charles the fifth of famous memory, and sundry
other, as well Princes, as subjects of the most notable sort. But I can not
praetermit that Astrologicall conference between Caesar, and the Egyptian
Priest in Lucans Pharsalia, where Caesar's own confession of him self is thus
delivered: media inter praelia semper, stellarum, coelique plagis, superisque
vacaui: Eudoxi Fastos noster superabit and Annus. Which he in deed performed,
correcting and reforming the Roman year by the help of Sosigenes, as Solon
did the Attique year by the help of Thales: an other manner of reformation,
than that of the Calender, which the Pope Gregory the xiij. has newly
published, by the help of I know not what Astrologers. As for the rest, least
I should seem to forget my self, in not having that regard to your Lordships
person, which I ought, will reserve their Astrologicall commendations unto some
fitter place, thinking it sufficient for this present, to stand upon the
Reasons, which Melancthon, a man as your Lordship best knows, of a sharp,
and sound judgment in most schollerly points of learning, alleges, in a
notable preface of his, In Theoricas nouas planetarum Georgij Purbachij
directed to his most learned countriman, Simon Grynaeus: wherein he shows how
needful Judicial Astrology is, both for private uses, and for public. For
private uses, first in medendo: then, ad regendos mores: thirdly, ad deligenda
studia: plurimum enim refert intelligere, quo quemque natura ducat: (I use not
a word, but his own:) beside, fortuna saepe comitatur mores: and quanquam
aliae quoque causae funt humanorum euentuum, tamen res loquitur ipsa, interdum
in Astris causara esse, cur vt Hesiodus inquit: ipse dies quandoque parens,
quandoque nouerca, sit. Fifthly, conducit tempestatum obseruatio ad Oeconomiam:
last of all, hi proximi anni aliquot satis claras significationes praebuerunt,
sidera magnam vim in aere, and rebus nascentibus habere, idque palam testantur
insignes siderum congressus (which makes directly for the present Discourse.)
And as for the public use and necessity thereof, he goes forward thus, in
my simple opinion, both very politickely and divinely: Existunt and inrebus
publicis fatales tempestates, in quibus admoniti ab hac art, multa prouidere
possunt, vel ad cauenda, vel ad mitiganda pericula. Saepe enim fata consilio in
melius flecti queunt, saepe fatorum saeuitiam lenit Deus, placatus piorum
votis. Quare haec quoque grauis causa fuerit, rerum futurarum significationes
animaduertendi. He adds for reason. Prodest enim commonefieri homines
atrocibus siderum minis, vt a Deo opem implorent; deinde, vt bonitatem Dei
magis agnoscant, cum viderint aliquam esse superiorem ac meliorem naturam
sideribus, quae tristes significationes mitigat. To the breeding of which
politic, and divine considerations in the minds of some or other, I would to
God, this slender Discourse of mine might be any means. Melancthon leaves
not thus, but still goes on, as it were in a certain fervent zeal toward
this profession. Nec dubia est harum Artium fides: nam and motuum ratio
demonstrationes habet, quarum eo est suauissima cognitio, quia delectat animos
certitudo, and harmonia, seu consensus in tanta varietate argumentorium: and
Diuinatricem si quis prudenter ad Physicen referet, intelliget eam habere
graves causas; and tuetur eam experientia peritissimorum hominum: recte vero
Galenus de hac ipsa art inquit: Sophisticum esse, contra experientiae
testimonium, rations quaerere. Finally, to answer common objections, and
such ordinary contradictions, as Astrologers ears are well acquainted
withal, he at last breefely decideth, and determines all such doubts in the
words following. Nec eo detrahenda est arti fides, quia aut artifices aliqui
inepti sunt, aut non omnes euentus humani in art monstrantur: sunt enim and
aliae quaedam praeter sidera, euentuum causae. Etsi autem in tantis tenebris
humanae mentis, multa prospici nequeunt, tamen ariis beneficium non leave
ducendum est, quae pleraque interim; and ad vitae summam pertinentia monet.
Quoties fallimur in leuioribus artibus, and in ijs rebus, quae sunt, vt ita
dicam, in manibus? Neque tamen propter eiusmodi errata explodandae sunt arts;
sed prudentia est, ad vitae vsum inde, quantum possumus, transfer. His
resolution and conclusion there is. Illud etiam recte institutis iudicare
facile est, quis esse modus Diuinationum debeat, and quod religio approbet has
Diuinationes, vt Medicorum iudicia, aut caeteras Physicae parts. Which reasons
of Melancthon, I doubt not but your Lordship will admit, and allow for
effectually material and good. Now I see not greatly, what remains to be yet
objected: unless happily some will oppose the old decrees of the Roman Senate,
and some newer imperial laws, against all such, as were vulgarly called
Mathematici, Chaldaei, Arioli, and Diuinatores, of whom Vlpian the famous
lawyer treats libro 7. de officio Proconsulis, under the title, De
Mathematicis, and Vaticinatoribus: Which very title I have heard so alleged.
Whereunto, first I might answer, that they dispute not ad idem: those laws
being made only against such, as Moses condemns in the XVIII. of
Deuteronomie, who vainly took upon them, to divine by magical and
superstitious sorceries, numbers, lottes, characters, charms, interrogatories
propounded to the dead, inspections of birds, entrals of beasts, and such
other monstrous, and abominable means: for so says A. Gellius in his first
book of his Noctes Atticae: vulgus quos gentilitio vocabulo Chaldaeos dicere
oportet, eos Mathematicos vocat; and Seruius Honoratus upon the fourth of
Virgils Aeneidos: Cum multa sacra Romani susciperent, semper magica damnarunt;
probrosa enim ars habita est. Secondly, that albeit those Roman laws had in
deed been devised as well against their Astrologers then, as against any
other Diuiners or Soothsayers: what reason is there, they should make more
against ours now, than the like laws make against our Rhetoricians,
Philosophers, Physicians, and in a manner against all other professors of any
liberal art? All such being by one Roman decree or other, at one time, or
other, upon one sudden occasion, or other, banished the city, as
troublesome, and needelesse persons, in a politic and martial state, so long
as the rage of that tempest endured. Thirdly, admit their Astrological
diuinations were lawfully forbidden, being found commonly deceitful and false,
by reason that the art it self was then very imperfect, and uncertain, as it
continued to the age of Ptolomey, who flourished but in the time of the Emperor
Antoninus Pius, which succeeded Traian and Adrian: yet may ours nevertheless
lawfully stand, the art being now generally of the most and best acknowledged
to be much more perfectly reformed, and a right art in deed: or if that seem
more, a right science in deed. For which two last reasons, I am to thank a
late conference, that I had with my brother Gabriel, about Hallowmas last,
touching the validity of those Roman laws. As for other later laws, and
statuts, either foreign, or our own, I know not any that universally and
simply condemn Astrology: and as for those, that condemn some particular
abuse thereof, I must needs confess, they are very wise, and necessary
ordinances, to meet with the lewd practices, and impostures of many, that
under the pretense of their figure commit intolerable villainies, wherein for my
part, I doubt not, but they deserve the penalties, inflicted upon them by law,
thinking them worthily punished, Pro mensura consultationis, as Vlpian speaks
of his Mathematici in the forenamed title, with this addition of his, following
immediately after in the same place: qui de principis salute, capite puniantur,
vel qua alia grauiore paenae afficiantur: extending withal the force of the
law in that point, even to the punishment of other simple wizardes: Qui contra
quietem, imperiumque populi Romani, improbandas arts exercent: and finally
alleging the example of the Emperor Marcus, Qui in Syrum insulam eum
relegauit, qui motu Cassiano vaticinatus erat, and multa quasi instinctu Deorum
dixerat: Neither dare I excuse either Thrasillus, or Ascletarion, or Gauricus:
whereof the first foretold the destruction of Tiberius the Emperor: the second
of Domitian: the third of the Bentiuoli in Bononia: or the Priest, that gave
out the rumor of the future murdering of Galeacius Sfortia, Duke of Millaine,
(who were all worthily rewarded for their folly) or any other, that by their
Horoscopicall predictions might seem to harten, and hasten one conspirators,
to the atchieuing, or attempting of their Princes death, but in that case would
wish all Astrologers, either not to deal at all, or else to deal privately
and privily with the Prince him self: and then too, to hold Cardanes rule, set
down amongst eight other like conditions, in the end of his book, De
Astrologicie interrogationibus: principi ne magnum malum firmiter vnquam
praedixeris, sed periculum: howbeit Cardane him self dealt more plainly, and
therefore more daungerously with our King Edward the VI. as appears in the
Judicials of his nativity, given out in the beginning of his Duodecim
illustres geniturae. At mihi, ex innata sinceritate, and quod miserum
adolescentuium amarem, sortisque eius misererer (quoth Cardane there) certum
erat, etiam cum manifesto vitae discrimine, omnia patefacere; quamuis futurum
crederem, vt me irriderent. But what follows? Ergo volentibus fatis, nec
singularis hu^^s artis cognitio prodesse regi potuit: nec bonitas, atque
simplicitas ingenij, mihi obesse. Which good success of Cardane, was partly to
be attributed to his own discreet handling, free from all manner of suspicion,
but specially to the innocent, and singular good nature of that most noble
young King, who accepted so favorably of his affectionate intention. But,
neither this special privilege of his being withal a stranger of
extraordinary credit, nor any like personal example can warrant other
private men, to intermeddle in like sort in the natiuities, and destinies of
their Princes, otherwise than is before limited, or upon the Princes own
direct commandment. And yet if either this way, or any like, the art happen
by some busy, and fond fellows to be abused, it has but the same fortune,
that all other arts and sciences have beside: and the Lawiers rule, Abusus non
tollit vsum, will still justify the right, and commendable practice thereof.
The bounds of which limitation, I having no way exceeded in any part of the
Discourse following: I hope, there is nothing therein contained, which,
considering the premises, might not proceed, even from one, that were already
professed in Divinity. And, then I trust, in respect of the matter, I have
committed no inconvenience, in recommending the same to the favor and
patronage of such a Divine, as all England knows your Lordship to be: who I
doubt not, can judge exactly thereof. For the manner, I am humbly to crave
pardon, being neither practiced in writing English, nor purposing any such
public dedication at the first. It may peradventure be an occasion, that
hereafter I shall acquaint my pen better with enditing in our own tongue. In
the mean time, I am to beseech your Reverend Lordshippe, to respect rather
what is here said, than how it is said: presuming that I have little erred in my
judicials, whatsoever defects may chance to appear in the style. And yet for
the very consequence of the matter too, I must say with Tullie, Optanda quidem
optima: expectanda deterrima: ferenda quaecunque erunt. How Gods omnipotency
ouerruleth all causes, and effects, as well particularly in specie, and
indiuiduo, as universally in genere, I have sufficiently uttered as it were by
the way in other places: our last remedy is Christian patience, if there be no
other remedy. But that is a Theological argument, worthy your Lordships
handling: and I see I have already presumed overmuch of your Lordshippes
patience, in being thus troublesome, and tedious unto you, beyond the compass
of an ordinary Epistle, or Preface. Which nevertheless I durst in no respect
have done, but upon certain assurance of that favorable acceptance, which
from time to time, it has pleased you to vouchsafe the like writings of diverse
University men, being little past my standing there, and namely my brothers
Anticosmopolita, when he was not much above the same continuance. In full
hope, and affiance whereof, I will here most humbly take my leave, committing
your Lordship to the protection of God, who give you many prosperous Newyeares,
and long preserve you, to his own glory, and the benefit of his Church. Here
in London this 23. of January. 1583.

Your good Lordshippes most humble, RICHARD HARVEY.

T. S. Ogdoas in R. H. Prognosticon.
CEdite Francitali, florenti cedite vati,
Harueius meruit nomen habere Sophi.
Spirat in ore Furor, Bacchoque and Apolline dignus,
Palladis vt noscas Mercurijque genus.
Ergo agite Anglorum proceres, legitote Propheta^,
Memphiticis similem, nobilibusque Magis.
Vade Liber, liberi ingenij, genijque beati
Insigne, and Patriae pulpita scande tuae.
Coeli schema sub Coniunctione Saturni and Iouis.
sky map

To my very good, and most loving Brother, Master Gabriel Haruey, at his
chamber in Trinity Hall.
GOod Brother, I have in some part done my endeavor to satisfy your late
request, wherein you advertise me either not so much to addict my self to
the study, and contemplation of Judicial Astrology, or else by some evident
and sensible demonstration, to make certain and infallible proof what general
good I can do my country thereby, or what special fruit I can reap thereof
unto my self. I confess greater wits can work greater matters: and mine
own principal study as yet, is but Philosophy and Physic, wherein I pray
God I may speedily grow to any reasonable mediocritie, that I may the sooner
proceed to my final Profession: But seeing it is your desire to practice me, and
as it were to oppose me in this kind: you shall hear, what I can briefly say
touching the great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, the next year
immediately following. I am to submit my opinion to the censure and correction
of those, that are longer studied, and more profoundly seen in this faculty:
but that you may not conceive, I have altogether misspent my time this way, I
will endeavor my self to make proof in some sort, how I have profited in the
study. Your self have often willed me to go roundly to the matter, without
either glorious insinuations by way of Preface, or pleasurable and conceited
floorishes by way of digression: and therefore I presume you will not blame
me, though I take a direct and plain course in the discourse following.
First, that Judicial Astrology is neither any vain and idle study, nor
forbidden and unlawful Art, your self having long since, taken some reasonable
pains therein, and being able to say so much in the defense thereof, out of
many old and new histories of approved authority and credit, can sufficiently
(I know) and will readily (I think) testify. The slight arguments of Picus
Mirandula, Cornelius Agrippa, and diverse other to ye contrary, have been
thoroughly answered, by Balantius, Schonerus, Melancto^, Cardane, and sundry
other, but specially of late by Iunctinus, who in his confutatio^ proceeds
compendiously, and directly from argument to argument, leaving in a manner
nothing untouched, that has been, or can be objected in disgrace of this
knowledge. And if the autorities of men, that have given them selves that way,
make any thing for the purpose, what goodlyer wits in ye world, than some in
every cuntrie, that have made special account, and bestowed much travel in this
divine study? To let strangers go, these of fresh memory have been none of
the basest scholars in England: M.D. Buttes, principal Physician to king Henry
the eight. Sir Thomas Eliot, Sir Thomas Smyth, who as you best know, and have
both truly and honorably testified in your Musarum lachrymae, excelled
therein. M.D. Record, both the Digges, M. Dee, who her majesty vouchsafes the
name of her Philosopher: M. Securis, M. Buckmaster, M. Mounslowe, M.D. Twyne,
besides most of our chief Doctors in Phisike, as namely our M.D. Baro, in
Cambridge, and M.D. Forster in London, and some of our very chiefest
Philosophers in either University, yt shall be nameles, being not so certainly
professed and renowned that way. But to omit for breuities sake, al other
arguments and authorities that might plentifully be alleged in the
mayntenaunce of Judicial Astrology, I will content my self, and I think, I
shall content you with that only famous testimony of Melancton, amongst many of
his to the same purpose, set down in an excellent epistle directed to the two
noble and honorable Lords, George and Huldrich Fuggeri, in commendation of
Astrology. Norunt omnes sani prorsus necessariam esse doctrinam, quae anni
metas and ordinem ostendit. Quam ob causam and sapiens antiquitas hanc cura^
public doctissimis hominibus, qui custodes erant religionis, commendauit, vt
Solis circuitus and interualla, and aequinoctia, and solstitia obseruarentur,
and mensium spatia, ad Solis iter accommodarent. But what follows? Alteram
parte^ quae Diuinatrix nominatur, multi acerbe vituperant, de qua alibi
copiosius dixi. Quanquam autem nequaquam omnium euentuum humanorum causae sunt,
stellarum positus, and sapienter causae discernendae sunt, and vitandae
praestigiae falsarum Diuinationum* tamen certum est, multas in Elementis
mutationes, ab Astris oriri: and in crasi humanorum corporum, et ingeniorum
inclinationibus lumen coeleste magna^ vim habere. Prodest autem ad valetudinem
tutandam nosse crasim corporum, and moribus prodest, cernere inclinationes
coelestes, and eas art regere, aut fraenare, sicut Pegasum Bellerophontes, ita
demum recte gubernauit, cu^ Pallas aureum ei fraenum iniecit. Wherein for his
opinion de crasi corporu^ humanorum, he iumpeth with the ancient and most
renowned Physician Hippocrates, who in his book de aere, aqua and regionibus,
being translated into english says thus much in effect: If we shall consider
duly of the highest causes and beeings, we shall find that Astrology is not
the least portion of Physic, for it behooves ye Physician to know the moon,
and the sign of heaven wherein the moon is, when any patient begins to
fall sick, and so forth. But hereof more at some other time, remitting you in
the mean while to ye learned Apology of Iunctinus, who is copious in these
points, touching the defense of Judicial Astrology. Now to come speedily and
directly unto that, whereunto at this present ye particular occasion draws
me. In this year ensuing, 1583. which from the creation of the world is 5545.
(to ouerpasse other needless computations and Chronologies: as how long from
Noah's flood? how far from the destruction of Troy? how many years from the
Assirian, Persian, and Macedonian monarchy, and so forth) The 28. of April
being Sunday, about high noone, there shall happen a very great and notable
Conjunction of the two superior and weighty Planets Saturn and Jupiter,
which Conjunction shall be manifested to the ignorant sort, by many fierce and
boisterous winds then suddenly breaking out and continuing certain days before
and certain days after the same Conjunction. These two high planets shall be
conjoined in the last minute of the 21. degree of Pisces, a sign (as is
commonly known) of the watery Triplicity, feminine, nocturnall, septentrional,
commune, cold, moist, phlegmatic, that is wholly of the nature and quallitie of
water: the essential house of Jupiter, the eraltatio^ of Venus, the governor
of the feet, which Conjunction may, and ought to seem so much the more
fearful and terrible unto us, by how much the more it is very strange,
marvelous, rare, and most specially noted of the learned. This is called of
Astronomers, Coniunctio planetaru^ maxima, quippe qua reguntur leges, imperia,
regiones: as Ptolomey the Prince of Astrologers writes, and Cardane more at
large in his Philosophical, and Astrological Commentaries upon Ptolomey, This
is that Coniunctio^ quae significat prophetam, and destructionem quorundam
Climatum, and sectas, and regnum: damna pluuiarum and pestile^tiae, as
Messahalah witnesses, whose books have been much esteemed of kings and
Princes. This is that Conjunction which Alboazen Haly says does praesagire
mortem regis magni and potentis, multam tristitiam hominibus, damnum in
diuitibus et nobilibus, etiam in illis qui su^t sicut Prophetae, et multas
locustas. This is that Conjunction which Guido Bonotus affirms, to
praemonstrare res magnaes and mirandas venturas in mundo. This is that
Conjunction, which Johannes Molitor surnamed of his contry Regiomo^tanus, a man
in my opinion, little inferior in worthiness, or fame to the former more
ancient Astrologers, does report to portendere continuas aquaru^ inundationes,
and particularia diluuia. Finally, this is that Conjunction quae minatur multum
mali, as Iunctinus Florentinus testifies, a great writer at this day, a
Conjunction and meeting, or joining togiter of ye very worst and very best
planet, Saturn and Jupiter, whereof the one is termed Infortunium maius,
barbarously Infortuna mayor, the other, Fortuna mayor, both singular in their
kinds, the one being (as it were) the Lord of horrible misrule, and tragical
mischiefs, the other a president of sovereign bounty and felicity, both
Heavenly instruments, ordained by God to those high purposes and intendementes,
wherein they are employed, more ancient indeed than in name, everlasting
workers of contrary inclinations, and effects in the world, to he short both
mighty Princes and potentates in their several actions, so far as it
pleases God to auctorize their proceedings, and use their ministry to his
own glory. Touching whose great conjunction, it is doubtless the more hard and
difficult, to set down any certain effects and Accidents, thereof to ensue,
because the Fortune and Infortune are equally matched, and as it were,
indifferently encountered with power and strength: For if the Infortune had
been greater and stronger than the Fortune, as if Saturn had been joined
with Venus, which is called Fortuna mayor, Saturn no doubt would have challenged
the prerogative or preeminence unto himself, as being mightier and of more
force: or if Jupiter had been joined with Mars himself being Fortuna mayor,
and the other Infortunium minus, he would so have repressed the sturdines and
fury of Mars, that the operations and effects of that Conjunction should have
been indifferent, that is rather good than evil. Whereupon in this case Guido
Bonatus a famous and renowned Astrologian of Italy, (as you know) in his fifth
Treatise de 146. Considerationibus, setting down 4. especial ways and
principal points, wherein an Astrologer may soonest be deceived, and most
easily ouershoote himself, makes this the fourth, Difficile erit aliquid
certi iudicare, si aequales fuerint Fortunae cum Infortunijs. Moreover these
two planets do not behold one another by any aspectuall radiation, as either
by Trine or Sextile, which are aspectes of amity and friendship, or by Quartile
and opposition, which are aspectes of enmity and hatred, for then it had been
somewhat ye easier to determine thereof in respect of the general Judgment, but
they are joined together in one degree, and one minute of the self same degree
and sign, which is termed of the Astrologers, Corporalis congressus, Coitus,
or Coniunctio, being always of more power, strength, force, and efficacy,
than any other aspect, because as Stoeflerinus writes in his 12. Proposition:
In ea radij maxim propter vnionem condensantur, which also Hermes Trismegistus
himself affirms in verbo septimo, where he says: Aspectus non potest
diminuere significationem Coniunctionis, Coniunctio vero minuit significationem
aspectus, why? nam fortior est aspectu, as there follows. And yet by nature
it is simplye and essentially neither good nor evil, but sometimes good and
sometimes evil, according to the nature and disposition of the planets, which
are conjoined, so that consequently, quia Coniunctio honorum bona est, malorum
autem mala, difficile admodum erit iudicium in Coniunctione illa, quae and bona
respectu Iouis and pernitiosa respectu Saturni iudicatur. Diverse of ye learned
in this faculty and namely Alboazen Haly, Capite 4. partis octauae says, quod
Jupiter iunctus cum Saturno prohibet omne malum, whereas Franciscus Iunctinus
avouches the contrary, to wit, that Coniunctio boni cum malo, mala est,
alleging this very Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter for example, but on both
sides they conclude with this clause or definitive sentence, hoc tamen pro
natura and dispositione planetae vincentis in figura iudicandu^ est. This
therefore now only remains, to consider which of them shall be strongest, and
of most virtue, power and might in the heaven at that instant. For Mesahalah
in his excellent Treatise de Coniu^ctionibus planetaru^, delivers this
judgment, Scito quod cum Jupiter fortior fuerit Saturno, significabit bonum in
eadem Coniunctione, si vero Saturnus praeerit significabit detrimentum atque
tribulationem, which is also generally agreed upon with ye rest. Wherefore we
are to understand, that Jupiter is joined with Saturn in Pisces, which is his
own proper and natural house, but by night, and not by day, which is a little
the worse, because him self being a masculine, diurnal, and fortunate planet,
he does not so much rejoice in a feminine, nocturnal, and infortunat sign, as
he does in a sign of his own disposition and quality. For so Alcabitius one
of ye most notable Arabians, very well concludes in Isagogae astrologicae
prima differentia: Fortitudo Planetae reboratur quando est in suo Alhaiz, id
est in sua similitudine masculinus scilicet and diurnus in signo, and gradu
masculino and diurno: nocturnus vero and faemininus contra, which is likewise
avouched by his Commentator Ioannes de Saxonia. whereof by a contrary sequel
it follows, that a masculine and diurne planet is somewhat depressed and
weakened in a feminine and a nocturnall sign, and yet because it is the house
of Jupiter, and himself resident therein, as in his own mansion place, and
court (albeit Sagittarie be the house of his speciallest delight and joy) he
receives five dignities thereby, being by so much the more strong, and
virtuous, according to that sensible axiom of Guido Bonatus, capite 19. primae
partis. Dum planeta est in domo sua, est sicut vir existens in propria domo:
est autem quilibet fortior in domo sua de Iure, quam in aliena, and vt plurimum
de facto quam alius, qui alias esset fortior eo* vnde Trutanus, Ante suam
gallus stat portam quisque vasallus. But yet Jupiter is not so highly promoted
and exalted by his own house, but is well nigh as much humbled and weakened by
his unlucky placing in the eight house of Death whereby he loses four
prerogatives, then is he there also afflicted and oppressed by the presence and
company of frowning Saturn, and in the terms of Mars his deadely enemy, in
quarta coeli faeminina, and Meridional discende^t, which do also much decrease
and abate his courage. So that it evidently appears, that the good planet
Jupiter is but indifferent: and that as he will not do much harm so he can not
do much good. Now concerning Saturn, as Jupiter was never the better, because
he was in signo faeminino and nocturno, so Saturn being in the same sign,
and also a diurnall and masculine planet is much the worse. For Messahalah in
his golden book, de reuolutione annorum mundi, the chapter entitled de anno
timendo, says plainly Saturnus in signo diurno et masculino minus impedit, so
that by an argument drawn from ye contrary I may logically conclude ye In loco
nocturno et faeminino magis impedit, but this impediment is nothing to speak of
or very small in comparison of ye rest: for besides that he is in a feminine
and nocturnall sign, and place of heaven contrary to his proper nature, he is
withal peregrine too, and out of al his essential dignities in the same sign,
whereby he has five debilities or impedimentes. Furthermore he is placed in
domo octaua, whereby he has four more hindrances, and slow in motion,
whereby he has two detrimentes. In so much that if we set and oppose his 11.
debilities, and the debilities of Jupiter against his five virtues, which is
two to one, there is no doubt, but we will soon and may truly conclude, Si
illius Fortuna cum huius Infortunijs comparetur, nihil est: Jupiter is
Oriental, so is Saturn: Jupiter is direct in motion, so is Saturn: Jupiter
is free from combustion, so is Saturn: Jupiter is little the better for his
virtues, because his hindrances are full as many, but Saturn is much ye worse
for his debilities, because his virtues be not so many. For as Guido Bonatus
notably determines, Mali Planetae quanto magis sunt impediti, tanto
efficiuntur deteriores, and augmentatur eorum malitia, and eorum impedimentum.
See the unfortunate disposition of unfortunate planets the more they be
troubled, disturbed or entangled, the worse and more malicious they are and
consequently do hurt and annoy the more spitefully. The conclusion and sum of
al must needs be this, that the vehement hatred, despite and malice of the
unlucky planet Saturn, has by his mischievous importunity overcome and
vanquished the good, wholesome, and sweet nature of the beneuolous and
favorable planet Jupiter, which victory (I fear me) and I think I am too
sure thereof, will cause great abundance of waters, and much cold wether,
much unwonted mischiefs and sorrow, much envy, debate, quarelling, hatred and
strife, many grievous and bitter contentions, much going to law one with
another for dead men's goods and old reckonings, manifold troubles, and
sudden vproares, much violent oppression, extreme poverty, hunger and misery
to the nedy and impotent sort of people, great persecutions of ecclesiastical
persons, much despitefull, injurious, and wrongful dealing, as also the
tragical ruin and destruction of sundry greatmen and noble personages, both
old and young, whereof some shall trecherously be entangled and entrapped, some
violently overthrown with shameful disgrace and dishonor, losing both
estimation, goods and life too. Great fear and dread shall come suddenly
upon the people, a great sterilitie and barre^nesse of the earth shall ensue,
manifold submersions, shipwracks, exustions, burnings, and such other, waterie
and fiery calamities will follow: finally, a very great and sore mortality,
with many general contagions, and pestilent diseases, both among men and
beasts, and specially an extraordinary death and destruction of fishes, and al
other creatures living, by, in, or upon ye waters. Al which evils and miseries,
(howbeit I know every man shall not personally feel them, yet if there
appear not a sensible difference between certain years immediately
following, and other ordinary years, let me lose the credit of my Astrology)
shall be the more dreadful and terrible, because the good and amiable planet
Jupiter is so much abased and humbled in the eight house, being simply the very
worst place of the heavens that can be, called commonly of the Astronomers,
domus inca^tationum, veneficiorum, timoris, magni infortunij, et etiam mortis:
who will also begin to shrink and go backward the 10. day of July, until ye 4.
day of Noue^ber, which shrinking too will not a little hinder his good and
prosperous influence. All which time, frowning Saturn shall be retrocedent
also, beginning his retrogradatio^ the 25. day of June, and so continuing til
the 10. day of Noue^ber, yea and that which is more notable for the space and
continuance of these whole five or six years together, they shall both be very
often retrograde, and more than commonly they use to be: and this withal is to
be observed ye these two superior planets Saturn and Jupiter shall the second
time also be very nigh the one ye other, ye 26. day of October, this present
year 1583. being then almost conjoined again together in Pisces, but both
retrograde, and not long before, at the beginning of the second Revolution, and
third part of the Astronomical year: to wit, at the Suns entrance into the
Equinoctial sign Libra, most unluckily and ilfaringly placed in the 10. house,
which must needs greatly increase their malice, and make their operations the
more vnhapy and unfortunate. The unlucky constellation and constitution of the
other planets, does also seem to help forward and augment the lamentable
eue^ts threatened by this Coniunction'. For fiery and furious Mars peregrine and
occidental in the fourth degree, and sixth minut of Leo, and placed in
Gacodaemone, In domo vbi tristes, tragici, and exitiales euentus notantur,
having there no less than 12. impediments, whereby he is much afflicted, and
greatly disgraced, but ye more perniciously hurtful and malicious, portendeth
wonderful contention, sedition, treason, rebellion and war: many tumults,
mutinies and vprores, with horrible shedding of blood, and warranteth this
terrible Prognosticatio^, that huge multitudes shall be spoiled, subdued,
destroyed and murdered of their enemies, who shall furiously assault, and
cruelly, unmercifully and barbarously oppress them perforce, with sword and
fire, And because Mars, who is a fierce, violent, and outrageous planet, is
placed in Leo, a hot, choleric and fiery sign, which notwithstanding of all
the signed of ye Zodiaque is most excellent and most noble, for that it is so
goodlily and gallantly adorned and decked with so many beutiful and notable
fixed stars, bearing signification only of high and great matters,
concerning states, kingdoms and empires, being ye natural, essential, and
only proper house of the mighty and roial planet Sol, who is the signifier of
Princes, Potentates, and high Magistrates: but a mortal and deadly enemy unto
Mars, who is now most infortunately seated in his house: many tragical
mischiefs and notorious calamities and presaged to some great rulers and
mighty governors, placed in sovereign and supreme authority, or else it is
vehemently to be feared, that in the East, and Southeast cuntries, a desperate
company of vile and villainous rascals shall flock together, and seditiously,
rebelliously, and traitorously arise in arms against their Princes and
Magistrates: who, (as a dog has a day, and a spider provision of ill
favored geere to serve her turn) shall for a time violently set upon, and
vehemently afflict many: which maugre their heads, must suffer grievous and
spiteful indignities. And yet because he is Lord and Ruler of the 9. House,
wherein Mercury is most unluckily appointed, being not long since much
discouraged and discomfited of him by a hateful Quartyle Aspect: it seems
that diverse persecutions are threatened unto sundry Ecclesiastical persons,
which shall be much disquieted and vexed by their rage. All which maladies
shall be the more hurtful and vehement, because he is entered into a fixed
sign: according to that maxim of Haly, Capite quarto partis octauae. Siquando
Mars fuerit in signo fixo, significat fortes lites inter Reges, and eiectos,
and in another place his judgment is: Si Mars fuerit in signo fixo, significat
lites sine ratione and causa. Beside, he will do the more harm also, because he
is in a masculine and diurnall sign: Nam in signo foeminino and loco noctis,
minoris impedimenti est: as Messahalah says in his book, De Reuolutione
Annorum mundi, the 2^. chapter. Item, Mars in Leone, and in the 12. place from
the Horoscope, threatens great loss and destruction in all kinds of beasts,
that have hoofes, or fleeces, and with all prognosticateth that pismires,
waspes, and other flies, and vermyne shall not greatly abound. Furthermore,
because he is seated in the eight house from the Moon, ipse significat
interfectiones and infirmitates magnas in h^minibus. To all which evils they
shall be most subject, which inhabit such regions, provinces, territories,
and cities, as are under the partition of the hot sign Leo. Item, Sol Lord
of the Ascendent, but peregrine, and out of all his essential dignities in the
sixteenth degree, and eight and fortieth minute of Taurus, the night House of
Venus, and resident in the tenth house, (the house of dominion, and power,
wherein he would greatly have rejoiced, had he not been so infortunately
disgraced by his weakness) will also help to increase the fury and outrage
of Mars, causing much trouble, vexation, and sorrow, to some noble men, and
honorable personages: yea this his placing does furthermore signify, that
many Magistrates shall be thrust out of office, and deprived of all dignity,
and other advanced to their rooms, who peradventure shall scarcely be so good,
but most likely to verify the Proverb, Seldom comes the better. Item,
Venus Lady of the tenth house, being both peregrine, and combust, does
increase the signification of the Sun, who because he is Lord of the
Ascendent, and infortunately seated in her house, signifies a badde state, not
only of Princes, but of their subjects too: which badde state shall specially
be found in the countries situat between the East and the Weast: Moreover
Venus, who naturally is very fortunate, and a planet of a good and amiable
nature, being withal settled in the 11. house, the house of amity, friendship,
and good fortune, would have pronounced much good, if she had not been so
unluckily peregrine in the second degree, and third minut of Gemini, being
there also combust, and accompanied with the mischievous Catabibazon: which is
with all as unhappy, and pernicious, as may be, by reason of her fall in
Geminis, in domo casus sui. For which cause she is therefore to signify much
subtle dissembling, and false packing amongst men: little faithful and sound
friendship, but much counterfeit and fained amity: nay, many through
discourteous dealing, and falsehood, shall break of friendship, so that one shall
hardly repose any trust in another: besides, she foresheweth that much hatred,
discord, and strife, much matter of divisions and factions, much debate and
contention shall ensue: and yet some naughty and ungodly persons, (whereof the
world shall never be to seek, but what remedy?) are like to accord and agree
together well enough, or rather ill enough. For much shameful and filthy
whoredom shall be secretly committed, diverse shall give over them selves to
pleasure, voluptuousness, riot, unlawful concupiscence, lechery, forbidden
lusts, and other unclean misdemeanors. But let those that are so corruptly,
and vilanously affected, beware in time, beast for every dram of momentanie
pleasure, they be rewarded with a pound of durable sorrow. For besides that many
thereby shall be shrewdly endammaged, and presently punished, according to the
quality of their deserts: the rest of that ungracious crew, unless they
repent, and amend the sooner, shall altogether most woefully perish, and be
utterly destroyed, both goods, body, and soul too. Haly his judgment is, ye
Venus iuncta cum cauda Draconis, significat destructionem futuram in
mulieribus: and this he also as resolutely affirms, that Venus infortunata in
vndecima domo, praesagit leguminum caritate^. Finally, I am persuaded, that she
will cause very many winds, bringing very much rain, by reason of her
occidentall combustion in Geminis, in the house and terms of Mercury. And, as
for Mercury, he in statione secunda, placed in domo peregrinationum, itinerum,
rerum sacrarum, and religionis: but peregrine, and much afflicted in the 21.
degree, and 20. minut of Aries, in the house and terms of Mars his mortal
enemy, does signify many journeys, and voyages, much travailing, great
removing from place to place, (for Aries as every one knows, is a moveable
sign, and Mercury a conuertible, and wavering planet) but not without many
losses, damages, and troubles: so generally true it is, that is commonly
alleged in a manner to this very purpose. The rolling stone, seldom gathers
any moss. For sundry grieuances, much theft, many violent robberies, and
spoylings, with wilful murder, and cruel interfections shall be committed, in
such wise, that plain, innocent, and true meaning men, (whereof our world now
a days is not greatly lavish) and the honest and faithful dealing merchant,
shall eftsoons go in danger of losing both goods and life. Furthermore, this
his unlucky constitution does portend the irreligious, and impious behavior of
diverse wicked, obstinate, stubborn, and disorderly persons, who will not care
most desperately to conspyre, even against heaven it self, and most horribly
to abuse, even Jesus himself, in not esteeming his sacred and blessed word, in
reuiling his zealous preachers, in making no account of religion, piety, and
godliness, in abandoning God him self out of their company, and betaking them
selves to all villainy. Likewise this his unfortunate state, threatens like
troubles, detriments, and dangers unto those, that are Mercurists, as namely,
unto Ambassadors, secretaries, Notaries, Registers, Clarks, Scriueners,
Messengers, Factours, Mercers, and such other: as also unto diverse of the
learneder sort, amongst whom some hot controversies, and contentions are like
to arise, touching some new contrary opinions, and heresies, which shall be
invented, published, and maintained by certain busy fellows, and factious
heads, too affectionately wedded to their own conceits. Item, Luna peregrine
in the fourth degree, and 58. minut of Sagittarius, decreasing in light, and
accompanied with her Dragons head, in the fourth house, and nigh the fifth,
being but six hours before, most infortunately in opposition, and at destance
with the gentle and merciful planet Venus, of whom I spoke before, betokens
many heavy calamities, impriso^ments, disturbances, and tribulations, with
much thought, anguish, and sorrow amongst the common people, who not
withstanding shall not be punished or afflicted, but according to their own
rebellious deserts, and misdemeanors: for her opposition with Venus, lady of
the 10. house, signifies the disloyal and unfaithful hearts of many froward
and disobedient persons, rebelliously set against their Magistrates, helping
forward the mischiefs and horrors presaged by the unfortunate constitution of
Mars. And through her company with the Drago^s head, ipsa significat
consumptiones, multas aquas, and damnu^ in frugibus, as a credible author
testifies. And her application unto frowning Saturn, by an aspectuall
radiation, I mean, a malicious quartile aspect: denotat, quod accident
hominibus infirmitates mortiferae, somnia horrenda, and opiniones
expauescibiles, prouenientes ex abundantia melancholiae. And, what says Haly,
Cap. 4. Part. 8? Sol est anima mundi, qui si quando maleficus fuerit,
intemperie afficietur Aer, vt cum Luna malefica est, afficitur terra. An other
judgment of his is thus delivered in the third chapter of the same eight
part: Si quando tota Triplicitas ignea fuerit infortunata, (as now it is in the
figure erected for the time I speak of) accident damna, and occasiones magnae
Dominis, Regibus, and claris hominibus. Idem significat signi vndecimae Domus,
and eius oppositi, scilicet, signi quintae Domus, (in which sign Luna is now
placed) mala, and infortunata constitutio. Item, Saturn placed in the eight
house, and lord of the sixte house, which is domus aegritudinum, morborum, and
seruitutis corporis, foresheweth many dangerous, and mortal diseases, which
are like to reign and rage in their kind: as also the stubberne, disobedient,
and ill disposed affections of diverse servant toward their Lords and
masters. Moreover Saturn lord of the 7. house, which is domus Coniugij,
Inimicitiae, Contentionum forensiu^, furti, and aliorum scelerum, threatens
many troublesome, and terrible events, which are like to be as mischieuously
accomplished. But, as touching this his lordly government of the 6. and 7.
houses, together with certain other Incidents, which by the figure erected
might Astrologically be gathered, for breuities sake, and for some other good
considerations, I add nothing, acknowledging that the heavenly and almighty
Jupiter, (that I may so speak) sitting above Sol and Luna in his everlasting
majesty, rules both Saturn and Jupiter, at his gracious will and pleasure,
as also furious Mars him self, with Venus, and Mercury too: quae inclinant
modo, non necessitant, as is truly answered in an old distinction.
Nevertheless, I am verily persuaded, that no Nation, or Country shall behold
this great Conjunction unpunished: but amongst the rest, they I grant, shall
especially feel the vehement force, and violence thereof, that inhabit such
regions, as are subject to the first, and second Climat.

Thus, as compendiously, as on the sudden I could, I have here, Brother,
written down, in what sign, and part of heaven every planet shall be placed:
how affected and disposed in the celestial scheme, at that very instant and
moment, in which this great, and wonderful Conjunction shall happen, with the
several, and special significations of each of them particularly, according
to the place of their residence at that time: agreeing wholly with the
Astrological judgments, and predictions of the most ancient and best approved
writers in this profession. Which I have done to this end, to show as it were
in a glass, what concordaunce and agreement, there shall then appear between
one planet and another: and what good or evil every one of them shall for his
part procure: good, by diminishing, slaking, and repressing the misfortunes
which are presaged by the Conjunction: evil, by helping forward, and
increasing the perilous malice, and as it were, venomous spite thereof.

Now, to treat somewhat more specially touching the weather, and constitution
of the aier, I have good coniecturall Arguments to persuade me, that great
store of rain and cold is like to ensue, that we shall have much hail,
thunder, and lightning, much unseasonable, immoderate, tempestuous, and
boisterous weather, that huge waters shall arise, that floudes extraordinarily
shall increase, many ouerflowings happen, diverse irruptions of waters
suddenly break out, causing some loss by land, but much greater decay of
substance by shipwrackes on the seas, whereby very many shall be shrewdely
endammaged, and not a few utterly vndane. Which operations and effects the
late Eclipse of the Sun, which happened the last year 1582. the twenty
day of June in the watrie sign Cancer, shall meruailously help forward and
augment, especially in winter this year, 1583. for these foresaid Accidents
shall continewe until the beginning of the next spring after, Anno 1584. At
which time about the end of March, and the beginning of April, there shall
happen a wonderful, strange, and rare Conjunction, convent, or assembly in a
manner of all the planets in Aries, a fiery sign. So that then both Saturn
and Jupiter shall forsake Pisces the last sign of the watrie Triplicitie, and
inhabit Aries the first sign of the fiery Triangularitie: which alteration
from one contrary triplicitie to his contrary, cannot be without diverse new
effects opposite to the former. For so Haly concludes, Duo planetae ponderosi,
(as Saturn and Jupiter are) semper faciunt diuersitates sua mutatione de vna
triplicitate in aliam, and de vna natura in aliam, and de vna haiz in aliam.
Wherefore now the watrie Trigone shall perish, and be turned into fire. Jupiter
shall be joined with Sol, with Mercury, and with Luna: Saturn shall be joined
with Venus, and with Mercury: Mercury shall be in Conjunction with Jupiter, and
with Mars: Luna shall be one while joined with Saturn, another while with
Venus, another with Mars, with Jupiter the second time, and then with Mercury,
and lastly of all, there shall be a great Conjunction of Jupiter, and Mars,
which is the third weighty planet, and in malice little inferior unto
devouring Saturn him self. After which kind of Conjunctions, some terrible,
and fearful Comet, or blazing star is like presently to ensue: for the
congresse of planets in a fiery sign, does commonly foreshew, and in deed
naturally cause a blazing star. As by induction of examples might at large be
discoursed, but one for every sign shall suffice. In the year 1556. in the
same month of March, when there was the like coaceruation of both superior
and inferior planets in this very sign Aries, there followed immediately a
great Comet. Anno 1434. after the like meeting of the planets in the second
fiery sign Leo, their appeared likewise a fiery Comet. As also after their
Conjunction in the third fiery sign Sagittary, Anno 814. before the death of
the invincible and most renowned Emperor Carolus Magnus, there ensued in like
manner a terrible, and tragical Comet. And if a Comet, as I have now problably
inferred, shall arise, these effects must be looked for, much scorching and
vehement heat, the drying up of ponds and deep waters: barren, and
unfruitful fields: and consequently, a dearth of all victuals, beside a sore
death of cattle, and many pestilent diseases amongst men. But if no Comet
appears, there shall doubtless be seen other horrible and rufull visions in
the Heavens, and many very strange and terrible sights in the middle region of
the aier, as fiery Meteors, flashings, and flamings of fire, wonderful
traiections, and impressions, much lightning, and thunder mixte with hail.
Whereby many shall be perillously terrified, and some miserably undone. For
even at the very self same time the operations and effects of the suns
Eclipse, which happened the last year, 1582. as also of this great and strange
Conjunction shall still continue: which shall afterward be accompanied with
another fearful and pernicious Eclipse, 1585. in Tauro, nigh the head of
Medusa, called of ye Arabians, Caput Algol, a most hurtful, violent, cruel,
and mortal fixed star, of the nature of Saturn and Venus. Whose
significations for so much as they are not alike, the one threatening vehement
heat, the other extreme cold, and with all the great Conjunction of Saturn
and Mars in Pisces, a watrie sign: and the great Conjunction of Jupiter and
Mars in Aries a fiery sign, both in April next, 1584. being thereunto
joined, whereof also the one threatens excessive cold, the other exceeding
heat, there must necessarily follow very great inequality of the aier, and
very much inconstancy and alteration of the weather, which mutual infraction
of qualities, non nisi coruscationes nubium sequentur, as Leouitius speaks,
yet the force and power of this Conjunction shall hear most effectual swaye,
especially in March, April, May, and June, Anno 1584. because then most of the
planets shall run there course in hot and dry signs, as also 1585. in
March, April, and May, when Mars a hot and fiery fellow shall possess a
hot and dry sign: with whom Saturn shall fellowship himself, being then
too seated in a fiery sign, and one while in Conjunction with Venus, another
while with Sol, with Mercury, and with the Moon, with whom also Mars and the
other planets shall be mingled: which Conjunctions shall al happen in fiery
signs. And this year say I, is like to prove an unhappy year for divines,
and religious persons. Item, in April, Anno 1586. the effects of these meetings
shall evidently appear at which time, there shall fall out a Conjunction of
Sol and Saturn, Mars and Venus, Mars and Mercury, Venus and Mercury, Saturn
and Mercury, Saturn and Venus, Sol and Luna, Saturn and Luna, Mars and Luna,
Venus and Luna, Mercury and Luna, and lastly of Saturn and Mars, which is a
great Conjunction, and therefore the worse, and more terrible. Which
Conjunctions for as much as they shall all happen in the same sign Aries, a
fiery sign, there must needs ensue diverse straung effects, much fervent and
exceeding heat, many rare and dreadful impressions in the highest region of the
aier, and consequently a sore and perilous drought. To make short, in this
year sundry woeful, and cruel evils, together with many strange and
horrible events shall sensibly appear, which shall principally molest and
afflict the weastwarde countries. But of these terrors, one of us, either I,
or if my leisure, by means of my final profession, happen to fail me, my
brother John will treat more particularly hereafter, (if God spare us life),
in there several and sundry years, according as the effects, and operations
of the aforesaid Conjunctions shall specially work, and take place: as also
of the Comet with the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, which I have only
touched here, reserving every such notable particular Accident, to his proper
time and place, then severally to be discussed either by me, or by him. This
alone I will add, as a needful Caution and admonition for those, which in
there natiuities had Aries placed in their Horoscope, accompanied with other
planets, or which had the superior planets placed then in the same sign of
the Zodiaque, as also for those, which had ye great light of heaven, the Sun
I mean, or the lord of the ascendent, or the lord of the nativity placed in
Aries, illi enim in primis ad choraeas coelestes inuitabuntur, aliquidque noui
molientur, the judgment carries sufficient authority. And especially let
Germany and Italy beware, for many grievous calamities, with sudden chances
and chaunges are threatened to the countries there aboutes, by this forcible
concurse of planets in Aries: these nations being chiefly and principally
under the regiment of that sign, whereunto our Astrologers add namely the
Regions, and Seigniories following: Britain, France, Bastarnia, Syria,
Philistim, Polonia minor, high Burgonie, Sueuia of Germany, Sylesia superior,
Pars Westriae, Naples, Florence, Capua, Ferraria, Verona, Vicentia, Bergamum,
Imola, Padua, Brusuicum, Vtricha, Lindauia, Cracouia, Marsilia, Saragossa, with
certain other Territories, and Provinces near adjoining. Praeterea, the same
sign being the house and mansion place of Mars, there are portended many
lamentable, and woeful casualties in battle, unto the German and Italian
soldiers: which shall fall out, either by treachery, and prodition, or
through the careless security and sluggishnesse of their Captains, two
perilous and deadly enemies to Martial proceedings, as by all histories is
most manifest, specially to you, that are so perfectly acquainted with them.
Now, touching the whole continuance of the aforesaid strange effects, and
operations of this present great Conjunction, I suppose it will suffice to
quote the judgment of the famous Philosopher, and Physician Cardane, delivered
in his Commentaries, upon Ptolomeis Quadripartita Constructio, concerning that
point. Whose words are thus set down verbatim in the second book, ninth
chapter, and LIVE, Text of those excellent Commentaries. Effectus durant ad
reditum, vtpote Coniunctio Saturni and Iouis, vsque ad aliam coniunctionem: and
Saturni ingressus in initium Arietis, vsque ad alium ingressum in initium
Arietis, quia nihil datur inane in natura, and ideo si effectus non duraret
vsque ad reditum, esset circuitus Mathematicus, non Naturalis, and causa sine
effectu, and impotentia quaedam. Quamobrem, proportio circuitus ad circuitum,
vt temporis ad tempus quod erat probandum. Vnusquisque tamen horum circuituum
redigitur ad dimidium, nam ab oppositione finitur coniunctionis vis,
attenditurque ipsa oppositio. Which place of Cardane may summarily suffice for
warrant of the continuance, so far as Art, and man's foresight extends. For
otherwise, vt caetera omnia, sic planetae in Manu Domini, who is truly termed
of the old Philosophers, Ens Entium, and Causa Causarum, wherein I am to
subscribe to the opinion of the noble Mathematicia^ and Astrologer, Petrus
Pitatus, who in the Proeme to his Diaria, gives out this learned judgment: Ex
futurorum euentuum generibus; sunt, quae habent causam determinatam, and
infallibilem, vt motus coeli, ortus, and occasus signorum, Coniunctiones
planetarum, and luminarium Eclipses, and similia: in quibus est determinatio,
and infallibilitas ex part motoris, atque etiam omnis impedimenti remotio, ex
part qualibet, nisi in quantum subiacent diuinae voluntati, and Prouidentiae,
quae tamen semper Ordinate agit: with much more importing the same conclusion,
his only exception is, ni secus a prima causa, secundae miraculose
impediantur. And thus much touching the notable effects, and operations of
this great Conjunction, in the last face of Pisces, and the first of Aries.
Now, by a sensible conference of the same with other Conjunctions, which have
heretofore happened in the watrie Trigone not without certain famous, and
most notable events consequently ensuyng: I will presume, to set down
certain Conclusions, collected out of ancient judgments and predictions of
Astrology, whereby it should in great likehood appear not only that
sundry, rare, and wonderful events must needs follow, but also that the very
frame of the world, cannot endure long after. Wherefore, to speak only of
the watrie Trigone, which shall now bear rule for a time, which Trigone
consists of these three signs of the Zodiaque, Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces: it
seems a resolute case, (unless my induction marvelously fails me) that
their never happened any great Conjunction of the superior planets in any of
those three signs, but some extraordinary change, and notorius alteration
ensued. First, after the mighty Conjunction of the two highest planets,
Saturn and Jupiter in Cancer, which is reckened the first sign of the
foresaid watrie Triplicitie, (which Conjunction happened in angulo quartae
domus, the ninth month from March first called of the Romans, and now of us
November) the world was ouerflowed with that wonderful exceeding deluge, which
to this day does, and shall ever bear the name of Noah's floude: such a floude
as the world shall never see again. Secondly, this fourth Monarchy, called
the Roman Monarchy, to follow the common distinction, (howsoever Monsier
Bodine probably reasons to the contrary) wherein we now live, and are still
to prefer before the Turkish Monarchy, seem it never so ample and huge,
began under the dominion of the watrie Trigone: for the 47. year before the
glorious nativity of our savior Jesus Christ, and five years before the
destruction of the most valerous and puissant captain, Julius Caesar there
happened a great Conjunction of the superior planets in Scorpio, the second
sign of the same Triplicitie, at which time that most Memorable and notorious
civil war between Caesar and Pompey, was very hot and violent, the end
whereof ensued a little after the same Conjunction, whereupon Julius Caesar
having oppressed the contrary force, and valiantly subdued his enemies, which
defended their ancient state, and common liberty, did first establish this
fourth most noble Monarchy. Thirdly, not long after this, namely, six years
before the happy birth of our Redeemer, there happened a Conjunction of these
mighty superior planets, Saturn and Jupiter, in the last face of Pisces,
which is the last sign of the watery Trigone, and the beginning of Aries,
which is the first sign of the fiery Trigone, which Conjunction happened never
since, but only in the days of the worthy christian Emperor, Carolus Magnus,
Anno. 789. which is almost 800. years ago, but is now to happen once again
in this present year 1583. Touching which, forasmuch as it is the last
Conjunction that ever shall happen in the end of the watrie Trigone, I am
Astrologically induced to this conjecture, that we are most like to have a new
world, by some sudden, violent, and wonderful strange alteration, which even
heretofore has always happened, at the ending of one Trigone, and beginning of
an other, but now most especially is like to happen, because ye contrary
Trigone succeeds his contrary, the fiery follows ye watrie, under which,
or the like succession, a notable mutation has already happened two several
times: to wit, in the time of Julius and Augustus Caesar, when as this fourth
Monarchy (as I said before) was established with much effusion of blood: and
again in the time of Carolus Magnus, and his father Pypin, (as I also said
before) at which time, as histories report, Monarchia haec eneruata aliquantum
respirauit: yea, your Paulus Iouius, as you best remember, after two or three
other most honorable greetings, saluteth this noble Emperor with these
gallant Titles, Salve Christiani Imperij propagator augustissime, Pontificiae
dignitatis assertor and vindex, aureaeque demum aetatis conditor: which last
addition of Iouius, makes most for our purpose, together with that superlatiue
Justification of his surname not much before, non magni modo, sed Ter Maximi
cognomento dignissime so that withal we forget not what the same Iouius
shortly after writes, continuing the foresaid brave Apostrophe, directed unto
Charlmaine him self: Te Auspice, Italia in primis, quae iampridem a Gothis,
and Vandalis deformata, prostrataque, ferrei saeculi iniurias pertulerat, se
vsqueadeo faelici rerum omnium prouentu erexit, vt pristinae amplitudinis
ornamenta reciperet. having a little before given out certain other
commendations of his martial prowes, tempered with devotion and wisdom, in
these honorable Terms: his long optimis belli and pacis artibus, non
indomitos modo Saxones, and peruicaces Cantabros, perpetuis victorijs deuictos,
verum, quod ad perenniorem laudem nobilius fuit, Longobardos arroganter and
impie sacrosancto Pontifici infaestos, Deo vltore, funditus excisos videmus.
But, to leave the second foundation, and as it were, the reedifying of the
imperial Monarchy under Charlmaine, which is far better known unto you,
than unto me, (how be it by the way it would not be forgotten, that Romanum
Imperium apud Graecos perstitit a Constantini Magni Temporibus, vsque ad
Tempora Caroli Magni, in quem nomen duntaxat Imperij translatum est ad
Germanos, as Agrippa writes in his inuectiue discourse, De Nobilitate:) and to
return now to the present Conjunction, considering that this fourth Monarchy
began first about the end of the watrie Trigone, and was afterward weakened
and decayed under the same, as appears by the premises: may it now seem
likely and probable enough, that it shall also finally be ended and destroyed
under the same Trigone? And, for so much, as our Lord and Savior took our
humane nature upon him, being borne of the virgin Marie in Bethlem, at the end
of the watrie Trigone, and the beginning of the fiery Trigon: the same now
happening again, may it not also signify and portend, some wonderful and
marvelous alteration shortly after to ensue? yea, why not even that great, and
dreadful time, wherein the same Ihesus Christ, shall come again in unspeakable
majesty, to judge both the quick and the dead, consuming the whole world by
fire? for now shall the fiery Trigone reign, and all the Conjunctions of the
superior planets which hereafter shall happen, shall continually be in fiery
signs, till the accomplishment almost of 200. years. In the reign of Carolus
Magnus, albeit the like Conjunction happened, yet the world could not then be
at an end: howbeit even at that very time, there were exceeding great
Co^tentions amongst Princes, debated with many fierce battles, horrible
murders, and much shedding of blood: to which effect I can not but remember
those goodly verses of the excellent Italian Poet, Honoratus Fasitellus: -- tum
primum Gallica signa
Boetis, and infractus victricia sensit Iberus.
Intremuere Asiae Reges, ia cuitque subacta
Punica terribili tellus concussa duello.
Which are to be understood of that self same time* yet then I say, could not
the consummation of the world be, because 5000. years from the Creation of the
world, were not yet expired, but now the influence and effects of this present
great Coniunctio^ enduring and continuing, as I have said, how little to speak
of, shall remain wanting, to make up the complete number of 6000. years,
which account is originally grounded upon the ancient famous prophecy of
Elias, concerning the worlds continuance, foretelling that the same should
stand 6000. years: 2000. vain: 2000. ye law: 2000. Christ: which together
make in all the final number of numbers 6000. years. Whereof it has already
continued 5544. so that not so much as 500. years do now remain, of which
also, some even of those that are yet behind, shall be abridged in respect of
our infinite sins, and exceeding wickedness, as it follows in the same
prophecy. Yea our Savior Christ him self has promised in his Gospel written
by S. Matthew, the 24. chapt. that he will detract somewhat of ye appointed time,
saying: Except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved,
but for the elects sake, they shall be shortened. So that all circumstances
being weyed, and all Astrological likehoods together with prophetical
predictions considered, what doubt is there, but we may, and ought to persuade
our selves, that the foundation of the world is in a manner worn out, and also
this goodly frame ready to fall upon our shoulders? for if so be there yet
remained another great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter like to the first,
then should there be required a Remanet of almost eight hundred years more,
which being added to the year of this great Conjunction, would amount to the
number of six thousand and almost four hundred years: which manifestly
oppugneth the prophecy of Elias above rehearsed, and Plato, before 25. of
those years were exspired, would bid us who. Almighty God, through his
infinite power, and unspeakable wisdom, in six days created heaven and
earth, the sea, and al things therein contained, but the seventh day he
rested, and hallowed the same: wherein some have reposed a high mystery,
imagining, and persuading them selves, that by the sacred ministry of his
holy word in this present life, within the compass of 6000. years, he will
also gather together his Church, wherewith in the seventh he will celebrate and
keep holy his eternal and everlasting Sabbath. To which purpose they affirm,
that the prophecy of Elias, was as it were allegorically borrowed from this
number of the six days Creation, applying to every day, 1003. years,
alleging to that effect, out of the nynetie Psalm, for a thousand years in
thy sight, are but as yesterday, and citing withal that place of Saint Peter,
in the third chapter of his second epistle, Dearly beloved, be not ignorant of
this one thing, how that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as one day. But how soundly these testimonies be applied to the
enforcement of my conclusion, it is for learneder men to determine, my self
dare not be over bold with Textes of scripture, which are so reverently, and
religiously to be handled, and therefore take it best, to stand rather upon the
probability of Astrologicall predictions, and namely, upon that old, and
common prophecy, touching the year 1588. which is now so rife in every man's
mouth, and was so resolutely defended in a public disputation in the last
Commencement, by one, sufficient to maintain his assertion. That year has
many hundred years agone been specially foretold, and much spoken of amongst
Astrologers, who have, as it were, vnanimi consensu, prognosticated, that
either a marvelous fearful and horrible alteration of Empyres, Kingdoms,
Seigniories, and States, together with other wonderful, and very extraordinary
Accidents, as, extreme hunger, and pestilence, desperate treasons, and
commotions, shall then fall out, to the miserable affliction, and oppression of
huge multitudes: or else, that an utter, and final overthrow, and destruction
of the whole world shall ensue. Which prophecy for so much as it is reputed of
so great consequence, and withal so nearely touches the scope of the present
Treatise, I will here set down, as it is delivered by Leouitius, in Latin
verses, made, as most suppose, by Regiomontanus, but translated out of a former
style, far more ancient, as were also the Dutch verses of Stoeflerinus
importing the same Contents. Post mill expletos a partu Virginis annos,
Et post quingentos rursus ab orb datos:
Octogesimus octauus mirabilis Annus
Ingruet, is secum tristia fata feret.
Si non hoc anno totus malus occidet orbis,
Si non in nihilum terra, fretumque ruet:
Cuncta tamen mundi sursum ibunt atque retrorsum
Imperia, and luctus vndique grandis erit.
Which Latin verses, after the manner of our rude meeter, I not long since at
adventure englished, for a friend of mine, but I make more account of so
solemn a prophecy, than to disgrace it here with my poor translation. You
see what therein serves to my purpose, that either a final dissolution, or a
wonderful horrible alteration of the world, is then to be expected. I might
allege many other arguments, and authorities, implying the same conclusion,
but I avoid to be over tedious. And yet am I violently brought to a further
consideration of the premises, by such extraordinary, and as a man would say,
presignificatiue Accidents, as these following: When were there ever seen so
many dreadful Eclipses of the Sun and Moon? When so many straung, and
wonderful copulations of planets? when so prodigious Comets, not without their
tragical operations? When such terrible Examples of fiery Meteors,
coruscations, traiections, impressions, and inflammations in the Aier, as have
been already observed in our Age, and will more fearfully appear within few
years? When was the Earth so violently and terribly shaken with an Earthquake,
as it was the sixth of April, 1580. not only in Ingland, and Scotland, but
also in other Countries, and Nations further off? which Earthquake,
(notwithstanding your pleasant Entrance into that Philosophical Discourse,
delivered thereof by you ex tempore in company of honest gentlemen, and
gentlewomen assembled together to make merry) seems yet unto me a matter of
no small consequence, whereunto your self also seem to incline in the
earnester part of that Discourse. Were not such signs and tokens foretold by
our Savior Christ? has he not forewarned us, that they should appear and
show them selves, as it were in their terrible likeness? a little before, or in
his very coming? does not withal the contempt of good learning, the contempt
of good manners, ye contempt of good laws, the contempt of good Magistrates, the
contempt of all good government, nay, does not the contempt of good religion,
good piety, good charity, and al goodness, which since these latter days
never so universally reigned, as now it does? do not these general abuses
seem to argue and import as much? when was ye world so quite deuoid of care?
when so secure, so recklesse, so bent against all discipline, and order? when
so vainly wicked or so wickedly vain? when was innocence more ridiculous,
faithfulness more contemptible, virtue more abiected, holiness more profaned,
love more hated, duty more neglected, honor more dishonored, honestye more
despised, good life more wounded to death, than now a days? Finally, when such
unnatural parts, such monstrous corruptions of body and mind, such vile and
absurd indignities, such inordinate, and barbarous proceedings, without any
respect to law, or conscience, so universally put in practice? when ever yt
like general lustiness, and iollitie, with such desperate wilfulness, and
self-loue, not in one or two more highly minded, or hawtily set than their
fellows, but even commonly in the whole world to speak of? when ever so just
occasion of complaint with the Poet? Omne in praecipiti vitium stetit. What is
now the Conclusion? Truly, that the second coming of the son of man draws
nigh, which shall be as were the days of Noah, for as in the days which were
before the flood, they were eating, and drinking, marrying, and giving in
marriage, even till the day that Noah entered into the Arc, and perceived
nothing, till the flood came, and overwhelmed them all, so shall also the
coming of the son of man be. Matthew 2^. May we not now sensibly perceive,
that these days of ours, and the days immediately following, are ye very days
here expressed: yea, even those days which Christ him self did so certainly,
and more than prophetically foreshewe unto his Disciples, preaching unto them
of the destruction of the Temple, the end of the world, and the latter days?
Why then do we still dwell in security, and deceive our selves with vain
conceits, building up a mountain of miseries, insteade of the right felicity?
If we know our Lords will, and do it not we shall worthily be beaten with
many stripes. Wherefore let us now at the last, speedily and carefully call
upon our merciful God, lest he consume us in the heat of his heavy wrath, and
indignation: let us humbly sue for grace, and heartily crave pardon and favor
at his hands, lest sudden destruction ouerwhelme us: let us with penitent,
and obedient hearts fall down before the throne of his celestial majesty,
asking remission of our manifold sins, and villainies, and with a contrite
affection, earnestly and unfeignedly embrace the gladsum tidings of his holy
Gospel, that through his infinite goodness, and exceeding mercy, we may be
safely protected, and wholly delivered from all these horrible evils both of
body and soul. For see what comfortable and sweet words the Lord of Hosts
has uttered with his own mouth: If ye walk in my Ordinances, and keep my
commandments, and do them, I will send you rain in due season, and the land
shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall give their fruit
and your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach
unto the sowing time, and ye shall eat your bread in plenteousnes, and dwell in
your land safely, and I will send peace in the land, and ye shall sleep, and
none shall make you afraid, and I will rid evil beasts out of the land, and
there shall no sword go throughout your land, and ye shall chase your enemies,
and they shall fall before you upon the sword and five of you shall chase an
hundred, and an hundred shall put ten thousand to flight, and your enemies shall
fall before you upon the sword: for I will have respect unto you, and make you
increase, and multiply you, and set up my covenant with you, and ye shall eat
old store, and carry out the old, because of the new, and I will make my
dwelling place among you, and my soul shall not loath you: I will walk amongst
you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people, and so forth. These are
the goodly and blessed promises, which the Lord of Heaven and Earth will
assuredly and plentifully perform unto those; that do faithfully fear, and
truly worship him, in that integrity of holiness and righteousness, that him
self requires. For no doubt, he is a most merciful God, and a most loving
father, full of compassion, full of patience, and long suffering, full of goodness
and pity. And yet as he is excedingly merciful to the repentant sinner, so is
he also just and terrible to the wilful and obstinate reprobate. For thus on
the other side has the Lord of Lords from the throne of his omnipotent
Majesty thundered: but if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not harken unto
me, I will also walk contrary unto you: I will bring upon you fearfulnes,
consumption, and the burning ague, to consume your eyes, and gender sorrow of
heart, and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it, and
I will set my face against you, and ye shall fall before your enemies: they that
hate you, shall reign over you, and ye shall fly when no man follows you,
and I will break the pride of your power, and I will make your heaven as iron,
and your earth as brass, and your labor shall be spent in vain, for your
land shall not give her increase, neither shall the trees of the lands give
their fruits: I will also send in wild beasts amongst you, which shall
rob you of your children, and destroy your cattle, and make you few in
number, and make your high ways to be desolate. And if ye may not be reformed
by these things, I will punish you yet seven times for your sins, and I will
send a sword amongst you, that shall avenge my covenant, and when ye are
gathered together within your cities, I will send the pestilence among you, and
ye shall be delivered into the hands of the enemy. And when I have broken the
staff of your bread, ten wives shall bake your bread in one oven, and they
shall deliver you your bread again by weight, ye shall eat, and not be
satisfied. And if you will not yet for all this harken unto, but walk against
me, I will walk contrary unto you also, and will chastise you seven times
more for your sins: and ye shall eat the flesh of your Sons, and the
flesh of your Daughters shall ye devour: I will destroy your high places, and
cut away your images, and cast your carcasses upon the bodies of your idols,
and my soul shall abhor you: and I will make your cities desolate, and bring
your sanctuary unto naught, and will not smell the savor of your sweet
odours: I will bring your land unto a wilderness, and your enemies which dwell
therein, shall wonder at it. Leuitic. Cap. 26. Now, Lord, can any be so
ungraciously stiff necked, and hard hearted, as not to be terrified and
astonished with the horror of such maledictions? then, alas, let him that has
an ear, hear what the Creator speaks unto the Creature, the Lord of
Lords, to his rebellious subject, Almighty God to man, to clay, to dust, and
ashes: let every one remember, what he has received and heard, and hold fast,
and repent: he that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his
God, and he shall be my son, says he that sits on the Throne. But the
fearful, and the unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and idolaters, and sorcerers, and all liars, shall have their
part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
Death. Let us therefore repent with Niniuie, least we be consumed with Sodom,
and Gomorrha: let us do his commandments, that we may be blessed, that our
power may be in the tree of life, and that we may enter in, through the gates
into the city, and take the water of life freely. Babylon is made a dwelling
place of devils, a cage of unclean birds, spirits and goblins shall walk in
her palaces, fearful wild beasts shall lurk there: scritchowles, and
ostriges shall walk in her houses, Apes and Satyrs shall dance in her
beautiful buildings, wild Cats shall cry therein, and Dragons shall there
abide, no voice of men shall be heard in her, no sound of a bell, or a mill
shall be heard, no light of a candle shall be seen, but perpetual solitude,
desolation, and sorrow shall remain and dwell there for evermore. But, we will
faithfully praise the name of our Lord Jesus, and in patience possess our
souls, that when sudden destruction shall come upon the careless world, we may
lift up our heads, and behold our redemption at hand. We will no more look
for life, but where it dwells, in the flesh of Christ alone there it rests,
all promise and hope of life is in him, he has alone the words of life, he is
alone the bread of life, the water of life, the author of life, the word of
life, the tree of life, the only life, he that believes in him, has
everlasting life. We will cry no more upon Angels: we will look no more unto
our own works: we will trust no more in our own prayers: we will no more
call for the help of creatures, they are all subject unto vanity: there is no
life, but in Christ above: the Elders, the Angels, the Beasts, all Creatures
they give this honor unto Christ: salvation is of him, that sits upon the
Throne, and of the Lamb, and altogether they cry, Amen.

You will marvel, Brother, to see me thus vehemently, and zealously affected
in a private Discourse, but truly the incomparable greatness, and importance
of the Argument, to him that has entered into any reasonable consideration of
so universal future calamities, as daily threaten us, must needs seem to
require much more, than I have here said, or can possibly say.

The last notable thing, that I have to observe this year, 1583. is, that
there shall not appear unto us in our Horizon, any Eclipse, either of the
Sun, or of the Moon. Marry, forasmuch as the influence, and working of that
Eclipse of the Sun, which happened the last year, 1582. begins to take
place and effect but in this present year, 1583. in May, perduring till that
time Twelve month, 1584. I have thought it not inconvenient, to prosecute
these matters somewhat further, and to deliver my simple Judgment touching
that Eclipse, presuming herein of your patience, as in the premises.

Of the Eclipse of the Sun, which happened the last year, 1582.
IN this last year 1582. upon the 20. day of June, immediately after five of
the clock in the morning, the body of the Moon at her chaung, being directly
put between the Sun and the Earth, or between our sight, and the Sun, and
thereby depriving us of the full light of his beams, there appeared within our
Horizon at Cambridge, (as you remember) A small Eclipse of the Sun, the Sun
and Moon being at that very instant conjoined in the seventh Degree, and 24.
minut of the sign Cancer, within two degrees, and 39. minutes of Catabibazon,
which Eclipse albeit it were of small continuance, the Sun being bodily
eclipsed or darkened by the Moon, but unto three fingers, or points, and seven
minutes, has notwithstanding the proper influence and peculiar effects: for
as Messahalah a cunning and perfect Astrologer witnesses, whose books (as I
said) have been much esteemed of mighty Princes, and as Experience her self
teaches, There never happens any Eclipse of the Sun, which does not
presignifie and foreshew some great Accident to come to pass, and Ptolomey him
self the Prince of Astrologers affirms, that the fatal conuersions,
overthrows, and destructions of kingdoms, may Astrologically be foreseen,
and prognosticated by the Defects and Eclipses of the Sun and Moon. Whereby
Thales Milesius, as Pliny credibly reports, did certainly foretell, sundry
chaunges, and alterations of states, and kingdoms, to happen in Asia, which
afterward came effectually to pass, even according to his Astrologicall
prediction: and the like is avouched by diverse other, of some other well seen
the same way. Whereupon Eclipses have been the more specially regarded, and
observed of the best Astrologers, as is very well exemplified by Stadius: but I
will return to the present Eclipse, from whence I have a little digressed. It
is first to be noted, that the Sun was eclipsed in Cancer, which is the
natural and essential house of the Moon, wherein she rejoices most, and
wherein also the most beneuolent and favorable planet Jupiter, called
commonly, Fortuna mayor, does ascend, being therein chiefly elevated, and
exalted: a sign of the partition of the watrie Trigone, feminine, nocturnall,
northerly, moveable, of direct ascension, whom Capricorn does obey by reason
of his superiority, unsavory of taste and effect, being naturally cold and
moist, and of the flegmaticke complexion, governor and ruler of the breast,
the mouth of the stomach, the lunges, even almost to Diaphragma, or the
Midriffe. Now the nature and properties of the sign being known, considering
that it is a cold and watrie sign, it betokens, according to the Judicials
of Astrology, that great abundance of rain is like to ensue, with many
perilous ouerflowinges by rage of waters: whereby a great number shall be
shrewdly hindered, and endammaged, it will also cause much raw, inconstant,
and distemperate weather, evil for all kind of cattle, but especially for
sheep: it portendeth the destruction of much fish, and water fowls: great
envy, strife, debate, contention, and sedition with many privy conspiracies,
unlawful fraies, violent oppressions, robberies, and murders, yea and much
martial provision, and preparation for war, beside sundry losses, and
grievous perils unto those, that get their living by toil and labor on the
seas, or other waters, which shall come to pass, by means of tempestuous, and
immoderate weather, wherewith many ships shall be overthrown, many mariners,
and watermen drowned, many towns and cities desolate, nigh unto the sea.
Moreover there shall follow a great death, and overthrow amongst the baser,
and poorer sort of people, according to that judgment of Proclus. Cum
acciderit Eclipsis Solis in Cancro, obscurae turbae, ignobilisque plebeculae
interitus sequitur, diuturnae bellorum seditiones, and aquatilium,
marinorumque, and aliorum in aequore degentium magna pernicies. Which saing of
Proclus, the unfortunate constellation and constitution of the other planets do
seem to verify: for Saturn was retrocedent in a feminine and nocturnal
sign, to wit, in Pisces, which is a sign of the same complexion and quality
that Cancer is of, being also flegmaticke, cold, moiste, and of the nature of
water: Mars, Venus, Mercury, and Luna, two of them in a dry and cold sign:
the other two in a cold and moist sign, and also in a moist mansion, will
likewise increase the cold watrie operations of this Eclipse, and for their
part, help forward the effects thereof. And as for Jupiter, he too was much
abased and weakened by his Retrogradation in Aquario, a moist sign. Item Mars
being in Tauro, and in opposition to his own house, is become more sturdie,
and unfortunate: and being lord of the 10. house, he notes that Lords and
Nobles will much afflict and oppress their poor tenants by enhauncing their
rents, and putting them to huge fines, without regard of common reason,
equity, or piety: so that the poor farmers shall be scarcely able to live, and
maintain their necessary charge. He signifies futhermore the utter
destruction, and overthrowing of those, which shall rebelliously set themselves
against their rulers and magistrates: for he is in opposition to the same his
own house, himself remaining in angulo Quartae Domus, vnde emittit sursum,
and ascendunt eius calores and malae naturae ad omnes alios planetas, as Haly
says) and there seated in Tauro the night house of Venus* which imports much
close whoredom, and secret ungodliness amongst many unclean and wicked
persons, that have shaken of the awe, which the fear of God should breed in
them, and only have respect to the impious policy, uttered in a common
proverb, Si non cast, tamen caute. Which policy too will fail them in the
end, and lay their corruption open to the general view of the world, and
shameful reproach of themselves, so universally true it is, that the Poet
writes: Quicquid sub terra est, in apricum proferet aetas.

I might here rehearse sundry examples of diverse Eclipses of the Sun in
Cancer, and thereby declare, both what destructions, and deaths, and also, what
other strange and rufull accidents have ensued, but amongst the rest for
shortness sake I will only report two, or three of the most notable, with the
several operations and effects thereof: that every man of any reasonable
conceit, and capacity, may thereby gather a sensible reason and cause of
fatal conuersions, changes, and alterations by conference of the antecedent
causes, and skilfully with discretion and judgment apply the same to a farther
consequence of times and matters to come: for as Stadius in the preface to his
Ephemerides excellently notes: Dum causas praeteritorum interpretamur, eadem
quoque Methodo and futurorum docemus, nam futura a praeteritis non specie, non
genere differunt, sed tempore tantum, quod eadem vt accidens comitatur. A very
wise rule, not only serving for these Astrologicall observations, but much
more to be extended to the right use of ancient histories, and politic
practices, delivered to posterity for their imitation, in like necessities,
and affairs. But, to contain us now within our bounds, in the year 1424. the
26. day of June, in the evening, as is credibly recorded, there appeared an
Eclipse of the Sun in Cancer, the 14. degree: at which time, Charles the king
of France being valiantly set upon in battle by the Inglish men and
Burgundians, was expelled his own realm: war was hotely maintained between
the Danes, and the Slesuicians: the Bishop of Breame provoking the Hollanders
to battle, was grievously wounded of them, and taken prisoner: a terrible
plague, and most vehement pestilence and mortality of men ensued, continuing
fierce, and hot a long time: afterward, certain Princes of Germany,
entering Bohemia with a great army divided into three parts, were forcibly
repelled and driven back of the Hussites, whereby the bounds of Bohemia were
enlarged, and spread abroad, toward Misnia, and Noricum: finally, all the
fruits of the earth, as corn, grain, vinetrees, and such like, perished
through unseasonable pinching cold, and extremity of weather.

In the year 1569. the ninth day of Iulie in the morning, there likewise
appeared an Eclipse of the Sun in the 26. degree of Cancer, the influence,
and effects whereof continued two years: when the Turks martially assayling
and inuading Pannonia, called otherwise Hungaria, and Syria, a country lying
in the east parts of Germany, a portion whereof bordereth on Hungary,
(saving which part ye whole country besides is altogether mou^tainish) forcibly
carried away many prisoners, and captives, with over sensible proof of their
might and fury. Mathias Hunniades, surnamed Coruinus, a most fortunate
prince, and as happy a warrier, who five years before was crowned king of
Hungary, by Frederick than Emperor, denou^ced and proclaimed war against
the Bohemians, being requested, and persuaded thereunto by the Pope, and at
that time by force of arms, took from them Morauia, Silesia, and Lusatia. The
same Mathias continued as fierce war with Casimire the king of Polonia,
courageously invaded the Turks, often discomfiting and vanquishing them: gatte
away Vienna from the Emperor, subdued, and conquered diverse other nations,
and territories adjoining, in so much yt at his death, he deserved this noble
Epitaph of Antony Thaebaldeus: Coruini breuis haec Vrna est: quem magna fatentur
Facta fuisse Deum, fata fuisse hominem.


The Prince of the Tartarians at the same time, assaulted and spoiled Russia,
upon which country Tartaria boundeth on the weast. The King of Denmark was
suttelly entrapped and taken by the crafty wiles, and cunning fetches of
Sweden, There ensued a sharp battle between the French, and Burgundian,
Anno 1571. the force and influence of the Eclipse still continuing, many
princes, and mighty potentates died: and amongst the rest, George the king of
Bohemia, whom Ladislaus, son to the king of Pollonia succeeded. To conclude,
Henry the sixte King of Ingland, was within the reach of this Eclipse, taken by
king Edward the fourth, in the Bishops palace at London, and by him committed
to the tower, where afterward he was murdered: as more fully appears by our
own Inglish Chronicles.

Last of all, Anno 1536. there happened an Eclipse of the Sun in the seventh
degree of Cancer, that is just in the very self same degree, wherein the
Sun was darkened this last year 1582. After which Eclipse there arose hot
war in Picardie, whereby both the French and Burgundians received mutual
harms and damages diverse ways, which are reported to have been very great
and grievous. At the same time, the soldiers of king Ferdinand, brother to the
Emperor Charles, being conducted by their Captains to resist the force of
their enemies in Hungary, were, as you know, trecherously betrayed into the
hands of the Turks by one Catzianerus: of whom they were almost all most
cruelly slain, their chief Captains taken captive, and carried away to
Constantinople the Turks chiefest city, where they lived in miserable
servitude and bondage. At the same time the Geldrenses seditiously rebelled
against their Sovereign. At the same time, the most fruitful, bewtifull, and
noble Islands Sicilia and Calabria, were woefully destroyed with fire, which did
straungly break out of the sealand being dried up. At the same time their was
heard at Rome, a most fearful, and horrible thundering in the air, being
also the more extraordinary for the very time of the year. At the same time,
an ancient tower of Helderberg, being suddenly blasted with lightning, did
cause a sore ruin, much mischief and great misery to that city. At the same
time, in high Germany, their happened an exceeding great inundation, the force
and rage whereof, was passing wonderful, and marvelous strange. And after the
same Eclipse (which we in Ingland, ought chiefly to remember) two notable
seditions and insurrections did shrewdly trouble, and disturb us here in
Ingland: which fell out in the 18. year of the reign of the most mighty and
puissant Prince king Henry the eight. Whereof the first was raised principally
for religion amongst the commons of Lincolneshire, who had gathered together
nigh 20000. persons, to serve their turns in the atchieuing of that rebellious
enterprise. The second began farther of, in Yorkshire, which northeren
commotion was also attempted for matter of religion, the people there flocked
together, amounting to the number of forty thousand. Against those of the
first insurrection, the King sent out the Duke of Suffolk, with a strong and
princely power, which when the rebels did understand, they straight ways
brake up there army, and suddenly departed. Against those of the second
insurrection, which was so far the greater, his Majesty sent the Dukes of
Northfolke, and Southfolke both, with a far stronger power, and mightier host
of soldiers: upon whose coming the battle was appointed to be fought
between them on Simon and Iudes day, but the same night it rayned so
extreemely, that the two armies could by no means meet according to that
appointment. Whereupon the rebels (as lightly they are wont first, or last)
were glad to crave pardon the second time, showing themselves very desirous to
depart, with due submission to their most noble Prince: so that both these
seditions were finally pacified, and dispatched with the death of a few
Archerebelles, and Captain commotioners, which were shortly after executed
for example sake, according to the haynousnesse of their disloyal, and
desperate attemptes. The same Eclipse might peradventure be accompanied with
some other semblable Events: but these are the chiefest, that I can presently
call to mind, and are sufficient, I suppose, to infer my Conclusion, what
heed is to be taken of like Eclipses, and namely this of late. Whereunto if we
shall now considerately apply the examples before alleged may we not
generally conceive, what sequel of troubles and evils, is like to be
prognosticated by the same? And yet to speak indifferently according to the
rules of Art, I persuade my self, that the misfortunes threatened thereby,
shall neither be fully so heinous, nor of so long continuance, as were those of
the former Eclipses. My reason is, because the quantity of the Eclipse having
been but very little and small, (not one quarter of the Sun being darkened)
the quantity of the influence and effects is like to be proportionable. For so
Messahalah judges in his book de Rebus Eclipsium, the 7. chapter. In Eclipsi
Solis semper significatur magnum aliquod Accidens, sed tamen secundum
quantitatem ipsius Eclipsis. Wherefore the quantity of this late Eclipse
being so small, I presume, the operations, and sequeles thereof shall be both
the less in quantity, and the shorter in continuance. Now, as concerning the
Regions, Provinces, territories, and cities which shall chiefly be afflicted
and oppressed with the evils ensuing, (which every man will be ready to
demand) it is sufficiently known, which are principally under the dominion,
and regiment of the sign Cancer: as Numidia, Africe, Bithinia, Phrygia,
Colchis, Carthago, Regnum Franciae, Regnum Scotiae, Regnum Granatae, Comitatus
Burgundiae, Prussia, Hollandia, Selandia, Constantinopolis, Thumissa, Venetiae,
Mediolanum, Genua, Luca, Pisa, Lubecum, Treueris, Magdeburgum, Gorlicium,
Berna, Ciuitas S. Andreae, Yorchia, sieve Eboracum, as they are confusedly
heaped together by our chiefest Astrologers, respecting rather matter, than
form. Of which very countries, and cities, those persons too shall especially
feel the violence of this Eclipse, which had Cancer placed in their
Horoscope. And this in effect is all, that I have presently to say, touching
the influence, and sequel of the foresaid late Eclipse* For, as for those two
instaunces, which you in your chamber, not many months since, obiter, and as
it were, disputandi causa objected against me, reasoning then familiarly of the
observation, and heed that was to be taken of Eclipses: the one of Agathocles,
the famous captain, and tiranne of Syracusae, the other of L. Sulpitius Gallus
a noble Roman: whereof Agathocles, as I remember, in his wars against the
Penians, when so ever any Eclipse was to happen the day before their battle
least his soldiers should take any prejudicial or superstitious conceit
thereat, used, as you then alleged, to discourse unto his army the whole
reason thereof: showing them, that what soever should chance there, was to
follow by course of nature, and appertained nothing to their Military
affairs: Sulpitius Gallus understanding likewise on a time, that an Eclipse
was at hand, assembled his soldiers together, and warned them thereof before
hand, expounding unto them all the reason, and natural causes of Eclipses,
least they should ignorantly mistake them, for heavy, and unlucky tokens: As
for these two instances, I say, I must needs grant, they were good martial
policies, and wise Stratagemes for the present, to abandon such fear, as
their soldiers might happily otherwise have conceived, by such shows of some
unfortunate chance, to befall them, but as according to Aristotels saying in
his Politiques, Non est tuta Regula hominum voluntas: so I think, these, and
such like Militate devises, are not of force, to prove, or disprove any other
Conclusion, but this, that in the time of necessity, or extremity, especially
in war, it is wisdom, to make the best of every such Accident, and to
interpret it in such wise, as may seem most behouefull for the encouragement
of those, whom it concerns, to be kept in heart, and to be delivered of all
by fear, that might any way daunt, or astonish their minds. Which no doubt
was Aeneas his politic consideration, where Virgil writes of him: Spem vultu
simulat, premit altum cord dolorem.

In which cases, not so much the very truth and consequence of the matter is
commonly regarded, as what is most expedient, and available, to serve present
turns. At an other time I remember, you urged upon me the like history out of
the fourth book of Q. Curtius, de Rebus gestis Alexandri. Where it appears,
how Alexanders soldiers were at the first terrified, and astonished, with a
terrible Eclipse of the Moon, and how again afterward recomforted, and
satisfied, by a cunning and subtle interpretation of certain learned Egyptian
Astrologers, there present in the camp. The place is very notable, and
therefore I have thought it worth the recyting. First, their marvelous fear,
and agony is thus described. Prima fere vigilia luna deficiens, primum nitorem
sideris sui condidit, deinde sanguinis color suffuso, lumen omne foedauit:
sollicitisque sub ipsum tanti discriminis casum, ingens relligio, and ex ea
formido quaedam incussa est: Dijs inuitis, in vltimas terras trahi se
querebantur: iam nec flumina posse adiri, nec sidera pristinum praestare
fulgorem, vastas terras, deserta omnia occurrere: in vnius hominis iactationem,
tot millium sanguinem impendi: fastidio esse patriam: abdicari Philippum
patrem: coelum vanis cogitationibus petere. Then follows Alexanders remedy,
and means of pacification, more politic for the effect, than true for the
cause. I am pro seditione Rex erat, cum ad omina interitus, Duces, Principesque
militum frequentes adesse praetorio iubet, Aegyptiosque vates, quos coeli ac
siderum peritissimos esse credebat, quid sentirent, expromere iubet. At illi,
qui fatis scirent temporum orbs implere destinatas vices, Lunamque deficere,
cum aut terram subiret, aut sole priuaretur, Rationem quidem ipsis perceptam
non edocent vulgus, but what Reason then? Caeterum affirmant Solemn Graecorum,
Lunam esse Persarum, quotiesque illa deficiat, ruinam, stragemque illis
gentibus portendi: veteraque exempla percensent Persidis Regum, quos aduersis
Dijs pugnasse, Lunae ostendisset Defectio. Whereupon Q. Curtius interlaceth
this politic judgment: Nulla res efficacius multitudinem regit quam
Superstitio, alioquin impotens, saeua, mutabilis, vbi vana religione capta est,
melius vatibus quam Ducibus suis paret. For the effect of that forged
interpretation, or rather, of that counterfaite Stratageme, was this: Igitur
edita in vulgus Aegyptiorum Responsa, rursus ad spem, and fiduciam erexere
torpentes. So easy a matter it is, by any colorable devise, or pretense of
reason, to content the unquiet minds, and assuage the reging fury of the
multitude. In which case, many both Martial and Mercurial experiments have
been practiced, that are not to enforce any rule of Art, other than this, what
way a politic man is to take in time of like extremity. As for that
efficacy, and sequel of Eclipses, that I here speak of, found out by
induction of Examples, and observation of cunning Astrologers, it is not to be
judged upon by any such Stratagematicall conceit either uttered in word, or
practiced in deed, at the point of necessity: but to be credited so far, as
the judgment of the learned in this faculty, and the foresaid
Exemplifications may give it credit. Artifici in sua art credendum:
especially if that Artifex be so expertus, as he ought to be, and as here I
make Account he is, considering what already has been alleged, and may
father be justified. But, for this present, sufficiat, quod satis est. For mine
own part, as I hope the best, so I fear the worst, enclyning in some sort
to the old rule, addiscentem oportet credere. What soever befalls other
places, I trust Ingland is still to continue in Gods favor, who from day to
day, and from year to year, mightily preserve our gracious Queen, as
hitherto ha has done: who grant her most excellent Majesty, a long and
prosperous reign over us, that we may still enjoy this happy continuance
of peace, wealth, health, and other our special felicities, whereas the
sword, penury, and so many plagues, have joined their forces, in a manner
against all other nations. Who for his exceeding mercy sake, vouchsafe us his
singular accustomed favor more and more, and continually bless her sovereign
Highness more and more. I doubt not, but every true Inglish heart will say,
Amen.

I have now delivered what I thought convenient in this kind: unless happily you
will furthermore enjoin me, to set down my Astrologicall judgment
particularly and severally of the four quarters of this year 1583. after the
ordinary manner of our common Almanac makers: which although it be less
needful, being already performed by them, yet to take away all matter of
suspicion, which other wise you might perhaps in some part conceive of my
insufficiency this way, and withal to discharge a piece of my promise in the
former discourse, I have briefly noted so much, as I would think necessary for
common instructions, to serve either public, or private turns, and namely
Oeconomical provision, if this Treatise were to come into more hands.

A short Judgment of the four parts of this year, 1583.
1 THe Spring time ensuing, is, in my opinion, like to be very moist, very
windy, and somewhat cold.

2 Summer, I suppose, will be rather moist than dry, with some hail, thunder,
and lightning, especially in July, and September.

3 Harvest will be diverse, and inconstant, moist, windy, cloudy, temperate, and
dry.

4 The Winter season is most like to be unseasonable, tedious, and very long,
not without great store of hail, rain, snow, many boisterous winds, and very
much cold, hard, sharp, and tempestuous weather.

The whole year, to speak more universally, is like to prove but a bad year
for all manner of cattle, but especially and principally for sheep. Pease and
Beans, I suppose, will be plentiful, and good cheap: but wheat, by my
conjectures, will be scarce, and very dear. Barlie shall be indifferent, but
yet of the two, rather dear than cheap. We are like to have good store of
Honey, and sufficient plenty of Oil. Butter and Cheese, shall be somewhat
dear: we are not to look for any store, or abundance of fruit: a dearth of
victuals is much to be feared: grievous losses by shipwreck: sundry damages
by fire: many shameful whoredoms, thefts, robberies, spoils, oppressions,
treacheries, and mutinies greatly to be dreaded: perilous factions, seditions,
tumults, insurrections, and vprores, together with hot preparance for war to
be looked for, especially in ye Northeast cuntries. Many infirmities, and
diseases, shall generally reign both amongst men, women, and children,
proceeding of unnatural moistnes, and distemperate heat, as by ye Event will
more sensibly appear. The death of some mighty, and renowned Magistrate by all
Astrological Conjectures is to ensue: and finally a sore mortality is very
like to invade many places, as well somewhat near hand, as farther off: which
God of his everlasting goodness, and mercy, turn from his Elect, continuing our
happy state and quietness in Ingland, to his gracious pleasure.

Having thus much presumed of your patience, contrary to my manner in such
private writings, I will yet adventure, to trouble you a little farther, with ye
view of a certain Phisical and Astrological table of Phlebotomie: which, (upon
occasion) I have lately drawn, and already communicated with a friend or two,
studious this way and desirous thereof. I will not say, but some error may
peradventure escape me therein, as in ye rest: and if you happen to light upon
any such I am to crave pardon, as in ye rest. The only preamble, I here think
needeful, is ye notable Astrological, and Phisical judgment given out by
Hermes Trismegistus him self, in ye very end of his Iatromathematica, ad
Amonem Aegyptium, thus translated into Latin by Stadius, in the Prolegomena to
his Ephemerides. Multu^ refert in quae hora primus morbi insultus
deprehe^detur, obseruare, an eo te^pore benefici in ortu sint, aut medium coeli
occupent, plus namque sic co^stituti, collapsis alioqui viribus: opis
subministrabunt, quam praestantissimus possit Medicus: scrutari igitur and
die^, and hora^ decubitus exact oportebit, and mundi positu^ examinare: nihil
enim homini superuenit, quod ex coelesti consensu, and sympathia non oriatur,
and originem ducat. Which famous and authentical Maxim of Hermes, together
with the long approved verse, borrowed from Hesiode: Ipsa Dies, hodie Matter,
cras ipsa Nouerca, may generally suffice for the justifying of that difference,
and distinction of hours, days, and times, which either here is, or else where
may Astrologically and Phisically be maintained. And so with my dutiful
Commendacions, I heartily commit you to the protection of God: being loath to be
ouertedious in officious words, or sentences of courtesy, howsoever other
whiles I may chance to ouershoote my self in matter of Discourse.

A COMPENDIOUS Table of Phlebotomie, or bloudletting, setting down by division
the general and special considerations thereunto belonging.
AS in other things, so in Phlebotomy, or letting of blood, the Cause is first
skillfully and circumspectly to be considered, as that it be to purge the body
of some unnatural, naughty, and superfluous humor, whose substance is either
simple, or mixed: simple, when it does of it self, without the admixtion of any
other, degenerate, as blood does, when it putrifieth in the veins, the pores
being stopped: mixed, when it is mingled with some that is already corrupted, as
in the Dropsy, where the blood is mixed with water, then the Cause being thus
allowed upon, and certainly known for needful and good to the pacient, (for
otherwise letting of blood is very dangerous, and opens a way to many
grievous infirmities, and withal here would generally be noted, that it is not
convenient either for a very lean and weak man, or for a very fat, and gross
man to be let blood) there remain to be considered:

How it stands with ye Pacient. inwardly 1. for his complexion. 2. age.
outwardly 3. for the time of the year, and month generally. 4. for the time
of the day, and diet particularly.


1. Complexion.
1. In the complexion is to be considered, whether he be 1. Sanguine, that is,
hot and moist. 2. Collerick, that is, hot and dry. 3. Melancholy, that is, cold
and dry. 4. Phlegmatic, that is, cold and moist.

2. Age.
2. In his age, whether he be in his youth. in his manly, or middle age. in his
elderly age. in his crooked old age.

3. The time of the year.
Concerning the time of the year, he is to be advised, what parts thereof are
good, as the Spring: from the midst whereof to the beginning of summer is
simply the best time for this purpose: howbeit some think Autumn reasonable
good, as no doubt it is, in comparison either of summer or winter: being
otherwise in it self, to be reckned rather for bad, than good. bad very bad,
as Summer and Winter, for their extremity of heat and cold. more tolerable,
as Autumn, being somewhat more temperate.


4. The time of the month.
Concerning the time of the month, these general Cautions are to be observed,
that he be not let blood in any member, with any chirurgical instrument,
either* The Moon being in Tauro, Geminis, Leone, Virgin or Capricorno: or the
last half of Libra, and first of Scorpio. The Sin, the Moon, or the Lord of
the Horoscope, being in the sign, that rules that member. The Moon being in
any part of via lactea, or in via combusta, or in domo casus sui, or being
vacua, or tarda cursu* or in terminis infortuniorum, or in the duodenarial
division of the twelve houses, placed either in 1.6.8. or 12. place thereof, or
applying to the Lord of the 8. house. The day before, the day it self, the
day after the change of the Moon. Half a natural day, that is 12. hours
before, and as many hours after the quarters of the Moon. A day before, and a
day after the full of the Moon. A day before, and a day after the
Conjunction, Quartile, or opposition of the Moon with Saturn, or Mars. A day
before the Conjunction of the Moon with Mercury, or Venus, or the head of the
Dragon, or tail of the Dragon unfortunate: beside other unfortunate days in
every month, severally noted in every Almanac: and expressly set down in
certain old Latin verses to be seen in many ancient Calenders: which kind
of verses for the matter commonly are current enough.

and then the conuenientest time of the month, for the 1. Sanguine. 2.
Chollerick. 3. Melancholy. 4. Phelgmatick
the Moon being in 1. Any of the signs following. 2. Cancer, or Pisces. 3.
Aquarius, and first half of Libra. 4. Aries or Sagittarius.

Ratio. Contraria contrarijs curantur.
Howbeit, some specially commend Cancer, Aequarius, and Pisces, for letting of
blood: but Pisces can not be so good, being a common or bicorporall sign.

also the best, and most laudable Aspects for this purpose, or these, according
to our soundest writers in this kind. the conjunction of the Moon with
Jupiter, or Venus, are simply and principally best: so that Venus be not
combust. the trine or sextile of the Moon with Jupiter, Sol, Venus, and
Mercury, are good, but especially with Jupiter, or Mercury. the quartile or
opposition of the Moon with Jupiter or Venus, does well. the trine or sextile
of the Moon with Mars, are reasonable good, or indifferent.

the time of the month for Youth: from the change to the first quarter.
Middle age: from the first quarter to the full. Elderly age: from the full to
the last quarter. Old age: from the last quarter to the change.

Ratio. Simile gaudet suo simili.
Howbeit, no child would be let blood before fourteen years of age: nor old
man after seventy, unless his strength be the greater, and somewhat more than
ordinary at those years.

5. Time of the day, and diet.
The time of the day must be either Morning: after the rising of the Sun:
when a man is yet fasting: which is simply the best, excepting the hours of
Saturn and Mars: and choosing specially the hours of Jupiter, and Venus,
whose nature is most temperate. After none: after reasonable good, or rather
perfect digestion, and expulsion of superfluities.

And withal, regard must be had of the aier yt it be not either too hot, or
too cold, or clowdie, but calm, clear, and temperate: the wind being then
either Northerly, or else, Westerly: for the South wind is no friend to
Phlebotomie.

Ratio. Callidum nimium dissoluit: Frigidum nimium refrigerat.
Exception.
Notwithstanding the premises, if this blood letting be for the Phrenesie, the
Pestilence, the Squynancie, the Pleurisy, the Apoplexy, for a continuing
headache, proceeding of choler or blood, or for any hot burning fever, or
other extreme pain, a man in such a case may not tarry a chosen time,
regularly set down by the Astronomer, or Physician, because happily, the pacient
might miscarrie in the mean season, but incontinently with all convenient
speed, he is to seek his remedy, this way: unless either him self be very
weak, or like to sound, or the Moon be in the same sign that rules that
very part of his body. Marry, in the foresayed case of extreamitie, blood
is not to be let in so great a quantity, as otherwise it would, if a chose
time might conveniently be exspected.

As before blood letting these circumstances of complexion, age, and times, are
to be considered, so after blood letting, like consideration is to be had of
our meats, and exercise. For meats we must take none, but such as are of an
easy, and light digestion.

For exercise, we are to abstain from all, until the fourth day, exclusive,
not only those, that be vehement, as, riding. running. leaping. vawting.
wrestling. fensing. tennise, etc.

But also, such as are more mild: as walking. bowling. bathing. and specially
venerie.

Which both antecedent, and consequent limitations, being duly and orderly
observed, I doubt not, but I may effectually conclude with that ancient
commendation of Phlebotomie, given out in two common verses.

Exhilarat tristes: iratos placat: amantes
Ne sint amentes, Phlebotomia facit.
And thus much, or rather thus little of Phlebotomie: hoping you will favorably
accept of this Astrological and Physic table, together with the other rude
papers: until better opportunity, and greater leisure, accompanied with more
reading, shall afforde some piece of work otherwise labored, and more
schollerly handled, than on such a sudden this could be. Rome, they say, was
not builded in a day, nor any work of price huddled up in have: every thing
must have a reasonable time, and it is impossible for a beginner, or nouice in
any faculty, to attain unto that perfection, which long experience, and much
meditation, have hardly bred in men of far riper years, and greater study.
The best is, I know unto who^ I write: and I trust at my return, I shall
find you (as I have always) rather a gentle reformer, than a sharp
controller. You know I use not to dote upon mine own errors, but as in all
things else, so in this pamflet, am ready, to correct, or amend any thing that
shall be found amiss, being glad to hold the ancient rule, Errare possum,
haereticus esse nolo, which I pray God, I may always follow, as well in the
conclusions of this science, as of any other. But truly, brother, I fear me, I
have now been too unreasonable tedious unto you, and therefore will here once
again take my leave, and bid you heartily farewell: wishing you as my self.
From my fathers in Walden the 6. of December. 1582.

Your loving brother, ever at commandment, RICHARD HARVEY.

AT LONDON: Imprinted by Henry Bynneman, with the assent of R. W.


