Unfortunate Englysh princes.
When master Chaloner had ended this so eloquent a tragedy and to al Princes a
right notable and wurthy instruction, we paused having passed through a
miserable time full of piteous tragedies And seeing the reyne of Henry the fourth
ensued, a man more prosperous although not untrobled with wars both of
outforth and inward enemies, we began to search what Princes were fallen therein,
whereof the number was not small: and yet because their examples were not much
to be noted for our purpose, we passed over all the Maskers (of whom King
Richardes brother was chief) which were all slain and put to death for their
traitorous attempt. And finding Owen Glendour next, one of fortunes own
whelps, and the Percies his co^federates, I thought them unmeet to be over
passed, and therefore said thus to the silent company: what my masters is every
man at once in a brown study, has no man affecion to any of these stories?
you mind so much some other belike, that these do not move you: And to say
troth there is no special cause why they should. Howbeit Owen Glendour because
he is a man of that country whence (as the welchmen bear me in hand) my
Petigre is descended, although he be but a slender prince, yet rather then he
should be forgotten, I will tell his tale for him under the privilege of Martin
Hundred: which Owen coming naked out of the wild mountains, like the Image
of death in all points (his dart only excepted) so sore has famine and
hunger consumed him, lamenteth his infortune after this manner.

How Owen Glendour seduced by false prophecies took upon him to be prince of
Wales, and was by Henry then prince thereof chased to the Mountains, where he
miserably dyed for lack of food.
I Pray the Baldwyn since thou do entend
To show the falls of such as clymbe to hie,
Remember me, whose miserable end
May teach a man his vicious life to fly:
Oh Fortune, Fortune, out on her I cry,
My body and fame she has made lean and slender
For I poor wretch am sterved Owen Glendour.
A Welsh man borne, and of a gentle blud,
But ill brought up, whereby full well I find
That neither birth nor lynage make men good
Though it be true that Cat will after kind:
Flesh gendreth flesh, so does not soul or mind,
They gender not, but fowly do degender
When men to vice from virtue them do render.
Each thing by nature tends to the same
Whereof it came, and is disposed like:
Down sinkes ye mould, up mou^tes the fiery flame
With horn the heart, with hofe ye horse does strike
The Wolf does spoil, the subtle Fox does pyke,
And generally no fish, flesh, foul, or plant
Does any property that their dame had want.
But as for men, since severally they have
A mind whose manners are by lerning made,
Good bringing up alonly does them save
In virtuous deeds, which with their parents fade.
So that true gentry stands in the trade
Of virtuous life, not in the fleshly line:
For blud is Brute, but Gentry is divine.
Experience does cause me thus to say
And that the rather for my contreymen,
Which vaunt and boast them selfs above the day
If they may strain their stock for worthy men:
Which let be true, are they the better then?
Nay far the wurse if so they be not good,
For why they stayne the bewty of their blood.
How would we mock the burdenbearing mule
If he would brag he were an horses sun,
To press his pride (might nothing else him rule)
His boast to prove, no more but bid him run:
The horse for swiftnes has his glory wunne,
To which the mule could never the more aspyre
Though he should prove that Pegas were his sire.
Each man may crake of that which is his own,
Our parents virtues theirs are and not ours:
Who therefore will of noble kind be known
Ought shine in virtue like his ancestors,
Gentry consists not in Lands and Towers,
He is a Churl though all the world be his
He Arthurs heir, if that he live a mys.
For virtuous life does make a gentilman
Of her possessour, all be he poor as Job,
Yea though no name of Elders show he can:
For proof take Merlin whose father was an hob.
But who so settes his mind to spoil and rob,
Although he cum by due descent fro Brute,
He is a Chorle, ungentle, vile and brute.
Well thus did I for want of better wit,
Because my parents noughtly brought me up:
For gentle men (they said) was naught so fyt
As to attaste by bold attemptes the cup
Of Conquestes wine, whereof I thought to sup:
And therefore bent my self to rob and ryue,
And whom I could of land and goods depryue.
For Henry the fourth did the usurp the crown,
Despoyled the king, with Mortymer the heir:
For which his subjects sought to put him down.
And I while Fortune offered me so fair,
Did what I might his honor to appeyre:
And took on me to be the Prince of Wales,
Entiste thereto by many of Merlynes tales.
For which, such Idle as wait upon the spoil
From every part of Wales unto me drew:
For loytryng youth untaught in any torle
Are ready aye all mischefe to ensue.
Through help of these so great my glory grew,
That I defied my King through lofty heart,
And made sharp war on all that took his part.
See luck, I took lord Reinold Gray of Rythen,
And him enforst my daughter to espouse:
And so vnraunsomed held him still, and sithen
In Wygmore land through battle rygorous
I caught the right beyre of the crowned house:
The Earl of march sir Edmond Mortymer,
And in a dongeon kept him prisoner.
Than all the marches longing unto Wales
By Syverne west, I did invade and burn:
Destroyed the towns in mountains and in vales,
And with rich spoils did homward safe return.
Was none so bold durst once against me spurn,
Thus prosperously does fortune forward call
Those whom she minds to give the sorest fall.
When fame had brought these tidinges to the king
(Although the Skottes that vexed him right sore)
A mighty army against me he did bring:
Whereof the French King being warned before,
Who mortal hate against king Henry bore,
To greve our foe, he quicklye to me sent
Twelve thousand Frenchmen armed to war and bent
A part of them led by the Earl of March
Lord James of Burbon a valiant tried knight
Withheld by winds to wales ward forth to march
Took land at Plymmouth priuelye on a night:
And when he had done all he durst or might
After that a mayny of his men were slain
He stole to ship and sailed home again.
Twelve thousand other in Mylford did arive,
And came to me, than lying at Denbigh
With armed welche men thousands double five:
With whom we went to Wurcester well nigh,
And there encampte us on a mount on high,
To abide the king, who shortly after came
And pitched his field on a Hill hard by the same.
There eight days long or hosts lay face to face,
And neither durst the others power assail:
But they so stopped the passages the space
That vitayles could not come to our avayle,
Where through constrained our hearts bego^ to fail,
So that the Frenchmen shrancke awey by night,
And I with mine to the mountains took our flight,
The king pursued us, greatly to his cost,
From Hills to wuds, fro wuds to valeyes playne^
And by the way his men and stuf he lost.
And when he see he gained naught save pain
He blewe retreat, and got him home again:
Then with my power I boldly came abroad
Taken in my country for a very God.
Philogamus
Give place ye Poets fine
bow down now and incline
For now ye Muses uyne
So Sacred and Divine
In Parnase holy Hill
Have wrought their worthy will
And by their goodly skyll
Upon that mighty Mountain
In Hellycons Fountain
(That always does remain
Since Pegase made it flow
As by your books ((...))
Have washed (...) one
That slepte^ (...)
That forkes (...) upon
Who after that anon
As he had seen the Muses
New Poetry he uses
And yours he clean refuses.
(...)
