arms of the Borough of Banbury, with central radiant sun excised BANBVRY
DEVS EST NOBIS SOL ET SCVTVM
To our wel-beloued friends, to whom this present Writing shall come. We the
Mayor, Justices, Minister, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the Borough o^ Banbury in
the County of Oxon. wish all welfare and happiness.
Our grievous loss, we presume, has sufficiently been witne^^ed by too true
report, which imboldneth us to seek to you, as feeling memb^rs, for relief.
The Kings mercy in granting Letters Patents, has been so many ways abused,
that in the general (we know) it has much dulled the edge of men's liberality,
especially to places remote: Might we have been permitted therefore, our
Letters only should have made relation of our lamentable condition, and
petitioned your supplies; but seeing the road way is the safest and most
usual in these evil events, we make bold to send both together. A fearful
fire of late furiously raging amongst us, has consumed so much, that, unless
to spectators, it may seem incredible: but if our honest credits may be a
sufficient testimony, we assure you, all the particulars in his Highness
Letters Patents mentioned, and in the Briefes thereof, are true; and the losses
(though therein rated at Twenty thousand pounds) are rather farrevnder, than
one whit ouer-valued. The number of our poor was great before, but is now
increased, and the substance of those that did relieve them, by this accident
is much deminished. We doubt not therefore, but in this extremity you will
extend your charity, promising our Prayers, to entreat him that can give and
take at his pleasure, to bless you with such continual safety and prosperity,
that you may be always so happy, as to give, rather then receive. And thus
presenting the sighs, groans, and tears of all these miserable afflicted
Christians, (now left harbourlesse and succourlesse) to your charitable
considerations. We humbly take leave, with such respects as every of your
places and qualities require. Resting,

From our distressed Town of Banbury, Iulij. 1628. Your loving friends and
wel-wishers, Epiphan Hill, Mayor. William Whately, Minister. William Knight,
Justice of the Peace. Justices of the Peace, and Aldermen. John Gill. Thomas
Whately. John Nichols.
Thomas Webb. Robert Russell. Thomas Halhed. Richard Viuers. Edward Wisdom.
John Austen. Henry Halhed. George Robbins.
Capital Burgesses. Edward Man. Edmund Smalbone. Matthew Alsop. William Allen.
Francis Andrew. John Turton.


To all Ministers, and other our loving friends and wel-willers.
^ee the neighbor bordering Ministers of Banbu^y, whose names are subscribed,
having seen and ^iewed the lamentable ruins thereof; and being ^erily
persuaded of the truth of this Certificate, ^n each particular, earnestly
desire your Christian ^orwardnesse and furtherance, toward the relief ^f
these poor distressed Inhabitants.

^ohn Dod. Robert Clea^er. William Wood. James Walbancke. Roger Matthew. Thomas
Lodge. Ralph Tailor.




This is Printed by a Letter, to which they have subscribed their own hands.


