THE GLORY OF THE B. FATHER S. IGNATIUS OF LOYOLA, FOVNDER OF THE SOCIETY OF
JESUS.

PRINTED MDC.XXXII.

At Rou^n by John ^ou^tu^er. 1^33.



THE LIFE OF THE B. FATHER S. IGNATIUS OF LOYOLA FOVNDER OF THE SOCIETY OF
JESUS.
AND the glory he atchiued, through Gods assistance partly by his own
admirable sanctity, confirmed by his miracles and Canonization; partly by the
wonderful holy life of S. Francis Xauerius, his associate and spiritual
child; partly by the many commendations of the Society he instituted, many
ways diuulged by S. Teresia; partly by S. Philip ^^^erius his rare testimony
of S. Ignatius: together with the correspondency held betwixt him and the
Society: and partly by the known sanctity of S. Charles Borromeus,
miraculously attained by the use of S. Ignatius his spiritual Exercises, with
his affection and esteem of the Society.

The heads from whence such things are derived as this treatise makes mention
of, in the selfsame words and phrases of the Authors.

1. The many processes for the Canonization of the SS. Ignatius and Xauerius,
containing the grave testimonies of six hundred threescore and fifteen
witnesses, concerning the life and virtues of S. Ignatius alone.

2. The relations of the Auditors of the holy Rote, delivered in writing to
the Pope, and gathered out of sundry processes made by authority of his Holiness,
for the Canonization of the Ss. Ignatius, Xauerius, Teresia and Phillip Nerius;
received and approved by the Lords Cardinals of the holy Rites (as they term
them)

3. The relations made in the name of the Congregation of Cardinals of the
holy Rites (before our holy Father Pope Gregory the fifteenth, in a private
Consistory) by the right Honorable Lord Cardinal a Monte Francisco Maria,
Bishop of Portua, printed at Rome this present year, touching the life,
sanctity and miracles of the S^. Ignatius, Xauerius, Teresia and Phillip Nerius.

4. The memorable things done by the SS. Ignatius, Xauerius, Teresia, Phillip
Nerius, and Charles Borromaeus, published at Rome, Naples, Salamanca, Venice,
Madrid, Antwerp, Collen, Ingolstade, Dilinge, Ausbourg, and other places, by
permission of superiors.

Out of all which heads this treatise was compiled at Cracouia, printed by
Andrew Petriconius, with license of Superiors, and entitled: The glory of
the B. Father Saint Ignatius of Loyola, Founder of the Society of JESUS. Which
copy woe follow.

APPROBATIO Cracouiensis.
EGo Sebastianus Nucerinus Sanctae Theologiae Doctor, Ecclesiae Cathedralis
Cracouien: Ordinarius Concionator, librorum in dioecesi Craco. In lucem
prodeu^tium Censor, fide^ presentibus facio quia opusculum hoc, de Gloria S.
Ignatii Loyola, Fundatoris Societatis Jesus, a Patribus eiusdem Societatis prius
relectum, vidi, ac deuoto studio probaui: atque vt lucerna haec in candelabro,
Ecclesiae typo poneretur potestate^ feci.

Crac. 6. Iulij, Anno 1622. Sebastianus Nucerinus.

THE GLORY OF St. IGNATIUS OF LOYOLA. Founder of the Society of JESUS.
Of the Birth of S. Ignatius and of his Conversion to a good life.
CHAPTER I.
SAINT Ignatius was borne in that part of Spain (adjoining to the Pyrenan
hills) which bears the name of Biscay, in the year 1461. His Father was
Bertrand Iannez Lord of Ognez and Loyola, of an ancient and noble Family: His
Mother, no way inferior to her Husband in worth and Nobility, was Mary
Sa^chez, descended of noble Parents, Lords of Balda. Both which families in
Biscay are of the number of them, to which the Spaniards give the name and
title of Great Ones. These were the parents from whom S. Ignatius descended;
who, being himself endowed with admirable parts of soul and body, and having
been bred a Page some time in the Court of King Ferdinand the Catholic,
desirous now to gain himself a reputation by the wars, betook himself to
Don Antonio Manriquez Duke of Naiara and Viceroy of Navarre one who had been
anciently allied with the family of Loyolaes; and began to apply himself wholly
to the wars. But the Castle of P^^plona, the principal City of Navarre (the
defense of which was committed to the charge of Ignatius) chancing to be
besieged by the French Army, a stone driven out of the wall, by the force of
the Artillery, wounded him in his left thigh, as he was serving bravely at the
head of his troops, and so utterly broke his right leg, that with the blow he
fell half dead upon the place, which happened upon whitson: Monday, the 26. of
May, in the year 1521. Ignatius being wounded, the Fort was taken by the
French, by whom Ignatius was nobly treated, cured of his hurts, and sent home.
But whilst yet he kept his bed, demanding some profane Books to pass his
time, two Books were brought unto him; one, of the life of Christ, the other
of his Saints; with the perusal of which, he found himself so touched, that
to follow the stepps of Christ, he resolved to leave the world, and take a
journey to Jerusalem; there to confirm the Christians in matters of spirit,
and to convert the Infidels to the Faith of Christ.

The memorable things done by S. Ignatius, from the time of his conversion till
his death.
CHAPTER II.
SAint Ignatius now cured of his hurts, bids adieu to his Parents, and all
worldly distractions, notwithstanding the strong opposition of his Brother;
and, being to serve from thence-forth under the colors of Christ, took his
journey to the Monastery of the Benedictin Monks of Mont-serrata, where making
a general confession of his sins (a thing in those days almost out of use)
offering up his sword and dagger with which he served the world, in the Church
of that Monastery he watched that whole night, being the Eve of the Salvation
of our B. Lady, before the Altar of that sacred Virgin, bare-headed, clad in a
course long Cassacke, girt with a Cord, dedicating himself there to the
service of God, in the year 1522. from whence he departed continuing to yield
worthy fruits of penance, in the Hospital of Manresa, and in a Cave near the
River which washes the feilds therabouts, and arrived at last at Rome, in the
year 1523. where, having had the blessing of Pope Adria^ the 4. he traveled
foreward toward Jerusalem. But, not being able, for the imminent danger and
fear of the Turks, to remain there, and employ his endeauours in the gaining
of souls, he returned into Spain: where, that he might the better assist his
neighbor in affairs of spirit, being now thirty years of age, he put himself
to the Grammer-schole at Bercelona, spending afterward, at Alcala a year and
a half in the studies of Philosophy and Divinity; and lastly, in the space of
almost eight years, made a repetition of these studies at Paris, living upon
Alms, in continual works of Charity, Humility and Penance; where by the
example of his holy life, by his prayers and spiritual discourses, he gained
to himself Nine other Companions, and amo^ght them S. Francis Xauerius: Men
famous for their virtues, discretion, and learning: And, together with them
made a vow, that their course of studies being ended, and all other respects
set aside, they would take their journey to Jerusalem, and wholly apply
themselves there to the gaining of souls: but if, within a years space, they
should light upon no commodity of shipping, or should not be permitted to
remain at Jerusalem; that then, their vow being dispe^sed with, they should
repair to Rome offering their service to his Holiness, for the spiritual good
of their neighbors. But he himself having contracted a grievous pain in his
stomach, by his continual and laborious watchings and studies, and having
(with the, rest of his Companions, after a strict examen, demanded by
themselves, and granted them) been honored with the degree of Doctor in that
University; at last, by the counsel of his Companions, and advise of
Physicians, he returned to his native Country: Where, after the working of many
miracles, when he had recovered his health, he took his journey toward
Venice, whether the rest of his Companio^s, by agreement, were likewise to
repair, and in that City was preferred to the dignity of Preisthood. But the
year above mentioned being now expired, and their embarquing for Palestin cut
off by reason of the wars broken fort betwixt the Turk and the Venetians,
he, with his Companions came to Rome, in the year 1537. At Rome, he presented
his service to his Holiness, for the gaining of his neighbor. The Pope approved
the pious resolutions of these Fathers, reclaming many souls by the industry
of S. Ignatius, and his spiritual exercises; and placed two of Ignatius, his
Companions in the Roman University (commonly known by the name of Sapientia)
there to read the public lectures of Scripture and school Divinity. Mean
while S. Ignatius instituted the Society of JESUS, for the defense and
propagation of the Faith, and the gaining of souls; and procured to have it
ratified by the Sea Apostolic, in the year 1540. in which Society, besides
the three vows common to it with other Orders, he added a fourth vow, by
which, promise is made to obey his Holiness, in undertaking iourneyes to the
Turks and Infidels, for the gaining of souls, without demanding any stipend
or provision for that journey. Which done, he composed the Constitutions of the
Society, directed by admirable Divine inspiratio^s (as shall hereafter be
declared) And being himself, by the uniform consent of his Companions, chosen
General of the Order, after he had governed it with an admirable reputation of
wisdom and sanctity, for the space of fifteen years, three months and nine
days, and dispersed welneare a thousand of his Society, in almost a hundred
several Colleges, over the whole world; not only in Italy, Spain, France,
and Germany, but even in the East and west Indies, Iaponia, Brasil, Ethiopia
and Persia; infinite multitudes of people being converted by him, and his, to
the true Faith, and good life; having instituted many ^^^gs for the good of t^^
^oly Church; brought to a c^stome the often frequenting of Sermons, Lectures,
Masses, Confession and Communion, in Rome first, and afterward in other places
of the world; having, by these means, discovered the subtility of the Devil,
and set a new luster upon the face of the Church: he ended his days of a
gentle ague, full of merits, strengthened with the Popes blessing, and the
Sacraments, according to the rites of the Church and gave up his Ghost most
peaceably, into the hands of his Creator, inuoking the name of JESUS, in the
year 1556. the last day of July, the 65. year of his age, famous for his holy
life, and miracles, as well in his life time, as after his decease; and for
other rare endowments (of which we now treat.)

The gift of Prophecy in S. Ignatius most perfect.
CHAP. III.
BEcause the gift of Prophecy, in comparison of supernatural virtues, is
esteemed one of the ordinary or meanest ornaments of Sanctity, and therefore to
be attained without grace, or Gods frie^dship, from thence I thought good to
begin the praises of S. Ignatius. And for as much as by the Spirit of Prophecy,
many things not subject to our senses are discovered, and things yet to come
are infallibly foretold, the secrets of men's hearts are laid open, and, which
is more admirable and rare, the very secrets of Almighty God, surpassing human
understanding, are perfectly understood; all these things were in S. Ignatius
in as eminent degree. The very first year, immediately after his conversion,
Almighty God began admirably to enlighten his understanding: for going for
devotion sake to visit a Church of S. Paul the Apostle, without the Town of
Manresa, and resting himself in his journey near the River Rubricate, which
ru^nes through that Town upon a sudden, a certain divine light shined so
clear upon him, that by that, without the help of any Master, he perfectly
understood many things, not only of the mysteries of Christian belief, but of
the most subtle questions and opinions of Philosophy, as perfectly as if they
had been presented to his view in some curious looking glass; mysteryes, which
other me, after long reading and pains, hardly comprehend. In which celestial
vision he remained a long space, not without infinite comfort and consolation
of mind. Ar other times also, by certain secret signs and mystical examples,
the order, that great workman observed in the Frame of this world, was
represented unto him, which mysteryes, as in themselves they surpass the
forces of human understanding, so S. Ignatius afterward affirmed, that it was
a thing not possible to guess at them, much less to express and make them
understood to life. And of this kind, about the same time, he miraculously came
to to the knowledge many other things. By which divine favors he was so far
forth confirmed in Faith, that though no other monuments had been extant of
Christian Religion, yet by these only mysteryes, miraculously revealed to him,
he would have been most ready to give his life for the Catholic truth. In
which respect S. Ignatius may well apply to him self those words of S. Paul:
For neither have I received it from men, neither have I learned it, but by the
revelation of Christ Jesus. Which extraordinary manner of faith infused in S.
Ignatius whilst yet he was unlearned, as well the Auditors of the holy Rote,
as the Cardinals of the holy Rites, particularly noted in their relations to
his Holiness. His course of studies being ended, at Venice, in his retirement to
Vicenza, and in his journey to Rome, he often received so many divine
revelations, and so absolute and perfect content and consolation, that he
seemed not only to be restored again, but to be restored with advantage to the
state, in which he had formerly found himself at Manresa (which place for the
singular favors showed him there by Almighty God, he was wont, in a religious
merriment, to style his primative Church) At such time as he composed the
Constitutions of the Society, amongst other things, he principally received
revelations of the mystery of the B. Trinity, of the divine Essence, of the
distinction and propriety of the persons; and this in a way of understanding so
plain, so perfect, and so beyond the judgment of the senses, that as he
himself confesses, in a little treatise found after his death, of his own
hand writing, it had been impossible for him, in many years study to have
attained the like knowledge. And, in an other book he left written, that he
though it impossible in this life, to arrive to a more perfect knowledge and
understanding of mysteries, then Almighty God, in a certain vision, had been
pleased to reveal to him; Which often revelations, intermingled with a kind of
unspeakable delectation, were wont to possess his understanding, not for a
short space, but often-tymes for many days together; so that, whether-soeuer
he went, whether he were in his chamber, in the Refectory, whether at home, or
abroad, they ever accompanied, and as it were, watched with him; with the
vehemence of which he was often so tra^sported, and did so loose himself, that
he seemed in spirit ever to be in Heaven, in body only upon Earth. Moreover,
the very first year after his conversion, whilst he lived at Manresa, the
principal points of the Society he was to Institute, and such things
especially, by which the Society differs from other Orders, were revealed to
him by Almighty God, as he himself acknowledged to Father James Laynez, one of
the first of his Society, and other grave Fathers: who, when they demanded of
him, for what cause he ordained some things in the Society, differing from the
customs of other Orders; he yielding them a particular reason for each thing
they demanded; in conclusion was wont to place the force of all his reasons,
in those admirable inspirations, miraculously bestowed upon him at Manresa, and
the recollection he made there, in which Almighty God sealed and imprinted in
his mind most manifest and evident notions of all these things. At his
departure out of Spain, giving some good precepts to one John Pascall at that
time but a youth, for the rest of his life to come; and being asked of the
youth, what would become of him? take heart child, quoth he, when thou growest
elder thou shall marty, and have thy share of many troubles, which shall hinder
thee from being tra^sported with pleasures, or being slack in imploring the
assistance of God: And so it fell out. It was miraculously revealed to him,
that one of his companio^s, taken with a solitary life, casting with himself
how to forsake the Society, was affrighted, by Gods permission, with an ill
Spirit. One Peter Ferrus, a Patauian borne, liyng sick, past human hope of
recovery, was certainly foretold by S. Ignatius that by the help of the
Mother of God; he should shortly recover: the night following the sick man;
expecting with devotion, what would become of him, the Mother of God,
accompained with a glorious train of Virgins, presented her self to him, and
by giving him her picture, restored him his health: The day following, Ignatius
returning, with a countenance more cherefull the^ ordinary, not being ignorant
of what had passed, found Peter recovered and said unto him: Did not I tell
thee that the Mother of God would recover thee? The death of Agnes Paschalis,
who ended her days most holily at Bercelona, was miraculously revealed to him
at Rome; so that the letters of Antony Araozius, one who was present at that
widows death, brought him afterward no news of it. At Antwerp, long before
the founding of the Society of JESUS, he foretold one Peter Quadratus, a
Spaniard, that he should one day be the founder of a College of the Society:
and so it fell out: for he afterward, with Francis Manionia his wife, founded
the College of Medina del Campo. He foretold one Simon Rodriguez that
infallibly he should recover and escape that sickness. It was miraculously
discovered to S. Ignatius that a certain person, not long before admitted into
the Society, being so molested with an office imposed upon him, that he could
not take his rest, or sleep in the night time, and therefore began to think of
returning back into the world the Saint commanded the party to be called to
him in the night time out of his bed, discovering to him, by little and little
his most secret and co^cealed thoughts, and with an admirable dexterity quieted
his troubled mind. The like charitable offices, with the like insight, he
performed to many others, who not being able through their ignorance, to make
known their diseases, he discovered the nature and causes of them prescribing
remedies for them. He foretold one Stephen Baroellus lying dangerously sick,
that he should not dye of that disease, who presently after recovered to the
admiration of all me^. His Companions at Venice finding strong opposition by
many powerful enemies, and being half resolved to let their business dye,
informed S. Ignatius of the danger they flood in; who returned answer, wishing
them they should not forsake the cause of Christ, for by his assistance they
should bring their business to their desired issue: which promise did not fail
them; for within eight days after, a sentence was given to their advantage,
almost by the uniform consent of the Senate: a thing esteemed no small miracle
by men of understanding, that two strange and vnkown Fathers of the Society,
and they of the Spanish nation, should be able to contest with the favor and
riches of the most eminent Citizens of that City. He foretold Don Fracisco
de Borgia, whilst he was yet Duke of Gandia, and F. James Laynez, that they
should one day be Generals of the Society of Jesus* He discovered to Michael
Arrouira, whilst he was yet a youth, the most inward secrets of his heart about
a marriage he then intended, with many miseries that were to befall him. I omit
other examples of his spirit of prophecy, too long to be mentioned in this
short abridgement.

The manifold and often visions of S. Ignatius.
CHAP. IV.
FOR as much as celestial visions have a dependency of the Spirit of prophecy,
this is a fit place to make mention of them: not that the Sanctity of Gods
servants is diriued from them, seeing it may be, and is often times found
without them, but because they are also certain ornaments of Sanctity: and
therefore some rehearsal is to be made of them: for with these also, in as
eminent a degree as may be attained in this life, Blessed S. Ignatius was
plentifully stored.

The frist vision he had, was of S. Peter the Apostle, who restored him to
health, when the Phisicians had given him over: for, it pleased his Divine
Majesty to have him restored to health by the chief Pastor (under Christ) and
Prince of his Church, whom, in a manner proportionable to his divine
providence, he had chosen for a special Champion and enlarger of the same.
Lying awake one night, sick in his Fathers house, the B. Virgin Mary, appeared
to him, with her little Infant JESUS, in a bright and glorious manner: not
shewi^g her self slightly, but remaining long in his presence: with which he
was so taken, that immediately he conceived a sensible hatred of all such
things, as blind mortal men hold most in esteem, and of those things
especially, which carry with them any show of unlawful delight: so that from
thence-forward, the remembrance of them, how deeply soever, by long use and
custom, rooted in his imagination, was utterly extinct in him, and washed away.

At other times, in like manner, the Mother of God often showed her self to S.
Ignatius, but principally whilst he composed the Constitutions of the Society,
either offering up her prayers, and comforting him with her presence, or
confirming the Constitutions he wrote of the Society. Besides, Christ our
Savior himself vouchsafed often to comfort him with his desired presence, at
Manresa, and other places. In his journey to Venice, being left behind by his
fellow-trauellers, in certain meddowes near the River Po, not being able,
through weakness, to hold on his journey with them; our Savior Christ (as he
had often done) appeared unto him the next night, and having exceedingly
encouraged him, conducted him, the direct way, to the Town of Padua first, and
after wards to Venture.

In his sea-voyage to Jerusalem, our B. Savior often appeared to him, to his
infinite encouragement, and conducted him at last to a safe Haven in Palestine.
At Jerusalem, being reviled with opprobrious words, by a certain Armenian,
who laying violent hands upon him, dragged him, in an injurious manner to his
Inn: in the midst of these affronts, he behold our Savior present with him,
accompanying him, in his iniuryes, to his great contentment.

As he traveled to Rome, with his two Companions, to found the Society, he
entered into a certain Church) of which there are many standing upon the high
way not far from the City) to perform some deuotio^s; and being (as he was
accustomed rapt into an Ecstasy. and tra^sported in Contemplation, God the
Father appeared to him in a glorious light, with his B. son bearing his
Cross, making show of the bitter pangs and torments he endured who commending
S. Ignatius with his Companions to his Father; God the Father, when he had
graciously received them to his protection, turning to the Saint, with a
cherefull browe, wouchsafed to utter these comfortable words: Ego vobis Romae
propitius ero: And this was the chief cause, that, after the Confirmation of
te Society, S. Ignatius imposed upon it the sovereign name of Jesus. Besides,
the writers of his life affirm, that he had often visions of the Divine
persons, sometimes all together, at other times only some one of the alone,
and of the divine Essence it self; and these things especially at the
sacrifice of the Mass, and at such time, as being busy with composing the
Constitutions of the Society, he implored the light and approbation of the
divine Wisdom. This appears evidently, by a large volume of his visions,
which, for piety and memory sake, himself took the pains to reduce to a
method: which visions in him were so admirable, and so penetrating the
profoundest mysteries of the divine Essence, that the most learned and famous
Doctors of mystical and schole-Diuinity of our age, doubt not to profess in
their printed books that if that opinion be true, which, with Saint Thomas and
other Fathers of the Church, many men follow, that Moses and S. Paul the
Apostle, even in this life, though for a short time, beheld perfectly, and not
in a figure, (as the Saints in the next life do) the divine Essence, and as
other modern writers believe of S. Ausien, S. Bennet, and S Giles, Companion
to S. F^ancis; the like perfect vision of God, even in this life, may probably
be believed to have been seen by S. Ignatius, who has left behind him, of
himself, with his own hand writing, that at such time as he wrote the Rules
of the Society, he often beheld the divine Essence, and Be^^^. And, before he
had studied, being yet utterly unlearned, he was in so admirable a manner,
instructed, by intellectual vi^^^s, in matters of the Unity of the Essence,
and Trinity of the Persons, that in that Nonage of his conversion, he was able
to compose a Book of the B. Trinity.

That famous vision of the holy Ghost is not to be omitted, who appeared to S.
Ignatius whilst he composed the Constitutions of the Society, sometimes in that
admirable fashion of fiery flames, as heretofore to the Apostles, sometimes in
other shapes. Besides all which, it was a thing usual to this glorious Saint,
to be comforted with frequent visions of Saints and Angels.

At such time as he ministered the Spiritual exercise, in Mont Cassino, to one
Peter Ortizius an Agent of the Emperors, praiyng earnestly for the health of
B. Hosius his Companion (whom he knew to ly grievously sick) he suddenly saw
(a thing reported to have happened to S. Bennet, in the same place, at the time
of the decease of German the Bishop) the soul of his Companion, shining
wou^drous bright, carried up by Angels, and enter into Heaven.

And not long after, going one day to the Altar; in the very Introite of his
Mass, imploring the aid of all the Saints a glorious Squadron of Saints
appeared before him, amongst whom he perfectly saw B. Hosius, in a most
glorious manner. With which two visions he was so ouerioyed, that for many
days after, he could not contain himself from weeping.

When Father John Codurius, one of the first Fathers, lay in danger of his
life, with a violent sickness, S. Ignatius intending to offer up the holy
Sacrifice of the Mass for him, at S. Peter's in Mo^te Aure^; in his journey
thither, being almost half way over the bridge ^a^iculus commonly known now
by the name of Po^^e Six^^) he cast up and fixed his eyes upon the heavens, and
behold the soul of F. John Codurius gloriously carried up amongst the Quires
of Angels; and turning afterward to F Baptista Viola his Companion: let us,
quot he, return home, for our Codurius is deceased. At an other time, whilst
he was writing the Rules of the Society, he behold the Saints, in their glory,
in so Maiesticall a fashion, as he confessed, was not to be expressed. And
whilst he was busy with the same Rules, he often heard, not with the ears of
his understanding only, but with the ears of his body, most harmonious music
from Heaven, with which he was enflamed with divine love, and melted into
tears.

The year after his conversion, being present at Mass, in the Dominicans
Church; at the elevation of the sacred Host, he perfectly saw, that under that
figure, true God and man was really contained.

At such time as he composed the Constitutions of his Society, having one day
consecrated the holy Host, and offered to Almighty God the Rules of his
Society; God the Father appeared most graciously unto him, insinuating by some
mystical signification, that it would be a thing pleasing to his divine
Majesty, that the Mother of God should offer up her prayers unto him, for him:
Whereupon the B. Virgin suddenly appeared, recommending S. Ignatius to the
eternal Father, and demonstrating that her own flesh was there present in the
Eucharist, in the flesh of her son.

The Books which S, Ignatius composed, by divine inspiration.
CHAPTER V.
IT seems not impertinent to make mention, in this place, of certain books
of S. Ignatius, written, out of doubt, by divine inspiration, as things
depending and belonging to the Spirit of prophecy. For though all the writings
and Epistles of S. Ignatius, carry with them a more then ordinary relish of
divine wisdom, yet some of them in particular, have a more perfect taste of it.

The first book he wrote, in the first year of his Conversion, whilst yet he
was ignorant of his Grammer-rules, was that of the B. Trinity, consisting
welneare of eight hundred leaves. In which, after that glorious vision,
mentioned in the former Chapter, he expresses this great mystery, (how soever
in a homely style) with such admirable variety of similies and examples, that
all men, with whom afterward he discoursed of that subject, stood in
admiration, and astonishement of it.

About the same time, in like manner, whilst he was yet unlearned, by the
revelations of Almighty God, and instructions of the B. Virgin, he wrote an
other book of Spiritual Exercises: in which, besides other excellent
admonitions, he prescribes, with admirable dexterity and method, diverse
manners of prayer and contemplation, fit for reformation of manners, and
progress in virtue; he gives Rules for the Examination of the conscience; and
rooting out of vice: for distinguishing betwixt great and less offenses: for
restraining the unbridled passions of the mi^d; for discerning the motions of
the good, from them of the bad Spirit: for the good choice of a state of life,
and directing that choice by the rule of Gods will: for the expulsion of
scruples: and in conclusion, gives notable precepts for the discerning of
Spirits. This was that book which gained those first Fathers of the Society,
and amongst them S. Francis Xauerius; which has stored many Monasteryes with
famous men; confirmed many Religious persons wavering in their good purposes;
reclaimed many dissolute people to a reformed discipline; and in fine, brought
infinite multitudes of secular and Ecclesisticall persons, through the
Christian world, to a reformation of their lewd lives, and advancement of their
good; amongst whom, to omit many of less remarke, one of the chief is, that
great light of the Church, and pattern of Pastors, S. Charles Borom^us,
Cardinal and Archbishop of Millay, who drew those first beginnings of his
virtuous life, from these Excercises of S. Ignatius, which all his life time
after, he so reverenced and esteemed, that at first once a year, afterward,
till his dying day, twice every year, ^e was wont to make use of them; so to
stir himself up to virtue, and a holy government of his Church; and with them
lastly he prepared himself for his last agony and death. No marvel them, if
even in the life time of S. Ignatius, these Exercises were wonderfully admitted
by all such, as had the charge of reuiewing them, and confirmed by the Bull of
Paulus tertius supreme Pastor of the Church, without altering a tittle of
them; and, recommended by him for a work full of piety and Religion, and most
profitable and useful for the spiritual good of souls; and by the Auditors
of the holy Rote, and Cardinals of the holy ^^i^es, acknowledged for things
not proceeding from the art, or invention of any man, but from some
supernatural light infused from Heaven.

The third Book S. Ignatius published, which whilst he wrote, he was so
admirably enlightened, and honored with such glorious celestial apparitio^s,
as has been said, was that of his Constitutions of the Society of Jesus,
divided into ten parts; a work much larger then any of the rest: which even in
the judgment of some Heretics, into whose hands it often falls, setting a
side the doctrine of Faith, and Ecclesiastical ceremonies contained in it, is
esteemed a rate Piece, and a thing surpassing human wisdom, being a lively
pattern of a perfect and well governed Commonwealth, And of many holy and
learned men, it is held a piece of work, deserving high esteem, for the depth
of divine wisdom contained in it, and for the excellent doctrine, full of
Christian and Religious perfections; and therefore, with good cause, approved by
many Popes.

The gifts of a glorisied Body miraculously bestovved upon S. Ignatius, in
his life time.
CHAP. 6.
AMongst the infallible signs of the true Church of Christ, some grave
Eclesiasticall writers, learnedly and piously reckon the endowments of
glorified bodies, in a proportion befitting the state of this life,
miraculously bestowed upon some children of the Church, famous for their holy
lives: amongst whom they name B S^^gnatius.

It is evident, by the testimonies of many grave witnesses, that his body, in
this life, was endowed with the guist of Clarity: for his head and face was
often seen shining in a glorious manner: so he was seen by one Isabel Rosella,
at Bercelona, whilst he was hearing a Sermon in the Church, amongst the vulgar
sort of people: so one John Paschall saw him: and so he was beheld by them of
the hospital whilst he lived amongst them. And at Rome. by Alexander
Petronius, by Father Oliuier Manare, and Father Lewis Gonzaluo; who,
whenever he came to Saint Ignatius, praying in his chamber (which he had
often occasion to do) he ever beheld him shining with most glorious beams. And
S. Philippus Nerius, a man of wonderful holy life, and a familiar acquaintance
of S. Ignatius, was a customed to say, that S. Ignatius was a man of that
Sanctity, that the interior beauty of his soul showed it self exteriourly in
him; from whose eyes and countenance he professes often to have seen glorious
beams, and rays of brightness to proceed.

Concerning the gift of Impassibility, his seven days fasts, without taking
any sustinance, accompanied, either with a violent ecstasy (a thing which much
impaireth the forces of the body) or with a cruelle whipping of his body thrice
a day, and many hours spent upon his knees in prayer, without any wearines, or
tiring of his body, do evidently show it.

The gift of Subtility was miraculously granted to him, when in his life
time, at the self same moment or instant of time, he was perfectly seen in
body, at Rome and at Collar, two places above nine hundred miles distant from
each other, as shall be related in the six tee^th chapter.

And that he was often in his prayers lifted from the ground, was an evident
sign in him of the gift of Agility.

Of the wrtues, and supernatural gifts of S. Ignatius, in general.
CHAP. 7.
BEfore our abridgement of the virtues of S. Ignatius in particular, some what
is to be said of his supernatural gifts in general, by which it will
appear, that he was raised, by the hand of God, to th^^ rate and eminent
degree of Sanctity so to prove a fitter instrument to communicate so great
benefits to the universal Church of Christ. And, as to the comfort and profit
of the Church, the divine providence has moved other great Saints, for some
particular good end, to declare ingenuously, though with submission, to their
dearest friends, their most concealed and most notable supernatural
endowments, as we read in their lives; so the same providence has wrought out
of the secrets of S. Ignatius, and procured from his own unquestionable, and
wonderful circumspect relation, many arguments and tokens of the great favors
of God. He was earnestly wont to labor, daily to make some new step in the way
of virtue, with this only aim, that he might ever present his divine Majesty
with some increase of glory. To which purpose, following the Counsel of S.
John Chrysostom and S. John Climacus, like a provident Banker, he compared the
day present with the day past, and the profit of one day with that of the
other. And, howbeit it is a rare thing for men of holy life, not to loose of
their first seruour; and more admirable, by respires, if not without
intermission to advance in the way of virtue, and most of all to be admired,
continually and without pauses o^ ^^terims to profit: yet S. Ignatius did not
only not make a daily increase in virtue, but comparing the profit of the day
present with that of the day past, found and confessed that he daily advanced,
and was more and more enflamed with desire of Gods service: so far-forth,
that in his old age, he was wont to term the state he found himself in, at
(...) [in which place he had the (...) to (...) so many glorious favors, as
(...) been said before] his first Rudiments, and as it were, his roughcasting,
which Almighty God daily polished and perfected in him. So that in S.
Ignatius, that unquestionable doctrine of S. Thomas has place, who affirms
2.2 q. 161. art. 3. That they who principate of the gifts of God, know they
are endovved with them; according to that of the Apostle 1. Cor. 2 That we
may know that of God they are bestovved upon us. In which respect S. Vertha,
in the tenth Chapter of her life, with good cause terms it an adulterate
humility, which does not acknovvledge the ^auours of God. And this does
evidently show the excellency of S. Ignatius his virtues, that he found the
mercy and favors of Almighty God toward him to be such, that by how much
the more he seemed to vvan^, and desire amendment, by so much more liberal
Almighty God was with him, and cast upon him more bou^tifully the treasures
of his sweetness. Wherefore he professed ingenuously, that he could not persuade
himself, that such a conionction of extremes was to be found in any man, as in
himself; to be so ungrateful to his divine Majesty, and daily to receive so
many, and so notable favors at his hands. To which may be added that which
Andreas Frusius (an intimate friend of S. Ignatius, and one who^, for his
admirable wisdom and innocence of life, S. Ignatius himself and others of his
acquaintance, were wont to compare and resemble to some Angel) was accustomed
to say, that in S. Ignatius, supernatural grace appeared to be inbred, and
connaturall to him: with such constancy and facility, at all times and places,
he held a straight hand over his proceedings. And other judicious men, with
whom he daily conuersed, taking a long and curious account of all his actions,
even to the least gesture or motion of his body, being taken themselves with
admiration of his Sanctity, affirmed, that all the perfections contained,
either in his book of the Constitutions of the Society, or in that golden
treatise of Thomas de Kempis of the imitation of Christ, or in his book of
Spiritual Exercises, were perfectly, and to life expressed in himself: Whence
Father Lewis Gon^alez, Confessor to the King of Portugal, a grave and
discreet man, was wont to say, that to converse with Ignatius, was nothing else
but to see the book of Thomas de Kempis (by others thought to be the book of
Gerson) lively and perfectly acted in him.

S. Ignatius relating upon occasion to F. John Polanco (a man of great wisdom,
one whose help he made use of for the dispatch of letters) some passages
concerning himself, for the better instruction of the other; and being
demanded of Father Polanco, in a kind of freedom, whether he ran not a
hazard of vain glory, in the relation of such passages, concerning himself?
the B. Father made answer, that he stood in fear of no vice less the^ of
vain glory adding besides theses words you may rest co^side^t Father Polanco,
that amongst a thousand of Gods favors bestowed upon me, many times I reveal
not any, and that merely for the incapacity of them who should hear me. And
yet it is certain that S. Ignatius, had the Company and acquaintance of men of
rare parts, endowed with great ^^it, judgment, experience, learning, and
Sanctity, and men of deep insight and knowledge, as well of the theoricke, as
Practicke of matters of Spirit; who if they were not capable of understanding
the graces of God, infused in Saint Ignatius, questionless they were of a
pitch higher then ordinary, far surpassing the ordinary course of other Saints.
Which is an admirable token of rare Sanctity.

S. Ignatius had ever a great opinion of the holiness of the Church, and of the
Saints which flourished every age of the Church: believing they were adorned
with many more admirable ornaments of divine grace, then is left written of
them in their lives, and Ecclesiastical historyes: in which respect he held
them in great veneration, taking a special care that their honor should be
advanced, and spread by them of his Society, with all possible diligence,
against all endeauours of any heretics to the contrary: of which his opinion
of their admirable Sanctity, discoursing upon occasion with a friend of his he
affirmed; that, for his particular, he would not change the supernatural gui^s
which he himself, without any desert of his, had aiready, or was in hope to
diriue from that divine fountain, with any one of the Saints, whose lives were
then extant, if they were not endowed with greater graces and gifts, then any
he had read, or were written of them.

Moreover, the B F. affirmed of himself, that he should not be able to live,
if his breast did nourish any human affection, or any thing which did not wholly
relish of heaven. In his actions he was not guided by blind affection, by which
for the most part, men are led to their destruction, but by the square and
direction of reason; often rep^^ting, that by reason men are distinguished from
beasts. He had a special care that his actions should be intended purely for
Gods sake, not for fear of chastisement, or hope, of reward: not contented
that each action should only be directed to the glory of God, but laboring,
with an act of reflection of his soul, that they might redound to Gods greatest
honor and glory. Whence it came to pass, that all his Epistles and Sermons,
and each leaf of his book of Constitutions, are full of those words: Ad
maiorem Dei gloriam. Ad maius Dei and Creatoris nostri obsequium, the like: his
hand and mouth uttering, what his heart was surcharged with: which sincerity of
inte^tion he began to apply to his actions, from the first day of his
Conversion, observing it religiously till his dying day. No marvel then if
Pope Julius tertius, in his Bull published the 19. of August 1550. not to
affirm, even in the life time of the Saint: that there was nothing to be
found in the exe^plar life of ugnatius, which sauoured not wholy of piety and
Religion.

But that is more remarkable, which, as well the Auditors of the holy Rote, as
the Cardinals of the holy Rites testify in their relations given to his
Holiness, of S. Ignatius, in these words: He was so i^stamed with the love of
God, that from morning to night, he neither sought, thought, spoke nor desired
any thing, but to please God, and obey ^as commands: and therefore he committed
himself wholy to him, resolved absolutely to fellovv him, though the loss of
Heaven and earth had gone upon it: he directed all his thoughts, words and
deeds to God, as his aym^; and imended them only for him and his honor. Thus
they Which rare and extraordinary commendations of all S. Ignatius his inward
and out ward actions, proceeding from these Judges Apostolical, and the
unquestionable assertions of so many sworn witnesses, how rare and eminent a
degree of excellency in virtue is shows in S. Ignatius and impartial man
will easily determine. Moreover, the Devils incredible hatred and indignation
of the Saint, which he failed not often to express in his life time, is no
slight testimony virtue. Whence it came to pass, that he often appeared in
horrid and ghastly shapes, endeavoring to fright and distract him in his
prayers, and was often, with a little stick, chased away by him, in contempt.
At Rome the Devil attempted to have strangled him in the night time, stopping
his windpipe with such force, that the Saint forcing his woice to inuoke aloud
the holy name of Jesus, became hoarse, and remained so, many days after. At
other times, in like manner, as heretofore S. Antony, and S. Catharine S, of
Siena, he was also ill entreated, and soarely, be aten by the Devil. And, as
well during his life time, as since his decease, the Devil has often
confessed, in the bodies of possessed persons, that he had no greater enemy
then S Ignatius. All which excellencies of virtues, and gifts of this Saint,
and some remarkable passages in particular, which shall be briefly touched, were
confirmed by the Oaths of six hundred threscore and fifeene witnesses, in the
process of his Canonization, iudicially examined.

The rare Chastity of S. Ignatius and purity of Conscience.
CHAP. 8.
A ^^ighty God, to exercise the Humility and Penance of Ignatius, permitted
him, whilst he was a Soldier, to sall into so me wanton and lascivious loves;
but after that mortal wound received in the assault of Pamplena, being by the
reading of good books, converted to the Warre^are of Christ, he never offended
mo^ally his divine Majesty; but the very first month after his conuertion, and
recovery of health, he made an irreuocable vow of perpetual Chastity: which
Sacrifice and Oblation of his devout mind. Almighty God was pleased to allow
of, and accept in so good part; that from that time to his dying day, howbeit
he was other wise of a complexion fiery and hot, and by nature and custom
inclined to fall into those lasciuiousnesses, to which the often errors of his
youth past had invred him, yet he was utterly freed from all such sensualityes.
Which, how rare excellent a gift it is of Almighty God, in such a man
especially as S. Ignatius professed himself, before his conversion, those
violent tentations may witness, which many innocent and holy men have
suffered, in matters of the flesh, ordinarily wont to be resisted, by casting
themselves into snow, nettles, thorns, and the like austerityes.

But how he farther excelled in purity of mind, appears by this. He kept a
perpetual watch against all allureme^ts of the world and the idle and
unnecessary, wandering of his mind, preserving his soul, with as great care
from vice, as curious me^, in dirty ways, are careful to preserve their most
sumptuous and rich apparel. And howbeit he ever kept a command of himself,
and according to S. Bernards Counsel, gave himself not to businesses, but
lent himself to them; yet he howerly made an examination of his conscience. He
carried a severe hand over his senses; he daily confessed all his omissions; he
held ever in remembrance the favors of God, taking a strict account of his
thoughts, words, and deeds. But this sufficed not him, whose aim lay so high;
he invented an other manner of Examen, which he called Particular Examen; and
this he made use of, not only for obtaining victory of his lesser vices, but
for the utter suppression, and supplantation of them, and for his advancement
and increase in virtue: concerning which he has prescribed certain Rules to
his Society, in his book of Spiritual Exercises. He curiously observed all
things, which he knew any ways tended to the maintayning or increasing of the
grace of Christ. If he chanced to hear any thing, which might justly move a
man to passion or choler, he presently recollected and betook himself to God,
casting seriously with himself what answer to make. Here-hence it happened,
that never any impertinacy outranne his reason, nor he never lost the peace of
his mind. Which course he observed, not in affairs of this nature only, but in
all his other discourses he likewise had a care to speak nothing unadvisedly,
but with premeditation; so that he uttered no word, not well digested. And it
is certain, that more then thirty years before he deceased, he never
miscalled any man by the names of fool or so^, or gave any other reproachful
language to any. When he had just occasion to reprehend any man, he did it
without bitterness, or any pi^quant word. And even in his most severe
reprehensions, he forebore to give any man the epithet of disobedient, proud,
sottish, or lazy; reprehending men for their faults, by opening and unfolding
the nature of them to them. He never used any words of exaggeration. He never
detracted from any man's fame, nor lent any ear to any detraction. Which how
rare a thing it is, in this world, S. Thomas teaches 2.2. q. 73. art. 2. ad 2.
That there are fevv, or no men at all, who out of leuity, at some time or
other, utter not some thing, in which an other man's good name, how lightly
soever dothnot suffer, because at it is said Jacob 3. If any man offend not in
word, he is a perfect man.

He never discoursed of other men's imperfections, how public soever they
were, or obuious to all men; nor permitted other men to speak of them, in his
presence. And if an other man by chance had committed a fault, he either
mitigated and excused the fact, or if that could not well be, at least he
excused the intention of the party. Touching the transgressio^s of them of his
househould, his silence was admirable; never disclosing any man's offense, but
for his amendment; and then also with such modesty and sweetness, and with such
a regard of the delinque^ts good name, that, if the discovery of the fault to
one man, were sufficient to redress it, he never opened it to a second person;
discovering only the truth of it, without any vehemence or heat of words. He
went once to Confession only for this sin, that he had made known the fault
of a certain person to three of his Fathers, whereas two of them could
sufficiently have applied a remedy: And yet the delinquent was such an one,
that notwithstanding the discovery of this fault of his, his reputation could
not suffer, by that third parties knowledge. He spoke so of all men, that each
man might believe he ftood in his good opinion, and might seem to claim a
particular interest in his soue. He was of behavior so complete and well
fashioned, that he never discomposed either his hands or eyes; preserving a
decorum in his gesture, his gate, his feeding, and sitting. No marvel
therefore if the perfection and c^cumspection of S. Ionati^s even in his least
actions, were such, and so inseperably conjoined with an internal purity that
be took all men with admiration that conuersed with him; in so much, that by
how much the oftener and more familiarly men treated with him, by so much the
more they stood affected to him, howbeit, ordinarily that saying of S. Cyrill
be found true: That he, who is ever present, loses the respects due from
them that Keep him Company. And that of Tacitus: That things farthest off are
most held in esteem. Certain it is, that the B. Fathers Confessor, F. James
Eguia (of whom S. Ignatius himself is reported to have said, that he was
equally to be reverenced with the greatest Saints in heaven) did not only
acknowledge S. Ignatius to be greater then a Saint, but could not be
restrained, notwithstanding any pe^nances inflicted upon him by the Saint, from
extolling, and speaking infinitely in his praise: Begetting wonder in all men,
with the intimatio^ of what he would publish, if it were his fortune to survive
S. Ignatius, but one hour.

The gift of Prayer, in S. Ignatius most excellent.
CHAP. IX.
AFter S. Ignatius was converted to a better life, he presently betook himself
to the refuge of Prayer, the better to appease the wrath of Almighty God, and
implore his divine grace. He daily bestowed seven hours, upon his knees, in
Prayer: besides that, he had a special care ever to be present at the
Sacrifice of Mass, Euensong, and Compline. And being afterward preferred to
the dignity of Preist-hood, and Government of the Society; ever after he had
offered the Sacrifice of the Mass, he spent two hours in Contemplation; to
omit his preparation to Mass, and that morning Prayer, which all they of the
Society, according to their Rules, are obliged to make, when they awake out of
their sleep.

He seasoned all his actions with the salt of Meditation, according to the
precept of S. Basil. When and as often as he pleased, he conjoined himself
with ease, by contemplation to God, not only by casting his eyes upon the
heavens and stars, with which he was most taken, but even so, that with the
behoulding of any herbs or flowers, or any thing of less reckning, he was
suddenly transported with the sweet conceit of the love of God. In the
reciting of his Office, he was often surprised with such abundance of
consolation, and floods of tears; that he was forced, almost at every word, to
make a pause, and interrupt his prayers, spending great part of the day in
repeating the Psalms; So that through the abundance of tears, his eyes often
suffered much, not without great danger often times of falling blind, and his
body, by means of his often Exrasies was infinitely traveled. For which
cause, his Companions obtained license of his Holiness, that it might be lawful
for him to omit his Office, in lieu of which, notwithstanding, he would daily
perform a certain task of Beads, so soon as he awaked out of his sleep.
And because in performing his other devotions, and particularly in the
Sacrifice of the Mass, he likewise ran the same hazard of being blind,
through the importunity of his Companions, and Counsel of Phisicians he
resolved to seek, at the hands of Almighty God, that he might have power, now
and then to moderate his tears; which also he obtained. And from that time
forward, he had so absolute a maistry and command of his tears, that he could
in a manner restrain, and let loose the raynes of them at his pleasure; in so
settled and quiet a manner, that the drines of his tears was not impeachment to
the fruit of his devotion, nor the restraint of them was no hindrance to the
abundance of his divine visitations. And whenever at Mass he burst not out
thrice at least into tears, he esteemed himself dry and indeuout. He prayed
with such fervor, that through the intention of his mind, he many times
contracted some disease. And once he brought himself in danger of death, by
saying two Masses without intermission upon Christmas day: in ^^much, that
except he were strong and perfectly in health, he could not well offer the
Sacrifice of the Mass: and it was observed by them with whom he co^uersed,
that even at such times as he was best in health, he often fell into some
infirmity after Mass. And many times he became so faint at the Altar, that of
necessity he was carried from thence to his chamber, by the help of other men,
not being able to stand upon his legs, for those divine visitations. In his
daily Mass (which always, the night before, he put in readiness in the Missal,
reading it over with atte^tion) he conceived so much ^oy, that his body being
surcharged with the greatness of divine comfort, he could not freely take his
breath, nor pronounce or utter any word, till that abundance and plenty of
divine sweetness did cease. And sometimes it fell out, that betwixt the prayers
and the Sacrifice, his fervor was such, that his whole body was enflamed; his
face waxed purple red, and all the veins of his body beat, with the palpable
beating and palpitation of his heart; and oftentimes also the very hair of his
head stood an end. Neither was this vehement intention of his mind, in the
Sacrifice of the Mass only, but even in the least things which had any
reference to God. In his Graces before meat and after, and in fine in all
other things, he did so with-drawe his mind, and recollect himself, that he
seemed to behold God present; not in Spirit only, but with his corporal eyes:
his affection interiourly being so enkindled, that his face grew red with it,
and (which his Companions have often stood amazed at) seemed wholly to be
enflamed. No noise whatsoever, if it happened not by his own fault, was able to
distract S. Ignatius whilst he prayed. In matters belonging to Almighty God, he
carried himself (as the writers of mystical Divinity term it) rather
passiuely then actiuely which by the^ is esteemed the supreme and most perfect
degree of contemplation. Oftentimes in his prayers he was abstracted from his
senses; and once in particular, the very first year after his conversion, he
remained so in a perpetual ecstasy, like a dead man, for the space of eight
days, without taking any sustinance. In which mean space, certain pious
people judging him to be dead, had caused him to be buried, but that feeling
his body, and curiously observing al things, they discovered by some little
motion of his heart, that life lay hidden in him.

S. Ignatius his more then ordinary austerity in the mortification of his body.
CHAP. X.
THe B. Father, knowing well that the entrance into the service of Almighty God,
required some punishment or chastisement of the body, as the first Rudime^ts of
a spiritual life, and apprentiship of Christ, began by all possible means, as
far forth as it was lawful for him for his health, to punish his body. Not
that he found it, any ways, rebellious to his Spirit (for from the first
beginnings of his better life, he was by the special favor of Almighty God;
freed from all sensuality, as has been said before) but that by the sharpnes
of penance, he might wash away the corruption of his life past, and make the
favor of heaven more propitious to him. He fasted all the week, (excepting
Sundays) with water and dry bread given him in alms. He lodged amongst the
refuse of Beggars, upon the grownd, or bare boords, without any couerture. Of
his meat and sleep he was most sparing. He punished his body with a sharp
haire-cloth, besides a chain or Iron girdle. He went at the beginning,
barefooted and bare-headed, using afterward, when he began to apply himself
to studyes, the souls of shoes boared through. He traveled in the dead of
winter, nakedly clad, notwithstanding the thick falling of the snow, or the
freezing up of all places, with the sharpnes of the frosts. Besides which, he
continually whipped his body thrice a day, with cruel Iron whipps; constantly
avoiding all things which might give his afflicted body any ease or
contentment. So farforth, that though he were a man of a comely aspect, and
admirable feature, yet the forces of his body being by little and little
decayed, all that souldier-like vigor, and beauty of youth was utterly faded
in him. And in his old age, broken now with the austerity of penance, studies,
labors, and other continual troubles, though his years required a competent
diet, he was yet so temperate in his meat and drink, that they of his
household stood amazed at it, and that he seemed utterly to have lost his taste
in all things; saving when now and then he fed upon chestnuts, which in Italy
and Spain is the food of poor people. His diet out of fasting days, was
Lamb, or some other flesh of no greater value; Veale, Chikins or any such
things as are accounted daynetyes, he would never taste, not though he had
invited strangers to eat with him. He never took gust in the taste of any
meat, how hungry soever he He never found fault with any dish of meat,
howsoever, through the ignorance or carelesnes of servants, it were ill dressed
or seasoned; nor though he were served with ill and sower wine. And in fine, he
himself would have nothing peculiar to himself: he imposed once a penance
upon one who served him at table, for bringing one bunch of grapes more to him
then to the rest. Which circumstances no impartial man will esteem triuiall,
if he consider either the years of the man to which much is to be granted; or
the infirmities of health, which in S. Ignatius, were frequent, and the almost
continual indisposition and weakness of his stomach; or lastly, the authority
he had amongst them he governed, and liberty, as it were, to live as he listed.
He allotted himself but four hours sleep, or thereabouts. He ever lodged in
a little, homely, low, and dark chamber, 29. palms long, 14. broad, and 10.
high.

The lone of his neighbor admirable in S. Ignatius.
CHAP. XI.
SAint Ignatius, had no sooner plunged out of the filth of sin, but
immediately he employed all his endeauours to draw his neighbors out of the
same mire: and spent his whole life-tyme after in those endeauours, to the good
of infinite multitudes of souls, and the notable benefit and profit of the
Church. To which only end he applied himself to his studyes, for the spare of
twelve years together, beginning them after he was 30. years of age; all
which time he lived upon alms, with great labor and pains. At such time as
he went to the Grammer-schole at Bercelona, he labored by all means possible,
to reduce a certain Monastery of Religious women, who led at that time a
dissolute and debauched life, to their ancient and wonted state of holy life;
and actually effected, that many of them did penance and amended their lives.
Which when some profane Lovers of theirs perceived, and found the way to their
desired bestialityes more and more daily blocked, they fell furiously at
vnawarres, upon Ignatius, beating him with cudgells, in so inhuman a manner,
that he was forced, for some days after, to keep his bed. But he had scarce
recovered strength; when nothing at all dismayed with this ill usage, he
returned cherefully to the same charitable office. And being warned by his
friends, and desired for Gods sake, not to bring himself again within the
compass of the like danger: What can there be, quoth he, more vvelcome to me,
then to give my life for Christ my Lord, and my neighbor? At Paris, having
often labored, in vain to reclaim a friend of his, from the familiarity of a
certain dishonest woman, and knowing well the street, through which he was to
pass, for the accomplishment of this his wicked desire; howbeit in a wonderful
cold season of the year, he cast himself naked, neckdeepe, into a water near
unto the place, and when he perceived his friend coming near: Wheth^r,
whether, said he, miserable wretch do thou hasten, do thou not perceive
the svvord of divine Justice bent against thee? go on, go on, and satisfy thy
detestable lust, I will here punish my self so long for thy sake, till with
my sufferance, I have diuerted the vengeance of heaven from thee. With which
strange spectacle the party was so stricken, and so taken with admiration of
that great charity of S. Ignatius, that he ever after refrained that dangerous
familiarity. He fasted three days from all meat or drink, bestowing his
prayers and tears to this only end, that he might reclaim an other person
from his wicked purposes, who from a virtuous course he had begun, was in the
way of falling to his first lewd life: and in fine he obtained that that
inconstant person constantly perseuered in his good course begun. During that
time he applied himself to his studies, he daily gave himself some time to
employ for his neighbors good. He ever drew as many as was possible for him,
by pious exercises and discourses, to a virtuous and pious life. He was a
chief actour in the institution of the B. Sacrament, in his own Country: and
procured that at noone a bell should daily ring, to pray for such as were in
mortal sin, and for the souls in purgatory. He was the cause that the use
of dicing was left off, and that the lives and manners of the secular, and
clergy people were reformed. He was wont to say, that he would be most ready to
walk barefoot, laden with horns about the streets, so it might prove for
the good of souls, and that he would refuse no habit, how ridiculous or
contemptable soever ir were, so it might redound to the good of others: and he
made his word good, whenever any occasion presented it self to him. For this
cause, with infinite labor and toil, and danger of his life, he made a
journey to Jerusalem, there to convert the Infidels, and assist the Faithful:
which to perform, having afterward drawn to himself nine eminent persons
for his associats, he made a vow: and in case he would not be permitted (...)
all this vow, he pre(...) his and his Companions endeauours: to the Popes
Holiness, for the good of souls. For the same purpose with infinite
difficulties, and strong opposition of the Devil, he instituted the Society of
JESUS, the aim of which he would have to be this, that all they of that
Society should labor, not only the safety and good of their own souls, but
seriously endeavor the perfection of their neighbors: and he declared their
vocation to be this, to travel into diverse places, and live in any part of the
world, where the service of God, and safety of souls might best be expected.
And that they might the better serve and assist others, he would have the
exterior comportment of them of the Society, not conformable to an Heremticall
manner of living, but fashioned to the life of Christ, and of his Apostles:
that is, in feeding and cladding themselves, common with that of the most
regular Clergy of the Country. By which Society what effects he has wrought in
the Church, and what he does to this day, work by the children of it (who six
years since were numbered to be 13112. distributed into 33. several Provinces,
and 516 Colleges) all upright and impartial men know: and the enemies of the
holy Church, and they in particular of the Society, confess. He was not
ashamed, when by that means he might withdraw any man from his wicked life, to
reveal to him, with an up right intention, some sins of his own, committed
whilst yet he lived in the world: By which course he assisted many men, almost
fallen desperate. And from the same desire of his neighbors good, proceeded
admirable monuments of piety instituted by him. For to omit the many Schools of
the Society, for the bringing up of youth, over the whole world, out of all
which, in this later age multitudes of famous men have, and do daily spring,
endowed with singular parts of virtue and learning, and other rare ornaments of
grace and nature. He was the cause that in Rome, the Mistress and sovereign
City of the world, the German College was erected, for the ^^tirpation of
heresy in Germany: He was likewise the author of the house of Orphans, for
children of both sexes, who had lost their Parents: Of the house of young
Christians, for the bringing up of Jews, and others newly converted to the
faith: Of the Monastery of women, whose marriages are doubtful or litigious,
where it is lawful for them to remain, till such time, as all controuersyes
being cleared, thy return into grace and favor of their husbands. For the
beginning of which Monastery, be himself, howbeit his own wants pressed him
much, having gathered a su^me of too. Crowns out of the profit of certain
stones which had been sold, dug out of the place where the Church belonging
to his College stood, was the first that contributed. He in like manner,
instituted an other Monastery, commonly called now Sancta Catharina de Funarus,
in which place certain young maidens, who for want of maintenance live in
danger of a dishonest life, are brought up at great charges, either to be
married, when they come to years, or else to betake themselves to some
religious course. Of which kind, to this day, some hudreds of such young Virgins
live in the same place. He had also an intention to effect that, which before,
in his own Country, he had brought to pass, that all vlcerous poor people,
miserably begging by the high ways; being gathered into one place, should be
maintained by a common purse. He commanded many prayers to be offered to
Almighty God, throughout the Society, for a certain person, whom threscore
years before had not been at Confession, by which he reduced the party to a
better life. In conclusion, he continually lay in wayt, and cast with himself,
how he might draw dissolute people from their sins, to an amendment,
willingly undergoing any troubles, dangers, or inco^ueniences whatsoever
without repining, for the gaining of souls. He brought to pass, in like
manner, that the law of Innocentius tertius of not undertaking the cure of
sick persons, from the first visitation of the^, till such time as they had
duly confessed their sins, a custom, by conniuency almost quite abolished,
was now many years after put in force again. And lastly, a thing most of all
beneficial for the good of souls, the often frequenting of holy sermons,
lectures, Masses, Confession and Communion, being long before, through the
negligence of Ecclesiastical Prelates, out of use, S Ignatius reduced it to a
custom again; in Rome first, and afterward in many other places of the
world, as ancient historiographers testify, and the Auditors of the holy Rote,
first, and afterward the Cardinals of the holy Rites have confessed, out of
the testimonies of many sworn witnesses, living in S. Ignatius his time. Whom,
in their Relations to his Holiness for his Canonization, they have in plain
terms acknowledged truly to deserve the title of Apostle of the Indians and
Barbarians, and of other Nations (which by means of his missions, have come to
confess Christ) for the conversion of the many barbarous nations, by his
Companions. By the same reason that S. Gregory the Great is styled, by
venerable Bede, the Apostle of England, for sending thithers A^sten and other
Monks, to preach the Gospel.

But the charity of S Ignatius was not satisfied with the spiritual good of
his neighbor only, for it extended it self, in a plentiful manner, to their
temporal commodities also. Immediately after he had left the service of the
world, and recovered his health, he gave continual atte^dance to poor sick
persons, serving the^ in the hospital, with great humility, and Charity: curing
their hurts; and sucking many times their soars. And though he himself,
having forsaken for Christ's cause, all he had in this world, lived upon the
Charity of other pious people, yet he daily demanded Alms, not only for
himself, but for other poor also: which when he had, he was most liberal in
the distribution of it, reserving to himself the hardest and stalest crusts of
bread, and bestowing the newest, upon the poor of Christ, not without the
shedding of many tears for joy, in expression of the love of his neighbor,
for the love of God. He was the cause that in his own Country, they of the
Sodality of the B. Sacrament, demanded Alms every Sunday, for the unknown
poor, or such as were ashamed to ask Alms themselves; causing it to be
distributed faithfully amongst them. He persuaded his own Brother, every
Sunday in like manner, to bestow twelve loaves of bread, in honor of the 12.
Apostles. In visiting and conforting such as were any way afflicted, whether
they were prisoners or free men, his charity was admirable: and that he ever
observed, even then when he executed that toilsome function of General of
the-Society. But in his fervent love of his enemies, his charity was more
eminent then in any thing whatsoever. He never repaied any man ill turns, for
ill: he did not only proportion equally his good turns for bad, but went
beyond ill offices done him, in his proportion of good. Being diverse times,
provoked by diverse, and justly moved to indignation, he never not withstanding
made the least show of passion, or took any revenge of any man when he might,
how greiueously soever he were provoked to it. Which might be showed by many
notable examples, but that the promised breuity of his treatise will not bear
it.

The love of God in S. Ignatius most perfect.
CHAP. XII.
SAint Ignatius, himself, by his punctual observation of the commaundments of
God, and his manifold charityes toward his neighbor, has given abundant
testimony of his high esteem, and true love of Almighty God: But yet there are
other infallible arguments of it, sollidly, not Rhetorician like, expressed by
the Auditors of the holy Rote, and Cardinals of the holy Rites, in their
relations for his Canonization, and confirmed by their judicial sentence,
after curious inquiry made, and the examinations of many sworn witnesses: It
appears (say those Comissaries and, Judges Apostolical) how sincerely he
loved God, out of the care and diligence he ever used, to do good to his
neighbor, for Gods cause in all things, spiritual and temporal, and out of
the especial regard he had to keep his heart undefiled. For, he did not only
preserve his affection from all such things as are opposite to the love of God,
but absolutely renounced the love of all creatures, which were nor God; utterly
converting his affection into the love of God, and laboring to apply his
desires to him. This love toward God (say the same Judges and Commissaries
Apostolical) he preserved so without mixture in his breast, that he had viterly
bannished all love of himself: for he said sometimes of himself, that he
would rather be contented if it were in his choice, to live in doubt of his
salvation, and in the mean time serve God, then dye at that instant with
assurance of salvation: and that if it should please God to confine him to
hell, he believed that the hearing of Gods name blasphemed would be more hard
and painful to him, then the suffera^ce of the torments of hell it self. In
conclusion, he was so inflamed with the love of God, that from morning to night
he neither sought, thought, spoke, nor desired any thing, but to please God and
obey his commands: and therefore he committed himself wholly to him, resolved
absolutely to follow him, though the loss of Heaven and earth had go^ upon it:
he directed all his thoughts, words and deeds to God, as his aim, intended
them only for him, and his honor: ever carrying those words in his mouth, as
his devise, AD MAIOREM DEI GLORIAM. Hence proceed that spiritual joy with
which this servant of God was ever replenished, that cherefulnes of countenance
he ever enjoyed, and that interior peace of mind. Thus they. Besides, these
are notable arguments of his admirable love of God; that howsoever he were
surcharged with care, or tired out with businesses, with the only calling to
mind, or embracing as it were of Almighty God, he found himself refreshed, to
his infinite contentment. He was so inflamed with the desire of behoulding
Christ our Savior, as he is, that for that only, he seriously begged from day
to day, to be freed from the bonds of his flesh (if Almighty God, for the good
of souls, did not longer exact his endeauours.) In so much that, if at any
time, he chanced to fall into agreat sickness, in hope of deceasing, he was
presently abstracted from his senses, not without the infinite impairing of his
health. For which cause his Phisicians enjoined him seriously to withdraw his
mind at such times, from the thought of heavenly things. In the midst of his
most serious and important affairs, he was so zealous of withdrawing dishonest
women from their lewd lives; that if any such, at any time chanced to repent
and desired to retire her self into some Monastery, he himself being now a
grave old man, and executing the Office of General of the Society, would not
stick, for Gods honor, to conduct, and as it were, to usher her on. And being
warned by some friends of his, that it was but labor lost, upon such kind of
people, who within short time after would return to their vomit: I (quoth he)
should esteem it a plentiful reward for all my labors and pains taken in
this life, if I could be a means to hinder any one of them, but from one
nights transgressing and offending of God. Calling often times upon God, he
cried out, in a kind of tenderness of heart. What I desire but thee, o Lord,
that I desire but there, or what is there else that I can desire? As often as
casting his eyes upon the heavens, he beheld the stars, which he was often and
long accustomed to do, all earthly things appeared contemptible in his eye, and
he himself was taken with a vehement desire of heaven. In his prayers to the
B. Trinity, which were frequent and long, he conceived admirable divine
consolations. Though in Spain it be generally esteemed a foul taint in blood,
and a blemish to any family, to have had ancesters descended from a Jewish
race: yet S. Ignatius, howbeit his family were never touched with that infamy,
was ouer-heard, by many men, to say to F. Ribadeneira, that he should have
esteemed it a singular favor of Almighty God to have descended from a Jewish
race; that by that means at least, he might in some sort, though far off
have been allied according to flesh, to Christ our Lord, and his B. Mother.
Which words he uttered with such a sense of piety, out of his fervent love of
piety; out of his fervent love of Christ, that he could not forbear weeping.

At Rome when he instructed children, and other ignorant Auditors, in matters
of Christian doctrine, he was ever wo^t to co^clud his exhortations in such
sort: Love God with all your hearts, with all your souls with all your powe^s.
Which words he uttered with such fervor, that he seemed to send forth flames,
and set on fire the hearts of his hearers. The B. Father in his latter time, was
much crased in his health, and troubled with an almost continual weakness and
irksomeness of his stomach, for which, he found no better nor more ready re^
medy, then the simple and plain Church song, daily used in Churches; so that
not only his heart, but his body rejoiced in the living God, and was
strengthened, and recovered with the praises of its best beloved. Wherefore if he
had been led by his own private affection, he would have instituted in the
Society, the keeping of the Quier. as in other Orders it is kept yet because he
saw that, they of the Society, might propagate no less the glory of God by
other means, then by the Quier, and perfect themselves and others, in the
service of God, he judged it most expedient that the Society should forbear
the Quier; commending notwithstanding the use of it (as he did all things else,
in other Orders) as a thing most proper to the Institution of them all.

The admirable commaeund in S Ignatius, of all his passions.
CHAPTER XIII.
SAint Ignatius, through the especial favor of God, and his own labor and
industry, had so absolutely conquered all his passions and affections, and so
subdued them to reason, that though he could not truly be said to be without
them (for that is a thing repugnant to human nature) yet he appeared to be
utterly void of passion, or any other turbulent motions of the mind. And
therefore, as well the Auditors of the holy Roman Rote, as the Cardinals of
the holy Rites, in their relations to his Holiness, for the Canonization of S.
Ignatius, wi^nes in plain terms, that he had an absolute maistry of all his
turbulent passions and affections. Which how rare and eminent a thing it is in
this mortal life, all men find by experience, and the learned are best able to
distinguish, who know what power the inclination to sin has, in our human
nature corrupted by Adam. So that although there are dry affections in men, of
hatred, of desire, of flight, of joy, of sorrow, of hope, of despair, of
fear, of audacity, of anger; yet S Ignatius had so conquered them all, that he
made use of them, according to the rule of reason, and square of Gods Laws,
not in any vicious manner, but in the way of necessity. Whence it came to
pass, that though he were naturally of a chollerike and fiery disposition, yet
for the wonderful mildnes he used in all his words and actions, he seemed even
to the Phisicians themselves, to be of a cold, and (as they term it) of a
phlegmatike complexion. When at any time he was discoursing of any subject of
merriment, if any of his, in the mean time had committed a fault
reprehensible, at his first behoulding of the delinquent he altered his
countenance, and putting on a severe browe, wa^ s^ri^^^, in his reprehension,
and suddenly again aft^^ the party was departed, (...) same instant of time,
(...) ^urned to his former caime and pleasantnes of dis^ours, with as cherefull
and quiet a countenance as if he had had no cause to reprove any man: so that
he appeared not to have been moved at all, but at his pleasure, to have taken
upon him, and laid down again that severity requisite. He always observed
the same method in his businesses, being ever constant to himself; and how
beit in body he was diversely disposed, and through his frequent infirmityes,
more o^ (...) fit for the dispatch of businesses, his mind notwithstanding was
ever the same, so that to obtain or effect any business with him, it was not
necessary to observe times or occasions. For, whether you took him after
Mass, or after dinner, as soon as he arose out of his bed or after his
prayers, to him it was the same, or whether his businesses went cross, or to
his mind: in fine, he was never altered with any change or alteration of
businesses, but was ever himself. In all cross accidents and vicissitudes of
this life, he was so present to himself, that he never seemed in any thing to
alter his course, or derogate from the dignity of a Religious person.

The rare patience and humility of S. Ignatius.
CHAP. XIIII.
BY how much more remarkable the supernatural gists mentioned were in S.
Ignatius, by so much more glorious was his humility: which as the foundation of
virtue, from the beginning of his conversion was eminent in him. So that in
those first years, he went barely and nakedly clad, he lodged (howbeit in
honest places) with the ordinary sort of Beggars; he curiously concealed the
nobility of his birth, and those divine visions which were so frequent with
him. He was wont to say, that he found matter and example of virtue in all such
as he conuersed with, and that he was not offended with any man but himself.
He desired that his dead body might be exposed to the wild beasts, or birds of
the air, to be devoured, or cast upon some dunghill. In matters which were
not otherwise evident and clear, he easily suffered himself to be led by the
opinions of others, and being himself Superior, accommodated himself to his
inferiors. He desired to become contemptible to all men: and but that he had a
regard to the good of his neighbor, (for which it was necessary for him to
vp-hold himself, and his authority) he would have walked the streets half
naked, in a contemptible manner, that so he might have been held and reputed a
mad man. He used all the power he had, not to be chosen General of the
Society, taking that charge upon him, by the command of his Ghostly Father,
and importunity of his Companions: which he himself, ten years after, in a
General congregation of the Society, desired by all means possible to have
resigned: he never discoursed of his own affairs, except he were moved to it,
by some important occasion (according to the custom of other Saints) for the
recovery of the defeased minds of others, or for the comforting of dejected
persons, who came to seek counsel and remedies at his hands, or else for the
encouragement or stre^gthning of them, by his example, against all cross
encounters, and being forced to speak of himself, he did it sparingly, and
that in the tender and growing years of the Society, according to the example
of S. Paul the Apostle, who, as S. Gregory says, concealed his good deeds, for
his own safeguard, and published the apparent wenders of God, for the profit of
others. He conceived so humble an opinion of himself, that he valued himself
the basest of all mortal men, and thought he stood most in need of Gods
favor. Whenever any discourse happened of the propagation of the Society, or
the fruit it reaped in the Church of God, over the Christian world, or of any
other subject whatsoever which might redound to his praise, he suddenly
recollected himself; and melting into tears, was surprised with a modest
blush. He would not permit himself to be praised by any man, and having
understood that F. James Eguia, his Ghostly Father, aman of wel-neare threscore
and ten years of age, had spoken many things in his praise, surpassing the
ordinary praises of other great Saints, he imposed upon him for his penance,
that he should, thrice a day, whipp himself, for three days together. But no
pennances being afterward able to restrain him from speaking his praises, S.
Ignatius refused, at last, to use him for his Ghostly Father, and commanded
him besides, upon pain of excommunication, and dimission out of the Society,
that from thence-forward he should forbear to speak any thing in his praise.
S. Ignatius, being newly converted, before the performance of his voyage to
Jerusalem, was much molested with tentations of vainglory, against which
making brave resistance, and being surprised with them, in the midst of a
dangerous sickness he had contracted, he was more molested with the conceit of
offending his divine Majesty, then with the vehemence of his desease growing
violent upon him; and at last through the favor of Almighty God, he so
absolutely conquered, and utterly rooted out that vice (and this the very first
year after his conversion) that afterward whenever the glory of God, or
good of souls required it, he could as easily discourse of his own virtues, as
of his vices, without any touch, or feeling of vain glory. Though many men
desired much the true picture of S Ignatius, he would never suffer it to be
drawn, or other ways taken by any. To which purpose Cardinal Pacieco, coming
once to visit S Ignatius lying sick in bed, intending to steal his picture by
a religious stratageme, having brought secretly, for that end, a Painter in
his Company, who through certain crannies had a full view of the Saint, and so
might draw his picture, as he lay. But the Cardinals obseruancie could not
prevail against the Saints humility; for his countenance did so continually
alter from one favor to an other, that the Painter, standing amazed, was
forced to depart, without doing any thing. The humility of S. Ignatius was the
cause, that though he acknowledged the gifts of God to be admirable in him,
and found that he was miraculously favored by him, yet being preferred to the
dignity of Preisthood, he durst not presently offer up his first Host to God;
but partly with a serious attention of his mind, partly with an inestimable
comfort of spirit, replenished with abundance of new divine lights, prepared
himself day and night to it, for the space of eighteen months. But his
humility appeared most in his suffering all things for Gods cause patiently and
willingly, with a peaceable and humble mind, judging himself worthily to have
deserved all crosses, and not to have merited any thing that was good. He
besought them earnestly to forbear, who went about to hinder injuries and
affronts done him; returning them may thanks, who did him apparent wrongs,
doing them all favors and curtesyes in his power. A certain heards-mans boy,
casting his eyes in contempt upon the Saint, ash passed by him, brake out into
a scornful laughter, heaping injuries upon him: at which whilst he with a
cherefull countenance, remained in the place, his Companion turning toward
him: Wherefore Father, quoth he, make you not have from hence to avoid these
insolenc^es of this ungracious boy? To which the Saint replied: Rather* quoth
he, why should we deprive the poor boy of this contentment, which, contrary to
his expectation he has ^hus encountered. So that he purposely remained in that
place offering himself in a courteous manner, to that impudent fellow to be
beheld, and curiously observed; co^ceauing more contentment in this scorn and
reproach, then other men in the popular applause and acclamations of the vulgar.

At Rome, whilst he preached openly in the streets, and certain roguish boys,
in contempt, threw apples at his head, he stood fixed like a statua, without
any show of anger. He was wont to say that the violent persecutions he endured,
before and after the foundation of the Society, were more dear and welcome to
him, then any honors or commodities this world afforded. Being demanded by a
friend of his, at such time as for a false imputation laid to his charge, he
was committed to prison in Salamanca, whether that imprisonement, and those
chains did not much afflict him? And does, quoth he, a prison appear to you
so fearful? know then that the whole Town of Salamanca cannot furnish me
with so many fetters or shackles, but that I would willingly desire more, for
the love of Christ my Lord. Neither did he only with humility, patience, and
willingness, embrace all adversities, by which his honor, reputation, body, and
affairs might suffer, but which is an eminent degree in these kind of virtues,
he rejoiced at any accident which happened against himself, or his good name; as
the Auditors of the holy Rote have noted, and the Cardinals of the holy
Rites, in their Relations to his Holiness.

The life and reputation of S. ^ Ignatius, miraculously conserved often times,
and defended by Almighty God.
CHAP. XV.
Whom the divine Majesty makes choice of to exploit great actions in his
Church, and to raise the glory of Christ, in some eminent degree, them and
their reputation he is accustomed to preserve, and by peculiar favor and
assistance defend. Of which in the life of S. Ignatius, there are notable and
rare examples.

When S. Ignatius lay sick in his Fathers house of his mortal wound, in
emminent danger of death, to the great regret of the whole hous-hould, having
received by the advice of friends, the holy Rites of the Church, S. Peter the
Apostle appeared to him, upon the Eve of his feast, restoring him miraculously
to his desired health. In so much, that immediately he was eased of his pains,
and began with appetite, to fall to his meat. And it is a token of a peculiar
care Almighty God had of S. Ignatius his life, that he committed the custody of
him, not to any Augel of an inferior Order, such as are ordinarily appointed
for our Guardians, but to an Arch-Angell of a high degree. That he preserved
him in his seauendayes fast, without receiving any sustinance; in his ecstasies,
and other prayers, without any infirmity, or ^mpairing of his strength; with a
cruel whipping of his body thrice a day, and the performance of seven hours
Prayer upon his knees.

S. Ignatius having been left by his fellow-trauellers, and arriving late in
the evening at Venice, where knowing not the way to the public Hospital, nor
having any money to hire himself a guide; being now accustomed by long use to
lodge ill; he found an empty Trades-mans stall, in an open public gallery,
where the night drawing on, he might in some sort rest his wearied limbs. But
whilst he passed thus the night, a neighboring Senator, Marco Antonio
Treuisano: a man of known integrity, who afterward came to be Dogue of
Venice, was raised up by a voice from Heaven, rebuking him for solacing in a
soft bed and curious furniture, whilst in the mean time the servant of God
being a stranger, and destitute of all human comfort, lay poorly in an open
place not far from his porch. He therefore being stricken with infinite horror
and fear, arose suddenly, and finding S. Ignatius, gave him noble
entertainment. In his sea-voyage to Jerusalem he discovered that many foul
facts were committed, by some of the passengers, in the ship he passed; for
which he in reprehending them freely, they conspired with the mariners,
plotting to put ashoare this troublesome controller, in some desert Island, out
of their sight and fellowship. Which design of theirs being discovered by some
other Spanish passengers, they acquainted Ignatius with it counselling him
withal, to have a care of himself. But he notwithstanding, when gentle
admonitions would not serve, continued to reprehend them sharply for their
enormities, relying upon the providence and help of Heaven: by the favor of
which it came to pass, that they approaching near the Island destined for
their exploit, were violently driven backward with a contrary wind, and whether
they would or no, brought Ignatius to his desired Haven.

Being to return into Italy, he found by chance three Passage-boats bound for
that place: two of which being tall, and strongly built ships, refused to
admit Ignatius: the third, a small and ill compacted vessel received him; and
having put to sea together with a favorable wind, the two which refused to
receive S. Ignatius were suddenly cast away; and the third only, which
transported him being weak, and much beaten with tempest and foul weather,
arrived the month following, safe in Apulia.

At Alcala, at the instance of the Suffragant of that place, one John Lucena,
made a gathering for the clothing of S. Ignatius in his Clergy garments: with
whom coming to a certain person of quality, to demand alms for that
purpose, the noble man, rurning to. S. Ignatius: If this fellow, quoth he,
pointing to the Saint, deserve not to be burnt, I will he contented to be burnt
in his place. And the self same day (a thing worth observing) that noble
personage was consumed by fire which by chance had taken hold on part of his
house.

At Paris, one Michael a Spaniard, being incensed against S. Ignatius, for
having drawn Saint Francis Xauerius, to the warrefare of Christ, from the
midst of apparent worldly honors attending him, resolved to kill him, as the
author of this fact. And having violently entered his lodging, for that
purpose, and in a rage rushed up stairs, with his naked sword, he was
affrighted upon a sudden, with this voice from Heaven. Whither go thou
miserable wretch? and returned back again, discovering the whole business
himself, being afterward convicted, by the guilt of his own conscience.

Not sar from Bassana lived a certain Anchorite, a man of a fair reputation
of sanctity, who observing curiously S. Ignatius, and finding nothing peculiar
in his habit, differing from that of the ordinary sort of Clergy: and
perceauing him to be of a pleasing and familiar behavior, without any show of
an Eremeticall spirit: measuring his sanctity by the square of a solitary life,
concluded there was nothing singular in him, or deserving particular note or
remarke: and therefore began within himself, to slight him, and conceive a
poor opinion of his worth. But Almighty God would not long permit the
simplicity of the man to be misled by error. For being in his prayers, more
vehement then ordinary, Almighty God was pleased to reveal unto him, that the
man of whom he had conceived so slight an opinion, was a man full of
Apostolical spirit, and a vessel of election for the safety of many. From
which time foreward the Anchorite condemning with sorrow his own rashness,
resolved ever after, to reverence S. Ignatius, and his followers.

F. James Fguia^ a man of known Sanctity, and Ghostly father to S Ignatius was
wont to say, in the life time of the Saint, that he lived more by miracle, then
by the force of nature. And after the death of S. Ignatius: the most famous and
renowned Phisicians of that time, examining the vital parts of his body being
opened, held it for a miracle, that he should live so long, especially
undergoing the charge of General of the Society, with so continual and
constant a pleasant face and countenance. For his stomach, through his
abstinence, sobriety, and continual drines, appeared strangely contracted. His
liver was so hardened and congealed, that it was almost become stony. And
Realdo Columbo, a famous Anatomist of that age, witnesses in his book of
anatemy, that he found three stones in his liver vein, or as they term it, in
his Vena Porta.

This extraordinary care God had of the life and reputation of S. Ignatius, is
confirmed by the sentences of many grave Judges, often given in behalf of the
innocence of S. Ignatius, at Alcala, Salamanca, Venice, Paris and Rome,
howsoever his adversaries by foul slanders and calumnies, employed all their
art to traduce his innocence, and utterly take a way his fame and good name.
But of all others, the clearing of S. Ignatius at Rome, of that most injurious
imputation laid to his charge, by a Monk infected with the heresies of Luther,
was the most famous: For this Monk having spread abroad that S. Ignatius, and
his followers, as men guilty of gross enormities, had been convicted of heresy
and other foul facts in Spain and France, and of late also at Venice, and
that having escaped the hands of Justice, they were come to Rome to debauch and
corrupt youth, under the color of piety, with the like foppeperies, broached
by this Monk and his accomplices, it begat in short time, so violent a hatred
against S. Ignatius and his Companio^s, that many men began to esteem them
runne-agate wandering Rogues, and to detest, and fly their Society and
aquaintance. And the bruit had not only filled the mouths of the vulgar in
Rome but it spread it self, by means of the letters and messengers of their
adversaries, into other Countries and adjoining Provinces, that the IGNATIANS,
with their ring leader, were esteemed branded men, and convicted of heresy and
other foul crimes. But our Savior Jesus, who had made a promise to S
Ignatius, in his journey to Rome, that he would be sauorable to him, quickly
delivered him out of these calamities. For it came to pass miraculously, that
almost all they who had been Judges of S. Ignatius in Italy, France, and
Spain, arrived at Rome, about their several occasions, at the self same
time, when sentence was to be given there against S. Ignatius. All who being
called to Judgment, discovered the fables and imposters of his adversaries,
giving rare testimonies of the virtues and piety of S. Ignatius. Besides which,
the letters of the several Cities of Italy, in which the Fathers had sometime
resided, being brought to Rome about the same time, added much to the
reputation of their deserts, and the refutation of the slanders of their false
accusers. By which, and by the express command of his Holiness, the Governor
of the City being moved, cleared S Ignatius, by his sentence in ample manner,
not only of all fault, but of suspicion of fault. But it happened far otherwise
to them that conspired against him, howbeit not at the instance of S. Ignatius:
for Michaell, after the discovery of the imposter, was bannished: An other of
them after Judgment given against him, being surprised with a violent sickness,
ended his days of it: an other turned heretic, leaving his picture behind
him to be sentenced to the fire in his place: a fourth was condemned to
perpetual prison.

The like favors of Almighty God to S. Ignatius may be farther confirmed by
some domestical examples. One of his first followers, a man not yet truly
marked with a perfect stamp of virtue, being transported with an affection of
a solitary life, and comparing the labor of S. Ignatius his life, with the
rest and ease of the other, and the dangers of this, with the safety of that
(as he conceived it) being thus distracted with many doubts, and dishartned
with the greatness of the Institution of the Society, resolved to betake
himself for counsel to an Anchorite of approved sanctity. But he had searse
put his foot out of the house for that purpose, when a vision of an armed man
was presented unto him, threatening him with a naked sword and menacing aspect:
which notwithstanding, when still he continued his way to the Anchorite, the
armed man in a fury opposed himself, not ceasing to pursue him, till he
turning with speed, had sought his refuge in the embraces of S. Ignatius: to
the admiration of all the neighbors, who saw the party affrighted betake
himself to his heels, but could not discover any thing which might occasion
his flight.

An other of his Fathers conceauing some grudge against S. Ignatius demeaned
himself stubbernly and contumaciously toward him, for whom the B. Father
praying earnestly in his Mass, and shedding many tears, cried out to our
Savior: Pardon him, o Lord; forgive him o Lord. To which our Savior replied:
Let me alone; for I will undertake thy quarrel for thee; and (...) vergeance
of him, if he do no^ repent. And it came afterward to pass, that that Father
(casting his eyes with devotion upon some relics in a certain Church, an
armed man appeared, threatening him with a fearful countenance, and whipp in
his hand, if he became not obedient to S. Ignatius. After the sight of which
though the Father humbled and submitted himself, yet he was diversely
afterward afflicted, in confirmation of the truth of that which Almighty God
had revealed to S. Ignatius.

The famous Miracles wrought by S Ignatius, in his life time.
CHAPTER XVI.
THough: the trial of sanctity consist not in the working of wonders, as S.
Gregory the Pope notes (whence it came to pass, that saint John Baptist, a
man so renowned in the holy writ, for his sanctity of life, is not reported in
the Gospel, to have wrought any miracle, whilst he lived) yet because the
voice of the vulgar seems to exact miracles, at the hands of Saints, which,
howbeit they are not merits, as S. Bernard teaches, yet they are signs and
tokens of merits; the sanctity of S. Ignatius was not void of this ornament of
Miracles. For in the processes of his Canonization, are mentioned more then two
hundred Miracles wrought by him, all confirmed by the uniform and grave
assertion of many sworn witnesses.

Here some few only, besides them often above mentioned, which happened to S.
Ignatius, in his lifetyme, shall be touched.

It fell out at Bercelona, that two Brothers, about their Patrimony, had long
sued one another. And he, in fine whose fortune it was to loose the suit,
falling, with too vehement apprehension, into despair, hung himself, with a
halter, upon a beam in his chamber. The brute of which came no sooner to the
ears of S. Ignatius, but suddenly he betook himself to the place, and
cutting a sunder the halter, from that unfortunate rafter, gave order that the
dead body should be laid upon a bed. Which done; falling a part upon his
knees, he began with many tears, to demand the safety of that miserable
creature, at the hands of Almighty God. But whilst S. Ignatius (being at that
time but a student in the Grammar schole) was thus earnest in his prayers, they
who were there present, standing in suspense, with their eyes fixed upon the
bed, (a thing full of miracle:) the dead man returned suddenly to life, and
had the use of his voice so long till calling for a Ghostly Father, he had
confessed his sins, and received absolution; and then at last gave up his
ghost, lately redeemed from out the jaws of hell, into the hands of his
Creator.

He recovered immediately a certain man called Bastida, who had been many
years sick of the falling sickness, by casting up his eyes and prayers for him
to Heaven.

He often chased the Devil out of possessed persons, by the sign of the cross.

He restored a woman to health, who lay half dead of a Consumption.

He delivered one Simon Rodriguez, being also at deaths door, from his disease,
by a pious embrace.

John Baptista Coce, who by accident one evening, had so burnt his hand, that
it became utterly unserviceable, and disabled for any manual function, the
next day, by his prayers, had his hand healed and restored.

Returning sick, into his Country, of a quotidian ague, and preaching often in
the open feilds (because the Churches were not capable of the concurse of
people) howbeit his weakness would not permit him to raise his voice aloud, yet
every word of his sermon was perfectly and distinctly heatd, and understood of
all men, for the compass of more then three hundred paces.

Coming once to visit one Alexander Petronio, who lay sick in a dark and
close chamber and bed, in regard the windows and doors were kept shut, to keep
out the light, he replenished the chamber with supernatural splendor of his
face, and recovered the sick person.

He freed one Eleutherio Pomano, who had been greiuiously molested, for the
space of more then two years, with certain foul tentations of the Devil, by
his only seeing, and discoursing with the party. Which (says S. Bernard in the
like case) I prefer before the miracle of raising a dead body: because there
only the exterior but here the interior man is restored to life.

The College of Loreto being fearfully haunted with spirits, appearing in
sundry foul shapes of men and beasts, and the ordinary exorcismes, and other
ceremonies usual having been applied, and those fearful apparitions
nevertheless not ceasing: the Rector of the College addressed himself, by
letters, to Saint Ignatius, commending the business to his holy sacrifices and
prayers. Who no sooner received news of it, but he absolutely sreed the house,
from those haunts of the ill spirit, by his prayers and letter, not for the
present only, but for ever after.

S. Ignatius his linen, being washed with devotion by a certain devout woman,
restored life and motion to her withered and dead Arm.

One Isaac, a Jew, refusing, with a passionate obstinacy to become Christian,
and contemning curtesyes and al other courses taken with him by others, was by
S. Ignatius soon satisfed, appeased, and persuaded to be baptized, by the only
uttering of these three words: Mane nobiseum Isaac. A certain person of note,
being of a more turbulent spirit then was fit longer to be endured, and S.
Ignatius not being able by gentle persuasions, to cure his diseased mind,
changing at last his style, and beginning to call upon the Justice of God, and
represent unto him the vengeance of Heaven, he did it with such a feeling, and
expression of fervor, that the walls and house appeared to him to tremble and
shake with horror. With the sight of which the standers by being stricken,
immediately fell upon their knees, imploring the mercy of God, by their prayers
and vows. And the delinquent prostrating himself at the feet of S. Ignatius,
and with a voice of confusion, begging pardon for his offense, promised from
thence-foreward an ame^dment of himself.

Father Leonard Kesselius residing at Collen, had a vehement desire to see S.
Ignatius, then at Rome, above 300. leagues distant from thence: And having
besought the B. Father by letters, that it might be lawful for him to travel
a foot to Rome, he made answer, that his presence was necessary at Collen, for
the good of others; enjoining him besides not to stir from thence, for that
Almighty God peradventure, by some other course, might so provide that he might
see him, without the pains and toil of so tedious a journey. The Father
therefore being one day at his prayers S. Ignatius appeared unto him, being yet
aline and breathing, and discoursed long with him, to his infinite contentment.

The B. Father, lying often sick, if in the mean time, any difficulty happened,
for the solui^g of which his virtue and wisdom was required, he seemed, in a
manner, to be perfectly recovered and his mind guiding his body, appeared a
sound man. So that it became familiar to them of the household, as often as he
fell sick, to desire that some business of consequence might happen, for the
facilitating of which S. Ignatius might rise, and be quit of his desease.

Diverse miracles wrought by S. Ignatius, after his decease.
CHAP. XVII.
IN the processes for the Canonization of S. Ignatius, commenced by the
authority of the Ordinaryes first, and afterward by that of the Sea
Apostolic, more then two hundred miracles are related, wrought by the merits
and intercession of S. Ignatius, after his decease: Besides which, there are
diverse other as authentical, not yet published (because those former for his
Canonization were more then sufficient) confirmed nevertheless by the grave
testimonies of men beyond exception, and printed at Rome and other parts of
Italy; in Spain and in Germany, and other places, by the approbation of them
whom it concerns to approve the^. Here only I will relate some few, because my
breuity promised will not permit many*

When the body of S. Ignatius lay exposed upon the Beer, for the performance
of his funeral rites, one Bernadina a Roman, had a vehement desire to bring a
daughter of hers, who had been long troubled with the Emerodes, so greiueously
that no art of physic could cure her, to kiss the hands of his dead body,
assuring her self the recovery of her daughter, by that touch: but the
daughter, tra^sported often times by the press of people, not being able, for
the throng, to approach near the body, her mother laid hold of a piece of his
garment, and had no sooner applied it to her daughters body, but she was quit
of her disease. Father daughters body, but she was quit of her disease.

Father Nicolas B^hadilla, having been long sick of an ague, was recovered by
lying in the bed of S. Ignatius.

At Manresa, a certain Lady of quality, feeling no living motion of her child
in her womb, for the space of three hours before she was brought to bed, at
last was delivered of a dead child: the unfortunate success of which being
much lamented by the standers, by, the rather because the child had not been
christened; the midwife, about half an hour after the delivery of the woman,
implored with confidence the help of S. Ignatius. And had scarce begun her
pr^yers, but the child, before pale and black, returned now to life.

S. Ignatiu^ being besought for the life of a little dead infant of an Indian
womans; restored the child to life.

He restored many blind men their sight, deaf men their hearing, lame men
their limbs: cured men stricken with the palsy; others given over by the
phisicians, and lying at deaths door, he restored perfectly to their health. He
appeared to many after his decease, either delivering them from greiuious
tentations, or freeing them from their diseases, or other dangers, or giving
them good counsel, or foretelling them things to come, or comforting such as
served him with divine consolations. And in his journey to heaven, at the very
instant of his decease at Rome (as afterward appeared by the computation of
hours) he appeared in glory to that noble and Religious Lady Margareta de
Lilus, commending the Society to her, as to a principal benefactresse of the
College of Bolonia.

Many Devils have been cast out of possessed persons, and out of houses which
they haunted, by the relics of the holy Father, or by hanging up his picture.

The oil of the lamp, which burns before his body, has wrought many
strange cures.

He has eased many women who have called upon him, in the extremity of their,
childbearing labors: and bestowed children upon barren women.

At Carpentras a certain woman being delivered of a child without motion, and
of the complexion of a black-moor; so that it was doubtful what course was to
be taken, in this prodigious accident, whether the child ought to be christened
or no, or whether it were to be deferred till some motion were discovered in
it. At last by the persuasion of a certain Chanon, they implored the aid of
S. Ignatius, by which the child was suddenly not recovered only but so
recovered that his countenance became cherefull and fair,

He cured diverse of the pleurisy.

He protected many men from the fury of their enemies. Others being fallen
headlong from some dangerous precipice, were defended from all hurt, by
inuoking his name.

At Cesenza, one Angelo Lopez, upon the Eve of S. Ignatius, in expression of
his affection, had filled his windows with many paper-lanterns, adding to each
lantern the picture of the Saint, and, with infinite demonstrations of
gratulation, repeated often these words: Io Loyola, B. Pater to! But, in the
midst of this triumph, by chance it came to pass, that by the greatness of the
wind, the fire had taken hold of his lanterns; which when it was observed by
some rascallity of the vulgar, they began to scoff at this devotion,
vpbraiding the man for his superstition, and with a bitter allusion to his
Motto of triumph, inuert the words of it thus: At, at, Beatus vritur: at,
Loyola crematur! At which the man growing infinitely out of patience, out of
his sense of this irreligion used to S. Ignatius; And I for my part, quoth he,
have so high an esteem of the sanct^^y of the B. Father, that I believe him to
be able to protect his cinged picture from the fire Neither was he deceived in
his belief; for the flame having consumed the paper round about it, forbore to
touch the picture, either in demonstration of the Sanctity of the B. Father, or
in obseruancy of the zeal of him who desired it.

At Braga, a certain woman having been lately brought a bed, was so much
weakened, for many days after, with a continual flux of blood, that life could
hardly be kept in her from following the course of the flux: who drinking of
the water into which her child had been dipped, having been wrapped immediately
before in the garments of S. Ignatius, her flux suddenly stopped, and she
recovered her accustomed strength.

In the Town of Gui^^arent, a ceataine woman, having already lost the use of
her sight and hearing, and received the holy oil and other rites of the
Church, lay utterly out of her senses: and whilst some about her, out of
devotion, were endeavoring to put her in mind of her last words, a certain
woman, who in curtesy sat by to visit her, called to remembrance that a
little piece of the guirdle S. Ignatius used in his life time, had lately been
sent to her, by a son of hers of the Society; which she with great
confidence, and reverence toward God, presently applied to the sick woman:
which done, she began to recover her senses by degrees, to breath, to streatch
out her hands, and make signs for meat; to the admiration of the Physicians,
for the suddenness of the cure: all which things were afterward confirmed,
by the attestations of sworn witnesses.

At Caglari a certain elder Brother snatching up a knife at dinner time, hurt
his younger Brother in the eye: and at the same time, the daughter of a certain
Gentleman, caruing at the table, was sorely hurt, in like manner, in one of her
eyes. Both which, calling upon the aid of S. Ignatius, were delivered from
danger, beyond expectation.

An other woman had been so weakened, for the space of four months, with
continual pains, that she was utterly deprived of the use of her feet: But
the feast of S. Ignatius drawing near, she, desirous to partake of the common
iollity expressed that day in our Church, was not frustrated of her desire; for
her pain ceasing and her feet being restored to their wonted strength, she
came thither with joy to have a share in the devotion.

In the same place, upon the Eve of S. Ignatius, the A^lltiery playing round,
(...) infant who could not speak, and who had never heard the name of S.
Ignatius, cried out, to the admiration of all standers by: To morrow is the day
of B. Ignatius. But they who were present, hearing a thing so full of wounder,
for experiment sake, demanded again of the child, what was to be done to
morrrow; who answered as before.

At Maiorca dwelt a certain woman, who through the contraction of her sinews,
was become so lame, that she could not go without crutches: the whole town
therefore being, filled with the noises of trumpets, voices, and other musical
instruments, Almighty God inspired her with a desire of visiting our Church,
Who put her self in readiness to go, notwithstanding the dissuasions of her
sister, who feared she might miscarry: by the press of people. She
nevertheless gave no ear to her dissuasions, but put her self upon the way,
and was suddenly cured and recovered strength in her feet. And throwing a way
her crutches, without any help betook her self to the Church, where in
thanksgiving, she caused a Mass of the B. Sacrament to be said.

An other woman, who some years past had received her sight by the means of
this B. Father, lying now again desperately sick, and being given over by
four Phisicians, not forgetful by whom she had received light before, now
again reposed all her hopes and considence in the same Phisician. One night
therefore she called out upon one of the women, who were accustomed to watch
with her: Make have, quoth she, come hither with speed, and behold this
glorious splendor: O if thou had come sooner thou should have beheld my
S. Ignatius visiting me; for I am now recovered, and perfectly well. And the
event confirmed it to be true. For the Phisicians themselves could not deny,
but that she was cured by some secret power.

At Monte in Gallicia, a great fire, raging for many days toagether, and
consuming a certain wood, gathered still n^w forces, dispersing and spreading:
it self far and near, there being no human means to stop or restrain it; To
which the wind rising, upon a sudden, drove the flame toward the Barnes and
bordering Town, so that the fire was now advanced within three or four paces
of the Corn and houses: a certain person therefore, taking the picture of S.
Ignatius, which he had about him, and falling to his prayers, threw it into the
midst of the flames, there where the fire raged most, and threatened greatest
ruin: and immediately the fury and rage of it ceased, the flames which flew
highest descended and vanished, and the whole fire returned upon a sudden
from whence it began. And which is worth admiration, a certain woman who had
observed the throwing in of the picture, leaping into the midst of the smoking
brands, raked away the ashes with her fingers; and being unhurt, brought away
the picture from the midst of the burni^g coals.

At Friburg, a little child of three years of age, by chance had broaken his
arm; the mother of whom searing the displeasure of her husband, being then
absent, inuoketh the help of S. Ignatius: but she had scarce ended her prayers,
when, to her infinite contentment, she found her child before her eyes, whole
and without hurt.

S. Ignatius. being inuoked, wrought a present cure upon diverse who had been
sorely wounded: whose cure would otherwise have exacted a long time.

Many men, by the presence of S. Ignatius his picture, or by the application or
touch of his relics, have cured the plague, when it raged most sorely, and
consumed multitudes.

A certain Noble man at Plata perceauing the sky to be ouercast with thick
clouds, and fearing a great spoil of his Corn; lying yet open in the field,
made a vow to S Ignatius; for the preventing of the tempest: so that when all
the adjoining territoryes swelled with floods of rain, not a drop had touched;
or fallen upon his feilds.

At Naples, one Vincentio Pagano having prepared certain artificial fires for
the celebration of the feast of S. Ignatius had daungerously through his own,
folly, scorched his hand. Upon which accident, certain women of his
acquaintance began to flock about him, applying to his burnt hand a note or
superscription of S. Ignatius his handwriting; the touch of which presently
eased his pain, and the raging of the burnt part, which usually cease not
till a certain day, was out of hand appeased.

At Catanzaro a certain pious woman, having a son by one Gaspar Mariscano
her husband, out of her devotion to S. Ignatius, had a desire to have him
christened by the name of Ignatius, how beit her husband (in regard the relics
of S. Ireneus were preserved in that City) had rather the child should have
been called Ireneus: but in conclusion, after much debate about the business,
they concluded the child should be named Ignatius Ireneus. But this contention
occasioned many differences afterward betwixt the man and wife: for the wife,
ever after, called her child Ignatius, and gave a strict command to them of
her house hold to do the like; and Gaspar, on the other side, commanded them
to call him Ireneus. The difference had continued thus betwixt them, almost the
space of three months, when arguing the business, one morning, they both grew
somewhat hot, till the Father, at last, in jest: Well, quoth he, let the
strife be put to the arbitrament of the child himself: to which the Mother was
contented to agree; where upon the Father, in merriment, demanded of his
child, at that time but three months old, by what name he would have himself
called? when, behold, the child miraculously received the use of his tongue,
distinctly pronouncing the name of Ignatius. Which voice so took his Father
with admiration of the miracle, that from thence-foreward he gave order his
child should be called Ignatius, dedicating him to the service of S. Ignatius.

In the Territory of Peru, in the West Indies, one Christopher Martinez de
Peredes, for the space of four years together, was forced through the
lamenesse of his feet, to make use of one crutch in the beginning, and
afterward of two: who hearing upon the feast of S. Ignatius the triumph of the
people: And shall I, quoth he, upon this day, when all men are in iollity,
remain as it were an unbidden guest^? shall I alone remain destitute? Which
words he had scarce uttered, when his feet recovered forces, and he found
himself so strong, that early the next morning, without any other help, he
betook himself to the College.

One Benedicto Lopez Prefect of the silver mines, pursuing a certain Ethiopian
fugitive, was set upon by five others at vnawarres, who stabbing and butchering
him in sundry places, dragged him from his horse, in a most barbarous manner.
In which his extremityes he implored the aid of S Ignatius, who presently
presented himself to him in these exigents, and laving hold of his Cloak,
bore of, with both hands, the blows of his enemies, so that at last (his
enemies being departed, and the B. Father vanished (he found himself safe, and
without hurt, saving that his hat and other garments were pierced.

A certain Lady at Auignion, had a son much afflicted with a violent
continual fever, who besides the desease it self, with the violence of it,
had one of his hands disiointed, and in a deformed manner, turned the wrong
side outward; so that in the opinion of the Phisicians, he was in danger of the
loss of his hand, if not of his life with it. Which lamentable case, a
certain Religious woman, allied to the sick youth, compassionating, vowed
three Masses, and as many wax candles to S. Ignatius for the health of her
kinsman. Which done, the youth immediately recovered; and in a more infallible
confirmation of the miracle, his hand was replaced in the right place.

At Bercelona, one Elizabeth Rebels a Religious woman, being in some high
place busy about her work, upon a sudden unfortunately tumbled headlong to
the ground, and received so sore a blow, that her thigh bone, which is the
sollidest bone of the body, was utterly broken. The Phisician and Chirurgian
were immediately called, who for more then forty days together, with what
diligence was possible, applied all the remedies their arts afforded, how beit
to little purpose. In conclusion, the sick woman was brought to those terms,
that in all men's judgments, she was past recovery, and as it was conceived,
could not last longer then that day. Yet notwithstanding, as soon as a Relic
of S Ignatius was applied to her heart, she presently recovered. One Hierome
Humphrey; aboy of ten years of age: upon one of his eyebrows, near the
temples had received a mortal wou^d, which occasioned an inflammation in his
eye, and cast him into a fever. For which the Chirurgian had him in cure a
month, not being able to help him; for the wound did not only not heal, but
grew so deep and wide, that it received a tent of a singer long, and voided so
much filth as amazed the Chirurgian. The Mother of the child made a vow to S.
Ignatius, commending her child to him; and behold, when (an other Chirurgian,
in the mean time having been called, for the better consulting about the cure)
the bands of the sore were unfolded, they found the wound perfectly healed,
closed up, and sound.

One Ferdinando Pertel having fallen into a Tercian ague, which afterward
proved a double Tercian, and at last a pestilent fever, with a kind of rauing
and fearful horror of his senses, was forsaken by the Phisicians, and lay in
his last extremity. Being therefore prepared with all the Rites of the Church,
and inuoking S. Ignatius; whose picture he held in his had, he began suddenly
to recover; and was cured of his disease.

One Anne Barzellona, a woman of threscore years of age, having for above the
space of two years, been so miserably stricken with the palsy, that she was
unfit for any labor, and unable, without crutches, to go up and down stairs,
and with her crutches also seemed rather to creept then go; to which when the
application of no remedies would serve, and she besides was taken with an
apoplexy in her other side, so that she became impotent, and was confined to
her bed: Finding herself thus void of all human help, by the assistance of
her crutches, and one Margaret her sister, she betook herself to a Chapel of
S Ignatius, two hours traveling distant from her lodging. Where, making a
vow in honor of S. Ignatius, immediately she began to find herself better,
and was able to bow her knee, which before was grown stiff: And having ended
her denotions, arose full of contentment, and returned a joyful woman, nimbly
to her lodging.

A bone and superscription of S. Ignatius being applied to the eyes of a
certain Widow of Matorca, called Jane Clara Noguera, who was blind, restored
her her sight.

Diverse other Miracles of S. Ignatius are related in a late life of his, set
forth by Father ^ed^o Ribadeneira in Spanish, printed at Madrid in the year
1601. and translated by others into Latin, Greek, Italian, the Poland and
other languages, and published in the chief Cittyes of Italy, Spain, France,
Germany and other places, where such as are curious to peruse them, may find
them.

Of the rare Sanctity of S. Fracis Xauerius, associate and spiritual child of
S. Ignatius; redounding to the, glory of S. Ignatius.
CHAP. XVIII.
SAint Francis Xauerius was borne in the Castle of Xauere, the year 1497 of
noble Parents, John Lasso President of the kings Counsel, and Mary Apzileueta,
Lord of the Town of Xauere, and other adjacent Territoryes; by whom he was
virtuously brought up and sent to Paris: where whilst he was enabling his
understanding by his studyes, he was won by the pious discourses and
spiritual exercises of S. Ignatius to the warrefare of Christ, and with him
eight other associates; men of rare parts of virtue and learning. And in
conclusion, after he had spent some time in Venice, Bolonia and other Cittyes
of Italy, as a matchless example of sanctity to those places, working rare
effects by his Sermons and other offices of piety, being now preferred to the
dignity of Preisthood, at the instance of John the third king of Portugal, he
was commanded into India by S. Ignatius, there to conioyne those Eastern
nations to Christ, being honored for that purpose by Pope Paul the third, with
the dignity and authority of Legate Apostolical.

In India, by the foundation of many Churches and Colleges, of the Society, he
generally dispersed and spread the faith of Christ. He gained first the kingdom
of Trauancor to the faith, then the Island of Zeilan, Aurea Chersonesus, the
region of Maurica, and other barbarous Nations: afterward Iaponia, the
uttermost climate of the East: where before the name of Christ had never been
heard of, received by him the light of the Gospel: a man of an vndainted
spirit, contemning in his traueils of those vast Countries, the imminent danger
of death, the rauing and pyracyes of the Ocean, with the like discommodityes of
his infinite navigations. And lastly, he intended a voyage into that vast
kingdom of China, the more to disperse the name and glory of Christ. He
converted and baptized, in the ten years space of his residence in India, many
hundred thousands of people: he assisted many deeply engaged in the filth of
sin, Domino cooperante, and sermonem confirmante, sequentibus signis. For in
his life time he raised more then fourteen dead persons.

Upon the frontiers of Piscaria he raised a boy, who for many hours together
had layne drowned in a well. In the Town of Mutan, in like manner he raised an
other boy, who dying of a pestilent fever, had remained dead four and twenty
hours. At Comire he raised a third body, which had layne buried under the
earth a whole day together. Near the Promontory of Comori, he raised a Girl:
not far from, that place a certain married woman. In the Island of Vaccare.
near Zeilan, the son of a certain Infidel. At Malaca the daughter of one
who had been lately converted. At Bembari a certain boy: another at Comori:
At Punical he raised a man who had lain dead a whole day. Near Manapar he
raised one Antoni Miranda. At Malaca, a certain man's daughter who had been
three days buried and overwhelmed with earth. He restored to life in like
manner, the son of one Mahomet Sarangio, who had layne three days under
water, to omit others raised by him in his life time.

And after his death he restored almost as many to life. In the processes for
his Canonization, mention is made of above five and twenty persons raised by
him from death to life. He often restored blind men to their sight.
Dispossessed possessed persons: cured many lying desperate, and given over by
the Phisicians, healed lepars, calmed tempestuous Seas, preserved ships from
wracks restored the lame to their limbs, and recovered men stricken with the
palsy. He foretold infallibly many things to come, penetrated men's concealed
thoughts, had a certain knowledge of secrets, and things absent. He appeared
in diverse places far distant, at one and the self same time. He spoke
several languages, which he had never learned, as readily, congruously, and
eloquently as if he had been borne and bred amongst those Nations. And it fell
out oftentimes, that at such times as he preached to multitudes of people, men
of several Nations, at the same time, heard him utter their own language. And
with one and the self same answer, he often satisfied the demands of several
Infidells. He was so ravished and transported with the desire and love of God,
that he was often miraculously raised from the ground, with a countenance
inflamed, eyes sparkling and fixed upon the heavens, and being surcharged with
celestial joy, was forced to exclaim: Sat est, Domine, sat est. By the sign
of the cross he turned saltwater into fresh, in several vessels at Sea.
Having dipped a brazen Crucifix, which he wore about his neck into the Sea, to
appease a tempest, and by accident lost it; walking the next day, upon the
shore, he espied a sea crab miraculously bringing him his crucifix in his
claws, which having delivered it, suddenly returned back into the Sea, from
whence it came.

He ended his days in the Isle of Sancion, near China, upon the second day of
December, in the year 1552. famous for many miracles, and all ornaments of
Sanctity. His body was found entire long after his death, how beit in was
neither bowelled nor baulmed, but buried in quick lime: and it appeared, many
monothes after his decease, lively, full of juice and fresh color, soft and
tractable, sending forth an admirable sweet savor, and many times bleeding.
For whith he was honored and reputed a Saint immediately after his death, not
only amongst Christians, but even among the Infidells; the rather for the many
miracles daily wrought by him. It appears by the processes for his
Canonization that many dead bodies were raised by him, after his death: that
many lamps burned before his body, with water only put into them, as clearly
as if they had been filled with oil, which being often-tymes extinguished,
took fire again of themselves, without human help: that diverse were cured by
him, or by his relics, or picture, of leprosy, palsy, blindness,
bloudy-fluxes, cankers, ulcers and other desperate and incurable diseases.

This so eminent man, deservedly styled the Apostle of the Indiaes, ever had
Saint Ignatius in so great veneration, that as often as he named him before his
familiar acquaintance, he gave him the Epithet of Saint or Blessed; and
whenever he wrote to him, he did it with reverence, upon his knees: and in
his Reliquary he wore the name of S. Ignatius, cut out of a letter of his to
him, as the relic, of some great Saint, whilst yet he was alive. He suffered
himself to be guided like a child by S. Ignatius, depending wholly of him, and
ever cherishing in his breast an admirable opinion of his sanctity, which upon
all occasions, he desired to express. Which words (says S. Chrysostom, in
the like subject, hom. 1. ad populum) do sufficiently demonstrate and speak
all his virtues. for the judgments of Saints go not either by favor or
disfavor, but are to be held unquestionable.

The B. Virgin S. Teresia added much to the glory of S. Ignatius.
CHAP. XIX.
IF the glory of the Father be the wise child, as holy writ expresses: the B.
Virgin S. Teresia: that glorious Foundresse of the Disealced Carmelites, a
woman so famous for her admirable and heroical virtues; who by those eminent
degrees of Contemplation, arrived to so fast a freindship with Christ, renowned
for her writings of mystical Divinity, glorious for her patience and
sufferance of labors, one so higly esteemed through the Christian world for
her reformation of the Carmelytes, an elect spouse of Christ, who through her
vehemence of divine love, was often surprised with ecstasies, a woman famous for
that fiery Cherubins dart piercing her breast, one inflamed with an
unquenchable desire and thirst of souls, adorned with the flower of pure
Virginity, glorious over the Christian world for her celestial visions, her
spirit of prophecy, her manifold gift of cures, in her life time and after:
this sacred Virgin, I say, added much to the glory of S. Ignatius, as one who
acknowledged herself a child of his Society; making use of the Fathers of it
for her confessions, and the whole manage of her spiritual affairs, and
miraculously came to the knowledge of many things in praise of the Society,
leaving testimonies of it both by word and writing: and particularly in her
Lise written by her self; by the command of a certain great Divine of the
Order of S. Dominick. Out of which Life, translated afterward into Italian,
printed at Rome in the year 1601. and dedicated to Pope Clement the eight, by
the Archbishop of Auignion. I will here relate some passages, translated word
by word into Latin.

In the 5. Chapter and 47. page of the said life, S. Teresia writes thus.
I Remained in this blindness above 17. years, as I remember, til a certain
learned Father of the Order or S. Dominick opened my eyes in some things and
they of the Society of Jesus, possessed me intyrely with such fears (to w^,
that certain sins were not to be esteemed tr^fles, which some ignorant
Ghostly Fathers had taught her to be no sins) aggravating my ill conceived
principles, as I will relate hereafter, etc.

In the 23. Chapter and 236. page of the same life, S. Teresia writeht thus.
When the Fathers of the Society of Jesus arrived here, to whom I not knowing
any of them, found my self much addicted, only because I had understood as
well of their insight into matters of Spirit, as of their manner of Prayer: but
I found not worth in my self to discourse with them, nor strength enough to
obey them, etc.

And again in the same Chapter page 239. the speaks thus.
IT was for my greater good that I came to know and deal with men so holy as
they of the Society of Jesus. It is here by the way to be noted, that one
Antony Kerbeke an Augustine Friar, in his Latin version of the life of S.
Teresia ( published at Me^ts, the year 1603. and printed by John Albin) has
omitted this; and almost all things else written by S. Teresia in praise of the
Society. But what his drift was in it, it is hard to judge.

And in the 244. page.
I Was afflicted, suspecting my own misery, that they of the household should
see me deal with persons of such Sanctity as they of the Society, and I seemed
to have the greater obligation not to become so miserable, and to deprive my
self of my idle recreations.

And again page 246. in the end of the Chapter, S. Teresia writes.
BLessed be God who gave me grace (howsoever imperfectly) to obey my ghostly
Fathers, who for the most part, were those blessed men of the Society of Jesus,
and my soul afterward began to perceive a manifest amendment, as now I will
relate.

In the 24. Chapter and 249. page, she writes thus of the Society.
I Dwelt not far from them, rejoicing much that I could have often
communication with them for my only knowing of the holiness of their
conversation, was the cause of that great proficience, I discovered in my soul.

In the 33. Chapter and 364. page, writing of a certain journey she made, with
license of her Provincial:
I Was much comformed when I understood, that in that place there was a House
of the Society of Jesus.

In the 38. Chapter and 421. page she writheth thus of the Society:
( SAint Teresia here in her original manuscript, expresses the name of the
Society* and reported the same, by word of mouth: witness Ribera in his life
of S. Teresia printed at Rome, in the 4. Book, 5. Chapter, and 207 page, which
life the Reverend Father, Friar John a Jesus Maria, discalced Carmelite, in his
abridgement of S. Teresia's life, printed at Rome in the year 1609. and
dedicated to Pope Paul the first, styles a history most worthy to be credited,
in his 1. Book, 1. Chapter and 4. page) thus, say S. Teresia writes of the
Society: I saw admirable things of some Religious persons of a certain Order,
and of the whole Order in general; I oftentimes saw them in Heaven with white
banners in their hands, and at other times I had the like visions full of
admiration. In which respect I hold the said Order in great veneration, as one
who have long conuersed with them, and perceive their lives to be conformable
to that which Almighty God has revealed to me, of them. The same is to be read
in the life of S. Teresia. page 303. published in Latin by Martin Martinez, and
printed at Collen, by, John Kinckius, in the year 1620.

And in the same Chapter, in the page 430. of her life, S. Teresia writes thus:
FInding my self thus much afflicted in soul and body, in a certain Church
of the Society of Jesus, where I was hearing the Mass which one of the Fathers
said for a Brother of the Society lately deceased, I saw him enter into Heaven
with great glory, and by a particular favor, accompany the Majesty of our Lord.

In the 39. Chapter, and 447 page, toward the end.
BEing, says she, in a Church of a certain College of the Society, whilst
the Brothers of that College were receiving the B. Sacrament, I saw a precious
garment (or as the Italian translation styles it Pallio) hang over their
heads: and this I saw twice; but when other people communicated, I saw no such
thing.

In the. 40. Chapter, and 455. page of her life, she speaks thus of the said
Society of Jesus, witness Ribera in her life written by him, in his 4. Book,
and 5. Chapter.
BEing upon a time, at my prayers, with great recollection, peace and quietness,
I seemed to my self to be placed near God, and environed with Angels, where I
besought his divine Majesty for the good of the Church. And it was revealed to
me what profit should accrue to the Church, by a certain Religious Order in
the later days, together with the fortitude with which that Order should
uphold the Church. And Ribera, in the place above mentioned, expresses these
words spoken then by Christ, to S. Teresia, to have been understood of the
Society of Jesus, as Martin Martinez translateth them page 307. Oh, if thou
did know what supplies those men shall bring to the decaying Church, in after
ages! etc. Which vision she says she often had. And howbeit in that life of S.
Teresia which goes about in print, the name of the Society is not particularly
expressed, yet in the original life, and in all written copies I have seen of
it, the name of the Society is particularly used. And these words of our
Savior she repeateth again in the 40. Chapter, howsoever not expressing the
name of the Society which as I said, is apparent, and received from the mouth
of S. Theresia her self. So Martinez.

The said S. Teresia hearing one day the Mass of F. Balthazar Aluarez of the
Society of Jesus her Ghostly Father, saw him crowned with a Crown of
wonderful brightness, all the time his Mass endured, as Lewis de la Puente
recounteth in the life of F. Aluarez. c. 6. 1. page 69.

It was revealed to S. Teresia that the said F. Aluarez her Ghostly Father
should be saved, and our Savior showed her an eminent place in Heaven which he
was to enjoy, adding, that he was at that present arrived to so high a degree
of perfection in this world, as was not exceeded by any man then alive; that
according to that degree his seat in Heaven was prepared, and that he was gone
beyond the perfection of all creatures then upon the earth, and yet then the
Church of God was well stored with men of rare Sanctity, as well in the Society
as out of it. This revelation S. Teresia discovered to F. Baltazar himself,
and other Fathers of the Society; and to some of her own Monastery, and other
Religious persons who reported it as a truth infallible. She noted it also in
her secret Notes which fell afterward into the hands of Diego Iepesio Bishop
of Tarazona who set forth her life in Spanish, in the year 1606. and dedicated
it to Pope Paul the fifth, amongst which Notes, he finding this revelation,
imparted it to others as Lewis de la Puente writes in the life of F. Aluarez.
2. page 124. and 126.

The said S. Teresia, being demanded by one of her Nu^ns, whether she thought
it would any way avail her to be directed by F. Aluarez, replied that it were
a great mercy of Almighty God to her, for, quoth she, he is one to whom my
soul owes more then to all others in this world, and who has more assisted
^^d directed me in the way of perfection. So writes Lewis de la Puente, in the
life of F. Aluarez cap. 11. in the beginning of the page 117.

The same S. Teresia appearing many years after her death to a certain
servant of God of approved virtue and credit, and one particularly devoted to
herself, and comforting her in her afflictions; amongst other things uttered
these words: And I my self, quoth she, am a child of the Society, and had one
of that Order for my Ghostly Father, whom now I see and honor in Heaven. Which
she understood of F. Aluarez. for though she had other Ghostly Fathers also of
the Society, yet he remained longest so, and with great industry assisted her
to put in execution those her aspiring thoughts and of whom she boasted that he
had been her Ghostly Father and Master, Se Lewis de la Puente in the life of F.
Aluarez cap. 58.. 1. page 607.

The same S. Teresia knew by revelation of the death of forty Fathers and
Brothers of the Society, martyred by the heretics in their journey to Brasill,
and as soon as they were put to death revealed it to F. Aluarez her Ghostly
Father, that she had seen the^ with crowns of Martyrdom in Heaven. As Diego
Iepesio Bishop of Tarazona, writes in the life of S. Theresia lib. 3. cap. 7.
page 152.

The same S. Theresia saw the soul of F. Gutierez of the Society of Jesus, who
died in France for the faith, by the miseryes sustained in prison, carried in
triumph into Heaven, with a Laurel of Martyrdom, as is to be read in the life
of F. Suarez printed at Lions 1620. in the beginning of his first Tome de Gra^^a.

But they of the Society who have either been Ghostly Fathers of S. Teresia, or
else at her entreaty, have had the examination of her spirit or revelations, and
have approved them, are these following as they are mentioned by the writers or
translatours of S. Teresia's life: B. Francis Borgia, F. Antony Araoz. F. Giles
Gonzalez. F. Balthazar Aluarez, F Martin Gutiers. F. Salagar; F. Ripalda, F.
Paul Hernandez, F. Rodorignez Aluarez, F. Santander. F. Francis Ribera, F.
Henriquez F. Bartholmew Perez and others singularly expert in matters of
spirit, whose names the Reader may find in the abridgment of the life of B.
Mother Teresia set forth at Rome by the Rd. Father, Friar John discalced
Carmelite, in his 1. book, 1. chapter, and 8. page: and 1. book 10. chapter
and 51. page, and 4. book, 4. and 5. chapters 227. and 231 page And in Ribera.
4. book, 7. Chapter and 316. page of his Roman edition in Italian. And in the
8. page of the Italian abridgeme^t published at Rome this present year. And in
the preface of Cosmo Gacci, annexed to the Italian life of S. Tertsia. And in
the Epistle dedicatory of the said life printed in Latin at Collen, by John
Kinckius.

And that S. Teresia drew those first beginnings of her more tender and entire
freindship with Almighty God, from the advice and counsel of a Ghostly Father
of hers of the Society, the R. Father John a Jesus Maria, discalced Carmelite
witnesses in his abridgement of her life, lib. 1. c. 10. page 51. in these
words: About that time, says he, her Gh^stly Father deceased at Ab^^a, a thing
which much afflicted her, because she conceived she should hardly find another
to succeed him so answerable to her desire. Yet she chose another of the same
Society, who discovering that out of a noblenes of disposition in her, she
would not suffer herself to be behind hand with any person, who bore her any
affection in the way of freind-ship, (in such things nouerthelesse as lesned
not her affection to heavenly subjects) counseled her utterly to retrench and
renounce all such freindships: a thing which appeared some what rigorous in her
eye, when she reflected upon the ingratitude if it. But the Father urged that
she would have recours to prayer, enioyning her for some days, the hymn of
the holy Ghost, for obtaining light in that particular which she seriously
vndertocks, and praying some what long, for that intention, upon a certain
day, she was surprised with a sudden ecstasy, which till that time was a
thing unusual with her, and being welneare deprived of her senses she heard
these words within the center of her soul: It is my will that now thou hold
freindship with Angels, not with men. Which words added so strong a resolution
to her breast, that in a moment she overcame herself in that, which for many
years to geather by great industry, and much importunity, she could not
conquer in herself. From this time forward our merciful God began to speak
to her, and often converse with her. Thus he.

Of the glory derived, to S. Ignatius, from S. Philip Nerius.
CHAPTER XX.
BEfore we treat of the means by which S. Philip Nerius increased the glory of
S. Ignatius, we will breifely touch, who, and how eminent a man this S. Philip
was. He was therefore the Founder of the Congregation of the Oratory, which as
it has begotten many famous me^, so amongst others it produced that renowned
writer of Ecclesiastical Annals, Caesar Baronius, and Thomas Bazius author of
the two Tomes of the maker of the Church: whose spiritual Master and Father B.
S. Philp was, amongst all other Christian virtues, in which he was eminent, he
ever preserved his virginity untouched; besides which, he had a miraculous
gift bestowed upon him of discerning in chaste persons, the perfume of
chastity, and in others, the ranknes and stench of unchastity. He was famous
for the gift, of Prophecy, he arrived to the knowledge of many things
concealed far from him, and such as were the most intimate secrets of men's
hearts; he foretold things to come, he was usually comforted with the
apparitions of Christ, and of his Angels and Saints: He appeared to many in
his life time, releeuing them in their afflictions: he cured sick persons
without number, and recovered men gasping at deaths door: he restored one dead
man to life, in his life time, another after his own decease, to omit many
other glorious miracles wrought by him; he was seen raised from the ground, in
the time of his Masses, and other devotions: he reclaimed many men from their
sinefull to a virtuous and religious life; he was ever held in great veneration
of all men. In conclusion, he ended his days at Rome, full of merits, the 26.
day of May, the year of our Lord 1595. in the 80. year of his age.

This eminent man was a familiar acquaintance of S. Ignatius, at whose hands he
sought long before his institution of the Congregation of the Oratory, to have
been admitted into the Society, as his familiar friends the two Cardinals
Cusane and Bellarmine (to whom he himself had often told it) bore witness of
him after his decease: but he received a denial from S. Ignatius, as a man
designed, by the providence of God, for some other Institution, beneficial to
the Church: howbeit he was ever a tender lover of the Society, as well in the
life time of S. Ignatius as after, of whom (as Gallonin, amongst other sworn
witnesses, testifies in the 15. page of his life, published at Rome in Latin)
S. Philip was wont to say, that S. Ignatius was a man of that sanctity, that
the interior beauty of his soul showed it self in him exteriourly,
professing to have often seen rays of brightness to proceed from his eyes and
countenancd: which thing as well the Auditors of the holy Rote, as Cardinals
of the holy Rites, understood to be an evident token of his sanctity. No
merueile then if S. Philip, being an eyewitnes of the sanctity of S Ignatius,
was wont to have recourse to him for counsel in his doubts, and was comforted
with the only sight of him, when he was afflicted in mind; and that after the
death of S. Ignatius, he ever cherished that freindship begun with the Society.
Besides, when he changed his place of habitation, from S. Hierom. to a place
near the Church of S. Maria in Valicella for many years after, as long as he
continued Gernerall of the Congregation of the Oratory; he used for his Ghostly
Father F. John Baptista Perusco of the Society of Jesus, a man of holy life,
and well versed in affairs of spirit. And afterward, having resigned his
Office of General to Caesar Baronius, one of the same Congregation, and begun
to use him for his Ghostly Father, which was two years before his death, being
then worn out with years, and unable to betake himself to F. Perusco,
dwelling far from him; he was often accustomed notwithstanding, at certain
times of the year, to address himself to him, and by a General Confession,
to give him an account of his conscience.

Of the gl^ry, accrewing to S. Ignatius by S. Charles Borromeus.
CHAP. XXI.
THat matchless example of Sanctity S. Charles Borromeus Cardinal, and
Archbishop of Milan, was not the least cause of S. Ignatius his glory, of whom
he ever bore a pious memory after his decease, and by the use of his book of
Spiritual Exercises, arrived to that emine^t degree of sanctity notorious to
the whole world, and as much as he could conveniently, perpetually made use of
his Society, as appears by many conuin^ing arguments, out of the memorable
things done by S. Charles published by certain domestical Prelates of his,
John Peter Guissano, Grattarolio and others.

In the year. 1562. S. Charles, being to receive holy Orders, and desiring
worthily to prepare himself to offer up his first Sacrifice of the Mass to
Almighty God, he made choice for that purpose of the house of the professed
Fathers of the Society at (...), where he prepared himself with the Spiritual
Exercise of S. Ignatius, Founder of the said Society. So writes M. Aurelio
Graitarolio in his Italian Book of the successes of the veneration of S.
Charles, and in an Oration made upon his anniuersary day before an other
Cardinal Borromeus, and the Clergy and people of Millan, the year 1601.

The same S. Charles, when he had with great pomp and ceremony, celebrated his
first Mass in public, to satisfy the devotion of the people, that he might
more freely comply with his own private devotion, he would celebrate his
second Mass, the next day in the house of the professed Fathers of the
Society, and that in a private Chapel S. Ignatius was wo^t to use, where he
watched that whole night. Se Sachinus, in his history of the Society. part. 2.
lib. 7. n. 11.

In the year 1562. In the first beginning of his Priest hood, he began also
with more then ordinary austerity, and frequent prayers, to dedicate himself
to the exercises of virtue. In which that he might walk the more secure from
danger, he entertained for guide of his Spiritual life, F. John Baptista
Ribera a Spanish Father of the Society; a man of long experience, great virtue
and learning, who having prepared the B. Cardinal by the Spiritual Exercises
of S. Ignatius, directed him in the way of solid and true virtues, training him
in the more perfect exercises of them. For which purpose he daily went himself
to the Cardinal, who lodged in the Palace, near his uncle Pope Pius quartus,
and discoursed long with him. Which the enemy of mankind perceauing, and
fore-seing the great good like to ensue of this Spiritual progress of S.
Charles, stirred up the principal kindred of the Cardinal against the Father,
whom they conceived to be the cause of this change of life in S. Charles whose
auersion from a secular course they infinitely deplored: and therefore they
began, by all opprobrious courses, injuriously to deride and revile the Father
so to deter him from his conversation with S. Charles, which when the
Cardinal discovered, he gave order that ever after, the Father should be
brought in to him, by some secret way. So writes John Peter Guissano, in his
Italian life of S. Charles, printed at Venice, the year 1615. lib. 1. c. 5.
page 14. col. 2.

In the year 1563. S. Charles, now created Archbishop of Millan, knowing the
corrupt manners of the Clergy and laity there, where as well the secular as
regular Clergy led lives more scandalous then laymen, infamous for their
public carnalities, putting on the sword in steed of the hood rude and
indecent in the Church, and ignorant of things requisite; in so much that they
who had the charge of souls, knew not the form of absolutio^, nor understood
not reserved cases, or censures, they themselves never frequenting the
Sacrament of Confession, who because the charge of other men's Confessions was
committed to them, conceived that themselves were no ways obliged to it, and
committed many things full of sca^dale: and that the lay men, on the other side,
through their many vices, the lamentable contempt of Sacraments, and
Ecclesiastical ceremonies, and the gross ignorance even of our Lords Prayer
it self, were in pitiful estate, desiring to rectify these deuious courses of
his own coming to them, sent before him out of the Court of Rome, one F.
Benedicto Palmio of the Society of Jesus, an eloquent and zealous preacher,
with some other his Companions of the same Society, to dispose the people, as
his forerunners, by preaching and Confessions, to forsake their lewd lives,
and entertain a new discipline and reformation designed, and infinitely
desired by him. For which purpose he obtained two Breues of Pius IV. his uncle,
one to the Duke of Sessa, then Governor of the state of Millan, and an other
to the Magistrates of the City, by which his Holiness commended to them the
providing of a house commodious for these Fathers to exercise their functions.
Wher-vpon the Church of S. Vitus in Perta Ticin, was given to them, and a house
commodious purchased for them. So writes Guissano, in the place above
mentioned l. 2. c. 9. p. 22. col 2. and l 2. c. 1.

In the year 1565. In the first Provincial Counsel he called at Millan for
the reformation of the Clergy and people of that City, he caused M Benedicto
Butinie, to make an Italian Sermon of the means and necessity of the
reformation of the Church, in the presence of 4. Cardinals and eleauen
Bishops. So writes Guissano, l. 1. c. 11. p. 26. col. 2.

In the year 1566. He caused the Fathers of the Society of Jesus to take the
first charge of his Seminary instituted for the reformation of the Clergy which
Fathers he ever used in all the ministeryes of his Church. Se Guissano, l. 2.
c. 5. p. 46. col. 1.

In the year 1566. S. Charles perceauing his harvest great, and his laboring
men but few, out of a vehement desire he had to find many good ones, he treated
with F. Palmeo, Provincial of the Society of Jesus, about the foundation of a
College at Millan, and obtained of the General of the Society a competent
number of able men, of wounderfull exe^plar lives, and infinitely zealous of
the glory of God, and good of souls, to whom he gave the parish Church of S.
Fidelis, with the adjoining houses, translating the Cure of that Church to
another. And of these Fathers he afterward made use for the training of his
new Seminary, and for the assistance of souls, and diverse other uses. For
(they are the words of Guissano) in their sermons they were fervent and moving,
diligent and laborious in Confessions, and all Ecclesiastical functions, as
men full of charity and divine spirit, being adorned besides with rare parts of
wisdom and learning, So Guissano l. 2. c. 7. p. 52. col. 1. and 2.

In the year 1569. S. Charles yearly made the Spiritual exercises once, by
which he ever increased in fervor of spirit, and perfected himself in virtue.
Afterward he made those Excercises twice every year, which custom he
observed till his dying day, persuading many others, and principaly his own
Officers, to the use of those Exercises: and he ordained that the Clergy of his
Seminary minary should make use of them, at their first entrance, and at their
receaui^g of holy Orders; For which purpose he built a house, with in the
Canons quarter, calling it by the Greck name Asceterium, or place of Exercise.
Se Guissano, l. 2. c. 16 p. 78. col. 2. And l. 7. cap. 11. p. 317. col. 1. and
l. 8. c. 5. and 23. And Greatorolia in the place above. mentioned. n. 1.

The B. Cardinal perceauing the Church of S. Fidelis, which he had given to
the Fathers of the Society, not to be capable of the concourse of people, which
for devotion sake, resorting to it, gave order that the design of a new Church
should be made, by a famous Architect, and laid the first stone himself, much
furthering the fabric of it, by his liberality. Se Guissano l. 2. c. 19. p.
9. col. 2. In the year 1572. At Millan he founded the College of the Society,
commonly called Brerano, in which, besides the Latin schools, he ordained
schools of Philosophy and Divinity, which schools he would have them of his
Clergy frequent.

Moreover, by permission of his Holiness, he resigned the Abbey of Arona to the
Society, and founded in that place, a Nouitiate of that Order. So Guissano l.
3. c. 1. p. 23. and 124.

Having instituted a College for the virtuous breeding of young Gentlemen, in
Christian ma^ners, near the College of the Society, he committed the first
Government of it, to the Fathers of the same Society So Guissano l. 3. c. 4. p.
132. c. 1.

In the year 1575. Being called to Rome, for the year of Iubily, he prepared
himself to gain the said Iubily, by the Spiritual Exercises of the Society.
So Grattarolio in the place above mentioned n. 1. And Guissano l. 3. c. 6. p.
139. col. 2.

In the year 1576. Having obtained, of Pope Gregory the 13. a Iubily for the
City of Millan, he employed F. Francis ^erusco of the Society of Jesus to
compile a treatise of the manner of gaining a Iubily, So Guissano l, 3. cap. 8.
p. 146. c. 1.

In the year 1576. he translated the bodies of S. Fidelis and S. Carpopho^^
Martyrs, from the Abbey of Arona, to the College of the Society,
notwithstanding the strong opposition of the inhabitants. Se G^issano, l. 3.
cap. 8. p. 147. 148.

In the year 1578. Being to take a journey into Sauoy to visit the sacred
Sindon of Christ our Savior, he took to accompany him in his iourncy, F.
Francis Adorno, of the Society of Jesus, and F. James Crucio, with intention to
make use of him for his directour in the Spiritual Exercises. which he
intended to make in that journey. Se Guissano l. 5. c. 5. p. 216. c. 1.

And in this journey, he caused F. Adorno, over night, to propose points of
meditation to all his followers. Se Guissano in the same place c. 2.

Being to make an other pilgrimage to Monte Varallo, a place adorned with the
mysteryes of the passion of our Savior, he would have the same F. Ad^^^ along
with him, to be directed by him in the spiritual manage of his life. Se
Guissano l. 5. cap. 6. p. 222. c. 2.

In which pilgrimage, whilst he visited those Chapels honored with the memory
of the passion of our Savior, meditating of the mysteryes of the passion, he
took his points of Meditation from F. Aderno. So Guissano in the place above
me^cioned p. 223 c. 1.

Having founded a College of Suitzers, he ordained that the scholars of it
should frequent the schools of the Society. So Guissano l. 5 c. 12. p. 238.
col. 1.

In the year 1580. At Florence, many men desiring to receive the B. Sacrament,
at his hands, he made choice for that solemnity, of the College of the
Society. So Guissano l. 6. 3. p. 247. col 1.

At Venier, being requested to minister the Communion in general, for the
satisfaction of the devotion of the people, who infinitely desired it, he made
choice for that purpose, of the College of the Society, where also at the
instance of the Popes Nuncio, and the Patriarch of that City, he preached. So
Guissano, in the place above mentioned.

Two Colleges of the Society were founded in Switzerland by the meane^ of the
B. Cardinal, one at Lu^erna, the other at ^^^burg. Se Guissano l. 6. c. 8. p.
265. col. 2.

In the year 1583. Being made Visitour Apostolical of the valleys of the
Grisons infected with heresy, amongst other assistants of so good a work,
famous for their lives and learning, he made choice of F. Achilles Giliardo of
the Society of Jesus to accompany him in this journey, daily employing him in
the explication of Christian belief. Se Guissano l. 7. c. 4. p. 300. col. 2.
And being to place some good men in lieu of other scandalous Priests, in those
valleys, for the spiritual profit of the inhabitants, he left behind him the
Oblates of S. Ambrose, an Order instituted by him self, and highly esteemed by
him, and some of the Society of Jesus. Se Guissano, p. 302. col. 1.

He caused a Catechism to be made by the said F. Achiles Galiardo for the help
and instruction of them of that Country, printed in the year following. Se
Guissano l. 7. c. 5. page 305. col. 1.

In the year 1584. Being solicited by certain of the Grisons, to send
thither some pious Priests, to assist them in matters of faith, and good life,
amongst three, he made choice of, F. Francis Adorno was one, who, with the
rest, wrought much good amongst them. So Guissano l. 7. cap 6 p. 307. c 2.

The last month before his death, being to make, as his custom was the
spiritual Exercises, he caused F. Franc^s Adorno to come to him, being
directed, and obeying him, as a man of holy life, and long experience in
affairs of spirit, and direction of souls, whose help he ordinarily used in
the like cases. Se Guissano l. 7. c 11. p. 317 c. 1.

In this holy recollection, in which before his death; he made the spiritual
Exercise, under the conduct of F. Adorno, he himself before day, brought a
candle to the said Father, that he afterward might raise the rest of his
family, who by his order also made the said Exercises, in the same place. And
S. Charles bore so much reverence to F. Adorno, that he came with great silence
into his chamber, least otherwise he might wake him, and passing by him bowed
with reverence to him, notwithstanding that often times he perceived him to be
a sleep. So Guissano lib. 7. col. 2.

Passing by Arona, in his return to Millan, and being invited to see hunting
by one Count Renato a kinsman of his, who had prepared to show him sport, he
refused it, and took up his lodging with the Fathers of the Society (see
Guissano l. 7. c. 11. p. 321 c. 1) And in that Church celebrated his last
Mass. Se Guissano, in the same place.

In the last hours of his life, he took counsel of F. Adorno, in all things,
depending wholly of his obedience, as his spiritual Father and Confessor, who
assisted him at his death, with a crucifix in his hand, putting him in mind of
heavenly things. Se Guissano l. 7. c. 12. p. 322. c. 1. And 323. c. 2. And c.
14. p. 329. c. 1. And l. 8. c. 3. p. 359. col. 1.

When F. Adorno of the Society of Jesus, who assisted S. Charles at his death,
in the quality of his Ghostly Father, was returned to his College, after the
decease of the saint, the same night S. Charles appeared to him, clad in his
Bishops robes, and with a countenance and face pleasant, and shining with
glory, spoke to him thus: Our Lord sends death, and our Lord restored life. I
am well, and you shall soon follow me. And it came to pass accordingly, that
within few months after F. Adorno deceased at Genua with an opinion of
sanctity. So Guissano l. 9. cap. 14. p. 329 col. 1.

And it is a great argument of the extraordinary opinion S. Charles had of the
institution and government of the Society of Jesus, that as a familiar friend
of the Society, and one who reverenced that Order, he would have his own
household, as near as was possible, ordered according to the Rules and
Institutions of the Society, giving the names and epithetes usual in the
Society to diverse Officers of his own household, of which thing see Guissano
in his second book, third, fourth and fifth Chapter, and elsewhere.

Certain Spiritual admonitions of S. Ignatius.
CHAP. XXII.
IT would exact a great volume to include all these spiritual admonitio^s, with
which, as with so many precious stones, the Books and sundry Epistles of S.
Ignatius are adorned. Some few of them therefore shall here be mentioned and
these in his own words, that (omitting many others for breuity sake) these may
correspond to those things which have already been breifely related of his
virtues and Miracles.

1. For as much as man is created to this end, that he may praise and reverence
his God, and by serving of him, arrive at last to salvation, and that all other
creatures, upon the face of the ^arth are created for man's use, as means to
assist him in the pursuit of this aim of his creation, it follows that they
are so far forth to be made use of, or forborne, as they further or hinder
the prosecution of this end In which respect, we ought to carry our selves with
indifferency toward all things created (as they are permitted and not
prohibited to the freedom of our will) so that (as much as lies in us) we
desire not health rather then sickness, or prefer not riches before poverty,
honors before contempt, long life before short: for it stands with reason,
that in all things, we desire and make choice of such as lead us to the end for
which we were created.

2 Every good Christian ought to be readier to interpret in a good sense any
doubt full or obscure proposition of an other man's then to condemn it: and if
he find the words not to be excused, let him examine the inte^tion of the
speaker, which if he find also to be (...), led him reprehend him with
^eekenesse: and if that suffice not, let him then lay hold of all other
oportunityes, by which he may rectify his understanding, and secure him from
error.

3. The first step necessary to salvation is, that I absolutely submit my self
to the observance of Gods laws, and that I willingly transgress not against
any divine or human precept, which obliges under pain of mortal sin, not
though the government of the whole world were proposed to me for it, or the
uttermost extremity of my life went upon it.

The second step is yet of greater perfection: that with a constant mind, I be
equally inclined, where the honor of God, or occasion of my good is equal, to
riches, poverty, honors, contempt, shortness or length of life. And that for no
hope of human felicity whatsoever or danger of my own life, I ever be induced
to consent to the least sin, though Venial.

The third step is of most absolute and profund humility: that having arrived
to the other two degrees of perfection though the honor of God were equal,
without any advantage, yet in more perfect imitation of Christ, that I rather
choose with him, who was poor, contemned and scoffed at, to be poor,
contemptible and esteemed a fool, then to enjoy wealth, honors and the
reputation of wisdom.

4. For the good choice of any thing, it is our duty to consider, with a pure
and sincere intention, wherefore we were created, to wit, for Gods honor and
our own salvation. Which being so, such things are only to be made choice of
as lead us to that end, for as much as the means ever ought to be subordinate
to the end, not the end to the means. By which it appears that they are in
an error, who resolve principally to marry, or seek after some
Ecclesiastical office or benefice, and then to serve God, preposterously
confounding the end with the means, and not tending directly toward God, but
laboring indirectly to wine him to their perverse intentions. A quite contrary
course is to be taken, by proposing first to our selves the honor of God, as
our aim, and then making choice of marriage or Preisthood, and all other
things, as they are ordained, or tend to that end. Wherefore nothing should
move us to the use or forbearance of any mean, till first we have had a
particular regard, as well of the honor of God, as of our own salvation.

5. For the good choice of a state of life, or of any other course (whether it
be matter of deliberation of bestowing money upon my kindred, or others, to
whom I have any ties of freindship, or any other thing, which by circumstances
may prove good or bed, it infinitely imports me to consider, if a man whom I
had never seen, and a mere stranger to me, yet one to who^ I wish all kind of
perfection, should occur, with the like doubts concerning choice or election,
what I would counsel him to do, and what choice to make, for the greater glory
of God, and perfection of his soul. Which when I have considered, let me
resolve to do my self what I would counsel an other.

I must likewise cast with my self, what course I would rather wish I had
taken, in the present action or deliberation, if I were now at the point of
death; and accordingly now I ought to resolve upon the same.

Moreover I must consider what course, in this particular I should desire to
have taken, when I shall stand at the tribunal of God to be judged. Which,
when I have considered, let me resolve now upon the same, that I may then be
more secure.

6. Nothing ought to be concluded or resolved in time of tentation or
desolation, touching our state of life, or good purposes; but must be constant
to that which we formerly determined in time of divine consolation. For as a
soul when she e^^oyeth divine consolation, is not guided by her own instinct,
but by that of the good spirit, so in time of desolation she is ruled by the
ill spirit, by whose instigation, nothing is right done.

7. A man enjoying the consolation of God, ought to consider how he will
afterward carry himself when he shall chance to fall again into desolation,
and then in time put on a resolution and strength to break the force of it
when it shall come.

8. Even as a woman railing or contesting with a man, if she perceive him make
resistance with a resolute and constant browe, relenteth and quitteth him, but
if she discover him to be timorous or desirous to avoid her, sets upon him a
fresh, with extreme insolency; so the Devil is wont to loose heart and fail
in his resolution, when he finds a spiritual Champion, resolutely and with a
fearelesse and undaunted spirit, withstand his tentations. But if he discover
fear in the first brunt or encounter, or argue want of courage, no savage
beast, upon the face of the earth, is more barbarous or untamed.

9. Our enemy imitateth the example of some voluptuous lover, who intending to
debauch a young Maid or Wife, desires to have his words and counsels
concealed, fearing, or distrusting nothing more the^ that the Maiden should
discover his design to her Father, or the Wife to her Husband, because then he
knows his labors and endeauours are in vain. In the same sort the Devil
seriously endeauoreth that the soul which he intends to circumuent or
entrap, keep his false suggestions under the seal of secrecy: and takes it
for a foul affront to have his designs revealed, either to a Ghostly Father,
or any spiritual man, for then he is assured to fail in his expectation, and
receive an utter overthrow.

10. He is wont, in like manner, to imitate a General of an Army, who intending
to give on, or assault a Fort besieged, makes first his discovery of the
strength of the place, falling on there, where he finds it least fortified.
In the same sort the Devil laying siege to our soul, subtily enquireth with
what virtues morrall or Theological the soul is fortified, or void of, and
in that place especially places the force of his assault, hoping there to
overthrow us, where he discovers us least provided, and slightest guarded.

11. It is a custom of the ill spirit to transform himself into an Angel of
light, and discovering the pious intentions of our soul, to seem at first to
approve the^, beginning afterward to entice us to his perverse desires: for he
seems to cherish, and comply with the pious intentions of the soul, but in
conclusion, engages her by little and little, and entangleth her in his snares.

12. We ought to take a curious account of our thoughts concerning the
beginnings, the middle, and the end; which three circumstances if they be
right, it is an argument that the good Angel inspireth those thoughts: but if
by discourse and due examination, we discover and follow any thing, which
either in it self is ill, or draws us from any good, or forces us to a less
good then the soul in her first search, was resolved to have followed; or
tireth, disturbeth, or afflicts our soul in lieu of the quiet, peace; and
tranquillity it enjoyed, it is an evident sign that the ill spirit is author
of those thoughts, as an enemy to our good.

13. S. Ignatius was wont to say that Innocence and Sanctity of life were rare
things in themselves, and by many degrees to be preferred before all things
whatsoever: but except they were seasoned with wisdom, and a certain method
in treating with men, that they were lame and imperfect, and not fit to guide
others: and that in matter of government, great wisdom conjoined with mean
sanctity, was of more force, then eminent sanctity conjoined with less wisdom.

14. He was wont to say that the familiarity of all women whatsoever ought to
be avoided, even of such women as appeared spiritual, but especially of such
whose years and condition might import greatest danger^ out of which, for the
most part either smoke or flame follows.

15. He said it was a thing full of danger to direct all men the same way in a
spiritual course, or to measure other me^ by ones self; or to reduce others to
the same method of living and praying, which a man finds profitable in
himself.

16. He was wont to say, that the proficience a man made in the way of virtue,
was not to be gathered out of the face or countenance, or out of the easines or
good natural disposition of a man, or out of continual prayers or often
recollection, but out of the victory of ones self, and suppressing of
disordinate passions rebelling against reason; and principally out of the peace
and equity of the mind, immovable in all sudden and desperate affairs.
Insomuch, that though he himself were eminent in the holy gift of prayer, yet
he ever preferred the spirit of mortification as they term it, before the
spirit of speculation or prayer. For as in matter of eloquence, in which there
is a necessity as well of art as practice, me^ of understanding attribute much
more to practice the^ precept; so in the pursuit of virtues, in which as well
speculation as action is requisite, much more profit is made by practice and
exercise, the^ by mere speculatio^.

17. He said it was infinite beneficial for the fortunate success of
businesses, that in the understanding of pious actions, a man so much rely upon
the desired assistance of God, as if no human help were to be expected; and on
the other side, so far make use of human remedies, which are lawful, as if
no divine help or assistance were requisite.

18. He said the Ghostly Fathers and Superiors of other men ought to imitate
the Angels, who in preserving the souls committed to their charge, omit no
necessary diligence, yet whatsoever happen, loose nothing notwithstanding of
their peace and happiness.

19. He advised men choleric by nature, to have a special care how they
treat with collerick persons, in regard that dissentions easily arise. In
which respect he counseled such me^ often to premeditate and cast with
themselves, how to avoid that inconvenience: which course he held necessary not
in men of hasty dispositions only, but in all men for the conquest of all other
vices.

20. He was wont to say, that if a man demand any thing at thy hands
vnbeseemi^g thy person, thou ought to moderate thy indignation, and so to
carry thy self, that thou both deny what is sought or demanded at thy hands,
and yet also part friends with him who demands it.

21. He said it was the Office of a Religious man, rather to gain me^ to
Christ, by dissuading them from a Courtiers life, then to be a means to bring
any man to the Court.

22. The B. Father was wo^t to say, that if Miracles were to be sought at the
hands of Almighty God, men ought to demand more and more conuincing Miracles
touching the observance of the Commands only, then touching the obserua^ce and
following of the Counsels: because Christ our Savior did plainly persuade us
to follow his Counsels, and on the other side, demo^strated the great
difficulties, and evident danger of salvation, in the enioyning and possessing
of riches. Matthew. 19. v. 23.24.

23. It is a thing infinitely beneficial to the advancement and proficience
of a spiritual life, wholly, and not in part to abhor al things which the
world affects and embraces, and to covet with all our powers, whatsoever
Christ our Savior loved and approved; to wit, co^tumelies, false witnesses,
the sufferance of injuries, to be reputed a fool: but this without any cause
given on our parts.

24. That we may the better arrive to this degree of perfection, each man ought
to employ his best endeavors, to seek in our Lord, the greater abnegation and
mortification of himself, as much as possible in all things.

Ad maiorem Dei gloriam.
FINIS.

