THE Treasury of health containing many profitable medicines, gathered out of
Hipocrates, Galen and Auicen by one Petrus Hyspanus, and translated into
English by Humfry Lloyd, who has added thereunto the causes and signs of
every disease, with the Aphorisms of Hipocrates, and Iacobus de Partibus,
redacted to a certain order according to the members of man's body, and a
compendious table containing the purging and confortatiue medicines, with the
exposition of certain names and weights in this book contained, with an
Epistle of Diocies unto King Antigonus. ()

Ecclesiast. xxxvij. The Lord has created Physic of the earth, and he that
is wise will not abhore it.

To the Gentle hearted Reader Humfrey Lloyde.
ALthough diverse learned me^ of no less judgment than practice, have here
before translated and set forth sundry books, containing the most wholesome and
profitable precepts of Physic, wherein they seem to have opened, and at
large declared all such things as seemed necessary and expedient to be had and
known in this our vulgar English tongue: yet nevertheless, I calling to
memory the notable sentence of Cicero, that every man is not alonely borne for
himself but chiefly to profit his native Country, then his parents,
afterward his children and friends, seeking a means whereby I might profit
this my natyue Country, thought it best to translate this little treatise
which was gathered out of the works of the most noble and ancient Physicians,
Hypocrates, Galen, Dioscorides, and Auicen, by one Petrus Hispanus, which
(although he chanced in a barbarous and rude time) was a man of great
knowledge and long practice: unto which work containing alonely the simple
and bare practice, I did add before every chapter as briefly as I could, the
causes and signs of the syckenesses, and diseases, trusting thereby both to
gratify and somewhat ease the pains of the reader, so that he need not
elsewhere to seek the causes and signs of such diseases, whose remedies were
contained in this book, and upon that consideration I bid also translate and
add thereunto the Aphorysmes of Hipocrates, redacted unto such an order, that
as the members of man's body be disposed to receive some one discase and some
another, so the Aphorisms, which entreat of every disease that may happen to
that member be gathered together into one chapter, beginning at the head and so
in order to the feet: and also because men oftentimes desire to know the
names and properties of compounde medicines, I did translate a little book of
such compoundes drawn out of Mesue by one Iacobus de Partibus, which work
I have redacted to the self same order that the Aphorisms be in: and
furthermore because I would gratify the Reader, and would not he should be
ignorant in the names and weight herein contained, I have hereunto added two
tables, of ye which the first does briefly express such simples and
compoundes as do either comfort or purge any disease or hurtful humor
infecting any member of man's body, and the second expounds certain
general names of medicines and weyghtes commonly mentioned in this book, and
thereupon have made an end of this rude and simple work, employing my whole
labor and diligence to set the same forth as truly and as nigh the authors
mind as I could, not thinking but that there do some remain therein, both
because the barbarous and Arabicke terms which the author does chiefly use,
and of the diverse and sundry opinions of most notable and well learned
Phisicions, as well in the names as in the natures of Herbs and symples, and
especially that we be either ignorant or destitute of English names for a
great sort of them, yet I did as nighe as I could, follow Dioscorides, and in
such things as I could not find in him, I did confer Fuchsius, Ruellius and
Dorstemius together, and followed the judgment wherein they did all or the most
part of them agree, and in the Englishing thereof I and all other which
intend any such work are much beholden to Master William Turner, who with no
small diligence has in both his herballes most truly and sincerely set forth
the names and natures of diverse herbs, unto whose judgment and correction
and all other learned in the most necessary science of Physic, do I submit
this little work and treatise, desiring them most heartily to take in good
worth this my first labor, and to accept my good will, not thinking it to
be done to hurt any man, knowing what a perilous thing it is for them that be
not learned both in the complexions of men, Age, Regions, and time of the
year, with the knowledge of the origin and causes of the diseases, to take
upon them the cure of any pacient, and that rather they shall do hurt than
good, with the sole and only practice thereof, except they do thereunto add
great knowledge and perfyte judgment had with painful study and long
practice, therefore I would that all such rash and temerarious persons should
perfectly know, that it was never my mind or will that this work should be
set forth to maintain their filthy lucre and blind boldness, but chiefly
^o be a token and sign of the entire desire I have to set forth the thing
which should be acceptable and pleasant to the Reader, and I would that it
should be for the use and profit of such honest persons as will modestly and
discretely (either in time of necessity when no learned Physician is at hand.
or else conferring with some learned man and using his counsel) minister the
things herein contained, and go about the practice thereof, and upon these
most honest and godly considerations, I take upon me this heavy burden and
hard province, therefore I shall most heartily desire the gentle reader to pardon
my audacitie and bear with my slender judgment, and not to despise this
simple work because it is not garnished with colors of rethorike and fine
polished terms, but rather to consider that Physic is an Art content only
to be plainly and distinctly taught, and nothing desirous to be adourned and
decked with eloquence and gay painted sentences: wherefore I trusting to the
sincere and indifferent judgment of the Reader, do entirely desire him to
pray with me to him that created Physic of the earth, and commanded that we
should honor the Physician, to preserve this realm of England in most
prosperous and continual health, and to endew the inhabitants thereof, with
perfyte understanding and the most desired knowledge of his holy word. Amen. ()

Places of scripture which seem to make for the praise of Physic.
Exodus 15. Moses brought forth Israel from the red sea, and they went to
the wilderness of Sur, and they went three days in the wilderness and could
find no water, and at the last they came to Mara, but they could not drink
of the waters for the bitterness thereof, and Moses cried unto the Lord, and
he showed him a tree, and he cast it into the waters and they waxed sweet.
Also if you read over the.xiij. xiiij. xv. Chapter of Leuiticus (where the
Priests be taught to discern the Leprosy from all other diseases) you shall
find many things that make for the praise of Physic.

Reg. 4. cap. 10. Hezekiah was sick to the death, and after he had prayed to
the lord he sent Isayah unto him, who put a lump of figs upon the sore and he
recovered. Reg 4. cap. 4.^. Heliseus the Prophet healed ye naughty and bitter
waters of Jericho, and the barennesse of the ground, with casting salt into the
spring thereof, he healed also Naaman of his leprosy with ye potage that was
made of colloquintida. Pro. 27. The heart is glad of a sweet ointment and
savor, but a stomach that can give good counsel rejoices a man's neighbor.
Tobi. 6. The Angel said unto Tobias, take out the bowels of this fish, and as
for the heart, the gall and the liver, keep them by thee, for these things are
necessary for medicine. For the fallinge of the Hear
The Causes.
THe falling of ye Hear is of two Kinds, of the which the on is caled
Alopecia, which is caused through the malignyte of vycyous, and noughty
Humores, which rotte and corrupt the roots of the Hear, whereby they fall
away.

The other is called Defluuium capillorum, and comes of the rarytie of the
skyne and lack of the Humore by the which the hear be com forth and nourished
for the relaxacion and losnesse of the Skin, is the cause why they be not
steadfast and want of their humor does extenuate the same, whereby they do fall
away.

The Signs.
The signs or tokens be plain inoughe for in the first, the hear is more
lose in one place then in an other, and in the second they fall in all places
like.

Remedies. Capt. primo.
Diosco Isac. IF thy hears fall, make lie of ye Ashes of Culu^r dounge, and
wash thy head, it is proved. So do walnut leaves beaten with Baressewet,
restore ye hears that be plucked away.

Seth the leaves of an Oak, and the middle rynd thereof in water, and wash thy
head, it is proved.

The Ashes of little Frogs burnt do cure the failing of the hear.

Galen. The Ashes of Goats dounge, mingled with oil, does engender hear.

The Decoccion of a Mallow Rote in water, makes ye scurffe of the head fall
of, if thy head be washed in that water, it is proved.

Galen. The water of the decoction of the myddle rynde of an Elm, thy head
being often washed therein, does the same.

Macer. Wormwood stamped and laid to the temples, does quickly remedy, the
pain in the head.

Stamp Parsley with the blood of an Hog, let them sees in white wine and
afterward let it be strayned through a cloth, over cold water. and let the
Fat that fleteth or swimmeth above be gathered together, and mingled with the
yolk of a sodden egg, and Mastike, and Cummin, and let the bare place be
anointed therewith, and there will hear grow quicklye, it has been proved.

Annoynte the place with raw Honey, and sprinkle it over with the (...) ever
with the Ashes of a grene Lacert, burnt, it enge^dreth much hear it is prouid.

Diosco The blood of a tortois, if the bare place be anointed therewith
enge^drethe much hear, and cures the Leprye.

The same does the Shel of the Snayle being burnt.

Gerard. The Milk of an Ass, does make black the hear after a wonderful
manner.

Bucne barley, bread with Salt and mengle it with bearessewet, and anoynte on
what place soever thou will, and the hears will grow there

The Joyce of Sloes and ynke, the utter rind or shale of a Nutte, brayde and
tempered with veniger so that they be moist, let them be applied for an
ointment, and they do make the pacientes hear black.

The Ashes of a Goats clawe, mengled and beaten with Pytche remedieth the
falling of the here. Let thy head be washed with dogs piss, and thou shall
not be bald Make lie of the ashes of the wood of Iuye, ye rind first pulled
of, wash an old ma^s head therewith and his hears shall be yelow two months
space after.

Diosco These things following make hears to grow after Auicenies opinion,
first Oil wherein a kind of flies called Cantharides be sod and boyld does
greatly dry the fleme, and afterward let these be applied why the follow. Oil
of Eggs, bearessewet, ashes of the herb called Condiese or Lanary, and of the
pintle and spleen of an Ass, the ashes of the ears and ye bellye of an Hare
burnt ye ashes of Laudanu^, or C^st sage of sothernewod, of C^^^wort and the
ashes of burned (...), and also of walnuttes, oil of (...) and bayberis. A
Lacert and horse leches, myngled together with the Oil called Laudanum and let
the place be anointed therewith and for a surety the hear will grow, it is
proved.

Galen. Burn the head of a Fox together with the skin, unto ashes, and
boil a Lacert (the head being cut of) in oil mightelye a hole day and anoint
and sprinkle that place with the ashes where ye will have hear grow the same
thing woorketh the ashes of Goats doung, or of the claw of a Goat.

Burn a quick Snayle upon a Tile, and crush it with ashes, with. of Alum, and
as much Mary of a Dear sees these in wine and anoint the baldenes. The same
thing doththe Ashes of Bees mixed with oil.

Euphorbium mingled with oil is wonderful good.

To take away Hear.
The Causes.
Auicen. IT is a common saying that if the one contrary be known the other is
plain and evident. So likewise he that knows why the hear falls or is
little in quantitye, is not ignoraunte why the Hear is much in quantitye and
steadfast, which comes of ye multitude of incorrupte humors and thickenesse
of the Skin of the beade with straitness of the holes through the which the
hear grows.

The Signs.
There is no declaration of the tokens necessary if a man do either see or
feel the head.

Remedies. Cap. ii.
IF thou will that ye hare should never grow up again, pluck ye up by the rotes,
and anoint the place with the blood of a back, or with the blood of a little
Frogge, it is proved.

Put also to the place horse leches taken out of the standing water, and
dressed with strong Vinegar.

The ashes of a Colewortes stalk made in a plaster, leteth the growing up of
hears, it is prouyd.

Galen. The milk of a bitche if the place be anointed therwt will not suffer ye
hear to grow the same affirmyth Galen also, of the blood of a bitche.

Let the joyce of a Gourde, well and delygently mengled with water be put on the
bare place.

Laydansi, the gum of an Iuy tree, Em^tes, eggs, Arsenicke and Vinegar bond
to the place whereto ye will apply them, and there will never he^^ grow.

Put the ashes of a grene frogge brent in a bath and all the hears ye be
washed of ye bath will fall away it is proved.

Isac. The Branne of Lupines, of penny b^ane laid on the hearye place, will
make the hear to fall, and will not suffer other to grow.

Diosco. The Joyce of Fumitorye myxte with gum of Arabyke, and laid on the
place the hears first plucked out by the rote will not aparmyte the hears to
grow.

Been flower laid to the preuy me^bres of a child, will not suffer the hear
to grow.

Auicen. the things that let the growing up of hear after Auice^, be these
opium, Henbane, the roughnes or cotton ye is found in fleworte, the blod of
water Frogs, of a water snail and of a Rere mouse, and the oil of the
Decoction of a little grave lacert, and the ^arth called Cymolea white Lead,
Litarge, ye powder of Oysters and Margarties.

Plini. The worm that glistereth in the night if it be anointed, does not
suffer the hear to grow.

The Ashes of the bones of a Swanne laid upon the head of any man, will
quickly make the here is to fall of.

The blood of a Snaile without a shell does mightly let the growing up of the
hear.

Of the pustules or wheles in the head.
The causes.
THe Pustules called Achores, or Tincae, be engendered of a humor partly thieke
and gross, partlye thin and biting, which sharp humor causes the patiente
to claw, and by and by after the ytchinge, the place swells, and breaks out
in little welkes, and some say that it comes of salt and slymy phlegm alone.

The Signs.
Little Vlchers or byles in the head with small holes whereby slymy matter
comes forth.

Remedies. Cap. iii.
Macer. THere is nothing better to heal the Pustules of the head, then to
wassh it often with Vinegar, or with water wherein camomil has been sodden.

Townecresse, stamped with Gose grese does heal the worms of the head.

The leaves of Violets stampte with Honye do lightlye heal the same.

The Decoction of Cich Pease takes away all Scabbynes, as well of the head as
of other members.

Let the rote of Rape, Vyolet or, Sowbread, be sode^ in water wherein let the
nape of the neck be washed, and afterward anointed with the oil of the
Decoction of Rape, Vilet, or Sowbread, for it heals myghtly.

Circan. Let the breaking out of the ringe worm of the head be washed with
strong vyneger, and sprinkle thereon afterward the ashes of the rynd of
wodbinde, and without doubt it will heal al ye scabbines, and filthi Ring
worms.

Take Vinegar wherein wine lies has boylid a little and anointed it all over the
scurfe first cleansed, and it myghtily heals and dries it, or take the
branches of a grene Fyge tree, and the leaves also, and stamp them in water
mightily, if ye scurfe be new, let them be vsid daily with Vinegar, till it be
like mary and then apply it to anoint the place. Constan Cleanse bitter Almondes
and thereof with the cold water of Fystyke Nuttes make anoynteme^t, it is very
good if thy head being shaven be anointed therewyth.

Stamp the rot of Helena Compana, the Branches and Leaves of the Fygge tree,
and bitter Almo^des, mengle them well with oil and strong Vynegar, afterward
putt therein the ashes of the rote of Colewort and Letarge, and Quick Silver,
white Lead and Common salt and blynne them well together and afterward wash
clean the place with Vinegar or Urine, and the^ anoint it it is proved.

Circan. Wine Lies, called Eartarum, made in powder and putt upon the Scurffe
being clensyd, menglyed in oil and Veniger, is very good thereto.

Constable. The Ashes of an wild Coucummer rote mengled with cold water does
cleanse the place wonderfully well.

Sees beaten Oak Apples and the Gall of a Bull, and bitter Almondes together
till they be thick and annoint the place.

Make a confeccion of the flour of Fenell Sede in a Glass with wine and anoint
the head there with and it will lightly heal it, it is proved.

Macer. Worm wood stamped and laid to the head heals lightly.

Circan. Let the Sede of Staphisagre boil in watter and te^per with the same
water a good quantity of chosen wine Lies, and let the head be washed with
this watter twice or thrice.

Of great Valor and efficacy thereunto is this, let Ship Pytch Be dyssolued one
whole nights in Strong vyneger, in the morning let the Oil of Nuttes be
add Mixed there unto and Arsenike and the rotes of an oak, and let it be well
beaten and put there unto a little quick silver and let the head be anointed
therewith but first let it be shaven it is proved.

Let the Root of Helena, Campane, boil with bread in strong vinegar, and
afterward strain it and let the head be washed with the straininge thereof, and
beat the Roots That are not sodden with Boores grease, and let a little Quick
Silver and wine Lies be put^ thereto, and anointe the place. It is proved.

Stamp the leaves of Radissh with Hogs grease, or myngle quick lyme quenched
in water with old grease.

Circan This is good for all Scabbes and Ringwormes take and make a confection
of wine lees and litarge with Veneger and let it stand all a night together, in
the morning let it over the Fire with oil of Nuttes put thereunto, and when it
is don take it of and anoint the place.

Macer. Take the dry doung of an ass Of an Hog, and of an Ox, and wine
Lyese well punned, and stire them together, but yet wasshe the place and dry
it, first rub it with Veniger, or Vryne that it blede again, it is proved.

Circan. Powder of Amptes, myxte with Oil and there with annoynte the Scabbe,
against the same it is very good.

Sethe the Leaves of an oak, and the myddell Rind thereof in water and wash
thy head, it is proved.

Beat old Grease, brymstone, Salendinne, and salt together and annoint the
bare place therwyth, x times, it is excellent.

Take of Alume..viii. of salt.: ii. dyssolue it in strong Vinegar, and anoint
the place, and it will heal it

Plini. Matter of the decoction of Nut leaves cures ye disease in the head or
berde, where the hears fall away. And other deseases of the hear.

Galen For the worms in the head, lay over all the head Ellebore stamp with
hogs grese.

Lay over the head in manner of a plaster the raw liver of an Hog the space
of.ix. days, wash it afterward with cold water and it will hele

Gilbert. The powder that is fyled of from a hearts horn given in wine to be
drunk, does not suffer nether nits nor lyce in the body, much more be ynge
made in an ointment.

All bitter things that cleanse and consume, does kill Nyttes.

Stauisagre, salt peter, Arsemion mengled and tempered with vyneger and oil,
does kill Lyce.

The same works salt water with brymstone in it.

Burn gume, and a Horsseche together, and mingle it with hogs blood, and
anoint the head there with and there will nether Nittes, nether any kind of worms,
Lyce nor fles live in the head.

Diosco Circan. The sede of Staphisagre mixte with oil, kylleth Nittes.

If Quick Silver, and Staphysagre, be mingled with oil and Vinegar, and be
anointed on, they kill the Lice:

Burn the head of a great Ratte and mingle it with the droppinge of a Bear or
of a Hog, and anoint the head, it heals the disease called Atopecia.

Against forgetfulness and drowsines.
The Causes.
This disease is called in Greek of the effect Lethargus, and in latin
veternus and is caused of cold and putrified phlegm which has made cold and
filled the brain.

The signs.
The Lithargy comes with great sluggishnes and such desire of s^epe as cannot
be eschued, with grease oblivion, and forgetfulness so that they can skant tell
what they have done nor make answer when they be spoken unto.

Remedies. Capi. iiii.
Galen. Constable. AGainst this disease of forgetfullnes apply Rewe and red mintes
with oil and very strong vinegar unto thy nosthrils. Burn thine own hear
and mingle it with vinegar, and a little pitche and apply it to thy nosthrils,
for it wonderfully stirs and quickneth the persons diseased with forgetfulness
The lights of an Hog. laid unto the head being shaue^ is very good.

The blood of a Tortoys anointed on ye forhead is of much valor

The gaul of a Craine, being made warm in a leaden vessel does tho roughely
and lightly stir up the deseased body, if ye nape of his neck be anointed
therewith.

Fume made of Roeslether, does myghtyly sterre him up.

Fume of Kyds skins, does quicken forgetful persons, and those ye be infected
with the falling sickness and women also that have there flowers stopte.

The sent or smell of Dog fennel, takes away sleep.

Grynd Mustardsede with Vyneger, and rub it myghtily on the plants of the
feet, and it does quicken forgetful persons.

Sauery beaten, and sodden in Vinegar, and laid in form of a plaster to the
hinder part of the head does merrily awaken those that are heavy with sleep.

Nothing does beter quicken forgetful persons then the smoke of a man's hear.

Galen. A drink made of Anacardiu^ is a peculiar remedy in this desease.

The inieke of Galbanum, or of an hearts horn is best of al things.

The skin of an Hare burnte and the ashes thereof droncke with calament
heals the Lytargie.

For the frensye.
The Causes.
THe Phrenisy comes of great abundance of blood or choler fyllynge up the
brains or paunicules thereof which choler, if it be a dust engenders a most
perylouse and peruiceouse Phrenese.

The Signs.
They which have the Phrensy be troubled with a contynual fever and madness,
with great watchinges, and little sleep and when they wake they roar and cri,
and cannot tell what they say, or do, and if it come of blood they laughe,
of choler the right and braule and skanfe be ruled without Lords or Chains.

Remedies.
FIrst let the matter be put back with the joyce of Plantayne or morell and
vinegar anointing the temples therewith, the^ make a coife or cappe of wax
terbintine and woman's milk and put it upon the head, for it will ease the
pains and provoke the patient to sleep.

Constan Let the sin fo the matter be drawn downward with a suppository or
clister, and with moderate rubbing of the hands and fete, then put a sponge
dipped in the decoction of Henban^ o^ a whelpe or a cock ripte over ye belly
upon the head, or ye lights of a swan, also bind the arms and legs of the
paciente, and let him smell Opium, camphory, Henbane, Basil, Saffro^ or wax
mingled with Rose water, afterward anoint the ears, eyes and nodle with mirth,
storax, castoreum, or wash, the head, with Henbane or Smalagethat have be^
sod in sweet wine Make an ointme^t of Dogfenel detain, and oil of Roses, and
anoint his head therewith, and it shall cause him to sleep.

Also take of Opium..ii. of leven.ii. well beaten with honey and vinegar, and
annoint the Pulses there with.

Make a plaster of Opium, Henbane seed, and Sugar, mingled in the joyce of
lettis, and lay it to his forehead.

Make a suppository of Opium, and oil of Violets.

White Popy, and Henbane seed. distempred with the white of an Egg, and laid
to the forhead provoke sleep.

It is very good to let blood of the vain which is in the middel of (...)
for^head.

Take..i. of opium..ii. of black popy and distempre them with populeo^, and the
milk of a woman that gives suck to a wench, and lay it to the forheade.

The wax of the pacyentes ear, given him in drink causes him to sleep.

Seth Henbane in sweet wine and wash there with thy ears, temples and
nosethrilles, and it provoke sleep.

The hot lights of a goat clapte to the head takes away the frensy so does a
sponge dipped in warm wine and put to the left Pappe.

It is very good to anoint ye forhead with oil of Roses, and to put (...) to
the forhead.

Can. Safron in all meats provoke sleep.

Galen. Lay to the pacientes head safron Ma^drag, and Opium and he shall sleep.

If the head be anointed with oil of Roses, Dogfenel, and Castoreu^, it swageth
the pains and causes the patient to sleep.

Galen. Sprinkle the powder of Mandrage and Arsenike upon a shaven head, and
the man shall sleep.

If the face be washed with hot water of the Decoction of Popy the patiente
shall out of hand either sleep or dye.

Diosco Lay the rote of Neproyal boiled to the head, and it will draw forth the
matter of the madness, it has been proved.

Galen. If the pacient be very sad, let the joyce of Iuy be put in his nose and
Mintes sod in Vinegar be laid to his head.

If the Frantike man have his head anointed with Castoreum, without doubt he
shall sleep.

If thou would cause a man to sleep take Opium, Henbane, Plantayne Popy, and
the leaves of mandrage and yuy leaves and beries, mulbery leaves, and the joyce
of hemlock and lettise, of every one of them..i. stamp the^ all in a mortar,
then let a sponge drink them up, and put it in the Son to dry, afterward
lay the sponge to his nose and he shall sleep, and when thou will awake him
dip an other sponge in vinegar, and hold it to his nose.

For the head ache.
The Causes.
THis disease is called in Greek Cephalalgia, and in Arabicke Soda, comes
sometimes of great multitude of humors contained in the head and sometimes of
an outward cause as of heat of the son of cold, of dronkennes, and of a
stripe, whch be also diverse, and sundry, but because the author is so short in
his remedies (and I entende to write n^^hinge here, but that shall be necessary
for the understanding of him. I will pass them over at this time.

The Signs.
Create pain in the head.

Remedies. Capi. vi.
THe joyce of ground yuie, cast into the nosthrilles purges the head, and
takes away the pain.

Gerard. This does purge the head wonderful well in every kind of head ache
take wax, Mastike, Pellitor^, mustard seed, town cresses Nigeila, romana,
Stauisagre, cynamo^, and of black and white, Hellebore, of either.ii.. let
these be well punned, and put in a bag of linen cloth, then let the patiente
fasting hold this bag in his mouth and chaw it betwi^ his teth, and after wash
his mouth with warm wine and Honey.

When al remedies fayl, a cantery in the hinder part of head helps.

Against the Rewme.
The Causes.
A great multitude of cold humors in the brayn which fall down to the nose and
throat.

The signs.
This disease is ^one known and especially in cold wether.

Remedies. Capi. vii.
IF the Rewme come of a cold cause lay hot Calament or running Time bruysed
to the head.

Diosco An emplaster made of Garlike cloves and leaves stops the humor
causing the rewme.

Isope broyled in the imbres and so laid to the head stops the Rewme a
little bag full of Darnell, salt, and anise, laid to the head is very good.

A Pomander made of the powder of Cubebes, macys, Lapdanum, and Greek pitch,
does remove from the brain all superfluouse humors.

Maces and Cubebes, chewed in the mouth do the same.

Macer. The joyce of colworts cast in the nosethrtiles, does purge the head.

Sorel puned with oil of Roses is good for the head ache.

Against the turn or daselynge in the head.
The Causes.
A gross and thick humore in the brain, from ye which rise vaporouse
spirits, and move discordinatly about ye brain, and sumtimes these spirits
or exhalations come from the stomach.

The Signs.
The pacyent thinks that all things which he sees does move and turn
round, and oftentimes falls down.

Remedies. Cap. viii.
Macer. LEt thy head. be washed with ye water of the Decoction of three leued
gras, and lay aplaster of the herb to thy forehead.

The pith of bread, which was baken with coriander seed laid to the head is
very good.

Diosco. The joyce of onions cast into the nosethrilles cleanses the head.

Sees Pulyole, and lay to temples, it is proved.

Pour Baume into the ears thrce or four times in the Son and it will heal
the pacient.

Lay to the head Silk or woll, dipte in vinegar and the joyce of ground yuy.

Misceltow laid to the head draws out the corrupt humors.

Mintes laid to the head take away the pains that come of a cold cause.

The joyce of Iuy mingled with old lard is wonderful good.

This emplaster was proved by Constantine to be very good, take of Opium and of
Saffro^ of either.i. of rosis..iiii. and thereof with Vinegar make a plaster.

An other is this, take Culuer dounge and branne of wheat, and temper them
with the white of an Egg, and lay it to the contrary part of the head to
that which is payned.

Against to much watching.
The causes.
Great quantity of choler or dryness in the brain.

The Signs.
That he cannot sleep after his accustomed fashion.

Remedies. Cap. ix.
MAke a suppositorye of Opium and oil of Vyolettes,

Anoint thy forhead with opium Mandrage, henbane, and Poppi sede myngled with
the joyce of nyghtshade, and oil of Vyolettes.

Rasis. If it come of old pains in ye head dissolve Opium and Comphory in oil
of Wylowe, and pour it into the ears and nosethryls, or put oil of violets
and milk into the nosethryles.

Dioscor. There is no medicin to be compared to tamarendes for this disease.
Mustard seed, or leaves bruised and laid hot to the head takes away the pains
and there is no beter medicyne.

The vapoure of Celydone sodde in wine and received at the mouth asswagith the
grefe.

There is nothing better then to blow to ye nosthrilles nesyng powder with
powder of Peper and Lastoreum.

Dioscor. The joyce of Sowbread mingled with Honye, and spouted unto the
nosethriles does purge ye head.

Auicen. Oil of fistikes heals the hemcrane and watchynges.

Make a plaster of the rot of a wild Cocumer and wormwod boiled in oil, and
lay it to the head.

The seed of mandrage heals al pain in the head.

Macer. This emplayster is wonderful good, take Gume, wild Rue, the utter
rind of the rote of Cappares French Garlic and euphorbium or clary, of al
like quantity, stamp them with ordoriferouse wine, and lay it to the head.

Siler Montayne is good for the head ache.

It is good to distempre powder of aloes with oil of roles.

He that uses to receive three pylles made of Aloes and the joyce of colwortes
of the bigness of a bean, shall never be troubled with pains in the head.

Let thy head be often washed with lie made of the ashes of Colworte roots, and
nettle rotes with the rote of brionye, for it is of great efficacy against all
pains in the head.

Galen. If ye have the hemicrane, anoynte thy brows and nosethrilles with the
joyce of Iuye leaves myngled with oil and Vinegar.

Plini. Anoint thy head with the ashes of a hertes horn, myxt with oil of
Roses.

The suffumigacion of ye oil of kerna is good for all diseases in ye head

The joyce of Popy myngled with oil of roses provoke ye pacye^t to sleep if
his head be therwt anointed

Galen. Theodoricon empericon takes away all pains of ye head, so do the
leaves of ground Iuye stamped with the white of an egg and laid to ye head

Anoint thy belly with this ointment following and it eases the head ache,
pnrgeth the stomach, comfort the appetite and clarifieth the eyes, take of
the joyce of smallage ii. oun. of mercury.iiii. oun. of gosegrese and hens
grese of either a pound of rosin.ii. ounces of mastike and frankensence of
either.v. of casiafistula..ii. make of al these an ointment and use it, but if
you add thereto the joyce of walworte and the rind of an elder it shall be much
stronger.

Galbanum emplastred to the head is of great efficacy.

For the falling evil.
The causes.
Gross and slymye humores which stop the ventricles of the brains, and
ways of the liuelye spirits.

The Signs.
The pacient to fall as dead to foam at the mouth, and loose his senses.

Remedies. Cap. x.
Sixtus. THe powder of Hearts horn drunk with wine heals the falling Evil.

The brain of a Fox given to infantes cures this disease.

Also the stones of a bore drunk with wine be good therefore so is ye gal of a
Bear bronke with warm water.

The milk of a mare drunk does preserve from fallinge, so does the stones of
a cock drunk with water, but the patiente must abstain from wine.x. days
after.

Galen. This is a sovereign remedy for this disease, make powder of castoreum,
Oppoponax, Antimonium and Dragons blood and use this.

Gerard Alike virtue has Antimonium with castoreum alone, or Antimonium
received with water.

The eggs of a Raven drunk be very good, so is the joyce of wild Rue.

Auicen. The ashes of the skull of a dead man drunk, is wonderful good.

Dioscor. Five leaued grass drunk. xxxiii days does perfectly heal.

The red stone found in a swalow heals the falling evil.

Aristologye carried upon a man cures him, so does the dounge of a curlew if
it be drunk.

The flesh of an wolf eaten and especialy the heart thereof is a great efficacy.

It has been proved that Misceltow drunk cures the disease.

The ashes of a want, wesel, frog or swallow brenned in an earthen pot, and
drunk it is very good.

It is good to drink three sponful of the joyce of Horehound mingled with three
sponefull of honey.

^afis. There is nothing better then wine wherein hemlock has been sodden powder
of the liver of a (...), or the joyce of Lowslope drunk.ix. days together
heals without doubt.

The blood of a wesell drunk, or the ioice of sparow tongue do cure the falling
evil.

Macer. A pie made of the blood of an hare, gromel sede, and other spices does
heal perfectlye, so does the liver of an ass sod and eaten.

Gilbert. The gaul of a bear, or of a dog, eaten is very good.

Make powder of the heart, liver, loges and all the entrails of a dog and give
it him that is sick for it heals wonderfullye, likewise does the powder of
the blood of a dog.

Galen. The ^emnet of an Hare given thirty days together erly, in the fashion
or bygnes of a fetch heals the falling evil.

Pyony tied about the Patients neck, keeps him safe from the falling evil.

The sand of a wall made in powder with dogs torde, and the joyce of sloes
drunk with warm watter as the disease begins to come on the sick parson
will heal him for ever.

Give the sick party the heart of an Heart to drink with warm water and he
shall be healed.

Give the pacyent to drink the heart of a Grype, with warm water and he shall be
whole.

Let the heart the liver and lyghts of a Grype, or vulture be dried well against
the fire, and let the paciente drink ye powder there of with oximel and the
falling sycknes will go from him

The stones of a Bear, be very good eaten, and so are the stones of a Ra^me,
of a Bore, and a boore big.

In tuscia there was acertayne man delivered and healed of this dyseases of a
certain husbandman, by only orderyng or dressinge of wild rue and afterward
were many healed, after the same manner.

the joyce of Coryander given to the pacient to drink, will not, suffer the
humore to ascend into ye head and it works also great help, to the pacyentes.

take a Frogge and cut her through the mids of the back with a kniefe and
take the liver and fold it in a coleworte leaf and burn it in a new earthen
pot well closid and give the ashes th^rof unto the sick person in his sycknes
to drink with good, wine and if he be not healyd at ons do so by another frogge
and so do still, and without dout it will heal him.

Powder made of ye stone of a swalowe heals without doubt those which have
the falling Evil, for it is a sure experyment.

Against madness called mania.
The Causes.
Great quantity of incorrupte blood flowyng to the brain.

The Signs
It is like to the Phrenesye saving that the frenesy, comyth with a fever, and
this without.

Remedies. Capi. xi.
LE^teyne men say that a roasted Mous eaten does heal Frantic persons.

Diosco Gilb. and Lapid. A red stonne found in a swallowe, carried about the
pacient and tied in a cloth of lynen and put under the lift arm does heal
Frantyke and lunatike persons.

A Radishe stamped, and bound to ye brain will heal one of the falling sycknes
by and by.

Against al deseases in the eyes.
The Causes.
Seeing that there be many diseases in the eyes and therefore have sundry causes,
and that the remedis be not digestyd to order for every cause, it were but vain
to recyt the causes in this place wherefore I will pass them over.

The Signs.
The signs do ever follow the causes.

Remedies. Capi. xii.
Galen. Give unto a daselled person lothernwod to drink, and laid on his head
being shaven, the ordoricon emperion, and anacardium for it draws and
sucketh out the venomous vapors

Baume beaten with oil laid unto the brain and forehead, is good therefore.

Efiula. Lions flesh does heal fantastical persons.

One dram of Armoniacke is good therefore mynystred with honye.

Gilbert. When as the pacient faulleth first into his sickness, give him the
joyce of Columbyne to drink, or make him potage of Valeria^ or of Sage or of
Rue and he shall be hole for ever.

Plini. The brain of a Camel being dried and taken drives away the falling
sickness.

Of the same operation is his blood being dronk.

The blood of a Lamb drunk with wine, takes away the falling sickness.

The herb that is called sparowes tongue heals if it be drunk.

The stone that is found in a hearts head stamped and given to the sick person
heals him.

Robert. Sees the heart of a storke in water and give the broth thereof to
drink and the heart to be eaten of the pacient, but let the blood be drawn out
of the heart first, and he shall never have the falling evil against.

The ashes of Rue snuft up, into the nosethrils does purge it incontinent.

Aistus. The spleen of an ass eaten often does remedy.

The brain of a camel mixed with oil of roses anointed on the pacient behind
and before through out all his body does throughlye heal which eis not so
wonderful an experient as it is true.

The blood or gal of a lamb does heal the sick of the falling Evil.

The donge of a Pecock^ taken in drink heals them also.

Swallows if they be eaten are good therefore.

The little stones that are found in Swallows bellies bound to their right
arms does perfectlye heal them. Cauteries applied to the head are good for
this disease, if it have reigned long upon him.

The bird that makes her nest in the banks under the ground that Galen has a
neck that is of a changeable color black and blew, and is much like to the
clear element, with her wings burnt and beaten and so after drink heals
those that are taken. Put the leese of wine, and the bran of wheat in wine a
day and a night, and afterward make pills which pills minister to
melancholic persons fasting.

Aistus. The white of an egg beaten together and scummed and put into the eye,
takes away the heat and pricking thereof.

Let the white of an egg and the joyce of Perritorye of the wall, be beaten
well together and scummed, and let one drop of licor remaining be put into the
eye and it shall heal the web in the eye. This is true and proved.

The joyce of Scala Celi or Salomons seal, strayned and put into the
nosethrils is very good for many diseases of the eyes.

The joyce of wormewod, woman's milk and Rose water mingled together, if they
be ordered in form of a plaster they will assuage the gricie and take away the
blood and other spots in the eyes.

The sede of the herb called dragons being taken in drink helps the sight.

Wormewod new stamped with the white of an egg and laid over the eyes, takes
away the blood and redness thereof, of what humor so ever it come.

If the eyes be sore with blood or who^e tears put in them the joyce of the
tops of a black beary tree with the white of an egg and fine Flax, and they
will be whole, this is proved.

The joyce of chicke^weed with the joyce of the top of the black bery bush
put into the eye takes away the blood and the white spot in the eye

New made cheese washed often in water and mengled with the whyt of an egg and
rose water, and so laid to the blood shotten eye, or that is full of hot
humors does quikely help and remedy.

Peter. It is also of the same operacion being only put in scalding hot
licoure The yolke of an egg sodde^ in rose water or myxt with oil of roses
and applied to the eyes does asswadg ye grefe of them, this has been proved

Roses put in a bag and being well boiled and laid to the eyes, take away
the pain and swelling from the eyes.

Against a great pain take the ashes of the leaves of Colewortes and the yolke
of an egg roasted in the fire and woman's milk and myngle with all a little honey
and bynd it unto the eyes till they behole.

Rychar. If thy eyes be burning hot mingle the milk of a Bytche with the
joyce of an herb called, Scalaceli and anoint them therwyth.

Sixtus. Diosco. The ^ightes of a Ram or weder bring hot bound over the eyes
does lightli take away the blood it is proved.

Another experyment is this, the gaul of a Partrytche put or dropped into the
eye takes away the dines of the eyes.

The same operacion has the gaul of a turtle, Dove, that has benne proved.

The ioice of Rue mixed with honi that has been scu^med and put into the eye a
little at ones, rides the patiente of an ancient dimnes of the sight.

If thou put into thine eye.ix. grayenes of the seed of Oculus Christy, thou
shall not feel the^, yet they will purge the eyes.

I have oftentimes seen that little stones like unto the nauel of a man which be
found growing together like beds by the sea side, put into the eyes purge the^
and yet are not feel. The water of the decoction of wild time does dry up the
tears or watrines of the eyes if they be often washed therewith, this is true.

Take and sees the leaves of betonye, and the root of Fennel and wash thine
eyes with the water thereof and the tears will be dried up.

The joyce of the leaves of woodbinde stampte and strayned with woman's milk
and put or squirted into the eye does put away the blemishes of the same.

The joyce of chickeweede does clear the eyes of blemish or spotte if it be
putrified.

The joyce of knot gras puts away the spot of the eye.

(...) The joyce of plantain or rybwort applied to the eye with a little silk
it heals the sore and hollow ulcers of the corner of the eye within ten
days.

Of the same operacion is the powder of horsehoofe that growethe by the ground
put into the eye.

Lapid. A saphir and a smaradge heal ye eyes of them whom they touch.

Diosco The joyce of ye rote of great galla^ga being put i^to ye eyes does clear
the^ the water wherein flewort has been stepped all a night put either into the
eye, or washed over the eye lyddes does incontinent dry and heal ye tears
with the heat and ytchyng.

The same does a fumigation where in the flowers of pomgranates or ye leaves of
an oak or plantayne have been sodden in, this is proved.

Let tutia be washed in rose water till the water change the color, and put
the same water into ye eye, it takes away ye blood the heat the abou^dau^ce,
and humidity of the tears Gerard Burn sowet grapes upon a tileshard and the
dust thereof being sifted through a fine cloth and put into thine eyes, it
takes away the rednes and also the humidity thereof.

The yolke of an egg, mingled with Rose water, bran, and woman's milk is by
asswaging the pain a very good expercussiue medicine.

Sixtus. Tuty does dry and clear the eyes more then all medicines and
restrayneth and keeps back sharp matter from flowing up the eyes.

Constan Stamp rue with Common and mingle thereunto the yolke of an egg, it
heals wonderfully well, and clears the eyes of congeled blood.

Anoint the eyes that are bleared with the joyce of ganderhose or lady traces ye
growich on mountains or in meadows and they shall be hole incontinent and the
grief taken away.

For ye dimnes and bloudshoting in the eyes sta^p aloes with ye white of a^ egit
is wonderful good.

Galen. Gallens collyry is exceeding good to heal the dymnnes of the sight in
one day take of Antimomium, and the joyce of Slowys of eiche. v. of Endyue.i.
and of burnt brass washed.ii. of white lead.i. of myrthe half.i. of castoreu^,
of opium, of gu^me Arabicke, of the joyce of whete, of each.i temper them
together with rose water and the white of an egg and cast it into thy eye

Against fistules, make powder of Frankensens, Aloes, Sarcocolle, Dragons
blood, flowers of Pomegranates, Anise, the flower, of brass and when need is
press the holowe ulcer, so that the rottennes may be quenshed or crusshed out,
then letye pacient lie on that side yt is whole and distell a little of this
powder with the claryfyed joyce of plantayne, and let it be dropped into ye
sore corner of the eye, and so let him lie.iii. or iiii. hours.

Put the ashes of a burnt snayle upon the spott in the eye, and with in three
days it will take it away.

All kind of milk does assuage the pain in the eyes, but chyefely when it is
made in form of a plaster with the yolke of an Egg and oil of Roses.

Macer. Betony stampte and made in a plaster, heals a stripe in the eye.

If thy eyes be washed with the water wherein betonye, or the root thereof has been sodden, they shall be whole with out Dymmes, or other blemysshe.

Plini. If you drink a drame of Betoni with water, it will bring down and
heal the cloudynes and bloudines of the eyes.

The same being eaten dries up the tears of the eyes.

Item the often eating of great Colwortes clears the dimmes of the eyes.

(...) tamp Comin d^ied against the fire (and not burnt) with the white of an
egg and mi^gle it with cromes of bread and put it on your eyes and ye shall
clear the blood from them, this is prove.

Veruen stamped with the white of an eg and bound unto the eyes at the euning,
takes away the watrynes of the eyes.

Resolve aloes in a good quantity of the joyce of Fennel put into a latin
basen.xv. days, and after put it into the eyes that are full of itthing, and
it is very good for them.

(...) Item Beans, the rind or over skin being pulled of, bruised and
mingled with the white of an egg and applied in form of a plaster to the
temples, or mingled with masticke keep back and restrain humors flowing up to
the eyes.

The same being plastered with wine health the eis that have had some strype.

Acatia made in a plaster is wonderful helpyng against swellings or other
humors of the eyes.

Likewise this precious powder is of great effycacye to extinquisshe the spot
of the eye by removing the blood and restraynyng the tears.

Take of tutia.ii. of Dragones blood.i. of sugar.i. stamp them and sifte them
fynely and pute into thine eye a very lityll, it is safe and without danger in
warrantise and often approved.

Item let the spot be ryped before you use dissoluing medicines with oil made
of filbertes sodden in water stampte and crusshed.

Galen. Make powder of Roses sugere and salgem of each like quantetye and put
it upon the spott in the eye and it will destroy it encontynetie.

Take cerusse and tutia.iiii. time que^chid in Vinegar and Sugar and stamp a
little marchasit, and let the powder be put upon the spot, this has been proved.

Let the rote of Fennel boil with water in a pot, of the same water take one
drop and put it into thine eyes

One drop of the pacientes own brine does mightily heal the watriaes of the
eyes.

Stamp burnt Almondes, Cerusse Sarcocol, Tutia, of each like quantity with
clear wine and let them be dried again and stamp them and put a little thereof
into thine eye and so shall it be whole.

Put Camphorye bruysed and strayned with the joyce of Fennel upon a little
blemysh in the eye.

The ashes of Hearts horn burnte on a tyleshard heals the blemish or sttipe
in the eye.

Diosco Isac. Fine whete flower mingled with water and strayned, put into the
eyes restrains and purges the tears and humors that else would flow unto
the eyes.

The grene leaves of the Plame tree sodden in wine and used as a plaster cure
the Rewme and watrines of the eyes.

The milk of the rind of a Sallow tree when it bears flours being cast into
the eyes, heals and clarifyeth them and being tender comfort them.

The joyce of the seed of Plantaine cast into the eye, takes away the soornes
thereof.

Diosco. A pumyse made hot, and thrisse quenched in wine and beaten to powder,
if it be put into the eyes it heals those that have pain thereof. Auicen. The
white of an egg clapped whote to the sore eyes restores and heals. Clear
common oil dropped into the eyes puts away incontinent the spots and
whitenes thereof. The joyce of thrystell, or Malowes and wild Endive put away
the blemyshe out of the eye.

Item take of the ashes of a swallows head burnt.ii. of chosen honey on.iii.
of the joyce of fennel. on. i mengle them together and put the^ in a vyol of
glass, and stop ye mouth thereof close, afterward boil it in a skelletful of
water sething still till the one half be mynysshed, and let the other half
remain, and anoint the eye early in the morning, and a little before the
pacient go to supper and also when he goes to bed putt one little drop thereof
into the eyes and it shall appeas the grefe, this has been proved of diverse
autors.

Auicen. The powder of Succory put into the eyes sharpneth the sight.

Morel also put into ye eye heals the hollow ulcers of the eye.

The leaves of wild mallows chewed in the mouth and a little salt applied as
a plaster to the eyes, make clear the hollow ulcers of the eye and make the
flesh to grow.

Peter. Mingle the ashes of Coluers donge burnte with vinegar and afterward
let it be dried and brayed finely and tempered with the joyce of Fennel, and
drop the joyce into the eyes upon the blemishe, it is a principal medicine.

Wine of the decoction of formentile dronk daily without any other drink and
the herb thereof sodde^ and every evening emplastered over the eyes the space
of.iii. or iiii. months or more restores the sight, Yea to those that have
there eyes as though they did se, and yet se not at all The leaves of veruen
stamped with wine and salt and bound over the eyes as a plaster day and night
has a wonderful efficacy against the blearynesse of the eyes.

Stamp Rue and strain it with Vinegar and Honey, and put of ye which is
stremed out a little in ye eye, it dries up the tears wonderfully.

Tempre ynke with the white of an egg and sterre them well together till a
froeth rise over it and the^ let it stand, and put that into the eye, which
fleryth above every night til it be whole.

Sta^pe the rind of black thorue being gren with a little wine and put into
thine eyes one drop of ye licour and thin eye will be hole within.iii. days.

Again, temper honey and ynke and strain it through a cloth and cas^ a drop
thereof into thine eye, within iii. days it will heal it and clear a way the
blemysshe.

Take a bruised cocle and press out the joyce, put it hastly into thin eye for
it puteth away the blemisshe in the eye wonderfully.

Item if.ii. of Alowes and.i of mastike be ministered unto the pacient temperid
with Fennel water it is amedycyne of great efficacy and often proved to clear
the sight.

Take of the wood of Aloes of cybryght, of runninge time, of sauery, of Isop,
of spyke, of eiche.i. of maces.vi. of Vyolettes half.i. let the^ al be made in
powder by them selfs then myngle them together, and of this powder sprinkle
the quantity of.i. scruple every evening two hours after supper on the
foreparte of ye head by the joint Sagit, from the ioynte ye comes up to the
crown of the head, full unto the point of the crown, called zenith, the
breadthe of four fingers, yet so that the first powder be taken away, for the
second powder must be laid upon the place. and this were good to be used. iii
or.iiii. days, and is a great help in apt complexions.

Item take of the uttermost part of the Iuy tree, of the seed or leaves of
Oculus Christi of amistica^os of each..i. of Calaminte of wild Margeram
ana..i. of the rotes of cond iii or lanary. oun.i. of the rotes of holyhoke.
on. and a half seth the^ all in two pottels of water until ye wasting of the
third part. then alter let the ashes of the same be shed over it finly sifted,
and with the water of the ashes, let thy head be washed once or twice in the
weke ge^tly rubbing it with white soap, for it dri^th up the spots and
vapors in the eye by soking them to the hinder patte and strongthinge the
substance of the brain and eyes.

The joyce of smalege and the whit of an egg mingle them together and put into
the pacyente eyes going to sleep.

Of the same operation is the ashes made of a sallow tree dried and burnt and
put into the eye.

Item the fat of fresshe river fysshes molten and mingled with oil and honey
ar of great excelle^cye for the clearnes of the eyes. And they are good against
the watrines when it first begins in the eye.

The joyce of wyld purslane dropped in the eye, puts away ye web of the eyes
without doubt.

The joyce of gronnd Iuy put into the cornner of the eye where the white is,
turnyng the head aside takes the freasing of the eye and remoueth the little
whitnes that is be hynde.

Against the cloudynes of the sight take morning dew and the ioice of rue, and
the flowers of Bytone, and put them into thine eyes.

Put a good quantitye of Salfe Peter burnt into thine eye it is very soueraygne.

The gaul of a Gripe of Ram, mixed with man's ordure and wine and well
strayned, is very good to clear the sight.

Against the itching and haw in the eye mingle sout and the joyce of smalage
with good white wine, the^ let it stand al a day afterward, anoint and wash the
eyes, it is very good.

To take away the pain and blood in the eyes, mingle Alowes and Opium with the
milk of a woman yt gives a man child suck, it is very good therefore.

Cut a whole lofe of barley in two in the mids, and lay the dust or powder of
wild Parsnep upon the raw flesh about the eye, and hold the hot lofe hard to
thine eyes it clears thy sight very much.

The self same thing does the powder of the mulbery leaves, this have Aproued.

Take time and eat it, it puts away the dimnes of the eyes.

Cerusse dropped in thine eyes takes away the pain and clears the eyes. Of
the same operation is camphory.

Vnguentum preciosum dropped into the eye with a fether dries the watrines and
put away the sparte in eyes, and sharpneth the sight.

Quench the stone called Calaminaris being first burning hot in Rose water
three times after the same manner do by Tuty, and with that water wash thy eyes.

Furthermore take of this Calamenaris stone dried and well dressed. on.ii. of
Tutia prepared after ye sa^e manner..vi. of the wod Aloes, half a on. of
roses..ii. let them be beaten and made in powder and wraped in a silk cloth
double folded, and thereof make an ointment, with ii. pound of swines blood
that was pigged ye year, and a pound of Rose water and let the^ seth together
til ye rose water be consumed, then cole it, and with ye same blood mingle ye
pouders above specified, and they shall be kept in their lively strength. this
has been prouid

The wine of the decoction of Rue unto ye third part dropped into ye eyes
clears them from all filthy blood

Of the same operation is the dust of the coals of a dry sallow tree put into
the eyes.

Petar. This water folowi^g is marvelous good against all spots in the eye,
and to comfort the sight.

Take of fennel, of Rue. of eybright of Veruen, of Endive, Tormentill Betone,
of Siler mountain, of the rote of Galingal, of each like quantity the first day
after they be stamped let them be put in wine, the second in ye brine of a
maide^ child. then after let the^ be distelled in a Lembike ye first water ye
comes out is a precious as silver, the second as gold the third as bawme.

Take the seeds of Fennel, of Persely, of Smalage of anise of oculus cristi,
and clary ye rottes of sale^dyne, of fenel, of betonye, of gali^gal, ye leaves
of agrimoney, of eybright, of torme^til, of rue, of verue^ of eiche like
quantity let them be stamped al together and let the^ be put ye first day in
the bryne of a maiden child ye second in wine, ye third in ye milk of ash
ass on the fourth day let them be distel lid and keep it as bawm it sharpneth
the sight, it clarifieth the eyes it puts away the pynne and web.

Camphorye and water betony have been greatly proved to clear ye sight stamp of
eyche together like quantity and that myghtly well, and strayn the ioice out
thereof through a cloth and distill or drope it into the eyes through a quyl.

The joyce of the Lyly rote put in to thy eye takes away the hawe

The ashes of a man's ordure cast into thine eye, does mightly put a way al
spots of the eye.

Plint. For the webe and cloudines in ye eyes, take and stamp Indisshe Peper
and put to it ye joyce of a Fenel tore and let it be put for.xv. days in a
basin of Brass, and so put it into the eye it is very good.

Galen. A bath of warm water does greatly supresse the burning or fyere
ytchynge and the grefe of the eyes.

The lights of an Hare cut in small peceo takes away the swellynge of the
eyes.

Take the gaul of a Cock mixte. the joyce of Salendyne and Honte and anoint
thine eyes therewith, it restores thy sight perfectlye.

The ashes of a great Swallow mixte with Honye and put into thine eyes, takes
away the dimnes of ye eyes.

Of the pain the Ear.
The Causes.
Goinge or rydyng in coldr wyndes, or bathyng in cold watter, and sumtimes it
comes of a hot inflamacyon.

The Signs.
Great pains in the Ears either with heat or cold.

Remedies. Capi. xiii.
Diosoe THe joyce of wild curu^met leaves, takes away ye grefe of the ears.

Take and put the grene wood of an Asshe in the fyere, and save the lycoure
that comes out at the end of the same, and put it into thin eats it cause
the pain of ye Ears to cease and a mendeth the hearing.

Stamp earth worms, the Eggs of Emetes and ye leaves of Rut together and
being sodden in oil strain them and let faul one drop of that oil being
warm into thine ear it restores again the hearing, being ons lost.

Put oil and scalion seed together, and me^gle thereto the joyce of lekes and
wormewod, and woma^smilke sees them over the coals and strain it, and put one
drop into thine ear and stop it fast with silk in ye morning, after six
hours. take it out, and tourn the sore eace downward and wash it gently, it
is a goodly experyment.

Item in a hot cause, Lettis mad in a plaster is much worth, Hemp tow dipped in
the white of an egg is very good it is proved.

Item worms of the earth stamped with Rose water and aplied to the ear are
very good also.

Item hot water with woman's milk only, applied for a plaster is of much
effecacy.

Rogeri. Item it a little stone or a grain or any such like thing saull into
a man's ear, let one person or other put his mouth to the ear let him blow
into it stronglye and a good while, and after set to his mouth a gain and
suck.

If a worm have crepte into a man's ear, drop thereunto of ye joyce of the
rinds of nuts or of the leaves of a peach tree.

A ripe apple ye has a good savor is to be applied unto the ear bring warm
some what opened on the lower part that fasteneth to the tree and in the
morning ye chalt find there a worm all to pieces throngh the savor of the
apple.

The oil of bitter almondes, and the cutnell of a peach does open the ears
very much.

Against the worms of the ears let the joyce of wormwod be dropped into the
ears.

Put the joyce of Sengrene, oil olive, the joyce of a leke, the milk us of a
woman y^ gives a man child sack into a viole of glass three days and three
nights setting the mouth open it is said to restore the hevrig wonderful well.

The gall of a Goat put into the ear with joyce of a Leky, takes away the
pain in the ear and restoring the hearing.

The gal of a Goat and woman's milk tempered with Honye, and a little Mirhe is a
principal medicine Boil the joyce of Sengrene put in a holow Scailio^ in the
fire, and put the ioice that is strained therout in to thine ear, and lay the
Onion over the same, in manner of a plaster, it is very much worth in both
causes.

Constable. The joyce of wild Margeram, mixed with woman's milk and put in to thine
ear takes away pain thereof.

The joyce of Iuy mixed with commen oil and put into the ear takes away the
grief.

Item Betels that are found in ye doung of beasts grinded and mixte with oil
of Roses and the rind of a Pomegranate, if the oil be put into the ears, and
the rest b^ing the dregs be plastered on, they will take away the pain of
the ears.

Plats. Item of a stone, or a corn fall in to the ear, put into it things
that will soften or make easy, and let the pacient always lie on that ear,
y^ if it decline or be coraing foreward be ever ready to receive it, it not,
set him stop bys nostrelles and mouth and provoke himself to Nees, if it will
not be so nether, apply ventose unto the ear with fire, then again put into
y^ ear Turbentine or bird lime upon the end of a stycke, and let it stick to
the ear, yet put it in and pull it out again.

Isas The joyce of an Onion, with woman's milk does wonderfully assuage the
greese.

Dioscor. The joyce of Betony cast into the ear luke warm, is very profitable
against the pain, deafenes and other impediments of the ears.

Item the fat of a fox does greatly cure the pain of the ears.

The loice of bay leaves distilled in to the ears does not permit deafenes,
nor other strange soundes, to abide in the ears.

Galen. Oil mingled with Cinnamon is ye most soueraygnest thing of all that
delayeth great of the ears.

Oil wherein bitter almonds have been stampte, or oil of Juniper, or oil of
ye decoction of onyons, or of a radish, all and every of these are good for
eats that have their grief of a cold matter.

The ioyces kill the worms of the ears, the joyce of wormwood, and the joyce
of peache leaves, or the joyce of wild cucummer.

Distell into the ear the fact of an Ecle with the joyce of an Onion and of
singrene ye grows on tyles, put it in luke warm and it takth away the deafnes.

Macer. Like wise the joyce of I sop mixed with oil, and blood warm put in to
the ears takes away the paynfull ache of the ears.

Gilbert. Item a perfume of whote Vyneger does greatli open the ears and both
much good to the hearing for the sharpnes of it.

Galen. Diosca. Item stamp Ampies eggs and strain them through a clothe and
put there unto the joyce of Swines grass or Knottgrasse and dystell it into the
ears it helps long continued deafnes.

These dryne of a boy poured in to the ear dries up the humor of the
disease, and healest it quickly.

Stamp, onions and comin with oil and rub the eats and lay it to hot and it
will take away ye grefe of ye ears

Plint. The fat of frogs instilled or dropped into the ears takes away the
tinkling or found in them.

Esfula. The fat of a Lion or of a Fox is of much valor against the pain of
the ears and al pains besides.

Plini. The joyce of creuises mightelye helps the grief of the ears.

The joyce of a Willow tree leaves put into the ears helps the hurt

Conff. Macer. The fat of a Dormous put into the ears helps the grief
thereof. Take of Alume.. s. Castoreum..i. of salt Peter,.i. and a half, let the^
seth in the best wine that may be gotten then strain it and let the same Wine
be put into the earts luke warm.

It would much help to anoint the out side of the ears and I aye it there in
form of a plaster.

The gaul of an Hare made hot with the sewet of a For and spicknard heals
the deafnes.

Drink a whole Mouse stampte and myxce with wine and Spiknard. it wonderfully
heals an old continued pain of the ears.

For the Morphew.
The Causes.
Gross and slymy blood changed to white phlegm, or to melancholye

The Signs.
The skin to be spotted like to a Snake.

Remedies. Cap. xiii.
TO expel or take away ye mor phewe or Ring worm myxte milk with the water of
the inner kernels of Pin Apples and with the creme ye sliteth above the warm
malke anoint the Ring worm and it will heal it, without doubt.

Kogeri. A bathe made of the chafe of barley or Otes of the leaves of mallows
and wormewod, and after annoint it with this ointment take barley meal and
flower of Fenigreke and Borace, make dust or powder of the each in like
quantity, and myngle it with the ioice of an onion, and hont scummed and
clarified and anoint the place therewith.

Against the Ring worms or mor phewe that has long reigned vyo^ one, take of
Camphorye.i. of Boraie.ii. of the meal of Ciche pease being read.iiii. mengle
them with joyce and Honey.

Plini. The fat of Lions, smerde over the face with Rose oil, keeps the
whytnes.

Galen Against the morphew in the face sees a Lacert being gren together with
white wine in oil unto the third part, strain it and put there unto white
ware and anoynte the place therwyth, this is proved.

The rot of a little burre sodden in Vinegar and dried over the ringeworme
heals the same.

The same does the rote of a plantayne stamped with Vinegar and salt and
strayned and after the place with warm Vinegar must be anointed To put away
the wrinkles out of the face and all other grefe, stamped the dry root of a
wild cucumer, sift it and mingle it with water, and wash thy face, and wash it
again, with other cold water, do this tor three days space, and it shall have
wonderful effect.

To make all the face far, smere thy face all over with bulls blood it takes
away the blemishe in the face, and makes the face fair.

Coluer dounge ground in Vinegar and smeared over thy face puts away all
morphew and rawnines this has been proved.

A sheep liver fresh killed and warm laid to thy face, it makes and fair
colored, and amorous face.

For the Tooth ache.
The Causes.
The synowes being very hot or cold or great quantity of humors falling from
the head to the gummes.

The Signs.
The pains is known well enough.

Remedies Cap. xv.
Diosco. IF you wash your mouth once a month with the wine of the decoction
of the rote of Mertwort, thou shalt be healed of thy tooth ache.

Salt mixed with dowe and baked against the fire, and so laid on the tooth
heals the ache perfectly.

In a vehement ache put a little of the joyce of ground Iuy, in thine ear on ye
side as thy ache is, it will a little grieve thee, but incontinent thy tooth
shall cease.

The joyce of yellow flagge put in thine ear is of the same operation

Put henbane seed upon the coals and teceyue the smoke thereof into thy teeth
by gapinge and holoinge thy mouth over it, it kills the worm and asswageth
the pain, this has been proved.

Anoint thy toth with mary of an horse it has been tried ye it does hele The
flower or meal of wild poppy seed put into the hollow tooth does quickly
heal.

Item let the mouth be washed with the decoction or our Ladies Chistel it takes
away the pain.

Diosco. Fill the tooth with a piece of Radish rote, or let thy gummes or thy
teeth be rubbed therewith it takes away the ache.

That thy teeth never ache, take the powder that comes of fylyng of an hearts
horn, and let it seth in water in a new earthen pot and so put it into thy
mouth where thy grief is

Diosco Wine or water after (as the cause is) of the decoction of wild cucummer
holden in thy mouth drives away the pain.

The joys of Succory put into the ear or nostrell that is on the contrary
side to the grefe takes away utterly the tooth ache, the stone of a Date
takes away the pains.

Sees the tind of a mulbery tree rote in the joyce of a cluster of grapes unto
half, and wash thy mouth therewith, and thy teeth shall never ache.

Macer. Rub thy teeth often with a Persenep root, and it shall take a way
the worms in them and aching for ever.

Against astrong pain sees violets in wine and hold them in thy mouth
Diosco. Vyneger wherein the root of Henbaneis sodde^ takes the ache in the
teth away, if thy mouth be washed there with and holde^ a good while there in,
Auicen. Hearts horn burned til it were white, and beaten fine makes the teeth
clean and the gumes and cease the buruyng pain in them.

Galen. Stamp (...) of garlyke and tie it about the arm on that side that ye
tooth aketh, nere to the hand it draws away as the payns.

Diosco Put into the ear of the same side that the teeth ache, the torce ot bit
it and of the leaves of wyld cucumet, it takes away the toth ache.

Galen. Rogeri. Constable. Let thy teeth be washed with the decoction of wild
Margetam, or put into thy toothe a burning streke for above all herbs, or
morethen all herbs the same helpethe the teeth.

Serapine stamped and put into the bolow tooth takes awai^ pains thereof.

Galen. Vinegar of the decoction of Lolloquintida, held a good while in the
mouth, is a princypal remedy, or if it be sodden in the rind thereof.

Dioscor. The mylk of wetwort baked with the branne of Corn and put into ye
hoole of the tooth breaks ye tooth

Fyl the hollow tooth with the gum of Iuy, it will take away the tooth ache.

Touch the toth that aketh with the rote of water crowsote, inconttnent it
takes the pain away and breketh the tooth.

Wash thy teth with the water of the decoction of pomegranetes flowers and put
ye powder of the said flowers into thy toth, it does make the teth fast and
takes away the a the thereof by restraining the rewm

Make agargarysme of the decoctyon of sage, Rue, Pelletory, Ysop. black
Ellobor of the rote of wild Cucumer, the root of Calamynte and of the stalk
of Organ, and part of it beside, put into the ear on ye side as the ache is
of, with oil.

If the grefe be exceeding paynful put thereto Opium temperyd with the yolke of
an egg half lod there be also which make of ye dregs of oil, the lykenes
of silk thrids the take the dregs of oil that has no grounds of Durte or
sand and sethe it in a caudro^ of brass til it be thycke and then they put it
upon the teeth yt ache, for it que^cheth the pain and he that does the same with
the joyce of sower grapes fill it be like honey and put thereof upon the teeth
yt be eaten hollow, it puleth them out by the rote, or else makes away to the
easiex pulling out of them.

If the holow tooth be filled with crows doung it breaks the toth and takes
away the pain.

Boil live corns of the seed of Iuy in the rind of a pomegranate with oil of
roses and put it to the ear one the cyght lise, and it will take away the pain
of thy teeth on the lift sid and so of the contrary part.

Constan The rote of black Henbane mightly heat, and it be applied to thy
toth that aketh and the roottes thereof, it will faull out by it self,
iocontynnent, but beware lest it touch other teeth also for then they will faul
out as many as are touched there with. Of the same operacyon is the heat be
being rubbed upon the toth.

Mengle the powder of pelletorye called in Latin Pirethru^ with the milk of
wertwort and with Galbanum, and lay it on the tooth and it will break, and the
pain shall be taken away thethy.

Rub thy toothe with a roots of walwort, it takes away ye pain thereof.

(...) Put the joyce of asodyll into the tares it takes away the pain of thy
teeth on the contrary side, of the same operation is the joyce of succory.

Sees the root of henbane in bineger, which bineger hold a good while in thy
mouth it takes away the ache of the teeth.

The joyce of town cresses put into the ear on that side that aketh takes
away the ache thereof.

Dioscor. Let I soap boil in bineger and let the tooth be washed therewith, it
take away the pain thereof quickly. The roose of cinke foil or the water or
the decoction thereof, put into the mouth and as it were gargarised, takes away
the ache of ye teth A decoction of the leaves of the tree yt is called of the
apothecaris, Camariscus helps the toth ache.

Sirtus Powder made of dogs teth put into thy toth does put away ye tot^, ache
The brain of a partriche put into the hollow tooth breketh the same takes
away the aching.

Water or win^ wherein y^ leaves of the damasine tree, or the rind of the rote
thereof have be sodden, the mouth being often washed thet Wall, it fastneth the
teeth and gummes, and keeps all the whole mouth from all kind of pain.

The joyce of the rote of dog fennel or of the herb thereof put into the hole
of the tooth will not permit any worm to live therein

But sod in wine, and laid in form of a plaster upon the pain in the gums
by drieng up the humor it takes away the pain.

Diostor. The rote of Sperage stamped and laid unto the toth that aketh with
woldrawth out the same, without pain.

The leaves of Sage laid unto the tooth yt aketh takes away the act, and
comfort the teeth y^ are hurt through cold, that they be no more put in
grief thereby.

If thou fill thy teth that are hollow with pitch of a Ledre tree, it will make
them to break, and if you hold it long in your mouth it will take the pain
away quite.

Mastike somewhat mollified with the white of an egg raw and applied to the
gums closes the chops of the gum and lips, this has been proved.

The liver of a stellion laid unto the tooth that does ache will appeas the ache
incontinent.

Take of Sumache of oak apples of the berries of the Myrthe tree, of acorns
bulkes, ye seed of myrrh tree the sebe of Plantaine of each..i. of white
vitriol of alume broken in pieces of each..i. and a half. of flowers of Gilofer
and of the seed of Rolls, of each..ii. and a half, let them all be stamped
together after a gross manner, and let the^ sees in a pot with water, wherein
let xl. young buddes of a bra^ble that bears berries be put continually to
boil, til half the water be consumed, which being strayned and co^^ed, let
the pacient wash his mouth with the same very often, which done let him apply it
to the Jaws and teeth.

Are^ take of Camphory and let it seth in vinegar, a little afterward let y^
sick person hold his mouth over it and make the ach to cease.

Auicen. Mingle man's hear being brent with oil of Roses, and put into thy
care, the grief of thy roothe shall cease. Put the powder of red Coral in the
hole of thy tooth and it will falout by the root.

Smallage root hanged about thy neck does alay the tooth ache.

Put the joyce of ground Iuy into the care of that side that the tooth does
ache, it is of wonderful effect.

Fithy teeth be often washed with the decoction of the rynde of our lades
thistell rote, thy teeth shall be fastynned thereby, and thy gumes graven about
will be made whole.

The Decuction of Pomegranate flowers or the powder of them being laid thereon
does the same.

Anscen. The powder of coral being laid thereon also is most princypall in
comfortyng the gumes.

Peter. Masticke chewed with win in a man's mouth, takes away the toth ache.

The root of Horehounde drunk or chewed of a man fasting does quickly heal
the ache of the teeth. Strawbery leaves chewed, in continent takes away the
tooth ache is a sure and tried experyent.

Light a sharp stick of asshe, and whyl it burns put into the holow tooth
first filled with Triacle it is much proved.

The body and fatness of a froge apolied, does make an easi means to pull out
the teth and therefore do the teth of lyuinge beasts that take and rate them
quickly faul.

Plint. Let the gumes be rubbed with yt ashes of a Delphin tooth the teeth are
there by greatli helped, or if they be touched only with the tooth it self.

Consf. Galen. The rote of mouse ear put in the holownes of the toth takes
away the tooth ache, this has be^ proved. Sta^p the inner rotes of Put trees
and mix it with oil, and put ye joyce into ye ear on ye co^trari part yt ye
teth ache and he shall be delivered out of pains. Let the skin of a serpent be
sod in Vinegar and hold the same Vyneger a good while in your mouth.

Peter. Sup up (so that there be nothing thereof swallowed but gargarysed) a
cup full (at times one upon another) of the joyce of yarow fasting tho^ ^^alt
be tyd of thy toothe ache thereby.

Sees the scrapinges of ye rote of a mulbery tree in wine, which w^^^ hold in
thy mouth it cease ye great incontinent.

Galen Of the same operacion is wine of the decoction of Iuy rotes.

Kychar. If you take one corn of Salt and wrap it in a fair whyt cobweb and
put it into thy hollow tooth it will heal it.

For bledynge at the Nose.
The Causes.
A bayne or arteri opened or broken within ye nose with great abundance of
blood, or to much laboring

The Signs
To blede at the nose.

Remedies. Capi. xvi.
Consf. THe joyce of hogs dounge cast into the nosthrells does, restrain the
blood.

Beware that nethrnge vynd the body has, as thy gyrdel or such like, and
hold thy ha^dful of she pardis purse and stedtastlye look up to the son, it
stauncheth bleding, this is proved.

Like is said of beruen.

Lay the joyce of night shade against the lywere if it run out of the
right nostrell, if not upon the spleen, it stauncheth the blood.

Dioscor. The flower of a bean the outr skine pulled of, put into ye nosiriles
stauncheth blood if it be a wound.

The half of a bean laid upon a wound closes up the wound and restrayneth
ye blood, especial where horesteches have been, this has been prouyd.

Cold stones laid upon the veins of the temples and hard holden thereon,
restrain the blood.

The joyce of Rue put into the nostrelles restrayneth the blood.

Diosce. The ioice of a nettle put into the nostrels makes the blood to flow,
but being anointed on the forehead makes the same to stop.

Yarow smelled unto, or being drouke restrains blood it put into the
nostrelles makes it to bleed.

Lapid. Item the stone Iaspis burn^d and applied stauncheth the blood.

The ashes of the rote of Rue, blown into the nosthrilles does wonderfully
staunch the blood.

The very blood it self burnt and made to powder, and blowe^tp into yt nose,
does wonderfully staunch the blood, and close up wounds, if the blood run
from the left nostral put a ventose upon the spleen, iffto^ the right upon the
liver.

Ifft be a woman after the same manner lay it on herteate,

If a woman blede put flar in ye whit of an egg and apply it to herteate, on
that part as the nose bledeth, or with the soyce of night shade.

Item make a plaster of potters clay, vinegar and the whit of an egg and
apply it to thy cods it is good and has been proved.

Galen. Let the person which bledeth lie upright and let his own water being
cold be dropped on his face with vinegar.

If the hears ^f an Hare be put into the Vinegar and water, and be put into it
is wonderful good.

The blood of a Cow laid upon the wound does staunche the blood incontment,
but I say it is o^ more valor being burned.

The ashes of a cowes horn, cast into the wound does quickelye restrain it.

Powder made of ynke, and laid upon the wound with ashes of a fern cote,
sta^cheth the blood and heals the wound.

Kychar. The ashles of a frogge burned in a well closed pot, stancheth all
bleding though it be of wounds it closes up the veins and arteries and
heals burnings.

Aalcen. The blood of a Thrushe, a partrige, a dove, and a turtle dove, put
into the wound stops the blood wonderfully.

Peter. The brine of a man made in form of a plaster, and applied with ye ashes
of a vine, stauncheth bleeding.

Chaw the root of a nettle until you may swallow it, and without doubt the
blood will staunthe.

Chawe the same till you may swallow it, but in no wise swallow it and than
will it staunche, for if a man keep it in his mouth he can leese no blood.

The powder of the scraping of a tandron or a frying pan Stamped and mingled
with the joyce of a netle andlput into the nostrelles does stanche the blood
incontinente, this has been proved.

Conff. Plaster burnt and stamped with Hares hears and made in a plaster with
the white of an eg stancheth blood if it be in an artery or vain.

A certain herb that is commonly called Torch or moleyne stamped and laid upon
the branches of the teates, does stop the bleding of any place.

Plinf. The ashes of a burnt Frogge applied to the place that bleedeth, does
staunche it incontinent.

The Fresh doung of a Bore is a chief Remedy against bleedinge at the nose as I
find in the book of natures of things.

The joyce of an assis dounge dropped into the nostrels or into wou^des,
stantheth the blood though it be of a vene or artery that is wounded of the
same.

Diosco Five leaued Grass drunk, and anointed in the nostrels, stancheth
blood.

The ashes of Hens Feathers, shouft up into the nostrelles, stanntheth blood.

Macer. The joyce of vyolet roottes gargarised in your mouth, and throat, and
swallowed stancheth often times bledyng at the nose incontinent.

Galen. The powder of a nettle snuft into the nostrils, will stanche blood inco^
tinent.

Item stamp earth worms with white frankencense and the white of an egg it is
good.

Prime rose leaves stamped and laid in the place that bled^th stanchythe the
blood.

Put into thy nostrels y^ rind of wod bind, and the scrapy^nges of a Rabyshe,
it is good. In onion only put into the nose is good also.

If a vain be broken within let the pacyent drink Peper and the sed of town
Cresses, take one part of Cerrasy gyllata, and anothere of the gu^me called
Sarasenicum, an other part of Dragance, stamp it with win that is old, and
make piles and give the pacient to drink.

Here unto sethe Goats milk with dragance and use it one day for an electuary.

Mengle potters claye with Rose water and vinegar, and make a plaster and apply
it, the blood there by shall be stanched.

Take Coufery, and terra, Sygillata of each like much, make a powder and
ministrr it with rain water three days, this has been prouid

The hears of an Hare chopte small and myxt with the white of an Egg, and
laid upon the place that bledyth takes away al flowing of blood.

For the Palsy.
The Causes.
Gross humors flowynge to the synowes.

The Signs.
That the member has lost both sense and mocyon.

Remedies. Cap. xvii.
Paralisis is a sickness caled the Palsy: wherein either al ye body or one member
or many members be mortifyed and be depryued of felyng and moving, it happenith
either of an impostume stopping the rottes of the sinowes, that they being
deprived of the lpuelye spirits which serve for them be come ded or else of the
Fleumatyke humor gross and undigested which stoppith the said places some
time of a stroke or faull, whereby the joints of the back bone are loused and
the sinowes which com from the nec is neck or nape of the head, at stopped
other while the sinowes and the rotes of them hurt with a bruise engenders
the palsy, and specially in a old man.

^apid. If the tongue be suddenly wrythed through cold, make a hot Gargatysme of
the wine of Decoction of Sage, Rue and pellytorye, it is very good.

Put these pylles in thy mouth and under thy tongue.

Take of Castoreum, of Pellytorrye, of Pyonye roots, of eiche like much make
pylles with Triakel it is very good.

Anoint the pacient without with oil benedicte or the oyntme^t caled
Martiaton, with caflorest these be ve^ry good in all palsis of a cold cause.

Rue, Pellitory, Sage Cinnamon, Mustard, salt, let them all boil together in
oil to half, and anoint ye patient thet with is very good.

Take a dead earth worm, make a plaster and lay it upon the hinder part of the
head where it rises with piche ware, old oil, Bears suet, coluer dounge,
quick lime man's, ordure Castoreum Pellitory.

If thou stamp a silk worm, and make a plaster and lay it in the nape of the
neck, because lightlye the disease rises there, and if it rise in another
place put it there, and not upon the hurt member.

If the tongue or throat be in flamed draw thereon a Sapphire, upon the grief
for it takes away the swelling.

Against all grefes in the flap being in the mouth which coueteth the wind pipe.
The Causes.
The recourse of humors from the head that place.

The Signs.
Great difficulty in swalowing his meat rednes and swetting.

Remedies. Cap. xviii.
FOr diseases in the mouth and especially in ye little flap which covers the
windpipe called Vnulla some call it Columella that is a little flap, it is
rightlye a little piece of flesh hanging in the roufe of ones mouth which
sometime swells and greueth one very much.

If the piece of flesh be to long hanging make a noyntmente if it be so
requisite, and lafter ward make a gargarisme with the water of the decoction
of Pomegranate flowers and vinegar, the husks of Acornes and such like, make a
powder of Peper, and the ioice of slowes and put it to the piece of flesh with
thy thumb.

Fill a shell and inche thick with pich, Galbauum, Opoponax, Calamint, and
aply it to the nape of the neck beneth the noll, it greatly helpith the grief,
of Vnula by drawing it, and better it were if another part likewise were put in
the crown of the head being shaven these ii. have I proved. Lay a hole egg
well sodden and the shell pilled of and some what bruysed unto the crown of
the head.

Mingle gum, Rue, Mustard sede, Frankencence, Pich, Opoponaxe, Galbanum, and
Calaminte, let the^ be aplied in a grievous sickness.

A cautery with Gold is the best remedy.

Dioscor. The ashes of Coleworte Rotes burnte, put with ones finger to the
flap, does ease it by drying up the humors.

Macer. Puliol royal warmed in vinegergeuen to drink and applied to the
nostrels does quicklye Restore speech suddenly lost.

Of the Squinancy.
The Causes.
Great multitude of blood ar choler drawinge to the muscles of the throat.

The Signs.
To have his mouth open with reed eyes, that he can neither swallow his meat,
nor draw his breath

Remedies. Cap. xix.
THey have turned cina^ch or sinanche into squinancy, Sina^che is an
inflammation of the throat which we call the squinancye, and it comes os
synanchen which signifies to choke, for in this disease theris great danger
of choking.

Constan In the squinancy first let therebe a vain cut, after that use
repercussiue gargarismes within and without euaporatinge, that the matter may
comfort (as in example) the joyce of morell, wherein lentil, roses, Lic orise.
and a little of cassia fistula has been sodde^ in, after that let th veins be
cut under the tongue. A dogs tord with ocapls if it be blowe^ into ye throat or
laid in form of a plaster, does wonderfully heal it

Let the head of a Lylly be sta^ped with leven and let the joyce be tempe rid with
sowes milk, which beynoe sodden and gargarised does by his own propertye
break the same.

Item snaples that be great and are found in the trees, made and aplied as a
plaster are above al medicines that are ordyned to break and ripe the
squinance, this is prouyd.

Place. Isope if it be sodden in vinegar and used as a gargarisme and the
swelling in ye throat or of the grape in the roufe of the mouth will be consumed,
Especially if ye flowers there of be made in powder, and put under ye swellyug
with thy finger.

Item ventoses aplyed to the vede being shaven, draw the hanging flesh away,
and so ease that party.

Make pulse of the braune of lvght wheat somewhat moist with Vinegar wherein
first rue has been sodden, then open thy mouth to sup the^ it restores
wonderful ye speace being low.

Diosco The ashes of anyse rote dries up and helps the dyseas of the mouth
and flap if it be swollen.

Let the rote of Saledyne stamped sethe in wine, whereof a Gargarysme made
healith the swellyng in ye mouth and purges the head.

Gilbert. A plaster made of dogs turd and manes ordure and the gall of a bull
is very good.

Make a gargariseme with the decoction of dried Fygges. and dogs turde it
does quickly open ye a postume.

I have hard many rxpert men say ye Verue^ stamped and laid to whote as a
plaster, has heled oftentimes these quinanci.

Dioscorydes says that Veruen bound to the swellings does open them, heal
them, and sparse them.

Dioscor. The flower of Ox eye conetyne nuallye eaten, never will suffer the
squinancy to rise or grow.

Auscen. The earth of a Swallows nest made in a plaster takes away the
swellyng of the Jaws and tears.

The flowers of Pomegranate, and Comphor made to powder is a blessed medecyne
to heal the swelling in the throat.

Gauls with sale Atmoniake are good therefore.

This has been proved, take of the seed of Roses a pound and a half, of ye
joyce of goats beard.iii. seth them in wine and make a Gargarisme.

Galen. Against a daungerouse squina^ry burn old swalowes in a new ear then
pot, and mengle the powder thereof with honey, and with a quyll put it down into
thy throat.

In the danger hereof take away ye blood wc ventosis aplyed betwyne ye sholders
of ye pacie^t, it does much dymynishe the matter and draws it to the contrary
part.

Gerard Wrap all the throat one the utter part, with wole depte in the decoction
of Arop and oil olyue.

Constable. Dype a sylken threde in a mouse blood, and so let that thread dipped in
the mouse blood be swallowed of ye pacyent, it is very good.

The ordur of an infant, and of a man in like case being dried and men gled
with honey, healyth the squinanci.

Let there be made a plaster of the fresh ordure of a man, and aplyed out
ward, with leven gume of trees, and the ashes of burnt time, the fat of a
hedgehogge, this does rypen and draw out ye matter and wareli breketh the
aposteme: beware ye you use out wardly no repercussines, but dissoluyng,
drawing and ryping medicines

Scabiouse gargarised and drunk or made in form of a plaster, heals the
squina^cy ye is past hope of healing, this is of certainty

Item in the mouth of the pacient being open put a slicke, as a gage and mark
welt the place of the Apostume and prick it with a sharp stick, there is
nothing of like efficacy for many Authors have oftentimes proved the same.

To heal the diseases of the mouth in the Vnula, put fine Salt in a cloth and
bind it to the kernelles of the neck it is very good.

Against horlenesse and cough.
The Causes.
The cough comes of superfluous humors coming from the head or of cold,
duste; smoke, and such like horsenesse is when the humor falls into the
wind pype.

The Signs.
To coughe or to be horse.

Remedies. Cap. xx.
THe gum that is of the Cherry trees dissolved with old wine and given to sup
up, does vttye well case the sharp Arterits of the breast.

Diosco. Roasted Filberdes or hasell nuttes stamped and ministered with honey he
leth the grief of a long continued cough.

Against a continued and dangerous dropping of the Rewme, and against the
vlceration of the liver apply unto the head being shaven: mustardsede, and the
skin shall be exasperate and the rewme dried.

Sees bay berries in water and the smoke thereof received at ye nostrilles and
ears, will throughlye dry up the rewme.

Take the fume of Laudanum and Frankensence, cast upon whote coals, nothing
dries better the rewm and comfort the brain.

Constable. Assafetida taken with a teere egg in the evening opens the
stoppinges of the liver that comes of gross and flegmy humors, and helps
them that be short breathed.

Diosco Item lie made of the ashes of a great oak, opens mightily ye stopping
of the lever, chefelp that which comes or engedreth of any venomous matter,
by dissoluing, and co^suming the superfluous humors. Sixtus. The lights of a
Fox is very good for short and paynefull drawing of breath and to al
straightars of the liver.

Galen The tongue of a Ram eaten often times is good and hoisom therefore.
Galen. The powder of a dogs tord sprenkled on a feit of Hear or cloth dipte in
honey, and old great made and applied to the breast or neeke of the diseased
heals the squinancy.

Put mustard seed in dry Figs, and give the pacient them to eat in the
evening it does dissolve the gross humor and openyeth the stoppynge of the
lights, and also the condites of breathynge.

The Smoke of Arsenicke receivid bt the mouth helps them that have great
payns to take there breath.

Against spyttynge of blood.
The Causes.
A Strype, great cryenge, hot rewme, repletyon, or great dryness.

The Signs be Plain enough.

Remedies. Capt. xxi.
Galen WHen a man spiteth or vomytith blood, give him to drink ye joyce of knot
grass, and it shall cease in continent, it was prouyd.

The greece of a Hen, a Gose, a Pygge, and a Ducke, the Marye of an Ox,
fresh Butter, Oil of Vyoiettes, of Cithe a like much mengle them all to
gether and meltte them, and put there unto white Wax, Bumme Arahycke,
Dragons so that it be like an opatment but first lay Do upon the breaste of
the pacyente, dypte in the Decoctyon of great Mallows, and keep it there
until be sweat, than let the breast be anointid with this ointment, and lay
above the same a Fore skin, or else another like thing warm, no thing
helps more outwardly than this.

Dioscor. Seth dry fygges in white win or in claret, but first fill ye fygges with
musterd seed, and let him drink the wyn every night when he has eaten the
fegges, it opens all stop pinges of the lever so that he may breath at his
will.

Gume of a Peach tree given fo him that rechit or spitteth blod, helps greatly
and opens the inward clawesures of the bresse, and purgethe the inwards of
the longes.

The powder of dry Mulberyes is ye thefest remedy, for the^ yt spit blood. A
Sirup for them that can scantlye take there breath take the ioice of the tote of
sweet breer, young time bole Aemintacke, ye ioice of slowes whit Coral, and the
powder of Rue, folefote, or Mintes, ye rinnes of Pomegranates, O keaples, gume
of Arabicke Dragance, Camtery, Knottgraffe, of the seed of Rybworte, of Manna,
Sumach, Drago^s blood, of Blood worte, of each of these.ix. and of Sugere take
sour pound, then make a syrope of Ribwort and give it with the decoction of
quinres, Le^tyles, and Medlers, this is very good against the blody flux, vo
mytynge and such like.

Dioscor.English Time, and Venician Time, stamp them together and botle them
in seething water, let it beset a side a day and a night in a pot well closid
that the smoke may not breathe out, let it be strayned and put melrolit there
unto, and being scomed of, let it be given to the pacient in ye going to bed
it heals the stopin ges of the coundytes of them which be short breathed.

Macer. Almondes given to them that spyt blood, is a singular help.

Therote of Draga^ce or Serpe^tine With claryfyed Honey cle^seth humores out of
the breast, so that ye shall never return or engender again.

Of ye sudden to sing of strength a debillitte of the vytall spirits.
The Causes.
It comes of all great euacuatyons, as losing of blood, great laxes,
vehement moryon, swetinge over much, sorrow fear and of the intemperance of
the heart, but the Author touches that alonli which comes of euacuacyons.

The Signs.
To lose all the strength suddenly with cold of the ex^ealne parts and
swetynge in the face, with despayr and great pains.

Remedies. Cap. xxii.
SEch a He^ne in a pot well closed on every side till you perceive ye towe
parts are consumed, take it forth and apply the Hen cut in pieces so the
pacientes Nosthrells, and gene him the brothe to drink thereof, and add to the
same Hen Mastike, Cubebes, Basyll, Authos, and such which comfort the heart.
The milk of a Bitch is very good

Peter. Give the pacyente this plaster following take the scraping of gold i.
Magarites of both sorts, i. of mastike.ii of Cubebes of Spodiu^ of the
scrapinge of Iuory, the bone of an Hearts berte, of burnt Silk of rosis of
each.ii, of white and seed Coral of each.i. of cloves.i. of sugertwo round,
of Musk of amber of each.i. make a plaster, or a powder thereof it does
wonderfulli comfort in all kind Syntops, if it be of to much sweet, or heat,
give unto the pacient Sugar of Rosis with cold water and sprynkir on him some
Rose water, Coras both greatly comfort the heart.

Macer. the wod of aloes, muses, amber mastike, and such like do comfort ye
heart renewynge ye liues^ies o^ ye spirits and natural heat.

Margarites coral, the scraping of Iuo^t the bone in the Hearts heart Gold,
Silver, Helebore and other such like do strengthen the vital spirits by
purifying the blood in the body and by altering the unnatural heat.

Treakel in all causes, and the rote of affodile having in it the virtue to
quicken and to strengthen, does cherish the heart by defending it from poynson
add keeping it in strength.

Of yesking and lothing.
The Causes.
Yesking comes either by lack of meat and great euacuation, or of
corruption of the meat and great quantity of sharp humors, lothing comes of
much corrupt meat, or sum gross and sharp humor.

The signs be evident.

Remedies. Cap. xxxiii.
Diosca. ANise seed dried and smelled un to takes away yeskinge and lothing.

Macer. Betony mixed with honey and after a sort ministered, makes good
digestion and afterward it is good to purge the same also taken, takes away
vomiting.

Isac. Endive made in a plaster and apited to the stomach, does comfort the
same wonderfully, the same takes away the pain of ye stomach and the cough,
and also short breath

Wild Margeram drunk with warm water takes away ye gnawing of the stomach
incontinently Gum of a chery tree dissolved with wine and given to drink
takes away the lothsomenes of a weak bealking stomach.

water of the decoction of Opium, with water and honey takes away the belking
of the stomach.

Matter crowfoote stamped with crommes of bread and a plaster made thereof takes
away the heat of the stomach.

Diosco. Coral stamped and drunk with water, apesith for ever ye grefe of ye
stomach and belly.

Auicen. Stamp Pomgranates hole with the rynd, and take a pound of honey let
them boil together till the be thecke, give thereof a quantite unto the paeyent
fasting with cold water, it restores the appetite very well.

Isac. The joyce of Pomgranates taken and made in a plaster with Barlye bran,
and applied on the mouth takes away the gnawinge about ye heart and stomach.

V^ruen being eaten does wonderfully styre up the appetyte it has ven prouyd.

The joyce of Malwort ministered ix. days with Honi, takes away ye swellinge
of the stomach and loses the belly.

The roots of Mugwort, and fenel, and ye leaves of Morwod sta^pt together gave
to ye pecient to dri^ke with warm water and Honey, provoke vomyting incontinent.

Diosco. Massicke baterid with white of an Egg, and vinegar applied unto ye
spone of the stomach, it comfort the stomach immediately, and restreineth
vomytinge, zedwary, chawed of the pacyent fasting and swallowed down takes
away the grefe of the belly.

Dioscor. Aloes helps the stomach above all other medicines.

Against ye pain of the stomach of a cold cause, stamp English Galengal, and
let so boil in oil and so be plastred one the mouth of the stomach, it is a
pryncypail remedy.

Make a plaster of iiii.vii. of Olybanu^ and.iii. vii. of ^o^r, and.vii. and a
half of cloi^es, Calame^ taken and Neppe with win takes away the pain of the
stomach.

Water Roses stamped and drunk with wine, do greatly restrain vomyttynge.

Galen. Against over much vomytyngand flux of the bellye, beyle comyne in
Vyneger and let the pacyent drynk the vyneger or eat Common.

Boil Frankensense and the ioice of Myntes and a little Vinegar togethere and
make a plaster thereof and bynd it to the spone of the stomach.

Stamp of Masticke of Comin of Bay beries of each un.i. mynglid with joyce of
Ru, aply the same with toe upon the stomach, it heth a wou^derful operacyon.

Of the pains in the lights
The Causes.
Great heat or dryness, much drynkyng of wine, eating of salt meats or
rewme.

The Signs.
Pains in the lift side with coughynge and difficultye of brethynge

Remedies. Cap. xxiiii.
THe grefe thereof that comes by cryinge, by smoke, by dust and by heats, is
easily curyed, of ye geu^ the pecyent when he goith to bed cold water to drink
wherein li coris has been sodden, and therein put Sugar Ca^dy, in the morning
when he rises give him a little morsel of bread dypt in the same water it
shall slake his thyrste, of the same operacion is clear water.

These pylles are very good for the same, take of Gume Arabicke, Dragance of
every one.ii. of Frankensence.i. and a half, make them up with Honye.

Against the Pleurysy.
The Causes.
Great quantite of hot blood having recourse to ye thine skin which is about
the rybbes.

The Signs.
Difficultye of breathynge, the coughe, great pains, and pricking in the side
with a sore fever.

Remedies. Cap. xxv.
Against the Pleurisy the beast ceunsell is to cure a va^ne of the contrary
side to the dyssease, after full ryping it ought to be on the same side, for in
the beginning the influence of the matter is to be turned on ye contrary part
after the first Phelebothomy, then must use hot repercussiue medicens that the
outward parties of the body may be comforetyd and the motter gooe away, if
in dead there be any suspicion of cold matter, use partly repercussoue
medicenes partly euapocatine comfortatiue, mainraliue among all which the
best is a bieder full of the decoction of Lamomil, Honey, and Fenigreke, and
such like.

In a hot Pleurisy never make euaporations, for then after must you make the
forer attractions, because that the laying to of things euaporating, works
only the in crease of pain, for all medicines euaporating and draw from the
inward part by subtyllinge the humor and entreaseth Rewme by opening the
ways, use therefore Maturatiues, Ingrossatiues, and Diuisines, as these
following, rote of Holyhoke, dry Liquiris, Ryce, Milk or joyce of wheat
styped in water a certain days, and Lineseede, Fenygreke, Fleworte. Pease
Barlye, and such like the leede of Maiden hear, Endyue with Popised mixte
with warm things I have receued this knowledge of a certain man and worthy
credit, yt this is a most sure remedy as with out danger because it makes the
cause and humor of the pleurisy to come forth.

Stamp the rote of Scabiouse and half a pound of red Coral.ii. ounces of
Sugar, and make a sirupe, and when the decoction shall begin to be almost
enough put into the same a postd and a half, of the force of Sea ^ious of ye
powder of coral as much let it be strained, and give thereof a good draught to
the pacie^t it breketh and opens the aposteme incontine^t and cleanses it by
spitting. Stamp a cluster of dry figs, with suet, or oil of gum, and make
a plaster thereof, is of a wounderfull efficacy.

Make a plaster of the rote of holy hoke and fenig ^^ke, with bran Hempseede
and bitter.

Make a good plaster of the bran of fenigreke and Linsede, and where and of
Leuin, make bread with butter and aply the same hot.

Plint. Boil the bran of fenigreke and Linsede in oil of Violets and butter
and mingle them with Mallows dissolved and with fresh Hogs greece, hete all
together, and make a plasture of it being hot and renew it often.

Dip wol in the decoction of Holy hoke and Butter, and lette-thy side be
wrapped often therwyth.

Mengle well Leuenid bread with Butter, and with the decortion of Holy hoke, and
oil of bays given to the pacient part thereof to eat, and after make a
plaster and lay it unto the apostume behynd and before and y^ shall find a
wonderful cure:

Dsoscor. Rue drunk heals the pleurysy quickly.

The dounge of a bore with water is a syngulet help to those that spit blood.

To be laxatiue, or against cost it nenesse.
The Causes.
Immoderate excercyse, or lack thereof, with using of testryetyue meats.

The Signs.
To be costiue and have no sege,

Remedies. Capt. xxvi.
Galen. TO louse the belie, mengle the gaul of a Bull, Alo, Salgem and oil
together and anoynte ye feu^demet, win a moment it provoke a man to the
stole, Sowebred rote stampte and laid to the nauyl and the belly of the pacient
moves flux.

Dsoscor. The joyce hereof laid to with sylke very well purges the belly,

Dsosco Sweet Theries eaten in a mornig fasting with the kernels do provoke the
belly so myghtely, that the fet be ynge fore by some in firmitie, shall be healed
thereby.

Collyquietida mxxt with Houi and Bulls gaull, and applied to the belly does lose
the same.

One pyll here of taken and eaten dath incontenente move the Uily it has been
prouyd.

Take wolle or sylke dypt in the joyce of ^owbread root and in wine use it for
a suppositorye.

Mallowe root stampte first and sod and myngled wc old hogs greece and a
little bra^ put there unto and applied to the stomach mouith the belly.

Walworte root or the joyce of the midell rynde of an elder tree myxte with fatt
of a mouse and laid under ye nauil mouth the belly to be laxati^ asupposteory
made of hard soap anoyn^ed with Butter and a little Salgeme sprynkled thereon or
eles gume, loses the belly.

Mallows and mercuri soden with hogs suet and eaten, cause a wholesome stole. Take
of neesyng powder, of black hellebor, hermodactile brioni, spoutge, of
Henbane, of the great Galingal, of singrene, ye joyce of coliquin tida, of
Aloe or each like portion, and when you will have a laxe, anoynte the plants of
your fete: and if thou will vomytt, anoynte the palm of thy hands, and when
thou will bind thy self again wasshe thy hands or anoynte them with
mattiaton.

One corn of Common baye salt be ynge put into the foundement, does
incontenente move the to the stole.

Stamp Sauyne well sodden first with hogs suet, and stamp them both in the
water thereof, and make an ointment and anoint the nauill.

Mingle bulls, gaul, Aoe, salgeme and oil together, and anoint therwyth
within the mouth of the fundament it provoke flux of the belly in contenent.

After the same manner ye gaul of a bull bound to the nauyl with towe provoke
to the stole, Of the same operation is oil of bays.

The whai of milk does work after like sort.

Isac. The joyce of walworte rote, and of the middel rind thereof, of an elder
tree root, of wyld cucummer, of the root of both Ellebores, of the ioice of
wertwort, of spurge rote, of malow root, of Mercury, of the root of such
Fern as growethe upon ye Wall, let them boil together, with Butter and Oil,
after put therinto Wax, therwyth anoynte thy nauyll, and it shall lose quickly
thy belly, soecialli if thou add thereto Scamony the herb caled Spurge and an
Ox gaul this has been prouid nether is there any other medicyne like unto
this.

If also thou make hereof a suppository it will lose the quickly.

Take Butter, Ilum, plume and salgeme, make a ointment, and anointe the
fundament, depely it lousith in continent.

Galen. Mengle the joyce of Helebor with course bran or meal from the mile
stone, and but a little butter thereto, and if you would purge upward. put it
upon the stomach, if downward, upon the nauyll.

The water of the decoction of an old Cock, losethe belly.

Against the Flux.
The Causes.
Eating of fruit, great cold or (...): and chiefly of ulcers in the bowels
with receiving of laxatiue medecyues.

The Signs.
To go to the stole very often or to have to many seges.

Remedies. Cap. xxvii.
Auscen. A Dogs Lord, that only eattith bones does bynd the belly myghtyly.

Auscen. Tryakle is very good for all fluxes.

Roste Popy, and Myllet, and litt them after ward be sta^pt and make a broth
thereof with Cowes milk or Gotts milk well soden, and with the fat of the raynes
of a Goat, for the flesh thereof is a great byuner.

Almondes blaunchtd and sodden with Honey, till they be black, and let them be
eaten fasting it restrainith the flux of ye belly wonderfully but yet much
more if they be not blaunchyd.

Make bread of the first grounded meal, after the peckyng of the Mill and
eat it it is named for a principal remedy.

Dioscor A bath of ye decoction of ye midel tid of an oak, does greatnd ind ye
belly

Take and eat S^^^on (...) herba^ is a very strong help against the flux of
the belly.

Auscen. Opium vsyd in suppositories does restrain the flux.

There is a wounderfull propertye in rewebarbe in restraining the loftenes of
the belly.

Galen. Milk wherein a goats mydryfe has been sodde^, does greatli restrain
the belie.

The decoctyon on of the rotte of the herb called in English Veruene, Mallow,
if it be drunk, does suddenly help the softenes of the belly.

Anscen. Galen. Old These much tosted and dried if the pacyente take thereof.i.
it is stronger then any thing eles.

Matter of the decoctyon thereof is very good.

The matter ought to be removed and cleansed with mirabolanes, some what dried
and mixed with rose water after as the matter requires after the woorking of
the medycyne, give the patiente fasting such an electuary, with rose water or
with ye decoction of sumach.

Take of Cassiafistula and of masticke of each..i. ypoquistidos, Acatia,
spodium, Cubebes, Ana..i. of Smalage.. and a half, ye scraping of old Chese sod
in vinegar..ii. let the^ be made up in a lectuary with water of Sumache, and of
Sugar a pound, let the pacient eat Barley bred, or millet or else Turki wheat
mingled with water.

Diosco Beans sod in Vinegar and eaten, or used as a plaster, do greatly with
hold Laxation.

Likewise pears and Cherris sodden in vinegar, and given to drink with Mastike
does greatly bind.

Still water of the leaves of an oak as you do of Rose leaves, the same water
drunk does bind also.

A Pine apple without kernels if it be dipte and suppled in Scamonye and
afterward part thereof laid on hot burning coals, and be received up through
a close stoule, it does wounderfully bind and takes away the disease called
Tenasmus" which is a desire to go to the stoule and yet may do nothing, with
burning and some time a bloody sege, it conforteth also those members, and
restrayneth the humores.

Gilbert. The powder of the pitche called Lolophino or Greca and the flowers of
pomgranates, and Acatia let the^ be usid in suffumigacious they bind myghtily.

Fleworte sed roasted with an egg and stampte and so given to drink with wine,
does bind hard.

Diosco. The sede of Cora^der drunk does greatly bind the belly.

Resolve coluerbounge in watter of the decoction of Fleworte or sallow tree,
and let thy fete be washed that with it is wonderful in operatyon, and true.

The decoction of acorne ryndes myghtyly binds the belly of ama^.

Wine or water of, the decociyon of Saynct John's hethe, is a most mighty help
against the laxe and all Flower of the Bellye, and of blood, or if the Herb
it self be drunk.

Take of Opium Frankencence Myrhe of each like much, mengle them together, and
butter them with the white of an egg and make supposytorye, and tyr it with a
threade that it may the more casyelye come forth, it, myghtylye restrayneth
the Flux of the belly and bringethe sleep on the party immediatlye.

Make a suppository of Acacia, Ipoquistides joyce of black Popy myxt with
py^che of greece, it binds myghtyly.

Auicen. A great ventose laid upon the be lie and remaining there.iiii. hours
takes away al losenes of the belly. water wherein Pears has be sodden, is very
good against ye flux of the belly.

Diosco. The Ashes of a Fygge tree brannchys temperid with water, causes laxe
to stop.

Fyl a pot with water of Rosts, and put eight cloves and therein mastike and let
the pot boil wish scalding licor and let the water be taken for drink it is
excedyng good to scour the filthy of the inner pattes engendered of sharp
matter cheiflye of Scammonye.

Gume of the Peache tree is good to bind.

A Catia genen to drink or put in to the foundame^t, and espcially vsyde in a
suppesytorye with Opium binds vehemently.

The joyce Sanicle the less byndeth alllosenes of the belly.

Dioscori The stalk of a Colewort roasted in embers, and eaten restranyth much
flux of the belly.

The flouers of Colewortes given twyse a day with old win, heals the
laxatyue lowsnes.

Sethe Horsehounde in wine and oil, and being stamped make a plaster thereof,
and apply it upon the share.

Galen The Rennet of a kyde or a Luerete is afcter one manner auayleable
tempered and given with the ioice of Pla^tyne it binds incontinent. Peter.
Ite^for a flouxe of matter cleauyng to the inner parts or stomach of a man,
make thin fine cakes, bake them and let the pacient eat them mixed thereto,
Terbentine it drawith with it slymy matter.

The lever of any best sodden in vyneger and eaten does myghtyly restrain
blood and bind the belly.

The powder of a Marbul mingled with the white of an Egg and sodden in win
and so eatten, is a mighty binder.

Item powder made of the mawe of an Oxt given in drink or meat does
wonderfully bind the losenes of the help.

A certain Physician healed all his paticutes with the same on medycine.

Myngle branne made of dried seruyse or quicke^ bet is with honi and the white
of an egg, let it be sodin on the coals, and give it the patie^t fasting, or
else raw putt it in by a clister, it mightilye byndeth.

Dios^^ Fill a hen with Sumathe and ypoquestidos and such like, and let
hyrleth well and drink the potage and eat the flesh and if it be a long
continued disease, it does remforte and bind much,

Item sodden milk drunk or vsyd for a clyster, does bynd the belly and heleth
meruelousli well the cortosyons of the inner parts, and specially goats milk
or asses milk Above al things the best is Cows milk sodden with an iron or a
stonne and above al suttes Beats ^utt is best worth in this cause.

Dlosco Item take Bramble berys, and seth them in the water of the decoction of
gladin, which being administried is a good remedy and help for him y^ has
the Flux, if it be with out an agew, but if it be with an agewe, let him be
bathyd in the water of the decoctyon of gladin, or wypt over with a cloth wet
the rin

Item powder of Rofes does bynd the lousnes of the belly.

Trytera the great, mynystreed with an Onyone, heals vtterely all Laxes and
restraynethe vomyttynge.

Galen. For the flux when the meat comes forth as it was eaten and overmuch
solublenes, make this throughli approved plaster, take sower and wild apples
roste them, make a plaster and lay upon the Raines and Navel, and when it is
cold renew it, and put a hoate one in the place, do this often til you be
healed, it quickly helps those that are past help.

Mingle the joyce of a Pigges head with Rosine, and lay it upon a hot i will, and
let the pacient take the smoke thereof fro beneth, three or sour times, this
has been approved and it is true.

Seth Duinces made clean within and without and oak aples, and Cinnamon
together, and put to the decoction sugar, and give of ye three in three nights
and the paciente shall be healed.

Sauety tempered with the joyce of Plantayne leaves is very wholesome herefore.

Take the flowers and ryndes of pomegranates, okaples, Acacia sumache, Saffron
cubibes, Opium make Pills thereof with the ioice of Rue, as you will and give, v.
or seven of them to the pacyente going to bed.

Take of myrhe, of opium, Acacia, of Prunes storax of each..i. of frankencense,
of mastycke of each. ii. of lauender gentle. and a half, mengle it with the
joyce of the Coppes of brambles or of Rybwort, make piies and give the
pacyent.v. or.vii. it has wonderful effects withal.

One knott of Mollen rote given to drink, does bynd the lousnes of the belly.

Diosco^. The root of Five leauid grass is very profitable against the flux
of the belly.

Let the pacient receive from under a clouse stoule or such like, the smoke of
a rusti iron burning, hott quenchid in veneger.

Item fine cakes fried with lard and wax, and so eaten do greatly bindethe
bellye.

Give to the pacient wine with a soft Egg and salt to drink fasting, and
let him tarry fasting a good while after, and on the morrow give him the second
time like wise and he shall be healed.

Item milk sodden, with myxt Staphllagre, and drunk is a sure tried medyeyne.

Beans sodden in vinegar and eat be a singular remedy for those which have
the laxe.

Almo^des bind the lousnes of ye belly Make little pies of the substance of
Colewortes sta^pt and well wrong, and of these broken in pieces sta^ped and
dissolved in water and well wrong, and of a hogs lever, and whytes of Eggs
first sodden and molte^, shepes talowe, and white wax, let them be laid in a
furnace or fried in a pa^, and let him eat them to his breakefast, it hyndeth
myghtyly.

Macer. Coluer dounge stampte and used for a plaster with strong venigere and
applied to the nauyll, bindethe incontinent al flux of the belly.

The dounge of a camel dried and drunk, is of the same operation.

Of the Lolycke and the pain called yliaca.
The Causes.
The Colycke comes of gross, and slimy humors or of wynd contained in the gut
colone, and yliaca is ege^dred of raw and corrupt meats, specially fat, and by
drynkinge cold drink after great heat.

The Signs.
Grypynges and pain in the utter part of the belly, with restriction thereof, and
belchynge, and lothyng of meat do signyfe the Colycke, and yliaca is when
the pains and swelling is in the small guts with belchynge and murmuring in
the belly.

Remedies. Capi. xxviii.
DOunge of beasts ye are kept up in stables very rank even from the place
where they piss dried and laid to the grefe with fryenge oil, does apease the
grefe wo^derfullye.

Wolves dounge bound to the thighs, or to the bone above ye preuy members
takes ye grefe away incontinent.

Make a powder of Wolves turde Dogs berde, Coluere dou^ge, and quycke lyme,
and myngle with molte^ Pitche, and suete meltid, lay it to whote, it is very
good.

Make a bath wherein put all the sundry tordes as may be found, the same
resoluith windines and slimy humores this have I prouyd.

Galen. Give Creakle in warm wine wherein dissolve cloves.

Sethe the flesh of and old cock or an Hen with a good deal of salt, and
give the broth thereof unto the pacient at even and at morn.

The herb called Seaholme being stamped together with the rote. and drunk with
honye and water, ass vageth the Colike.

Macer. The ashes of the branches of colwortes burnt, mixed with stale greece and
used for a plaster, takes away the ache of the belly, the sides, and of the
taynes, for it dries and wastes mightily.

Galen. Sees old oil and butter, and strong Vinegar, and sees of them
equal portions till they be thick afterward dippe therein moist wolt and apply
it to thy belly, and change it as often as it cole^h, i^ is good in a hard and
intolerable collyke.

Perytory drunk with wine, or used in a plaster, or after ye manner of
tomentacion, aketh away the pain of the colyke.

Loluer dounge, brayd fynely and drunk with wine, and used for a plaster, is
above al for the colicke.

Item take a hot shepes turde with gotes talow stamped well, and put there on
pitche all to beaten in fine powder and well minglid together, apply it warm
as a cerote, it has with out doubt wonderful efficacy.

The dounge of a Woulfe, if it be newly made, and so applid, there is nothing
beter then it for to heal y^ Colycke, if it be stale dissolve it in old oil.

(...) Horehounde stampte and sodden in oil olive and applied to ye grefe does
assuage the pain wonderfully A young whelpe not nine days old killed and ^^ene
ordere^, healyth y^ gre^, or pain in the gultis for ever.

Diosco. The rynde of the pynt apple tree lodden with wine and the same wine
drunk, does myghtyly take away the wrynging of the belly.

The root of Affodyl drunk with wine, takes away the pains of the sides.

Take of Agaricke.i. and drink the same, it all apeth the grypinges of the
belly by demyshing raw humors.

Anicen. The ashes of scorpiones given in drink is very good.

Hearts horn burnt and given in drink, takes a way the Lolycke incontinent.

The powder of the bowelles of a Wolf, is of great efficacye to heal those
that be payned with the Colycke.

The dounge of a Woulfe given in drink, helpyth him that has the colycke
streygth way.

The rote of a Lilly given to dry the in the decoetion of Horehound, appeseth
the colike it has been proved

Give the pacient Garlike with a little bread, for it breketh windines more then
all other medicines, and engenders no thryst, and therefore it is very good in
this cause.

Galen. Give tryakle unto the pacyente with things that induce sleep they
ashwage quycklye the grefe.

Make a suppositorye of Castoreum and Opium, it is very good to assuage the
pain of the eres, ye eyes and of the Agew.

March Malowes sodden in water heal the pain in the boweles within three
days, we have prouid it, and also Dioscorides.

Diosco. The powder of Coral drunk with warm water, does a prase ye grefe of
the stomach and of the hely.

Watter of the decoctyon of Holy, hoke taking the smoke thereof from hineth,
thris in a day, heleth ye pain of the belly.

Anleen. Heat the joyce Plantayne and put it into a close stoule, sit there on
and receive the air thereof upward, it takes away the pain of the belly
incontinent.

Mengle the joyce of Myntes, or of the leaves of Christ's throne caled Rhammis
with eight corns of Pepper and a little Honey, and give the pacye^t to drink,
the effect there of is wonderful.

Galen. Take the flouer of Linseed, and of Barlye, sethe them with oil of
Ca^mamel, and lay it to the nauyl hot.

Make a plaster of ye bigger Dorke leaves, and of Malowe leaves sodden in water
and stamped, it is wonderful good.

Hydroleon and Alegante drunk is wonderful good also.

Hydroleon is made of.ii. parttes of water and the thyr^e of oil sodden
together, to the consumption of the water.

Isar. Take an old cork filled with oak fern or walferne, and saffron sed of
ye east part, and wild Colwortes, let them all seth together till the flesh
fall from the bonnes, the decoctyon is very wholesome for those that be payned
with the colycke.

Auicen. Use Rue sodd in oil and butter inform of a clister, it takes away
the pain incontinente.

The root of tormentyl, stampte and drunk, takes away the pinchynges and
pains of the belly.

Galen. Take of Bay leaves, of Rue, Ana ii. of Common one patte, heat it upon
the fire in a fryeng pan, and apply it to the place where the grefe is, it
health myghtylye and dyssoluyth windines, and takes away the pain.

Syler, montayne and Comin sodd (...) wine and laid to the stomach is of the
same operation.

The scrapynge of ah arts horn given unto him that is sick of the colicke,
with water and honi being sod together, and vsyd.ix. days helyth the Colicke
parfitly.

For the worms in the belly.
The Causes.
Flame putrified in the stomach or bowels.

The Signs.
Great paynts in the belly with much desire of meat.

Remedies. Capt xxix.
TO kyl worms give unto the pacient fasting clean milk to drink.iii.
or.iiij. dayrs together the.v. day give him garlycke sta^pt with warm veniger
to drike

Make a plaster of the peache leaves or leke blades with veniger bid it to ye
stomach of the pacie^t, and let him sit in his warm bed, the worms will not a
bide the bitterness thereof

Dlosen. The seed of Cole wortes drunk kileth all the worms of the belly.

Anleen. Salage sede drunk, kylleth the worms, and is mighty in operacion Rib
wort stamped and bound to the nauyl as a plaster or drunk especialli with
Vinegar of his own property kypeth the worms.

Galen Sethe the rindes of Pomgranates, and the root of an Asshe in wine, and
drink the same wine fasting, it sleeth the worms wonderfully.

The joyce of Basyl or Myntes, myngled with Goats milk, kyleth worms.

Yi the nauel be anointed with bitter Almondes, and the oil of Peach kernels,
it mightily destroys the worms.

The scraping of a hearts horn drunk kills worms.

If the fundament be depely anointed within and without, with milk and honi
minglid together or elsit sylke being dypt therein be vsid as a suppositorye,
the worms will descend to the swet place in continent.

If the worms hurt the mouth of the stomach put honi combs in the mouth
fasting, they will draw unto the honey, and so voyed by yt mouth, it has been
proved.

Agarike given fasting to the paeyent kills all the worms.

Anlocen. Sumache dissoluyd in water and drunk, is wonderful against worms.

Purssand sede in good quantytye drunk, kyleth the worms.

Acacia drunk in watter of the decoctyon of Pomgranates, or sodin vyneger
kylleth them.

Galen. The decoction of grene myrthe drunk, does sseye the worms mer
nelouslye.

Pyles made of Galbanum, and sugereandy stamped together, and gen to the pacient
do greatly help.

Take of the joyce of mynte, rybmort, of orpin, of singrene, of peach leaves,
strong veniger, and on oxs gaul, oil of peachis, flours of Lupines, smalage
sed, of each like quantity, make an ointment and auoint the nauel and there
about, and they shall al dye.

Leke seeds kill the worms, also radish emyxt with water and honi

For the Hemorrhoydes.
The Causes.
Much melancholyke blood conteynyd in the liver.

The Signs.
The veins in the fundamente breking forth and bledynge.

Remedies. Capi. xxx.
Galen. Yarowe drunk restranythe the flux of the hemorrhoydes, and a swageth
the pain of them ye flow not, bring drunk, or inform of a plaster.

Make a has of molle^ cod in wine vsyd in a plaster belith.

Item the leaves of he^bane, and Parslande, the yolke of a rostid egg, the pyth
of bread, oil of Roses, mingled together, and made in a plaster, apply them to
the grefe, the same in contynent heals.

If the hemorrhoydes flow over much, make a supposytorye of Ceruse alone, or
of Ipoquistidos or else myxt burnte led, Ceruse, Ipoquistidos, and Acasia with
pytch called Colofonia, and order them as a suppository.

Against the pain of hemorrhoides make a plaster of ceruse, of burnte led,
the yolks of roasted eggs oil of roses, mingled together, put there unto
Sumache, it helith all the hemorthoydes and al ulcers about ye fundament. Anyse
sede brunt and laid unto the grefe with honey, helith hemorrhordes

The dust of rosty iron, or the scales of iron mingled with the joyce Molen, is
very good.

Galen, Dyp old sylke in the watter of the decoction of Dil, and afterward
dry it, and therwyth wype the hemorthoyde, and make a supposytory of the same.

Diosco. A plaster of Rosemarye leaves helith the hemortoydes.

Common clay restranyth the flux of the hemorrhoydes.

Ashes of eggs shells that chyekyns were hatchid, in, given with white wine
fasting, help the hemorrhoydes incontinent.

Against the hemorrhoydes being swolen and not runnynge, sethe horehound in
water wine and salt, put it in a close stoule, sit over the same to take the
air thereof upward being ho^e and lay ye herb thereto for a plaster.

Peter. If the hemorrhoydes be much ha^ging and paynful, make a plaster of
lynne^ cloth and hard pitche, and upon the plaster cast powder of smalage rote
and mastyche, apply it to the grefe it helps incontinent.

Myngle Intimonium with the joyce of Mollen, were silk therein and apply it to
the hemeroydes, it heals the pains thereof.

The powder of Agarihe mingled with the joyce of Sowbreade and warm oil, is
very good.

The hears of an Have made in powder and cast upon the Hemerhoydes both
incontinent restrain their bleding.

The yolke of a roasted egg mixed with oil of Rosts and laid to the grefe in
form of a plaster, heals the pain of the Hemeroydes.

Against desire to the stool without any sege.
The Causes.
Aprykyng humor, or dry dounge in the small guts.

The Signs.
Great desire to the stole without avoiding of any thing at all.

Remedies. Capi. xxxi.
Diosco. Stamp Rue first sodden, and use it for a plaster, it heals very
well.

Sethe mollen and stampte it, and make a fume thereof. or use ye herb for a
plaster, it heals also.

Asumigation made of teribenthine cast on the coals heals.

Sethe the rynde of a pomegranat, and the rote of an ash in swet wine and give
the same win unto the pacient to dryuke, it is very good.

Take of white Frankensence, i. of Ameos.s. of Opii.. and a half, of Safron.x.
myngle them with honey and make a suppository, for this is very good. Put Common,
Anyse Dyl, and greek pitche upon the hot coals, and when it burns let the
pacie^t receive the smake thereof closely from beneth.

Dyp old Sylke in the decoction of Dill, and afterward dry the silk let the
pacient wype his fundame^t therwyth.

A fumigation made of sarcocoll upon hot coals, bealeth the pacie^t of this
desease.

Plate. Annoynte the Raynes and al parts down ward to the end of the back
bone with honey, and spre^kle thereon powder of Greek Pitch, and of town
cresses, and the sed of Penny ryall, Isope, and Organe, and let it be bound with
a rowlar.

Peritory made in a plaster helith the hard sege and the swellynge of the
fundament.

Against chynes and ruptions in the fundament.
The Causes.
Sharp humors, or going much in cold wynd.

The signs be euydent enough.

Remedies. Cap. xxxii.
Galen. A Prouyd medycyne against Hemorroydes and attricious in the fundame^t,
take of plantayne iii. handfules of yacowe, and Fenel white myntes of each
fouer handefulles, stamp them and press out the joyce thereof, and put
thereto. viii graynes of Peper, and.vii. graynes of masticke, and drink it
fasting renew the drink as need shall be, till nine days be past.

^e he Linkfoyle in gotes milk, and drink it.iii. days, it is good if the
fygge blede.

Mingle.ii. yolks of Eggs with dyle of Roles and white wine, and dist^ll it
upon the grefe through a guyl, it helps myghtyly and that incontine^t, for
it has been proved.

Lomin eaten makes the hemorrhoydes to flow.

Cast brymstone beatten into powder upon Coals, ant incontynente upon ye smoke
left there be cast in an herb called Blind nettle, and le^t the smoke thereof
be receyuyd upward closelye, and do so thryse, it takes away the grefe
incontinet and so after it dries up the hemorrhoydes it has been prouid, for I
ini self have tried it.

Take and stamp the stalks of Rue, and the fresh ordure of a man together,
and blend them with the yolke of an egg and make a plaster it is very good.

Galen. Here unto take Sage, rue, Frankensence, Max, oil, and gotes milk
mingle them together and anointe the place.

Marigoldes put to the fundame^t do lightly heal the figs and hemorrhoydes.

For the Hemorrhoydes that appear hanging in the fundament, myngle the donge
of a colte french soap, the stalks of mollen together and putt it into the
fundamente the third day, thou shalt find thy self hole thereby.

The powder of mollen myxt with the joyce of horehound, breketh the sweling
hemorrhoides of the same operation is the root of holworte plastered with
Organ.

Of the coming forth of the foundamente.
The Causes.
Resolutyon or imbecilitie of the muscles which be about the fundement not
being able to draw in the gutte.

The signs be manifest.

Remedies. Cap. xxxiii.
THat aposcolicon against the fire and touch the fu^dament therwyth, it shall go
in again into^ tinent, do this.iii. or.llii. times as it shall com out, and
afterward let the pacie^t bath him self in the water of Derytorye, and Fygge
leaves, and Pear tree leaves, or only Peritory

The leaves of Rosemary aplyed inform of a plaster, take away, the swellyng of
the fundament.

Item make a fume of Greek Pitche cast upon the hot coals, it has been prouyd.

Also cast upon the fundament powder of hearts horn burnt, it is good

Roger^. This is a suer experyment above al, make fames closlye beneth with the
warm joyce of Garlycke, being clear, and aftter ward let it be sharpened
with the powder of a, Harttes horn burate, and Pytthe burnnte, with
Frannkensence and Mastycke, it is very good. not only for the going forth of
the foundament, but also against the going forth of the matrixe.

Galen. Make a warm suppositorye of wole tha is moIst and dipte in ye joyce of
Lekes without the bladdes, and when it is cold heat it again and when it is
dry renew it again. iii or.iiii. times, it is a sure remedy for those whose
fu^dame^t comes forth, or else put the water of the decoction of white
frankensence alone into ye fundament.

Of the oppilatyon of the liver.
The Causes.
In Apostem, or gross humores therein couteyned.

The Signs.
To be euel colored in the face and great pains in the right syd.

Remedies. Capi. xxxiiii.
IF thou will open the stoppynge of the lyugt anoynte the place against the
liver with this oyntme^t, take common oil, butter, Gose grese, Hens grease, and
Hedghoges grese, and mingle the^ together and let them be meltid, but first let
them boil in a pot mingled with the led of gromell and Saxfragge, of each like
much, of Fenell, of Carowes, of sauery, of Calamente Ana., and a half of
fenell roots, Percely.. f. strain these same and use the^, and after thou
have anointed the place, apply there unto a plaster of Wax, Pitche and butter
like much, then cast upon the grese this powder.

Take of Sage dried, of Sauerye of Anyse of, Femrell, Gotes dounge, of al like
much let the^ be myngled and make a powder thereof, afterward give a little
quantytye of seen, and a garicke, with Vermilyon it is very good against the
stoppyng of the liver and heals them ye have the dropsye of a cold cause.

Such alike drink as this does very well open the stopynges in the liver of
a hot cause.

Diosco. Cake of Hearts tongue, of Rybbworte, of Betonye, of Litarge, and as
much water as shall suffyce, let the same boil therein suffycyently and strain
them, and let the straynyng thereof be drunk earlye in the morning with Eudyue
stampte, and myxte with oil of Uyolettes, and Veniger.

Rib wort sod, healith those ye have the dropsye.

Of the Hydropsye.
The Causes.
Water contained betwyxt the bowels and thy thine skin that goes about them
and comes of it, coldness in the lever.

The Signs.
Swellynge in the belly, evil color and (...).

Remedies. Cap. xxxv.
THe hidrops^e ye is engedred of a hot cause, wherein it is not much confyrmyd,
is easly healed with often eating of Endyue, and drinking of the decoction of
the same, this have and prouyd.

A plaster made of both the plantaines aplyed against ye liver with vinegar and
barley meal is much worth amo^gal hot things, and immoderate exercise, also
make anoyntme^t of ye oil of al sorts of landers, and Rosis, and of the sede
of pla^tayne and use it in such like electuarief, Take of al sorts of
sa^ders, Ana.s and a half of basyll, of cubebes i. of the four cold seeds,
which be Melons throns, cucumer and gourdes of ethe.i. and a half of endive of
putllan, Ana a pund, let it be made with the Decoctyon of endyue, use it every
morning if the substance of the liver be not al redye, disolued wtoute doubt it
shall shortly be clean and helthfull.

Constan Fill a pot almost to the drink with the joyce of plantayne, and bind
about the pot a linen cloth and upon the cloth put ashes, and let it sees so
upon the tire unto the half, and give thereof every morning to those that be
sick in the spleen, and that are infected with the dropsy it is a principal
remedy.

Rye. Goats blood heat on the fire, and given to drink does perfectly heal
those which have the dropsy.

Diosco. Mine of the decoction of wild cucu^mer rote, quickly heals those
who who have the dropsy engendered in them of a cold cause.

Mingle of the powder of ox dou^ge vi. un. of bra^k brsin. un.iiii. iii. raw
eggs, a pound of brimstone and make a plaster thereof and with the same
plaster, thou shall hele those that be sick of the gout, of the dropsye and of
sache like.

Diosco Give unto him that is diseased with the dropll the joyce of briony with
honye, it shall heal him with out danger.

Water of the decoction of the said bryony helith the dropsye.

Rye. The rote of an Elder sod and drunk giuith perfect remedy unto ye dropsi.

Dioscor. Wine of the decoctyon of cucummers rote being drunk, purges ye
swellynge from those that have the dropsye.

Mustard sede drunk, or the wine of the decoctyon thereof, does lightly heal
the dropsye by dryuyng up the humor and taking away the heat of the liver.

The kernels of Peers stampte and drunk with honey takes away the grefe of the
liver.

Water or wine of the decoctyon of walwort if it be drunk is a present remedy
for those ye have the dropsi.

Wine ye Isope has been sodden in being drunk, burns the hidropsy call
humors so that it cannot indinger again.

Water of the decoctyon of stauesagre being drunk, does greatly hele the
dropsy, it has been prouid.

Auscen. Goats piss heals the dropsy.

If these that have the dropsye be anointed with comen dirt that is unde in the
carte ways, or upon the carts, they shall be hole.

Ellbert. A certain man healed the cold dropsye, by giuyng every morning a
sponeful of a black goats piss, or of a black sheep, in the water of the
decoction of spicknard.

A man's own urine being drunk is very good.

Plini. The fat of a Delphyn meltyd and drunk with wine, heals the sick man
of the dropsy.

Diosco. The powder of the stone magnes drunk with milk resolves ye dropse

Diosc^. kye Hares piss drunk healyth the Dropsye, for if the pacient drink,
if sponefulles thereof, it will perfitly heal him.

for them that be splenetike.
The Causes.
Great abundance of blood or choler in the spleen.

The Signs.
Swellyng and great pains in the lift side.

Remedies. Capi. xxxvi.
Wine wherein the tynde of Assue has been sodden dronke fasting is a most
certain remedy for those which be sick in the splen as says Co^sta^^^ne and
after the use hereof, three days space use to anoit the splen with dialtea and oil
of Bays the space of.vii. days, and after make a plaster of Goats dounge
baked with strong Veniger, and let it be often renewyd till the paryent be
hole.

Diosco. Hearts tongue drunk with wine xxx. days does dry up the spleen, and
dymy sheth it.

Wine of the decoctyon of the rynde of a wylowe tree, molifieth the swelynge and
hardness of the spleen.

Diosco. Egrymoyne taken with meat, wasleth the spleen.

Kye The leaves of a willow tree stamped with a little falte, and applied unto the
spleen, apeassed the ache and grefe thereof.

Diosco. Stamp Iuye leaves sodd in vinegar, and make a plaster, for it wastes
the spleen.

Kye The rind of a Sallow tree sode with water and honi, and given to the
pacyent to drink, loses and mo^yfieth the spleen.

Diosco. Sethe the rote of an elder in water unto the third part thereof, it
wonderfully helps the spleen.

Pacer. The root of docke sod in strong vinegar, and stamped, and applied unto
the Spleen inform of a plaster does vtt^rly take away the swelig of the
spleen.

Diosc^. The leaves of docke sod in Veniger and playsteryd upon the spleen lose
the swellynge thereof

Gilbert. A plaster of Goats dounge ming lyd with the powder of horehound
leaves, and Rue, and elder, and the ashes of the stalk of a Vine, with wine,
and a little veniger, is of great efficacy to dissolve the hardenes of the
spleen.

Sixtus. The powder of a fox dried upon the hot coals, if it be given in
drink does utterly wast the spleen.

Sees the twigges of a Millow in water, and give the same water unto the
paciet to drink, it viterly consumyth the spleen.

Dios^ Goats dounge loses the stopynges and all hardenes of ye spleen or of
the stone.

Peniryall sod with salt and applred to the grefe, losith ill humors of the
spleen, and takes away the swillynge.

Coral stamped and drunk with water, dries up the spleen.

Raw Colewortes caten with venyger, is a help for the spleen.

Ealcn. Against the stoppynge of the spleen the rote of hearts tongue, is very
good made to powder, and put in wine, and at the wane of the moon the said
wine is to be given to the pacyente to drink.

Dios^a Grass sod and bound to the grefe brings great help to the spleen.

The leaves of tamaryscus sodd in venyger, and stampte, aplyed unto the spleen,
are very good.

Take a dry coutord, the joyce of aneltle, eyle of eggs and of brymstone make
a plaster thereof, it is very good for those that be diseasid with the pain in
the spleen, the fallinge Euyil, and dropsye, for it is a precious medycyne.

Bind the spleen of a doge to the spleen of the pacient, and it shall heal
him.

For the yelow Iaundes.
The Causes.
An opilacion in the gaull or spleen, with great beat in the liver or debylitie
of attraction in ye milt.

The Signs.
Wanne and yelow color of the skin and white of the eyes with sum grefe in
the spleen or liver.

Remedies. Capi. xxxvii.
Gllbere. This is a good experymente, to heal the Iaundyes, take of the
scrapynge, of Iuorye, of the joyce of L yuer worte, of Saffron, as much as
shall seem to be suffycient, of French Soap to the quantytye of a Chesse
Nutte, and bind them all in the Corner of a Clothe, and swinge them up and
down in the water till the virtue of al ye said things be in the water, and
give ye same to the pacyent to drink, this is wonderful good,

The urine of the pacient drunk with the joyce of Horehounde heals the
Iaundis.

The scraping of Iuory with the water wherein it was washed, does myghtyly heal.

A certayue old woman healyd me^ which were almost full of the dropsye, with the
joyce of planten soden to half, it might also be made in a syrope.

Make a bathe of the water of the decoctyon of Gladyn, and of ye rote of
Ciclanim, or slampt the^ and drink it with water, it heleth ye Iaundis if the
Pores be open that the pacyent may sweet for in the sweet thou shall perceive
choler to proceed.

Saffron dissolved in watter and drunk, bealith incontinent.

The ioice of Camomll given to drik unto the pacient dyscasyd with the Iaundis
or lever, with warm water is a present remedy.

The joyce of morell drunk is a help therefore.

Water of the decoction of mouseare, or wine healith incontinent.

Diosco. The donge of wild goats bett to powder, and drunk.iii. days,
healith those that have the Iaundis.

Of the stone in the raynes or bladder.
The Causes.
Great heat, dryeng up gross and putrified humors contained in either of them.

The Signs.
Gravel in the vryne with great pains in the dyseasyd place.

Remedies. Capi. xxxviii.
TAke of Cloves, of Inannone muskara, or bettels, of Galingale, of dried
grassehoppers, of gromell, of long Peper, of saxfrage, of the ashes of a
Scorpyon, of Goat^s blood dried, of the stone of a man, of each.ii. make
powder thereof, and give it to the sick (being in a bathe made of the decoction
of Bocheres brom Spetage, Smalage, fenel with white wine, wherein great
Galingale, and English Galangale and the rot of Radishe have been sodden, this
is wonderful good.

Item take Goats b^oud, ^he ashes of a Scorpyone, the powder of Grasshoppers of
Spodium, of spiknard, of the blood and hears of an hare, of Galingale, Drago^s
blood, of Gromel, make powder thereof and mingle it with Syrope of gromel and
Saxfragge, and give it to the pacient in the morning that he maislipe upon it,
it helps very much Sees all those simples that break the stone, put them
together in agourd, that is old, and stop it incontinent with the pacientes
yard, so the hole air thereof may enter through the hole of the yard, and let
him use the same often times a good while after the same manner, for it breaks
the stone, enlarges the ways loses the humors of the blader, and consumes
dries and also expels the stone, inespecially if many flees called cimyces
be sodde^, afterward make a plaster of the dregs, and apply it to the yard
and to the bone above the yard.

Diosco. Item put the powder of the worms called Cimices, in the condute of
the yard, they perform a singular remedy.

Constable Item if the yard be anointed over with fore blood, the stone will
break incontenente, for put a stone into the blood of a fox, and it will
break in three days.

Item.ix. Iuy verys given with warm wyn to drink, purgith the stone, and
provoke brine myghtily.

Burn hares blood and the hole skin of an hare, in a new pot well closyd,
and of the same ashes give the pacyente a sponefull in warm wine in a bath,
and fasting, it brekith and drives out the stone.

Item the stone of a man, given in drink unto the pacient fasting, breketh the
stone and brings it out myghtily with his bryne.

Before al things the pacient must be purged, and nourished with such things
as open the pipes and veins, and cleanse slimy humors, or else all the medycines
that shall be given will little avail him.

In the bead of a great Tod there is a stone, which stone being sta^pt, and
given to the pacyent to drink in warm wine makes him to pise the stone out
incontinent, but if the stone be to hard and to great, take the powdere of
Snaylez, for it is a good experiment.

Egg shells dried and beatten to powder and given to drink, breketh the stone
it has be^ proved.

Take a good deal of mug worte, stamp it, and wrynge ou^ the ioice thereof,
dryuke a good draught there of every day to the quautite of half a cupfull, it
breaks the stone wou^derfully, and causes the gravel to issue forth, it
bath ben prouyd.

Gerard. Item if the stone will not be borke^ by no means, put in a spout of
bras softely through the hole of ye yardetyl it stouche the stone, then pinch
it till thou torn the stanne out of his place, and it be setlyd in some other
place of the bladder, there it may remain forty years with out danger. Diosco.
The guine of Cheryes does myghtely ^ye. break ye stone and lofe the grauil:
Item the herb and rote of seahclme sodden and drunk with wine and Honye,
earlye in the bed, heleth the stone, if it be used sixtene days.

Galen. Stamp Goats blood the liver ye lights raynes, yard bowels and stones
altogether, make a puding thereof in the great gut of the same Goat, sees it
and give it to the pacient to eat, and thou shall see wonderful operation
thereby, in taking away the stone.

Diosco. Betony given to the pacient to drik with wine, honye and peper,
mingled together, takes away the pain of the rains, and expels the stone of
the raynes and blader.

Galen, If thou doubt whether the stone be in the blader, make a plaster of ye
herb that is called Check wed sod in water and bound to the yard and so the
bone about the yard and if the grefe increase it is in the bladder if it do not
increase it is not there but in the raynes.

Dioscor. The guine of a damason tree breketh the stone, and causes it to
issue.

The rynde and beries of a baye tree drunk breketh the stone.

Goats pysse drunk expellith and breaks the stone.

Anicen. Ameos o^ in the sted thereof the sed of charuyll, losith the
difficultye of making water, and dryueth forth the stone broken.

Rafis. Item the ashes of grasshoppers given with the syrup of spykna^d is of
wonderful operacyon.

Peter. Sethe seven heads of garlyke in water a good while, and give the same
water unto ye pacient in, days, it is a prouyd medycyne against the stone.

Take.ii. or.iii. young leuerettes, drown the^ in vinegar, that they ^y there,
and afterward boil them in a pot well closyd without any thing else, and
give the ashes thee of to him that has the stone, it breketh the stone.

Goats blood, and Gose blood, myngled with veniger, and sod together with a
slow fire, does mollyfye the stone.

Macer. The leaves of Enuala Campana, sod in wine and vsid for a plaster is a
great healpe to them that be frantyke through the pain of ye stone.

Circan. Item English galingale stamped and sod we oil, and plasteryd warm
upon the bone above the yard, provoke vryne without doubt.

For blood fressh drunk brekithe the stone, for it is known that if a stone
be put into it, it will break. The powder of a hare burnt quick in a new pot,
and the powder of a hearts horn, if it be taken is greatly to be commended,
for it breketh ye stone.

A Fox eaten, and the suer thereof anointed on the pacyent, is a great help.

Auicen. A special remedy after Auicen, is a wagtayle.

Gilbert. Make powder of grass Hoppers taking away the fete, head and wings,
myngle it with Gillofloures, and Sixfrage made also. in pel ider

The stone of a man, the stone in a spong the stone that is found it the
bladder of a hog, be very good.

Oil wherein Betels and Paper worms be sodden, anoyntid or put into the
holowns of the yard with a spout, is very good.

Galen. Stamp the rotes of Olyue, comin, and Chibois, then seth them in oil,
and apply them hot upon the share, it moves him to piss incontinent.

Gerard Stamp Peritorye, and apply it warm unto the same place, it is of
wonderful effect.

The blood of an old Got made to powder, and myxt with ye decoctyon of
spiknard and cynamon, and dry gross^, oppers beton to powder, and given to
drink causes the stone to gu^^e out wonderfully.

(...) ^^^ette of a Cock given to the pacie^t to eat ar very good but not the
rest of the flesh.

In cause the stone to break, and issewe for^h make ten or more roules of
Radyshes rotes, put them in white win al a hole night, in y^ morning drink
the wine fasting, use it every day till the stone go from the.

^y^ The raynes, doung, blood, ashes, and hears of an hare, break the stone.

Of the Strangury.
The Causes.
Ulceres in the bladder or an Apostem in the liver or re^nes, whythe causes
the vryne to be sharp and prickyng.

The Signs.
The urine ever droppyng at the yard with great desire to piss.

Remedies. Cap xxxix.
Anicen. Ox dounge myxte with honye and warm aplyed to bone above the yard,
is very good.

Item.iii. flies called cantharydes (there heads and wings taken away) myxt
with goats milk, and drunk, do lose the siranguryon.

Paper worms stamped with oil and with the fat of a hedghogge anoint the yard
and the place there about therwythal, it provoke urine myghtyly.

Watter of the decoctyon of galingale provoke vryne.

Make a plaster of hensgrese gose greece, and the grease of a hedghege of the
sead of gromell, and Saxfrage and goats blood.

Apply Galbanum upon the belly under the nauyl, it causes the pacycient to
make, vryne incontinent.

Byls made of Rye mele, and applied upon the yard (it being anointed with
vnguentum, Popule on) helyth lightly.

Diosco. There is nothing that provoke urine more mightly than a radyshe rote.

Item the rote of a Docke sod with wine and oil and plasterid above the yard,
provoke vryne in great quantytye.

(...). The powder of the beryes of briony does greatly heal ye straguri on
The rind of a Hassil nut tree or the lesues help greatly the stra^gutio^

Diosco. The leaves of planitayn which grow ner^ the rose, bring drunk
healith al difficultis of the blader.

Radyshe rote sode in whyt wine and a little powder made of hearts he^es mingled
thereto causith ye pacie^t to make water inco^tinet, it has be prouyd.

Warm eggs aplyed above the yard, heal the grefe of the bladder and raynes
wonderful.

Item Filbertes stamped and dronke with water or wine, heal the pains of the
bladder, and raynes.

Of the ulcers or pustules in the yard.
The Causes.
Sharp and bitter humors.

The signs be manifest.

Remedies. Cap. xl.
Macer. Wash thy yard often with win of the decoction of sage.

Diosco The ashes of a dry gourd helith quickly the rotten vicers of the yard.

Item a fomentacion made with wine of the decoction of olyue leaves, is very
good.

C^^^^ If it be swellen about the yearde take dry figs and flouer of whet
myngle it with oil, and apply it to the yard.

The joyce of planten sodden and put into the holownes of the yard heals
ulcers thereof.

Circan. Litarge dyssoluyd with oil of Rosys is very good.

Diosco. Seth the milk of an Ass, or of a got, with the joyce of plantyn it
heals if it be drunk, the ulcers of the raynes bladder and yard, I sace
spekyth only of the very milk.

Of them that cannot hold there water.
The Causes.
The weakness of the retraction and great strength of attractyon in the
raynes.

The Signs.
Great thurst, and inuoluntarye making of water.

Remedies. Capi. xli.
Cons^. Against this disease give the pacient the bladder of a goat or of a
black sheep, or eis of a Bull made to powder, give it him to drik with vyneger
and water when he goes to bed.

Diosco. Give him for iii. days at the wane of the moon, the bladder of a
fresh water fie she.

The brain of a Hare given in wine to drink causes the pacient to with hold
his vryne.

Filberdes rostyd are hole some against the distillacion of urine.

Galek. Stamp to powder a dry blader of a sow Pygge, give it in drink, for
it is very good and wholesome.

Gonstan Item gallingale withholdeth the flowing of the vryne, ingenderid of
the coldness of the rednes and blader

Item the blader of a bore rostid re straykyth y^ inco^tinency of ye vryne The
ligthes of a kid eaten and bound under the nauyll with holdyth the distillacion
of the vryne.

Of inflatyon and swellyng of the Coddes.
The Causes.
Abundance of hot or cold humors falling to the Coddes.

The Signs.
Great inflatyon and swellynge in the coddes.

Remedies. Capi. xlii.
Diosco. IF the Coddes be swollen, take been flouer and temper it with ye joyce
of walworte, and common oil, bind it unto the coddes it loses the swellyng
thereof incontinent.

Of the same operacion are the ioyces of Elder and walwort.

^ye Goats dounge dyssoluid with wine takes away all the swelyng of the Coddes.

Diosco The seed and leaves of Henbanne stamped and bound to the coddes take
away the pain and swelynge there of. This cure is wrought many ways, first let
the place and fundament be mollifyed with ye decoction of Margeram, and
afterward the things mentioned, before myxt together and made in a plaster,
suppli the same till he be hole of ye sweling

Another form of plaster is this take of marciato^, wax, pitche, ship rosen,
and Cerebentine, of Frankensence, Mastycke, Dragons blood, bole armonike new
of each like qua^ title: after that let him use such a like syrup aa this
following. xxi or. xl days.

Take of Veruen, Stycheworte, Calament, wyld Margeram, Pla^tayne, Stare wort,
Scabiouse, and of the rote of restharo we, let the^ boil well together
afterward take Fra^kensence, Dragons blood, bole Armonycke, Fenegreke, of
mastycke, of each like much slampe them and blend them with whytes of eggs and
put therinto a good quantytye of the foresaid decoctyon, and give it unto the
pacient early and lat, so shall he be healid.

Coluer dounge, dogs turdes, Gore dou^ge with the joyce of wall worte and
commone oil, is much worth.

Of the inflatyon of the yard.
The causes.
Uaporouse wind therein counteyned or ye arteris being very open

The Signs.
Swellynge and pain in the yard.

Remedies. Cap. xliii.
IF the yard do swell, and be grievously pained, mingle Wax and oil and ye
joyce of purslande together, and apply it unto the yard, it is a prouyd remedy.

Put Betonye sedde in wine unto the yard. Barley branne sod in wine and Honey
and bound unto the yard as a plaster, takes away the ache and swelling
thereof.

Olive leaves stamped with Honey heleth the Ca^ker in the yard or else where, also
let the place be washed with warm vinegar and dried with a linen cloth,
sprinkle thereon powder of gauls, do this thrice a day and it shall heal it
perfitly in short space.

Gilber^. Item the joyce of water lentyls anointed upon the yard, healythe the
yard, Cods, stones, and raynes and suppressith the fleshely lust.

The joyce of lenttils laid upon ye canker of the yard kills the same.

Against great desire to fleshly lust.
The Causes.
CUse of hot meats and such as do increase much seed.

The signs need not to be declared.

Remedies. Cap. xliiii.
Macer. HEmlokes bound to a man's stones. take utterly away al desire of
copulacion.

If Opium, Henbane sede, and mandrage be mynglid with war and oil in the
which they have soden, and the members therewith be anointed and a plaster
thereof being made, and bound unto the coddes, it takes away the desire of
copulacion.

Anoynte oftentimes the members with the ioice of Night shade Singrene, and
vyneger.

All men and inespecially Dioscorides says that Peper, Rue, Cutlaine,
Calamint, Castoreu^ wast the seed of generacyon,) by dryuynge it up) of there
property and strong heat.

Gonstan Item let the yard be anoyntid with oil, wherein Camfore has been
resolved, and he shall have no fervent desire to it.

If a man eat the flowers of a sallow or wyllowe tree, or of a Popler t^ee,
they will make cold all the heat of catnall lust in him.

Diosco. Isac. Bean flouer made in form of a plaster and bound unto the
pryuye members of a boy, queuchith al con cupiscence and suffers not hears to
grow there.

Auicen. Lettis sede dries up the seed, and quenchith the desyer of
copulacion Anyonte the pryuie members with the joyce of Henban, and the carnal
concupiscence shall be que^chid therbi.

Against an apostem or hard swellyng in the matrix.
The Causes.
With holdyng of the flowers, or pains in child birth, or of an old ulcer or
in flamacyon.

The Signs.
Sudden losing of strength, pains in the head and neck, hardness and
grefe aboutes the share, with holdyng of vryne.

Remedies. Capi. xlv.
Diosco. THe joyce of Lilly sodde^ with common oil mollefieth hardness of the
matrix and opens the same.

A fomentation of ye water wherein Mallows or Holy hook have been sodde^ in,
takes away the hardness of the Matrix and opens the mouth thereof, Mingle Gose
grease with the joyce of lekes and anoint ye neck of the matrix, it vnbindeth
the same drawn together after the issuing of the flowers.

Item cokle, myrhe, white franke^ sense, and saffron, let them al sees
together in wine or water, and if a woman be anointed therwt it openyth the
narrones of ye matrix, and makes her apt to conceptyon.

Diosco. The rote of wall worte soden and a fomentacyon made thereof, helpith all
the hardines and clausures, of ye matrix.

To provoke the flowers.
The Causes.
COppliatyons in the matryx, abundaunce of gross blood, or aftter great
euucuation, or fatnisse in the womb.

The Signs.
Pains in the lower parts of the belie desire to sleep in the same the in
temperance of all the body, wytholdyng of watter lack of dyig^styon and no
desire to meat.

Remedies. Cap. xlvi.
THe wine wherein wild margeram has been sod in, does prero^^ the flouers,
like wise the herb laid to the matrix in a plaster, or ye suffumygacion of the
same.

A supposytory or pessarie of cocte^ dypt in Tirbyntyne, does cleanse the
matrice.

The dregs of oil put into the matrix, does cleanse the same, and brig forth
a dead child.

The root of madder made in a pessary has no less stre^g the, mine of the
decoctyon of Calamint or pulyoll drunk, does quickly provoke the flouers, but
mugwort is much better for the same purpose.

The rote of a Lyllye rostid under the Embres and stamped with oil being laid
to the matrix does wou^derfullye open the same, so does the sede thereof, and
also brig forth a dead child without peril.

Purslane does utterly dissolve all swelinges in the matrix, whether it be
drunk emplastered or the place be washyd with ye decoction therofe

Sethe sage and drink it, either stamp it and lay to the, matrix, for both
ways it provoke the flouts. and after burdens.

Holworte drunk and laid to the matrix clensyth the matrix, and takes away
the after burdens after child birth, nevertheless it is cory sieve, and
therefore perilouse.

The flouer of Nigella, Romana, put to the matrix with Nonye, draws out al
contents with great vyolence, wherefore it is perelouse.

Let the root of gladyn be made like a pessarie and anoint the same with oil
de bay or common oil, the^ taste thereon powder of walwort and put it into the
matrix al a night, till it provoke it to blede.

It is very good to make a bath of such herbs as do provoke the flowers, and
to wash the members there with, and to receive the fume thereof standing over a
close stole, such herbs be those.

Wild margeram, calamint, sauery, Mynte, Mugworte, Cynamon, Cardamomum.i.
Galingale, Cappares the rinds of Cassia fistula, et Cassia liguea, fenell sede,
sage pulyol, afterward make a pessary or suppository of black helebor nigella,
Romana Scamonie, wrappid in a lynin cloth, put that into the matrix and with out
doubt it will provoke the flowers wonderfully.

A pessarye of cotton dypt in oil where in coloquintida has bin sodden is very
effectuouse.

The flowers long stopped are brought furthe with a bathe of the decoction of
ye herb called bawine.

A pessary of lynen cloth full of sode garlike beads stampid with oil is very
good.

Also one Cloue of piled garli^ke put into ye matrix, does open ye same Bitter
Almonds blau^thid and sta^pid put to the matrix like a pessari or otherwise, do
draw forth al fylth and corrupt humors contained in ye matrix or else where.

Cinnamon (having great virtue to provoke brine) does cle^se the after burthe^s
of a woman, and ye much better, if it be mynglyd with myrte Chick wed roasted
vuder the embres and stampid and laid to the matryx, provoke the flowers.

There is no medicine like unto oil of lyllyes, if the members be anointyd there
with, it belith all dyseases of the matrix.

Power of scamony cast upon a pessary of the rote of malowe does bring forth
the flouers, this have I prouyd.

A bathe made of the decoctyon of Mayde^ hear and teynworte does
wounderfullye purge the matryx. Mugworte stamped and put to the nauyll or the
joyce thereof mynglyd with myrre and made in a pessary does provoke the
flowers.

Sauery drunk or emplasterid to ye matrix does cast out a dead child

A pessarye made of Galbanum does myghtyly provoke flowers.

To stope the flowers.
The Causes.
The veins broken or opened, erosions in the matrix or losinge of a child.

The Signs.
Change of color, swellynge in the feet and lack of apetyte.

Remedies. Capi. xlvii.
If the flowers will not cease in there natural time, make a pessary of goats
dounge, and the ioice of shepherds purse or rib wort of Plantayne, and put it
into the Matrix.

Yarowe stampid with the water of the decoctyon of ypoquistidos, and the
flouers of pomgranate stops wonderful.

Make a bath of these herbs, Pla^tayne, Sheperdes purse wyld Casill, and the
middel rind of an Oak, and afterward use this pessary, take the powder of a
hearts horn, Ipoquistidos, Acacia, hole armentake, new plaster, wax, talowe
of a Got, and of ye which remaynethe make a plaster to the raines and share
and it stops flowers on warrintise. Likewise make a bathe of the rind of an
Oak, quicken beres, or service, and plaste, his is of great efficacy.

As many graynes as a woman does drink of Coryander side, so many bays shall
the flowers be stoppid.

A pessary or powder of ceruse of whit lead mingled with powder of smallage,
does metuclously stope flowers.

The joyce of Lekes stops both the flowers and after burden.

Coral drunk stops the flowers so does the ashes of brent acornes, cast
into the matrix dry, can heal all filthy and noisome humors.

Acatica made in a peslary, is very good for the same, likewise a great
ventose laid to the pappes and kept ahole hour.

Ribwort drunk or made in a pessary stops al flux of the Matrix, and there
is no medicine compatable unto this.

The sede or rote of a water Lylly has a peculiar virtue.

The water found in an hollow Oak, is good with Rain water for the same, is
water of Pulioll drunk.

A decoction of Acorne shales does ^^^ueloussy enclose the matrix, and (...)
^oth a pessary of Morell.

Sanct John's herb drunk, does stope utterly both white and Red flux,
Cinabarys of some men called dragons blood has a matuelouse strength to stop
the matrix.

for the Mother.
The causes.
Much abundance of humores with stopynge of the flouero, or the co^tencyon, and
putrefaction of sedg in the matrix or great cold in the time of the flowers.

The Sygres.
Sadness, pale color, sluggishnesse, weakness in the legs, and in the
fytte, desper to sleep, doitage, losing of all the seuses and voice, with
crampes in the legs.

Remediee. Capi. xiviii.
If a woman be greuid with che mother, sta^pe nettle leaves and put the^ to the
Matrix, and let her also drink parsnepsed with wine, for it is very good and
losyth the suffocations and cleanses the sede contenid in the matrix.

A pessary of oil, of bitter almondes, does assuage the grefe utterly.

This is a principal medecin, let the woman smell to euphorbiu^ that she may
nese or blow it to hit nosthrilles then shall she drink Castoreum cloves, and
assofetida.

Also louage, Isope wormewode and fern leaves, sod and made in a plaster, and
laid from the nauyl to the share do wonderfullye help the Mother.

Sethe wormewod, and Fern or either by itself, and stamp them for a plaster
thereof does break the pains of the mother.

A lynnen cloth sod in the lie of the ashes of coleworts, does take away the
ventositie of the matrix.

Triakle, cloves and garlyeke dyssoluyd in strong vote wine, is present
medicine for the Mother, this have I prouyd.

Like wise does a great ventose with much fire upon the share: also let her
receive stynkinge and fylthy sauoures at her mouth, and a suffumigacion or
diverse swear and odoriferous things beneth.

Rue sod and stamped in oil with hens grease, and gose grese hot laid
betwyxte the nauyll and the share, is an excellent medicyne.

Nettle sede drunk in wine, does aswageall pains in the matrix, and take
away the ventositi thereof.

A suffumigacion of myrhe does open the Matrix being inclosyd: so does the
fume of Terbentine, received by the mouth.

Make a pessary of minte, calamine Sauery, hilwort and musk with castoreum,
put this into: he matrix and let her smell Assafetida, and rue this have I
prouyd to be wounder full good.

Also Rue sod in water, and put into the matrix, alwagith the pains even so
does the suffumygaryon of galbanum.

Ruin water mynglid with strong vinegar, and spouted into the nosethrilles,
does suddenly drive down the mother, and like virtue have, xv graynes of Peony,
drunk with wine.

To help conceptyon.
The Causes.
Immoderate heat, or coldness in matrix or much fatness, with diverse other.

The signs be plain.

Remedies. Cap. xlix.
THe suffumigacio^ of Cocle and Franke^se^ce, is very good therefore, An
emplaster of laudanu^ laid to the matrix or the same suffu inigated does
dispose the matrix to conceive if the let come of cold.

A pessary or suffumlgacion of Nep does dry and heal the moist, and cold
matrix, but chefly a pessari made of Theodorico^, and scammony, and put into
the matrix: after the natural stoppinge of the flowers, if she use the
company of a man, it will make a bartan woman conceive.

Herb Bawme suffumigated does wonderfully comfort the matrix.

Let a woman eat the matrix or re^net of an Hare, and she shall conceive. This
is a present medicine take ye dounge of an Hare, and the Rennet thereof and
mingle them with honey and afterward make powder thereof, and let the woman
drink the same three days and three nights with the shauinges of Iuorye, and
without doubt she shall conceive.

The powder of the stones of a Bore made in powder and dronk, do^^^ (...)
^elously help conception, like wyle does a bathe made of the decoctyon of
rosemary, and of more efficacy is garlyke sod in oil of Roses and wol made in
a pessary, this is a present medicine.

If a woman do use to anoint her memberes with this oil she shall conceive
without fail, take of dates apound of fistikes a pound, of Nutmigges, and
Linamoum Ana,.i. of long Peper, of Nuttes of Egypt ana..i. of gauls..ii. of
Gynger i of Sugar a pound and mingle the^ with honi and make anointment thereof.

Also let an egg shell be filled with. i ofgreke pitche.ii. of Castortum and
bind it upon, the nauil for it is very good, so is the suffumygacion of Aloes.

Here follows a pessary of great virtue and efficacy for aftter burdens and
al pains in the matrix and beside this does meruclously help co^ceptyon, take
ye brains of a heart or calfe, of grene Isope, and butter, of gots milk or
cowes milk almondes, storax, clarysyed honey, of every of them.i. of oil of
spike.ii. then stamp those which be to be stampid and melt the rest afterward
mingle them together, and with wol make a pessary thereof, and if the woman use it
three days and there upon use the company of man although she has been barrayne
of long time yet she shall conceive.

Also this has been often prouyd very good for ye purpose take comlery, the
rynde of Pomgranattes, ye skin of amedler, the rynd of an oak, the leaves of
swet breare ana.i of nut curnels, cloves, and Nutmigges ana.i. make poudet of
al these and of the same with rose water make little balls, and dry them in
the shaddowe, and when ^on be dysy^ syd to use them dissolved, on in rose water
and with the same has the matrixe and you shall conceive without doubt

Of the swellyng in the Pappes.
The Causes.
Muth abundance of hot blood, or the milk therein contained waxed hard like to
chese.

The Signs.
Great pains and swellynge in the Pappes

Remedies. Cap. l.
If the tets be swole^ up through superduitie of milk, first of all put it
back with poters claye, and vinegar or else with a bean broken and stamped, and
minglyd with the white of an egg, or with netils sod in veniger, apply it unto
ye setes in all increase of the same, and with oil of rosys, it takes away al
sweling an^ hatoenes of the tetes.

Constable. Bind unto the breast cromes of bread myxt with ye joyce of smallage

The rote of Colewortes myntes been flouer all and every of these loss and
dry up the milk.

If there be any holowe ulcer or cankar in the breast, goats dounge tempered
with hour. kileth the same, and takes away al fylth.

If the head of the tete be anoyntid with bawme, it takes away ye pain
thereof.

Item the ordure of a man burnt and applied unto the tetes belith the ca^kernes
and inueterate ulcers.

The leaves of an Olive tree sta^ytekyll the Canker and worm in the breast.

Diosco. Against the swellyng of the tetes aplye malloes sta^pte, and made hot
with common oil, and bynd them to the same.

Macer. Henbane seed stamped and put in wine and aplyed to the Tettes takes
away the pain thereof and of the kyrneIs also.

Diosco. Goats dounge minglid with vinyger and branne and aplyed for a
plaster, losith wonderfully al swel lynge of the breasts.

Constable. Ashes made of a dogs head sparsyd upon ye holownes of the breast,
that is ingenderid of a kankar kills and brekith away al filth there of:
Coluet dounge with honye and wax is much worth and of great efficacy hereto.

A not grass being carried about the person takes away the sweling of Tetes
in continent.

The grease or fat of a Hedghogge anointed upon the Pappes, sleithe the milk
therein by ope^yng of ye pares and losyng thereof.

Mouse turdes anointed upon the breasts with water losith the hardness pain and
swellyng thereof.

Isac. Brimstone stamped with wynt and plasterid over the Tetes, brekyth ye
hardness of the same.

The shells of partrigis eggs sta^pt and minglid with wax and Catra Sigillata
do heal the tetes being ready to fall of with ache.

Against the pains in child birth.
The Causes.
The faintness, or gross saines, or weakness of the woman, or the
innaturall coming furthe of the child.

The Signs be known by woman's telling.

Remedi^s. Cap. li.
Against dangerous child birth mani say that the s^rapinges of Dates stones
given with wine does wonderfully case weme^ of there traualynges in child birth.

Dippe a lynnen clothe in the ioice of stone Perslye or of Common persly and put
the same into the mouth of the matrix, and it shall cause ye dead chyldes
delyueraunce and the after burdenes also, and the sam^ being drunk in any
kind of drink clensyth the matrix and the child of all gross humors.

Oak fern stamped and plasteryd upon the foece of the traualyng woman, causes
the child birth either a live or dead.

Auicen. If a woman drink maiden hear in wine, it causes spedy deliverance

Peter. Item drink made of Castorcum is very good in such causes.

Also if the priuityes of a woman be anointed with ye ashes of an asses houte,
it is a very good and easy remedy.

Also give unto a woman in this case an other womans milk to drik it causes
spedy delyuerance.

Gilbert. Stamp Veruen, and give it to a travaling woman to drink with water,
it causes deliverance also.

Item myrhe given to drink in warm wine, the quantity of a big nut, causes
deliverance of the child either quick or dead.

Dragance bound to the priuities of a woman in labor, causes her to be
delivered incontinente, but there must head be taken, that it be quickly
removed, least it draw forth the matrix withal.

Rogert. Sees Mugwort in water and plaster it hot upon the nauel and thighs
of a woman laboring with child, it causes both child birth and ye after
burden also if it tarry long there, it will cause ye matrix to follow upon. The
joyce of Leekes has a mighly operation in this case, if it be dronke with
warm water.

The joyce of figs or powder of Dyttayne, given to a woman that laboring in
child has the ague, with water, if she have not the Ague, with wine, it
causes ye dead child in her womb to issue for the A horse turde drunk and
suffumy gated causes delyuerance, as well of the secondines as of the child.

^ye. Item take pyony sede, when it is black, stamp it and blend it with
oil, and anoint the loins, and pryuytes of a woman traualing with child, it
makes delyuerance of the child in her womb without pain.

A suffumygacyon made of the horns and houses, of Goats moves mightily the
matrix to deliverance.

Diosco. Take of Betony sedden with water and honey. 31. It hasteneth the
delyuerance, and deiyueryth deiyueryth y^ laboring woman out of her danger,
but in any case beware that there be no pieces in the house wherein the woman
traualeth for they are very hurtful and do not suffer the Matrixe easily to
open.

If the woman cannot easily be rid of the after burden, take Berage and
Leeke blades, and the joyce of Parsley roots, give the same witth Oil and it
shall be delivered incontinent.

Constable. The leaves of Juniper drunk with water and hunnie, causes the
deliverance of the child and of the secondiles, and after burden.

Dissolve a Swallows neast with water, strain it, and drink it, it causes
ye birth of the child to be very easy.

The pains after childbirth.
The Causes.
Cold taken in the bearing of the child, with diverse other.

The lignes be manifest.

Remedies. Chap. lii.
FOr the pain after childbirth, take the yolks of eggs mightily sodden in
water, break them to pieces, and mingle them with suet and the joyce of
Mugwoort, and Common, and make a plaster thereof.

Sees Onions in water, and after stamp them with Oil and Comin, and yolks
of eggs, it is very good, applied in like form as the other.

Sees in Wine or water the roots of marish mallow, and walwort, and stamp
them well, and mingle them with common Oil warm, and make a plaiste.

Dioscol. Let Bay berries being beaten to powder, be put upon hot coals, and
let the woman man receive up the fume thereof clos^ly, it helps much the
pain of the matrixe, and conception, and wastes the superfluities of the
Matrixe, also it causes deli^eraunce.

for the Gout.
The Causes.
Much surferring and drunkenness, to much accompaniyng with women, immoderate
exercise, long standing and such like.

The Signs.
Great pains and swellinge in the ioyutes, chiefly in spring time, and harvest.

Remedies. Cap. liiii.
THe joint sickness is thus divided into scratica, which is in the huckle
done. Podagra the gout of the legs and feet, and Chiragra the gout of the
fingers, and Arthritica which is in every other part of the body.

Town exesses stamped and made in and plaster with suet, takes away y^ joint
sickness long hanging upon a man before if it be used.

Diosco Asphaltuum made in a plaster with ialte Pe^er heleth the joint sickness
and the gout.

(...) Water of the decoction of Rape, through the workig thereof, helith the
pain of the joint sycknes, and gout^ of his own properly.

Diosco. Cost or detin plasterid upon the gout, and disese called sciatica,
healyth the same, by drawing out the humors from the bottom^ and after the
same sort, it is good for them, y^ have the palsy, and ioynte sycknes. The
root of a holyhoke or marish mallow stamped and myxt with the grease of an old
hog, heals the gout within three days.

Macer Playntain leauis plasterid with fresh grease, is a good remedy to take
away the pain and swellyng of the gout. Take sede thereof also used in a
plaster, is a great help against the got.

The leaves of Cresses myxt with branne and vinegar and emplastered upon the
grefe ar, of much effect

Ite^ take musterd sede, a ne^e bred dry fygges, honey and as much vinegar as
you will, put them all together, and bind it to the grefe.

Gslbere. Take the flesh of a fat Catte the grease of a Gose, of a graye, and
of a fox, and the mary of a Hearts horn Iuy, Sage, Rue, Vyrgins Wax,
frankensence, the yolks of rostyd eggs, Snayles, put them all in an earthen
pot that has, a hole made in the botom, for the nones, and let it be clouse
above with past that no air may issewe forth at al, and put under the same
pot, another whole pot and close the^ together and put the nethermost in
ground, and as it were burye it in earth, and compass it about with fire
above, and thet will distill a wonderful good ointment out of the upper most
pott which wylbe good for the cold gotee.

Against the cold and swell^ng. gout, take stale grease, and the whites of
eggs, beat them together a good while and mingle together bristone, the root
of red-Docks quick silver without any fire use ye same plastared upon some
lether, early and late, let it be renewed it shall cause it to itche greatly,
but yet doubt nothing of it, for it will heal thee.

Also this plaster following has bee^ proved of this Gilbert and is an
wunderful invention. Take of the bare earth of Emetes..iiii. of barlz bran.. of
Rose, un. and a half, of bean flower un. and a half, malowes ma^drage ans
un.vi. sees the mallows and mandrage in iii. pound of water unto half, and
make therewith the other medicines beaten to powder in a mortar, and mingle
therwt wax and yolks of eggs of Saffro^. iii kneede them all well together, and
it shall need no other plaster or medicine.

An other plaster whythe is to be used when the grefe is most behement. Take
of honi comb (...) ad of the milk of Barelye (...) Rose water and Rain water
minglid together..i. and a half, mingle the^ together in a mortare, and
blyinde them well with the white of an Egg, make a cerrupe, and apiye it ia
very good.

Item sees six Backs, or Reremysy in Rain water, and afterward streyne it,
and put thereto of oil of Roses, and bows of Wyllowes, and seethe them unto
the consumpcyon of the Oil, it is much worth both in a hot and cold cause,
for it has an vnkowen virtue.

Diosco. Shype Pytche, and salt Atmoniake myxte together, is a syn^gular help
for them which have the Crampe.

Item Betony stampte and playstered upon the grefe of the Gout, eases the
same, and the decoctyon thereof being drunk does the same sooner.

Take oil of Henbane anointed upon the ^vefe of the gout takes away the
pain.

Item a bathe made of the decoction of ste wort takes away al gouts

Time stamped with the white of an egg and applied for a plaster is a good and
helthfull medicine for ye Ioynte sycknes, and especyall y the sciatica.

Take Bay berys and the leaves of Rue, Time Vrgayne, Pennyrial, old soap,
myngle them together and frye them and apply them vr o^ the hot gout with to
we, the place being first anointed with Honx it takes away the gout and al
other grefes.

Thus is a preciouse ointment a gaynst al gout and ioynte (...), take the three
sorts of Snayles gathered in May and put them in a frying pan, use it for
an ointment

This following is approwed remedy, in all cases, without purgacion, anoint the
piace with ye joyce or Gaiyngale and of attychokes, or lay a spounge upon the
grefe dypte in warm win of the decoctyon of comin, it will draw out the hurtful
humores, it has been prouyd.

Kye. Hares dounge discomperd w warm wine, and plastered helith utterly those
ye have the sciatica, though they be past hopr.

Anoyntment made of hearts horn is good for the same disease also

This is a most assurid oyntmente against al old goutes and joints sickness
and against the palsye. Take for flesh and sethe it in good wine till it faule
from the bonnes, afterward stamp the flesh myghtylye, bring hot and wring
out ye joyce thereof and sethe the same joyce till it be as thick as an
ovntme^t, afterward put a little red war there unto and little of powder of
Mastycke of Castoreum bedelii myrre bay beris a quantity of euforbium and a
little of musk, and let them be incorporatyd all together as anoyntment.

Another most certain approuyd ointment. Take abygge root of Bryony, and
make it hollow and put into the holownes thereof yt joyce of Hellebor, Calamint.
Cyme, or Rue unto two hollow parts and let the third part remain emptye,
and put the pouders therein mencyoned in the formare ointment. Pyretory the
root of Getian, and hermodactiles, and put thereto Petroleum or sum old oil
and Wax, and let it be stoped with Potteres claye or paste, and let it be
put in the embres there let it hoyle a good while and afterward stamp it and
wring out the juice, use it for an ointment.

Another oyntement of efficacye there unto, take the juice of a wild Cucummer
root, green grapes, paritorye, the leaves and beri^s of Iuy, Juniper beries,
euforbium, Castoreum, the fat of a gripe, of a gose of a Heron, of a fox, and
ofn Bear, then take a fat Cat and pull of the skin, and til her with all these
foresaid things, and let it cost well upon a spit against the fire, and let the
drippinge that comes of her be kept and resolve a little wax therein, and
annointe the grief therewith.

Item kill a whelpe of xxx. days old and anoint the painful grief, with the
blood of the said whelp, it is very good.

Item seethe the flesh of the said whelp in wine, with Rue, Betany fenigreke,
Egrymony and Sage afterward stamp them al together and put to a little mary of
a Hearts bone, and a few ashses sethe it in manner of anoyntment, and anointe
the place, it is very good.

In a great and extreme pain of the joint sycknes, take a whelpe of the age
foresaid and roast him, and cut him in the mids a longyst the back, and aplye
it hot, it is very good, and much worth.

Constable. Item seth Rue and Sage, in oylt together and being hot stamped, aply
it to the grefe, it will alay the pain incontinent.

Constan Boil the joyce of Henbane in the grease of hog, and put there unto
a little wax and anoint the grefe thee with: ye herb it self also sod in wine
and bound unto the grefe appesith it immediately.

A plaster made of the rote of walworte and Hermodactil, and, stampte with
Hogs grese, and bond unto the cold gout, helps the same

A plaster made of Ox, and Hogs dounge sodden in vinegar, and Ravens grese,
cattes grese, or Hearons grese, is very good against an immoderate pain. Make
to powder.i. of Opiu^ minglid with Saffro^ and yolks of Eggs, and oil of
Rosys, this myghtylye asswagith and restraneth the matter.

Item take Emetes and the eggs of them, and a little of ye earth wherein they
did abide and common salt, mengle them with the grese of an old Hog, and being
put betwyne a clothe of lynnen apply it unto the grefe.

Misselto boylid in water and the grefe being bathid with the said water has
great help thereby.

Item ashes of burnt Time myngled with the white of an egg and plastirid upon
the place, brekith gout and draws out the hurtfulnes.

A bathe wherein Emetes and their eggs being stamped have been sodde^, does
quickly heal an old and almost incurable ioyue sickness.

(...) Gotes dunge takes away the hardness and swelling of the joints.

Green tue plastered with salt and Honey takes away the pain.

This confection is most prorer and certain medicine for those that have the
joint sickness.

(...) Take of Sauain.ii. of Pe^^^, of Iuy and Rue leaves. Ana.vi. of Get
mander..ii. give the same unto the patient wito wine.

Item boil Mules piss, with wax oil and litarge, make a plaster thereof and
it will remedy.

If the greese be mixed with swelling, take of beans.iiii. v. yolks of eggs,
blend them together, and plaster them upon the greef.

Item, Bay leaves sodde in water, and mixed with water of Purstande, if the
grief be washed therewith, it much helps.

Take of Lions grease two pound, of Ware, a pound, of Masticke, Oil.iiii. it
utterly takes away all grief of the joints.

Item, an ointment of a Cat helps the patient in one day, if it be made
after this fashion, it is very good.

Take a fat flayed Cat, her bones being pulled from the flesh, stamp it
mightily, and put it in the belly of a fat Goose, and put Salt grease thereunto
with Pepper, and mustard seed, of Dragons, of Pellitorie, of Woorme wood,
Garlike, and Bears suet, An^. un.i. of Ware un.ii. roast it, and keep the
dripping.

Galen. Mingle the ashes of Coleworts burnt with fresh Hogs grease, anoint
the gout therewith, it will heal it in three days.

The dounge of a Storke mixed with Hogs grease, heals a long continued Gout.

Temper Parslie and oil of Roses with woman's milk, and anoint the grief
therewith.

libert. This potion following is wonderful good for the gout and joint
sickness: take of Hermodactill.iiii. of Cummin and Ginger ana..i. give thereof
at once unto the patient ii.

Hermodactill made in a plaster with vinegar, is very good.

Pepper plaistred upon the grief warmeth the joints and sinews, so that there
is no medicine like unto it.

Galen. Phlebothomie or the cutting of a vein next the greatest joint, is
very good.

The root of wild Mallowe stamped with stale grease, and plaisted, heals
the gout in three days.

Diosco. Take of Amoniacke and pytche like quantytie, mingle it and make it in
a plaster it is a singular medycyne for the gout.

Oil sod in water and honye plasterid with cokle (after that the pacie^t has
bathid the grefe with water) heallth the disease.

Take a good deal of wormewode of the roots of Walworte of whete branne of
dunge and salt, let them sethe together in vyneger till the Vinegar be consumed
afterward stamp it and apply it hot.

Rattes turdes stampte and minglyd with old grese losyth all swellynges of a
cold cause.

Item coluere dounge sodden in wine, till the wine be consumyd and plast^rid,
helith the gout.

Take half a pound of (...), of oil olyue.v. pound, of good wine a pound,
let them sethe together till the wine be consumyd, afterward mingle thereto.ii.
of Euphorbium made to powder make an ointment thereof it has been proved in
the gout and joint sickness.

Take a dram of the juice of popler rind, drink it for i^ is very good.

Sees a dead wesel til the flesh fall from the bones, strain it with oil,
and mingle wax there thereunto and anoint the joint greef therewith and the great
swine pocks, it mightily heals all corruption of the linowes and joints,

Sees nettels that grow in whote and dry ground in lie made of the ashes of
a vine, and with the same lie being whote weshe the grief and plaster the
nettels upon it, it is very good in all aches of the gout.

Sees salt and sifted wheat, bran, honey and red wine til they be thick and to
apply it unto the greef.

Be sure of this one thing that in some cause medicines ye are made (except
they be purging, or breking or at the lest except some sufficient cuacuye^on
of ye matter gobe fore) do not (...) help therefore let the hot hu^^^^ be
purged with an electuary made of the joyce of rosys.

Let those pacientes be well ordered and warely and let the water be by little,
and little purged, that the nouryshinge virtue be not dystroyed, for in Pills,
many things are received that draw with vyolence, as euphorbium,
harmodactill, Colloquitida, Turbith, scamonye, which all are as it were
poison, and therefore indiscreetly mynystred causes faintness through the
devilitie of vitaill sperites in that nature cannot with stand the matter, and
such things are never mynyestreed except they have stand settelled a good
while after commixtyon and full ordring, so that the strength and violent
operation of them is mynyshed by long tariaunce and settling. And yet is not
their whole virtue destroyed, but their operation is better and helthfuller.

Constan Item wild myntes that grow in jolks, make in an ointment delyuereth
him that has the sciatica, and give of his greef, by hearing and drawing
forth the master.

Gilbert. If the greef be to ^ureagious take of Opium i.. of saffron three
ounces mingle them with four yolks of eggs or five, and plaster the same up on
the grief, for it mightily asswageth the pains and restrayneth the corruption.

Item gotes dung sodden with cats grease, or the fat of a raven or vulture, is
much worth in this case.

The dung of a storke myxte with hogs suet, is very good also.

Above and more force then all things else is to keep the belly lose at all
times.

Galeii. The ruyce of sallowe or willowe rote mixed with oil of roses is
wonderful good for the gout.

Against the chopping or ruptures.
The causes.
Much going in cold winds, and drynes.

The signs need no declaration.

Remedice. Cap. liiii.
HEmlock leaves stamped and dried and so made in a plaster, hele al ruptures
or choppings within ix. or x. days.

English Galangale heals the choppings and deep wounds.

Liuerworte stamped and drunk with wine every day is helthfull and good.

Yung Hares dressed and ordered with honey in manner of pills, and i^ ministrid,
do clouse up and make hole choppes and ruptures.

Item hearts dung myxt with honey and given often unto the pacycut to drink, in
ye bigness of a been closes up the ruptures mightilye

Let the he ade of a got be sodden hear and al, y^ in water of a gourd and
eat the meat thereof, or drink the water, it makes all the inward parts of a
man hole and sound.

Of the Agew called ephimera which endures but one day.
The Causes.
The vital spirits in a wonderful unnatural heat without putrefactyon,
which comes of much watching, sadness, anger, ho^ger, or dronkenesse.

The Signs.
Great heat in the body with a fever and ending in a sweat or vapor.

Remedies. Cap. lv.
FIrst make a sirup of the decoction of Saunders, and the flowers of water
Lillies, then let the patiente avoid and eschew all things that burn the
heart and all that are gross and whote, and if the vital sprites be inflamed
chiefly above all things bring the patient in a soft sleep, and let him smell to
Camphore with rose water, and violets and such like, and minister things that
cause coldness and comfort the heart, as Margarits, and saunders, and the
scraping of Iuory, or else let him be anointed with oil of Roses and Nenufar
upon the breast and plaster thereon cold things tempered with vinegar, and it
is very good against the heat, if y^ nan rall spirits be inflamed, tak cold
^rops and electuaryes that cause coldness as are sugar. Rosys, and Violettes and
plaster the ^osys and saunders upon the liver, but if it be of a cold cause he
ware of letting of blood, to engender more cold thereby and specially if it be
with a rrwme.

Give unto the pacyent Rose water newly made myxt with Sugar or violettes, and
let him smell to basyl yet let him not smell to other sweet sauoures, ye be hot,
and in a hot rewmatike cause, let him use a cold fomentarion and ointment, but
the felye if it come of ouermuche labor, or copulacion or heat of the ayrce
and such like, let the holownts of the hands and the souls of the fete be
anointed with oil of Vyoletes rosys woman's milk, also anoint the back bone,
the forehead and temples with oil of rosys, Populion, woman's milk that gives
a woman child suck, and let his meare and drink be of light degestyone, and
cold but if it be of over much labor, or of over much emptines he must be
nourished with the resu^pti nes and confortatyues, if he cannot sweet, this will
heat him incontinent and minister occasion unto the patient to sweet.

Let the leaves of Sallowe tree and Holyhoke, Violettes and rosis and such like
boil together in water wherein put a great clothe, and let the pacyent be,
wrapped in the same being warm and couetyd there with till he swer, and
afterward let him wash his fet arms legs in the same decoction.

Diosee. Item the joyce of Cucumeres Woyle of rosya anoyntid upon the pulsys
and upon the heart, asswageth the heat of the ague,

Platcarius had a certain pacie^t deslytute of strength, and put him in a
bathe of water, wherein sodden eggs were resolved, and after the bathing he
departed strong.

Put a green gourd in paste, and bake it in Oven, and alter wringe out the
juice and put it into a pot and sees therein Hens flesh or of some other
bird (first well washed with wine and salt) and a few grains of wheat and Barley,
Licorice, gum of Arabicke, Dragone, Roses, flowers of water Lilies flewort,
Almondes, of the guinnie of the Almond tree, Basil, Reasons, Mirabolans,
Sebestian seed, the seeds of a goued, Mello^ and Cucummer, being a^^ clean
dressed put them in a pot well closed with clay, and let them boil til the
third part be washed, afterward stain it and put Sugar into the strayner,
and make a Si^up thereof and give i^ unto the patient, it restores very well,
and temperatelye cools and h^lth^ully comfort fainting persons.

Of a contynuall Agew.
The Causes.
Abundance of putrefyed humores contained within the baynes.

The Signs.
Contynuall beat and pains unto the end of the fever.

Remedies. Capi. lvi.
Macer. TO mytigat the over much here in a continual Agew, sethe Colewort
leaves with oil of Rosys, and plaster it upon the stomach.

The same thing may be done of Willow leaves, Morel and flewort

A certain curious practicionate showed me for a certaynte, ye Pympernell
drunk with warm water takes away the contynuall Fever

Anicen. Put the sede of fleworse hole in water all a night, then let it be
strayned and put thereto Sugar, and give it unto the pacient it colethe, and
intolerable heat of sharp Agewer.

Sirup of nenufur does mightily heal sharp Agewes.

Galen. Item if the Ague be not very sharp let the pacient drink cold wine
migled with water, it opens the stop pings within, and brings forth
corruption through the vriny and comfort weak members.

Dioscori. says that if the patient drinck a great deal of cold water the
intolerable heat wilbee extinguished thereby.

In this cause apples that are called bitter sweets are very good.

Of the tertian Fever.
The Causes.
Much choleric humor putrefying in the sensible parts of the body.

The Signs.
To have a fit currye other day and not to endure above xii. h^^res.

Remedies. Cap. lvii.
IF it be the right tertian, give unto the patient to drink, the juice of
Dendelion before coming of the fit thr^e or four times and the Ague shall go
from him this am I sure of.

The matter bering digested, cause thy self to be let blood in the fourth or
fifth hours before the coming of the fit, and if it so be there go before any
tokens of digestio^, he shall have the Ague no more.

The matter being digested make a plaster upon the pulses of the arm of the
lesser nettle that grows in a very dry and warm place, stamped with much
salt, for shorty after the fever shall ceace.

Myngle a radyshe root being stamped with wheat branne, and make a plaster,
apply it betwee^ the nauel and the share, that the matter being first
digestid he should not perceue the pain and wringinges this reme dye has been prouyd agaydst al kind of Certian leuers.

Diosco. The joyce of Ribwort given before the fyt do com, takith away ye same
Of the same operacion are.iii. plantain rotes stamped and drunk with water
before the fyt come.

Three graynes of Coryander put in rere Egg and given to the pacyent to sup of
aftter the.iii. or.iiii. fyt will deliver him of the Agew.

The joyce of sower grapes vsid.ii. days in the morning, takes away the
Certian Fever.

To take away al tertia^ fevers, take mellilot. Cellydone, white and black
Pepper, netels, and salt Peter well bound unto the pullis of the arms this was
tried by a practionar.

The joyce of pympernell drunk as the fit comith does vtterli take it away.

Of the same operation is Cithory, the same thing woorketh the juice of Parcely
drunk after the same fashion.

Item stamped veruen leanes and iii. roots thereof dissolved in water, take it
before the fit come and it will drive it away.

Dioscor. Take vine leaves and put them in wine, and give the same wine ii. or
iii. times to drinck, and it will rid him of the tertian or quartain fever.

Rewponticke is a singular remedy against fevers.

Take three slips of iii. leaued grass stamp it and put the juice in water and
drink the same water, it is very good for the fever.

Take rye branne, the juice of Veruen, Sinegreen, Nettels and plantain, mingle
them together with iiii eggs and plaster it over the belly before the coming
of the fit.

The juice of mollen put into the nosestryls of the patyent in the coming of
the fyt, takes away the disease.

Gilbert. The powder of Crystal given in wine and Dendelyon, before the
coming of the Ague, takes away the fyt thereof.

The powder of Crystal given to drink to a nurse, takes away the Ague from
the children that she gives suck unto.

Item the lytoure that comes from the sodden lyghts of a Ram, heals the
tertian fever, and ye disease of the raynes.

Garlic bound to the outward members of a man, takes away the quodyan and
tertian Fever, but it must be applied as I understand before the lytte come,
for by that means the matter is drawn to the extremitles, that is to say to
the hands and feet so that the principal members are helped.

Of the quotidian fever.
The causes.
Putrefied fleume, driven by nature to all the sensible parts of the body.

The Signs.
To have a fit every day about xviii hours long.

Remedies. Cap. lviii.
(...) IF thou will speedely heal the quotidian Fever, take these approved
medicines, give to the patient ii.. of Betony, i.. of plantaine, with the
strayniug of them, before ye coming of the fit, and the patients shall be whole
thereby.

Give unto the pacient this sirup, take the leaves of Betonye, the rotes of
percelye, of Fenell, of Filipendula, of Maiden heart, of Hearts tunge, of the
middle rind of an elder. Ana. Mi. of Agaricke.i. ounce, of Oak fern.li.. of
wild time i. vnct and much honey as discrecyon will give to be sufficyent, it is
of much and great efficacy.

Item stamp trummes of bread and Gull, of each like quantytye, myngle i^ with
a soft tusted egg, and oil of Bays, or oil of Ciprisse and wete a cloth
therein, and apply it over the stomach and belie, it has been proved to be very
good.

Provoke vomit unto the pacyent with an electuary of cassia, and a ^^le Cinamound
with the decortyen of wild cucummer rote: and radysh rote and vinegar made in a
sirupe with honye, is very good.

Take the rote of Galingale, and the seeds of Radish, and the seed of Orenche,
the tore of black helibore and as much Honye and Vinegar as shall be thought
sufficient, mingle them together and let them seth to half, and let the
pacyent drink thereof two hours before the sit comes, and afterward let him
eat nothing in five hours or at least in a good space after.

Item give unto the patiente before the fit come upon two pennye weights of
bay beries made to powder with a soft egg, or pulses and without doubt the
patient shall be made whole.

Mustarde eaten before the coming of the fit, expels the cold and fevers
that come by course, as in quoridians and quartains.

Item Ifope given with water and honey putgeth slimy humors.

After purgation of the whole body apply unto the veins of both the arms
this plaster following.

Galen. Take four leaves of Nettels of Morel, and of Sengreen, Ana. ^. m. of
Cobwebes ii.. as much common Salt as shall be thought sufficient stamp them
all together, and make aplayster.

One say the in his book of practyses. that he has healid many of the
Quotidian Fever, with the middel rynd of an elder given with warm watter, or
with the rind of a nut tree given after ye same manner, and with.ix. grains of
less spurge or of pyonye but these things at to be ministrid unto strong men
and laboriouse.

Give unto the pacyente, we man's milk, ye gives a man child suck, with
water, either before the fyt or in the fyt, it shall so heal him.

Take.ix. roots of waulwort, of ye bigness, of a manes finger, cut them in
pieces and stamp them and strain them with Ale or with white wine, and give
thereof unto the pacyent before the hour of his fiet, and let him not sleep in
any case.

The liver of a Hare dried and given to drink with water, takethe away the
Fever,

Gsiula. Take of agarpeke..i. give it unto the pacient to drink with wine and
honey, it takes away al fevers Quotidians, tertians, and quartaines, through
purginge slimy and corruptiue humors.

Take wine and myngle it with Asses blood, drink the same, for it heals the
Quotidian Fever.

Of a quartayne fever,
The Causes.
Melancholy putrefyed, having recourse do diverse parts of man.

The Signs.
To have two good days, and thet hyrd a sore fyt.

Remedies. Capi.lix.
TO take away the Quartaynt Agewe, give unto the pacient three or four pills
as follow, take of opium, of brimstone, myr and Agaricke, Rue leaves, cassia
Fistule, Ana, vai mingle them with the lioice of wormwood and make pills in
the bigness of a bean, give unto the patiente before the fit do come on him.

Item Trochiskes are of certain proved, wherewyth many have been healed of
the Ague at once drinkinge, but they are best in quotidian fevers. Take to Rue,
of Alum, Miche, Opium, ana i.. and di of saffron.ii.. cassia fistula ii.. of
quick brimstone.ii.. of Henbane..vi. make Trochisks and give them with water.

Also bears flesh eaten heals the quartain fever.

Circan. Item strong wine wherein Egrimony bathe been sodden, heals the
quartain fever.

Make a hole in a bean, and put therein to the small stinking worms that breed
in paper or wood called Cimices, they take away the fever.

Item cinkfoile stampte with a little Peper and drunk before y^ fyt. come, is
good against ye quartayne

The joyce of Mollen drunk before the fyt sleeth the same.

Item yarow given to drink before the fyt comes with wine, takes away the
Quartayne.

Item the joyce of Camomill being drunk before the fyt, takyth away the Fever.

Take Assa fetida, Rue leaves, peper ana. ii. mingle them with honye, give them
unto the pacient.ii. hours before the coming of the fyt as bygge as a Chest
nut, it has been prouyd.

A swalowes donge drunk takes away the Fever Quartayne.

The ioice of horse house drunk and vsyd.x. days takes away both the
tirtian and quartayne fever.

The joyce of mugworte myxt with oil and given unto the pacie^t warm three
days, takes away the fever. Take of Dragons blood and wild time, of each in
like qua^li ie, as much as shall suffice, seethe them in water til it be thik,
and afterward mingle thereunto of the stone called Lazulus ii. give unto the
patient thereof the space of three days one. a day, the first day it takes
away the rigorousnes, the second the fit, the third day it heals all
together perfitely, this same has been proved.

Item Briony stamped and plastered unto the pulses of the temples and arms
before the fit come, takes away the quartain Ague.

Item Astra fetida sodden in wine put it into a holow-rote of soubread and put
therinto sugar, give it unto the patient before the fit (and a purgation
ministered before it) i^ heals.

Give unto the patient to drinck before his fit the seeds of Henbane. Mandrage,
ana.ii.. Assa felida.i.. and a half, and it will heal him, Let the patient fast
all a whole day before his fit come on him, and let him wache all the night
after, in the morning roste him a partriche, and let him eat thereof, and let
him drink good wine and strong, and let him eat no other thing all the day and
afterward let him sleep his fill.

This same also is named to be a helthful medscine, Azarabacca, if it be fresh
gathered stamp it and sees it a little while in wine, and let the wine be
given unto the patient two hours before his fit, if the matterly in the
stomach it causes vometinge if other where it wastes it.

The matter being digested give unto the patiente before his fit a little oil
of Ienoper (a purgation presupposed) it is mutche strength in the Quartain
ague,

Give unto the patient three grains of Iuy gum.

Take the rote of sperage let them sees a good while in water, and give thereof
unto the pacient that has a Fever quartayne.vii. days. and the^ is a
wondefrull help therein.

The joyce of tyb worte, drunk with warm water and honi, two hours before his
fit come upon vym, takes away the quartayne agew.

Of ye same operation are.iiii. rottes of pla^tayne sta^pt and dronke with watter

Fill a hen ye is but a year old with persly and Basyll, as much as shall be
thought sufficient, and put into her all the hole substance of a raw egg
beside the shell, and salt sufficient and put her in past, and bake it upon
the herth under some vessel and give unto the pacient one part there of one
day, and so much anothere day, and lot him eat no other thing it is good
also for the tertia^ and quottdia^ fever, it provoke urine and disistith y
water and takith away ye fever The blood of an ass anointed over the back bone
while it is fresh and warm takes away the quartain Ague.

Wine of the decoctyon of the root of Gensian is good, for let the pacient
drink thereof, and it shall take ye fever away.

Take holwort and henna dung and stamp them together, diste^per the^ with whit
wine strain it and give it unto the patient before the coming of his fit.

Certain practioners say that turmentil drunk before the fit loses the
quartain.

Kye. Put a Scorpion in oil and let the soles of the feet and palms of ye
hand he anointed therewith and the forhed and back bone before ye fit comes, it
expels both the quartain, quotidian and tertian fever.

The fat of a bulture mixed we oil if the patient be anointed therewith it
dryueth away the quartayne.

Take.iii. leaves, and.iiii. rotes of Verue^seth them in wine, and let ye
pacie^t drink ye same before his fit.

Diosco. Calamint given before the fyt, takith away ye quartayne, Wyld margeram
does extenuat and wash ye fites

Calamint, wild Margetam, Peniroyall, Buglosse, Borage, Haris tongue, seen, the
tyndes of the ro^e of tamarike, and of ash, betony, iarmander, time, and wild
time Ana. un ii of Betony. m.i. of Mugworte, of egrimony, of Sperage. m.i. let
them seth al together in whyt wine, and put a little honi thereto let the pacie^t
drink thereof, morning and euenig it mightyly wastes choser a dust and
melancholy.

Take of Violettes, of Boreage Flours, of seen, time, and wyld time ana. un i.
and a half. Myrabolans, Cytryn, rewebarbe ana. i. sethe them unto the.iiii.
part then streyne it, and so sethe it again till it be brought to the full
point of. un.il. or.i. and in ye end of the decoction put to rewbarb and let it
be sharpnyd with. un i. of spurge, or of the joyce of scamonye and give it an
hour before his fyt come on him, and without doubt it will heal all
Quartaynes.

A cure prouye of one often times before the sy^ give all the sorts of
myrabolans, and sen with cynabaris made to poudir, put therinto a little of
spurge with cream of evening milk, and if the pacie^t be a woman and full of
choler, put thereto rewbarb

Dioscor. Take Nep, stamp it and wring out the joyce and drink it with wine it
losith all the hole water into swe^ and so take away his disease.

The joyce of Mugwort that has one stalk, mixed with oil of Rosts and
anointed on the back bone and pullys, takes away the fever, and healyth the
pacient soundly.

Orenche sead stampte and sodden in drink, takes away ye quartain. Take ye
joyce of Pellytory and myngle it with the powder of Mirabola^s of India, give it
before the fit.iii. hours, and before the very fit give, i penny weight of
wyld Margera^ and it shall heal without doubt.

Diosco. Take. iiii. of Betony with wine and water before the fit, it takes
away the fever.

Macer The decoction of black Helebut passes all medicines in operation
against a long continued quartain fever.

Gilbert. Take of white and black Helebur Ana.i.. of the stones called Lazulus
and Calaminaris and armeniacus of each i.. of oketerne.i.. and a half of Borage
flowers.i.. of Gotes blood dried.ii.. make a powder thereof and give the patie^t
in drink ui. hours before his fit, the matter being first digested and extenat
by purgacyon.

Stamp persly and all the hole substance of an egg and a half a pound of
hogs blood, incorporate them well together sesonid with salt and take a h^ne
and stuff her therewith, the^ make a pie and bake her therein, and let the
pacie^t eat thereof, it takes away the quartaine fever by a little and little it
comforteh the heart, stomach and noryss^inge virtue, and prouokith apetit.

Take.xl. graynes of Peper with warm water and drink it, it is very good to
take away the quartain and intermyssiue fevers.

The cuttynge of a vain before coming of the fit distroyeth greatly the
fever, let it be vsid often and a little at once.

The rynde and leaves of a nute tree drunk in vinegar, takes away the Fever
and rygorousnes thereof. Diosco. Cost or Detin stampte and mixed with oil, and
anointed upon the back bone and pulses of the patiente, heals the
intermyssiue rigorousnes of the fittes.

Item fill a Capon with Oak fern, and flowers of borage, seen, and with ye
juice of Garlic, make potage thereof, it purges the raw humors and burnt
choler if you put thereto a little Penerial, for it wastes more better the il
humors, and makes the potage of better operation.

Mustard seed stamped and drunk before the fit, drives it away.

Peneriall, both kinds of time, Sent, Calamint, wild Margeram mingle them all
together with Honey, sees it and let it be scomed clean and let the patient
take thereof, it is very good for the quartain Ague, and against the steppinge
in the spleen and liver.

The ordure of a man dried and drunk with wine or honey, restrains the
fittes.

Auicen. A sea Crabbe eaten is good in the quartaine fever.

Camomill drunk is good for all fevers.

Mingle the juice thereof with oil and anoint the ridge of the back, and the
pulses of the pacient before the time of the fit, and he shall have no fit.

Stamp Rosemarie and give the juice thereof unto the pacie^t to drink before
his fit, and he shall be hole incontinent.

Peter Lu Sieth.ix. handfuls of Rue iu sufficient wine, and give the same unto
the pacient to drink in the hour suspected of the fevers approaching.

Macer. Stamp the root of Holwort, and seth it with water and honey, and give
the pacient thereof to drink before his fit, it will take away a long
continuing fever if it be oit used.

Take the inward skin of nut kernells and sta^pe the same and se the it with
good wine, and drynk the same when it is claryfied a little before the fit, and
it will cause the same to cease.

A grene frogge sodden in oil of myrthe, if the pacient be anointed therewith
before his fit, it shall clear him of his Agewe.

The juice of Hemp, before the fyt takes away the fever.

Wine of the decoction of Sage, rose mary, and Laua^der drunk before the
coming of the fit, heals the quartayne Agewe.

Rewpontide is a singular help unto intermissiue and cold fevers.

Centory stamped with wine and dronk before the fit, causes it to be no fit,
this experiment is known to be of most certayntie.

The rote of wild cucumber given to drink before the fyt, takes away the
fever.

Make lie of fine wine, oak ashes of the root of red coleworts and of
rustinesse of iron burnt and stamped to powder, and give it to drink long before
the coming of the fit, it mightily loses the bowels, and takes away the
quartaine fever.

For a Carbuncle, and a venomous bytyng.
The causes:
Gross and hot blood having recourse to any one place.

The signs.
A sore and painful ulcer or byle with a foul scab as it were burned with
fire with a great heat and fever.

Remedies. Chap. lx.
THe brain of ashenne or potage made thereof eaten or applied to the place of
the grief is of more better operation tha^ any thing else.

A pacients own spittle is very good against venomous bitings.

A scorpion stamped and applied to the grievous place, is contrary to hit own
stinging, and other of hit kind, and therefore it is a wonderful remedy.

Lyr^ A fig leaf or the rind of a fig stamped and applied, is very apt and
good against venomous stingings.

Goats blood warmed over the fire and dronk, is of myghtie operation against
all drinking of poisons.

Goats dung tempered with honey, and put unto the stinged place, heals the
same.

Dioscor. Ox hoofes sodden and eaten with Mustard, withstand all poison, so
that nothing is able to hurt.

Agrimonie drunk with wine, is wonderful good against the venomous bityng of
a serpent, a dog, or a man, and a Carbuncle.

Take Hounds tongue grene or dried, and lay it to the Carbuncle and stynged or
venomous place, and it will ripe it.

Mollen stamped and plastered, is of great efficacy against the stinging of a
serpent, or when a member is wounded, put the juice thereof into the wound, and
it will cause the venom to issue out.

Cresses stamped and mingled with brain, heals the Carbuncle plaistered
thereon.

Auicen. The ordure of a man is very good often times before the breaking forth
and after.

Juniper berries are medicinable against poisons, for there is none of like
operation unto it. Dioscorides also affirms that they do help against
poisons and styngings of serpents.

Gilbet. Cheruill and culuer foot are very good against the carbuncle: and in
the danger of death give unto the pacie^t milk mingled with wine and water.

The root of brom put into a vessel of wine, preserves the drinkers thereof
from all poison, it has, ben proved.

Dioscor. The roots of Affodils expels all poison incontinent, and it
preserves from evil and venomous meat, and plastred, helthfully helps
venomous bytings.

Isaac. Rue, nuttes, and honey stamped together, and plastred, break wonderfully
a melancolike or flegmatike apostume.

Nuts stamped and applied to the grief, together with the rynds, destroy all
apostumes within the body.

The sede of a palm tree dro^k with wine heals al venomous bitings

Fill an egg shell full of the juice of egrimony, give it unto the parie^t to
drink, it purgethmightily al poison upward, and with a wonderful facility
heals the biting of serpe^tes and other venomous beasts.

Bees and flies bound and knit with Honey and wine in a cloth, draw out all
venom, also apply stamped garlike therinto till it break.

Constable. Ditanie stamped and plastred, and the juice thereof dronk, is very good
against all poison, and venomous bytings.

Dioscor. The same expels and draws out of the body an arow or shaft.

Isaac. Take a kernel of a great nut sta^p it with the leaves of rue, and
plaster it on the grief early and late, without doubt it will break the
apostume, or any kind of swelling else in the body

An ox gall breketh a felon, or the sore that is called Cats hear, and
breaking out in the fyngers.

Mulberies very ripe dro^ken and applied to the grief, break wonderfully the
apostumes.

The sede and herb of Cresses mingled together, and plastred, heals the
Carbuncle.

If a man eat garlyke, and then drink the blood of a Cock with warm wine,
he shall be hurt with no venomous beast.

The blood of a duck dronk with wine, preserves the drinker from all poison.

Saint John's herb stamped and plastered immediately upon the biting, does
permit no operation of the poison in him.

Of the Measels.
The causes.
Nature purging all corruption from the inward parts of the body.

The signs be euidente to the sight.

Remedies. Chap. xj.
HE that will heal the Measels ought first to labor and bestow his endeavor,
that they first come all forth, thereto take dry Figs and flower of Lentils
mundified and made clean, Ana..x. of the gum Lacca, Dragance an..vi. let them
be sodden in five pounds of water unto.iiij.. strain it, and put therinto.. of
Saffron, and give the pacient thereof to drink before meat, and when he goes
to sleep, till all come forth.

Salt Peter mixed with Terebe^tine opens the Carbuncles, and draws out the
filthy corruption.

Take of the leaves of Basyll, and fill the place of the Ulcer that makes the
Carbu^cle, there is nothing more stronger than this.

Against Felons in the fingers, make a plaster of brimstone, Rosen,
terebentine, put a little Saffron thereunto, and the Tallow of a calfe.

Leven of wheat breaks the venomous humors and apostumes.

Any cloth dyed Purple has virtue of attraction.

Against a hollow ulcer or Fistula.
The causes.
A corrupt and sharp humor in any member.

The signs.
A deep holow ulcer, narow and hard withal.

Remedies.
Against the disease called fistula mingle the milk of Wertworte with the
fresh grease of a Hog, let them boil a little together and incorporate
the^, afterward put thereto powder of myrrh, and anoint the tent withal, and
put into the hole.

Wine of the decoction of spurge put into the holownes of the ulcer, heals,
and of the same operation and working is the juice of culuerfote, Take of both
kinds of Plantayne, of culuerfote, coriander, marigolde, yarow, primrose,
daisie that groeth in medows, the tender stalks of dork, and bitony, make them
all to powder, or to a juice, and give it to the pacient diseased with the
fistule, at morning, noonetide, and night, it is sovereign, and heals all
kinds of fistules and holow ulcers if they be curable, if not, the pacient
shall vomit it up again.

Powder made of a dogs head heals the fistule, the cancer, and al
filthiness in holow ulcers.

Constable. If the Fistule have many holes and be not straight, yet if a medicine
may pe^^e into them, there is nothing (...) tha^ to put into the holownes (...)
them gotes dung with warm Honey mixed withal, for it loses all swelling,
draws out rottennes, and purges foul and defiled sinowes, and heals up
the fistule, and assuageth the cancer and grief thereof.

If the Fistule be outward put therinto the juice of culuerfote, it heals,
if it be inward, drink it, and it heals also.

Time stamped with salt and plastered upon the Fistule, heals the same.

Man's dung burnte, having mixed therewith Pepper beaten to powder, kylleth the
Fistule and Canker, above all things.

Sethe the juice of Mollen with Honey, skum the same till the juice be consumed,
then put thereto of the rindes of Pomgranates, and of the stones of myrabolanes,
apply it to the Canker, it helps incontinent.

Take the juice of a cow turde (in a woman) and of an ox (in a man) wash the
fistula with the juice, and apply the residue thereto plastered it helps
quickly.

Dioscor. Put leaven in strong lie, and so apply it to the fistule, and so it
shall be lightly healed, for it draws the rottenesse even from the botom of
the ulcer, and Dioscorides affyrmeth the same of the lie, and Isaac of the
leue^.

This potion is wonderful and very often proved of me, for it kills the
Fistule in what place soever it be, and draws out the corrupt and broken
bones.

Take the rotes and leaves of Plantain, strawbery leaves, the leaves or seed
of Hemp, the leaves or seed of Mustard, the tops of sharp docke, red Colewort
leaves, Ta^sey, let the^ all sethe in good quantity, in white wine, afterward
strain all the hole, and put into the strayning as much Honey as shall be thought
mete, give it unto the pacie^t early and late, till such time as the clear
potion come forth by the mouth of the Fistule, which must always be kept open
with a silver pype put into it, and keep upon it always a red Colewort eafe, it
is of a wonderful operation.

Gilbert. The blood of a Sea Tortoys takes away oftentimes the holownesse of
the Scrophules.

Dioscor. Plantayne stamped and the juice wrong out, and put into the holownesse
of the ulcer with a spoute heals the same.

Bitonie stamped and applied to the fistule heals.

The juice of Cinksole put with a spoute, heals the fistule.

If the fistule be in the head, kill a cat, and straight way put in the bowels
of the cat, and bind her all a whole night unto the fistule, and so do four
nights by four cats, and it shall be hole.

Peter, Lu. A tent of lead put into the fistule and not taken out in thirtene
days heals the fistule.

Put the juice of Pimpernel therinto, and bind the herb thereupon, it is a
souerein medicine.

Take dry Setwaule, and the root of spurge, and made a powder thereof, and put
it into the fistule, it heals incontinent.

Take the sede of Millet, and hens doung, burn them together in a grene pot
well closed, and when that is done stamp it, and put thereto the third part of
salt or more, and a little quantity of centorie, stamp them and make powder
thereof finely, and put the same powder into the fistules being open, and
thrust it down with centorie root or red Madder, bo^ first it ought to be
mollified between the hands in oyling it between two plain bords that it may be
soft, and make a tent of it till the place of the fistula be well open, and
then put in the foresaid powder, there is no better, no nor mightier medicine,
nor no fayrer cure.

Take salt stampte, the leyes of wine, and Agarick, and make them into powder
fynely, and myngle them with honey, and dippe a tente therein, and put it into
the holownes of the fistule, it draws out the corrupt and broken bones, and
heals the ill flesh.

A drink most certainly proved of wonderful and incredible efficatie, which
being given to be drunk of wounded men, so that the wound be not mortal,
wypeth out within xiij. days al filthiness from the wou^d, and draws therout
al broken bones, and heals up the wound.

Take of red Cole worts, fenegreke Percely, sothernwod, Ta^sy, strawbery leaf,
and Snet, Brere leaves, Plantayn leaves, Hemp, red madder, Smallage, Cranes
bill, Alam, Nuttes, before all things let them be sodde^ together in pure white
wine, and put thereto a little Honey, give it unto the pacient early and late,
and anoint the wound without when he has dronk of the said potion, and lay
thereon a leaf of red Coleworts, and keep the same continually over it, it
opens it, and has bin often proved.

A wonderful good and approved powder, take of Egrimoney, of Pimpernel, and
plantayn,.ij. a.C. graynes of rushe seed, verdegrece, and the place being
mundified put this powder in.

Take as much powder of hole wort as you can take up in three fingers, and use
it at noone and at night, for it purges downwarde the hole fistike, and
heals wonderfully.

Auans dronk with wine, and implastered often unto the ulcer, heals the
fistula.

Albert. The water of night shade heals the holow ulcers though they be in
the eyes.

Poly drunk with wine and benet thistell, has a wonderful effect in drawing
the hollow ulcers called fistules, but when it is drunk, the powder of
egrimonie must be poured upon the fistule.

Agrimonie is of wonderful profit in medicines, and in especially against
holow wounds and ulcers.

Of the scabbe, pockes, and Leprosy.
The causes.
Gross and filthy humors mingled with thin and sharp matter.

The signs.
Scabbes in the outward parts with great pains and itching, and if he have
the lepre, mistemper and pains through all the body with filthy scabbes and
falling of the hear.

Remedies. Cap. xlij.
THese remedies following are against the French Pockes, Lepry, and such like.

Make anoyntment against the Scabbe that is engendered of salt phlegm, of
Aloes, and unquenched lyme, with common oil.

Dioscor. French garlike fried with oil kills the ill scab, and the
breaking out thereof and applied upon the apostum, so that it touch no other
flesh by and it breaks the same immediately.

Auicen. To heal an old Lepry, Take a serpent of a dry hill, and cut off the
head thereof quickly, and the tail, and let her blede, and stir about the blood
til the bleding cease, and afterward let the serpent be mu^dified from his
inwardes, and let it be sodden, and cause the pacient to eat thereof every
day.i. and drink the wine wherein the serpent has been sodden, till the
leprous person be swollen and puffed up, and begin through anguishe to be in
a manner beside him self, then put the pacient in a stewe or hot house, and
let the hole body of the pacie^t be anointed with the liquor wherein the adder
or serpent was sodden, for the hole flesh and skin is thereby renewed, and so
shall the pacient be perfectly healed. Take a black serpent, the head being cut
off, bury her, till she be full of worms, and then let hit be dried, and give
thereof unto the leprous..i. with a syrope of honey every day.

Put corn in water of the decoction of serpents, and feed hens with the same
corn, and let drink the same water, and their feathers shall fall of, and when
they be vnfethered let them be sod, and let the leprous person eat them, and
drink the water wherein they were sodden and let him wash his hands, face, and
beard therewith.

This same experiment is said to heal the pockes for a certayntie in one day:
take of mollen, pitch..iij. of quick brimstone, of salt Peter, Fra^kencense
ana..ii. as much oil as shall be thought sufficient, make it and work it up
well, and reserve it as ye shall ocupie it.

Circan. The bark of our ladies Thistle stamped with vinegar, and applied,
takes utterly away all scabbinesse and scurffe.

Take nesing powder, louage, fennel, and sees them all together in wine, wash
the pacient that has a deformity of the skin enclyning to a lepry, and it
will clear him.

A precious ointment against the scabbe, which is wonderful in effect, and
has been often proved.

Take of quick silver..ij. of euphorbium..j. of stauisagre..ij. of
litarge..ij. of suet a pound and half, make anoyntment and let the pacient be
anointed therewith, all the arms shoulders, and backbone, and about the knees,
either against the sun, or against the fire, and if you perceive by anointing
the pacient with this unction, that he be inclined to vomiting, or else any
swelling of the upper parts in the body, anoint him no more, if not, cease not
to anoint him til the seventh day be past, and if the^ he break not out, make a
fomentation against the stomach with water of the decortion of Rosemary and
Sage, and after three days let make a bath with water of the decoction of
enulacampana and dock, and lay a white linen clothe upon the anointed place,
that the ointment touch not the other parts of the body, by this manner of
ordering have many leprous persons been healed.

Against the French pockes take of brimstone.il. of neesing powder, quick
silver, and cumin, ana.i. of Staphisagre.i. and a half, and incorporate the^
with.vi. of stale hoggs grease, by this means every evil disease or sickness
is for a surety healed, except it be full of glandules or kernels, which must
be cured after other mean.

Keep a cock fasting three days, and then tie him to a stake with some
Cord, and tie a tode by him with a cord also, so that the cock may eat him,
within two days after the eating of the Tode, kill the Cock, and seethe him in
pure good wine, a good while, put raw honey therein, let the pacient use the same
every day: a hen were better. But thus has it been proved.

Peter. The leaves of Lilly stamped and plastred upon the grefes, heleth the^.
Vitriolum citrine dried and myxte with vinegar, and burned upon a tyle sharde,
and do so by it thrice, lastly make it to powder being applied, it heals the
sickness.

The roots of Lekes made in a plaster and applied upon the glandules or
kernels (whereof the sickness comes) heals it, and anoint the ulcers with
this ointment.

Take the juice of Leke blades, oil, and ware, and incorporate them, and so
aniont the places that be cankrous, it heals them wonderfully.

Melt tallow, and dip therein a linen cloth, and so bind it to the legs, it
does exceedingly well heal the pustules of the legs and else where.

Take the pith of leauened bread, stamp it and temper it with wine and honey,
and make them boil together, and mingle thereto talow, and spread it upon a
linen clothe, and apply it hot to the bruses and grievous pustules of the
legs.

The cutting of the vain that is nighe the bygger joint does mightily heal
the scabbe, and the evil pustules on that side.

Dioscor. Dry figs stamped with the flowers of Iuy and so applied, do mightily
help the paynfull pustules of the legs.

Stamp red mints, Rue, blackbery or bramble leaves, and morell together, with
ye rotes of lilly, mixed them with the whites of eggs, vinegar and oil,
strain the^ all together and anoint thee therewith, it is wonderful good.

Dioscor. Sethe the rotes of dock, and sta^pe them mightily with hoggs grese,
and put thereto quick silver quenched with Sage and ashes, incorporate it and
anoint thee therewith, it will yield wonderful effect.

Seth the flowers of Wertworte mightily in vinegar, and put oil thereto, anoint
thee therewith, it will heal the lepry, the scab, and al itchyngs.

Apply to the ulcers being first mundified, triacle, and in the spring
following, or then, if it be the^ spring, thou shall be hole.

Take stauisagre and litarge make a powder and a bathe, and after wash thy
selfe-it is good against the morfewe.

The smoke of henbane sede (the grieved member being fumigated therewith) heals.

An ointment therewith expert and cunning men say, that though the paulmes of
the hands and soales of the feet (being nothing grieved) be anointed therewith,
yet al scabbines is taken clean a way from all the body. Take of oil of
bays..iiii. of white Frankencense, and clear white Wax. ii. of quick silver
quenched with spittle.i. of Hogs fat well fried. v. of baye salt well stampte.
viii. of the juice of plantayne, and fumitorie as much as you will, myngle
them all together, and if your confection be just and good, it is a wonderful
experiment.

Lyra. Take a snake and roast her with salt, and afterward burn her in a pot
well closed unto powder, and give the same against all Lepry: and all other
desperate greefes.

Of Glandules or kernels.
The causes.
Gross and thick phlegm gathered to one place.

The Signs.
A kernel in the flesh not very hard.

Remedies. Chap. xliiij.
Dioscor. TO take away the Glandules, incorporate brimston and wheat branne
with Turpe^tine, and make a plaster of it.

Circan. Dioscor. Darnell, quick brimston, linsede and tuluer dung, take them
and sees the^ in wine and aply it to the scrophules, and weles, it kills and
breketh the^.

Lentil seed given with wine that is fined, does expel and drive forth the
Glandules.

Dioscor. The root of wild cucumber sla^pt with barley mele, and made in a
plaster takes away old swellings filthy and hard.

The root of betonie incorporated with grief and coluer doung, (...) the
scrophules myghtily.

Macer. Wyld Poppy, quick brimstone, culuer doung, and Linseede, let the^ be
all sodden with pure wine first sta^pt together and so plastered, it heals all the scrophules.

Gilber^. Take and sees an egg well, and break it in the milk or juice of
spurge, and give it the pacie^t to drink. 3. days early and late, and let him
eat no supper, and so shall he be delivered thereof.

Take of Culuer, Gotes and Ox doung dried, of litarge, of the ashes of cole
worte rote, of serapine of bitter Almondes ana..i. incorporate them all with
pytch, and a little stale oil or stale grease, and so apply it, the same
helps and loses quickly, specially if they first take a purgation of
turbyth.

Macer. Mustard seed stamped and punned with old greaseand so plastred cleanses
the scrophules clean.

Make dow of bean flower with the juice of coriander, bake it and plaster it
hot, it heals perfectely the Scrophules.

Dioscor. Snailes boiled, stamped and so laid do mollify and dissolve the
scrophuls. The powder of black pepper dried and mixed with hard pitch, does
disperse and put away scrophules of infants.

A sodden fig plastered thereon, heals them.

Lycorise stamped and plastred takes away the swelling of the scrophuls

In the wane of the moon, let the pacient use to drink.ix. days together the
juice of Agrimony and whay fasting, and so shall he be hole of the Glandules.

Melt pitche and hogs grease, and put thereto quick brimstone and wheat
branne, and so make a plaster, it heals the pustules of the neck and throat
applied there.

Goats doung is good to heal glandules.

Mingle the ashes of the feathers of culuers wyngs, and burnt Henbane, with
bread, and so apply them to the scrophuls of the neck, for thereby they shall be
resolved and consumed.

Take the juice of wild Lylly, and euforbium, temper them together and give
the pacient seven pills made thereof in the morning for.xxx. days continually,
for it expels the scrophules, so that one shall not remain.

Take the root of a lilly and linsede, and stamp them and mingle them with
vinegar, and put thereto culuer dung, and plaster it on the scrophules, for it
is wonderful in operation.

Ribwort fresh gathered mixte with clear grease and plastered, loses all
swellings.

The blood of a Wesill dropped upon the scrophules, is very good and medicinable.

Gilbert. Sixtus. A plaster made of walwort does assuage, mitigate and
extinguishe the scrophules.

Radish taken of the pacient in any form either in meat or drink, is
wonderful good against the scrophules.

Galenc. Peache leaves stamped with salt, and plastered, are much worth.

Apply the root of brionie stamped and mixed with hogs grease, and if the
scrophules be hard, take goats doung and vinegar, mollify the goats doung
therewith, and put it into a linen cloth, and so apply it.

Of Wartes.
The causes.
Gross and cold melancholy or Phlegm.

The signs.
Every man knows a Wart.

Remedies. Chap. lxv.
TO take away Wartes, make this experimente, put the fete of Hens into the
whotte Embres till the scales or skmne thereof be separated and shronk from
their legs, and the same skin warmed, rub the warts three or.iiij. times or
more, and it will drive them away.

The rind of a sallow tree burnt and tempered with vinegar, and so plastered,
takes away the warts and scabbe that be in any place.

Dioscor. Egrimonie mixed and stamped with vinegar, and so plastered, puts out
the wartes.

Putslane rubbed upon the wartes, pulls them up by the roots by his own
propretie.

(...) Burn the grene vine that bears grapes on the inner side, and with the
same water that comes thereout, annoint the wartes, bunches, and figs
about, or give it the pacient to drink, it shall cause them all to fall out by
the roots.

An egles turd anointed or bound on the wartes, takes them away.

Gilbert. Take a red snayle and cut her overthwart the back, and reserve the
liquor that comes thereof, and blend it with salt, and apply it, for it shall
kill all the wartes.

Dioscor. The milk of figs annoyuted, pulls them out by the rotes with out
any biting.

Arsenicke mixed with vinegar and applied on the wartes, takes them away.

The gum of Yuie applied after the same manner is of the same effect

Pull up the marks on every side, and lay about the sides unque^ched lime and
then anoint them with oil of Lilyes.

Of the brenning with fire.
The causes and Signs be euidente.

Remedies. Chap. lxvj.
To heal the burning of fire, skaulde a Hare, and take the hears cut very
small and fine, and sprinkle it upon the place.

Mingle the oil of Nuttes and wax together, and anoint the place it is very
good.

Gilbert. Wash quick lime in several waters. ix. times, and that which
remains in the last winter mingle with co^mmon oil, mightily stirring it
about, and anoint the place, this experiment has been proved.

Dioscor. A certain practicioner says for a surety, that if straight upon
the burning, ynke mingled with water and common oil be bound unto the place,
it will shortly heal it.

Macer. Dioscor. The root of Lilly roasted upon the coals, and resolved with
oil of roses, does mightyly heal the burnings with fire.

Apply unto wounds ye be moist and old.v. parts of the juice of Lilly
leaves, and one of vinegar and in especially unto the head.

Take a mouse skin and apply it hot unto the burning and take it not away
till it be hole.

Take the ashes of a dry Cucumber, and sprinkle it upon the burning, it has
great efficatie to heal the same.

Soap anointed upon the place is very good.

Auicen. Ashes made of a dry snayles shel heals the burnings.

Burn Doves dung in a linen cloth and mingle it with oil of roses, and
anoint the place, for it is very good and medicinable.

Sees leekes, then stamp them and apply them, they are also very good.

The leaves of holioke sod in oil and plastered, heals burnings.

Take the white of an egg raw and oil Dlife, stir them about so long
together till it be come into a thick ointme^t, and anoint it upon the place,
and there shall apere no scarre. The leaves of a pear tree stamped and applied,
heal the burning of fire.

For the wild fire or creeping ulcers.
The causes.
A stuxion myngled with hot blood and choler.

The signs.
A certain redness in the skin, and not very painful.

Remedies. Chap. lxvij.
The body being first purged of burnt humors, apply unto the place raw
eggs, and lay thereon a blete leaf, and thou shalt wonder at the healing
thereof.

Take the horn of a got and burn it in the flame of the fire, and the rynd
that rises thereof at that time, take and stamp it with vinegar, and ouernoynt
the burned place therewith, for it heals wonderfully.

Galen. Barley meal fried or culuers dung dissolved with oil, aad put a
lynnencloth and bound unto the burnte is wonderful in efficacy, for thou
shall find no stronger medicine against this disease called wild fire and all
other burnings.

Dioscor. The grene leaves of a plane tree, stamped and mixed with grease,
heals oftentimes the burnings.

The leaves of ribworte stampte and plaistred, are a singular help.

The yolke of an egg tempered with oil, and so applied assuageth all burnings.

The ashes of the rind of an elm sprinkled upon the burning, heals
mightily the burnings without scarres.

Salt stamped and mixed with oil, and applied, does quench this disease.

Albert. Vinegar is of valor above all thing for burnings. And Dioscorides
says, that it heals this disease called Ignis sacer.

Dioscor. The powder of Hares hears (...) and sprinkled upon the burning
heals the same quicklye and causes tue hear to grow.

To draw out any thing fixed in the body.
As for the causes of this chapter and of the rest unto the end of the book,
because that either they be manifest, or else before touched, I will write
nothing at all.

Remedies. Cap lxviij.
Macer. SOthern wood and fresh grese of their own property do draw out
sprigges, thorns, and other things that fasten in the body.

Holeworte stamped and applied is of the same operation.

The same operation has the seed of rocket.

Alexan. Gose turdes plasterd upon the grief, draws out the sticks and
Iron that be fastened in the flesh.

Gilbert. Of the same operation is the juice of Dytanye myngled with Gose dung.

The ashes of a burnt Swalowe mixed with veneger and aplyed, is like in
operation.

Oxeferne stamped with Hogs grese and bound unto the greef, is very good also.

Dioscor. The root of Gladen stamped and applied to the greef, is good in
operation for it draws out the broken bones and if it be drunk it heals
brusings.

Isaac. The branches of wild poppie and unripe figs, draw broken bones out
from ulcers.

Lyra. Betony draws bones out of brekings kings wonderful well.

Dog Fenel root, expels the broken bones.

Dioscor. Ashes made of Fumitorie stamped and mixed with raw honey, and applied
upon the wounds, draws out the pieces of broken bones.

Stamp a root of Enula and of a reed with hedgehogs grease and honey, and
apply them for it dreweth out the thorn, or such like thing fastened in a
man's body.

The ashes of earth worms with honey sodden and applied, draws out broken
bones.

A drink for them that be hurt and bruised. Remedies. Cap. lxix.
FOr them that be bruysed, take Betonie, Egrimonie, Strawberie leaves,
Azarabacca, or Folefoot Malowes, buglosse, tansy, margeram, Five leaued grass,
Saint John grass, and Pimpernell, gather of each M.j. stamp them and sees
them with.iij. pound of wine, and the same wine that remains, strain and put
thereto an hundredth corns of pepper, and the oftener that the pacient drinks
thereof, the sooner shall he be whole, but let him beware from all poisoned and
hurtful things.

Incorporate the powder of fragra^tcense and wheat bran with percely juice,
that they may be good and thick, and so apply the same to the sore.

Take a gobet of lard, and take honey branne and Fenigreke, and wine, sees them
all together, and apply it unto the sore of the stripe, it wonderfully helps
and heals.

A drink that is wonderful against brusing.

Take Egrimonie, betonie, Sage, Pla^tayn, Iuy leaves, rose, percely, poune them
together, and myxe wine thereto, give the pacient it often to drink till he be
hole.

To cure beasts that are sick or hurt.
THe blood of a Gray mixte with salt, and instilled in the horns of beasts,
preserves them from the moren, this is well known and proved.

Dioscor. Pulyal royal applied to their nothrils with vinegar, takes away the
hurt of them.

Peter, Lu. Cut the beast and put into the wou^d powder of black Hellebore,
which with his property draws out poisoned humors, and so the beast shall be
delivered from the moren.

If the beast drink a good hearty draught of ink it will heal it.

Against drunkenness. Cap. lxxj.
Give unto that man that is given to drunkenness the lights of a sheep, and
he shall feel no drunkenness.

Give unto a drunken man the ashes of burnt swalows, and he shall not be drunk
while he lives.

Of them that take weariness by Iorneying. Capi. lxxij.
Dioscor. Give unto the weeryed person to drink at night of the root of mug
worte, and so shall his weariness depart from him.

Water of the decoction of lynseed it self, being hot applied to the stomach,
provoke swet, and causes weariness to issue out.

Calamus Aromaticus, Pelliter, Calamint, Carobes the less, detyn, Maioram, any
of these that I have mentioned, either simple or compou^ded sodden with oil,
and the pacient therewith anointed, provoke swet

The ashes of an old wild fig tree, drunk, provoke swet, this same has been proved.

A good drink for wounded men. Capi. lxxiij.
THis is a good drink for wounded men. Take mouse ear, betany, Sinamon, sage,
of each. m.i. as much red madder as of all the rest before, make a powder
thereof, and boil the premises in wine, and give there of to the wounded parts
as much thereof thrice a day, as will into an egg shell.

A good ointment for wounded men, take of good vermilion..i. of Synomon..i. of
cardamomum..i cloves, in number.xx. long peper.. i and a half, black
peper.xx. graynes, of Saffron..i. make an oyntme^t with the foresaid pouders
and good white wine and honey, and then make a plaster and apply it unto the
wound as thus. Take of Lilly malowes young that grow hard by the root, m.i.
wild Gillefloures. M.iii. boil them together with strong wine, and make a
plaster, apply the ointment and lay to the plaster.

A drink against the Fistule. Capi. lxxiiij.
TAke cloves. Pympernell, valerian, mouse ear, herb Robert, tansey, sees
themal in white wine, give unto the pacient twice a day thereof.

Pills to heal al sores. Take the sede of red cole worts, the sede of ta^sey
and Cabage, of each like much, of the greter madder, make of the hole as much
as shall suffice for the hole year, give thereof twyse a day, and keep always a
Cole wort leaf upon the fistule.

Take of dragons blood, sea gyrdel, of Cinnamon of Cardamomum. ana..i. of
Alu^..i. of Ge^riane.. and a half of saffron..i. make an ointme^t, the^ after
you have given the potio^ twice a day, have this respect whether the wounded so
does preserve and keep the said potio^, if he cast out the potion thrice, the^
is it to be douted of his health.

To purge the cholerike humor downward. Capi. lxxv.
TO purge Cholerike humors downwarde by the belly, and that in helthful men:
first let the matter be digested with Oxizacharum, or else with sirupus
acetosus, the matter being digested, purge it with this medicine: take of the
electuari desucco rosaru^, oximel resoluid with the juice of rosis, ana.ij. of
the juice of scamoci., and a half, mingle the^ together, and if you will you
may give the pacie^t thereof te^pred with wine, or you may make thereof pills.

If it so chance that the matter be contained from the navel downward, or in
any other part of the body, then mingle with the fore rehearsed medicines.ii. of
the powder of mirabolanes, citrines, of all this make pills, and let them be
given the pacient.

Of melancholy natural, Capi. lxxvj.
TO purge natural melancholy in healthful men, fallen in the nether parts of
the body, first digest the matter with squilitike oximell, or else with some
syrop made therefore, the matter being digested purge it with this medicine.

Take of Hierologodion.ii. of hiera rufi..i. of theodoricon emp..i. of honey
Anacardine.. mingle them together, and make pills, and give it in the evening,
and let them be sharpened with.i. of spurge.

If the matter which ought to be purged, be in the middle parts of the body,
as in the stomach, or in the inward of man thereunto must be applied
laxatiues, as Cassia fistula. etc. or as the medicine above mentioned.

But if it be in several parts of the body, as in the gout, in such a case
must strong medicines be ministered as is rehearsed before, and they ought to be
doubted.

Of purging burnt collar. Cap. lxxvij.
To purge burnt collar or salt fleme let the matter be prepared with
oxisacharum in three parts thereof, and the fourth part of a syrup of diurerike
things, or of syrups made of the juice of Fumitorie, and purge it with this
medicine. Take Catar Imperial, oximell laxatiue, of each.ii. of
Hierologodian..i. of spurge.i. mingle them together and make pills, give them
in the evening.

Of the Quotidian fever. Capi. lxxviij.
Against the Quotidian fever after the fourth coming of the fit, take of the
juice of Germander..i. of the juice of Cinkesoyle and violets ana..iii. of wine
of Pomgranates..ii. sugar a pound and a half and the same is good against the
quartayne after the.vii. fit, the juice of Germander being doubled, these
medicines are ministered to helthful grutched, and not greatly vexed with fits
of the agew.

To purge phlegm in Quotidian Fevers. Capi. ixxix.
TO purge natural phlegm in quotidians, take of electuarium ducis.i. temper it
with warm water, and give it unto the pacient to drink in the morning.

Of a Quotidian Fever through sweet phlegm. Cap. lxxx.
Against a Quotidian of sweet phlegm, make this decoction, and give it unto
the pacient, take of Violets. and a half of pruines, oak fern.i. mirabolans
kebules.. i make a decoction and minister it unto half a pound.

Of a Quotidian, of sharp phlegm.
Against the Quotidian, that is of sharp phlegm, take this order, digest first
the matter with oximell simplex, or oxizacharu^, or with syrope composiue, and
being digested, purge it with this medicine, take of violets.ii. of Seen,
time, wild time, and oak or walferne, ana. of Cassia fistula, of tamarindes,
ana. and a half, Mirabo as kebules..ii. make a decoction, if it be a strong
pacient give him all, if weak, give him but half, and mark that this
medicine that is ministered against a quotidian of sharp phlegm, may be
ministered against the same of slimy phlegm, and against a quartayne of
melancholy natural.

Of purging of choler in tertian Fevers. Capi. lxxxij.
TO purge choler in tertians make this reception. Take of Violets.ii. of Cassia
fistula..i. of tamarindes. give them unto the pacient in the morning, but first
make a preparatiue of the decoction of prunes, a pound, first strain it, and
resolve the foresaid things in the strayning. A syrop against a tertian of red
choler, take maide^heire. m.ii. of violets.iiii. of these.iiii. melons Gourds,
Curumers, pepons, of the seeds of purslane, of Sandarache white and red, of
each, and a half, of white poppy,.i. of ashes of spodiu^. and a half, of wine
of pomgranates.i. of prunes.v. of clear cassia fistula.i. of manna. and a
half, mirabolanes, citrin.. Rewbarbe..i. make a decoction.

Of Tertian of yellow choler. Capi. lxxxiij.
Against the terria^ or yellow choler, or glassy, or else like salt, take the
rotes of fenel, parcely, teintwort maidenheare, endive, cychorie, hearts tung,
ana. m.i. violets.iii. of iuiubes, of these.iiii. melons, gourdes, cucumers,
pepons, of lettis and purslan seed, an.. of dil. of wine, of pomgranates, of
sugar.ii. pound, make a syrop, and clarify the straining thereunto take of
violets.iii. of iniubes, and of the sour cold seeds before named, maiden here,
cassia fistula, clered tamarinds, anise, fenel, ana. and a half, of citrin
mirabulanes, Reubarbe ana.iii. of prunes, xx. make a decoction.

Of a simple or double Iertian. Capi. lxxxiiij.
Against a double or simple fever Tertian, after the third fytte prove this
experience. Take of the juice of Endive, or Cichorie, of southistle.i. of the
juice of plantayn, of hearts tongue.i. and a half of wine of pomgranates two
pound, sugar a pound and a half, make a syrope, and let a young man drink.v.
sponefull thereof, and an old man iiii. with water of both the endiues ana.
m.i. of these.iiii. melons goutdes, cucumers, pepons, of purselane ana.i.
violets.iii. of the flowers of Borage.i. of sugar a pound, of wine of
pomgranades make a sytop. A decoction for the same, take of violets. of Borage
flowers.. i mirabolans citrins, kebules, ana. prunes.v. oak or walferne.. and a
half, turbith.ii. of anise, fenel sede ana. and a half, make a decoction.

Of the Iertian fever of red choler. Capi. lxxxv.
Against a tertian of red choler take of Maiden hear, Teyntwort, so wthistle,
liuerwort, of winter Gelyfloures ana. M.iii. of Uiolets.iii. of the flowers of
water Lyllies.i. of these.iiii. cold seeds, Letise, Purslane, white poppie and
Sanders, ana.i. Prunes.xx. of sugar.ii. pound, make a syrop, and let it be
clarified.

And if it end not either by swette or sege, or else by some good success in
the declinatio^ of the fever, give unto ye pacient this decoction: take of
violets.iiii. of the.iiii. cold seeds, ana.ii. of casia fistula..ii. of
mirabolans citrin. and a half, of rewbarbe.i. and so make the decoction.

Against the fever tertian or quartayne take of nettle. m.ii. of a copweb, and
salt.i. and make.iiii. plasters thereof, and let them be put in the.iiii.
extremities on the vains pulsatiues after the third fyt.ii. hours, and before
the fit.i. hour, and give unto the pacient.. and a half of camphory, with
rose water,

Of the Quartayne Fever that comes of burnt choler. Cap. lxxxvj.
Against the Quartayne of a burnte choler in Summer, take of Endive, Cychory,
Hearts tongue, citterache, maidenhere, teintwort, ana. in.i. of Violets.iiii. of
Borage flowers.ii. of the four fold seeds, melons, gourds, cucumers, pepons,
an..i. prunes.x. time, and wild time, ana.iiii. seen, dodder, ana and a half,
sugar.ii. pound, make a syrop and clarifye it. A decoction thereunto, take of
violets, sebeste^, of borage flowers, ana. and a half, of mirabolans, citrin,
kebules, indi, ana,.iii. of rewbarbe.i. make a decoction.

Of a Quartayne in harvest.
Against a Quartayne of burnte choler in harvest, take the rote of fenell,
parcely, of butchers brom, sperage, cinkfoyle, of grass, of Endive, cichory,
cyterach, maiden here, tentwort, hearts tung, langdebefe, Lentils, Acasia, ana.
and a half, prunes.xx. wine of pomgranates, a pound and a half, of sugar.iii.
li. make a syrop. A decoction hereunto, take of violets,.iiii. of borage
flowers, sebestene, cassia fistula, tamaryndes ana..i. of time, and wild time,
of both sorts of sticados mirabolans citrinia Indi, the four cold seeds,
Melons, Gourdes, cucumers, Pepons, ana a nounce, of Pruines.xx. make a
decoction.

Of a Quartayne bred of natural melancholy. Cap. lxxxviij.
Against the fever quartayne bred of melancholy natural, take the rote of
Fenell, of percely, of buchers brom, of sperage, of cinkfoyle, of hearts tung,
of the root of langdubefe, of dogs tung, the rote of an elder, walwort,
germander ground Iuy, of both sorts of stychados, Calamint, Organy, of the
cold herbs, Melons, Gourds, Cucumers, Pepons ana. m.i. of Violettes, of Borage
flowers. ana..ii. of Spikenarde.iij. of the juice of Borage.j. of white Vyneger
a pound, of sugar.iiij. pound, make a syrup with the decoction of.iii. pound
of germander, let the pacient receive the syrup with this decoction early and
late.

Against a quartaine Ague, take Violets, Bourage flowers, Seen, time, and
Epithime, ana..ij. mirabolanes, citrine, Kebules, Indie, Ana., make a
decoction, and give it to the pacient (if he be strong of nature) before the
fyt.

A potion for a quartaine. Chap. lxxxix.
FOr a Quartaine this potion is good to purge by little and little, and is
given from three days to three or fro four to four, as is needeful, for it
purges and digesteth specially if it be with a cough.

Take wild time, calamint, black helebor, Seen, violets, hysope, and oak or
wall fern Ana,.i. and a half of Fenel, Liquorise, of the roots of Fennel,
and smallage, ana, and a half, let them be sodden, and stand to settle that it
may clarify and take of the decoction v. pound, and let it it be made in a
syrope, give thereof in a reception unto the pacient..ij. in the morning.

A confection of pills to purge all corrupt humores. Chap. lxxxx.
A Confection of pills wherewith humors are dissolved, take the inner part of
Coloquintida j. of agaricke and a half, of Baurache j. of Liquorise ij. of
nettles seed, rocket royal, ana and a half, sta^pe them, and make pills.

Of heaviness or drowsiness of the head. Chap. lxxxxj.
A Certain experimente against the heaviness of the head, Take of Agaricke
v. of the juice of wild sage, Rubarbe, Holworte, ana.j. white sugar, ij. and a
half, make Pills like to Cyche pease, and drink once thereof thrice in a
weke, or else every day, til you have made an end of all: it helps in the
mids, but specially in the end without any danger.

Take of Cloves, Maces, Nutmigs, Galyngale, Dragons blood, Anyse, Cummin, Ana
i. as much of Spurge as of them all, and make a powder.

The Aphorisms of Hippocrates, redacted unto a certain order, according unto
the members of a man's body, and the diseases that may fall in any of them.
Of the disposition of the head. Chapter.j.
Urine troubled like unto the water of an Ox or horse signifies pains in the
head.

Milk is evil for them that have the head ache.

If the pains be in the noddle of the head, it is good to cut the veyn in the
forhead.

If any matter or water flow out at his nose or ears which has the head ache,
it takes away ye pains Whatsoever helthful man is suddenly payned in the head
and therewith loses his voice, and routeth withal, he dies within seven days,
if an Ague take him not.

Of the Lethargy or forgetfulness. Chap. ij.
To tremble in a Lithargie is very evil.

Of the pains in the head called Subeth. Cap. iij.
In this disease painful stepe is mortal.

Of to much watchyng. Cap. iiij.
Immoderate steape or watching is very evil.

Of the Palsy. Chap. v.
PAlseys do commonly chance from xx. years of age till.lx.

It is hard to help a small palsy, but to heal a greuouse palsy it is
ympossible.

It is no matter what kind of spume or froth be about their mouths which be
stra^gled or have the Palsy, and be not yet dead.

Of the madness called Melailcolie. Chap. vj.
AS welling or weakness enduring a long time brings a man to a melancholy.

Perilous eruptions in all melancholic diseases, do signify either the palsy
a convulsion, blyndnesse or madness.

The Hemorhoides be very good to such as be melancholy.

Of raging madness. Chap. vij.
IF he that is mad be taken with a laxe or hidropsie, it is good.

The Hemorrhoides breakyng out, take away madness.

If a mad man use to laugh, it is a laudable sign, but if he be very sad, it
is perilous.

If a mad man find ease in sleaping it is good, but it his rage increase, it
is to be feared.

Of the Falling Evil. Chap. viij.
THey which have the falling evil in their chyldehood be often healed, but if
they be past.xxv. year old, they die for the most part.

The changing of place, time, and age, cures the falling evil in young men.

Of the diseases of the sinews. Cha. ix.
ALl cold things be noisome to the sinews, the bones, the teeth, the
brains, and the marie in the back, and unto those all hot things be
profitable and good.

A sudden fever heals the cra^pe. A co^vulsion or gripings in an ague, is the
sign of a convulsion.

To be short breathed in an ague, is the sign of a convulsion.

A convulsion or grypings in the bealy in sharp agues be very evil.

A convulsion after the drynking of hellebore, is deadly.

To have a convulsion with a sore wound is death.

A convulsion is perilous to him that has bledde much.

A convulsion or yesking after a great inadition be very evil.

If a dronke^ man lose his speech, and have a co^uulsion he shall shortly die.

A convulsion comes of immoderate fullness or emptiness, and so does yesking.

Yesking, vomiting, a convulsion or madness coming upon him that is pained in
the small guts are to be feared.

The crampe or madness with much watching, is very perilous.

He that is taken with a sore conuuision, if he live four days shall escape.

A conuulsion after a purgation, is very perilous.

If a young man being fleshly, be taken with a distension of the sinews in the
summer time, let him be washed with cold water, for ye does increase the heat,
and ye heat does assuage his pains.

In sore wounds a convulsion or distentyon be very evil.

Of the drousynesse in the head. Chap x.
TO dote or to be astonyed after a blow or stripe, is very evil.

Of the members being set awrye. Chap. xj.
In a continual ague, if the lips, the eyes, the brows, or the nose stand
awry, so that the pacient can not hear or see, and be therewith very weak, he
shall die shortly after.

Of the disposition of the eyes. Chap. xij.
OF the times of ye year if it chance the winter to be dry, and the north wind
to blow, the spring time moist with the south wind, ye somer following there
shall many be troubled with blearnes, but of the contrary part, if the winter
be moist with much south wind, and the spring time dry with nothwinds, men
shall be like wise vexed with dry blearnes.

If in autumn, or Harvest therbe much drought, and north winds, it shall do
good to moist persons and women, but other it shall vex with dry blearenesse.

When the times of the year be dry, many shall have bleare eyes.

The southwinde blowing daily for a season, will engender daseling in the eyes.

Diseases of the eyes do chieflye reign in summer.

In a continnall agew if the eyes be wrythen aside, and the pacyent weak and
cannot see, it is a present token of death.

In all kinds of Fevers, and other diseases, voluntarye tears be laudable,
but if they flow contrary to the racyentes mind, they be to be feared.

It is very good, if he that is diseased in eyes be taken with a sode^ lask

All diseases in the eyes be healed either by drinking of sweet wines or with
baths of whot water, or letting of blood, or with a purgation.

If a man be sick, mark his eyes when he sleeps, for if any white thing
appear betwixt the eye liddes, and the pacient have no great laxe nor
received any putgation before, is a terrible and deadly fygne.

Of the disposition of the ears. Chap. xiij.
Whosoever uses to void choler, and in ye mean while waxes deaf, the laske
floppeth, and of the contray part, a sodeine lask and deiection of choler
takes away defnesse.

To wax deaf in a continual Agew (the pacyente being weak of body) is a
token of death.

Uoluncary bleding at the nose or a sudden laske does take away the deafness
which comes of an ague

Of the disposition of the nose. Chap. xiiij.
THey whose nostrilles be full of superfluous moystenesse, and have also their
nature or seed very watrishe, be not healthful of body, and they that be
contrary, enjoy continual health.

Hoarsnesse and continual fluxion of sneuil in old men, do in no means wax
ripe.

A dry summer with often northwind and a moist harvest with the southwind,
both engender in ye next winter the hedake, the cough, hearsenesse, and much
fluxion of reume by the nosthrils, but if the Harvest be dry, and the
northwynde blow, the reume shall endure much longer. Old me^ be often grieved
with fluxion of rewme and the cough.

Much rewme contained in the stomach is changed within twenty days to plain
matter.

All cold things as snow and ye, do engender distillations.

Of bleeding at the nose Chap. xxv.
Old men and children do often bleed at the nose.

If it chance him that is sick of an agew to bleed, he shall have a laske in
the decrease of his fever.

He that waxes deaf through an agewe, and bledeeth at the nose shall recover
his hearing.

Who so is likely to have an apostume in any of his ioints, and in the mean
while bledeth at the nose is sure to recover his health.

If a woman whose flowers be stopped do chance to bleed at the nose, it is a
good sign.

Bleeding at the nose or ears takes away headake.

To have the Crampe or to dote while the nose bleedeth is an evil sign.

Of Neesing Chap. xvj.
IF a woman having the mother, or being in pains of child birth chance to
nese, it is very good.

Nesing takes away belching. All nesing that comes of the head is caused
either of the brain being hot, or the empty place of the head being very
moist, for the air with in contained, breaks out through a narrow passage,
and thereby causes the noise.

Of the disposition of the mouth and tongue. Chap. xvij.
Young children and infantes be often troubled with ulcers in the mouth, and to
much vomiting.

Of all other men they which lispe, be most troubled with many sieges, and
laskes.

Of the diseases in the teeth. Capi. xviij.
IT is the sign of continuance in an ague, to have much slymy matter about the
teeth.

When the teth begin to grow, children are payned with fevers, crampes and
ytching of the gummes, and especially in the growing of the gum teeth.

Of the grief in the throat. Cap. xix.
OFtentimes diseases proper for the somer season do chance in autumn, as the
squinancy, shortness of breath, and the pains in the flap that covers the wynd
pype.

A suffocation chancing to him that has an agew, and no swelling remain in
the throat, is a token of death.

If the squinancie fall down to the lights, and the pacient live seven days,
the fluxion will turn to matter.

If he that has the squinancie do swel in the neck, it is a good token for
the ftuxion is driven out ward.

He that has an age we not being able to turn his neck, neither to swallow
his meat without a manifest swelling in the throat, shall shortly dye.

Of the breast and lights. Cap. xx.
TO have the breath some what stopped in an age we is an evil token, for a
convulsion shall shortly follow, they which have swelling in their backs before
they be xiiii. year old coming of shortness of breath, or a sore cough, shall
shortly dye.

If it chance a dro^ken man suddenly to fall spechelesse, he shall shortly dye
of a convulsion, except either he fall to an agew, or else he receive his spech
again at the hour when the surfit is digested.

They which suddenly are taken with pains in the head, and there with lose their
spech and rout, they dye shortly, if they be not taken with anage w. Whosoever
has his brains hurt any way, does suddenly lose his spech.

Of blood spitting. Cap. xxi.
Young men be chiefly troubled with spitting of blood, consumptions, hot
fevers, and the falling Evil.

The spittle in a continual Fever being wan of color, bloody, stinking, or
choletike, is an evil token. He that spitteth frothy blood is diseased in the
lights.

If he that spitteth blood, spit therewith all filthy matter, it is an evil
lygne.

To vomit blud without an ague is helthful, but in an ague pernicious.

Of the plurisie. Cap. xxij.
If in the beginning of a plurisie the pacient use to spitte, it shortneth the
disease, but if it chance afterward it prolougeth the pains.

The Northwind blowing a long season together, engedreth colikes, coughes, and
pleurisies.

Pieurifies, peripueumonies. reumes, and coughes do chiefly reign in the
winter.

If he which has the pleurisy, be not purged in. xiiii days, the fiuxion
will change to matter.

The pleurisy once changed to matter, if the pacie^t be not purged within
forty days after the breaking forth of the matter, he shall fall to a
consumption.

A sodayn laske following a plurifie or a peripneumony, is very perilous.

They whose belching smells some what sharp or tart, be not given to the
plurisie.

The frensy in a peripne umonie is an evil token. Who soever having filthy
matter in the void place of the stomach, or having the hydropsie, is lanced or
burned, if all the water or matter issue forth, it is present death.

Of the consumption or ptisick. cap. xxiij.
Autumn or Harvest is very evil to them which be in a consumption.

A dry summer with much northwind, and a moist harvest with south winds, do
engender in the winter following, coughes and rewmes, and to diverse,
consumptions.

In consumptions purge downewarde, and upward.

They which be betwixt.xviii. and xxv. be chiefly troubled with the ptisike.

If his spittle which has a consumption being cast upon coals do stink,
and the hear fall off his head, it is a sign of death.

A sudden lask to him that is in a consumption, and his he are fall off, is
deadly.

Milk is unwholesome to them which have the headake, or that be sick of any
fever, and to them which have noise and wind in the hyer part of their
belies, and that have cholerike decottio^s in hot fevers, or that have lost
much of their blood, and of the contrary part, it is good to such as have a
consumption without an agew, and also it may be ministered to them which have
agues long time, if none of the above said tokens do appear, and to such as
have been long sick of a consumption.

A ptisicke or lask with spitting of filthy matter, if the spitting cease, is
deadly.

Of the dispositions of the heart. Ca. xxiiij.
GReat brenning in the stomach and pricking about the heart, is an evil token
in an ague.

They which lose their strength oftentimes without manifest occasion shall dye
suddenly.

Of the pappes. Cap. xxv.
IF the pappes of a woman which is with child of two do wax little, she shall
lose one child, and if it be the right pappe it is a man child, and if it be
the left, a woman.

If a woman, that neither is with child, neither has brought forth a child,
have milk in her pappes, she is past her Flowers.

Blood drawing to the pappes of a woman, is a sign of the frensy.

If thou will stop the flowers of a woman, put a great ventose upon her
pappes.

Much milk issuing out of the tetes of a woman that is with child, betokens
the child to be very weak and feeble, but if the pappes he hard the child is
strong and healthful.

Like as the decrease of the pappes is a sign of the destruction of the child,
so the hardness of the same signifies great pains in the pappes, legs,
knees, or eyes, and the life of the child.

Of the stomach. Cap. xxvj.
THe stomach is most hot in the winter and springtime, and the^ also the
sleeps be longest.

Men can not well away with much meat in the somer and harvest, but meanly in
the spring, and best of all in the winter.

In all diseases to be steadfast of mind, and to be content with such things
as be ministered to him, is a laudable sign, but the contrary is very evil.

Drink of wine does take away hunger.

If ^e which goth very dry to bed sleep, it is good.

If they which have certain murmuring and wind in their bellyes have great
pains in the loins, they shall have moist d^iections, if the wind do nether
come forth, nor great multitude of urine, and all these do chance in fevers.

If in a laske or vomit such things be purged as ought to be purged, it does
ease the pacient, and it is nothing grievous, but if it chances contrary.

Let such as can not easly vomit, be purged down ward, but not in the summer.

In all kind of diseases if black choler be purged upward or downwarde
without a medicine, it is perilous.

In the pains of the small guts called yliaca, vomiting, yesking,
convulsion, or dotyng be evil.

A convulsion and yesking after a great purging, are to be feared.

A sudden and voluntary vomiting, heals him that has had a long lask.

Yesking is good to him which has a heat and swelling in the liver.

Of the diseases in the liver. Cap. xxvij.
AN agew takes away the grief and pains in the liver.

A wound in the brayns, heart, midrife, small guts, stomach, or liver, is
deadly.

If he whose liver mattreth be bre^ned, and thereout issue pure and white
matter, he shall escape, but if it be like dregs he shall shortly dye.

Many diseases proper to the summer do chance in harvest, as quartaynes and
Hydropsies engendered in the spleen.

If he which has the dropsy be wounded, it is hard to heal him.

Whosoever has gripings about the nauel, and pains in the ioynes and cannot
be helped by purgations or otherwise shall fall into a dry hydropsie.

The cough going before the hydropsie is evil, but in the hydropsie much worse.

If they which be splenetike have a bloody flux which will long continue, they
fall to the hydropsie, or their meat shall come through them undigested, and so
they dye.

A bloody flux, an hydropsy or madness after a frenzy, are laudable.

Who so have their liver full of water, and it break downward to the belly, it
is death.

If he that has an ague be taken with the yellow iandis the.vij. the ix.
the.xj. or.xiij. day, it is laudable, if the right side wax not hard, but if
it do, it is contrary.

An agew takes away the pains under the sides, if it be without great heat
and swelling.

Of the gall and spleen. Cap. xxxviij.
IF the yellow iaundis chance in an ague before the seventh day, it is evil.

They which have the yelow iandis be not full of wind.

If their liver which have the yelowe iandis be hard, it is an evil sign.

A bloody flux is good to them that be splenetike.

Of al kind of flurions. Cap. xxix.
In a laske diverse kinds of sieges be good, except they change to such as be
evil.

Black sieges like to filthy blood being voluntary be wonderful evil whether
they be with an ague or without an ague, and the darker color they have, the
worse they be, but if these sieges come through a purgation, they be more
laudable, yea and although they be of diverse colors, they be not evil.

To have a siege of plain melancholy, or to perbrake the same in the beginning
of any disease, is deadly.

Whosoever is brought weak either by some grievous disease of sickness of long
continuance, or by wounds received, or any other way, and thereupon have a
siege of melanchoty like to black blood, he shall doubtless dye the day after.

A bloody flux beginning with a melancholic siege, is deadly.

Little pieces of flesh appearing in a bloody syege, be tokens of present
death.

Uayne desire to the store in a woman with child, kylleth the child.

Tart and sharp belching suddenly chancing to him whose meat comes through
him indigested, is very good.

In long continuance of a bloody flux to abstein from meat is very evil and if
it be with an ague much worse.

A bloody flux is good to such as be splenetike.

A sudden bloody flux after a sincere or clean siege, is to be feared.

If a great lask chance in a white morfew, it takes away the disease

Frothy sieges in a flux, do declare the phlegm to come from the head.

It is an evil token in a sharp ague, to have a convulsion or painful
gripings in the belly.

Pains in the hyer parts of the belly be more gentle, and of lesser peril
than they which be in the lower part.

If he which has the stra^gurie be taken with the pains in the small guts
called illiaca, he shall dye in seven days, except a fever take him much flux
of urine.

Of the fundament. Cap. xxx.
IF the hemorrhoydes chance to such as be melancholic mad, or frantike, it
is laudable.

If he that has long time had the hemorrhoydes be healed, and not one left
open, it is to be feared lest he fall to a consumption or hydropsie.

The hemorrhoydes be very good to such as have a mela^cholike madness, or
great grefe in the raynes.

Of the disposition of the raynes. Cap. xxxj.
THey which have the payns in the raynes after.xi. years of age, cannot be
healed.

They whose urine is full of grauel be sick of the stone, either in the raynes,
or in the bladder.

Diseases in the raynes and bladder, are scant curable in old men.

Little bladders or bubles in a ma^s urine, do betoken pains in the raynes,
and long diseases.

The hyer part of the urine fattie and thycke, is a sign of pains in the
raynes and some grievous disease.

If the above said tokens appear in such as be sick in the raines, and also
have sore pains in the muscles of the back, if the pains be inward it
signifies an apostum in the inner parts, but if they be outward, the apostum
shall be there also.

Much phlegm contained betwixt the stomach and the midrife, having no way to
the belly is sone dissolved, if it issue by the veins in the bladder, and
thence forth in urine.

Of the diseases in the bladder. Ca. 32.
In moist and wet season, long agues, fluxes, rottenness, the falling evil,
the squinancy, and the palsy do chiefly reygne, but contrary in dry seasons,
co^sumption, blearnes, goutes, stra^guries and bloody fluxes.

Children be often grieved with pains in the throat, and falling of the jaws,
worms in the belly, and stranguries.

Old men have most commonly these diseases, shortness of breath, reume, the
cough the strangury, difficulty of urine, goutes, daseling in the head, pains
in the raines, paises in their bodies out of just temperance, the itche,
watchinges, with moystnesse in the belly, eyes, and nosthrils dullness of sight
and hearing.

If his water that is sick of an ague be little in quantity, thick, and full
of cru^mes, and thereupon his urine follow much in quantity and thin, it is
very good.

Whosoever in an ague has his water troubled like to the urine of an ox or
cow, has, or shortly shall have the headake.

In such diseases as shall be ended the seventh day, there shall appear in the
pacients urine a red cloud the fourth day, with other reasonable tokens.

Uryne white and clear is not laudable, and especially in them which be
frentyke or dotyng.

They which be like to have an apostum in their joints, be delivered thereof by
much urine white and thick as that which comes from such as have been.iiii.
days sick of an ague. Blood or matter in the urine does declare ulcers and
byles, either in the raynes or bladder.

Little pieces of flesh and hears in the urine come from the raynes. Contents
like branne in the urine, signify a Pocke, or Scabbe in the bladder.

They which piss blood have a vain broken in the raynes.

If they which piss blood or cru^mes, or else have the stra^gurie, if the payns
be beneth the belly about the share, the disease is in the bladder. Gravel in
the vryne betokneth the stone in the bladder.

He that pisseth blood or matter, and he in whose urine scales do appear, or
the water have a strong smell, has ulcers in the bladder.

Who so has pustules or welkes in his yard, and if they break, and the
matter run out, they shall be shortly hole.

To piss much in the night, does betoken a little siege.

The strangury chances to that person which has a hot swelling in the
fundament, or matrix, and to him whose reins do matter, and yesking ever
follows the heat and swelling in the liver.

Diseases in the raynes and blader, are hard to heal in old men.

Contents in the botom of the urine like unto thick branne, signifye the
disease long to continue.

If the water do appear unlike of substance, it betokens great
mistemperance, for diversity of humors within the body.

Drinking of wine, heleth the stra^gurye, and him that cannot hold his water,
and it is also good to let blood in the inner veins about the ancle.

Of the members of generation in men. Chap. xxxiij.
LIkewise in men, either for the raritie of the body, the spirits go out, so
that the seed cannot come to his due place: or for the thicknes thereof the
humor cannot get forth, neither wax hot, for the coldness and so it heapeth
in that place, or else ye same thing comes of great heat.

Above, a gristle, a synow and the top of the yard being cut, will neither
grow nor join together.

Of the members of generation in women Chap. xxxiiij.
IF the winter be moist and warm and the Southwind blow, ye spring time dry
with northwindes those women that be then with child shall of every light
occasion lose their children and the children the^ borne shall be weak and
sickly, wherefore they shall either dye foorthewith, or else all their life time
be faintie and full of diseases.

If a woman with child must need be purged, let that be from ye fourth month
to the seventh, yet those su^what less, but before four and after seven let
the^ receive no purgations.

The suffumigation of sweet odors does bring forth the flours, and is good for
diverse other things, if it did not cause ye head to be drousie.

Letting of blood does kill the child but the nier the birth, the more
perilous it is.

If a woman with child be taken with any grievous disease, it is death.

The fluction of the flowers takes away vomiting of blood.

If the flowers stop, it is good to bleed at the nose.

It is perilous for a woman with child to have a great laxe.

Nesing is very good to her that has the mother, or that trauayleth of
childbyrth.

She whose flours be evil colored or that keep not their common course had
need to take a purgation.

If thou woldst know whether a woman has conceived or no, give her water and
honey mingled together to drink when she goth to sleep and if she feel
gripings and pains in her belie, she is with child: if she feel none, she is
not.

A woman which has conceived a male is well colored, but if it be a female,
it is contrary.

Those women which be very small and lean before they conceive, shall lose one
child before they wax gross

Those women which be mean of body, do lose their children the second or third
month without many fest occasion, have the closures of their wombes full of
fylthy matter, wherefore they cannot sustain the weight of ye child, but so
de^ly break.

They which be very fat cannot conceive till they wax lean, for the mouth of
the matrix is stopped up with fatness.

If thou will provoke the flowers cause the woman to nese, and in the mean
while stop her nose and mouth

They which be with child have their wombes closed up.

If a woman with child be taken with an agew, and wax very hot, without
manifest occasion, she has great pains in child birth, ^^cis she loses her
child with peril of her own life.

If a cono^ulsion, and faintness take a woman in the time of her flowers, it
is perilous.

If the flowers have to much issue there do ensue diverse dyseases, and if they
be stopped, there follows great grief in the womb.

If a woman has not conceived and thou will know whether she shall conceive or
no, let her be well covered with clothes, and beneth let a suffumigation be
made of hot things and odoriferous, for if the smell come up through her body
to the nose and mouth, be sure that she is not baraine of her self.

If a woman with child have her flowers, it is impossible the child should be
healthful.

The flowers stopping with an agu or great cold, and the woman loathe her meat,
say she is with child.

The matrix cold and gross, or very moist, is not apt to conceive, for the
seed is therein quenched and destroyed. Like wise if it be dry and very hot for
then is the seed lost for lack of nourishment, but they whose matrix is of a
mean temperature be ple^tifull and do often conceive, if thou will know more,
read above in the disposition of the Pappes.

Of the disposition of the outward members. Cap. xxxv.
If two great grefes do happen in diverse members at one time, the greater
takes away the less.

Pains in the knees and loins, or grypinge in the bealy coming upon him that
has no age we, do signify that he should be purged do wnewarde.

In painful fevers apostumes do often happen about the knees and cheeks.

The sickness shall chefely remayn in that place which was grieved before it
began.

The joints of such as have had a fever for a long season, shall ache and be
full of pustules.

Great pains and swellings in the joints with any breaking or issue do
signify that the gout or crampe shall follow, and many be remedied with much
washing with cold water, for that does extenuate the humor and take away the
pains, for a mean cold extinguisheth. Letting of blood does utterly take away
such pains as begin at the back, and thence remove to the arms. Enuches be
never bald nor gouty.

Women have never the gout as long as they have their flowers.

A child has never the gout until he has known a woman.

Al kind of goutes (if the inflammation be quenched) within forty days do end.

All goutes do chiefly raygne in spring time and harvest.

If the hippe bone fall out of his place after a long sciatica, there shall
much matter follow, or the leg will consume away, and the pacient shall halt,
except he be brenned.

Of fevers and Agues. Chap. xxxvj.
THe sickness it self, and the time of the year do plainly declare the time of
the fittes, the chief time of the disease, and the order in the fits.

Did men be never trubled with sore agewes, because their bodies be cold.

All sharp diseases are judged in fourteen days.

Quartaynes insommer be very short, in Autumn much longer, in winter longest
of all.

It is much better that he which has a convulsyon be taken with an agew, tha^
he which has an agew be taken with a convulsion.

If his flesh that has a sore ague do either fall nothing away at all or decay
very much, it is evil, for the first betokens long continuance of the
disease, and the other great weakness in the person.

At the beginning and ending of an agew all things be of more strength than in
the chief part thereof.

In all diseases they be in less icopardy to whose nature age, custom or time
of the year the siknes does agree, than they with whom it does in no point
agree.

When the summer is not unlike to the spring time, you shall look for much
sweting in all agews.

In dry seasons there shall reygne diverse sore agues.

All diseases in the harvest season be perilous and deadly, but in the spring
time most gentle and easy.

In the somer these do chiefly reygne, continual and brenning agues tertian
and quartayne fevers, vomiting, laskes, blearnesse with ulcers in ye mouth and
privy members. A cold stiffness chancing the sixth day in any fcuer does take
away al judgment.

All fevers which do not intermit and give over the third day, be perilous,
but if the pacient have no fyt that day there is no ieopardy.

If great coldness take him which is very weke through a continual ague, it
is deadly.

If in a continual ague the outward members be very cold, and the inward parts
hot and dry, it is a token of death.

If in an ague pustules and pains chance in the joints, it is a sign that
the pacient feeds well.

In a continual Fever, if the lyppes, the eyes, the Nose or the mouth be
writhen and out of fashyon, so that the pacient cannot see nor here, and
therewith all his body be weak, it is a sign that death is at hand.

A sudden laske or dofage in a continual fever is deadly.

An apostum which does not break at the first judging day in a fever, does
signifye the long continuance of the disease.

Voluntary tears in agues be laudable, but they which flow against the
pacientes will, be to be feared.

All Agewes with swelling in the foundament be evil, except such as endure but
one day.

If he which has an agew do swit very much and the disease continue it is
evil, for it betokens long sickness and abundance of humors.

He that has a convulsion or dissension in the synowes, and there upon an agew,
is sodeinly delivered.

A tertian not ended inseuen fits, shall continue long.

The yelow iaundis coming upon him that has a Fever before the seventh day is
perilous.

To be afraid in his sleep, or to have the crampe is evil.

To be short brethed in an agewe is the sign of a convulsyon.

Sorrowful sighs in sharp agews be to be feared.

They which have the quartayne have seldom convulsyons, and if he which has a
convulsion fall to a quartayn, he shall be delivered from his convulsion.

If he which has an agew sweat in these days following, it is very good, the
third, the.v. vij. ix. xi. xiiij. xvij. xxi. xxvij. xxxi. xxxiiij. for ye
swetes do judge ye fever, but if they be otherwise, they declare long
continuance of the disease and great pains.

Of the diet to be observed in Agewes. Chap. xxxvij.
IN all diseases of long continuance the pacie^t must use little meat, and
exquisite, but in sharp diseases, that is perilous, yet to eat to little or
to much be both evil.

Sick men do more often err in vsyng little meat, tha^ in that diet which is
some what larger, whereby they be often hurt, yea and to such as be in health small
fare and exquisite diet, is very perilous, because they easly err therein.

Unto extreme diseases extreme cures necessary.

When the disease is most extreme and sharp, the pacient shall by and by have
wonderful pains, wherefore he must use most small and thin diet, and as the
disease is from extreme pains, so must the diet amend.

When the sickness is most violent the^ must the pacient use lest meat of all.

The physician must mark well whyther the pacyent using such small diet may
endure to the state and strength of the disease, or whether the pains will
first assuage or no.

If the sicknesses in the beginning be most fervent, then must the pacient use
little meat, but if the sickness he afterward most vyolent, the pacients meat
must be some what before diminished, but in the beginning he must feed well
that he may be able to abide the disease.

The pacient must forbear meat in the fits, and especially in such ag^^^s ye
do intermit and come by fits. Among all other old men may best away with
fasting, then such as be of middle age, after young men, and worst of all
children, and especially such as be quick and lusty.

Such as grow, have much natural heat within them and therefore do require much
meat, which if they have not, the and bodies do soon consume, but contrary
little meat will serve old men because they have but little natural heat,
which with much meat is soon quenched, and therefore they have not so fervent
agues because their bodies be cold.

The stomach and inward parts be most bote in winter and spring time wherefore
me^ must the^ feed beter for ye inward heat the^ being much does require much
meat, and for a proof thero^f mark ye ages and the cha^pio^s.

Moist meats be best of al to such as be sick of agues and chief lyrd
children, and to such as have (...) like meats.

You must mark whether you shall give them meat once or twice, and to whom
you must give more, to whom less, and some what you must bear with the time
of the year, the country, the age of the person, and with the accustomed use.

In summer and Autu^ne me^ may skarce away with much meat but in the winter
best of all, and mean in the spring.

To such as have their sickness by certain fittes in order, you shall give
nothing, neither add nor diminish before the time of judging. Here end the
Aphorisms of Hypocrates, set in order for every member, and translated out of
Latin into English, by Humfrey Lloid.

Book containing the names of the compound A medicines which be good for all
kind of diseases that may chance in any member of man's body, in reading of
which book I would the gentle Reader should be admonished of one thing,
which is, that I do commonly through all this book use the Latin names, and
have not translated the same to the English tongue, being moned there unto,
because that many of them be such that they can not be well Englished, and
also that the Apothecaries which have such medicines to fell do commonly use
the Latin, or rather Arabike and barbarous terms, and not the English names
thereof, upon which considerations I thought it best to use the same through
all this present book.
For all diseases in the head. Capi. j.
THese confections followyng do not suffer the hears to wax hoar and gray,
electuariu^ de arematibus, confectio alharif, oleum coslinum, and de alchana.

These be very good for all diseases in the brain, the electuarie of Perles,
Triacle dyatessoron, and the confection of musk.

These comfort the brain, aromaticum rosaru^, maius aromaticum, diambra,
gallie elephangine, and pillule stomatice.

These purge the brain, the co^fection alphescera, and pillule elephangine,
Oximel squillitik opens the opilation of the brain.

The infusion of hyera heals the melancolike pains of the head.

These be good for the falling evil, confectio de musco, thiriaca diatessaro^,
confectio alfescera, syrupus sticados, acetum and oximel squilliticum,
vnguentum de bdellio, oleum de cucumere asinino, de lapide, gagatis, de
piperibus and philosophorum Confectio alharif and kebuli conditi, be very good
for all diseases in the senses.

These purge the instruments of the senses, pillule elephangine, stomatice,
aggregate and pillule lucis, maiores, minores. Hyerapicra purges al cold
diseases of ye head, so does hiera hermetis, hieralogodion rufi, and pillule
aggregate.

The cold diseases of the head are healed with the confection of water and honey.

These confections ensuing are good for all pains in the head, oximell
squillitike, infusion of Hyera trochiskes of etro: oil Anet, oil of Laurel,
of spikenard, of elder, and oil of wild cucumer.

The infusion of hyera cleanses the head, so do pillule stomatice, and pillule
aggregate maiores.

Hyera hermetis purges the hemicran, and pillule alhandach, an emplaster of
mustard and oil of enforbium heal the same.

The electuary of Roses purges the headache of an hot cause, and so do
pillule alhandach.

These heal the turn or daseling in the head and eyes, the confection of
musk a sharp syrop of citrones or of prunes, vinegar or oximel squillitik,
but these purge the same, hamech, electuary of Roses, confectio psilij, hiera
hermecis, and pieralogo dion ruffi.

For the payns and diseases in the ears, Ca. 2.
Oil of bitter almondes, oil of peches, and of bean, are good for all pains
and noise in the ears.

Oil of Spikenarde is good for wind in the ears.

For all diseases in the eyes. Cap. 3.
The electuarie of Roses purges the superfluities which discende to the eyes,
also oleum philosophorum is good for watery eyes.

Pillule de yera, and trifera Persica purge al diseases of the eyes, and make
clear the sight.

For all diseases in the nose and face. Cap. 4.
Oil of wild Cucumer takes away the strength in the nose, and oleum
Philosophorum opens the oppilations of the same.

A syrop of Popy and diacadion with pillule contra catarrum, purge and heal al
wheales which be upon the nose and face.

These cleanse all foul color, and difformitie of the face, diacucurma,
diamorosio^, diacodio^, trifera minor, confectio rauedsein and alkake^gi,
trochiskes of roses, and of rewbarbe.

For all diseases in the mouth and throat. Ca. v.
For an apostum in the throat dyamoron and diacaridon be very good.

These confections following be good for them which can not take their breath,
the confection of musk loche of squilla, loche of pyne, loche ad Asma, Loche
Alfescera, dyasulphur, philonium, the confection of perles and alchermes.

Diacodyon and a syrop of popie heal a rewme and coughe, so do pillule contra
catarrhum.

Vinegar squillitik heals rotten and lose gummes.

Oil of sweet Almondes, and of sami takes away the asperitie and roughnes of
the throat.

Oil of grysomile takes away all impediments of the tongue.

These confections make the mouth to have a sweet smell or odor, electuary of
Aromatikes and of perles, of citrones, the confection xiloaloes, Aromaticu^
muscatum, aromaticum nardinum, trifera saracenica, a syrup of the pylling of
Orenges, mellicrate of orenges, trochiskes of gallia muskata, and Sufuf
xilolaoes, aromaticum, pillule diarhodon.

An electuary or syrup of peches, Peches condite, trochiskes of xiloaloes, take
away all stenche in the mouth.

Dyatryonpipereon takes away all belching.

A wlep of iuiubes heals all horsnesse.

Diacalamentum, philonium, diaciminum and a syrup of mintes do utterly stop
all paynefull and cold yesking.

These confections of Musk, Tiriaca, diatesseron, syrupus of sticados, the
cerote of Alexander, oil of Piper, and Oleum Philosophorum, and Hiera
Hermetis, with hiera logodion, do purge the same wonderful well.

Let him that has an old and paynfull coughe use these, Dianisum athanasia
mag. and if his breast be full of matter, these be good, diasulphure, loche de
pino, lochsanum, with [irupes of myrre, of licorise, of Calamint, of prunes, of
iuiubes, of Ysop, and these do extenuate the gross humors, loch ad asma, and
sufuf ad Asma, and if they cannot sleep take a syrup of Popie.

For a coughe of a hot cause, take loch of popie, loch ad caliditatem, a iulep
of violets, and a syrop of ye same, with the syrup contra catarrhum, but if it
be a dry cough, take a syrop of tereniabine and of popie, loch bonum, and loche
of almonds.

Pillule de agarico and pillule ad omnes morbos catarhi, do purge the matter
of an old cough.

Loch sanum and expertum, or a syrop of iuiubes, take away horsnes that comes
of cold phlegm.

Oil of cartamus of nucis Indice, of sisami, do clarify the voice, and so
does vinegar squillitike.

Musaacnea, oleum philosophorum, be good for the tothake, and acetum
squilliticum fasteneth the teeth.

For the morphew, yellow iaundis, and all other deformities of the skin. Ca.
vj.
THese confections make the skin well colored, electuarium de Aromatibus,
confection of quinces, confectio anacardina, algatif, syrup fumitory, oil of
saffron, of cost trifera galeni, and the confection of manna.

Vnguentum alfesericum, and oleum de cucumere asinino, takes away the
roughness of the skin, hamech purges all diseases which be in the skin, and
the elephancie.

It you will have your skin smoth and clean, use these, trifera mulkara,
diacucurma, diamorusion, oil of been, of cherystones, of citrones, of elder,
of serpents, of eggs, of wheat, of juniper, and oil of ash.

Vnguentum sericinum is good for to cause the skin to grow.

Vnguentu^ rosaru^, violatu^, vngue^tum ceruse, oleum de iunipero, and
defraxino trochiskes of arsenicke, do heal wildfire and ring worms.

These confections heal the yellow iandis, confectio raued seni, trifera
persica, co^fectio de psilio, trochiskes of Roses, of reubarbe, of camphory,
and of eupatori, electuariu^ rosarum, sirupus de fumoterre and pillule Inde.

Hyeralogodion ruffi, hamech, confectio epithini, pillule Inde, Pillule fetide,
do purge all matter of morphew and leprosy.

Syrupus de fumoterre, and epithimi, oil of Juniper, vnguentum alfesericon, do
heal the leprosy.

Vnguentum aragit oleum de been, de nucleis cerasorum, de granis citrangulorum,
do take away the spots of the morphew.

Vnguentum alhariel, takes away the spots of the skin.

Pillule Colloquintide, do purge an old morphew.

Pillule aggregate minores purge and take away all itching and scratching.

These be good for scabs, oleu^ nucum, vnguentu^ cerusa, and alphesericu^.

For all diseases in the stomach. Cap. vij.
AN hard apostum of the stomak is mollified with moist ysop, and a terote of
ysop, of galens description, diaquilon, with the emplaster of oribasius, and
oil of masticke.

These do stir up appetite once lost, aromaticum rosatum, the confection of
quinces, of alchan i, and of orenges, trochiskes of Myrabolanes, do increase
appetite wonderful well.

These confections do make good digestion, dyarodon, a condite of orenges,
aromaticum nardinum, and rosatum, hyeralogodion ruffi, pillule stomatice,
rosatum maius, diaciminum, diambra, diatrionpipereon, kebuli conditi, a condite
of Quinces, of buglose sufuf xiloaloes, sufuf aromatum, vinegar squillitike,
trochiskes of rose, pillule elephangine, pillule de turbith.

The confection de galanga, diaciminum oximel squilliticum, be good for
belching that comes of sharp matter.

Confectio de aromatibus comfort the stomach that can not abide the smell of
meats, so does aromaricum rosarum, and gariofilatum, and syrup de minta.

Athanasia magna, lochbonum, aqua mellis, sirupus de tiqueritia, pillule de
agarico, trochiscianeti, do cleanse the stomach.

Loche de papauere, loche de squilla, loche alphescera, syrupus de isopo, sufuf
ad tussim antiquam, oleum de keiri and de lillio, take away all pains in the
stomach.

Lochsanum cleanses al filthy matter out of the stomach.

Loch de amigdalis heals the vehement dryness of the loungs and stomach.

Sirupus de prassio, de thimo, dekesmes heal all cold diseases of the stomach.

Oleum de cartama, and oximel squelliticum, syrup de eupatorio, troche de
absinthio open the opilations of the stomach.

These confectio^s take away the asperitie or roughness of the stomach.

Loche ad calliditatem, iulep vio, iulep iniub, syrupus cucurbite, syrup de
prunis, syrupus de granatis, oleum papauer, oleum violace.

Electuarium de aromatibus, de gemmis, confectio xiloaloes, oximel
squilliticum, and oleum nardinum heal all diseases of the stomach which come
of gross and slimy phlegm.

All ventosities and inflations of the stomak are cured with these confections,
electuariu^ de aromatibus, de citro alxicostum, troche de spodio, vngue^tu^
rosaru^, cerotum sandalinum, co^fectio de gala^ga, de zinzibere, philonium
diaciminum, trifera muscata, diacucurma, diamorusion secacul conditum, pillule
agregate maiores.

These confections comfort a weak stomach, and cause good digestion,
electuaries de aromatibus, de citro, de granis mirrhi, de persicis, de sorbis,
confectiones xiloaloes, alkinzi, de citonijs, aromaticum rosatum, gariofilatum,
nardinum, trifera galeni, yeralogodion ruffi, kebuli conditi, emblici conditi,
citonia persica condita, zuccharum rosatum, syrupis de piris, de citonijs, de
corticibus citri, de granis mirrhi, de albela, de absinthio, de fumoterre
mellicrata, de citro, de buglasso, de citonijs, rob de piris, de citodijs, de
granatis, fructibus, de aggresta, trochiskes, de gallia, de rosis, ramich de
absinthio, sufuf xiloaloes, sufuf diarodon, sufuf aromaticum, pillule
elephangine, aggregare stomatice, diarodon, Cerotum Alexandri, emplasters,
dyafinicon stomaticum, de Gallia, de Fermento, oils de stiucho, de Citonijs,
maluinum, myrtilorum, masticum, costinum, and of Elder.

Let him that is payned in the stomach with multitude of hot and sharp
humors, use these, dyarodon galleni, acetum, squilliticum, infusio de Hyera,
pillule elephangine, but if the pains come of cold humors, these be very
good, confectio anacardina, philonium Musa aenea, athanasia magna, oleum de
cartamo, and de kerua.

These mitigate the vehement heat of the stomach, electuarium de persicis,
confectio de acetosa, de Prunis, trifera persica, iulep rosaru^, syrupus de
persicis, de portulaca, trochiskes de Camphora, de sandalis, Sufuf Dyarodon,
rob de ribes, de berberis, de sumache and de moris.

Against the humiditie of the stomach, use aromaticum maius rosatum,
gariofilatum, confectio de cinamomo, trifera saracenica, diacucurma,
diamorusio, emblicti conditi, trochisci diarodon.

These confections purge the stomach, hierapigra Galeni, hiera Hermetis,
pillule elephangine, and agregate fetide, and sebellie, electuarium alharif.

For the inflammation of the stomach, take sirupus de succo, acetose de agresta,
de pomis, and sirupus acetosus tereniabin.

These comfort a cold stomach, sirupus de menta, de thimo, secaniabin, de
calamento, mellicratum conditum.

Let him that vomiteth overmuch use these, aromaticum rosatum, and
gareofilatum, sirupus, acetosus de citonijs, de prunis, and de menta, de
agresta, diafinicon, troch, ramich, and if he vomit choler and phlegm, take
the confection de citonijs, and a sirupe de calamento, but if it be choler
alone, use these, rob de ribes, de agresta, de berberis, de sumach, de moris,
de sceni, de granis.

These do expel and dissolve al ve^tosities out of the stomach. Aromaticum
gariofilatum, diaciminum, oleum nardinum, aromaticum nardinum, dianisum trifera
saracenia, muscata alkanzi trifera hieralogodion, ruffi electuarium meum, sufuf
aromaticum, emplastrum de alijs, oleum amigdalarum amararum, nucum de kerua and
de enula.

Let him that is in a consumption use these confectio testieulorum vulpis,
lochsanum trochisci de camphora oleum amigdalarum dulcium.

These oils make fat the body oleum amigdalarum dulcium, sismide nuce indica,
and oleum de granis papaueris.

These confections quench thirst and keep the stomach moist electuarium de
persicis, confectio de acetosis, alxicostum trifera persica, persica condita,
Succharum violarum, iulep rosarum, syrupus de persicis, de acetositate citri,
Acetosus de pomis, de citonijs, de prunis, de cannis de portulaca, rob de
ribes, de sumach de berberis, de Agresta, de moris de steni, de granatis,
trochisci de camphora, de spodio, de berberis, de sandalis and vnguentum
rosarum.

For all diseases in or about the heart. Capi. vij.
ELectuarium de gemmis, and confection Xiloaloes, be good for all diseases
about the heart.

These heal the trembling and beating of the heart confectio de acetosa
xioaloes and de musco syrupus de pomis, de prunis conditum, de citro, de
buglosso, rob de agresta, confectio xiloaloes.

These consections comfort the heart electuarium de citro, de pomis,
Aromaticum rosatum, muscatum, Gariofilat, Dyambra, Pira condita, Poma persica,
Citra, zuccharum Rosatum syrupus de pomis, rob de ribes de Citontis de piris,
trochisci Gallie muscate, Ramiche, sebelline gallie elephangine, Dyarodon,
sufuf xiloaloes.

Let him that has the heart brennyng, use these, Alxirocostum, syrupus
acetosus de succo fructuum, Sirupus de Succo Acetose, Rob de Ribes, de
Berberis, de Sumach de Moris, de seeni de granatis.

The confection of xiloaloes does make a man merry, so do the Dyambra and
confectio de Musco.

Dyasulphur is good for poison and trifera persica against the pestilence.

For all diseases in the Liver. Chap. jx.
THese co^fections heal al diseases of the liver that come of gross phlegm or
ventositie, electuarium de Aromatibus and de gemmis, confectio xiloaloes,
diacucurma magna, confectio de galanga trochidianisis emplastrum de gallia, and
de fermento, sirupus de thimo, secaniabin de calam: and mellicratum conditum,
Also hierapicra, and alharif purge the same.

For the stitch and pains in the liver use confectio diarodon, Athanasia,
magna sirupus de absinthio, de eupatorio, pillule de rubarbe, pill alkakengi,
ysopi, cerotum, and oil of euphorbium, if it come of a cold cause. For the
weakness and debilitie of the liver take Diarodon, Aromaticum muscatum
dialacca, confectio alka^zi, sirupus de absinthio, citra condita trochisti
xiloaloes, and if it come of great heat emplastrum de gallia and diafenicon be
very good.

These comfort and make strong the liver. Aromaticum nardinum, eleci: de granis
mixti, confectio de citonijs, sirupus de fumoterrae, conditu^ de citro and de
cytonijs troc: gallie elephe^gine and ramich, pillule aggregate minores oleum
costinum.

For all indamation and heat in the liver, take confectio de pomis, de
tereniabin and de portulaca trochisci de ca^phora, de spodio cum semine
acetose, de berberis, de sandalis, vnguentum rosarum cerotu^ sanda, emplastrum
de fermento de melliloto andromachi and diaquilon.

The hidropsie of the liver is healed with tiriaca diatesseron, and the
oppilations thereof with the confection of fumitory, dycodion Athanasi syrupus
de eupatorio de fumoterre secaniabin de kersinij and deradicibus trochisci, de
Reubarbaro, de Rosis, de lacca, de absinthio, and pillule de Rauidsem.

Pillule stomatice and aggregate cleanse the liver, and confectio alrengi,
pillule de turbith, and sebellie purge the same.

Cerotum ysopi, troc: de reubarbe and de eupatorio, heal an apostum in the
liver.

Sirupus de agresta, de pomis, and de tereniabin, be wonderful good to quench
thirst.

For all diseases in the lungs. Capi. x.
THese do cleanse the lungs of all gross humors, loch de squilla, emplastrum
filij zachariae, oleum philosophorum, confectio de musco and sirupus de thimo,
also a syrup de granis mixti, does comfort the lungs, and is cleansed with a
syrup de liqueritia, and oleum cartami.

Oil of Vyolets and of sweet almonds, do take away the asperitie of the lungs.

A tulep of Roses, is good for the inflation of the longs.

For all diseases in the spleen. Cap. xi.
VNguentum arthanite, oleum de been and philosophorum, do dissolve all
apostumes and hardness of the spleen.

For all pains and oppilations of the Spleen, take Dyacucurma, Magna Athanasi,
Sirupus diacodion, secaniabin de Radicibus, and de Kesin acetum squilliticum,
Syrupus acetosus de Radicibus, de calamento, trochiscisci de eupatorio, de
lacca, pillule rauedseni, Sebelie and Inde, confectio alkekengi, oleum
Nardinum, and de euphorbio.

These do dissolve and mollyfye the hardness of the Spleen, Dyasulphur,
secaniabin de Calamento, trochisci de Capparis, Cerotum Isopi, Diaquilon
emplastrum, Andromach and de melliloto, oleum philosophorum.

For all diseases and pains in the back and sides. Cap. xij.
OLeum de pipere, vulpinum and philosophorum, be good for all pains in the
back, and if the pains come of heat, take vnguentum de papauere.

These pills purge the matter which causes pains in the back, pillule
aggregate maiores de serapino and de oppoponace.

For pains in the sides, take philonium, loch de quilla, loch de alfescera
syrupus de ysopo, oleum rute and electuarium alestof purges the matter.

Emplastrum Andromachi and aristarchi swage the swelling in ye side. For the
pleurisy, take loche de papauere, iulep viol. iniubarum, syrupus cucurbite de
prunis, de granatis, de cannis, de iniubis, de violis and oleum violaceum.

For all diseases in the belly, guts and intrayles. Chap. xiij.
EMplastrum de allijs, dissolueth an apostum of the entrayles.

For the colike take diaciminum diasenicon. Philonium, musa aenea, oleum de
cartamo, de lilio and de piperibus.

These purge the humor causing the colike, hiera hermetis, electuarium indum
and a lescof, confectio de dactilis Dyacitoniten, aquamellis pillule aggregate
and fetide maiores.

For the hidropsye, use Diacucurma magna, diamorosion, diallacca, diacoston,
biasulphur, Sirupae de eupatorio, trochisci xiloaloes de rosis and de reubarbe,
emplastrum, de allijs and Andromachi, oleum almereseron, and these purge the
matter co^fectio de eupatorio and de alkakengi, pillule sebelato de reubarb,
and almeresion, and vnguentum Arthanita magnum.

Oleum de kerua and de ass be very good for the pains in the small guts.

Aromaticu^ rosatum dries up the humiditie of the entrayles.

These comfort and make strong ye guts, aromaticum nardinu^ suecaru^
rosatu^, dyacostum, syrypus ^e granis mirti, mellicratu^ de citoiris For ye
lubricitie of ye bowelles when the meat comes forth undigested use these,
electuariu^ de granis myrthi, dyalacca, trocisci ramich.

Co^fectio de seminibus, dyacoston, oleu^ lauri heal ye pains in the belly
which com of wind therein contained, and hiera hermetis with electuarium alescof
purge and cleanse ye lame, these also be good against all pains in ye
entrayles, oximel squilliticum, diafinico^, emplastrum arabicum, oleu^ de ouis,
and if it come of slymy phlegm take diatrio^ pipereon, diacyminum confectio
anacardina, and an emplaster de granis lauri.

Syrupus calame^ti, oleu^ cute, emplastrum aristarchi, do hete ye entrai les
that be cold, and dyaciminum, diamsum, decoctio alhast, dissolve ye ventosities
in the belly contained.

Emplastrum de fermento heals the instammations of the guts, and secaniabin
de calamento, or emplastrum de melliloto, mollify the hardness thereof.

For the flux use the confection de citonijs citonia, syrupus de albelach, and
de me^ta, emplastrum de gallia, and if it come of choler take electuarium de
fructibus, sirupus, acetosus de succis fructuum. Trochisci de spodio emplastrum
diafinicon, and if the Flux be bloody, athanalia magna is good, but if the
cause be stegme take confectio de storace, rob de fructibus, trochisci de
Berberis. Succharum violaceum makes the belly lose.

For all pains in the raynes and bladder. Cap. xiiij.
THese cenfections heat the ^eines, electuarium de aromatibus trifera galeni,
secacul conditum, confectio de zingibere, oleum de lilio and de ruta,
aromaticum rosatum.

For the pains in the reins and bladder take diacucurma, dyamorasion,
philonium, empl. de granis lauri, oleum lauri, de keyri, de ruta, de asle, de
piperibus, oleum vulpinum, philcsophorum and nardinum.

These break the stone in the reins, and bladder, dialacca, oleum de nucleis
cerasorum, de granis citrangulorum, de scorpionibus and de piperibus.

Hyerapicra, hyera hermetis, electuarium indi, purge the raynes.

Syrupus acetosus, de radicibus, opens the opilatio^s of the reins and
trochisci alkakengi heal the blters thereof.

For the hardness of the bladder use cerotum ysopi, and for the brenning heat
thereof, Oleum amigdalarum dulcium.

These provoke urine, diacalamentum, diacucurma, diamorusion, diasulphur,
secaniabin de radicibus, and de cheisyn, trochisci de lacca, pillule aggregate,
oleum philosophorum, philonium, masa aenei, oleum ask.

Oleum quatuor seminum frigidorum maiorum, is very good for all brenning and
heat in the yard.

Syrupus de piris and de citonijs be good for him that loses his nature.

For all diseases in the matrix and privy members. Chap. xv.
CErotum Isopi mollyfyeth the hardness of the matrix.

For the pains in the Matrix commonly called the mother, take diambra oleum
nardinu^, philonium, musa aenea, emplastrum de granis, lacca de ruta, de croco,
and philosophoru^, and if the pains come of cold use oleu^ de enula, and
hierapicra, hiera her metis, pillule de cerapino, expert.

These heat a cold matrix electuarium de gemmis, oleum rute, lilij and de
piperibus.

Aromaticum muscatum and oleum de lapide gagatis, be very good for the mother.

Diacalame^tum and pillule de serapino expert provoke the flowers, and trifera
minor stop the same.

For the hemorhoydes and all diseases of the foundament. Cap. xvi.
Oil of lynsee de is good for all pains in the fundament.

Trifera saracenica, trifera muscata trifera galeni, confectio alkakengi, heal
ye he morhoides, and these assuage the pains thereof, oleu^ de grisomilis and
de nucleis persicorum.

These stop the fiux of the hemorhoi des, pillule de hdellio maiores and
minores, and of the contrary part pillule aggregate, lose the same.

If they swel, anoint them with oleum de gersomilis.

For the gout, the sciatica, and all other ulcers and ach in the outward
members Ca. 17.
OLeum violatu^, and cerotum sa^daliu ar good for all hot apostumes and these
ripe and dissolve the same, cerotum andromachi, emplastrum de fermento, and
dyaquilon Oleu^ auellanaru^, vulpinum, de lapide gagatis, and philosophoru^
heal a cold gout, and if it be hot, use oleu^ de ranis, and for an old gout,
cerotum alexandri, oleu^ de nucleis cerasoru^ and de granis citrangulorum be
very good, hieralogodio^, and hamech purg aca^ker or crabbe and these ointments
heal ye same, diafinicon alpheserico^ emplastrum arabu^, oleum iuniperi and de
fraxino, and these ripe and break it, syrupus de epithimio, pillule inde.

These dissolve al hard knobbes and swellings, dialacca, oleum amigdalarum
dulcium, and s^saminum, cerotum ysopi, e^plastrum diaquilon and de allijs.

Oleum lilij, masticum and sinapis, ease all pains which come of cold, but if
they be hot take oleu^ rosaru^ and de papauere, and these assuage al aches,
oleum rosatu^ camomilli, and de melliloto with cerotu^ andromachi.

Vnguentum egiptiacum cleanses an old fistula very well, but ieralog odion
ruffi purges the matter, and these oyntmentes heal the fistula, vnguentum
diafenicon, de lino and alpheserico^, oleum de ouis, sirupus de epithimo and
emplastrum arabu^

Pillule aggregate and de oppoponaco purge the matter that causes pains in
the knees, and emplastru^ andromachi takes away the ache. These purge all
goutes of cold causes, hierapigra, hierahermetis elerium indu^, confectio^
alkakengi, pillule alhandhal, de hermodactilis, and de oppoponaco, but if I
come of a hot cause, take electuariu^ de succo rosarum, and these purge all
kind of goutes, electuarium alescof, pillule stomatice, aggregate, fetide, of
serapino and coloquintide.

Anoint cold joints with cerotum alexandri, and oleum de stincho comfort
lose joints.

For all pains in the joints, take aqua mellis, oleum masticum, de storace, de
euphorbia, de been, de lauro de keire, de cucumere asimino, de granis
citrangulorum and de piperibus, also use cerotum Isopi, acetum squilliticum,
emplastrum andromachi and filiz zachary.

Emplastrum diaquilon ripeth all swellings.

Trifera sarasenica, is good for weariness.

Vnguentum alphesericon, oleum de iunipero and de fraxino heals the pains in
the legs.

Confectio de ass and diasulphur be good for bytings of venomous beasts.

Emplastrum de fermento draws al fixed things out of the body. For the
sciatica, take emplastru^ andromachi, emplast, sinapis, oleum de piperibus and
philosophorum.

Anoint thy body with oil of dil and thou shall sweat, and oil of quinces
does stop the sweat.

Pillule aggregate maiores and serapine purge the sciatica.

Hieralogodion ruffi and pillule aggregate minores purge foul ulcers.

Vnguentu^ noble nichodemi ceraseos, and ceruse, oleu^ almezereo^ de iunipero,
and de fraxino heal old ulcers

Oleum de been takes away the skarre of an ulcer.

Vnguentu^ sericinum and vnguentum ceruse heal al burning with fire.

For wounds and all diseases in the lynewes. Capi. xviij.
HIera hermetis purges well al slymy matter contained in the synows, so do
pillule alhandel, and de opoponaco, for cold diseases in the sinow, use
siripus sticados, aqua mellis, vnguentum de bdellio, oleum nardinum, de croco,
de piperibus, de euphorbio, de storace, de scorace, de been, and oleum de
enula, cerotum andromachi, oleu^ costinu^, and de sanbuco, oleum nucum, and if
they have a contraction cerotum Alexandri, and for ache in the sinows, take
isopi cerotum, oleum amigdalarum, amararum auellanaru^, nucum lauri, camomyl,
Canbuci, keyri, melliloti, masticis, and de euphorbio.

If the sinowes be hard or swollen, take oil of bitter almonds, of lynseede,
of saffron, of nuts, and of laurel, and oil of quinces is good for to lose
synowes. Confectio alphescers and balanchiot be good for the synowes.

Vnguentum diaphenicon, and un guentum arabum be very good for broken bones.

Emplastrum synopis is good for pain in the bones, if it come of a cold
cause, and emplastrum de fermento draws out broken bones. Syrupus de epithimo
vnguentum de lino, diafinicon, emplastrum Arabicum, vnguentum deceraseos, do
wonderfully cleanse and heal wounds, and if the wound putrify, take vnguentu^
cerianium, and egiptiacum magnum, and if the synew be hurt take vnguentum
basilicon magnu^.

Oleum philosophorum is good for an old sore, and oleum de grisomilis assuageth
the swelling in a wound, and emplastrum de fermento dries up a hurt ye
mattreth wonderfully.

Emplastrum andromachi aliud, does bren and consume the skin, and flesh as it
were a cauterie.

For the crampe, take sirupus stica^os, pillule de serapino, vnguentu^ de
^dellio, oleum de been, de troco, de de^i^eribus, and de lapide gagatis.

For all agues. Cap xix.
FOr all base Agues, use confectio de acetosis, de prunis, syrupus cucur^ite,
and Acetosus de po^^^ (...) viclaceum, cerotum vio^^eum, (...) de rosis, and de
spa^io trochisci de eupalcrio.

For the quartan, take confectio de assa, de daccilis, diasulphur sirupus and
de calamento, infusio de hyera, diarhodon, trochisci de rosis, de cupatorio, de
absinthio, with pillule inde good for a quartayne.

These purge sharp agues, trifera persica, alxicostes, co^fectio de dactilis,
syrupus acetosus, de succis herbarum, and decoctio cupatorij.

For hot fevers, use iuleb violarum sirupus de prunis, de granatis, de a
cetositate, citride portulaca, trocisci de ca^phora de berberis, and de
sa^dalis and ye same be good for pestilent agues. Sirupus de bisantijs, is good
for old fevers of long continuance, and so is confectio de psillio, and for
cholerike agues take syrupus de succo, acetose and agresta.

Sirupus acetosus de tereniabin, is good for hot fevers ye ^e very perilous,
and for agues in y^ which diverse humors be putrified, take sirupus diacoido^,
trocisci de rosis and eupatori

Decoctio de sticados and trocisci dia rodon heal agues that come of corrupt
phlegm.

These purge al kind of agues, pillule aggregate, de rubarbaro, de alkakengi,
and in the cold or shaking it is good to anoint the pacient with oil of dyl,
or de enula.

For all corruption and diseases in the four humors, blood, choler, phlegm,
and melancholy. Cap. xx.
Hyeralogodion ruffi, hamech, decoctio epithimi do purge mela^choli. These
purge choler wonderful well co^fectio de psillio, confectio de manna,
electuarium rosaru^, diacitonites, pillule de turbith de coloquintida, syrupus
acetolus laxatiuus, aqua fructuum, aqua casei infusio, de succis herbarum,
confectio fumiterre, and de croco, with myrabolanes.

To purge choler adust, take sirupus minor fumitor, sirupus de epithuno, acetum
squilliticum, and decoctio capilli veneris, pillule de lapide lazuli, and de
armuico, pillule stomatice, purge both choler and melancholy.

These assuage and delay the heat of choler, succharum violaceum, sirupus
acetosus laxatiuus, and sirupus acetosus de succo fructuu^. Gross and thick
choler is made thin and easy to digest with sirupus acetosus, de radicibus,
seca^iabin de radicibus, trocisci de ramich. These be good to purge phlegm,
hieralogodion ruffi, decoctio alharif, and of myrabolans, pillule de cuphorbio,
de turbith, stomach de sarcocolla, de serapino, and de coloquintida.

If thou wylt break gross and slymy phlegm, take syrupus mayor de fumoterre.

Diacala galeni purges all slymy matter, so does acetum squilliticum pillule
aggregate maiores, and fetide minores, infusio hyere, and if the humors
discende to the sinews, take pillule de euphorbio, and lay to the place
emplastrum de allijs.

Confectio^ de dactilis purges raw humors wonderful well.

The blood is mundified and made clear from all corruption by these
co^fections, co^fectio auacardina, decoctio capilli veneris, aqua fruciu^,
decoctio fumiterre, and pillule ad febres cholericas purge the blood.

Aqua fructuum, Aixicostum trochisci de camphora, delay the heat of the blaud.

Athanasia magna and frochisci de terra sigillara, be good for the^ that spit
blood, but for bleeding at the nose take trochisci de ramich de ferra sigillata
and de karable, and they be also good for a bloody flux, oleu^ philosophorum
dissolueth blood gathered to one place.

Rob de prunis, de fructibus, trochisci sandalorum, v^guentum rosarum,
violatum, and oleum mandragore, be good for all inflammations and brennings.

Hamech purges all diseases which come of choler or salt phlegm.

These open oppilations through all the body, diacyminum, confectio de
seminibus, syrupus acetosus, de succis barbaru^, de fumoterre, secaniabin, de
radicibus, trochisci de aniso, pillule aggregate minores, oleu^ amigdalarum
amararum, de been, costinu^, persicorum and de piperibus.

Electuarium alescof purges the superfluities of all the body.

These purge melancholic, pillule inde, lucis maiores, de lapide lazuli and
zebelie.

A Table containing the weightes which Physicians do commonly use, and the
interpreration of the names of the compounde medicines heerem contained, with
the quantity and time that they ought to be received in.
THe least and first of all weightes (commonly used among physicians) is a
barley corn, and.xx. corns make a scruple, three scrupules make a drachme,
eight drachmes make an ounce.xij. ounces make a pound, A quarter of a pound is
three ounces.

And they be thus noted.

A corn. gra. A scruple.). A drachme.. An ounce... A pound. li. A quarter. q^.
A half. s. A handful. m. Ana. of every one.

All compounde medicines be either received within the body, or laid to the
same without, and they which be received into the body be these.
ELectuarium and confectio differ in this alone, that electuarium is moist, and
made with sugar and honey, and confectio dry, made alonely with sugar, and
because they be for diverse diseases, there is no certain time or measure, for
the receiving of them. Mixtura is when diverse electuaries or co^fections be
mingled together, is received.ij. hours before meat. Tragea is when diverse
pouders be mingled together with sugar, and they be received a.. at once, with
soppes of strong wine. Conserua and conditu^ be when diverse spices be mixed with
some sirup, and be commonly received early and late the bigness of a walnut.
Loch is a medicine which may be licked with the tongue, and may be received at
all times in the quantity of a hasell nutte. Iuleb is a clear potion, made of
diverse waters and sugar. Rob is a juice made hard and thick with the heat of
the sun, or of the fire, and is commonly mingled with electuaries and
conscrues. Syrup is a moist medicine which may be received early or late.
Decoctum is a medicine made of roots, leaves, seeds, and flowers, whereunto is
added sugar or honey. Infusie is when diverse medicines be beaten to powder or
hole, laid to stiep a certain space in some liquor. Trochiscus is a round
confection and plain, made after the manner of a wheel, the which before it be
received must be beaten to powder, and drunk with wine or other lycour the
weight of one.. commonly. Pills be known to al me^, and ought to be received
two or three hours after supper, the quantity of..i. Sief is a co^fection
made after the fashion of a sugar lofe, and must be dissolved in licour before
it be received. Collyrium is a moist confection, made of sief dissolved. Sufuf
is a fine powder made of diverse spices. Secaniabin is a sharp syrup, wherein is
put sugar or honey. Masticatorium is a confection which is held in the mouth,
and chewed to purge the head and phlegm. Suffimentum or suffumigatio is when
diverse pouders be cast upon the coals, and the pacient does receive the smoke
thereof. Gargarisme is a confection of diverse matters, and some decoction wherein
some rob is dissolved, which is gargarised in the mouth, and not swalowed down.
Here follow the compound medicines which be applied to the outward parts
of the body.
VNguentum an ointme^t, is made of oil, spices, and wax, and ought to be
applied hot to the place being somewhat before rubbed with a linen cloth.
Linimentum is in all points like to vngue^tum, saving that there goes no wax
to the composition thereof. Emplastrum is made of herbs and spices, not being
beaten to powder, but a little bruised mixed with some liquor or decortion, and
being hot is put upon a linen cloth, and so laid to the sore. Pulls differs
not from an emplaster, saving that meal of branne is good to the composition
thereof. Cataplasma is made of grene herbs or dry, sod in water till they be
soft, and then applied to the sore. Cerotum is made of wax or rosin, with oils
and spices, and is laid upon a clothe cut after the form of the member
should be applied unto. Dropax is an ointment only used to take away hear.
Sinapismus is an emplaster made of mustard to vlcerate the skin, and make the
same red. Epithema is made of diverse pouders mixed with some juice or distilled
water, and commonly laid upon scar let, is applied to the sick member.
Embrocha is when the member is washed gently with a sponge dipte in the
decoction of diverse herbs, rotes and flowers. Fomentum is a bath made of the
decoction of diverse herbs to wash the sore place withal. Euaporatio is when
the diseased member is holden in the hot vapor of some decortion. Sacculy be
bags made of linen cloth wherein be contained herbs, rotes, and leaves, which
being hot, must be first dypte in Wine or vinegar, and then laid to the
member that is grieved. Encathisma or insessio is a decoction of certain
things wherein the pacient must sit for certain space.
A Table of comfortatines.
Age. SRue. Margeram. Betonie. Peonie. Saxerie. Simples. Camomill. Pulioll.
Calamint. Nutmegs. Note medicines which cumfort the head. Cubebes. Musk.
Fenell. Aurea alexa^drina. Letificans rasis. Pliris acroticon. Compounds.
Dyacastoreon. Electuartu^ de ge^mis Diacodron iulij. Dianthos cu^ musco. White
Popy, Henbane, Lettis, Uyolets, Simples. Camphory, Mandrage, Wylow leaves,
Uineger. Cold medicynes, which comfort ye head. Dyapapauer, Diacodion musue,
Dyagregantum, Kebuli conditi, Compounds. Diapendio^ sine speciebus, Iulep
violatum, Succarum rosatum. Borage, Cloves, Rosemary, Simples. Aloes. Musk,
Hot medicines which comfort ye heart. Cubebes, Saffron, Mynts. Diamargariton
Compoundes. Diacinamomum, Plerisarcoticon, Diaboraginatum, Electuariu^
letificans Dyanthos, Succaru^ buglossa^u^, Electuarium regum Camphory, Uyolets
Simples. Margarites, Iuory, Coral, Water lyllies, Coryander, Roses. Cold
medicines which comfort ye heart. Diarrodo^ abbatis Succarum rosatum, Manus
christi Syrupus violaceus, Rob de ribes Compoundes. Tyrasandali, Trocisci de
ca^phora, Succarum rosatum Sirupus nenufarius Mynts Sage Wormewode Margeram,
Simples. Horehound Anyse, Common, Maslyke Gynger Maces. Hot medicines which
comfort the stomach. Diatrion pipereon Dyagalanga Rosata nouella Mel rosatum
colatu^, Compoundes. Dyanysum Dyacymynum Dyacalamentum Philonium mesue
Dyacucurma Dyalacca Rose. Uyolet Plantaine Lettis, Simples. Pomgranates Quinces
Gourdes Melones Purslane Uyneger. Cold medicines which comfort the liver.
Diacitoniten cum succaro. Dyarhodon abbatis Succarum rosatum Rob de berberies
Rob de rybes Compoundes. Succarum violaceu^ Iulep rosatum Rob de moris
Triasandali. Spyke Squinante Cynamom Wormewode Simples. Fumitory Fennel Ameos.
Hot medicines which comfort the liver. Dyacyminum, Theriaca magna Dyacosta,
Co^fectio anacardina Compoundes. Rosa nouella Dyalacca Dyanysum Aromaticu^
rosatum Diacalamentum, Endyue Lettis Purslane Symples. Uyolets Lyuerworte,
Camphory, Berberyes. Cold medicines which comfort the liver. Diarodon abbatis
Tyrasandaly, Rob granatorum Succarum violaceu^ Compoundes. Succarum rosaceu^.
Capparis, Tamaryndes, Borage, Symples. Buglosse Cresses Calament, Time,
Almondes Hot medicines which comfort the spleen. Anyse, Fenell Dyacapparis,
Dyacalamentum, Compoundes. Dyacimynum. Lettyse, Endyue, Symples. Eourds,
Cucumbers, Cytrones Uineger. Cold medicines which comfort the spleen.
Diaboraginatum Triasandali. Compoundes. Saxifrage, Gromell, Alexander Symples.
Nettle, Rocket Spi^nard, Paritory, Hot medicines which comfort the raynes.
Juniper. Dyagalanga, Trifera magna, Dyacalamentum, Dyalacca mesue Compoundes.
Electuarium ducis, Aromaticum rosatu^, Phylanthropos, Theriaca. Water lyllyes,
Lettys. Purslane Symples. Endyue, White Popy, Plantayne, Cold medicines which
comfort the raynes. Sirupus menufarinus. Compoundes. Syrupus acetosus, Mugwort,
Rue, Sage, Sauayne, Symples. Puliolle. Calaminte, Myrrh, Opoponax, Cynamom.
Hot medicines which comfort the matrix. Diacalamentum, Electuarium ducis,
Dyambra mesue, Compoundes. Philanthropos, Dyamargariton Philanthropos,
Dyamargariton Theriaca magna, Electuariu^ de baccis lauri.

The cold medicines that comfort the raynes, do also comfort the matrix.
Hermodac^^s, Saint John's herb, Symples. French garlyke, Folefote, Castoreum,
Cresses, O^edoung Note medicines which comfort the joints and outward parts.
Organ Pri^rose. Co^fectio anacardina Electua^ u^ dimarte, Oximeli^iani
Compoundes. Oximel squilie^ti^cu Marell Sy^grene Symples. Lettys. Endive,
Uineger, Cold medicines which comfort the joints and inward parts. Rosewater.
Syrupus Nenufarinus. Syrupus acetosus. Oleum rosarum. Coloquintida, Symples.
Agaricke, Aloes, Lapis lazuli, These medicynes purge the head. Lapis armentius,
Kebuli Indi, Hierapicra, Hieralogodion Pillule cochine, Compounds. Pillule
auree, Pillule de hyera. Hysope, Withwind, Symples. Agaricke, Casiasistula,
Gladine Colloquintida, These purge the breast and lights. Diasene, Paulinum,
Pillule de agarico mesue. Symples. Aloes, Wormewod, Mirabolanes Medicines
which purge the stomach. Dyaprunis Stomaticum laxatiuum. Catarcticu^
imperiale Compounds. Hyerapicra Pillule de hyera. Pillule Stomatic^ mesue,
Pillule lucis, Simples. Wormewode Fumitory, Tamarindis, Medicines which comfort
the liver. Gladin Mirabolani citrini. Dyaprunis Trifera sarasenica Compoundes.
Pillule de reubarbara mesue. Agaricke Symples. Seen, These medicines purge the
spleen. Black helebor Calamint. Dyasene. Compoundes. Pillule inde
Hermodactiles, Turbith. Oppoponax, Symples. Salgene Euphorbium, Centory, Wild
cucumber, These purge the ioints and outward members. Such fern as grows
upon walls. Electuariu^ de succo rosarum, Compoundes. Hamech, Benedicta
Hermodactili, Pillule de benedicta Pillule arthretice, Cataretico^ imperi.
Wormwod, Tamarindes, Scamony Aloes. Mirabolanes citrins Reubarbe, Water of
cheese Joyce of Roses, Symples. Casia fistula, Uyolets Manna, Prunes, Spourge
Withwind, Fumitory. These purge choler. All pills wherein is diagredion,
Electuariu^ de succo rosarum, Diaprunis Compoundes. Rhabarbarum Aqua
tamarindoru^, Hierapicra, Pillule aloes Electuariu^ de psillio Pillule
elephangine Pillule aureat. Kebuli, Emblici Belerici Mirabolanes Agaricke,
Turbith, Colloquintida Simples. Gladin, Bean, Wild cucumer Hermodactilis
Folefote, Pepper Sugar Gynger Centory Elder Hellebore Okeferne. These purge
phlegm. Benedicta, Stomaticum laxatiuum, Theodoricon Paulinum, Hierapicra
Pillule arthritici Pillule fetide, Pillule cochye Compoundes. Pillule auree,
Pillule sine quibus, Hiera archigenis Pillule de hermodactilis maiores, Pillule
asayret. Mirabolaniindi Spurge, Walferne Lapis armenus Lapis lazulus Simples.
Seen, Calaminte Fumitory Black hellebore Saltgemus Garden saffron Sticados
These purge melancoye. Prunes Wild time Hyera ruffi Dyaserta Catericu^
imperiale Compoundes. Dyacatholicon, Hamech, Pillule inde Pillule de lapide
lazule. Hoppes Tamarindes Maiden hear Juice of Roses. These medicines purge
and cleuse the blood. Casia Manna Fumitory Aloes Lapis lazuli Reubarbe.

The Epistle of Diocles unto king Antigonus, which teaches a man to preserve
himself in health.
IN so much as your grace being now somewhat run in years (most noble Prince
Antigonus) is endowed with knowledge above other kings and that in all parts of
philosophy and the arts called Mathematical, where in your grace has
wonderfully profited: I thought that part of Philosophy which teaches a man to preserve himself in health not worthy to be despised and left
untouched of your regal majesty, wherefore I thought it necessary to declare
unto your majesty in this Epistle, the causes of diverse diseases, with the
signs and tokens which go before the same, and last of all the remedies where
with the same may be healed and cured: for like as there is no raging and
hideous tempest without some manifest and open signs which declar^ the same
to follow, whereby men which have knowledge and be learned in the Arcane and
privy works of nature do so provide for themselves that they be sure from all
perilles and leoperdies that may ensue, so is there no kind of disease or
sickness that may infect any member of man's body, but that has before such
euidente signs and tokens that it may be easly known to follow. Therefore your
grace putting your trust and confidence in these our pr^ceptes may easily
attain to the perfect and absolute knowledge of all things.

First of all I have divided the body of man into four parts, that is to say
the head, the breast, the belly, and the blader.

These signs and tokens do declare when any kind of disease is about to
infect the head, daseling in the eyes, the headache, heaviness of the brows,
a noise in the ears, pricking in the temples, the eyes to water in the morning
and the sight to fail, with dullness or want of smelling and the lifting up of
the gummes.

When thou do perceive any such tokens, it is the best remedy to purge and
cleanse the head (and that with no purgative medicine) but with five ounces of
wine made of withereo grapes, or of new wine sodde till half be wasted away
therewith thou shall wash thy mouth fasting, and gargarise it therein till the
head be purged of fleme therein contained, and this is the casiest remedy for
all diseases in the head. Also it were very good and healthful, if the pacient
fasting would eat a quantity of mustarde which have been macerate or steeped
in water and honey mingled together, and gargarising the same, would draw down
the humor contained in the head, but first of all you must take heed the head
be covered till it heat, whereby the slymy fieme may be made more apt and
meet to flow down to the mouth.

Now of the contrary part, who so despises these signs and tokens shall be
troubled with these diseases, or one of them, the ophtalmy, the pearl in the
eyes, breaking out about the ears, poukes or wheales in the neck, the
consumption in the brain, heaviness in the head, the squinancie, worms
which eat the hear, the pains in the slappe that covers the wind pipe,
the falling of the hear, scabbes or ulcers in the head, and the tothache.

You may perceive by these tokens, if any man is like to be diseased about the
breast, or no, first a swet through all the body, and breast the tongue to wax
rough or thick, the spittle to be salt, or bitter in taste, or cholerik, sodayn
pains in the sides or shoulders, without manifest occasion, often yaning, much
watching, suffocations, thyrst after sleep, great sadness, coldness in the
breast, and a shaking in the arms and hands, and the diseases thereof ensuing
you may anoyde with parbraking after a mean supper, without receiving any
medicine. Also it is very good to vomit fasting.

Therefore let him that would vomit eat radish, towneresses, roket, mustard,
or purslane, and afterward drink warm water, and he shall vomit forth with,
but he that sets little by these presages and signs, ought to fear these
diseases, the plurisie, pains in the lungs, melancholicall madness, sharp
agues, the frenzy, the lethargy, and a burning ague with yesking.

When the belly shall be diseased, some of the signs do commonly appear
before, the throws and pains in the belly, meats and drinks to seem bitter,
heaviness in ye knees, cold stiffness in the joints, weariness of all the
body without any occasion, lack of senses in the legs, and easy fevers. Now
when any of these tokens do appear, it is best to make the belly soft and lose
with some kind of diet, and with no purging medicine, for it is less
leopardie to use such things that a man may scant err in, as boetes sod with
water and honey, sod garlike, malowes, dockes, or Mercury, and sweet meats
made with honey, for all these things do mollisie the belly, but if any of the
foresaid signs be manifest or endure long, add to the said decoctio^s the
juice of bastard Saffron, for thereby it shall be sweeter and more wholesome.
Also Coleworts sod in a great quantity of water, or four ounces of the juice
thereof received with honey and salt, is very good, and of no less eff^cte is
the water of the decoction of Cychepeason or bitterfetch drunk fasting. But
they which think these signs to be of none effect, are oftentimes diseased
with these sicknesses, the flux in the belly, pains in the bowels, the
lyenteri, ilica passio, which is a disease in the small guts, the sciatica,
the fever tertian, the gout in the feet, the apoplexy, the hemorrhoydes, and
the ioynte sickness.

Al diseases of the bladder be known by these tokens, to be very full after
little meat, great inflations, much belching, the pale color of all the body,
heavy or sad sleep, urine wan of color, and great pains in the making
thereof, with swelling about the privy members, after which tokens it is good
to use odoriferous things which move brine, as the rotes of fenel or persely,
which have been steped a while in good and odoriferous white wine, of the
which let the pacient take every morning fasting three ounces with the water of
yellow carectes or louage or enula campana, for they be of like operation, and
of no less efficacy is the water wherein Chiches have been stepped in, if it
be dronk with wine. But who so does lightly pass over these tokens shall look
for some of these diseases, the hydropise, the bigness of the spleen, pains
in the liver, the stone, payns in the raynes, the strangurie, and the
distention of the belly. And here is to be noted, that in all these signs
before rehearsed, we ought to minister gentle and easy medicines to children,
and to such as be elder, medicines that be of more strong operation and
greater efficacy.

Now I intend briefly to declare unto your majesty the two turnings of the
son called in Latin solstitia (at which times such things do commonly
chance) and what meats your grace shall use or abstain from, in either of
them, taking my beginning at the winter turning.

The vvinter turn.
Solstiticum hiemale which I call the winter turn, is about the xj. day of
December when the sun enters the Goat. IN the winter turn do reunies and
humiditie increase in men's bodies till the spring equinoctial, therefore it is
good to eat whoate meats, and to drink sweet wines, and especially with
wild margeram, and also to use the company of women.

There be from the winter turning to the spring equinoctial nyntie days.

The spring time equinoctial.
The spring equinoct^^d is the.x. day of March, when the sun enters the Ram.
FRom the spring equinoctial unto the rising of the seven stars called
virgilie, does phlegm and sweet corruption of the blood engender in man's
body, and for that cause it is good to use moist and tart meats, to exercise
the body, and not to absteyne from women. From the spring equinoctial to the
rising of Pleiades be.xivj. days.

The rising of the seven Stars.
The seven stars called Uirgihe or Pleiades, rise with the sun about the ix.
day of May. CHoler and bitter matter bears rule in man from this time unto
the summer turning: therefore use meats that be sweet, laratiue, beware of
acts venerial: from the rising of the Pleiades unto ye summer turn be.xiv.
days.

The Summer turning.
The somet turn, is about the x. day of July, when the sun entieth the Crab.
AT this time is melancholy augmented till the harvest equinoctial, therefore
drink cold water, and smell odoriferous things, and as for Uenus you must
either use it moderately, or eschew it utterly: we have to the harvest
equinoctial nyntie and three days.

The harvest equinoctial.
The harvest equinoctial is the.xiij. day of September. when the sun enters
the bala^ce. Phlegm and thin fluxions abou^d from this time to the setting of
the seven stars, therefore it is good to purge the humors, or to stop the
fluxions, and to eat all ^arle and moist meats, to parbrake nothing at all,
to exercise the body, and to flee women. From which time to the setting of the
seven stars be.xxxvj. days.

The setting of the seven Stars.
The seven stars set with the sun about the tenth of November FRom this time
to the winter turnyng does fleme bear dominion in man, therefore you must take
fat and bitter things, drink sweet wines, and exercise the body. From the
going down of the seven Stars to the winter turn be five and forty days.

FINIS.
The Table of this book.
Against the falling of hear. cap. 1. To take away hear. cap. 2. To heal
pustules or wheales in ye head. c 3 Against forgetfulness. cap. 4. Against the
frenzy. cap. 5. Against the headache. cap. 6. Against the reume. cap. 7.
Against the giodinesse of the head. cap. 8. Against the headache which comes
of to much watchings. cap. 9. Against the falling evil. cap. 10. Against
madness called insania. cap. 11. To heal all diseases in the eyes. cap. 12.
Against dymnes of the sight. cap. 13. For all pains in the ears and
deafness. Cap. 14. To take away the morphewe and Kingwormes. cap. 15. Against
the tothache. cap. 16. To stop blood at the nose. cap. 17. To heal the Palsy.
cap. 18. For horsenesse and all faults in the speech, and for the Cough. cap.
19. Against spitting of blood. cap. 20. For the sudden debilitie of the vital
spirits coming of emptiness. cap. 21 Against yesking and belking. cap. 22.
For all diseases in the lights. cap. 23. Against the plurisie. cap. 24 To make
a man laxatiue. cap. 25. To bind or make one costife. cap. 26. Against the
colike and fretting of the guts. cap. 27. To kill worms in the belly. cap. 28.
To stop the flure of the hemeroydes cap. 29 To heal the disease called
Temasmus which is a desire to go to the stool without avoiding of any thing.
cap. 30. To heal the Emerodes, being extant and ofissours in the fundament.
cap. 31. Against the coming forth of the arsegutte. cap. 32. To heal the
stopping or spilation in the liver. cap. 33. Against the dropsy. cap. 34 To
heal all diseases in the spleen. cap. 35. Against the yellow iaundis. cap. 36.
Against the stopping in ye raines, the stone, and disease of the bladder. cap.
37. Against the strangurion. cap. 38. To heal Ulcers and Byles of the yard.
cap. 39. For the^ that cannot hold their water. cap. 40. Against the swelling
of the codd^s. cap. 41. Against the swelling of the yard. cap. 42. To assuage
fleshly lust. cap. 43. Against the hardness and apostum of the matrix. cap. 44
To provoke the flowers. cap. 45. To stop the flowers. cap. 46. Against the
suffocation of the matrix called the mother. cap. 47 To make a woman conceive.
cap. 48. Against the swelling of the tetes through much abundance of milk.
cap. 49. Remedies against hard deliverance of children. cap. 50 For the pains
of the deliverance of the child. cap. 51. Against the gout, joint sickness,
and sciatica cap. 52. Against ruptures and breakings. cap. 53. Against an ague
that holds a man one day. cap. 54 Against the burning ague. cap. 55. Against
the tertian fever. cap. 56. To heal a quotidian fever. cap. 57. For the
quartayne ague. cap. 58. Against a carbuncle. cap. 59. To heal the mesels.
cap. 60. To heal a fistula or holow ulcer. cap. 61. Against the scab and
French packes. ca. 62. Against glandules or kyrnels. cap. 63 To take away
wartes. ca. 64. To heal burnings of fire. cap. 65. Against the disease called
wildfire. cap. 66. To draw out arow heads or thorns that stick in the body.
cap. 67. Against brusing. cap. 68. To cure beasts that be hurt or sick. c.
69. Against drunkenness. cap. 70. Against weariness. cap. 71. A drink for
wounded persons. cap. 72. A drink against the fistule. cap. 73. To purge
cholerike humors downwarde. cap. 74. To purge melancholy humors. cap. 75. To
purge choler adust. cap. 76. A purgation against the Quotidian fever. cap. 77.
To purge phlegm in a quotidian. cap. 78. A purgation against a quotidian of
sweet phlegm. cap. 79. A purgation against a quotidian of sharp phlegm. cap.
80. To purge choler in a tertian. cap. 81. A purgation against a tertian of
yellowe choler. cap. 82. Against a simple or double tertian. cap. 83. Against a
tertian of rest choler. cap. 84. Against a quartain of bre^t choler. cap. 85.
Against a quartayn in autumn or harvest. cap. 86. Against a quartaine of
natural melancholye. cap. 87. A potion against a quartain. cap. 88. A
confection of pills against cuill humors. cap. 89. Against the heaviness in
the head. cap. 90.
The table of the Aphorisms.
OF the dispositions of the head. cap. 1. Of the lethargy. cap. 2. Of the
payns in the head called subeth. ca. 3. Of too much watching. cap. 4. Of the
palsy. cap. 5. Of madness called melancholia cap. 6. Of raging madness. cap.
7. Of the falling evil. cap. 8. Of the disease in the synowes. cap. 9. Of
drowsiness in the head. cap. 10. Of the members being set awry. cap. 11. Of
the disposition of the eyes. cap. 12. Of the disposition of the ears. cap. 13.
Of the disposition of the nose. cap. 14. Of neesing. cap. 15. Of the
disposition of the mouth. cap. 17. Of the diseases in the teeth cap. 18. Of the
greefes in the throat cap. 19. Of the breast and lights cap. 20. Of blood
spitting cap. 21. Of the plurisye cap. 22. Of the consumption or ptisike cap.
23. Of the disposition of the heart cap. 24. Of the pappes. cap. 25. Of the
stomach cap. 26. Of the diseases in the liver cap. 27. Of the galle in the
spleen cap. 28. Of all kind of fluxions cap. 29. Of the fundament cap. 30. Of
the disposition of the raynes cap. 31. Of the disease of the bladder cap. 32.
Of the members of generation in men. cap. 33. Of the members of generation in
women. cap. 34. Of the disposition of the outward members. cap. 35. Of fevers
and agues. cap. 36. Of the diet to be observed in agues. cap. 37.
The table of the compound medicines.
For all diseases in the head cap. 1. For pains in the ears cap. 2. For the
pains in the eyes cap. 3. For the disease of the face cap. 4. For the disease
in the mouth and throat. cap. 5. For the morphew and yelow iandis. cap. 6. For
all diseases in the stomach cap. 7. For the dispositions in the heart cap. 8.
For all diseases in the liver cap. 9. For the pains in the lungs cap. 10. For
all diseases in the spleen. cap. 11. For the pain of the back and sides. cap.
12. For all pains in the guts and entrails. Cap. 13. For all pains in the
raynes and bladder. Cap. 14. For all diseases in the matrix cap. 15. For the
emorrhoides cap. 16. For the gout and sciatica cap. 17. For all wounds cap.
18. For all agues cap 19. For the corruption in the four times or seasons of
the year. cap. 20.

