The Travelers joy: OR, A SERMON on the third Verse of the second Chapter of
Salomons song.

By Master JOHN ADAMSON, Minister of the Word of God at Liberton.

CANT. 2.3. As the Apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my well-beloved
among the sons of men: under his shadow I delighted and sat down, and his
fruit was sweet unto my taste.

LONDON, Printed by John Hauiland for Henry Bell. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir David Murray, Knight, all happiness in this
world, and in the world to come perpetual glory.
Worshipful Sir,
AS there is no vice more odious and detestable in the sight of God, more
hurtful and pernicious to the Commonwealth, and more repugnant and contrary to
nature and reason, than ingratitude (that mother sin, or rather monster of
all mischief) so there is no virtue more praiseworthy, more requisite and
more commendable in a Christian than thankfulness; that is, a requital of one
good turn with another, a rendering (at least a willing desire to render, if
means and ability fail) of one gift in lue and recompense of another; whereto
the Prophet David tieth the godly as to a duty which they must of necessity
do; Psalm. 33.1.
It becomes (says he) the upright men to be thankful: and the Apostle
Paul reckons the unthankful amongst the number of those from whom we should
turn away, 2. Tim. 3.2.
whose number (alas) in these perilous times increases too fast. Against the
neglect of this precious Jewel the Lord himself bitterly enueigheth by his
holy Prophet Esaias, Esa. 1.2, 3.
saying, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me; yea he prefers brute beasts in the return of their duty before
them, saying, The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, but
Israel knows not me. And our Savior Christ having cured ten Lepers, and
finding one only thankful, encouraging the one, he says, Arise, Luke 17.17,
19.
go thy way, thy faith has made thee whole: and checking the others
ingratitude, he says, Where are the nine? The Gentiles so worthily hated and
abhorred this vice, that they adjudged those whom they found more willing to
receive than willing to requite, execrable unto God, injurious to nature, and
unprofitable members of a commonwealth, the which is clear by the example of
Naaman, who being cleansed of his leprosy, 2 Kin. 5.15.
turned again to the man of God, and would have given him a reward, yea and
would have constrained him to receive it: Finally this vice is so detestable to
the very beasts, that they strive to shun the foul imputation hereof, as
Androdus his Lion (of which Gellius lib. 5, noct. attic. cap. 14. mentions)
and Porus an Indian Kings Elephant (of which Erasmus in the sayings of
Alexander) manifestly shows. And surely, if it be so odious in Gods sight,
and so detestable and hateful to the Heathens and brute beasts, what should
not Christians do to avoid and shun it? The consideration hereof, together
with your Worships favor to my Uncle being alive, and earnest care of his
Orphane (his centuries) he now being dead, and kindness to me (unworthy
thereof) since I came to this Country, has emboldned, or rather constrained
me to dedicate this little Book (albeit the talent of another man's zealous
invention) to your Worship (wherein is contained the miserable estate of those
who are without Christ, and the joy, ease, peace, contentment, and happiness
of those who delight in him) humbly beseeching your Worship to accept of my
good will herein at this time, hoping if God permit, ere long to propine you
with an increase, which in some measure shall be proportionable to your
sowing. Thus ceasing, I beseech the Lord to continue you in your godly course,
and endue you with all blessings which either this earth affords or Heaven
contains.

Your Worships most bounden, A. S.

THE TRAVELERS JOY.
CANT. 2.3. As the Apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my well-beloved
among the sons of men: under his shadow I delighted and sat down, and his
fruit was sweet unto my taste.


IN the first Verse the Bridegroom Christ praised his Bride, his Church, or
the faithful soul: Here she praises him, for none can praise him but they
who have been before commended of him; and without controversy who are
commended of him are praiseworthy: So God accepts no praise but of those
that are praiseworthy. First the Lord bestows grace upon us to make us
commendable, and then he praises us for his own graces in us, and all to this
end, that we may resolve our hearts, and open our mouths in praise of his
gracious goodness, as here does the Church.

The argument of her Lords commendation the Church takes from his comfortable
fruits, which are first generally propounded, next particularly expounded.
Propounded in comparison, As is the Apple Tree of the Garden in respect of the
trees of the forest, so is Christ my love (says the Church) in regard of other
men: but the trees of the forest are naught in respect of the Apple Tree of the
Garden: So are all other men in regard of Christ, they are naughty, barren,
fruitless and unprofitable. This Proposition first shows us a method how to
meditate on Christ, that we may the better attain to the knowledge of him.
Would we see what excellency is in him? Let us compare him with any thing
beside him. Things which simply looked on seem to be most profitable,
pleasant, perfect, high, illustrious, glorious, compared with him, are base,
imperfect, unprofitable and naughty. As the most bright stars of the
Firmament vanish and disappeare in the sight of the Sun, so is the glory of
all creatures eclipsed in his presence. The Prophet David to express his
beauty compares him with all other men, and says: Psalm. 45.2.7
He is fairer then the children of men: to express his unction and gifts, he
says; He is anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows. So, if ye
will know what a food he is, compare him with Manna. Psalm. 78 24.
Manna considered by it self, is called the Wheat of Heaven, and the Bread of
Angels; Ioh. 6.3^
but in comparison of him, the Lord denies it to be an heavenly Bread, it could
not preserve it self from stink and rottenness, much less us from death,
where Christ the Bread of life does both. Ioh. 6.4^, 50.
Would we know what a Garment he is? compare him with the most excellent
Garment. The Lillies of the field may contend with Salomons Roabe royal, Mar.
6.29.
but no Garment may compare with Christ our wedding Garment. Mat. 22.12. and
Romans 13.14.
Other Garments may defend us from the injury of the air, may adorn us and
make us beautiful in the eyes of men, may cover the blemishes of our bodies,
but this Garment being put on can defend us from the stormy tempest of Gods
wrath, can make us beautiful, yea glorious in the eyes of God; and not only
cover, but cure the blemishes of our souls. There is nothing in this world
profitable, pleasant, commendable, high or glorious, whereby our Lord is not
parabolically named in the Scripture, yet all being compared with him, all
their excellency, greatness and goodness disappeares, euanishes, and seems
nothing.

Romans 1.19.
The use of this Doctrine is, not only to lead us by the hand of the creatures
unto the knowledge of Christ, but also to teach us to discern if we have
attained to the right knowledge of him, after we have known him, if we
esteem of any thing beside him, we know him not as we ought to know him. Phil.
3.7, 8.
Saint Paul accounted highly of many things before he knew Jesus Christ, but
after he had attained to the knowledge of him, he accounted them all to be
dung, to be damage, to be nothing. Secondly, observe what man is by nature and
in himself. He is as a barren and unprofitable tree of the Wood: Psalm. 14.2, 3
the Lord looked down from Heaven upon the children of men, to see if there
were any that would understand and seek God, but what finds he after search?
all are gone out of the way, all are corrupt and become abominable, there is
none that does good, no not one.

Howsoever the unregenerate man please himself, here is Gods Testimony of him:
in respect of good he is unprofitable, for he does no good: in respect of evil
he is erroneous, close out of the way. And the reason of both his ineptitude
to the one and promptitude to the other, is in himself, for he is corrupt and
stinketh. Ioh. 15.4, 5.
A man out of Christ can bring forth no good fruit, without him we can do
nothing: he may well produce the broad leaves of lusty and worldly wise words.
He may spread the branches of his worldly glory to the ends of the earth; yea,
and touch the Heavens with the top of his pride like Nebuchad-nezzar, Dan. 4.8,
9, 17, 18, 19.
but in respect of good fruit all are as trees of the Wood, barren and
unprofitable. To this well agrees Saint Jude, Jude 12.
who describing natural men, in whom the supreme faculty is a natural or
reasonable soul, they are, says he, (...), they are in respect of good (...),
fruitless trees, but in respect of evil they are (...), that is, trees of
corrupt fruit, of corrupting fruit, or corrupt in the harvest. Their fruit is
corrupt in it self, and corrupts others with its contagion, as rotten fruit
corrupts the whole, as a little Leven does leven the whole mass, and as a
little gangrene in the flesh corrupts the whole body. Their fruits are as the
Apples of Sodom, fair and pleasant without, but crushed in pieces, are full
of stink and rottenness: neither is their fruit only corrupt in respect of
the internal quality, and corrupting in respect of the external operation,
but also in regard of the season, they are corrupt in the harvest, when other
trees are most abundant in good, bringing forth fruit for meat, and leaves for
medicine, then are they most luxuriant in evil. O alas that there should be
so many such trees even amongst us, Luke 13.7.
in the midst of the Orchard of God! while as other good Christians are seeking
the Lord, now when he offers himself to be found in the Word and
Sacraments, even now in this harvest of grace, they are fruitless in good,
albeit luxuriant in evil: while as others are sacrificing praise to God, they
are sacrificing to Mammon, to their Nets, to their Bellies. A good man is as a
good tree planted at the rivers of waters, Psalm. 1.3.
and bringing forth good fruit in due season, but these bring forth evil fruit
at all seasons, and can find no season for good. Luke 13.^


Thirdly, consider how Christ Jesus is opponed to these men, yea to all men: He
is as the fruitful Apple tree of the Garden, they as the barren trees of the
Wood, no tree comparable to the Apple Tree, for pleasantness of the fruit
thereof to the eye, to the smell, to the taste, no tree like it, against
thirst, against hunger, against faintheartednesse and sickness. The Apples of
this tree will banish hunger, quench thirst, and comfort the sick and
languishing heart. Therefore the hungry, the thirsty and faint soul puts up
a Petition to her Lord in the fifth Verse, Stay me with Flagons, Cant. ^ ^
and comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love. In respect of these
singular virtues he is called the Tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise of
God, Reu. ^^
and in the midst of the street of the new Jerusalem, Reu. 22.2.
bearing twelve manner of fruits every month, and sending forth leaves that
heal the nations. Oh what a store of meat and medicine is here! Oh what
haruests of comfortable fruits! twelve times twelve, that is, 144. haruests of
consolations are brought out by this tree every year. Here is abundance of
medicine against the poison of the tree of knowledge, whereby our parents in
Paradise brought death on themselves, and their whole posterity. The fruit of
that tree has poisoned us all, no medicine can make us whole, and free us of
that poison, but only the fruit and leaf of this Apple Tree, this Tree of
Life, Christ Jesus.

Number. 21.8.
He is as the brazen Serpent: they that were stung with the fiery Scorpions
could not be cured but by looking up to it, neither can we that are stung by
that old Serpent be made whole, but by looking up to Christ. He is as the
waters of Jordan: 2. King. 5.12.
albeit Naaman in his carnal conceit once said, are not Abanah and Pharpar,
rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? yet by experience he
found there was no curing of his Leprosy but by washing himself in Jordan:
and if we contemn the blood of Jesus, Heb. 10.26.
there remains no more sacrifice for our sins. Of that Tree of Knowledge
God said, If ye eat ye shall die. But of this Tree of life he says, Ioh. 6.53.
Except ye eat, ye shall die. We esteem our Parents fools because they did
eat where God forbade to eat. There was medicine for eating of that Tree of
Knowledge, but no medicine for no eating of this tree of Life. This tree
although in the beginning it was but a little graffe springing out of the root
of Iesse, Isa. 11.1.
yet being covered with earth (in the burial) grew to a great Tree (in the
resurrection) the top whereof (in the Ascension) grew in height above the
Heavens, and (in the preaching of the Gospel) sent forth branches to the
outmost ends of the earth, Hos. 14.7.8.
that all Nations might rest under his shadow, and enjoy his comfortable fruits
to everlasting life: we can have no life but from this Tree of Life. Thus
concerning the proposition: follows the particular exposition thereof,
wherein is declared the effectual working of the excellency of this Tree in
the Christian soul, it works desire and delight. The reasons of this souls
desire and delight are set down three in number. First, she delights in this
Tree, that she may rest and repose under it. Secondly, that she may be covered
with the shadow of it. Thirdly, that she may eat the fruit of it, as being
sweet to her taste. Concerning the souls delight and desire, consider how that
first she speaks of the excellency of this tree, and then of her desire toward
it, and her delight in it. For it is not possible we can have a desire of the
Lord, or a delight in the Lord, except we first know his excellency and
goodness. It is true concerning the natural man, of natural things unknown
of him he has no desire, how much less can spiritual things affect him,
being unknown of him? The men of this world misregard the Lord, and those
things that belong to his Kingdom, because they know them not. Mat. 13.45, 46.
The Kingdom of Heaven is like a pearl of great price, which when a Merchant
has found, he sells all that he has, and buyeth it: He finding this pearl
quitteth himself of all things to gain it, to get it; except he find it and
see it, he labors not to attain unto it, he cares for no more but this
present life, because he knows no better: Mar. 8.34.
If the Gadarens had known Christ, they would not have preferred their swine
unto him. The Lord Jesus came unto his own people, Ioh. 1.11.
the Jews, but his own received him not. Mat. 27.20, 21. 1 Cor. 2.7.
Why? because they knew him not: for if they had known him, they would not
have preferred a robber unto him: if they had known him, they would not have
crucified that Lord of glory. The Lord said to the woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4.10.
If thou knew the gift of God, thou would have asked; she asked not,
because she knew not. No marvel to see the worldling have little desire of the
Lord, have little delight in him. What wonder he fix his heart on the things
of of this world only, seeing he knows no better: for if he knew better he
would do better. If these carnal and worldly minded men that were called to
the wedding of the Kings Son, Luke 14.16.
had known how great a benefit they were invited unto, they would not have
refused to come. They would not have preferred their farms and Oxen, that is,
their earthly commodities, they would not have preferred their wives, that is,
their fleshly pleasures to that heavenly banquet. All tend to this, that we
strive to get a sight of Christ, Phil. 3.8.
that we study by all means to attain to the excellency of the knowledge of
him, that our hearts may be inamoured with him, that he may become the Butte of
our desires, and only object of our delights. Secondly, as desire must begin at
knowledge, so knowledge must end in desire: in vain we hear of Christ, in
vain we know him, except our hearing and our knowledge set an edge on our
desire, to affect him, to seek him. When Jesus had shown unto the Jews of
the Bread of Life which came down from Heaven to give life to the world, Io^
6.34.
their desire as stirred up, opens their mouth to say, Lord give us evermore
that bread. What ever a man knows of Christ, he knows nothing as he ought
to know, 1 Cor. 8.2.
except he love him as much as he knows him: if we acknowledge him to excel
all other things, we must love him and delight in him, we must desire him and
require him above all other things.

Now to the reason of the souls desire and delight. First the wearied soul
delights in this tree, that she may sit, that is, rest, remain, and repose
her self under it: Christ is to be sought and desired for himself, that we
may rest and remain in him, that we may repose on him. And good reason have we
so to do if we consider, either what he is, or what he has, what the father
has professed of him, or what the Son has promised of himself. What is he?
he is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last. Reu. 1.8. Romans 11.36.
He is the last end of all ends, for to him are all things, therefore he is to
be desired for himself, and all other things for him. What ever we desire
beside him, we are not to rest upon it, but must use it as a mean to further
us to this last end, this supreme good: and we dishonor him much, and
disadvantage our selves more, if we desire or seek him for any other thing
beside himself, if we take in that last end of all things to be used as a
mean and mids to any other thing. Secondly, we have good reason to rest on him
if we consider what he has. He has in himself all perfection and beauty: he
has in himself sufficiency both for himself and for us, Genesis 17.1.
as being El shaddai, God all-sufficient. Col. 1.19. Col. 2.9, 10 Ioh. 1.14.
It pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell in him, in him dwells
all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, in him we are complete and full, he is
full of grace and truth; fullness of light, fullness of life, fullness of
salvation is in him, and what good thing is to be desired which we shall not
find in him? In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Col.
2.3.
He is made of the Father to be our wisdom, justification, 1. Cor. 1.30.
sanctification, and redemption: are we fools? in him we have wisdom: are we
guilty of sin and condemnation? in him we have righteousness: are we filthy
and profane? in him we have sanctification: are we sold under sin to hell?
Ephesians. 1.7.
in him we have redemption, even the remission of our sins in his blood.
Seeing then he has all things we stand in need of, to free us from extreme
misery, and to bring us to supreme felicity, good reason have we to rest and
repose on him.

Thirdly, what professed the father of him? This is my beloved Son (...), Mat.
17.5.
in whom I am well pleased, on whom I have rested and reposed. If the father
has rested on him for fullness of satisfaction, why should not we repose on
him for fullness of salvation? Lastly, what has he promised of himself? Mat.
11.29.
In me ye shall find rest to your souls: We may with that rich man, Luke
12.19.
bid our souls rest on our Barnes; but try who will, he shall find no true
rest but in Christ Jesus. As for other things, the more we possess them, the
more they possess us, yea the more they oppress us; the more obtained, the
more they inflame the desire: as water, the more it be drunk by a dropsy man,
the more it kindles his thirst, and as oil powered on a fire, it is so far
from quenching that it increases the flame. The reason is, first, because
there is no proportion betwixt the spirit of man and these things, it being
eternal and heavenly, these being temporal and earthly. Secondly, because
nothing can rest but in the own place whence it has its beginning, and on
things suitable to its nature: therefore stones, metals, and all earthly things
thrust up in the air, do not rest till they return to their original earth
again, the center of their motion: Job. 5.7.
and hence it is, that a fiery flame is in a continual restless motion, and
shaking and shiuering, always tending upward toward its natural place; even
so, Eccl. 12.7.
the spirit of man which is from above, cannot rest but on things above. The
heart which God has made for himself, has no rest but on God himself, as
the Needle of a Mariners compass cannot be still and steadfast except it point
directly toward the Northern star. O then, my soul, since in thy unstable
and restless motion, thou have wandered too long from thy Lord, seeking rest
elsewhere and have found none, Psalm. 116.7.
Return to thy rest my soul, the Lord is thy rest, he is the center that
must stay thy unstable and restless motion.

This Doctrine confutes and reproues, First, all Papists in general. Secondly,
politic Papists that dwell among us in particular. Thirdly, us all in
universal, so far as we are carnal and worldly minded. Hereby are convinced
all Papists in general that rest not on Christ, that seek not their
perfection and salvation in him, but elsewhere they mix the blood of Christ
with the blood of Martyrs, his merits with theirs. They make many Mediators and
Saviors beside him, and so forsaking the Fountain of living waters, Ier. 2.13.
they dig unto themselves dry Cesternes that can hold no water. Fullness of
salvation is only and wholly in Christ, Col. 1.19.
wholly in him, Col. 2.9.1^
for it pleased the father that all fulness should be in him; in him we are
complete, Heb. 7.25.
and he is able to save perfectly them that come unto God by him: only in him,
for there is no salvation in another, Act. 4.12.
and among men there is given no other name under Heaven, whereby we may be
saved. He is as Noah's Arc, out of the which there was not safety; and as
Jacobs Ladder, by the which only we have access to Heaven. 1 Cor. ^.13
Was Paul crucified for us, or were we baptized in his name? Our Lord was
crucified between two Thieves, not two Apostles; as for the Apostles, one of
them betrayed him, another of them denied him, the rest withdrew themselves the
time of his suffering, to show that his blood only is the price of our
redemption, that he alone trod the Vinepresse of Gods wrath, Isa. 63.3.
and that of all the people there was none with him: this is the old faith, and
therefore the only sound Religion. Will we look to David the sweet singer of
Israel, a man according to Gods own heart? will we follow either his practice
or his precept? by both he teaches us this Religion. Concerning his practice,
he says to the Lord, Psalm. 23.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and on earth I have desired none with thee;
and giving a Precept he says, Let Israel wait upon the Lord, Psalm. 130.7, 8.
for with the Lord is the great redemption, and he will redeem Israel from all
his iniquities. Let other Nations wait on whom they please, let the Egyptians
wait upon their Isis and Osiris, let the Moabites and Midianites wait upon
their Baalpeor, let the Amonites attend on Moloch, the Sidonians on their
Ashtaroth, the Philistims on Dagon, Ezekiel. 22.3. Ge^^^im. ^^ (...).
the Turks on their Mahomet, the other Pagans on a thousand other such dirty
gods of their own invention, and let the Papists as fondly doting on Idols, as
they wait on as many such gods of their own creation, let all Idolaters, I
say, wait upon their Idols, it becomes the Israel of God, to wait on the God
of Israel, it becomes all true Christians to wait on Christ their Lord, to
rest on him alone. He is Jacobs stone on which he rested; they that rest on
this stone, shall find with Jacob Heaven opened, a ready passage to Heaven,
and the Angels of God attending them, to furnish and further them in this way.

Secondly, this Doctrine makes against politic Papists dwelling among us, who
make religion to serve their policy, and take in Christ, the last and of all
ends, to be a mids and mean to their crafty designs: as many come to the
musters for fear of poynding, so these come with us to the Church, to the Word
and Sacrament for fear of the Kings Law. They profess the Gospel of Christ
with us, that they may enjoy their state among us, like Judas that followed
Christ for the bag; a better purse of money will make Judas betray his Master.
Jupiter (say the heathen Prophets moralizing by fables) could not obtain the
love of Danae till he turned himself in a shoure of gold: oh, but then she
kept him in her bosom. If Christ were not turned in gold, he should not be
welcomed by these our symbolizing false brethren: if the Gospel were not
accompanied with security of estate, with profits, preferments, and other
emoluments, they would not receive it, they would not profess it. This is not
to rest on Christ and his truth, but on these worldly emoluments, for the which
they profess Christ and his truth. These men, as the messens of Mammon follow
Christ, because their master Mammon is in his company; but when Christ and
Mammon shall part company, like Demas they will leave Christ and follow Mammon,
2 Timothy 4.10
and then the world shall see that not Christ but Mammon was their master. Who
love Christ, who seek him, who follow him, must love him, must seek him, must
follow him for himself, otherways they do not, no they cannot rest upon him.

Lastly, this Doctrine fights against the worldly-mindednesse of us all,
while as we seek other things to lean unto, and to rest upon beside Christ:
for even Israel the people of God sometimes beside God can lean to Egypt, 2.
King. 18.^1.
a staff of reed, which breaking fails them, and thrusts through their
hand. Whateuer we lean to beside Christ, it is as a staff of reed, it
helps not but hurts. Is it wisdom? is it learning? is it riches? is it
friendship? Whatsoever a man trusts unto beside the Lord, it shall disappoint
him: in the end it shall prove not helpful but hurtful unto him, as did
Hamans honor, Goliahs greatness, Ester. 7. 1 Samuel 17. 2 Samuel 17.
and Achitophels wisdom. We must not love the world then, nor yet the things
of this world, 1 Cor. 7.31
for the shape of this world passes away, and whatsoever is in the world, as
the lust of the flesh, 1 Ioh. 2.16
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, are not of the father, but of the
world, and all things worldly are but vanity, passing as a smoke, as a dream,
as a shadow. Our Treasure is not here, but above, here be only the shadows of
good things, their substance is in Heaven. We laugh at the foolishness of
little Babes when we see them chase shadows, and glame after them on a Wall,
with confidence to apprehend them. Greater fools shall we prove if we chase
the things of this world, for they are but shadows indeed. The pomp, the
riches, and pleasures of this world, they are but shadows of that glory,
riches and joy that is hid with Christ in God. Good reason is it then we settle
our minds and hearts on him, and not on any thing else: We must forsake all
things to win him, Mat 1^.44
like that wise and thrifty Merchant, who finding that precious Treasure in a
field, sold all that he had and bought it.

Under his shadow. The second reason of the souls delight in this Tree, is the
shadow of it. The shadow of a well busked Tree serves for refreshing of a
wearied Traveler, it serves to cover him from the parching heat of the Sun,
and to save him from a tempest. The shadow of Jesus Christ refreshes the
wearied soul, Man. 11.^8.
sore traveled under the burden of sin, tentations and afflictions; it
covers him from the fiery heat of Gods consuming wrath, it defends and
holds off the tempest of his judgments. Isa. 32.18.
Under his shadow is that Tabernacle of peace, Lam. 4.20.
that sure Habitation and safe resting place, in the which the Lord has
promised his people shall dwell and live: Christ is our peace, our sure
habitation and safe resting place; if we dwell elsewhere, we can have no peace,
no surety, no refreshment, we cannot live under another shadow, another shadow
may slay thee, it cannot save thee. Pliny in his Natural History writes of
the Taxus, Plin. lib. 16. cap. 1^.
which we call the Yew tree, that in Arcadia the shadow of it is so deadly and
poisonable, that if a man sleep or eat under it, it does presently poison and
kill him; such is the shadow of any thing beside Christ, it may well kill us,
it cannot keep us, it is a Taxus to intoxicate and poison, not a saving shadow
to comfort and refresh. A shadow is made of a light and a body: where a dark
body interuening between and a light, obscures the light, there is the shadow.
Col. ^.17
The Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Law were shadows of Christ, wherein the
people did sit, having the light of the Gospel eclipsed and obscured to them,
for then the wisdom of God was a mystery and hid. Then was the new Testament
covered in the old, 1 Cor. 2.7. Ephesians. 3 5.
as the old is now discovered in the new. Now these shadows are fled away,
since the day of salvation is breathed forth in the rising of that Sun of
righteousness: We then that are not under the Law, must not desire any more
to sit under these shadows, Luke 1.78.
since the dayspring has visited us from on high. We have better shadows to
sit under: the first is the shadow of his flesh and humanity, through the which
the glorious light of his Divinity appeared, Ioh. 1.14.
and was seen as the glory of the only begotten of the father, full of grace
and truth. Under this shadow we must delight and sit, in this shadow we must
seek for rest, refreshment and safety. It is the shadow of his flesh whereby
we are saved; no salvation had been to man, except God had become man, we
should have had no comfort against sin, except in his flesh he had borne our
sins; we could have had no safety from the wrath of God, Psalm. 19.9.
except he in his flesh had borne it. But now our flesh may rest in hope, Ioh.
1.14. Hos. 13.14.
because the Word was made flesh: now we may laugh at death and destruction,
because by his death he has been the death of Death, and has saved us from
destruction. Oh! then let us still delight to sit under this shadow of his
flesh and humanity, which if it had not interuened between us and God, in his
wrath, as with a burning fire, we all should have been consumed. Blessed be
his holy name for ever and ever, for preparing such a shadow to cover us, Psalm.
32.1.
and blessed are they for ever and ever who delight under this shadow, whereby
in all their tribulations they are sweetly refreshed, whereby all their
iniquities are closely covered, and their souls are surely saved from the
wrath to come.

Neither is his flesh only, but his Word and Sacraments also are his shadows,
under the which we must delight to sit, 1. Cor. 13.12.
for as yet we see him not face to face, we see him not as he is, but in a
mirror, and in a riddle or obscure speech, for what is to be known of God here
by Word and Sacraments is nothing in respect of that we shall know hereafter, 1
Ioh. 3.2.
when we shall see him as he is, and know him as we are known of him:
Therefore in this chapter, verse 9. he is said to speak to us through a wall,
and to look to us through windows and lattesses. The Holy of holies was
covered with a Veil, which was rent in the suffering of our Lord, to show that
the mysteries of the Law were revealed and discovered in Christ, and as the
twilight of the Law was darkness in respect of the bright meridian Sunshine
of the Gospel, so is this of the Gospel in respect of that which is to be
revealed in the Kingdom of glory: even now in this Kingdom of grace the Lord
stands behind our wall, he speaks to us through a veil, he looks to us
through windows and lattesses: we see him in a mirror, and in a riddle, we
hear him speak as it were behind a wall in his Word, we see him look as it
were through lattessed windows in the holy Sacraments. These are all shadows
of Christ, in which we must delight to sit for safe protection, and refreshing
consolations, till that glorious day breath forth his light, and then shall
these shadows fly away. Ios 5.12.
Manna was the peoples food in the Wilderness, and ceased when they came to
Canaan: so by the Word and Sacraments we must be refreshed here, till we come
to Heaven our Canaan. But there do cease Word and Sacraments, which are but
shadows of things that be there, there shall be no use of the shadow, there
shall we not see him in a mirror, but as he is; there shall we not hear him as
behind a wall or veil, for all things that make partition betwixt us and our
Lord shall be taken away, there shall he speak to us mouth to mouth, there
shall he not look to us through lattessed windows, but with a discovered face,
and we shall be able to behold the glory of his face vnueiled, albeit
infinitely more glorious than the face of Moses, when he came down from the
Mount, 2 Cor. 3.7.
and could not be looked upon for the brightness of his countenance. Reu.
21.22, 23.
In that heavenly Jerusalem shall be no Temple, no Sun, no Moon, 1 Cor.
15.28.
for the Lamb is the light thereof, he shall be all in all immediately. But
till that day breath forth his light, we must not only content our selves, but
also delight our selves in these shadows, for without them he gives no
presence, we cannot hear him, nor see him but in them: except we delight to
sit in these shadows, his flesh cannot shadow us, his suffering in the flesh
cannot cover us from the wrath to come. And this is the third reason of the
souls delight in Christ, his sweet and comfortable fruits, which sweetness
the Church testifies by her experience; His fruit was sweet to my taste. Not
only does this Tree in regard of the shadow serve for safeguard and
refreshment, but in respect of the fruit, it serves also to comfort the hungry
and thirsty soul. The Lord promises to those that sit under this Tree, Isa.
49.10.
that the burning heat of the Sun shall not smite them, and that they shall
neither hunger nor thirst. Israel in the Wilderness had the cloud to cover
them and Manna to eat: Christ is both to us a Cloud to cover, and Manna to eat.
1 Cor. 10.3
Manna was a lively Sacrament of Christ, and hence it is called a spiritual
food, amongst other resemblances it had of Christ, all manner of good tastes
were in it, Wisd. 16.10. And so in Christ is every thing desirable, and every
thing delightful, he has the taste of the Wine, Ioh. 15.1. the taste of the
Olive, Romans 11.17. the taste of the honey and the honey comb, Cant. 4.11. the
taste and sent of all delicate spices, ibid. 13, 14. As here he has the taste
of the apple, yea of every good Apple, for so the original word Tapuach here
used does signify. And what I pray you else is meant hereby, but that he was
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45.7.
Ioh. 3.34.
and that he received not the spirit by measure. In a word, that the graces and
fruits of the spirit in him for us are of infinite variety and value, for by
him we have righteousness, peace and joy of the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. He is
made by the father unto us, our wisdom, justification, 1 Cor. 1.30
sanctification and redemption. By him we are made the righteousness of God.
2 Cor. 5.21 Col. 1.20.
By the blood of his Cross all things are pacified both in Heaven and Earth.
ibid. 21, 21.
By the body of his flesh we are reconciled. By his blood we have redemption,
even the remission of our sins. Ephesians. 1.7. Ephe. 2.13. Isa. 53.5. 2 Timothy 1.10
By his blood we that were far off are made near. By his stripes we are made
whole. By his death, death is destroyed, and life is brought to light. By his
death he has destroyed him who had the power of death; that is, the Devil,
Heb. 2.14, 15. Ephesians. 2.15. Gal. 3.
and we are delivered from the fear and bondage of death. By his flesh is
taken away the division and separation betwixt God and us. By his curse we are
saved from the malediction of the Law. By his poverty we are made rich. 2 Cor.
8. Ephesians. 2.
By his condemnation we are justified. Ephesians. 2.
By his death we have life. He is our peace. He is our advocate with the
father, 1 Ioh. 2. 1 Ioh.
and a propitiation for our sins. He takes away the sins of the world. He
saves us his people from our sins. He has torn in pieces the obligation
that was against us. Matthew. 1.
Col. 2.
He justifies the wicked by faith. Romans 4. Romans 5.1.
By him we are at peace with God. By him we have boldness with confidence to
draw near to God. Ephesians. 3.12.


In a word, he has all manner of delectable and good tastes, all things that
are to be desired are to be sound in him, Col. 2.10.
and in him we are complete. O admirable Tree that so abounds with such
fruits! O happy soul that tastes, and thrice happy soul that inioyeth the
sweetness of these fruits! Sweet so my taste. Some things be sweet of their
own nature, and in themselves, Judge. 14.18.
as is honey, according to that of Samsons riddle, What is sweeter than Honey?
Some things are sweet to the taste and mouth, which in themselves have no
natural sweetness, for to the hungry soul, even bitter things seem sweet;
hunger is a sauce that makes them sauory. The fruits of this Tree are most
sweet in themselves, yet not to every taste, not to the taste that is
preoccupied and vitiat with the sent of fleshly delights. The humor possessing
the taste suffers not the sweetness of these spiritual fruits to enter and
affect. As to those that are in an Ague, the bitter humor that infects their
taste, makes the sweetest and healthsomest things distasteful and unsavory: 1
Ioh. 2.5.
So the heart possessed with the love of the world, cannot be affected toward
God; things spiritual are abominable and distasteful to it. The natural man
given over to sinful and fleshly delights, perceives not the things that are
of the spirit of God, 1 Cor. 1.14
for they are insipide and unsavory to him; neither can he perceive them, for
they are spiritually discerned: as none can discern natural things but by a
natural soul, so spiritual things cannot be discerned but by a supernatural
spirit. His fruits are sweet to my taste, says the Bride. The Spouse of Christ
has the Spirit of Christ, therefore she can discern things belonging to his
Kingdom: and as they are most sweet in themselves, so are they to her taste.
Hence we may discern our selves; if we have the Spirit of Christ, we will
savor the things of the Spirit, Romans 8.
they will be most sweet and sauory to our taste, otherways we are sensual,
natural and carnal, the supreme faculty in us is a natural soul: for is not
the life of every living thing discerned by the operation thereof, it being
proportionable to the object affected by it? the herbs of the field thirst for
the sap of the earth, and the dew of Heaven, whereby they are nourished and
increased: whereupon we conclude that they have a natural life. The beasts of
the earth are affected toward things sensible, and by their appetite are
carried toward those things that be pleasant to their sense: Whereupon we
conclude, they have also a sensible life. And men without God affect things not
only by nature and sense, but also by reason: Whereupon we conclude, that they
have a reasonable soul. And whereas many, Mat. 6.32.
howbeit professed Christians, are affected and inclined only to things
natural, sensual, and such as are founded on reason, what can we conclude of
them, but that they live a life only natural, as do plants; sensual, as do
beasts; and reasonable, as do the heathen, and have no spiritual life at all.
Seeing their appetite does not carry them toward the things of God, Col. 3.1.
it is certain they live not the life of God; Romans 8.5.
and (profess what they will) Christ lives not in them by his Spirit,
otherways their desire would be toward him, their delight would be in him,
and his fruits would be sweet to their taste.

Let us study then to know our own misery, and Jesus Christ his excellency;
then our desire and languor will be toward him, our delight will be in him.
The soul that is weary of the burden of sin, will hunger and thirst after
his righteousness, will earnestly desire to rest and repose under his shadow.
The Spirit that feels the piercing Arrows of Gods wrath for sin, will
above all things seek to be covered with the saving shadow of his mercy. O
how sweet will his comfortable fruits be to the hungry and distressed soul,
that sees no life, no refreshment, no consolation, but in him and through him!

Now the Lord of life, that Father of mercies and God of all consolation, so
move us, so direct us, so affect us, that above all things we may seek him,
and find him, to his everlasting glory, and our eternal felicity, Amen.

A sweet and heavenly Prayer made for the help and direction of the weaker
sort of Christians in knowledge, and comfortable also for the stronger.
O Lord God, most glorious and merciful, who searchest the hearts and know
the thoughts of the sons of men, we thy unworthy servants do here at this
present most humbly present our selves before thee, ashamed and grieved for our
manifold sins committed against thee: Lord if thou should enter into
judgment with us according to our deseruings, we were not able to abide it,
if thou (O GOD) should strictly mark wherein the best of us all have erred
before thee, O Lord, who were able to endure it? for we are loath some,
leprous, and out of measure sinful: our minds so blinded, that we know nothing
that may make for our bliss: our judgments so shallow, that we cannot
conceive and rightly adiudge of holy and heavenly things: our memories so dull
and dead, that we can hold no good thought or holy meditation: our hearts so
hardened, that neither thy mercies nor judgments can bring us to obedience: our
wills so perverted, that we freely desire nothing but evil: our affections so
corrupted, that we lust for and delight in nothing but wickedness: our words
so vain and our works so vile, that we practice daily nothing but sinful
rebellion against thee: Lord therefore for Jesus Christ his sake be merciful
unto us thus miserable sinners: we are weary of these our sinful conditions,
and laden with these our damnable abominations, Lord be thou our refreshing.

Persuade our hearts (dear God) by faith, that our sins are forgiven us, our
souls reconciled unto thee, and our names written in the book of life: we are
instant suitors unto thee for this thy mercy, as was Moses upon the Mount, Lord
show us thy glory, and say unto our amazed souls, that thou art our salvation.

And we most humbly beseech thee to sanctify us all with thy holy and heavenly
fear, let thy Word and Spirit dwell in us in all wisdom plenteously, that
thereby our vile affections may be purified, our wicked minds renewed, and our
sinful lives most graciously amended, that as formerly we have given our
selves to profaneness, so ever hereafter we may apply our selves to
holiness: O that our ways were made so direct, that everlastingly we may
keep they commandments: O that we could do thy will on earth, as thine
Angels and glorified souls do it in Heaven.

Lord bless with us all thy Church and chosen, bless this sinful nation,
bless all our friends and kindred, bless this house and family, bless all
afflicted members, especially such as are wounded in conscience for their
sins, continue thy blessed Gospel unto us, and make us truly thankful for
all thy mercies.

And this night (we beseech thee) redouble thy blessings upon us that are
humbled in prayer before thee, bless us in body, bless us in soul, bless us
in the basket, bless us in the store, bless us in whatsoever belong unto us
within doors and without: give unto our bodies a comfortable rest and sleep,
pitch thine Angels about our tents, that nothing may destroy them, and keep
our souls from sleeping in sin and the seducings of Satan: that we (being
blessed of thee in soul and body in this world) may have the surer hope and
truer hold of everlasting salvation from thee at that screeching day of
judgment to come: and that for Jesus Christ his sake, who (we hope) at this
present intercedeth to thee for us, for a prosperous blessing from thee upon
us, to whom with thee and thy holy spirit (three persons, but one God) we
desire to return all glory, honor, dominion, and thanksgiving, this night and
everlastingly to come, both here on earth, and hereafter hopefully in Heaven.
Amen.

FINIS.

