TVVEEDS Tears of joy, to CHARLES great Britains King.
RUsh forth my billows in the roaring maine,
And rouse the Tritons of old Neptunes train,
Through the yast Ocean of the furthest shore,
To publish these our joys and triumphs over
The watrie world, whilst long-wingd flying fame,
To Nile and Ganges dwellers does proclaim
Our feasts and bone-fires, that both sea and land
May hear our happiness, and joyful stand:
To see great Charles (his anger smoothed) smile,
And kiss his mother; from whose love ere while,
Seditious sycophants had him estranged,
And sought (O wickedness! Heaven will reveng't)
To break that band, in which great Brittane stood
After so many ages, so much blood;
But were deceived at last: Hell, Rome, and Spain,
Thanks be to heaven, have spent their spite in vain,
Faiths great defender, world-divided King,
King of a world, which to thy wish can bring
All what thy pleasure, or thy power require,
To make thee happy in thy hearts desire:
If in this storm of joy and pompous throng
Old Tweed, thy Kingdoms limite (ah too long!)
May have access, and that thy gracious ear,
Will daigne his harsh and lowly song to hear,
While tears of joy his holy breast bedew,
And passion paints his cheeks with purple hew:
'T may be the freedom of his plain discourse,
Will not offend or make thee like him worse.
Two hundredth and five lustres did my streams
Run neutrall, and divide thy joined realms,
Which in times fullness thy wise happy Sire,
Sent from above combined in one Empire.
How often they changed their cristall into blood,
And saw their banks over shadowed with a wood
Of bristling lances, numbrous hosts and powers,
Whose might made right, and saccag'd towns and towers,
As wars ambiguous issue gave the lot
Of Thee and thine for ever be forgot:
Since now the Heavens have made thy Albion,
In palmie peace united All-be-one;
And still shall be (so long as days bright Carre
Does light the World) a world without a war.
Though Hell-born Python, and that cursed crew,
From whom the Serpents teeth to slaughter grew,
With poisoned tongues into thine ears have powered
Their venom, and unsheathed thy royal sword,
Against thy loyal Subjects: Seeking so
Both Churches fall, and Kingdoms overthrow.
The pride of priests thy power must maintain,
Be 't near so lofty, mutinous and vain.
Their sleeves as full of vengeance as of wind,
Swell proud if they least opposition find,
So high, that they thy Scepters help reclaim,
Which must support them both from hurt and blame,
And even the Crown the Mitre must uphold,
Whose horns point higher then thy pearls and gold.
O Heavens! Is that religions modest gate
To hoise a topsaile of such pomp and state?
Saint Peter's master never taught that lore;
Whose humble meekness is commended more.
These wolves disguised in lambskins, not content
To sow sedition till the state be rent,
Broach schisms, and superstitious heresies,
With power obtruded from their Hierarchies:
And make it now Church-treason to control
Their Canons which give body, law, and soul.
That Court which from the high Commissions name,
Did over all a jurisdiction claim,
And would at pleasure, fine, confine, and use
A boundless freedom, did thy power abuse,
And sought to take thy Scepter from thy hand,
Since Englands Prelates for that right did stand.
(And gained it by thy grant a few years since)
To separat the Church, and slight the Prince:
What e're their maine intentions aim to reach.
It Is thy prerogative they always preach.
Thine intrest still is next, thine Honor suffers,
When Church or Country shun what Popery proffers
Wrapped up in gaudie tires and glossing terms,
With cer'monies like exorcismes or charms.
And then thy Royal hand is either bound
To right thy self in them, or you are uncrownd:
Base impudence! The horned beast of Rome,
By such by-ways crept up in Caesar's room.
Conformity they urge, and grudge to see
Englands triumphant Church should greater be
Then Scotlands militant in wealth and power,
Which made the daughter erst the Dame devour.
And he who from a private Pedant late,
Could climb by favor a cathedral Seat,
Lookd down in scorn upon thy noblest Peers:
And sleight'd the Statsmans purple that he wears.
It Is strange Religion that should show the way
To others, should her self first go astray.
And laying all true piety aside,
For worldly ends, turn purity in pride.
Scotland was by their Conclave first ordained
To be the Theater, this Church unstained,
With Romish rites, which preached the Gospel pure,
The weakest thought, did seem the place most sure,
To act the Prelates plot, which Rome had laid,
And meant with great applause to have it played:
The Common Prayer was the name it had,
Written (as was alleged) by Bishop Laad:
Strange scenes, new songs; and action, masks, and clothes,
Had made it fine, with many pretty shows,
If it had been presented: But it found
So hard a welcome, that the name did wound
The peoples hearts and ears, who begged with tears,
No puppet play might interrupt their prayers:
The Bishops railed and ragd to be refusde,
Cursde, swore, the Church and King were both abusde,
If so the rascal multitude withstood,
What ever sort of worship they found good:
And calling Thee from out thy royal cares,
To countenance (great King) that plot of theirs,
Could so prevail with their pernicious lies,
To make Thee in thine anger, arm and rise,
As if thine honor at the stake had layne,
And Scotland now rebellious arms had taine.
My Nymphs did shroud them in their sedgie bowres,
At thy reproach, and frighted left their flowers,
Their sport and dancing, where the harmless Swains,
In both my banks sat piping. Hills and plains,
A plantive Echo sent, at the dread sound,
Of drums and trumpets, squadrons marching round.
Yea, I my self surprised with the sight,
Mine eyes mistrusted which were dazzled quite.
With glancing helmes and shields; so proud a train,
Since blessed Elizas days and happy reign,
I had not seen, when wars did end in peace,
And Britain on my banks did first embrace
Thy happy Sire. O Charles! my hoarie head
I hung for sorrow, and my heart did bleed
To see the iron age return again,
Where thine own hands should in thy bowels stain
Thy burning-brand. Accursed be, I said,
These Hell-borne monsters, have this mischief bred;
While here no noise, no breach of peace, nor jarre,
As was of old, gave fire unto the war.
Yet when thy royal breast began to ponder,
The state of things, amazed with joy and wonder,
To find thy Scotland (far from what they made her,
Whose wicked counsels wished thee to invade her)
Fall at thy feet, her self and arms lay down,
Which she (but to defend Gods Church, thy Crown,
Her Laws and liberties) did threatened take,
No boot nor conquest over my stream to make,
And from that due obedience, loyalty,
Had never swervde, which once she swore to Thee.
Thou sawst (dread Prince) thy mothers Churches tears
Wipt them away, and cleard thy countries fears:
That King by whom Kings reign, both knew thy grief,
And her affliction, which required relief.
And He it was inspirde thy royal heart
TO accept thy Subjects love, and to avert
That storm of wrath, which brought thee to these bounds,
Big swollen with fury, breathing death and wounds.
What ever false aspersion has been put
Upon thy people, here thou foundst it not.
The black-mouthd Hell Hounds that did belch their gall,
To make them foul, and in thy vengeance fall:
Now lurk in darkness, and their faces hide,
And dare, nor can not Truths pure light abide.
But God will rouse them, and his justice rod
Shall scourge them that dare jump with King and God.
Now that these clouds are cleared, which darkened late
Thy royal favor from this Land and State,
Go on great King in glory, shine forth bright,
And grace thy native Scotland with thy sight,
Embrace her zeal, the captived Church deliver,
Whose vows and prayers, have wished thee happy ever.
And called to witnesses Heaven and Earth, if she
Has in least thought declined thy power or thee,
Repair these breaches Schismatics have made,
Whose tyran yoke, Religion bond-slave led,
To compass their unluckie ends, and take
A power to them, which should thine weaker make.
So shall heavens blessing shield thy happy throne,
And of the Stewarts race shall never want one
To swey great Britains Scepter, while the sun
To light this lower world, his race shall run.
From priests whose pride is temporal and great,
Usurpers in the Government and State,
From factious firebrands, from dissembling Doctors,
Loyola's loyal ministers and Proctours,
From Romes emissaries, and all that seek
The Church and Kingdoms happy peace to break:
Great Charles, our hopeful Hercules set free
This land, which looks to be relieved by Thee.
And purge it so, no dregge nor filth remain,
That does refer to Rome, or smell of Spain:
Then shall thy Britain prosper, and thy reign
Bring to the world the golden age again.
But since all now is one, that Thames and Tweed
An equal interest in thy person plead,
And seek who shall be nighest, though I claim
Thy birth and cradle, yet I do not aim
At such a Sovereign share, as to possess
Thee all alone, that he may have the less.
Whom heavens have joined, no earthly power shall sever,
And thou shall be a like to both for ever.
Though thou be pleased to bless with thine abode,
His happy banks, and seldom come abroad,
To grace me with thy presence, I presume
In thy affection Tweed with Thames does come
In equal balance. But I grieve to see
Some wicked spirits strive to poison thee,
With lies and railing, (if they could) to make
Thee hate thy Country and their love forsake.
These vipers hatched in venom, spew their spite
In Pasquills, Ballads, striving to excite
Thy fury, and revive the long unquenchd fire,
Whose ashes drenched in blood of thine Empire,
The ground stone-laid and labor to defame
Thy noble Ancestors with scorn and shame:
What battles erst were in old quarrels fought,
Before this happy Union could be wrought,
They now reproach, and vaunt strange victories,
Of prisoner Kings, which were but treacheries:
For when first James a child, and bowne for France,
Through storm cast in at Flambourgh by chance,
Was contrare to all court'sie, law, and right
Detained by treason, but not taken in fight,
The conquests glory was not very great,
Nor can they boast so much of our defeat.
But will these villains call to mind how once,
When Englands crown was lost, the royal ones,
By proud usurping Steven dispossessed,
Who did himself into the throne invest;
That second Henry with his Uncles aid,
Scotlands third Alexander, who did invade
With mighty powers that Kingdom, and constrain
Th'usurper to restore their crown again:
They Will say that Scotland could for them do more
Then they could for themselves, and them restore,
To Crown and Kingdom, though she boast it not,
But (with more favors) has it quite forgot.
Great King confound these monsters, crush their necks,
That would disturb our peace with flowts and checks,
Tyburnes triangle trees their portion be,
That so do slight thy Country, scoff at thee.
One thing thy Tweed would humbly beg for all,
Great Charles, and prostrate at thy feet does fall,
To gain thy grant. Thou see what armed bands
Thy will can raise, and even thy wink commands.
They if thou speak the word, can sack proud Rome,
And give the Law for Thee to Christendom:
While yet their arms are clear, their courage hot,
Do not, O mighty King! dissolve them not,
But let Eliza lead them to her Rhine,
And repossesse her there. Her cause is thine;
These hopeful Princes, that Thee Uncle call,
Pearls of that Crown, which from her head did fall:
All beg the same, and even with tears entreat,
Brave Rupert may at liberty be set,
And that thy Scots may on proud Isters streams
Their valor show, and with thy Nephews names,
In wounds and blood on Vienns battered walls,
Which boast that royal spoil, and Princes thrals.
So may thou mighty Monarch live and reign
In glory, till that King return again,
Who shall with endless glory crown thy brows,
And lead thee to these joys which heart not knows,
Eye has not seen, nor can the Soul conceive,
Until he do it of free grace receive:
May earth all fear and love Thee, and thy name
Fill all the world with never-dying fame,
FINIS*

