Heir follows the coppie of the ressoning which was betuix the Abbote of
Crosraguell and John Knox, in Mayboill concerning the mass, in the year of
God, a thousand five hundredth three scoir and two years.

Apocalips. xxij. For I protest unto every man that hears the words of the
prophecy of this book: If any man shall add unto these things, God shall
add unto him the plagues, that are written in this book. Imprinted at
Edinburgh by Robert Lekpreuik, and are to be sold at his house, at the nether
bow.

Cum priuilegio.

1563.

John Knox unto the reader, wishes grace mercy and peace, from God the
Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ: with the spirit of righteous
judgment.
AFter that the Prophet Isayas in great vehemency, had rebuked the vanity of
Idolles, and Idolaters as in the 40. Isa. 40 and 41.
and 41. chapters, of his prophecy does appear, at last he bursteth forth in
these words. Let them bring forth there Gods (saeth he) that they may shaw
unto us things that are to come, or let them declare unto us things that have
been done before. etc. Shaw things that are to come, that we may understand
you to be Gods, let you do either good or evil, that we may declare it. By
which words, the Prophet does as it were in mockage, provoke Idolaters, and
the Idols to produce for them selves, some evident testimonies by the which
me^ might be assured, that in them was power, and that there religion had
approbation of God. which when they could not do, he is bold to prononce this
sentence: Behold ye are of nothing, Isa. 41.
and your making is of nothing, abomination has chosen you. In which words
the Prophet damneth, both the Idols, and the Idolaters. The Idols, because
they can declare nothing to prove any power or wertue to be in them, why they
should be worshipped as Gods. And the Idolaters, because from Gods month they
could bring no assurance of there addulterat and usurped religion. If this
reasoning of the Prophet, had sufficient strength in his aige, to shaw the
vanity of the Idols, and the phrenetick foolishnes of such as worshipped
them: then may the godly this day most assuredly conclude against the great
Idol presented by the Papists to be worshipped in there mass, and against
the patrons of the same: that it and they are vain, foolish, odious, and
abominable before God. It, because it has mo makers then ever had the Idols
amongst the Gentiles: and yet has no greater power, then they had. Albeit it
has been worshipped as God him self. And they because, they worshipped there
own imagination, and the workmanship of there own hands, without any
assurance of God or of his word. If any think that I speak more liberally, then
I am able to prove, let him consider what makers the Idols of the Gentiles
had, and what makers the God of bread has. And then let the power of both be
compared, and let me be rebuked, if I speak not the treuth. The Prophet in
description of there vanities, makes these gries. The earth brings forth the
tree, it grows by moistour, and natural wacknes, it is cutted down by the
hand of the hew ^t. A part thereof is burnt, a part spent in uses necessary
to man, an other part chosen to be made an Idol. This is formed to the
licknes of man or woman, and then set up and worshipped as a God. All these and
some mo, shall we find to assist and concur in the making of this great God
of bread. The wheat is sown and nourished in the earth, rain, dew, and heat
bring it to maturitie. The reaper or scherer cutteth it down, the carte or
fled, drawn by horse or some other beast, draws it to the barn, or to the
barnaird. The tasker, or the foot of the ox tradeth it out. The fan delivers
it from the chaff. The millar, and the milstones by the help of wind or watter,
makes it to be meall. The smith makes the yrnes, that gives to that God, his
lenth and breaid, licknes and form. The fine substance of that God is nether
wood, gold, nor silver, but watter and meal made i^ manner of a dra^mock. And
then must the workmen take good head to there hand. For if the fire be to hot,
that Gods skin must be burnt, if the yrnes be evil dight, his face will be
blecked, if in making the roundnes, the ring be broken, then must an oher of
his fellows, receive that honor to be made a God, and the crased or cracked
miserable caik, that ones was i^ hope to be made a God, must be given to a
babby to play him withal. And yet is not all the danger past, for if there be
not an anointed priest to play his part aright, all the formar artificers have
lost there labor, for without him that God can not be made: yea, if he have
not intention to consecrate, the fashioned God remaueth bread, and so the blind
people committ Idolatry.

These are the artificers and workmen that travel in making of this God: I
think as many in number, as the Prophet recites to have traveled in making of
the Idols. And if the power of both shall be compared, I think they shall be
found in all things equal, except that the God of bread is subject unto mo
dangers then were the Idols of the Gentilles. Men made them. Men make it. They
were deaf and dum, it can not speak, hear nor see. Briefly in infirmity, they
wholly aggre, except that (as I have said) the poor God of bread is most
miserable of all other Idols. For according to there matter whereof they are
made, they will remain without corruption many years. But within one year,
that God will putrify, and then he must be burnt. They can abide the
vehemency of the wind, frost, rain, or snow. But the wind will blow that God
to the sea, the rain or the snow will make it dagh again, yea, which is most of
all to be feared, that God is a pray (if he be not well kept) to rattes and
mise. For they will desire no better denner then white round Gods ynew. But o
then what becomes of Christ's natural body? by myrackle, it flies to the
heaven again, if the papists teach treulie, for how sone soever the mouse
takes hold, so sone flies Christ away and lets her gnow the bread. A bold
and puissant mouse, but a feeble and miserable God? Yet would I ask a question,
whether has the priest or the mouse greater power? by his words it is made a
God, by her teith it cease to be a God. Let them auise, and then answer. If
any think that I oght not to mock, that which the world so long has holden,
and great Princes yet hold in so great veneration. I answer, that not only
I, but also all godly oght not only to mock, but also to curse and detest,
whatsoever is not God, and yet usurps the name, power, and honor of God. And
also that we oght both to mock, gain say, and abhor, all religion obtruded to
the people, without assurance of God and his word, having nether respect, to
antiquity, to multitude, to authority, nor estimation, of them that mantean
the same. The Idols of the Gentiles were more ancient, then is the Idol in
the mass. There worshippers, manteners, and patrons, were mo in multitude,
greater in authority, and more excellent before the world, then ever was any
that bowed to that Idol. Isa. 4^
And yet feared not the Prophet Isayas to mock and jest them, yea, sharply to
rebuke them, in these words. They are dung backward with shame, they shall be
ashamed, whosoever trusts in a graven image, and that say to the molten
image, Isa. 44.
ye are our Gods. All the makers of graue^ images are vain, there pleasing
things shall not proffet them. For they themselves are witnesses, to there
Idols, that they nether se, nor understand any thing, and therefore they
shall be ashamed, who then (says he) shall forge a God? or a molten image that
profits nothing? behold all those that are of the fellowship thereof shall be
confounded, for the workmen them selves are men, let them all be gathered
together, and stand up, yet they shall fear and be confounded together. And
when he has fully painted forth there vanity, he concludes. They have not
understand, for God has shut up there eyes, Blindness and induration is Gods
just punishment for Idolaters.
that they can not see, and hearts, that they can not understand, none
considers in his heart, I have brunt half of it, even in the fire, and have
baken bread also upon the coalles thereof I have roasted flesh and earen it,
and shall I make the residew thereof an abomination, shall I bow to the stock
of a tree? etc. Thus, I say, we see, how that the Prophet does triumph against
the Idolaters, in mocking of there madness, and painti^g forth of there vanity.
Who then can justly be offended against me or any other albeit by all means
possible, we let the blind world see, the vanity of that Idol? considering
that by it, has the glory of God been more obscured, then ever it was by any
Idol in the earth. For to none was never absolutely given, Let the Papists
consider
the name, nature, power, and honor of God, but to that Idol allone. If any
think that the Scriptures of God give unto them patrocinie, either to believe
Christ's natural body to be there, after the words of consecration (as they
call them) either yet to believe that Christ Jesus, in his last Supper, did offer
unto God his Father his body and blood, under the forms of bread and wine, he
is miserably deceived, for the Scripture makes no mention, of conversion or
transubstanciation of bread in Christ's natural body, but witnesses that
bread remaneth bread, yea eue^, when the faithful receive the same, 1. Cor 10
as the Apostle affirms in these words. The bread that we break, is it not
the communication of Christ's body? the cup of blissing which we bliss, is it
not the communion of the blood of Christ^^ we many, are one bread, and one
body, because we are all partakers of one bread. And after he says, 1. Cor.
11.
as of^ as ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye show the
Lords death till he come. Let therefore, a man try himself and so let him eat
of this bread, and drink of this (...) etc. By these words we may clearlie
understand, what judgment the Apostle had of the substance of that Sacrament,
even in the very action of the same. And as touching that foolish opinion,
that Christ Jesus did offer his body unto God his Father, under the forms of
bread and wine. etc. (which the Papists make the ground of there mass) what
suffrage that ever it has by man, of God, nor of his word, it has none. Ioh.
3.
The Scripture does witness that God the Father gave his Sone unto the world,
that the world might be saved by him, and that Jesus Christ did offer him self
ones unto God, Heb. 10 and 9.
for the destruction of sin, and for to take away the sins of many, but
that ever he did offer him self under the forms of bread and wine (as the
Papists allege) the holy Ghost does no where make mention. And therefore the
faithful not only may reject it as the dream and invention of man, but also
are bound to abhor and detest it as a doctrine brought in by Satan, to deceive
such as delight not in the verity of God, to whose (...) and voice are the
faithful only ^ou^^. M. Quintyne that great patron of the mass, in this
subsequent conference, Master Quintynes affirmative.
a^^^ieds for the probation of his affirmative, Christ Jesus did offer (says
he) unto God his Father, in his last Supper his body and blood, under the
forms of bread and wine. etc. For the probation hereof, I say he adduces the
fact of Melchisedec that brought forth bread and wine. Genesis 14.
etc. But how sone he is ashamed thereof and how unable he is to prove that
which he alleges to be most easy to be prouen, the diligent reader may
es^y. For perceauing him self unable ever to prove, Luk the ressonig of the
third day.
that either Christ Jesus or yet Melchisedec, did make any such oblation, as
he and the fond Papists do imagine. He ri^neth straight to his fortres and
shameless schift. O says M. Quintyne, I have hurt my own cause, I was carried
away with zeal etc. It apperteaned not unto me to prove any thing, but to
defend my artickles as they are written. If M. O. and his collat^ralles will
resolve me an dout, then will I give my judgment, whether he oght to prove, or
to defend only. My dout is this, whether are M. Quintynes artickles necessary
to be believed to Salvation, or are they such as without danger of damnation,
we may dout of them? If we may dout of them and not offend God, then assuredly
I think that M. Quintyne may hold them for treuth, til that the falshead of
them be manifestly declared. But if they be such as we are bound to believe as
a treuth of God, and an doctrine necessary to Salvation, then is M. Quintyne
bound to shaw to us that God has prononced them, and not man. which if he be
not able to do, and that in plain and expressed words, then must we reject
them as deceauable, Ioh. 10.
and falls, according as we be taucht by our master Christ Jesus saying: My
sheip hear my voice, but a stranger they will not hear. If M. Q. will not be
reputed an falls Prophet, and one that teaches lies in the name of God, and so
expone him self to Gods here displeasure, he may propone no doctrine to the
Church of God, the assurance whereof, he brings not from the mouth of God. If
M. Q. were brawling in the scooles, or bragging of knowledge amongst the
Philosophers, I would pacientlie abide, that he should affirm as many
paradoxes, as pleases him. But in the Church of God to affirm that God has
spoken, when God has not spoken, or done that which he is not able to prove,
by his plain word, that he has done, so to do (I say) is altogether
intolerable, and therefore let M. Q. search the Scriptures, for the probation
of his affirmative, or else I will cry als loud as I can, that he has lost his
cause, and is convicted an manifest lear: in that he has affirmed Jesus to
have done that, which no Scripture does witness, that he has done. Let all men
therefore that will not follow lies, detest the mass, till that it find a
ground within the book of God, as I am assured it never shall. And that shall
the reader more easylie perceive, by this conference that follows.

Read and then judge.



The abbotes first letter.
M. Quintyne.
John Knox I am informed, that etc ar cum in this cuntrie, to fe^^ disputation,
and in special to mak^ ^^pugnation to certane artickles quh^^^ war pronunced
and reheirsed be me to my stock, in Kirkoswald on sunday last was (treulie I
will not refuse disputation with ow) bot may ^^^nstlie and effectuouslie
couatis the sa^in, (...) it may be to ye glory of God, and trial of ye
treath, like as I haif, ye rest of ye ministers, ^uhilk h^s been heir, and culd
haifna^e. Quhair ^ore gif^t pleis ow this day viij days in ^ay house of Mayboi^
e pleis, prouidand always their be na com^cation passand xii^vj or xx on ather
side, quhil^ is ane sufficient number: to beir witness be^uir us, I sal enter in
restoring with ow, and God willing fall defend ye saides artickles be ye
manifest word of God, and all good resson, as (...) a^ writtin, and in special
ye artickle concern^^^ ye mess. e salbe sure e (...) ressaif na im^^^^^ of me,
nor ^a^^ that me p^^^nis, nor na^y (...) of molest^tio^ in w^^d ^or work, bot
familiar, formal, and ^^^ll restoring; and think not y^^ this is done for
^^i^^ng of time; (...) be ressone I am ^^^^eit and (...) be my Lord of
Cos^^^is, in name and (...) of the counsel, (...) (...) or any other (...) his
returning in the cuntrie, quhais command I haif promised to obey, nottheles and
he cum not betuix and the said day, I sall discharge my promis to him with
diligence, quhairthrouch e, and all vthers may se how desirous I am that ye
treuth cum to ane trial but drifting of time. Als e may be sure that I am
verray desirous to haif my Lord of Ca^^llis (as my chief and brother sone) and
vthers my brether and freindes, quhom of I haif charge, to be auditors,
quhairthrow gif it pleis God they micht haif proffet of our ressoning, and gif
e pleis to accept this condition, send me our promise under our hand writ, and I
sall send ow the foresaid artickles to awise on, to this day viii days, and in
the meine time e may provide to be auditors sic as e pleis, conform to the
number above ^^heirsed, and I the like, and gif e will nawise enter in
ressoning without co^uocation of strangers, the haill world may se, it is ^ot
per^^rbario^, tumultuation, and cummer that e seik, under the pretense of the
true setting forth of Gods word, and glo^e, and this I certify ow, I will
not enter in disputation with ow, gif e eu^^ with co^uocation, for I will nawise
be the instrument of discord, The answer thereof was se^d. But my lord maid no
reply.
a^^ als it is not necessar etc ^^m with convocation of strangers, ^e (...) e
ha^ my Lord of Camilis pro^^e qu^^ (...) to ow, and all the ^est wi^^^^
Ca^tick, and in ye ^^ines ^^ne e pleis to (...) confu^ation of yo^^ ^^^gisme
qu^^^ I (...) and to ow with the L^^d of (...) el^^e^, and gif ye (...) the
samin weill, e ar mair able to make impugnation to mine. Of their heides I
require our answer in writ, with this herat with diligence quhaitthrow I may
send away to my Lord of Cassillis as said is. And sa fair e weill, of
Crosraguell this Sunday, the ser^ of September.

Crofraguell


the answer to the abbotes first lettter.
John Knox.
THe treuth is, that the cause of my coming in these parts (...) not of
purpose to seak disputation, but simply to propone unto the people Jesus
Christ ^cussed, to be the only Savior of the world, and to teach further,
what are the fruits that God requires of the members of his dear sone. etc.
But heauing that ye had in oppen audience proclaimed blasphemous artickles,
making promise to give further declaration of certane of the^, this last Sunday,
likewise in oppen assembly, I could not but of conscience, offer my self to be
your aduersat in that ^ace. And this far for the cause of my coming esterday
to k^^hos wai^.

That ye have required disputation of the ministers (of whom some are yet
present) and could have none, I hardly believe it, the contrary being assured
to me by diverse of honest report.

That ye offer unto me familiar, formal, and gentill reasoning with my whole
heart I accept the condition. For assuredly my Lord (so I style you by reason
of blood and not of office) chiding and brawling I utterly abhor, but that ye
require it to be secret, I nether se just cause why that ye should require it,
nether yet good reason why that I should grant it. If ye fear tumult asye
pretex, that is more to be feared where many of evil mind have a few quiet and
peceable men in there danger, then where a just multitud may against and
violence, if it be offered. Of my Lord of Cassilles promise, I nothing dout as
touching my own person, for I stand in the protection of the Almighty, to
whom I render hartly thanks, when his mercy and power boweth the hearts of
men, to assist the cause of the just.

But I wonder with what conscience ye can require private conference of those
artickles that ye have publicly proponed? Ye have infected the ears of the
simple? Ye have wounded the hearts of the godly, and ye have spoken blasphemy
in oppen audience. Let your own conscience now be judge, if we be bound to
answer you in the audience of 20. or 40. of whom the one half are already
persuaded in the treuth, and the other perchance so addicted to your error,
that they will not be content, that light be called light, and darcknes,
darcknes. If ye be a pastor as ye brag your self to be, ye oght to have respect
to your whole flock, yea, to the instruction of all those, that are offended at
your blasphemies. But now to grant unto you, more the^ reason, I am content of
the greatest number appointed by you, provided first that the place be. S.
Iohnes kirk in Air, which is a place more convenient then any house in Mayboill.
Seco^darlie, that Noters and Scribes be appointed faithfully to take and commit
to regester, in oppen audience, both your reasones, and mine, that so we may
aswea^^ avoid confusion and vain repeticion in speaking as forclos the
diversity of rumors, which may arise by reason of oblivion, what has been
spoken by ather party. The day by you required. I can not keep, by reason of
my formar promise made to the master of Maxwel, and unto the Churches of
Niddisdall, and Galloway. But if ye will send unto me, your artickles before the
15. of this instant, I shall appoint the day, which by the grace of God I shall
not faill. If ye send your artickles to the baillies of Air, it shall be
sufficient discharge for you. And thus craving your answer, I hartlie desire
God if his good pleasure be, so to molifie your heart, that ye may prefer his
eternal treuth, contained and expressed in his holy word, to your own
preconceaued opinion. From Air this 7. of September. 1562. in haist.

Youres to command in all godliness. John Knox


the abbotes second letter, whereunto answer is made briefly to every head of
the same.
M. Quintyne. John Knox I ressaned your writing, this monu^day the seuint of
September, and considered the heides thairof, and first quhair e say, our
cu^ming in this cuntrie, was not to seik disputation, but simply to propone
unto the people, Jesus Christ crucified, to be the only Savior of the world,
praise be to God, that was na newingis in this cuntrie, or e war borne.


John Knox. I greatly dout, if ever Christ Jesus was treulie preached, by a
papisticall prelat or monk.


M. Quintyne. Secondly, quhair e allege that I proclaimed in oppen audience
blasphemous artickles (he is ane evil judge that condemnis or he knows) than
had been time to ow to haif called them blasphemous, quhen e had seen them, red
them, and sufficiently confutated them.


John Knox. I had hard them, and thereof I feared not to pronunce them such as
they are.


M. Quintyne. Thridly, quhair e allege that I promised declaration of the
saides artickles, on Sunday last was, my promise was (as my hand writ will
testify) to do the samin, prouidand always yair had been na convocation of
strangers, quhairthrow tumultuation and cu^mer micht follow, and swa was I
exonered of my promise, in that, e come their conuoied with v. or vj. scoir of
strangers.


John Knox. I lay the night before in Mayboil, accompanied with fewer then
tuentie.


M. Quintyne. Apperantlie mair like to seik perturbation and cu^mer, nor the
glory of God. Als I was inhibeit be my Lord of Cassillis to his return in the
cuntrie, as I wrait to ow of before, for avoiding of cu^mers. Ferdlie, gif I
required disputation of John Villock, and als of master george Hay, gif they
had ocht to say to any warkes set forth be me, I report me to the auditor, and
als gif they refused or not, to the time they had auised with the counsel and
the brethren.


John Knox. Master george Hay offered unto you disputation but ye fled the
barras.


M. Quintyne. Quhair to say e can not per^ai^ ^^hairfore. I sold desire ^^ere
it desputation. Treulie it is not secreit, that is in the presence of al
persons. Quhair e say e do^^ not of my Lord of Cassillis promise, as (...) your
(...) person. Treulie apperanlie e refer als lytil (...) his ^omes as e may,
considering e ^ome conuoyed with ^ie one number of strangers as is above
reheirsed. Quhair e say, e stand in the protection of the Almichtie, swa dois
all good christian men as e, bot apperanlie e put als lytil in Gods handis as
e may, that gois accompanied in every place, quhairsumeuer e go with sic
multitude, quhidder it be for devotion, or protection, or rather tumultuatio^
God knawis, for I know not.


John Knox. Ye do well to suspend judgment.


M. Quintyne. Quhair e wonder with quhat conscience I can require private
conference (treulie I haif money good ressonis mouand me) first to avoid
tumultuation, perturbation, and cummer.


John Knox. Your reasones are as stark to your self, as ye think them.


M. Quintyne. Secondly, that we may haif ane ressonable number that may beir
witness of both our pairtes, but clamor or tumultuation. Thridly, I am certane
gif we cum to the just trial of the treuth, chair man be conference of money
buikes, quhilk can not be done co^modiously in public audience. Attoure it
will be mair handsum and easy for me, nor misteris not sic crying out, as gif it
(...) in oppe^ audience, for gif ye victory consist in clamde, or cryi^g out,
I will quite you ye cause but father pley, and it praise be to God, I may
quhisper in sic manner as I will be hard sufficiently in the largest house in all
catrick.


John Knox. The larger house, the better for the auditor and me.


M. Quintyne. Quhair e say I haif infected the earis of the simple I haif
wounded the hearts of the godly, and I haif spoken blasphemy in oppen
audience. I meruell how e foret our self, chidand and railland on this manner.


John Knox. The speaking of the treuth is chiding unto you.


M. Quintyne. Considering e said ane lytill before, e did abhor all chiding and
railling, bot nature passis nurtor with aw.


John Knox. I will nether interchange, nature nor nurtor with you, for all the
proffets of Crosraguell.


M. Quintyne. Quhairfore I man beir with our babline and barking, as dous
Preices, hear poweris Maiestrates, and money hundrethes better nor I. Quhair e
esteem me as ane bragand Pastor, say and, that I ^^cht to haif respect to my
haill flock. It is question to me gif it de the weill of my flock, to make oppen
disputation in profound mysteries concerning the christian religion, but it
will I not refuse gif any man will make impugnation, but convocation of
strangers, or tumultuation, I haif hard of public disputation in scoulis, but
not before ^ne vulgar and rude multitude of people.


John Knox. Ye are not then so weall ^^ne in the ancient writers as ye brag.


M. Quintyne. Quhair e desire me to cum to dispute in S. Iohnes Kirk of Air, e
may be sure I will not dispute with ow their, My lord delytes in ryme without
reason.
for money good ressonis, quhilkis to write, war over prolitt, bot gif e pleis
to conueine according to my first writing, I salbe ready at all times, upon
viii. days warning, and sall send you the artickles viij. days before to auise
with. And sa fait ye weill. Of Crosraguell with diligence, the famine day and
day. CROSRAGUELL.


John Knox. THis letter was none otherwise answered for that time, but by
appointing unto him the place, according to his own desire, albeit that no
reason could have required that of me.



The Earl of Cassilis letter.
After hartlie commendation, forsameklil as I understand their is ane
disputation appointed betuix you, and the abbote of Crosraguell in Mayboill,
the xxviij. of this instant, to the quhilk I am not willing that any of mine
make disputation with ow, except it cum of our occasion, for I can not
understand that any erudition fall proceid to the auditor of the famine, bot
rather contradiction and tumult, the quhilk. I wald sold not be for our pairt,
like as I am willing to cause the abbote of Crosraguel to dissist. As to
quhasaeuer that will proffer them self to preach the true word, conform to the
consuetude of the realm, may do the famine without impediment as I wrait to ow
of before, in any of my rowmes. And desires ow to write me ane answer of this
writing, and God keip ow. Of Saint Iohnes chapel the xxiij. of September.
1562.

Be our good friend. Cassillis


the answer to my Lord of Cassillis writing.
John Knox.
AFter hartlie commendation, of my service unto your lordship, your L. letter
dated at S. Iohnes chapel the xxiii. of this instant, received I in Vghiltrie
the xxv. of the same. As touching the disputation appointed, the occasion did
procead of the abbote, who in oppen audience of the people, did propone
certain artickles, whereof the most part conteane deceauable doctrine, which
nottheles he promised not only to explain, but also to manteane against any
that would impugn the same. Whereof I being advertised, and so near in the
country could do no les then offer my self adversary to that doctrine, which I
am assured shall be certain damnation, to all those that without repentance
depart this life, infected with the same. And upon that motive I repared to
Kirkoswald, where because the abbote compered not, I preached, and after the
Sermon a seruand of the abbotes presented unto me a letter, conteaning in
effect, that as he had required disputation of the other ministers, so did he
of me, and did appoint unto me, that day eight days in Mayboill. My answer
was, that to dispute I was hartlie content, but because I had before appointed
ye master of Maxwel to be in Dumfreis that same day, I desired the day to be
prolonged, to my returning from Nethesdaill. In this mean time by letters past
betuix us the xxviij. of this instant is appointed which day be the grace of
God I mind to keap. Nether yet in my judgment is there any just fear of
tumult, for the persons that shall conuene with me, will promise and keap all
quietness, and of your lordship I nothing dout but ye will take such ordour
with your freindes, that by them there shall no occasion of trouble be offered,
and albeit that the erudicion shall not perchance be such as the godly would
desire, yet I dout not both the verity and the falshead shall appear in
there own colors, albeit not to all, yet to such as either have ears to hear
ye treuth plainly spoken, or eyes to discern darcknes from light. Let the
abbote judge if he had just occasion to accuse me as he after does.
And therefore I would most humbly require of your lordship, rather to provoke
and encurage your friend to the said disputation, then in any manner to stay
him, for if your lordship do consider that whil, that he oppenlie preaches one
thing, and we an other, that the hearts of the people are distract, yea, and
inflambed one against another, your lordship should rather fear tumult and
trouble to ensew thereof, then of mutual conference, in the audience of
peceable and quiet men. The number is not great that is admitted to hear, and
therefore trouble is les to be feared. Please your lordship to understand that
the verity oght to be to us, more dear then our own lives, and therefore we
may not leave the mantenance of the same, for fear of that whereof the ishew
is in the hands of God, to whose protection I most hartlie commit your
lordship. Of Vghiltrie in haist the same hour your lordships letter was
received. 1562.

Yours lordship is to command in all godliness. John Knox


the abbotes third letter answered by mouth.
M. Quintyne.
John Knox I persaif the policy used be ow and vthers, to make my awin ay my
party. The last time e come in this cuntrie, Brag o^t
I was persuaded be my Lord of Cassillis not to rancounter ow, or else treulie e
should not haif passed vnrancou^tered as e did, bot e salbe assured I sal keip
day and place in Mayboill according to my writing, and I haif my life, and my
feit louse, notwithstanding any writing that is cumin to me, fra my Lord of
Cassillis, therefore keip tryst, and excuse ow not upon my Lord of Cassillis
writing, notwithstanding that I know it is purchest be our policy, Ye know
that, as ye know that melchisedec offerred bread and wine unto God, which two
ye are never able to prove
to put me to schame, and our self to aduansment, quhilk sall not ly in our
power, thairfore I assure ow, in case I sold do the samin with the haissart of
my life, do e the like without excuse. And sa fair e weill. Of Crosraguell this
xxiiij. of September. 1562. Attoure that their be na convocation bot conform
to our writing, or else three scoir at the may, of the quhilkis tuentie to be
auditors on ather side.

CROSRAGUELL.


The abbotes fourt letter.
M. Quintyne.
John Knox and baiillies of Air, this present is till advertise ow that I
ressaued writing and credit with this gentle man, fra my Lord of Cassillis,
certifi and me that he will keip day appointed for our disputation, thairfore
keip our promise, and pretex na ioukrie be my Lord of Cassillis writing. And
this fair e weill. Of Crosraguell the xxv. of September. 1562.

CROSRAGUELL.


The answer to the abbotes fourt let.
John Knox.
TO nether of these did I answer otherwise, then by appointing the day, and
promising to keap the same. For I can pacientlie suffer wa^tone men to speak
wanto^lie, considering that I had sufficiently answered my Lord of Cassillis
in that behalf.


SOme other letters are omitted because they were of les importance, follow the
condictons.

THe day hour, conditions and number aggreid upon, for the conference betuix
master Quintyne Kennedy abbote of Crosraguell, and John Knox minister at
Edinburgh.
The day is the xxviij of September. 1562. The place the Prouestis place of
Mayboill, the hour to conuene is at eight hours before none, the day
foresaid, the number for every part shall be forty persons, by there
Scribes and learned men, with so many mo as the house may goodly hold, be the
sight of my Lord of Cassillis.

And heirupon, both the said abbote and John Knox are wholylie and fullylie
agreed. In witness whereof they have subscriued these presents with there
hands. At Mayboill the xxvij. of September. 1562.

Crosraguell John Knox



THe number received within the house foresaid, and so many besides as pleased
my Lord and his freindes. John Knox addressed him to make publict prayer,
whereat the abbote was soir offended at the first, but whil the said John would
in no wise be stayed, he and his gave audience, which being ended, the abbote
said be my faith it is weil said. And so after that he had spoken certane
words, he commanded one of his Scribes to read openly his protestation as
follows.



Heir follows the coppie of the ressoning quhilk was betuix the commendator of
Crosraguell and John Ki^^^ in Mayboile concerning the mass, in the year of
God. 1562.
M. Quintyne. PErceauing the great perturbation controversy and debeate,
quhilk is stirred up laitlie in all Christen realms, for the cause of religion
(honorable auditor) and als being remembered of the terrible sentence contained
in scriptures toward all negligent pastors in this dangerous time. I was
constrained in conscience notwithstanding my great inhabilitie, as it pleased
God to support my imperfectiones to give instruction to all those committed to
my cure, within my Kirk of Kirkoswald, how they should be able to be enarmed
against all wicked and decetfull preachers quhilk gaes about not knowing
quher^fra they come, nor by quha^ order. And to the effect that our
deirlie-beloued flock micht have been the more able to have been war with all
falls wicked and ungodly doctrine. Amang other godly lessones contained in my
exhortation I inserit certane catholic artickles having their warrant of the
scriptures of almighty God, according to ye doctrine of the halie catholic
Kirk, and burdyned my conscience in the presence of God the saides artickles to
be godly, necessary and expedient to be believed by all good christian men.

John Knox upon sunday the aucht day of September, came unto the said Kirk of
Kirkoswald, being certefied that I might not be present, and as I was informed
to make impugnatio^ to my saides artickles wherethrough I wrote to him,
certifying that I would affirm the saides artickles, and in special the
artickle concerning the mass against him or quhasoeuer pleases to make
impugnation there to upon aucht days warning, the place being in any house of
Mayboyle, the number tuentie on either side, without any further convocation.

Shortly we being agreed by writing of the day hour and place, quhilk was the
28. day of this instant September. I am common conform to my writing to
affirm the saides artickles as they are written, beginning at the artickle
concerning the mass. Protesting always that I come not to dispute any of my
artickles as matters of faith and religion disputable, considering there is
order taken already by the Kirk of God (as I would say) be the general
councelles, deulie co^uened quhilk represents the universal Kirk of almighty
God to whom it apperteines to take order quhensoeuer question rises for matters
concerning faith and religion, but according to the doctrine of S. Peter and
als S. Paul to render my dett and duty to all that inquires therefore: and
after that manner to abide gentle and formal reasoning of all that pleases, as
may stand to the glory of God and the instruction of the auditor. And to the
effect foresaid that we may come to formal ressoning, as to ward the artickle
concerning the mass, I will ground me upon the Scriptures of almighty God, to
be my warrant conform to my first confirmation, quhlik was gathered upon the
priesthead and oblation of Melchisedec: and was presentet ou in Februare, and
as it has gotten no answer, notwithstanding that it was of sober quantity
sextene or 20 lines. Wherefore please you to receive this same confirmation yet
as of before for to be the beginning of our formal reasoning, concerning the
artickle of the mass in manner as after follows. The Psalmest and als the
Apostle S. Paul affirms our Saluiour to be an priest for ever, according to
the ordure of Melchisedec, quha made oblation and Sacrifice of bread and wine
unto God as the Scripture plainly teaches us: now will I reason on this manner.

Read all the Euangell wha pleases, he sall find in no place of the Euangel
quhere our Saluiour uses the priesthead of Melchisedec, declaring him self to
be an priest after the ordor of Melchisedec, but in the latter Supper, quhere
he made oblation of his precious body and blude under the form of bread and
wine prefigurate by the oblation of Melchisedec: then are we compelled to
affirm that our Savior made oblation of his body and blude in the latter
Supper or else he was not an priest according to the ordor of Melchisedec,
quhilk is expres against the Scripture.


John Knox. Iohne Knox protested that he mght have the coppie of this formar
writting given in by my Lord in writ, to answer thereto more fully, and at
greater leaser, which was delivered unto him.


Quintene. And in lykemaner, my Lord protested that he might have place to
reply, if he thought good.


The answer of John Knox to the Abbottes oration, given in by the Abbote before
the disputation, in writ.
John Knox.
Whenever it pleases God of his great mercy, to show the light and to blow
the trompet of his true word unto the blind and unthankful world, after darkness
and long silence, it has the strength to move and walken not only the
chosen, but also the reprobate, but in diverse manner: for the one it walkeneth,
from ignorance, error, supersticion, vanity, and horrible corruption, to walk
before there God in knowledge, verity, true serving of his majesty, and in
purity of life. But the other it walkeneth from there formar ^iueth, and yet
to there further condemnation. For such as in the time of darkness did live as
men without God, at ye sound of the trompet, calling them to repentance, adds
and ioynes to there format corruption, blasphemy against God, and against his
eternal verity. For perceauing that the light discovers there turpitud, and
that the trompet will not suffer them to sleep, as that they did before without
open reproach: Isay. 5.
they shame not to call light, darkness: and darkness, light: good, evil: and
evil, good. And to bring that to pas, to wit, that the light shine no more,
does the whole ba^d of such as oppone them selves to the verity of God, so
earnestly travel, that stugardes and effeminat men become active and strong
Souldioures to the Devil. The exemples hereof are in Scriptures so common that
they nead no long rehearsal. For what was the estate of the false Prophets and
Preastes in the days of Isayas, Jeremy, Ezechiel, Micheas and the rest of the
true Prophets of God.

What care (I say) they which by ordinary succession oght to have teached the
people of God, took over there charges, the complaints and attestations of
the true Prophets used against them do witness. Isay. 56. Read the place.
In the which they call them dum dogs, blind watchemen, such as regarded
nothing but ambition, tyarous cheer and lusts of the flesh. Ezeh. 34


Pastors that fedd not the flock, but fedd them selves. Finally they term
them, Iere. 6.
men from the most to the least, given to auarcie, apostattes that had left
God, his laws, statutes, and ordinances, and had laid them selves down to
sleep in the mids of corruption out of the which they could not be walkened.

But yet how vigilant and active they were to resist the true Prophets and the
doctrine offered by them, the Scripture does lykwise testify. For then was
Isayas and such as adheared to his doctrine, Isay. 8
holden as monsters in the eyes of the proud preastes, Iere. 38
and of the multitude. Then was Jeremy accused of treason, cast in presone,
and dampened to death. 1. Re. 22
Then was Micheas openly stricken upon the mouth, and briefly then did none of
the true Prophets of God escape the hatred and cruel persecution of those that
clamed the title and authorie to rule in the Church. The same may be seen in ye
days of Jesus Christ: for how negligent and careless was the whole leuiticall
ordor (a few excepted) these words of our master Jesus Christ do witness.
Mat. 23.
woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees Hipocrites, for ye steak the kingdom of
heaven before men: ye your selves do not enter, and such as would enter ye
suffer not. But when the trompet began to blow in the mouth of John the
Baptist, and when Jesus Christ began to preach and to make mo disciples then
John did, when John called them progeny of vipers and Jesus Christ did term
them blind guides, how careful was the whole rabble then? Ioh. 1.
Is easy to be espied. For then were ambassadors send to John to know by
what authority he made such innovation among the people and in the religion
of God. Mat. 15.
Then was Christ Jesus tempted with sharp and subtle questions. Mat. 17.
Then was he accused for breaking of the tradicso^es of the ancients. Then was
he called Beelzebub, And in the end he was procured to be hanged betuex two
thieves. And by whose diligence was all this brought to pas? was it not by them
who before had abused the law? blinded the people, deceived the simple, and
under the title and name of God had set up the devil and all abomination to
ring over men?

For in place of Gods true worshipping they had erected a market, Ioh. 2.
and filthy merchandrise in the temple of God.

The eiection whereof did so enrage those dum dogs that with an bay they began
to bark against Jesus Christ, Mat. 21.
and his most wholesome doctrine: and that because the zeal of that great God,
their belly, did altogether consume and eat the^ up. These things we know to
be most true, and therefore we oght not to wonder albeit the true word of God
reteane the own nature, and that the self same thing chance now in our days
that heretofore has been fully performed. As for my self I nothing dou^ but
the great perturbation, controversy, and debate, lastly stirred up in all
christen realms, for cause of religion, is the cause that my Lord abbote has
be^e of lait days troubled to unaccustomed la^boures. For if the supersticion,
idolatry, pride, vain glory, ambition, unjust possessions, The cause why
Papists ar^ow so diligent in preachi^g
superfluous rentes and filthy living used and manteyned heretofore by such as
clame the name and authority of the Church had not been openly rebuked and a
part thereof in dispyte of Satan supressed it may be thought that my Lord in
this his impotent age could have contented him self with the self same ease and
quietness that in his younger age and better ability, he enjoyed. But now the
tro^pet sounds dampnatio^ to all negligent pastors, and thereof is my Lord
afraid, and therefore to discharge his conscience he will take the pain to
instruct his flock, and to warn them to be ware of falls teachers. I will
interpret all to the best part, if my Lords eye be single, his work is good.
But if the light that appears to be in him, Mat. 6.
and in his sect, be nothing but darcknes, how great shall the darcknes be? my
Lord is a clerk and needs no interpreter of such places of Scripture. Yet
for the simple (I say) that rightly to teach the flock of Jesus Christ, True
knowledge is required in a true preacher
requires right institucion in Christ's own doctrine. For else a zeal without
knowledge is nothing but the cause of further blindness. Yea, if the blind lead
the blind, the ignorant idolater take upon him to teach the ignorant people
of long time brought up in idolatry: neither of both can escape condemnation
so long as they follow that train. And therefore it will nothing vnburding my
Lords conscience albeit that after his negligence and long silence he begin to
cry to such as he terms his ^ock, bewar of falls prophets. For it may be
that him self be one of that number. Yea, perchance the falsest that they have
hard this hundredth year. Duet. ^
For if he be a falls Prophet that teaches men to follow strange Gods, that
prophecies a lie in the name of the Lord, Iere. 14
and speaks to the people the divination and deceat of his own heart, Iere. 18
that causes the people to err, and leave the old paths, and to walk in the
pathe of the way that is not trodden. That constantly say to them that have
provoked God to anger. The Lord heath spoken it. Ye shall have peace. And to
all that walk after the lusts of there own hearts there shall no evil chance
unto you. etc. If finally, Iere. 23.
they be falls prophets that be auaricious and study for advantage, that sow
pilloues under the arm hoilles of wicked men, and lay sinners a sleap, Ezeh.
13.
and promise life to them, to whom they oght not to promise it. If these be falls
prophets (I say) as the Scripture effirmeth them to be, then stands my Lord
abbote in a wondrous perplexity and such as believe him, in no les danger.

For God has never pronunced, such artickles as my Lord calls wholesome
doctrine, the chief of them, to wit, the mass, purgatory, praying to
saints, erecting of images and such other, have no assurance of Gods word,
but are the meare dreams, statutes, and inventions of men, as there particular
examination (if my Lord pleases to abide the trial) will more plainly witness,
and therefore, it is no sufficient assurance to the conscience of the auditure,
that my Lord burden his conscience, in the presence of God that his artickles
be godly, necessar, and expedient to be believed. For so have ever the false
Prophets done, when they and there doctrine, was impugned. Did not the
prophets and preasts of Baal affirm there doctrine and religion to be godly,
against the prophet Elias? 1. Reg. 18
They did not only burden there conscience, but also offered them selves, to
suffer trial (God him self being judge) before ye King and before the whole
people. ^. Ac. 22
The self same thing did the false prophets against Micheas and Jeremy, and
therefore yet again I say my Lords conscience (if a blind zeal be worthy of
the name of conscience) will neither save him self nor others, because it is
not grounded upon God, his reueilled will nor promise. If my Lord thinks that
the holy catholic Church is sufficient assurance for his conscience, let him
understand that the same buckler had the false prophets against Jeremy for
they cried, Iere. 7.
the temple of the Lord the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, but
as he with one stroke did brust their buckler a sonder, saying put not your
trust in leing words: so say we that how catholic (that is universal) that
ever their Church has been, holy are they never able to prove it, neither in
life, making of laws, nor in soundnes of doctrine, as in my answer given by
mouth, I have more planely shown. It pleases my Lord to term us, wicked and
deceatful preachers, who go about not knowing wherefro we come, nor by what
ordoure, and further he fears not to pronu^ce our doctrine, falls wicked, and
ungodly, for of us, and our doctrine it is plane that my Lord meant and meneth.

I answer that as by Gods word, we accuse the whole mass of man's nature, of
corruption, and wickedness, so do we not flatter our selves, but willingly
confess ourselves so subject to corruption and natural wickedness, that the
good that we would do, we do it not, but the evil that we hate, that we do.
Yea, we do not deny but that in our lives and outward conversation there be
many things both worthy of reformation and reprehension. But yet if our lives
shall be compared with the lives of them, that accuses us, be it in general or
be it in particular, we doubt not to be justified, both before, God and man.
For how many ministers this day within scotland, is my Lord abbote (joining
with him the whole rabble of the horned Bischoopes) able to co^uict to be
adulterers, fornicators, dronckards, bloodscheders, opperssors of the poor
wedow, fatherles, or stranger, or yet, that do idilly live upon ye sweat of
other me^nes brows. And how many of them from the hiest to the lowest, are
able to abide an assyse of ye forena^ed crimes. And yet shall we be called by
the^ wicked and deceatful preachers, even as if ye strongest and most common
harlot, yt ever was known i^ the bordell, should sclander and revile an honest
and pudick matro^. But in somewhat must the sons resemble there father.

The devil as that he is perpetual enemy to treuth and to ane honest life, so
is he a lear and accusar of our brethren, and therefore albeit such as serve
him in idolatry and all filthiness of life, spew out against us, there wennome
and leis, with testimony of a good conscience, we refer vengance to him, to
whom it aperteineth, neither yet would we have ones opened our mouths for the
defense of our own innocence (for God be praised, even before the world it
will utter the self, war not that in sclandring our lives, they go about, to
deface the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ, whereof it has pleased his mercy
to make us ministers: and in that eace, let them be assured, that the lies
which without shame and assurance, they causies womet out against us, with
shame and double confucion they shall justly receive again in there own
bosoms. If my Lord abbote allege, that he accuses not our lives and
external conversation, but our doctrine which he terms falls, wicked, and
ungodly, we answer, that as that does more greiue us, nor the sclandring of
our lives, so doubt we nothing, but that he that made his favorable promise, to
afflicted Jerusalem in these words:

Isay. 14.
All instrument that is prepared against thee, shall not prosper, and every
tongue, that shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall rightly convict
and condeme of impiety. We doubt not (I say) but the same God, will in this
our age, confound the tounges, that oppone them selves to his eternal verity,
which is the ground, and assurance of our doctrine. And therefore we nothing
fear to say, that my Lord in the end shall spead no better (if he continue, in
that his irreuerent railing) then such as heretofore, have blasphemed Jesus
Christ, and his eternal verity, to the which albeit for the present, they
will not be subject, and that because our persons and presence whom God makes
ministers of the same, are contemptible and despised, yet in the end, they shall
feal, that in rebelling against our admonicions, they were rebellious to the
mouth of God, and in defasing us, they have dispysed, the eternal Son of God,
who of his mercy, has sent us, to rebuke there impeitie, and to reduce to
knowledge, and unto the true pastor again, such, as through blind ignorance,
have followed the inventions, and dreams of men: and have soght justice,
remission of sins, and reconciliation with God, by other means then by Jesus
Christ, and by true faith in his blood. But of this point, I know my Lord
most doubts, To wit, whether God has sent us, or not? For my Lord says we
go about, not knowing wherefro we come, nor by what ordor, we answer, that in
our consciences we know, and he him self, will bear us record, that we are not
sent by that Roman Antichriste, whom he calls Pope, nor yet from his carnal
Cardinals, nor dum horned Bischoppes: and thereof we rejoice, Being assured,
that as we are not sent by Christ's manifest enemy in the earth, so are we
sent by Jesus Christ him self, and that by such ordor, as God has ever kept,
from the beginning, when public corruption entered in the Church, by sleuth,
and impiety of such, as of duty oght to have fedd the flock, and to have
reteaned the people under obedience of God, as well in religion, as in life and
manners. The ordor of God (I say) has been in such public corruptions, to
raise up simple, and obscure men, in the beginning of there vocacion, unknown
to the world: to rebuke the manifest defection of the people from God, to
convict the pastors of there formar negligence, fleuth, and idolatry, and to
prononce them unworthy of there offices.

Reg. 17 Iere. 35. Amo. ^.
For so was Helias sent in the days of Ahab, Jeremy in the time of corruption,
under Iehoiakin, and Zedechias. Amos under Jeroboam, and the rest of the
Prophets, every one in there own time, and after the same ordour has God
rased up i^ these our days, such me^, as my Lord and his faction terms,
Heretics, Schismatikes Zuinglians, Lutherians, Oecolampadians, and Caluinists.
To prove the Pope, to be an Antichriste, his whole glory in the earth, to be
altogether repugnant, to the condition of Christ's true ministers. The mass to
be idolatry, and a bastard service of God, yea more corrupted the^ ever was
the Sacrifice in ye days of the Prophets, when yet they affirmed them to be
abominable before God. Purgatory to be nothing but a pykepurs. The defense of
man's frewill to do good, and avoid evil, to be ye damned herisie of
Pelagius. The forbidding of marriage to any estate of men or woman, to be the
doctrine of Devils. And the forbidding of meat for conscience saik, to procead
of the same fontaine. The erecting images in Churches, and in public places of
assembleis, to be against the expressed commandment of God. Prayer for the
dead, and unto saints, to be work done without faith, and therefore to be
sin. Briefly God has rased up men in these our days, so to discover the
turpitud and filthiness of that Babiloniane harlote, that her werrie golden
cup, in the which her fornication was hid before, is become abominable to
all such, as trust for the life everlasting. And they have further set so
vehement a fire in the werray ground of her glory, that is, in her usurped
authority, that she and it, are both like to burn, to there vttermoste
confusion. My Lord and his companions fear no such threatninges. they are
but railing knaves yt dispytfully speak against there holy mother the Church. I
have already said that the Prophets in there days was even so rewarded of
those, that had the same title and dignity, that now our adversaries clame.
And yet did they not escape the plagues prono^uced, and in the same confidence
stand we, rejoicing further, that howsoever they repyne, storm and rage, yet
they that are of God, hear us, know the voice of Jesus Christ speaking in us
his weak instruments, and do fly from that horrible harlote, and from her
filthynes, which is to us a sufficient assurance that God has sent us for the
comfort of his chosen. But my Lord perchance requires miracles, to prove our
laughfull vocation. For so does Vinzet procutor for the Papists. To both I
answer, that a treuth by it self without miracles, has sufficient strength to
prove the laughful vocation of the teachers thereof, but miracles destitute of
treuth, have efficacy to deceive, but never to bring to God. But this by the
grace of God shall be more fully entreated, in the answer to Vinzetes questiones
thereupon. And yet one word man I say before I make end, to my Lord, and unto
the rest of the Popes creatures. And it is this? If they will study to keap
them selves, in credeit and estimation, let them never call our vocation in
doubt, for we in continent will object to them, that from the most to the
least, there is none amongs them, laughfully called, to serve within the Church
of God. But all commit symonie, all are heretykes, all receive the spirit of
lies, and ye leprosy of Gehezi, and finally, being accused in there first
ordination, they neither can give grace, nor benedictio^ to the people of God,
and this by there own law I offer my self to prove, as evidently as my Lords
Bischops, abbots, Priors, and the rest of that sect, are able to prove the^
selves, called to ecclesiastical function (as they term it) by there fathers
bulls, and co^formation of the Pope. I wonder not a lytil, that my Lord
should allege, that I was certified that he might not be present at
Kirkoswald, the day that first I offered my self to resist his vain and
blasphemous artickles. I am able to prove that by his promise he had bound
himself ofter the^ ones to be present. And also that by famous gentle men that
same Sunday in the morning he was required either to come and teach according
to his promise, and so to suffer his doctrine in audience of such as he named
his own flock, to be tried, or else, to come and hear doctrine, and with
sobriety and gentilnes, to oppon at his pleasure. These two heads (I say) I
am able to prove. But that I was certified, that he could not be present. etc.
I think it shall be as hard to prove, as to prove that Melchisedec, made
Sacrifice of bread, and wine unto God. But my Lord shall have liberty of me,
to allege in such cases what pleases him, so long as his allegation shall not
preiudge the verity, nor give patrocynie to a lie, in matters of religion. It
is not of great importance, whether I was certified, or not, that my Lord
could not be present, as he alleges. I presented my self at the day
appointed. And that is some argument, that I greatly feared not my Lords
presence. The letters that have passed betuix us, together withsome answers,
that I differed, shall be put in register before the disputation. That men may
see, the whole procedings of both parties. And this much by writ, to my
Lords first oration given in, in writ.

Now follows my answer, to the rest, given at that same instant by mouth.

John Knox answers by mouth BEcause I perceive, both in your protestation
and artickle, that ye dispute not upon these matters, as disputable, but as of
things already concluded, by the Kirk, general cou^selles, and doctors: I must
say somewhat in the beginning, how far I will admit of any of the forenamed.
Ephe. ^.
And of the Kirk first (I say) that I acknowledge it to be the spous of Christ's
Jesus, builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets: so that into
all doctrine, it hears the voice of the spous only, and an stranger, it
will not hear, Ioh. ^0
according to the words of our master Christ Jesus. My sheep hear my voice.
etc. And therefore if yt any multitude, under the title of the Kirk, will
obtrude, unto us, any doctrine necessar to be believed to our salvation, and
brings not for the same, the expres word of Jesus Christ, or his Apostles,
etc. men must aperdone me, although I acknowledge it not to be ye Kirk of God,
for the reason foresaid. And unto the general counselles, I answer the same,
to wit, that such as has been gathered duly and in the name of God, for
extirpatio^ of heresies, with my whole heart I do reverence. Provided always,
that the doctrine, that they propone to be believed, have the approbation of the
plain word of God, or else with that ancient I must say, that more credit is
to be given to an man, bringing for him, Panormita.
the testimony of Gods Scriptures, then to an general counsel, affirming any
doctrine without the same. And as concerning the authority of the doctors (for
whom I praise my God, as that I do for all them whom he makes profitable
instruments in his kirk) I think my Lord, Let the godly judge if these
peticions be reasonable.
will bind me no straiter, then he has desired to be bound him self, that is,
that men be not received, as God. And therefore with Agustine I consent, that
whatsoever the doctors propone, and plamly confirm the same by the evident
testimony of the Scriptures, I am hartlie content to receive the same, but
else, that it be laughful to me with, Jerome to say, whatsoever is affirmed,
without the authority of Gods Scriptures, with the same facility it may be
rejected, as it is affirmed. And these three admitted. So forth I enter in
disputation.


M. Quintyne. Their ar diverse heides quhair with I am offended, willing that
the purpose we come for, may go shortly to pass. Thairfore presently I will
omit. And as the occasion sall serve of the doctoures, counsalles and ocht
else, quhilkis are not expressly contened in the Scriptures. And this quickly
go to the purpose.


John Knox Ye are not ignorant (my Lord) that in every disputation, the
ground oght so to be laid, that ye matter disputable, or the question, either
come under an perfect definicion, or else under an sufficient description: and
specially when the question is, De woce simplici. As is, Missa. If it please
your Lordschip to defyne the mass, or yet sufficiently to discriue it, I will
take occasion of yt, which I think wrong. And if not, then must I explain my
mind, what mass it is, that I intend to impung, and have called idolatry,
not the blissed institution of the Lord Jesus, which he has commanded to be
used in his kirk, Let men judge if this be not impugnation of the papistical
mess
to his gaincomi^g, but that which is cropen in, into the kirk visible, without
all approbation of ye word of God. And this mass, I say, has a name, a form
and action, an opinion conceived of it, and an actor of the same. And unto the
whole four I say, that neither the name, the form and action, nor the
opinion, nor actor, have there assurance of Gods plain word.


M. Quintyne. As to the diffinicion or description that I gaif the last eir, I
will abide at it this eir, for I am not cu^min in use of est, and non est. And
as to ye mass that he will impung, or any man's mass, ea, and it war the
paipes awin mess, I will mantein nathing but Jesus Christ's mess, conform to
my artickle as it is writtin, and diffinition contened in my buik, quhilk he
hes taine on hand to impung.


John Knox. As I can conceive, my Lords answer, contains three heads, the
first is, a relation to his book as conteaning the difinicion of the mass.
The second a declaration of his Lordschipes constancy. Let men judge how
favorable the sone is unto the Father.
And the third, an affirmation, that he will affirm no mass, but ye mass of
Jesus Christ, yea, not if it were the popes own mass. Unto the first I answer.
That I have not red his Lordeschipes book (not excusing thereintill my own
negligence) and therefore it appears unto me, that rather his Lordship,
should cause the diffinition to be red out of his book, nor to burden me with
the seaking of it. As concerning his lordshipes constancy, I beseak the
eternal God, to make us all constant, in his eternal verity: for inconstancy
in the treuth, can not lack infamy, and great danger. But to me it appears,
that in no wise it can hurt, the fame, nor conscience of the godly, to
confess them selves men, who both may err, and also be occation that others
err. And yet, when that the fuller knowledge comes unto them, by the spirit
of God, no man oght to impute unto them inconstancy, albeit they retreat there
formar error, as in diverse heads did that learned Augustine. But the thride
head does most delight me, to wit, that my lord has affirmed that he will
defend no mass, but the mass of the Lord Jesus: Note my offer
which if his lordship will perform (as my good hope is) then I dout not, but
we are on the werray point of an christian aggrement. For whatsoever his
lordschip shall prove to me, to be done by the Lord Jesus, that, without all
contradiction, I shall embrace. Providing that his lordship allege nothing to
be done, by Jesus Christ, which his own institution, witnesses not to be
done.


M. Quintyne. I define the mess, as concerning the substance, and effect, to
be the sacrifice and oblation, of the Lords body and blude, given and offered
by him, in the latter Supper. And takis the Scripture, to my warrant, according
to my artickle as it is written. And for the first confirmation of the same,
grounds me upon the sacrifice and oblation of Melchisedec. To the second, I
thank John Knox of his prase and prayer of my constancy, and in lyk manner for
christian cheriteis saik, prase God with all my heart, for his induretnes and
pertinacitie (gif swa be that he be in error) and will wish him, that he be
willed to refuse his pertinacitie, as I sall do my constancy gif I be in
error. To the third, for avoiding of cauillation, I mein that I will defend no
mess as concerning the substance, institution and effect, bot that mess
only, quhilk is institut be Jesus Christ.


John Knox Omitting to further consideration, the answer to the definition, to
the last two heads I shortly answer, that I praised no constancy, but that
which is in the treuth. And as touching my owen indurednes, wherewith my Lord
seameth to burden me, I plainly protest before God, that if I knew my self in
error, in that case, or in any other, that concerns the doctrine of
Salvation: I should not be ashamed, publictlie to confess it. But the last
part of my Lords answer, appears somparte to vary (in my judgment) from
his formar affirmation, which I took to be, that his lordship would defend
nothing in ye mass, which he was not able to prove, to be the verray
institution of Jesus Christ. And therefore, must I have recourse, unto the
formar division of the mass: which is in name, action, opinion, and actor. And
humbly requires of his lordship, that he would signify unto me, if he would be
content to prove the name to be given by Jesus Chrste: Note if this be to shoot
an pistollet at the mess.
the whole action and ceremonies from beginning, to the end, to be the
ordinance of almighty God. The opinion, which has been conceived, taught, and
written of it, for to be aggreable with the Scripturs of God. And finally, if
that the actor, has his assurance of God, to do that, which he there
publictlie protests, he does.


M. Quintyne. As willing that the treuth cum to ane trial, I will not trifle,
bot schortlie geues for answer. A shifti^g answer.
I will begin at the best first, quhilk is ye substance and effect. And as to
the ceremonies, actor and name, sal defend them abu^dantlie (Godwilling)
conform to my artickle quhen I cum thairto.


John Knox. The ceremonies used in the mass, and the opinion conceived of the
same, have been holden substanciall parts thereof, Let the papests answer if
this be true or not.
into the conscience of a great multitude. And therefore, oght the conscience
of the weak, and infirm, first to be delivered from that bondage. For what my
Lord affirms of the mass (to wit, that it is a sacrifice) this perchance
may be also alleged to aparteane to the right institution of Jesus Christ, in
some case, which ones was woid, both of those ceremonies, and that damnable
opinion.


M. Quintyne. I am not cumin heir to mantein the opiniones of me^, but to
defend ye institution of Jesus Christ, conform to my artickle.


John Knox. It appeareh to me yet again, This is a dowble cannon against the
mess.
that my Lord is willing to defend no thing, but the werray institution of
Christ Jesus. And I have already affirmed, that neither the name of the mass,
the ceremonies used in the same, the opinion conceived of it, neither yet that
power, which the actor vsurneth, has either the institution or assurance of
Jesus Christ.


M. Quintyne. I am willing to defend my diffinition concerning the mess, as I
have diffined it, and takes Gods word to my warrant, My lord fled the Barras
for the first.
and as to the ceremonies actor and all the rest fall defend God willing to be
aggreable with Gods word all throuch abundantly as time and place sal serve
beginning first at the substance and effect.


John Knox. I answer, that albeit in my judgment, the conscience of man, oght
first to have been set at liberty, yet hoping that my Lord will be content,
according to his promise, that the name, ceremonies, and the rest of the
accidents of the mass suffer the trial by the word of God. I am content
shortly to enter in the body of the matter.

And desires the difinition to be resumed.


M. Quintyne. Let my Lord remember his promise.
I promise, before this honorable auditor, to defend that all co^tened in the
action of the mess to be aggreable with Gods word, providing always we gang
to the substance.


The difinition being resumed.

John Knox answered. Your lordship is not ignorant, that in every difinition,
there oght to be, Genus, which I take your lordship here makes this term
(Sacrificium) but because the term is general, and in ye Scriptures of God is
diversely taken, therefore, it must be brought to a certane kind. For in the
Scriptures there be sacrifices called EVCHARISTICA that is, of thanks giving.
The mortification of our bodies, and the obedience that we give to God, in the
same, is also called Sacrifice. Prayer and invocation of the name of God has
also the same name within the Scriptures. Liberality toward the poor, is also
so termed. But there is one Sacrifice, which is greatest, and most of all,
called, Propiciatorium, which is that Sacrifice, whereby, satisfaction is made
to the justice of God, being offended at the sins of man. etc. Now I desire
of my Lord that he appoint unto the mass, which of these Sacrifices best
pleases him.


M. Quintyne. Quhat e mein be the Sacrifice, Propiciatorium, presently I will
not dispute. But I tak the sacrifice upon the cro^^, to be the only Sacrifice
of redemption, and the Sacrifice of the mass, to be the Sacrifice of
co^memoration, of Christ's death and passion.


John Knox. So far as I can conceive of my Lords answer, he makes no
Sacrifice, Propiciatorie, Heir are mo cannons the^ one.
in the mess: which is the chiefhead, which I intend to impung. For, as for
the co^memoration of Christ's death and passion, that I grant, and publictlie
do confess, to be celebrat in the right use of the Lords S^^pper, which I
deny the mess to be.


M. Quintyne. It is our deutie according to formal proceiding, to impung my
warrant, If this be shifting or not let men judge.
quhilk I have chosen, to defend my diffinition be, and artickle even as it is
writtin.


John Knox. Protesting that this mekle is win, that the Sacrifice of the mass,
being denied by me to be a Sacrifice Propiciatorie for the sins of ye quick
and the dead, Let men now judge whitther the mess gat a wond or not.
according to the opinion thereof before conceived, has no patron, at this
present: I am content to proceed.


M. Quintyne. I protest that he hes win nothing of me as it, and referres it,
to black and quhite, contened in our writing.


John Knox. I have openly denied the mass to be an Sacrifice Propiciatorie
for the quick. Note.
etc. and the defense thereof is denied. And therefore I refer me unto the
same judges that my Lord has clamed.


M. Quintyne. e may deny quhat e pleis, for all that e deny I tak not
presently to impung, bot quhair I began their will I end, Shift on
that is, to defend ye mess, conform to my artickle.


John Knox. Seeing that neither the name, the action, the opinion, nor the actor
of the mass, can be defended for this present, I would glaidly know what I
should impung.


M. Quintyne. All above rehearsed can be defended, and salbe defended
(Godwilling), I did nothing but as my lord commanded
and quhair e are glaid to know, quhat e sold impung, apperanlie that sold be
na newinges to ow, for I certify ow e sold impung my warra^d alleged for
defense of my diffinition and artickle.


John Knox. If be your warrant, Have at your ground.
ye understand the oblation made in bread and wine by Melchisedec, I plainly
deny, that Melchisedec made any oblation or Sacrifice, of bread and wine unto
God, and desires the text to be judge.


M. Quintyne. It is our pairt to impung, and mine to defend, for I am the
defender, and salbe Godwilling.


John Knox. Can I impung more plane, then when I deny your ground?


M. Quintyne. I say the denying of the ground is na proper impugnation.


John Knox. Your lordships ground is, that Melchisedec is the figure of
Christ, in that, Let men judge now if my lords ground for the mess be not
shaken.
that he did offer unto God bread and wine, and therefore yt it behooved Jesus
Christ to offer in his latter supper his body and blood, under the forms of
bread and wine. I answer to your ground, yet again, that Melchisedec offered
neither bread nor wine unto God. And therefore it, that ye would thereupon
conclude has no assurance of your ground.


M. Quintyne. Preue that.


John Knox. Whether that the probatio^ of a negative, should be deuolued upon
me, especially when I have denied your chief ground, I am content the learned
judge.


M. Quintyne. Moved throuch feruor of the trial of ye treuth of Gods word,
I refuse logik captious cauillationis for the present (not perchance for
ignorance) bot yt we tyne not time, Gather what is spoken.
to finnish and establis our godly pretense for the ease and quietness of the
conscience of the noble men heir present.


John Knox. I have else protested, that I abhor all cauillationes, and yet
again declares unto your lordship, that in my judgment it is the way most
succinct, yt your lordship prove your own ground, that is, that Melchisedec,
offered unto God bread and wine, which I deny.


M. Quintyne. I tak the text to be my warrant and ground.


John Knox. The text being red, the 14. of Genesis. There is no mention made of
any oblation of bread and wine, made by Melchisedec unto God, but only yt
Melchisedec being King of Salem, Genesis 14.
brought forth bread and wine. And that being Priest of the most hie God, he
blessed Abraham as the text bears witness. And therefore I say that the text,
preueth not that any oblation of bread and wine, was made unto God by
Melchisedec.


M. Quintyne. e do affirm that Melchisedec brocht forth bread and wine. I speir
at ow to what effect? Judge now if my lord shifts.



John Knox. Will ye deuolue upon me now, the person of an answerer, seeing that
ye refused your self of before the same?


M. Quintyne. This quhilk he calls answering, is mair properly to be called
impungnation in this case, Marck what is confessed by my lord.
in that, finding the text to serve nothing for my purpose, is plain
impungnation to my pretense.

And swa are e cled rather with the personage of ane impungnar, nor ane
defendar.


John Knox. Whether that I susteane the personage of an impungner, or of an
defender, I am not bound to answer, what was done with the bread and wine,
after that it was brought forth. It suffiseth to me for my formar purpose, that
there is no mention made in the text, that bread and wine by Melchisedec was
offered unto God.


M. Quintyne. It ryndes to ow to preif, Let the learned Judge if this be true.
that Melchisedec made no oblation of bread and wine unto God.


John Knox. It suffiseth to me, that in the text there is no mention made that
Melchisedec, made any oblation of bread and wine unto God, as ye before
alleged, and has laid for your ground.


M. Quintyne. I say the words of the text ar plain that Melchisedec maid
oblation of bread and wine unto God, Note if so be.
and desires ow to impreue the same be the text.


John Knox. My inprobation is already ledd. For in the text there is no
mention of oblation of bread and wine made unto God. And therefore I am
content, that the whole world judge, whether the ground be not sufficiently
inprouen or not.


M. Quintyne. Melchisedec brocht forth bread and wine, quhilk he did not
without cause, and e deny yat he brocht it forth, Consider in what straitnes my
lord was now,
for the cause, that I allege, ergo, for some other cause. Quhilk gif e will
not, nor can not shaw presently, I sall do deligence to cause the present
auditor understand cleirly, that he brocht forth bread and wine for the cause
alleged be me. Providing that gif e will not shaw the cause presently, that e
sal have no place to shaw it heirefter.


John Knox. I answer, that he brought forth bread and wine, the text plainly
affirms, and I have already granted. But that he made oblatio^ of the same,
because the text perporteth it not, I can not grant it. As touching the cause
wherefore he brought it forth (if place shall be given to coniectors, and that
not grounded without great probability, and also with sufrage of some of the
ancients, to wit, Josephus and Chrysostom.) It may be said that Melchisedec
being an King, brought forth bread and wine, to refresh Abraham and his werie
soldiers. And this, for your satisfaction of the cause, why he brought forth
bread and wine: ever still sticking upon the principal ground. That because no
mention is made, that Melchisedec made oblation of bread and wine unto God, I
deny it, as of before.


The pennult of September. 1562.
M. Quintyne. Of John Knox saying is above reheirsed, I conceive two heides in
special, the ane is, This was the beginning of the second days travel after
that my lord had sleaped.
that Melchisedec maid na oblation unto God, dot he did bring forth the bread
and wine, to refresh Abraham and his company. I will answer unto the saides
heides formally, and on this manner. First I will make impugnatio^ unto ye last
heid quhair it is thocht that he did refresh Abraham and his company. In that
the text is manifest in ye contrar, in sa far as the text testifies, that
Abraham and his company war refreshed be the spole of the enemies, and was not
refreshed, Let my Lords argument be noted
nor mistered na refreshing of Melchisedec, quhairfore it is manifest that
Melchisedec brocht forth bread and wine unto ane other effect, nor to refresh
Abraham and his company.


John Knox. My formar prove, that Melchisedec, did not offer bread and wine
unto God, stands upon this ground, that the text makes mention of no manner
oblation made there unto God of bread and wine. And therefore in a matter of so
great importance, darre not I affirm oblation to be made, whill that the holy
Ghost keeps silence. And now unto my Lords argument, Answer to the formar
argument
first, I answer, that there is no contradiction betuix these two, Abraham and
his company, were refreshed of the spoolies of there enemies: and Abraham and
his company were refreshed of the liberality of Melchisedec. And first,
because in the time when Abraham and his company received there nourishement of
the substance of there enemies, they were out of the presence of Melchisedec:
and not returned unto there country. But albeit that they had been even in the
presence of Melchisedec, yet they might have been nourished, partly be his
liberality, and partly be there own provision. And thridly because the text
does not affirm that Abraham and his, were nourished only of the spoil. I
can not admit my Lords argument.


M. Quintyne. For satisfaction of the auditoure, and to cum quickly to the
point without drifting of time I will refuse reasoning, after scoolmaner, and
will go it to the text, and depend thairupon. And on this manner sayaud (Saif
only that, quhilk the ong men hes eatin) I infer of this text, that it dois
appeir, e and is manifest, that their remaned mair nor was eitin, be Abraham
and his company, for the present.


John Knox. I do not deny, but there remaned substance, which was neither eatin
nor consumed by Abraham and his company, but what shall be hereof concluded?


M. Quintyne. I infer yat not only their remaned substance, bot their remaned
mekle mair substance, nor Abraham and his company was able to consume, ea, and
to gif ane great deal away, for quhy, Abraham was victor of four Kingis,
quhairthrouch he obtened ane great spole, and not only of four, bot also he
gat the spole of other five, and gat all their viuers and meat, quhairthrouch
it is manifest be ye verray plain text that Abraham and his company, had mekle
mair meat nor they war able to consume, and swa mistered he nor his company na
refresching of Melchisedec, considering he and his company was bot ane meine
number (as I would say) three hundredth and auchtene.


John Knox. The victory of Abraham is in the text specified, as also the
number of the Kings vainqueshed. And that there remaned substance, yea, mekle
more then was spent; I do not deny. But this will not necessarlie conclude, but
that Melchisedec of his liberality brought forth bread and wine, to the purpose
forsaid: as be conjecture, is most probable. For men of godliness and civil
honesty, do not only shaw them selves, liberal in time of extreme necessity,
but also will declair there benevolence without great neid, yea, and in greatest
abundance.


M. Quintyne. Because John Knox speakis of substance indifferently, I will
desire him to declair his opinion, conform to the text, quhither Abraham and
his company, recovered of the nine Kingis spoleis bread and wine, and other
sustenance, quhilk treulie, albeit the text do not proport the same in plain
words, it can na man of judgment think vtherwise, as I can gif many hundredth
examples in the Scriptures, and ane in special, quhair Jesus Christ our Lord
speakis in his awin prayer, called the Pater noster, of daily bread,
quhairinto is to be understand all required unto the sustentation of man,
albeit the text dois not expressly declair the samin.


John Knox. I have spoken of substance in general, so instructed by the plain
text, which makes mention neither of bread nor wine, in expressed words,
other nor of that which Melchisedec brought forth. And by all apperance, there
could not any great store, of bread and wine be carried back again, by Abraham
and his company, after the victory of his enemies. For plain it is, that he
brought nothing back, which they before did not carry away (him self and his
company only excepted) we read that they took the pray of Sodom and Gomorra,
and carried with them the substance, Let this co^iectur serve for answer to my
lords argumemt
yea, and the victual, Loath, his substance. etc. Now albeit that in the
beginning there victualles had been great, yet being such a company as we may
justly suppose them to have been: and also being arrived within there own
costs, it is not appeari^g that great store was reserved. But howsoever it be,
this matter standing in conjecture, we will of necessity conclud no thing, seeing
that the holy Ghost has not expressed it. As touching my Lords allegation,
of the daily bread. etc. I acknowledge with his lordschip that to be the
familiar phrase of the Scripture, that under the name of bread, is commonly
taken all things necessar for the use of man's body, like as these, Frange
efurienti panem tuum. etc.


M. Quintyne. Hauand consideration, that John Knox, wald cast in ane suspicion
in the hearts of the honorable auditor (saifand his pardone) be continual
repeticion of this word conjecture, we will do as God will give us grace, to tak
this policy out of the hearts of the auditor, and that by proper description
of arguments of inferrence or conjecture, quhairfore the auditor sall
consider, that their is sum conietures and arguments of inferre^ce quhilk
necessarlie concludes and follows upon. Let the learned consider this proper
description of coniectural arguments which do necessarly conclude.
And arcalled nottheles arguments of conjecture or inferrence, because the ane
word is not the other, nor dois not expressly conclud the other, as for ane
familiar example, Spirat, ergo viuit, as I wald say, he aindes ergo he lives.
Quhairfore I infer that this conference of phrase, or manner of speech quhair it
is said in the text, al their victuallis, necessarly inferris breid wine, and
all other thingis expedient to be eatin, considering their was great abundance
in the citeis quhilk war spoleit as do this phrase, break unto the hungry thy
bread, and swa quhatsumeuer may be inferred of the ane phrase, necessarlie may
be inferred of the other.


John Knox. Hitherto I have traveled, to make difference betuix that, that man
of necessity is bound to believe, and that which man may either believe, or not
believe, without any hurt of conscience.

What God in expressed words and sentences, has committed to us within the
Scriptures and commanded the same to be believed, he requires of us that
necessarlie we believe the same. But where the spirit of God has keped silence,
and has not in plain sentences, declared unto us the will of God our Father,
there may a man suspend his judgment, without hurt of conscience, yea, and
more sure it is, not boldly to affirm, that which is keped close, by the
wisdom of God: then that we should rashelie affirm any thing, without the
warrant of Gods word as we are taught by the admonition of Augustine. As
touching ye diversity of arguments. I know both the strength of them, that
are called Necessario Concludentia, and of those which stand in probability,
The ground of faith is the word of God revealed
which both I grant to have the strength in persuasion: but the faith of man
requires a surer ground, then any argument that can be deduced from nature (to
wit) it requires hearing, and that hearing of the word of God, according to
the doctrine of the Apostle. Now to my Lords argument, I say it does not
necessarlie conclude, that Abraham and his soldiers brought more reddie meat,
such as bread and wine back from there victory, then they were able to spend,
albeit that they carried with them the whole substance, yea, That is the Kings
vicust by Abraham
the whole victualles of Sodom and Gomorra. etc. Because that in the journey
some might have been lossed, in the journey no dout but much was spent, and in
the victory the rest might have been dispersed or lost. For by all apperance
Abraham had small respect to bread and wine, Let the reader aduert.
more then to that which might reasonably susteane him and his company unto
there return. And thus from conjecture we shall continually pas to conjecture,
onles that my Lord be able to prove, that the text affirms in plane words,
that such superflouous abundance of bread and wine was brought back, unto the
time that Melchisedec met him (and although his Lordship be able so to do as I
am assured no man is able) yet shall always Melchisedec and his libiralitie
stand still vnconuicted.


M. Quintyne. To meit all the heides co^tened in John Knox, partickle above
rehearsed, notwithstanding appearanlie I am constrained to the same. it
always in fauoris of the auditure, Let the indiffire^t judge
I will go schortlie to sum special heides. And first quhair he makes ane
meine, that I go by natural ressonis to persuade, to take the suspicion of men
justly of me in this heid, I say and do affirm, yt I have done not in that
cause as it, bot conform to the Scriptures althrouch. And quhair John Knox
speakis in general of meat, our contention was for bread and wine, quhilk I
inferred necessarlie of the text. And desires him to give me ane resson
schortlie, grounded upon the Scripture, quhairfore the phrase alleged be me
concerning the meat sal not include bread and wine asweil as his phrase
concerning the bread, be his opinion, without expres Scripture sall include all
kind of other meatis.


John Knox. I purge me first, that I neither burden my Lord, with
informalitie, neither yet, that his lordship, trauelleth by natural reason
only, to persuade to man. But because the whole state of the cause (as I
understand) stands in this, whether that Abraham and his soldiers brought
back again, superfluity of bread and wine or not, I have desired the same to
be prouen by the expressed word. The phrase is not mine only, but I did aggre
with my Lord, Let all men judge if this reason be not fufficient.
bringing in the same first. And now why I think that Abraham, and his, brought
no superfluity of bread and wine back again? the reason is, because the text
does plainly affirm, that victualles, besides the other substance, was
carried away by the enemies. But that any victualles, besides the substance were
brought back again, there is no specification.


M. Quintyne. Because I perceive John Knox, dois not meit the heid of my
partickle quhair I do mark the conferrence, betuix the phrases of the
Scriptures alleged be us both: quhairin (after my judgment) consistes the
marckis point of the purpose, I will travel na further thairin,
notwithstanding that I have ground of ye Scripture abundantly. And swa I will
go to ane other heid, to assure the reader that Melchisedec brocht not forth
bread and wine, to refresch Abraham and his company, I will ground me properly
upon the text, and on this manner. The text sayis, Protulit or proferens, quhilk
is in the singular number as, ane, person bringand forth bread and wine,
quhairfore necessarlie it concludes he brocht not forth bread and wine to
refresch ane multitude, as Abraham and his company was, quhllk was not possible
to ane person to do: but only to make Sacrifice conform to my beginning.


John Knox. What I have answered, the beneuolent reader shall after judge, to
the present conjecture of my Lord, I answer that if Melchisedec allone without
al company had brought only forth so much bread and wine, as he was able
goodly to carry, yet shall it not be necessarlie concluded that therefore he
brought it not forth to gratify Abraham, for an small portion may oftentimes be
thankful to many, but my Lord appears to shoot at that ground, which I
have not laid for my principal. And therefore albeit his lordship should win it,
yet my formar strength were little deminished (in my judgment) for onles his
lordship, be able to prove by the pertain words of the text that the bread
and wine were brought forth to be offered unto God, my principal ground does
always abide. But ye phrase of the Scripture, and als the ordinary manner of
speaking, does often times attribute to the principal man, that which at his
commandment, or will is done, by his seruandes or subjects, whereof I offer my
self, to shaw in Scriptures, mo testimonies then one, with time. And yet this
is not my chief ground, but this I speak for explaning of the text.


M. Quintyne. Of the formar pertickle I mark two heides in special, quhilk
dois not only give apperance for my pretense, bot plainly dois convict, as
the godly and ineffectionat reader may cleirly perceive. The first heid is,
quhair John Knox dois allege that Melchisedec brocht forth bread and wine,
Consider what shifts my lord sought.
to refresch Abraham and his werie company, quhilk plainly differis fra his
speaking present, say and that it was to gratify Abraham and his company,
quhairinto their is sic manifest diffirence as it gives plain persuasion, his
ground in this heid to be nochtis. Secondly, it is against the ordur of nature,
to think that any ane man (lat be ane King and ane Priest) sold bring forth
that might gratify, lat be to refresch sic ane multitude as, three hundredth and
auchtene werie personis.


John Knox. What my Lords judgment does move in the hearts of the auditure, I
remitt to there own judgment, but I plainly affirm: that neither in my word,
nor in my dytment is, there any such repugnance or diffirence, as justly may
convict me to have an evil ground. For in my formar sayings, my words were,
that by probable conjecture, the bread and wine were brought forth by
Melchisedec, to refresh Abraham and his werie company. I did not affirm, Note
that he and his whole company were thereof wholylie refreshed. And in my
latter words, I say, that albeit there had been no more bread and wine, then
Melchisedec only brought forth, yet does it not thereof necessarlie conclude,
yt the same were not brought forth, to gratify Abraham. In which manner of
speech, this term gratify, does nether repung, nor yet differ, from the
term refresh, otherwise, commonly does in manner of speech Benus and Species,
that is to say, the more general, and the inferior. For in sofar as Abraham
and his company were refreshed by the bread and wine (were it never so little)
in sofar does he bring it forth, to gratify him. Protesting plainly, that
unwillingly I am compelled thus to answer.

And thus ends the second days travel, all whole spent to answer my Lords
shifting.

Whereto he was moved, because he was not able to prove that Melchisedec
offered bread and wine unto God, as willingly ones he took to prove.


M. Quintyne. As dois John Knox, sa do I with all my heart, remit me to the
judgment of the auditor, in this heid: and will not report the heides, of his
formar pertickle for avoiding of prolixtnes.

But now will I conclude with ane argument.


And thus begins M. Quintyne the third day, having this argument written in
paper which he caused to be red. M. Quintyne. Quhatsu^euer opinion is conceived
of the Sciptures of almichtie God, hauand na expres testimony nor apperance of
the same, is alluterlie to be refused (as sayis John Knox him self). Bot swa it
is, that John Knox a win opinion, conceived or contracted of the Scripture,
concerning the bringing forth of bread and wine, by Melchisedec, to refresche
or gratify Abraham and his werie company, is not expressly contened in the
Scripture, nor hes na apperance of the samin: therefore it followis weill, that
it is alluterlie be his awin judgment to be refused.

Moved on godly zeill (honorable auditor) that in this dangerous time, the
treuth sold cum to trial, in sic manner, as the conscience of sic, as ar
perturbed (safar as lies in our sober possibility) sold be establesed, and
at quietness: we set forth certane artickles (as plesed God to gif us grace)
unto the quhilkis, John Knox tuik on hand to make impungnation: specially to the
artickle concerning the mess. Day hour and place beand appointed and
observed, I come to defend my artickles, and in special my artickle concerning
the mess. Let the blindest amongs the Papists judge.
And according to the samin, tuik me properly to my warrant, grounded vpone
Gods word: unto the quhilk warrant, John Knox, as it hes maid na
impungnation, bot desired me to sustene and defend the name, the actor, the
ceremonies, the opinion of men conceived of the mess, and gif it was ane
Sacrifice Propiciatorie. I beand willed, that we schortlie sold go to the
ground, and effect, and substance of the purpose quhairfore we come, I stude be
my artickle and warrant, as they are written: not refusand to defend, the heides
above reheirsed, as time and place sold serve. And notwithstanding that I was
sufficiently grounded upon Gods word, quhilk I tuik to be my warrant, Note
that my Lord confesses that he was persewer and that he hes hurt his own cause.
and tuik likewise upon me, far above my ability, the place and personage of
ane defender: nottheles throuch occasion that served (as work will beir witness)
I was constrained to tak upon me the personage of ane persewer, far by my
appetit, ea, and the weill of my cause: and als by the opinion of all sic as
wald the weill of the samin, moved on godly zeill (as God be judge) that the
truth sold cum to a trial, Sed sero sapiunt Poriges.
to the pleasure of God, and satisfaction of the honorable auditor, I beand
cled with the personage of ane impungnar, expres contrar to my mind, for sic
causes as ar abone reheirsed, I maid impu^gnation, not be manly imaginationis,
bot be the manifest word of God. And that three manner of ways, Let your
friends yet judge
first to tak away John Knox conceived opinion, that Melchisedec brocht forth
bread and wine, to refresche or gratify Abraham and his werie company, I
called to remembrance, how that the spuleis of nine Kingis, and of certain
citeis to, was recovered be Abraham, quhairthrouch, he and his company, was
sufficiently refresched, and had yneuch to be refresched on, swa that they
mistered not to be refreshed with breid and wine of Melchisedec. Secondly
quhair Io. Knox maid question, that they had not bread and wine. I returned
again to the text, to werifie the samin. Quhilk says, and all thingis,
pertenand unto meat. Inferrand that in this phrase, was contened bread and
wine, conform to the phrase of the Scripture, quhair mention is maid only of
bread, contenand all thingis necessar for ma^nis sustentacion, he find and this
not sufficient satisfaction. it eid I not to ma^nis imagination, bot to the
plain text, and grounded me upon the words of the text sayand. Melchisedec
brocht forth bread and wine. Inferrand, in that it was spoken in the third
person singular, How shall that be prouen.
it was against the ordoure of nature, to think that ane man, sold bring forth
(especially he that was ane King and ane priest) to tak that pains to bring
forth bread and wine, that micht gratify (lat be to refresch) three hundredth
and auchtene men. Seand that inuinsible persuations, properly gathered upon
the text, But did nor does not so appeir to others.
could na wise bring John Knox, to confess that thing quhilk appeared unto me
conform to the Scriptures of almichtie God, and all good resson he sold have
confessed. Then concluded I with the Scriptures, Nor yet will do to hurt a just
cause
as I did begin, as my conclusion will beir witness, that he wald have justified
his opinion conceived of the Scripture, co^form to his awin sayingis, be the
expres word of God. And of my liberality will grant him it, gif he hes any
manner of apperance of the samin, notwithstanding he said to me, he wald not gif
me ane hair of his heid, gif I sold stand their seven eires.


John Knox. Protesting first, that I may answer, in writ, unto the formar
argument (because as I perceive it was before conceived in writ) I enter in
shortly unto the long discourse, made by my Lord: not willing to answer
every part thereof, but only so much, as may appear to infirm the just
cause. And first, where that my Lord affirms, that I have made no
impungnation unto his lordships artickle concerning the mass, I am content,
that not only this honorable audience, but also the whole earth be judge, in
that point. For I have plainly denied, Note,
that either the mass, has approbation of the plain word of God, either in
name, action, opinion (to wit written of the mass, taucht of the mass, and
in the conscience of men, conceived of the mass) and finally that the actor
thereof, for his usurped power, has no greater assurance of Gods word. Which
whole heads being denied to be disputed, at the present, against my Lordrs
artickle and ground, I did thus reason: that his lordeship was not able to
prove that Christ Jesus, in his latter Supper did offer his body and blood
unto God his Father, under the forms of bread and wine. His lordeship taking
for his prove, the alleged Sacrifice of Melchisedec in bread and wine, offered
unto God. I did likewise deny, that Melchisedec did at that time (to wit in the
presence of Abraham) offer either bread or wine unto God, which has been these
two days bypast in controversy betuix his lordeship and me. I have always
denied, that the holy Spirit, in any notable or evident place of Scripture
does affirm such an sacrifice to have been made by Melchisedec unto God: and
whil ye I did hear no place of Scripture adduced, for the approbation thereof,
my Lord demandand of me, what then I thought was done with the bread and wine,
I answered, that albeit, I was not bound to give my judgment, because that he
was bound to prove his affirmative (as yet I say he is bound) and thereof I
will be content, Considder what judges I admit
that his lordshipes most favorable freindes, of best judgment, yea, even if
his Lordeship please, the Lords of the Session, be judges in that point. I
answered, I say, that be conjecture, the bread and wine were brought forth by
Melchisedec, to refreshe Abraham, and his werie company. Upon which occasion,
his lordship (how justly let all me^ judge) did cleith him self again,
Contrar the objection made of impossibility and that it was against nature
that Melchisedec allone should bring forth bread. etc.
without my procurement, with the personage of ane impungnar.

And did adduce such things, as best pleased his lordship, whereto I did
answer, as ye whole conference will report, and as I suppose, sufficiently to
every thing objected, except that because my Lord did not touch the
exposition alledgede by me, upon the words, Melchisedec allone did bring forth
bread and wine (as my Lord alleges) I differed to bring in the conference of
Scriptures, to prove that it is an thing in Scripture verrie commone, that the
thing, that is done at the command of any notable person, is attributed unto
him self, although it be done, be seruandes or subjects at his command, which I
do now shortly. It is said in Scripture, that Noie did all that God commanded
him: and plain it is, that God commanded him to make the Arck, Genesis 6.7.
which was i^ building the full space of a hundredth years. God further
commanded him to furnish the Arck with all kind of victualles, which the text
affirms, that he did. Now if we shall conclude, that Noie allone cutted every
tree, Noie allone did hew every tree, and so forth: it appears to me that we
shall conclude a great absurdity. The same is evident in David, of whom
mention is made, that he being Prophet and King, 2 Samuel ^
divided to the whole people, yea, unto the whole multitude of Israel, yea,
both to men and women, an portion of bread, an portion of flesh, and an
portion of wine.

If we shall think, that David did this with his own hand, we shall conclude in
my appearance, ye formar absurdity. The same is manifest by many other
phrases, yea, and by our daily manner of speaking. And therefore yet as of
before. I think my Lords exposition coact, in that he will admit none to have
brought forth the bread and wine, but Melchisedec allone. But howsoever it be,
it moves me nothing, for unto such time, as that my Lord, in plain words
pronounced by the holy Ghost, prove that Melchisedec, did offer unto God bread
and wine: he has prouen nothing of that, which he took on hand to prove. And
therefore I greatly fear, that whill that, The best ground, culd find no
ground within the word of God.
which his lordeship calls the best, is so long in finding an sure ground
within the Scripture, that the rest in the end, be found altogether groundles,
at the least within ye book of God. And therefore I desire, as of before, to
hear his lordshipes probation of the principal.


M. Quintyne. I am sorry that we are contrined on this manner, to drive time,
ather parteis in justification of his a win cause: bot wisses quickly to go to
the markis point, as I have ever done, conform to my artickle and to my
warrant: and makis the hail world to judge, quhither it is my deutie, after
formal ressoning, to defend the saides artickles, or to prove, or to impung.
Quhair John Knox makis ane meine, that I have brocht my arguments or purposes
in writ: quhat I have in word or writ, or vtherwayes, I praise God.

Bot the truth is, according to my custom, I maid memory, after my repose,
of sic heides, as I thocht, I was able to have business ado with all. And that I
did be the grace of God only, not that I am eschamed to be learned with any
man that will teach me. And as to the conclusion of his partickle, quhair he
dois make meine, yat I have na ground of the Scripture for the mess (as he
beleuis) will God sall frustrat his expectation in that, When ye perform promise
let men believe you.
and all vthers. And assures him will God sall justify the mess als
sufficiently, conform to my artickle, as he and all the rest of his opinion
in christendom, salbe able to justify be expres Scripture, or any other
meine, that Jesus Christ is ane substance with the Father. Homonsion sieve
co^substantialis
And that it be not thocht that their ar wantone words, like as the matter sold
not cum to pas, bot that I wald trifle the matter: I will desire John Knox may
humbly and hartlie, for Christ's saike, let us go schortlie without trifling
to the purpose, and lat wark beir witness. And swa requires, to resume my
argument, and say thereto formalie as effeires.


John Knox. Because that every man must give accomptes before God, not only
of his works, but also of his words and thoghts. I will make no further
protestation, whether that I have defended hitherto my own opinion, or a
manifest treuth, or whether that I have impungned any treuth of God, or a
manifest lie (let this be said with reverence of all persons, for the iustnes
of the cause) leaving, I say, the judgment to God: I say that I have in plain
terms justly oppungned both the grou^des, brought forth by my Lord, for
defense of his artickle. For in plain words, I have denied, that Jesus
Christ, into his latter Supper, did make any Sacrifice of his body and blood,
under the forms of bread and wine, unto God his Father. And likewise I have
denied, that Melchisedec did offer unto God, bread and wine as of before. which
grou^des, because my Lord has not hitherto prouen, I must hold them as
impunged and oppu^gned: ever whill, I hear the ground of Melchisedec, plainly
prouen, by plain Scripture (to wit) that the plain Scripture say, that
Melchisedec offered unto God bread and wine: Let my lord answer when he pleases.
or that it be of any plain and evident Scripture, plainly convicted, that so
he did. His lordship, oght not to think it strange, although I require to answer
in writ, to that argument, which his Lordeship has proponded, conceived
before, and committed in writ, for such I take to be, the liberty of all fre
disputations. Whose lauboure it was, or is, I nothing regard. For so long as
God does minister unto me, spirit and life, with judgment and ability, I
intend (by his grace) til oppu^g, that which in my conscience I hold to be
damnable idolatry. And where his lordship says, that he is als able to
affirm the mass (which I impung) to be the ordinance of God, as that I or any
of my opinion, is able to prove Jesus Christ to be one substance with the
Father: Let the godly judge if the mass and Christ Jesus and his divinity
oght to hing in one balance.
with reverence of his lordshipes personage blood, and honor, and with the
reverence and patience, of the whole auditor, I say, that the assercion is not
only rash, but also most dangerous, yea, and in a part blasphemous. For,
for to compare the greatest mystery, yea, the whole assurance of our
redemption, with that, which as it has been used, has no approbation of Gods
word (for that I have impu^gned, and intendes to impung) can not lack
suspicion, of a lightly esteaming of our redemption. And to cut the matter
short, the formar question being decided (to wit whither that Melchisedec, did
offer unto God bread and wine) I offer my self, without further delay, to
prove, that Jesus Christ, is of one substance with the Father: and that by the
evident testimonies of Gods Scriptures. And therefore yet as of before, I
humbly require his lordeship, to prepare him for his probation of the formar,
to wit, of the oblation of Melchisedec.


M. Quintyne. Quhair John Knox dois affirm, that in plain termis, he hes
justly impunged, both ye grou^des, brocht forth be me, for defense of my
artickles. I answer, I deny that he hes maid any impu^gnation. And quhair he
says, that in plain words, he hes denied, that Jesus Christ, into his
latter Supper, did make any Sacrifice of his body and blude, under the forms
of bread and wine, unto God his Father: or that Melchisedec did offer unto God
bread and wine, Your warra^d is so weak that it neides no other impugnation,
the^ to say it is not
as of before. I answer, that it is his deutie to make impugnation, to my
assercion, conform to my warrant, for denying, is na proper nor sufficient
impugnation. And quhair he says, that because I have not hidderto prouen the
saides grou^dis. etc. I answer, that it is my deutie to defend and not to
preif, conform to my artickle, and my warrant. And quhair he desires time to
answer to my argument, proponed this day in writ, I freely grant it unto him.
And quhair John Knox says, Then ye ouersaw yourself.
yat my assertion is not only rash, bot also may dangerous, ea, and in ane
pairt, blasphemous. I answer, that quhair he says, I am to rash: I wis his
modestnes in this samin, sic as becu^is ane sinceir christian, like as he is
reckned to be. Blasphemy is blasphemy before that man prove it.
And quhair he callis my assertion in ane pairt blasphemous: than had been time
to have called it blasphemy, quhen he had prouen it in deid sufficiently. And
quhair he says, it is dangerous, their is na danger, it be and understand, as
I say, and treulie meines. For I am mair nor assured, that Jesus Christ our
Lord, is ane substance with the Father, Not as papists have used it.
and als that Jesus Christ is the author and institutor of the mess. And swa
dois not ane verity, make impugnation to ane other. Bot in this manner of
speaking, I will plain my industry, given unto me be the grace of God, Aduerr
what ye speak.
willing to contrafit the wisdom and prudence, of the wise and prudent
medicinar (for we are, and sold be of resson, medicinars to the saul) for
like as the prudent medicinar, dois expel ane vennome or poysome, be
contrapoysone. Swa wald I expel the damnable herisies, of the Caluinistes, My
lord would have bursen if this byle had not broken.
Lutherians, and Accolampadians, against ye blissed Sacrifice of ye mess, be
conference with the damnable herisies of the Arrians, quha did allege ten
testimonies of Scripture for ane, geuand mair appearance, to preif that Christ
was not ane substance with the Father: nor dois the Caluinistes, Lutherians,
and Aecolampadians, to preif that the mess, is idolatry: as I fall
sufficiently justify, as may stand to the glory of God, and weil of my
cause. To the latter pairt, quhair he says, to cut the matter schort, the
f^r^nar question be and decided (to wit quhither that Melchisedec did offer
breid and wine unto God or not) he offeris him self without farther delay, to
prove yat Jesus Christ is ane substance with the Father. etc. I answer to the
hinder pairt of this partickle. I wis of God, he and all vthers of his opinion
mistered als little probation or persuasion, to the ane, as I do to the other,
as I wald say, to believe the mess, to be the institution of Christ Jesus, as I
do mair nor assuredly believe, Christ to be ane substance with the Father,
That are you never able to do.
and desires na probation thereof: bot sall God will and preif ye ane be the
Scripture als expres, as he sall preif ye other. And quhair he humbly desires
me, to prepair me for the probatio^ of the formar (to wit of the oblation of
Melchisedec) I humbly and hartlie desire John Knox, as he will testify his
feruor, that the treuth cum to ane trial, and as he will satisfy the
expectation of the noble auditor, that he will make impugnation formallie
according to his deutie, to my last argument and conclusion.


John Knox. Where my Lord to unburden him self of that, which by all reason, he
oght to susteane, to wit, to prove his affirmative, by him self proponed, Your
lordship took to prove your ground by the text, and that you have not don.
says, that to deny, is not properly to impung. I answer, that in that case,
it is most proper. For he that proponeth for him self an affirmative, and his
aduersar denying the same, is ever still bound to the probation thereof, and
the aduersar has ever still impungned it, unto he prove it, and thereupon I
desire judgment. To the Second, I still affirm that it is his lordships
deutie, to prove his affirmative, whereupon stands the victory of his whole
cause: wc is be me in plain words denied. To the third, I thank his lordship
hartlie, And that he hes received
and promises unto him an answer, again in writ, this present conference being
put to an sufficient end. To the fourt. As my protestation will witness, I speak
against the assercio^ only and not against the person: which yet (in my
judgment) lacks not suspicion of the formar crimes. For howsoever my Lord be
persuaded of the ground and assurance of the mess (the assurance whereof I
have not yet hard) I my self am fully assured, that there be mo then ten
thousand, which evidently do know, the vanity and impiety of that mass,
which I have impungned: who nottheles, most constantly believe Jesus Christ,
to be of one substance with the Father: yea, that do believe, whatsoever by the
Scriptures of God, can be prouen necessary, for ye salvation of man. Therefore
yet again, I say, that to lay in any manner of equality, that which is most
sure, and that which was never yet plainly prouen by the Scriptures of God, to
be the institution of Jesus Christ: is more subject to the crimes foresaid,
then that I can be subject to any suspicion of immodestie for my formar words.
To the blasphemy, I answer, as before. Immediately to the sext. How that ever
my Lord understands and means, that his lordship is als able, to prove the
mass to be the institution of Jesus Christ, as I am able to prove Christ, to
be one substance with the Father: I think that an great number will think my
lords affirmation, verrie hard to be prouen. And I my self will still
continually dout, unto the time, I hear the probation led. To the seuent, as
touching my Lords comparison of the mediciner, and of his lordships industry.
What the pastors of ye Church oght to be, the Scriptures plainly do teach us:
but what universally they have been these nine hundredth years bypast,
histories, experience, and recent memory, has taught us, yea, and presently
do teach us: to the great grief of all Christianity. Where that his lordship
does in plain terms, condempn the Caluinistes, Lutherians and
Aecolampadians, of herisie: I would have required of his lordship delay of time,
according to his desire of me, unto the time, that there cause had been
sufficie^tlie tried, in an lawful, universal counsel, deulie indicted, and
conuened. But where that he compares, the doctrine of the forenamed, with the
damnable heresy, of Arrius: I would likewise have wished unto his lordship
greater foresight, in so grave a matter. For howsoever the Arrians appeared to
abou^d in testimonies of Scriptures, without all ground, indistinctlie
co^gested (and that because they made no diffreence betuix the two natures in
Jesus Christ, Let my lord accuse before he co^pai^.
but did foolishlie appropriat to the Godhead, that, which did only aperteane
to the manly nature) yet think I, that my lord shall never be able, by plain
Scripture, to impung any chief head, either affirmed, or denied, in doctrine of
salvation by the foresaides persons: like as did the godly and learned in there
ages, the foresaid damnable herisie. To the last, I have already promised to
answer, to my Lords argument in writ: and therefore oght not to be burdened
with it now, especially because it is without our formar ground, and does not
properly aperteane to the cause. And yet therefore now last for conclusion,
that we shall not be compelled continually to repeat on thing, I desire my lord
according to his deutie, and reason of disputation, Heir my lord stayed and for
answer offerred to me a book.
to bring forth his probation of his two formar grounds, be me plainly denied.

This conference being ended, for this time, my Lord presently did rise, for
trouble of body, and then John Knox, did shortly resume, the principal
grounds. And because the noblemen heir assembled, were altogether destitute of
all provision, both for horse and man, the said John, humbly required the
foresaid Lord, that it would please him to go to Air, where that better easiment
migh be had for all estates. Which because my Lord utterly refused, the said
John desired when that the said conference should be ended. My Lord did
promise, that upon license purchased, Whither I have so done or nor mo then them
selves can witness.
of the Queen's majesty, and her honorable counsel, that he would co^peir in
Edinburgh, and there, in there presence, finish the said conference. The said
John did promise, to travel with the secret counsel, that the said license might
be obtained. And desired the foresaid Lord, to do the like with the Queen's
majesty, whereupon the said John Knox, took instruments and documents.


M. Quintyne. At the conclusion of our ressoning, The answer was given before,
so that it apperteaned not to me to prove my interpretation, but it appertened
to my lord to prove that melchisedec offerred etc. But that can not my lord
understand
I gaif John Knox ane argument in writ, desiring him that he wald justify his
opinion be expres testimony of Scripture, or any apperance thereof. Quhairto
the said John required time to gif answer, and the time, micht nawise serve, of
farther ressoning, for sic causes, as ar comprehended in the said John Knox
writing. And as toward his desire of me to Air, treulie it was ye thing that I
micht not presently, co^modiously do. Bot always, I will copeir before ye
Queen's grace, and sic as hit grace, plesis to take to be auditors, to defend
the saides artickles, and in special the artickle concerning the mess, as they
ar written, qu^en and quhair it be her grace pleasure, swa that the ability of
my body will serve any wise as I hope to God it sall, to quhom be praise
glory and honor for ever.


Crosraguell

The answer to my Lords last argument, proponed by him in writ, the last day
of disputation. The argument is this.
M. Quintyne. WHatsumeuer opinion, is conceived of the Scriptures of almichty
God, hauand na expres testimony nor apperance of the samin: is utterly to be
refused, as says John Knox him self. Bot swa it is, that John Knox a win
opinion conceived or contracted of the Scripture, concerning the bringing forth
of bread and wine, be Melchisedec, to refresh or gratify, Abraham and his
werie company, is not expressly contained in the Scripture, nor hes na apperance
of the samin, thairfore it fal^^ wis wei^, that it is all^terlie be his awin
judgment to be refused.


John Knox. If I should grant unto you, my Lord your whole argument, I should
but declare my self ignorant of the art, and ^^^lyndful of my own affirmation:
but yet had ye prouen nothing of your intent. The chief question, and
controversy betuix you and me, is not whether that my interpretation of that
place which (...) your instance and (...) not: but whether that Melchisedec the
figure of Christ, did offer unto God bread and wine, which ye have affirmed,
and have laid it to be the ground and cause, why it behooved Christ Jesus, to
have made oblation of his body and blood, under the forms of bread and wine,
in his latter Supper. Which both I denied. So that it rests to you to prove,
that Melchisedec the figure of Christ, did offer unto God bread and wine. etc.
And apperteines not unto me, to prove my opinion, nor interpretation. For
supposing that my opinion, conceived of that place were to be rejected (as ye
are never able to prove it to ^e) yet is your affirmative, never the better
prouen, for if ye will conclude: it was not brought forth to refresh Abraham
(which yet is not prouen) ergo it was brought forth to be offered unto God:
babes will mock you, and send you again to your logic. But yet my Lord with
your leave I must come nerar you, and say, that the mayor or first part of your
argument is false and that ye falsely allege upon me, that which I never spak
nor meant.

Read the whole conference betuix you and me, and ye shall not find that I have
simple affirmed that all opinion of man, conceived of the Scriptures, is
utterly to be rejected: onles the same be prouen by the manifest word of God.
For I am not ignorant that some interpretatio^s ar tolerable, yea, and may be
to the edification of the Church, although they do not fully expres, the mind
of the holy Ghost, in that place. But I have affirmed, and yet affirms, that
nether the authority of the Church, the determination of the counsel, nor the
opinion of the doctor, is to be received in matters of faith, and in the
doctrine concerning our salvation: onles the same be prouen by the expres word
of God. And therefore my Lord, with your leave, I must say, that either wilfully
or else by some oversight, ye have omitted both in the mayor and in the minor
of your argument, that which should have been, ye cause and assurance of your
conclusion. For thus ye oght to have reasoned. Whatsoever opinion is conceived
of the Scripture of almighty God, concerning faith and the doctrine of
Salvation, having no expres testimony of the same, is to be rejected. But so
it is, that John Knox own opinion, concerning the bringing forth of bread and
wine by Melchisedec, is a matter concerning faith, and the doctrine of our
Salvation, and yet has no testimony of Gods expressed word: therefore it is
to be rejected. If on this manner ye had reasoned, my Lord, (as of necessity ye
must do, if ye conclude any thing against me) I would have immediately denied
the second part of your argument, and have said: that to know or define, what
was done with the bread and wine, brought out by Melchisedec, is no artickle of
our believe, nether yet is it a doctrine, necessary to the Salvation of man.
For nether did Adam, Abel, Seth, Enos, Henoch, Mathusalem, nor Noie, believe any
such thing, nether yet is there since the days of Abraham, any commandment
given by God, to believe such an artickle, yea, further in the whole
Scriptures, there is no mention made what was done with that bread and wine,
and therefore it can be no artickle of our believe, nor yet no doctrine
concerning our Salvation, and so has your argument broken the own neck. If I
list, my Lord to sport a lytill with you, I might find some occasion in the
second part of your argument. For where ye affirm that my opinion concerning
the bringing forth of the bread and wine, by Melchisedec, to refresh Abraham
and his company, is nether expressly contained in the word of God, nether yet
has appearance of the same: and therefore utterly it is to be rejected. Now
my Lord give me leave, to turn this part of your argument in your own
bosom, if I can, and that so I may do, thus I reason.

The opinion conceived by my Lord Abbote, concerning bread and wine, brought
forth by Melchisedec to be offered unto God, is not expressly contained in Gods
Scriptures, therefore it is utterly to be rejected. Bewarre my Lord, that ye
be not beaten with your own batton: Let my lord degest this
for then must the mass, yea, the best part of the same, stand upon an unsure
ground, that is to say, upon the opinion of man, and having no assurance of
Gods expressed word. But now my Lord, meryues set aside, I humbly require
you, by my pen, as I did by mouth, that deeply ye consider, with what
conscience before God, ye da^ affirm ye doctrine to be wholesome, yea, and
necessary to be believed, ye are able to bring no prufe out of the manifest word
of God. The second day of our conference and disputation, when I was
constrained to answer, your treuole co^iectures and vanities: your bragges and
boste, ofter blown out then ones, were, that your probation should be so
evident, that the stones should hear your probation, and ye dead walls should
se the iustnes of your cause. I patiently did abide (although perchance with the
grief of some brethren) these your wantone words, and thought with my self
Parturiunt montes. etc. But what is now produced and brought forth; the world
may se. It may appear that ye were hard beset, when for to avoid the prufe of
your own affirmative, ye fled to impugn, that which apperteaneth nothing to
the purpose. For as I was not bound to have shown unto you what I thought was
done with the bread and wine, brought forth by Melchisedec, so was I not bound
to have defended, my interpretation and judgment of that place: but unto you
it always aperteineth (and if ever we meit again upon that head, it will be yet
judged to aperteine to you) to prove that Melchisedec, did at that time offer
bread and wine unto God, which I am well assured, that ye are never able to do,
by any testimony of Gods word. Note.
And therefore must I say, the mass stands groundles. And the greatest
pa^r^^^ thereof, for all his sicker riding has ones lost his stirropes, yea,
is altogether set besides his sadil. And yet the common brute goes, that ye my
Lord, your flatterers, and collateralles brag greatly of your victory,
obtained in disputation against John Knox, but I will not believe you to be so
vain onles I shall know the certantie by your owen hand writ.

Let all men now judge upon what ground the Sacrifice of the mass stands.
The heavenly Father has not planted within his Scriptures such a doctrine. It
follows therefore that it oght to be rooted out of all godly me^nes hearts.


the end
Imprinted at Edinburgh by Robert ^ekpreuk. Cum priuilegio. 1563.


