CHRISTIAN POLICY: OR THE CHRISTIAN COMMONWEALTH.

Published for the good of Kings, and Princes, and such as are in authority
under them, and trusted with State Affairs.

Written in Spanish, and translated into English.



LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER, for Edward Blount.

M.DC.XXXII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JAMES HAY, EARL OF Carlisle, Viscount Doncaster, Lord
HAY of Sauley, Gentleman of the Bedchamber to our Sovereign Lord King
CHARLES, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable:
KNowing man better verst in public affairs, then your self, I could not
more fitly address this Discourse, then to you, without the rifling of any
particular man's merit: (...) may ascribe as much to the praise of your
exercise, as any can assume to his private Notions, or Public Observations.
To speak the story of your true and ingenious acts in foreign, (and in those
foreign, the most subtle and active parts) would rather seem a Tract, then
a Dedication of a Book; but here you are only Patron, though I know you might
by your natural gifts and observations, be Author of a far better piece. You
have been long the entrusted servant of your Prince, which should employ you
the darling of his people, and truly you ought to be so, whilst Truth relates
the story of deserving men, or Honesty reads their merit. What, and whose work
of politic government this is, your eyes may at leisure look over, while
your quicker eyes, I mean your discerning mind, may Perhaps correct, yet (I
hope) not chide his labor, who was willing, though not able to serve you in a
piece worthy your observation. If in the translation there be any thing that
has forsaken the Original, it was intention, and not negligence, of which
there needs no account.

My good Lord, there is nothing left, but to implore your pardon for the
preferring this work; which if it shall appear unworthy your grave perusal,
yet at the least, forgive his intention, who conceived it a direct way of
expressing himself to be

Your Honors truly devoted, EDWARD BLOVNT.


THE AVTHORS EPISTLE DEDICATOrie to the King of SPAIN.
Sir,
THe cause why the Ancients by fire signify Love, is, for that this Element is
the hardest to be hid: For the more a man seeks to cover it, the more it
discouers it self, and blabbs the place, where it is. Of this quality is Love,
and truly participateth of the nature of fire. I came (says our Savior
Christ) to put fire into the world. And the holy Ghost, which is the true God
of Love, came and showed it self in the shape and figure of fire. So that Love
is a kind of extraordinary active fire. Nor can it, wheresoever it be, be hid,
or idle. Operatur magna, si est, (says Saint Gregory) si autem non operatur,
amor non est. Love will be always in action, always in working; it works by
benefits; it works by good works, and by friendly offices, and charitable
services: And when it cannot work what it would, or when the subject whereon
it would work, has no need thereof, it supplyeth that defect with good
desires, and words. God, who needs not the service of any, contents himself
with this in those that are his servants, accepting (when they can no more) the
will, for the deed. And the Kings, which here upon earth represent his person,
do not require tribute and service, save only in that, which every one is
able to give. That which J am able to afford, and do here offer unto your
Majesty, forced thereunto by the love of my service, (howbeit my desire has
evermore had a larger extent) is only a parcel of words; which if they
proceed from the soul, and come truly and sincerely from the heart, are of
some worth and estimation, and perhaps (upon occasion) may prove likewise
profitable and aduantagious. Howsoever, it may serve at least to express that
my service and devotion, which ever has been, is, and shall be ready pressed to
serve your Majesty. And I am willing to show it in this little, that I may not
wholly seem unprofitable. And therefore with this affection of Love, suitable
to my subject, ouercomming those fears which are wont (and not without reason)
to withhold those that treat with great Kings, Princes, and Monarckes, and
write of such and the like subjects, I presume to advertise them, and in this
paper to propone unto them, that which I find written of those that are past
and gone, (and seems very fit and convenient for the conservation and
augmentation of the authority and greatness of those that are now living and
present amongst us) and will with all possible breuity, procure a full
resolution and distinction herein: And (as Seneca says) Totum comprehendere
sub exiguo; Sen. epist. 84. in princip.
To comprise much under a little. For, as that is the better sort of money,
which in the matter is the lesser, but the greater in value; so likewise that
Learning is the best, which is brief in words, and large in sentences. It is
Maximus his counsel, that Multa, and magna, Valor. Max.
breuiter sunt dicenda. Matters that are many and great, are briefly to be
delivered. For this breuities sake therefore, as also for the greatness of
your Majesty's employments, and the great burden of so many weighty businesses
that lie upon you, I will not here interpose any large discourses and long
disputations, wherewith to entertain and spend the time: but brief, certain,
and general Doctrines, such as are of most profit, comprehend most subjects,
and may be applied to particular, both persons and things, all taken out of the
Politics, the law of nature, and men that are Statists, and no way contrary to
the Law of God, and Christian Religion: As likewise out of ancient
Philosophers, and wise men, both Lawyers and Lawmakers. Accompanied wholly for
to give credit to the cause, and that the subject may not be disesteemed as an
egg of mine own hatching) with the examples of Kings and Emperors, (if the
examples of Kings may move Kings) and with those which cannot but move, be
esteemed, and believed, being drawn out of the holy Scripture. Which being
well observed and put in execution by Kings, they shall obtain that end for
which they were intended; To wit, to maintain and preserve their Kingdoms in
peace and justice.

Read it therefore, I beseech your Majesty, and take it to heart; for it is a
piece of work that is directed to the service of Kings, of their Favorites
and Ministers. And let them not say, that they are Metaphysicall, and
impracticable things, or, in a manner, mere impossibilities, but rather, that
they are very conformable to our possibility, and practiced by our
Predecessors, Princes of famous memory, for their wisdom and prudence, and in
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, of great Concernment, Artifice, and Policy, in
matter of Government, and reason of State. And viewing those with these times,
and that which then was, with that which now is, it will appear unto us, that
your present Princes do not come much behind their good Predecessors: And
that which is good, stands always in a way or degree of ableness to become
better: and that which is not so, may be bettered in the end. Time is a great
proficient, it attaineth to all, and can do all. And your Majesty (whom God
preserve) may likewise in time do the like, if you will really and resolutely
affect the same; and that you will be pleased to put in execution, what in
these Aduertisements shall seem good in your eyes. And seem they, or not
seem they good unto you, sure I am, that my desire, in these, in the rest, and
in all, shall endeavor to hit the mark whereat it aymeth. God direct it as I
desire. For mine own part, J rest well contented with my pains, and hold my
self well paid for my labor, in having put them into your Majesty's hands.
And that you shall vouchsafe to dwell a little upon them. For matters of State,
Justice, and Government, and of things of this high nature, is a King-craft,
and a knowledge or science that deserves your care and discourse. Let others
do as they lift; particular men may follow their particular pleasures and
delights. But this well becomes Kings.

The Argument of this Book, is the Head of Man's body; beginning at the
understanding, till we come to the last of the senses. For therein, and thence
they have the principium or beginning of their operations. And as in man's body,
so in the mystical body of a Commonwealth, Kings are the Head, to whom
Regiment and Government belongs; and what choice they are to make of those who
are to assist them therein; the qualities which they ought to have, and how
they should carry themselves toward them. How they shall come to discover the
humors, affections, minds, and dispositions of their Ministers. And in a
word, how they ought to behave themselves in all, and with all.

I search not into the secret closet of any man's bosom, nor touch upon any
particular person, it being the least part of my intent and purpose. I treat
only in the general, and manifest unto all, that what I write, being certain
and true, and grounded upon principles and certain causes, may serve to
reform, amend, and correct, and (if need be) alter those fashions and
customs they find to be amiss. This I am bold to utter unto your Majesty,
and dedicate the same with that security and confidence, which mine own
knowledge does promise and prompt unto me; being not ignorant, that I talk
and discourse with mine own proper King and Lord, whom I humbly beseech, that
he will be pleased, out of his great prudence and natural piety, to run
all this over with his eye, and to cast his cloak over my faults. And though
(no doubt) his Majesty may meet with some, yet my mind tells me, that he
may likewise light upon something in this Treatise, that may be of some profit
for the service of his Majesty, and for the conservation of that authority
and greatness of place (which he so justly possesses, and for the good of the
Commonwealth. For, there is not that Book says Seneca) so unprofitable,
whence some good may not be gathered. And though this (in supposall, or it is
own nature) may be small, and of little or no price, yet is it of no less
noble and royal a condition, to receive a little lovingly, and with a gracious
acceptance, then to give much liberally. All this your Majesty does with all,
and I assure my self you will likewise do the like with me. For the natural
Love which I bear unto your Majesty, meriteth no less, nor the mind
wherewithal J do it. And herewith I shall in some sort satisfy my desire
(which is to hit the mark I aim at) and that obligation, wherewith I was
borne to serve you, whom I shall never willingly offend. And evermore, in all
my prayers, and sacrifices, I shall humbly on my knees beseech the Almighty
God, to preserve your Majesty, to give you many, and those most happy years,
and that he will conserve you in his divine grace, and humane Greatness, with
much augmentation of Estate, both Temporal and Eternal. Amen.

Your Majesty's servant and Chaplain, Fr. Iuan, de Sancta Maria.

A Table containing the Chapters and Paragraphes of this Book.
Chap. 1. WHerein it is briefly treated, what is comprehended in this word
Republicke, together with it is definition. Chapter 2. What the name of King
signifies. Chapter 3. Whether the name of King, be a name of Office. Chap. 4.
Of the Office of Kings. Chap. 5. Of the reason and understanding of Kings, and
of their wisdom. Chap. 6. How Kings ought to carry themselves in those
businesses, which their understanding comprehends not. Chapter 7. A
prosecution of the former Discourse; showing how Kings are to take Council:
And what signs they are to mark and observe for their better knowledge. Chap.
8. Of the diligences, which Kings are to use in the Election of their Ministers
and Councillors. Chap. 9. Of the qualities which Kings are to consider in
those, whom they are to make choice of for Ministers and Councillors. Chap.
10. He continues the discourse of the Qualities of Ministers and Councillors.
Chap. 11. Of other Courses and Means, which Kings may take for the notice of
such persons, in whom the said Qualities concur. Chap. 12. How Kings ought to
carry themselves toward those Ministers whom they find sufficient for the
Government both of Peace and War. Chap. 13. The Author prosecutes the same
Subject, and shows how Kings ought to carry themselves with their Counsels
and Councillors. Chap. 14. It is demanded by way of Question, Whether Kings
ought inuiolably to observe the foresaid Order. Chap. 15. Whether it be fit for
Kings, to use much the remitting of businesses. Chap. 16. Of the sense of the
fight: that is, of those businesses which Kings ought to reserve for their own
view, and to dispatch with their own hands. Chap. 17. He prosecuteth the same
matter, and shows, How Kings ought to carry themselves toward those that
find themselves aggrieued. Chap. 18. Of the sense of Hearing. And the
Audiences which Kings ought to give. Chapter 19. He goes on with the same
Matter, treating of the Audiences of Ministers and Councillors. Chap. 20. Of
the virtue of Justice, the natural sister and Companion of Kings. Chap. 21. Of
the parts of Justice in Common; and in particular of Justice commutatiue. Chap.
22. Of Justice distributive. Chap. 23. How, and in what sort, limitation in
giving, may suit with the greatness of Kings. Chap. 24. Of the repartment, and
division, which is to be used in the conferring of offices. And of the
knowledge of such persons as ought to be nominated for the said offices. Chap.
25. Whether Honors, Offices, and dignities, are to be conferred on those, that
sue for them. Chap. 26. Of the sense of smelling: that is, of the prudence of
Kings. Paragraph 1: Of the Magnanimity of mind, which Kings ought to have.
Paragraphe 2. Of the blandure, gentleness, and love, which Kings ought to
have. Parag. 3. That it much imports Kings, to have the good Love and
affection of their Subjects. Parag. 4. Of sagacitie, sharpness of wit, and
quickness of apprehension, which Kings ought to have. Parag. 5. Of the
Discretion, which Kings ought to have. Chap. 27. Of the sense of Tasting; and
of the virtue of Temperance; and how well it befitteth Kings: Chap. 28. When,
and at what time, sports and pastimes are worthiest reprehension in Kings.
Parag. 1. Of the Language, and Truth, which Kings, and wherewith Kings are to
treat, and to be treated. Parag. 2. That Kings ought to keep their Faith and
Word. Parag. 3. Of that secrecy which Kings and their Ministers ought to
keep. Parag. 4. Of Flatterers, and their flatteries. Chap. 29. Of the sense of
Touching. Parag. 1: Of Temperance. Parag. 2: Of another remedy against
Excesses, and superfluities, depending on the example of Kings. Chap. 30.
Whether it be fit for Kings to have Favorites: Chap. 31. Of another sort of
Favorites. Chap. 32 Whether it be fit for Kings, to have any more then one
Favorite. Chap. 33 Of the Conditions, and Qualities, of Favorites. Chap. 34
How Kings ought to carry themselves toward their Favorites. Chap. 35 Whether
the Kinsfolk, and Friends of Favorites, are to be excluded from Offices.
Chap. 36 The Conclusion of the former Discourse, with some Aduertisements for
Kings, and Favorites. Chap. 37 Aduertisements for Favorites, and Councillors
of State.
SAP: 6. v. 10. Ad vos (O Reges) sunt hi Sermones mei, vt discatis sapientiam,
and non excidatis: Qui enim custodierint iusta just, iustificabuntur, and qui
didicerint iusta, invenient quid respondeant.

WISDOM 6. v. 10. Unto you therefore (o Kings) do I speak, that ye may
learn Wisdom, and not go amiss. For they that keep holiness holily,
shall be holy, and they that are learned there, shall find defense.


CHAP. 1. Wherein it is briefly treated, what is comprehended in this Word,
Republicke, together with it is Definition.
MAny, and those of the grauest sort, that have been well versed in all kind
of Learning, have written of a Republicke, or Commonwealth; And have divided,
and sub-diuided it into many and sundry species, and defined it after diverse
and different manners; A prolixe, and tedious business, and full of
difficulties, and far wide of my intension (which is in few both words and
reasons) to describe a mystical body with it is Head, and principal members,
and the peculiar Offices belonging to every one of them, leaving (to such as
shall take pleasure therein) the multitude of unprofitable Questions, the
ornament of humane Eloquence, and the Magazine of profane histories, being of
little truth, and less efficacy. And taking thence my beginning whence all
begin; Arist. lib. 3. Polit. cap 1. lib. 4. cap. 1.
To wit: from the definition, or Description. I say with Aristotle and Plato,
That a Commonwealth is no other thing, save an Order of Citizens, and Cities;
in which and amongst whom, nothing is wanting, that is necessary and needful
for the life of Man. It is a just government, and disposition of many families,
and of a Community amongst them, with a superior authority over them. And it
is a Congregation of many people united together, fraternized, with certain
Laws and rules of government. And, because I will not loose time in things not
necessary, I omit that government, which the Greeks call Aristocratia, which
is the government of the Nobility, as it is with the Signorie of Venice. And
your Democratia, which is popular, and consistes of the Many, as that of Genoa,
and the Cantons of the Switz. Which (though approved by many) have their
inconveniences, and those no small ones. For the Nobility, and powerful
persons, if they not persevere in the observance of the Laws of good
government, they presently grow to be covetous, and are much subject to
Ambition. And because they are but a few, they fear the multitude; and for to
conserve themselves, exercise cruelty; whereby in the end it turns to a
Tyranny. For (as Mecoenas says.) The state of a few Lords, is the state of a
few Tyrants. And he that is the most powerful, the most ambitious, and best be
friended, and respected of the people, upon the least dissension, ioynes with
the multitude, which being it is naturally envious, mutable and a friend to
innovation, will with a great deal of facility overthrow the Commonwealth.
And say, the Nobles do not side, but agree amongst themselves, yet cannot they
but live in fear of the infidelity of the Vulgar; for ordinarily, those that
have a hand in the government, are more envied, then those that have none at
al. Besides, it is a weak kind of government, nor is it possible, that these
few Lords, can in large, conquer, and conserve a great Empire, as can a King,
or a Monarke, because the forces are less united in them, then in him. And the
people which is little interessed, and has no share or part in those
honorable places, carry a Capital hatred to your great persons, and are hardly
drawn to such liberal Contributions, as may sustain a War, and subdue
kingdoms. Your popular Estate in falling from that equality, which it
pretends, is easily converted into a licentious liberty, or rather
looseness, pulling down some, and setting up others, and is much subject to
Alterations through it is inconstancy, and weak head-pieces of the Popular.
For (as Tully says) the sea has not so many storms, perils, and tempests,
as has this kind of Commonwealth. And of force (every one attending his own
proper good and private interest) it must run upon one of these two rocks:
Either on the Tyranny of him, that is the strongest, and, vpheld by the favor
of the Mayor part, liftes up himself above them all: Or on the Plebeian
government, then which none can be worse; for all then falls into the hands of
ignorant people who put ordinary people into the highest places of honor and
command, without any distinction or reckoning of rich, noble, wise, or
virtuous. What good Counsel, or sound Advise can all the Communaltie give
(put all their brains together) in a doubtful case, or business of
importance, Eccl. 7.27.
when (as Solomon says) there is scarce one to be found of a thousand, of
ability and sufficiency in this kind? But put case that such a one may
happily be found amongst them, how shall he be heard with silence. What
patience will their ears lend him? What secrecy will be had in that which is
treated, be it of Peace, or War, that it be not divulged before it is due
execution? your Tumultes and seditions, shall be more ordinary, and greater
then in other states; because your meaner sort of people, are governed more by
their own unruly appetites, and womanish longings, then by reason and
discretion. And your base and cruel Vulgar, which upon the least occasion
suffers it self to be led away by hatred, and revenge, presently falls to
taking of stones in their hands, tearing up the pibbles in the streets, as
Cicero sets down unto us, that in the popular assemblies of Rome, it so fell
out, that oftentimes they drew their naked swords, and that the stones were
seen to fly about their ears on all sides. And when this headstrong
multitude has once broken the reins, there is no keeping of them in, nor can
the wit of man devise how to bridle them. In a Monarchy, the Monarke; In an
Aristocratia, your Noblemen are supreme Judges, and Arbitrators, and by this
their supreme and absolute power, they many times compose the differences of
the subjects. But in a Democratia and Popular Estate, they are the supreme
power, and they themselves bandy one against another, the fire of faction,
setting them in a consuming flame, without acknowledging any superior, to
decide the quarrel, and compose their differences. And therefore Aristotle
said; That there was not any Tyranny either greater or more pernicious, then
that of an entire Communaltie, which, of it self, is inclined to cruelty. The
Monarchy, or Kingdom is freer from these burning fevers, and by all is ranked
in the best place, and is stiffely maintained by the grauest Authors. Of this
only shall I treat at this present. It is called a Monarchy, of (...), which,
in Greek, signifies One, and of (...), which is the same with Prince, which
is as if we should say a Principality, or a Kingdom; where one alone is he
that commands and gouernes, and the rest all obey. All these three kinds, of
Popular, Aristocraticall, and Monarchical governments were used in Greece, and
more particularly in Rome. But Rome never came to be Mistress of the World,
till she was reduced to a Monarchy in the time of Caesar Augustus. There are
found therein 8. differences of States: Husbandmen, Tradesmen, Merchants,
Soldiers, Judges Cleargie-men, the Nobility, and the King, which (to speak
more properly, and, as in diverse places it is delivered by the blessed Apostle
S. Paul) is a Mystical Body, which we call a Kingdom with it is Head. For a
king, is the supreme Lord, subject only unto God.

That in S. Augustines, and Diuus Thomas his opinion, Aug. lib. 2. de Ciuit.
Dei. D. Tho. de regim. li. 1. cap. 2. Arist. Pol. 3. cap. 5. and 10. Plat.
Dial. de repub. Prou. 8.15.
as also sundry other Authors of diverse faculties, amongst which are Aristotle,
and Plato; the most excellent government, is that, which acknowledges a
Superior, one King, and one Head. For all natural, and good government
proceeds from One, and that which comes nearest unto Unity, has most
similitude, with that which is divine, and is by much the most perfect. By God,
Kings reign, according to that of the wise man. Per me, reges regnant; Per me,
Principes imperant. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. And God
being one, and most simple in his Being; and Nature the Head of all the whole
Universe; by Whom, and Which all is governed with admirable and ineffable
providence, and is the Idea of all good and perfect government, it is not a
thing to be doubted, but that that shall be amongst us the best, which is most
agreeable, with his. And if the Members of the body, being many, and bearing
different Offices therein, admit to be governed by a Head, and that God and
Nature, has so ordained it, Why should not a Monarchical government be the
best? Most certain therefore is it, that it is mainely to be preferred before
the other two. Some will have this Monarchical government to be the most
ancient, and that it had it is beginning from Cain, Adams eldest son, who was
the first, that did gather people together, built Cities, and did shut them up,
and fortify them with walls. After the flood, Nimrod, the son of Chus, and
nephew unto Cham, Beros lib. 4. de Flor. Called. secundum Philon. de Antiq.
a man of valor, and amongst those of those times, the most able, and
strongest man, was the first, that reduced men to live in a Community, and to
be obedient to one only King, possessing himself of the Kingdom and Signorie
of the World. And before these, even in the very beginning of the Creation, God
began to establish this government, and form of a Commonwealth. Act, 17.26.
For (as S. Paul says) God would, that all Mankind should descend from one
Man. And Gods chosen people did evermore maintain a Monarchy, and did
ordain, that the Supreme power should reside and remain in One. The first
governors of the world, were Monarkes, and did govern with this Title, and
all the Commonwealths of the World, have generally desired to be governed by
one king. As appears by those of the Gentiles, every particular state having
his peculiar King. And were it not a great monstrousness in nature, that one
body, should have two Heads? Much more were it, that one kingdom should be
governed by two persons: Unity is the Author of much good; and Plurality, the
causer of much ill. The Roman Commonwealth did suffer much misery and
calamity, not because all would not obey One, but because many would command
All. And therforein their greater necessities, they did create a Dictator, so
called because all did obey whatsoever he dictated, and said unto them. For
they knew well enough, and did clearly and plainly perceive, That in the
Empire of One, the authority was the greater; greater the obedience, freer
their determinations, firmer their Counsels, speedier their resolutions, and
more prompt the execution of their designs. In a word, Command, Signorie, and
Supreme power, does better in one head then in many. And therefore all do
unanimously and undoubtedly conclude, That the Monarchy, is the ancientst, and
the durablest of all other; and it is government the best: yet, would I have it
to help it self with the Aristocratia in that which may be useful for it is
advantage. That in regard of it is strength, and execution, does by it is
greater. Union, and force excel the rest: This other which is composed of a
few noble, wise, and virtuous persons, because it consistes of more, has the
more entireness, prudence, and wisdom; and by conioyning and intermixing the
one with the other, resulteth a perfect and absolute government. So that a
Monarchy, that it may not degenerate, must not go loose, and absolute (for
Command, is a madd-man; and power Lunaticke) but must be tied to the Laws, as
far forth as it is comprehended under the Law; And in things particular and
temporal, must have reference to the body of the Council, serving as the
brace, or joining piece of timber, between a Monarchy, and an Aristocracie,
which is the assistance and advise of the chiefer, and wiser sort. For, from a
Monarchy not thus well and orderly tempred, arise great errors in government,
little satisfaction to the State, and many distastes amongst those that are
governed. All men, that have had the estimation of sound judgments, and
accounted wise in all kind of faculties have held this to be the best and
perfectest government, and with out it, never City nor kingdom has been
taken to be well governed. Your good Kings and great Governors have ever
favored this Course; whereas on the contrary, your bad kings, and evil
Governors, transported with their pride, have run another way. And
therefore, in conformity heereunto, I dare confidently affirm, if a Monarke,
(be he what he will be) shall resolve businesses alone on his own head (how
wise soever he think himself) without having recourse to his Council, or
against the opinion of his Counselors, (although he do Acertar and hit right
in his resolutions) yet therein, he breaks the bounds of a Monarchy, and
enters into those of a Tyranny. Of whose Examples, and the evil successes
ensuing thereupon, the Histories are full. But one shall serve instead of many.
And that shall be of Tarquinius Superbus, taken out of the first Book of Titus
Liuius, Live. lib. 1.
who out of his great pride, and haughtiness of mind, that he might rule all
himself, and have none else to have a hand in any business, made it his
Master piece, to weaken the authority of the Roman Senate in lessening the
number of Senators. Which he purposely did, that he wholly and solely by
himself, might determine all whatsoever that occurred in the kingdom. In this
Monarchy, or Kingdom, there are three parts, or parties to be considered, of
whom principally we are to treat. The King, The Ministers, and the Vassalls.
And if in a humane body, the Anatomy and consideration of the Head, be the
nicest, subtillest, and most difficult, what difficulty will it not be, and
what a dainty hand will it not require to touch, talk, and treat of a king,
who is the head of the Commonwealth? And hence I infer, that for to treat of
Kings, and to prescribe them Precepts and Documents touching a Kingdom, he
ought to be such a wise King, as was Solomon. Who, considering the difficulties
and dangers, which may in this matter offer themselves, advises all without
any difference, that they should not seem to be desirous to seem wise before
their Temporal kings. For no man, howsoever fulfilled with wisdom, is
(speaking in his kings presence) secure and safe. Penes Regem, noli velle
videri sapiens. Eccl. 7.5.
Boast not thy wisdom in the presence of the King. The reason is for that he
that is the supreme sovereign in Temporal power, whom all acknowledge and
obey as their Superior, risenteth it much, to see himself inferior in a
thing of so great esteem, as is wisdom and discretion. Xenophon, laying his
foundation on this opinion, introduces Cambises, instructing his son Cyrus,
King of Persia, how he ought to carry himself in his Kingdom. As also
Alexander, who received his Military Precepts from his father Philip and not
from any other that was inferior unto him. It is written of Agasicles, king of
the Lacedaemonians, that he refused to learn Philosophy of a famous
Philosopher of those times; it seeming unto him, that being a king, it was not
fitting, he should be his Scholar, whose son he was not. As if he should
have said; That he, only by a natural obligation, acknowledged him alone, and
that he contented himself with that which he had learned from him, and would
not acknowledge any other inferior unto him in birth, though never so much
before him in learning and knowledge. But this difficulty I purpose to overcome
by proposing, in this my Treatise, unto kings, not mine own Reasons, nor
those, which I might draw from great Philosophers, and humane Histories, but
from the words of God, and of his Saints, and from Histories Divine and
Canonical, whose Instructions kings may not disdain, nor take it as an
affront to submit themselves thereunto, be they (being Christians) never so
powerful, never so supreme; because the Author that dictates these Lessons
unto them, is the Holy Ghost. And if I shall at any time allege the Examples
of heathen Kings, and shall make some good benefit of Antiquity, and serve my
self with the sentences of Philosophers, that were strangers unto Gods people,
it shall be very sparingly, and as it comes in my way, and as one that ceazeth
upon his own goods (if he fortune to light upon them) and takes them from
those that unjustly detain and possess them.

CHAP. II. What the name of King signifies.
THis name of King, in Divine and humane Letters is very ancient, and so old as
is the first Man. For in Gods creating of him (even before that there were many
Men) he made him King over all the beasts of the field. And it is a most noble
Appellatiue, and that which is better, and more nearly represents unto us
the Majesty of God, who very frequently in the holy Scriptures, and with much
propriety, is called King. And it is the common opinion of the Wisest, that it
signifies one that rules, and gouernes, being deduced from the Latin word
Regere, which is to rule, or govern. Reges a regendo dicti sunt, (says S.
Isidore) Ideo quilibet recte faciendo, regis nomen tenet, sed peccando,
amittit. And considering with more attention, this it is true Etymology, he is
properly said to be a King, who over mastring his passions, does first rule and
govern himself, cumplying (as he ought) with the obligations of his Estate,
without offense either to God or his neighbor; and next has a care to rule
others, and, to procure all he can, that all may do the like; And he, that
shall do the contrary laying his foundation on humane wisdom, and reason of
State, regards more his own temporal commodity and proper Interest, then
the good of the Commonwealth. This suteth not with the name he holds; nor may
he be called a king, neither is he so for himself, nor for others, because he
neither knows to rule himself nor others. Malus, si regnet (says S. Austen)
servus est. Aug lib. 4. de Civit. Dei, cap. 2.
He has the Appellation and honorable name of a king, but in very truth, see
how many vices reign in him, so many times is he a servant, nay a very slave.
It was the advice of Agapitus to Justinian the Emperor, that he should have an
eye over himself, and look well to his actions; for albeit he were a King and
a great Prince, yet the Title of King did then convene to him, when he should
be Master of himself, and curbing his unruly appetites, should of a King
become a Vassal to Reason and Justice. He that is good, and just, is a God
upon earth, and from thence is the name of King derived unto him, and is his
Vicar in all causes, for to maintain his Subjects in Justice and Truth by his
Empire and Command, and to sustain all things in Order, Policy, and Peace.
And therefore a Law of the Partida says thus, Lib. 2. and lib. 7. Tit. 1.
part. 2.
Que el Rey es Vicario de dios, para hazer iusticia en to dos los cosas. That a
King is Gods Vicar, for to do justice in all Causes. Answering to that his
own saying; By me Kings reign, etc. Which is, as if he should have said; That
their power is derived from God, as from the first and primary cause. The
signification likewise of this word King, or Rex, is (and me thinks) far
better declared, if we shall but refer i'ts original to another word of the
primitive Language, where the Hebrew word Raga signifies (amongst other it is
significations) To feed. And in this sense it is to be found in many places of
holy Scripture. And from this Raga, is derived Rex, Rego, or Regno. And Regere,
and Pascere, amongst the Poets, and even also amongst the Prophets, are
promiscuously used. Homer, Virgil, and David, put no difference betwixt Reges
and Pastores, styling Kings Shepherds; and Shepherds Kings. And therefore in
the 23. Psalm, Psalm. 23.
where the vulgar Latin reads, Dominus regit me; S. Ieromes Translation has
it, Dominus pascit me. The Lord is my Shepherd, therefore can I lack nothing,
he shall feed me in a green pasture, and lead me forth besides the waters of
comfort. And Homer he styles a King Pastorem populi, the Shepherd of his
people; in regard of that sweetness of Command wherewith he governs them,
and the gentle hand that he carries over them, feeding, but not fleecing of
them. Xenophon says, that the actions of a good shepherd, are like unto those
of a good King. So that the name of King, does not only signify him that
rules, but him that rules like a shepherd. And the better to instruct us
herein, the Prophet Isaiah, speaking of that, which the true Christian King our
Savior should do, when he should come into the world, says; Sicut Pastor,
gregem suum pascet, Isai. 40.11.
in brachio suo congregabit agnos, and in sinu suo levabit, foetas ipsa
portabit. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall gather the
Lambs with his arms, and carry them in his bosom, and shall guide them with
young. He shall perfectly perform all the Offices of a shepherd by feeding of
his sheep, and by bearing them (if need be) upon his shoulders. And of the
self same King, Ezech. 34.23.
Christ, God said in respect of his people; Ipse pascet eos, and ipse erit eis
in pastorem. I will set up a shepherd over them, and he shall feed them. And
in the next words following he calls him jointly King and shepherd. Servus meus
David Rex super eos, and Pastor unus erit omnium eorum. My servant David shall
be the Prince amongst them, and they shall all have but one shepherd. And
they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods, and none
shall make them afraid. And for the clearer signification hereof, the first
Kings that God made choice of, and commanded to be anointed, he took them
from amidst their flocks. The one they sought after, the other they found
feeding of his flock. The Prophet Samuel whom God commanded to annoint for
King one of the sons of Ishai, having seen the elder and the other seven (all
goodly handsome men and of a good disposition) had no great liking to any one
of them, but asked their father; Whether he had no more children but those; And
he said unto him; Adhuc reliquus est parvulus, 1 Kings 16 11.
and pascit oves. There remains yet a little one behind, that keeps the
sheep. And the Prophet willed him, that he should send for him; for we will
not sit down, till he become hither; showing, that to be a shepherd and to
feed the flock, was the best Symbol, and most proper Emblem of a King. And
therefore I would have no man to imagine that which Philon did fear, that when
we come to make a King, we must take away the Crook, and put the Scepter in
his hand. The Office of a King I tell you, and the Art of ruling, will require
a great deal of study, and experience. For to govern the bigger sort of
beasts, and those that are of greatest price, a man must first have learned to
have governed the lesser. It is not meet, to Popp into great places
unexperienced persons, and such as know not what belongs unto business, nor
the weight of the charge that they are to take upon them. For indeed, great
Matters are not handsomely carried, nor well managed, but by such as have been
formerly employed in businesses of an inferior and lower nature. And this
choice, which God made of David, iumpes with this our intent. He does not say,
De post fottantibus accepit eum, pascere Jacob Servum suum and Israel
haereditatem suam.
that he took him on the sudden from the sheepefold, and presently clapp't a
Crown upon his Head; but first bred him up to feed the house of Jacob, and
his family, and that he should exercise himself therein. For a well ordered
house, and a family that is well governed, is the Model and Image of a
Commonwealth; And domestical authority, resembles Regal power. And the
good guidance of a particular house, is the Exemplary and true pattern of a
public State. It imbraceth and comprehends in it all the sorts of good
government. It does treat and set in order those things, that appertain to
Policy, Conservation, and the direction of Men, as well in regard of
Commanding, as obeying. What other thing is a house with his family, but a
little City. And that a City, but a great House? Many houses, make a City;
And many Cities, make a kingdom. And in point of government, they only differ
in greatness, for howbeit in the one, they are busied more, and in the other
less, yet they tend all to one end, which is the common good. And therefore S.
Paul and other Saints, and wise men are of opinion, that he that knows not
how to govern his own house well, will hardly govern another man's. The
Emperor Alexander Severus, visiting the Roman Senate, did inquire, how the
Senators did rule and govern their own private Houses, and families, and
said; That that man, who knew not how to command his wife, and his Children, to
follow his own businesses, to make provision for his house, and to govern his
family, it were a madness to recommend unto that man the government of the
Commonwealth. Amongst those the famous Governors, Cato the Roman, was
preferred before Aristides, the Grecian, because the former was a great Pater
familias, or father of a family, and the latter was noted to be defective in
that kind. So that the life of a shepherd is the Counterfeit or Picture of
government, as is to be seen by his assistance in his Office, in the care of
the welfare of his flock, in the obligation of the Account that he is to
make, in the offense that he is to find by Wolves and Thieves, and in the
solicitude and watchfullnesse, which those ordinary dangers do require,
wherein his flock stands, and more especially when the shepherd is wanting
unto them. And it is so proper unto a King to feed his flock, that when our
Savior Christ fed that multitude of people, which followed him in the desert,
John 6.15.
they no sooner saw that he had satisfied them, but they were desirous to make
him a King, Esaias. 3.
and to clap the Crown on his head. And for this cause in the 3. Chapter of
Esaias, he that saw he was unprovided of bread, would not accept the Votes of the
people, that were willing to nominate him for their King, saying thus unto
them: Non sum medicus, and in domo mea non est panis, neque vestimentum; nolite
constituere me principem populi. There is no bread in my house, nor clothing,
I cannot be an helper unto ye, therefore make me no Prince of the people. And
therefore with very good reason, and with a great deal of propriety, a King
and a Shepherd, is all one.

In the Greek tongue a King is called (...) Quasi basis and fundamentum
populi. As if he were the basis and foundation of the people. And of your
Kings (says Rabbi Abraham) those words are to be understood of Job, Qui
portant orbem; Who sustain the weight of a kingdom, and bear the load
thereof upon their shoulders. And a Hierogliffe hereof is the Crown which
they wear upon their head in manner of a City, circled about with Towers, and
battlements; signifying thereby, that the strong brain, and the good and wise
head, Greg in Job.
and sound sconce of a King, does fortify and uphold the whole weight and
burden of all the Cities of his kingdom. And this is S. Gregory's
Interpretation upon this place. Some others conceive that this name was given
it, in consideration of that creature called the Basiliske; who is the king of
the venomous creatures, and has this evil quality with him, that he kills
with his looks only. And do not the kings sometimes kill their favorites,
and those that are nearest about them, with the knit of the brow and a sower
look? And some such Kings there be (or at least have been) in the world, that
take it offensiuely, if their frowns and disfavors, do not kill like poison.
But this Etymology has little ground for it. For the Greek word (...) which
in that language signifies a king, is much different from that of Basiliscus, a
Basiliscke. For it is more proper to Kings to cure and heal, then to kill, and
slay. As the forecited place of Esaias teaches us, where he that would not take
the Crown upon him, excuses himself, not only for that he had not bread to
feed others, but also because he was not a Physician. Non sum Medicus, and in
domo mea non est panis, presuposing, that a good King ought to be a Physician
to his people, and ought to help and feed his subjects. And the said Prophet,
when in the person of Christ, he relates, how the eternal Father had
anointed him, and Crowned him for King, says, spiritus domini super me, Esaias.
16.
eo quod vnxerit me and vt mederer contritis cord. And Christ himself being
calumniated by the Pharisees, because he did converse and eat with Publicans,
and Sinners, he made them this answer. Mat. 9.12.
Non est opus valentibus medicus, sed male habentibus. They that be whole,
need not the Physician, but they that be sick. Patricius Senensis, calls
Kings and Princes, Medicos vniversals reip: Universal Physicians of the
Commonwealth. And S. Austen tell us that to them appertains the remedy of
all the sick, and the cure of all the diseases, and other those cross and
repugnant humors which reign in a Kingdom, and to apply a medicine to every
particular person, agreeable to that humor, wherein he is peccant. And the
Office of a shepherd, which is so proper unto Kings (as already has been
said) has with it this obligation, to cure his flock. And therefore in the
34. of Ezechiel, God does lay a heavy Tax upon those shepherds, because they
were faulty in this their Office of Curing. Quod infirmu^ fuit, non
consolidastis, Ezech. 34.4.
and quod aegrotum, non sanastis, etc. The diseased have ye not strengthened,
neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that
which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away,
neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty
have ye ruled them, ye eat the fat, and ye cloth ye with the Wool, ye
kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the flock. And here that third
signification suits well with this name of King: which is the same as Father.
Genesis 20. Judge. 8.
As appears in that of Genesis, where the Sichemites called their King
Abimilech, which is as much to say; As my Father, or my Lord; And anciently
their Kings were called Patres reip: Fathers of their Commonwealths. And hence
is it, that King Theodoricus defining the Majesty royal of Kings, (as
Cassiodorus reports it) speaks thus: Cassio. lib. 4. epist 42.
Princeps, est Pastor publicus and Communis. A King is the public and common
shepherd. Nor is a King any other thing, but the public and common Father of
the Commonwealth. And because the Office of a King has such similiancie with
that of a Father, Plato styles a King Patrem familias, A father of a family.
And Xenophon the Philosopher affirms: Bonus Princeps nihil differt a bono
patre. That a good Prince, differs nothing from a good Father. The only
difference is in this, That the one has fewer, the other more under his Empire
and Command. And certainly, it is most suitable unto reason, that this Title of
Father be given unto Kings, because they ought to be such toward their
subjects, and kingdoms, carrying a fatherly affection and providence, toward
their welfare and preservation. For reigning, Homer.
or bearing rule (says Homer) is nothing else but a paternall government, like
that of a father over his own children. Ipsum namque regnum, imperium est
suapte natura paternum. There is no better habit of governing, then to have a
King cloth himself with the love of a father, and to have that care of his
subjects, as if they were so many children of his own loins. The affection of
a father toward his children, his care that they shall lack nothing, and to
be one and the same toward them all, carries a great proportion with a Kings
piety toward his subjects. He is called a Father, so that the very name,
obliges him to answer this signification, in works, not in word; but to show
himself a true father indeed. Again, for that this name father is very proper
unto Kings, if we shall well and truly weigh it, amongst all other Attributes
and Epithites of Majesty, and Signorie, it is the greatest, under which all
other names are comprehended, as the Species under their Genus, being
subordinate thereunto. Father is above the Title of King, Lord, Master,
Captain, and the like. In a word, it is a name above all other names that
denotate Signorie, and providence. Antiquity when it was willing to throw it is
greatest Honor upon an Emperor, it called him the Father of the
Commonwealth. Which was more then Caesar, or Augustus, and whatsoever other
name most glorious in the world: whether it were conferred upon them either for
to flatter them, or to oblige them to those great effects, which this name
(Father) ties them unto. In conclusion, by this word (Father,) it is given
Kings to understand, what they ought to do. To wit; That they are to rule
govern and maintain their Commonwealths and Kingdoms in Justice, and in
Peace: That they are to feed, (like good shepherds) these their rational
sheep. That they are (like skillful Physicians) to heal and cure their
maladies: And that they are to have that care of their subjects, as fathers
have of their children, watching over them with prudence and with Love,
respecting more them, then themselves. For Kings, are more obliged to the
Kingdom, and the Commonwealth, then unto themselves. For, if we shall but
look into the Original, and Institution of a King, and a kingdom, we shall
find, that a King was ordained for the good of the kingdom, and not the
kingdom for the good of the King.

CHAP. III. Whether the name of King, be a name of Office?
LEt us not detain our selves in the ill apprehension of those, who conceive,
that the name of King is a Title only of Honor and Dignity, and not of
Charge, and Office. For if (as we said before in our 1. Chapter) a King in a
Commonwealth, holds that place, Romans 12.2.4. 1. Cor. 12.12.
as the Head does in a humane body, where all the Corporal Members have their
particular Offices, and even the most and most principal, then most certain
it is, that a King, in his kingdom, is to be the most Eminent in the
Government, so that we are not only to acknowledge that a King is an Official,
but even the greatest of all Officialls, and that of all Offices, his is the
chiefest and of greatest dignity. Etenim (says S. Chrysostom) imperare, non
solum dignitas est, imo ars est artium omnium summa. To rule, is not only a
dignity, Chrysostom. in Epist. vlt: ad Corin: Sermon. 15. Plato Dion. Epist. 7. D.
Thom. de regi. Prin. cap. 14. Nazian: in Apologetico.
but an Art also, and of all Arts, the greatest. Divine Plato, and Diuus
Thomas likewise affirm; Inter omnes arts viuendi, regendi ars amplior, and
superior est. The Art and office of governing a Commonwealth, and a kingdom,
is a Regal knowledge, a Princely science, and which particularly appertains
unto Kings; it is an Art of Arts, the most difficile to learn, and the most
dangerous to practice; And Nazianzene renders the reason. Quia inter omnes
animantes homo maxim and moribus varius, and voluntate diuersus. Because
amongst all living Creatures, man is most various in his manners, and most
diverse in his will. He is most mutable in his opinions, most deceitful in his
words of more colors, foldings, and doublings then any other creature
whatsoever; worst to be known, and hardest to to be ruled; and above all, most
ingrate and unthankful unto him that is set in authority over him. And Plato
more particularly tells us, that he held it in a manner a thing impossible, for
any one to have such a Wit, that alone of himself, he should be sufficient to
govern well; it being so hard a matter to do, though a man have never so good
parts, and abilities to perform that function. Ptolomy, King of Egypt,
considering the great difficulties, which accompany governing and reigning,
began to weigh the quality of each difficulty, and comparing some with other
some, he knew not which to rank foremost, or to prefer before his fellow. It
seemed wonderful hard unto him, to know the Talent, and parts of persons, for
the conferring of Offices and places upon them; a business, whereon good
government mainely depends. He likewise found it as difficult, to make good
Laws, and Statutes. As also, to rule so many Towns, and so many people, as
are listed under a Crown, and name of King: As likewise to dress so many
dishes for so many different palates, so many things to the gust and content of
so many sundry wills, and a thousand other difficulties which daily offer
themselves in the ruling and governing of men. For (as Seneca says) Nullum
animal, maiori est art tractandum, Seneca. lib. de Ciem. 1. cap. 17.
quam homo. There is not that creature, like unto Man, for whose government,
more Art more prudence, more wisdom, more discretion, and sagacitie is
required. No man can deny, but that to bear on his shoulders the weight of a
kingdom, with obligation to attend on such and so great a diversity of
things, as of Peace, and War, and of so many grave and weighty business,
and of so great importance, without failing one point or tittle therein, is an
intolerable trouble, a most heavy burden, and most difficult Office. And in
this respect, so few have there been, that have known perfectly to cumply
therewith. And it is worthy our consideration, that there being so many
Histories, and Books of the Lives of Kings, and Emperors of the Gentiles,
there is not one amongst them all to be found, who has not bin noted of many
faults. Alexander the Great, who for his famous Acts, and great Courage, had
the surname given him of Great, had many things in him worthy reprehension, and
unbeseeming royal dignity. And howbeit Xenophon in his Cyropedia, Xenophon.
Lib. 1 de Cyrop.
would give us to understand, that King Cyrus, had all those virtues and
greatnesses, which are there represented unto us, yet many wise men are of
belief, that that was no true History which he wrote of that King, but an
Idea, or Pattern, that Kings might draw from thence, what they ought to be.
Like unto those Books of Cicero, which he wrote de Oratore; Who painteth forth
the properties, which he that will be a good Orator ought to have, though that
man was never yet found, that had them. Besides, if we shall turn our eyes
toward those ancient Kings of Gods people, the sacred Scripture does
dis-deceiue us. For, out of the whole pack of them, he picks out but three
only that were good. Eccl. 49.5
Praeter David, and Ezechiam, and Iosiam, omnes Reges peccatum commiserunt.
Excepting David, Ezechias, and Josias, all the rest of the Kings committed
sin. Not that these three had not their sins, for the holy Scripture taxes
them of some, (and those no small ones) but because they had not sinned in the
Office of Kings. And because in it is administration, it is an Office so full of
difficulties: the Apostle S. Paul admonishes all the faithful, that they
always make earnest Prayers for them, which is still used to this day in all
your Catholic Churches.

Moreover that the name of a King, is the name of an Office, Refran -- El
beneficio se da por el oficio.
it is confirmed by that common saying; Beneficium datur propter Officium. And
therefore Kings being so greatly benefitted, not only by those great Tributes,
which are given them by the Commonwealth, but likewise by those which they
receive from the Benefices, and Rents of the Church, it is an undoubted truth,
that they have an Office, and of Offices the greatest; and for this cause the
whole Kingdom does so freely and liberally contribute unto them. Which is
specified by S. Paul in a Letter of his which he wrote unto the Romans. Romans
13.6.
Ideo, and tributa praestatis, etc. For this cause pay you Tribute also. For
they are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing, etc.
Kingdoms do not pay their taxes idly and in vain: So many sessements, so
many Subsedies, so many impositions, so many great rentes, so much authority,
so high a Title, and so great a Dignity, is not given without charge and
trouble. In vain should they have the name of Kings, if they had not whom to
rule and govern. And therefore this obligation lies upon them. In multitudine
populi, dignitas regis. The honor of a King, is in the multitude of his
People. So great a dignity, so great revenues, such a deal of Greatness,
Majesty and Honor, with a perpetual Cense and rate upon his Subjects Lands
and Goods, bind him to rule and govern his States, conseruing them by Peace
and Justice. Let Kings therefore know, that they are to serve their kingdoms,
being they are so well paid for their pains, and that they bear an Office,
which ties them necessarily to this trouble. Romans 12.8
Qui praeest in solicitudine, (says S. Paul) He that rules with diligence.
This is the Title, and name of King, and of him that gouernes. Not of him, that
goes before others only in his Honor, and his pleasure, but of him that
excells others in his solicitude, and his care. Let them not think, that they
are Kings only in name, and representation, and that they are not bound to any
more but to be adored and reverenced, and to represent the person royal with
a good grace, and to carry themselves with a sovereign kind of State and
Majesty like some of those Kings of the Medes and Persians, which were no more
then mere shadows of Kings, so wholly neglectfull were they of their office,
as if they had been no such manner of Men. There is not any thing more dead,
and of less substance, then the image of a shadow, which neither waggs arm,
nor head, but at the Motion of that which causes it. Exodus 20.
God Commanded his people, that they should not make any graven Image nor any
feigned Pictures, or counterfeit paintings which show a hand, where there is
none; discover a face, where there is none; and represent a body, where there
is none; expressing therein actions to the life, as if the Image or Picture did
see, and speak. For God is no friend of feigned figures, of painted men, nor
of Kings, that are only so in shape and proportion, being in fashion like unto
those, Psalm. 135. 16.
of whom David said, Os habent, and non loquuntur, oculos habent, and non
videbunt, etc. They have mouths, but speak not, eyes have they, but they see
not; They have ears, but hear not, and hands have they, but handle not. And
to what use I pray serves all this? They are no more then mere Idols of
Stone, which have no more in them of Kings, but only an external
representation. To be all name and authority, and to be Men in nothing else,
do not suit well together. Woe to the Idol Shepherd (says Zachary) that
leaves the flock. Zach. 11.17.
The sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye; His arm shall be
clean dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkeneds it is written in
the Revelation; Nomen habes quod viuas, Apoc. 3.1.
and mortuus es. Thou have a name that thou live, and art dead: The names
which God sets upon Kings, are like unto the Title of a Book, which in few
words, contains all that is therein. This name of King, is given by God unto
Kings, and therein includes all that, which this their Office ties them to
do. And if their works and actions do not answer with their name and Title,
it is as if one should say yea, with his Mouth, and by making Signs, say no,
with his head. What a jest and mockery is this? How shall such a one be
truly understood? It were Cosenage and deceit in that Gold beater, who writes
upon his Sign, Here is fine gold to be sold, when indeed it is but Orpine,
and base gold for Painters. The name of King, is not an Attribute of Idleness;
A person regal, must have real performance. As his name sounds, so let him
serve in his place: it is the people that proclaim the King, but it is the
King that must proclaim his love to the people. He that has the name of
ruling and governing, a Gods name let him rule and govern. They are not to be
Reyes de anillo (as it is in the Proverb) that is to say; nominall Kings only,
and praeter nomen nihil: having nothing else in them. In France, there was a
time, when their kings, had nothing but the bare name of Kings, their
Liuetenants General governing, and Commanding all, whilst they (like so many
beasts) did busy themselves in nothing else, but following the delights and
pleasures of Gluttony, and Wantonness. And because it might be known, and
appear to the people, that they were alive, (for they never came abroad) once
a year they made show of themselves, on the first day of May, in the
Marketplace of Paris, sitting in a chair of State on a throne royal, like
your kings amongst your Stage Players; and there in reverence they bowed their
bodies unto them, and presented them with gifts; and they again conferred
some favors, on such as they though fit. And because you may see the misery
whereunto they were brought, Eynardus, in the beginning of that History which
he writes of the life of Charles the Great, says: That those Kings (in those
days) had no valor in them in the world, made no show of Nobleness, nor gave
so much as a taste of any inclination thereunto; but had only the empty and
naked name of King. For in very deed they were not Kings, nor had actually and
effectually any hand in the government of the State, or the wealth and riches
of the Kingdom; for they were wholly possessed by the Praesecti Palatij, whom
they called Seneshalls, or Lord high Stewards of the Kings House. Who were such
absolute Lords and of that unlimited power, that they ruled the roste, and did
what they list, leaving the poor seely King nothing save only the bare Title,
who sitting in a Chair with his Perriwigge, and his long beard, represented
the person of a King making the world believe that he gave Audience to all
Ambassadors that came from foreign parts, and gave them their answers and
dispatches, when they were to return: But in very truth, he said no more unto
them, save what he had been taught, or had by writing been powered into him,
making show as if all this had been done out of his own Head. So that these
kind of Kings had nothing of the Power-Royall, but the unprofitable name of
King, and inutile throne of State, and a personated Majesty that lay open to
nothing but scorn and derision. For the true kings, and those that commanded
all, were those their Minions and Favorites, who oppressed the other by their
potencie, and kept them in awe. Of a King of Samaria, God said; That he was no
more but paululum spumae, a froathy bubble. Which being beheld a far off,
seems to be something, but when you draw near and touch it, it is nothing.
Simia in tecto, Rex fatuus, in solio suo. He is like unto an Ape on the
house-toppe, who using the apparances, and gestures of a man is taken for such
a one by them that know him not. Just so, is a foolish King upon his Throne,
your Ape likewise serves to entertain children and to make them sport: And a
King causes laughter in those, who behold him stripped of the actions of a King,
without authority, and without government. A King, appareled in Purple, and
sitting with great Majesty in his Throne answereable to his greatness,
seems in show, grave, severe, and terrible, but in effect nothing. Like unto
the Picture of that Grecians limming, which being placed on high, and beheld
from a far, seemed to be a very good Piece, But when you came nearer unto it,
and viewed it well, it was full of Blots and Blurs, and very course stuff. A
King under his Canopie or Princely Pall, expresses a great deal of outward
State and Majesty, but himself being narrowly looked into, is no better then
the blurred Character of a King. Simulachra gentium, David calls those Kings,
that are Kings only in name. Or, as the Hebrew renders it: Imago fictilis, and
contrita. An image of cracked earth, which leaketh in a thousand places. A
vain Idol, which represents much, yet is no other then a false and lying
shadow. And that name does very well suit with them, which Eliphas falsely put
upon Job, Job. 4.19.
who, being so good and so just a man, did mock at him, vpbrayding him, that
his foundation was in the dust, that he was not a man of any solid and sound
judgment, but only had some certain exterior apparences, calling him
Mimicoleon, which is a kind of creature, which in Latin, they call Formicaleo.
Because it has a monstrous kind of Composture, in the one half part of the
body, representing a fierce Lion, which was always the Hierogliffe of a King;
and in the other half an Ante or Pismire, which signifies a weak thing and
without any substance. Authority, Name, Throne, and Majesty does well become
Lions, and powerful Princes; And hitherto, it is well. But when we look on
the other half, and see the being and substance of a Pismire; that goes hard.
There have been Kings, who with their very name only, have struck the world
into a fear and terror. But they themselves had no substance in them, and
were in their Kingdom no better then Ants, and Pismires. Great in name and
Office but poor in action. Let every King then acknowledge himself to be an
Officer, and not only to be a private, but a public Officer, and a
superintendent in all Offices whatsoever. For in all, he is bound both to
speak, and do. S Austen, and D. Thomas, expounding that place of Saint Paul,
Aug. and D. Tho. in Epis. 1. ad Tim. 3.
which treates of Episcopal Dignity, say; That the Latin word Episcopus, is
compounded in the Greek of two words, being in signification the same with
Superintendens, The name of Bishop, of King, and of whatsoever other superior,
is a name that comprehends Superintendencie, and assistance in all Offices.
This, the royal Scepter signifies, exercised by Kings in their public acts,
a Ceremony used by the Egyptians, but borrowed from the Hebrews, who for to
express the obligation of a good King, did paint an open eye placed alofte
upon the top of a rod, in form of a Scepter; signifying in the one the great
power that a King has, and the providence and vigilancie which he is to have.
In the other that he do not only content himself in possessing this supreme
power, and in holding this high and eminent place, and so lie down and sleep,
and take his ease, as if there were no more to be done: but he must be the
first in government, the first in Council and all in all Offices, having a
watchful eye in viewing and reuiewing, how every public Minister performs
his duty. In signification whereof, Jeremy saw the like rod, Ier. 1. v. 12.
when God asking him what he saw, he said; Virgam Vigilantem ego video. Well
have thou seen, and verily I say unto thee; That I who am the head, will watch
over my body; I, that am the shepherd, will watch over my sheep; And I that
am a King and Monarke, will watch without weariness over all my Inferiors.
The Chalde translates it, Regem festinantem, a King that goes in have. For
though he have eyes and see; yet if he betake him to his ease, be lulled
asleep with his delights and pleasures, and does not bestirre himself,
visiting this, and that other place, and seek to see and know all the good and
evil which passes in his Kingdom, he is, as if he were not. Let him
bethink himself that he is a Head, and the Head of a Lion, which sleeps with
his eyes open; That he is that rod, which has eyes, and watches: Let him
therefore open his eyes, and not sleep, trusting to those that perhaps are
blind, or like Moles, have no eyes at all: or if they have any, use them no
farther then for their own private profit: And therein they are quick sighted.
These, have the eyes of the Kyte, and other your birds of rapine; but it were
better that they had no eyes at all, then have them all for themselves.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Office of Kings.
Having proved, that the name of King, is not of Dignity only, but likewise
of Occupation, and Office, it is fit, that we should now treat of the
qualities and parts thereof. For the better understanding whereof, we must
follow the Metaphor, or resemblance of Man's body, whereof the Apostle S. Paul
made use, thereby to give us to understand the place and Office which every
Member is to hold in the Commonwealth. All the Members of the body (says he)
have their particular Office, but the Occupations and functions of every one of
them, are diverse, and different. The most important and of greatest
Excellency are those of the Head; which is the superior part of the body. In
which the Soul does exercise her principal operations, as those of the
Understanding, and Will, Arist. and Aly. lib. 3. de Anima.
the instruments whereof have their habitation in the head. There is seated the
Sensus Communis, or Common sense, so called, because it is knowledge is common
to all those objects of the exterior or outward senses. There likewise, is the
Imaginatiue, the Estimatiue, the Fantasy, and the Reminiscentia, Corporal
faculties, which serve to those that are Spiritual, as are the Understanding,
and the Will. In the Head, are likewise placed the exterior senses. As Seeing,
Hearing, Smelling Tasting, Touching, and other faculties and virtues, wherewith
the life of man is sustained and governed. And therefore S. Ambrose calls it
Imperialem Aulam, the Imperial Court, because therein resides the Imperial
power, or that Empress the Will, which rules and Commands all those powers
and faculties, as being obedient and subject unto her. And we may also style
it Regalem Aulam, the Princes Palace; for therein abides (assisted by it is
operations) the Understanding as a King in his Court. For if the Will be
termed an Empress, of it is Empire and rule: The Understanding is called a
King, because it directs and governs in Man, and unto Man, all his
operations, Lactan. Firm. Lib. de Opificio Dei, cap. 12. Heb. 1. c. 6.7.
guiding them to their due and fit ends. Lactantius (contrary unto Galen) says
of the Head, that it is the first member that is formed in Man, and has the
Primacie over all the rest. And is for this cause, called Caput, which is the
same with Principium, (as some Doctors do expound it.) And in the Spanish
tongue, they call the first lines of a Process, Cabeca de Processo, the head
of the Process, or the beginning of it. And it carries the same signification
in the Latin. In capite libri scriptum est de me; M. Varro. Rob. Steph. in
Thesau. 1. Plato in Tim.
id est; in principio Libri. And for this, we have not only Varro's, but also
Robertus Stephanus his Confirmation. Caput dicitur, quod inde initium capiant
Sensus. It is called Head, because from thence the senses have their Head, and
Beginning. As also, for that the Head, is the Wellhead of Man's life. From it,
have their original, and in it, do all the Senses live. It Sees, Hears,
Smells, and Tastes, not only for it self, but for the whole body, that is,
for the good and benefit of all the members and parts of the body,

Hence it follows, that the Institution of the State-royall, or of a King,
which is represented in the Head, was not ordained only for the Kings own use
and profit, but for the general welfare of his Kingdom. And therefore he
ought to See, Hear, Taste, and understand, not only by him self, or for
himself, but by all, and for all. He ought not only to have an eye to his
important affairs, but likewise to the good of his Subjects: Being that for
them, and not for himself only, a King was borne to the World. Seneca. lib.
de Clem.
Aduerte (says Seneca to the Emperor Nero) rempublicam non esse tuam sed te
reipublicae. Consider, that the Commonwealth is not thine, but thou the
Commonwealths. Those first men who leaving solitude, assembled themselves to
live in a Community knew full well, that naturally, every one cares for
himself and his own people, but no man that takes care for all in general.
And therefore they did agree amongst themselves to choose one of more especial
valor and worth, to whom all might have recourse. And that he, who among them
all should be most renowned for his virtue, prudence, and fortitude, should
preside over all the rest, and should rule and govern them; that he should be
watchful over all of them, that he should be solicitous of the common good and
profit of them all, and to be as careful of them, as a father would be of his
children, or a Shepherd of his sheep. And weighing with themselves, that such
a kind of Man, as this ought to be, employing himself not in his own, but
other men's businesses, could not be able to maintain himself, and his family
(for then all did eat of the labor of their own hands, and the sweat of
their brows) they did jointly resolve to find his house, and to sustain and
maintain him, Regal power was first ordained for the ease of the people.
that he might not be withdrawn by other by businesses, but apply himself
wholly to those of the Common good, and to public government. For this end
were they established; This was the beginning that Kings had; and it ought to
be the care of a good King, to care more for the public, then his own
particular good. All his Greatness is at the cost of a great deal of care,
trouble, vexation, and inquietude both of Soul and Body. He is weariness to
himself; to others, he is their ease, their sustenance, and their defense.
Like unto your fairest flowers, and fruits, which although they beautify the
tree, they are not so much for it, or for it is own respect, as for others. Let
not any Man think that all the good does consist in the beauty and bravery,
wherewith the flower does flourish; and in the goodly show wherewith the Great
ones of the world do gallant it; your powerful Kings and Princes, are
flowers, but flowers which fade and wither, wast their life to preserve others,
drawing care upon themselves, and affording comfort unto others, others more
inioying the fruit, then they themselves. For (as Philon Iudaeus says) A King
to his Kingdom, is that, which a wise man to the ignorant, a shepherd to his
sheep, a father to his children, light unto darkness, and that which God
here on earth is to all his creatures. For this Title he gave unto Moses, when
he made him King, and Ruler over his people. Signifying unto him, that he was
to be as God, the common father of them all; Seneca lib. de Consolat ad Polib.
c. 26.
For to all this does the Office and dignity of a King oblige him. Omnium
domos illius vigilantia defendit, omnium otium illius labor, omnium delitias
illius industria, omnium vacationem illius occupatio. His subjects houses are
guarded and secured by his Vigilancie; their ease procured, by his labor,
their delights inioyed, by his industry, and their merry vacations, by his
painful employments. And therefore the Prophet Samuel said unto king Saul,
anon after he was anointed King over Israel; declaring unto him the
obligations of his Office; Behold Saul, now that God has anointed thee King
over all this Kingdom, that thy Office ties thee to it is general government.
Thou wast not made King to sleep and take thine ease, or to honor and
authorize thy self by the dignity Royal, but that thou should govern and
maintain the people in peace, and justice, and that thou should protect and
defend them from their enemies Rex Eligitur, non vt sui ipsius curam habeat
(says Socrates) et sese molliter curet, Sed vt per ipsum, ij qui eligerunt,
been beateque viuant. Kings are not chosen, that their whole care should be for
themselves, to pamper the flesh, and to live nicely and daintily; but that by
him, they who had elected him, might live well and happily under him. They were
not created, nor introduced into the world, for their own commodity, and
their own pleasure, and that all the good morsels should be for their own
trencher (for if it should be so, no man would willingly be subject unto them)
but for the public profit and common good of all his subjects, for their
happy government, for their safe protection, their augmentation, conservation,
and in a word for their service; (and without any unmannerliness, we may well
term it so) for albeit in outward appearance the Scepter and the Crown, have
the face of Empire and Signiory; yet in strictenesse and in rigor, it is but
the Office of a Servant. Servus Communis, sieve Servus honoratus: The
Commonwealths servant, or a more honorable kind of Servant. This is the
attribute which some give unto a king. Quia a tota republica stipendia accipit,
vt serviat omnibus. Because he receives stipends from all, that he may serve
all. And the Pope of Rome holds it no dishonor unto him, to be styled; Servus
servorum Dei The Servant of Gods servants. And howbeit anciently this name of
servant were infamous, yet after that our Savior Christ had in his own person
taken it upon him, it has since been accounted honorable. And as it is not
repugnant and contradictory to the Essence and nature of the son of God, no
more is it any prejudice or disparagement to the Majesty and greatness of
Kings. And this was well understood by Antigonus King of Macedonia, who
reprehending his son, for carrying too hard a hand over his Subjects, thus
checked his immoderate Empire; An ignoras (fili mi) Regnum nostrum nobilem esse
seruitutem? Wootst thou not (my son) that our kingdom, is a Noble servitude?
Answering to that of Agamemnon; We live (says he) in the opinion of the world
in much greatness, and in high Estate, Aelian. de varia Hist. lib. 2.
but in effect are but servants and slaves to our Vassals. This is the Office
of good Kings, to serve in this honorable manner. For, in being Kings, their
Actions depend not on the sole will of their own persons, but of the Laws and
Statutes which they have given, and allowd of, and those conditions wherewith
they accepted this their Sovereignty. And though they should be wanting to
these (which are no more then a humane Conuencion, Covenant, or agreement
betwixt Prince, and people) yet may they not be defective in those, which the
natural and divine Law has laid upon them; the Lady and Mistress as well of
Kings as subjects. All which are in a manner contained in those words of
Jeremy, Ier. 22.3.
in which (according to S. Ieromes opinion) God sets down the Office of Kings.
Facite iudicium and iustitiam, liberate vi oppressum de manu calumniatoris, and
aduenam, and pupillum, and viduam nolite contristare, neque opprimatis inique,
and sanguinem innocentem ne effundatis: Execute ye judgment and
righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, and
do no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow,
neither shed innocent blood. etc. This is the Sum wherein is cyphered up the
Office of a King. These the Laws of his Court, whereby he is bound to mantaine
in peace and Justice, the fatherless, and the widow; the poor and the rich;
the mighty, and the weak. To his Account are put the Agrauios and wrongs which
his Ministers do unto the one; and the Injustice, which the other suffer. The
wretched estate of those that are necessited, the cry of the distressed, and
the tears that are shed out of anguish of heart; and a thousand other loades,
even wane-loades of cares and obligations, lie upon the shoulders of him that
is the Head, and King of a kingdom. And albeit he be the head in commanding
and in governing, yet in bearing (if not often ouercharged therewith) the
heavy weight and load of all, he must be the feet or supporters to bear
the burden of the whole body of the Commonwealth. Of Kings and Monarkes, the
just men Job says; that by reason of their Office, Job. 9.13.
they carry (like Porters) the world on their shoulders, under which burden
the proudest helpers must stoop. In consideration whereof, it is said in the
book of Wisdom; In vest ponderis, quam habebat summus sacerdos, totus erat
orbis terrarum: In the long garment, was the whole world. The Latin translation
In vest ponderis, carries more weight with it; so that, in taking upon thee to
be a King, thou must make account, to take so great a charge upon thee and so
heavy a load, as the strongest Carte will hardly be able to bear it. And this
Moses knew well enough, whom God having made his Viceroy, his Captain
General, and sole Liuetenant in the Government; in stead of giving him thanks
for this so honorable a Charge committed unto him, made his moan and
complaint for having laid so heavy a load upon his shoulders. Numb. 11. and 11.
Cur afflixisti seruum tuum? Cur imposuisti pondus vniuersi populi huius super
me? Wherefore have thou afflicted thy servant? And wherefore have I not found
favor in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of all the people upon me?
And proceeds farther with his complaints, saying; Nunquid ego concepi omnem
hanc multitudinem? Aut genui eam, Number. 11.12.
vt dicas mihi; Porta eos? Have I conceived all this people? Have I begotten
them, that thou should say unto me; Carry them in thy bosom, as the nursing
father bears the sucking child etc. Where it is worthy the noting; That God
said not any one such word unto Moses; But only commanded him, that he should
rule and govern his people, that he should be their Captain, and their
Leader. And yet he here sticks not to say, that he laid the burden of all
the people upon him; with this Motto added thereunto; Porta eos: Carry them
etc. A man would think he complains here without a Cause; for God says no
more unto him; but that he be their Captain, and that he take upon him the
rule, Command, and Government of them. But to this it is answered. Al buen
entendedor, pocas palabras: To a wise man, half a word is enough. And he that
is wise, and well understands what it is to govern, and to be a Head, knows
that Government, and Charge, or Load, is all one. And that the words
themselves Regere, and Portare, are Synonomyes, and have one and the self same
signification. For there is not any Government, or charge, which is without
it is burden, and trouble. In that repartment and division of Offices, which
Jacob conferred upon his children, he marked out Reuben to be the first in
Inheritance, Genesis 49 3.
and the greatest in government. Prior in donis, mayor in imperio: Thou art my
first in the excellency of dignity, Hierom. in Traduc. Hebraicis in Genesis
and the excellency of power: which S. Jerome renders, Mayor ad portandum; The
greatest to bear. For Empire, and bearing, are both one thing. And by how much
the Empire is the greater, by so much the greater is the toil and trouble and
the burden the heavier. St Gregory in his Moralls says; That the power,
Gregor. lib. 24. Moral. c. 26.
Dominion, and Signorie, which Kings have over their subjects, ought not to be
esteemed an honor, but a trouble. Potestas accepta, non honor, sed onus
aestimatur. And the blindest Gentiles did attain to this light of truth. And
one of them used the self same phrase of speech, speaking of another that was
much puffed up and well contented with the charge and office, which Apollo had
allotted him. Ovid. Metam.
Laetus erat, mixtoque oneri gaudebat honor. So that to rule, and Command, is a
Mixture of a little honor and much trouble. And the Latin word, which
signifies honor, does not differ more then in one Letter from that which
signifies a load or burden. Onos, and onus. For (H.) is but an aspiration.
Nor was there ever that man yet wanting, nor ever will be, to take (for Honors
sake) this burden upon him. Though all of them can be well content, to take as
little of the load as they can upon them, but as much of the Honor, as you
will; howbeit this is not the securest Course.

But I shall conclude this Chapter with this Aduiso. That the Office of a King
consists not so much in the outward operation, (though in this he is not to
fail) as in the inward apprehension. Which in it is own nature may embrace
infinite things, not as infinite, but as such as may be reduced to a few
points, nor no more then shall be pointed at in this Treatise. Which ought
always, of a wise and prudent King, to be well understood, and to make use of
as many of them as he can, and which do more particularly appertain unto his
Office, and to leave the rest unto his Ministers. A King must be like the Heart
in the Body, which solely of it self cannot perform all those offices, which
all the members more particularly may. But by the help and means of diverse
Instruments, members, and Organs, diffusing and sending forth their virtue unto
them, it finds it self in the operation of them all. The king, is the heart
of the kingdom, and must work therein like it, not doing all by himself (for
that is impossible, and instead of doing good, would do hurt) by keeping
himself in his proper Station, without transiliating that Circle which more
particularly belongs unto him, and performing those Offices, which another
cannot execute for him, by his great power and virtue, he may in a diffusiue
manner have recourse to all the parts even the most remote of his kingdom,
take a care of all and have a hand in all. And this care, is as proper to a
King; as it is to the heart; it being impossible for the heart to live without
care. And from thence it takes it is name and Appellatiue. Cor (says Isidore)
dicitur a cura, Isidor. lib. 4. Etym.
(or which is the Heart) is so called, a Cura: from it is care. For it is that,
which takes care of Man's life. Ego dormio, and Cor meum vigilat. I sleep, but
my Heart waketh. Cant. 5.2.
While Man sleeps the heart still beats, and takes care of the life and
conservation of the whole body, sending forth to all the parts thereof, it is
natural virtue and heat, without the least dis-carefullnesse in the world,
loosing it is own quiet, to give Man ease. And therefore the Spouse, called her
Beloved, her Heart; because he performed this office with her. And the like
must a King do in his Kingdom. He must watch, and forgo his own sleep and
quiet that his Vassalls may take their ease and rest; upon pain of being
unfaithful and defective in that fidelity which is due unto the office of a
King. 1. Tim. 5.8.
This made S. Paul to say; Si quis suorum curam non habet, fidem negauit. If
any provide not for his own, he has denied the faith, and is worse then an
Infidel. The heart likewise has another property very proper unto Kings, which
is, it is continual beating on the left side. The Author of Nature being
desirous by this secret to teach Kings, that they should apply themselves with
more care to the weakest part, and that which has most need of their help.
The right side is more assisted with natural heat and blood, then the left,
which is more stripped of these favors. And in this, the Heart shows, that
Kings should show their King-craft and the finenesse of their care, toward
poor needy people, and such as are destitute of all humane favor. For to the
rich and mighty, blood abounds, and nothing is wanting unto them. God does
illighten Kings, which are the Heads of the people, to the end, that they may
do in their Kingdoms all that which a good Head ought to do with it is body,
by whose offices we will go, discoursing those of the mystical Head of this
body of a Commonwealth, which is the King; beginning first with the
understanding, and it is pertinencies, or whatsoever appertains thereunto,
which is the first in perfection, and whereunto (in regard of it is Active
beginning and end) the rest of the Senses are in ordination. According to that
measure of Light which he shall vouchsafe to Communicate unto us, who is that
true Light, which illighteneth every Man that comes into the world.

CHAP. V. Of the reason and understanding of Kings, and of their wisdom.
IN good and true Philosophy, and the best received Divinity, it is auerred,
that the understanding and natural reason is the most principal power that is
in Man, by which he is distinguished from Beasts; and is the principium and
radix, the ground and root of wisdom. And by how much the more ingenious a
man is, and of better understanding, by so much the more is he capable thereof,
and the more intensiuely does he love it. And for this cause did Pythagoras
call wise men Philosophers, Lovers, or coueters of Wisdom; because the
possession thereof does set an edge on the desire, and makes a man to covet it
the more, for it is treasure is infinite, and no man can exhaust it. And
therefore the more a man has of it, the more he desires it. It is the retreit
and receptacle of faith, and of all the Arts and Sciences, both practicke and
speculatiue, having an universal aptitude to receive them all into it self,
and upon the apprehension of them to put them in execution. And although it be
a potentia or faculty of a limited power, yet so great is it is capacity, and of
that amplenesse and ableness to receive and contain, that it seems
infinite, for let a man know never so much, yet can he not fill up his
knowledge. For such and such notions dispose the understanding for others.
Knowledge begets knowledge, and the more things a man knows, so much the
more easily does he apprehend those he knows not, till he come to the perfect
inquiry and knowledge of the truth: and by conuersing with the wise, and
exercise of good Letters, he goes still rising higher and higher. And by how
much the more a man is advanced in his understanding, so much the more
advantage shall he have of those which have not the same measure. Suting with
that saying of the Comicke Poet, who wondering to see the great difference
between man and man, cries out, Homo, homini quid praestat! So much does one
man differ from another in wisdom and prudence, that they seem to be
different species. And hence is it that the advantage which a wise man has
over those that are not so, is, to make him King over all the people. Which
lesson God taught us in the first King he made choice of for his people, who
standing in the midst of his Subjects, was taller then any of them from the
sholders upwards, so that his head showed it self above them all. 1 Samuel 10.28.
And the word Melech which in the original signifies a king, in that large
and eminent Letter which stands in the midst of it, does mistically give us to
understand the excellency that above others, Kings ought to have. And therefore
Plato styled a prudent and wise Governor, Virum divinum, a divine man;
presupposing that he should be somewhat more then a man, and exceed in divine
wisdom all other Governors whatsoever. Vbi sapiens, ibi est Deus in humano
corpore. And therefore, as God by way of eminency contains the perfections of
all the Creatures; so, (as far forth as a Creature can) a wise King should
(and that with much advantage) possess the perfections of all his people. And
the holy Scripture teaches us, that God created man after his own image and
likeness, giving him Understanding, Memory, and Will. And having created him,
Genesis 1.26.
made him King over all he had created. Vt praesit piscibus Maris, and
volatilibus Coeli, and bestijs vniversae Terrae, etc. To have dominion over the
Fish of the Sea, and over the Foul of the Air, and over the Cattle, etc. And
this was granted him, and did accompany the common nature of men. But to rule,
and command, to be Lord, and Governor over men themselves, (as are Kings) is a
far greater matter, and such as requires a greater measure of Understanding
and Wisdom: and he that has most store thereof, shall reap the most profit
by it, as he that wants it, shall contrariwise find the lack of it. Solomon,
the wisest of Kings, as he was both wise, and a King, could better then any
other inform us, of what importance are Understanding and Wisdom in Kings. In
whose name he speaks, when he says, Per me Reges regnant, Prou. 8.15.
per me Principes imperant; By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. To
the wiseman the Scepter and Crown of right belongs. For wisdom her self,
as being the most essential form of Kings, makes him King and Monarch over
others. And in all Nations almost, they gave the same name, and the same
Ensigns to Empire and Wisdom. And S. Paul makes them Synonomies, and will
have them to signify one and the same thing. She alone (by keeping Gods
commandments) will be sufficient in a King to make him pleasing and acceptable
unto God, and to be cut out according to the measure of his own heart. And
though some are of a larger heart and understanding then other some; yet (with
God) to be wise, is that which conueneth most both to King and Subject.

By Esaias the Prophet God promises to all his people a golden age, happy days,
and fortunate times, wherein all shall have a share of happiness, peace,
equity, justice, health, content, and abundance of fruits. But coming unto
Kings, he says no more, but that there shall not be any one that shall be a
fool. Non vocabitur vltra is qui insipiens est, Princeps. This is a great
happiness. But (O Lord) let me ask thee; Is a King of worse condition then
his Subjects, that thou should promise so many good things unto them, and but
one alone unto him? The answer hereunto is, that our good God gives unto
every one (according to his state and calling) that which is fittest for him.
The Subject who has one to rule and govern him, has need of one to minister
justice unto him, to conserve him in peace, and to make such provision, that he
may have wherewith to eat, and the like. But a King, who is to rule and
govern, has need of wisdom, which is the life and soul of Kings, which
sustaineth the weight of a Kingdom, and without which (be they never so rich,
never so powerful) they shall be as fit for government, as a body without a
head, or an head without a soul. And as from the soul the Senses are
origined, and from that essence result your passions; so in like sort from
wisdom resulteth unto King, and Kingdom, all that good and happiness that
can be desired. Wisd. 6. 24.
Rex sapiens, stabilimentum est Ciuitatis. A wise King is the upholding of the
people. And a foolish King the ruin of his Subjects. You shall not name that
Nation either barbarous, or civil, which (where Kings were made by election)
did not make choice of a wise and prudent King.

Judge. 9.8.
In that general Diet, where all the Nations of Trees and Plants met, seeing
that without Law, and without a King, they could not conserve themselves in
peace, and justice; the first resolution they took, was to choose a wise King.
And in the first place they nominated the Olive, a tree of many good parts and
qualities; and amongst other, this the chiefest, that it was the Symbol or
Hierogliffe of wisdom, which is all whatsoever can be desired in a King.

Psalm. 119.144.
This alone did King David desire for himself: Intellectum da mihi, and vivam;
Give me understanding, and I shall live. He did not desire life, nor health,
nor riches, but only understanding and wisdom. And with this alone did he
promise to himself eternal life, and a durable Kingdom. And therefore, Wisd.
6. 21.
Si delectamini sedibus and sceptris, o Reges populi, diligite sapientiam, vt
in perpetuum regnetis; If your delight be in Thrones and Scepters, O ye Kings
of the people, honor wisdom, that ye may reign for evermore.

Plato lib. 1. de Repub.
Happy is that Commonwealth (says Plato) which has a wise King. And unhappy
that (says another Philosopher) which has a King without wisdom.

Aristotle termed the Thebans happy, Membrin. Rosi. cap. 33.
all the while that they were governed by those that were wise. Of such
consequence is wisdom in a King, that upon the very rumor that he is a wise
Prince, all presently obey, and sooner submit themselves, then at the noise of
his power. As was to be seen in King Solomon, whose wisdom was no sooner
known to the people, but they began presently to respect and fear him.

But let me ask this question: Shall it suffice a King to have understanding
and wisdom, unless he make use thereof, and show a willingness to execute
what he knows? No certainly. For the greatness of a power or faculty
consists in it is operation. The Understanding without Intelligence, (like the
Will without Love) serves to little or no purpose. And it is doubted (as I
touched in the beginning) upon which of these two potentias, or faculties, is
that arm and hand, whereby the soul operateth it is most excellent works? The
understanding alleges for himself, that it is he that in the kingdom of our
soul does ordain, dispose, and govern. The Will, she says, that without her
nothing is done. For as the Philosophers term it, Applicat potentias ad
operandum, she sets these faculties a work, and finds them hands. The
Understanding confesses this is true; but with all says, it is he that nods
and winckes upon her, makes signs and tokens unto her, is as it were the
Watchword, and does expose unto her whether she will this or that, for the
better ordering and disposing of it. The Will, she on the other side replies,
that she likewise fomenteth and affectionates the Understanding, and does
excite and solicit him, that he study, think, and dwell upon that which she
best likes. But leaving the resolution of this Controversy to your Thomists,
and Scotists, who dispute it at large; the Understanding (as I said before) is
a Regal power which rules and governs in man, and is that Star which
guides and gives light to the whole house of the soul; yet is the Will so
much Mistress, that nothing is done without her. Nor can God himself (by
violence) draw a yea, or a nay from it, without trespassing upon that liberty
wherewith he created it; for in it is own nature it is free: and (as Philosophy
informs us) it cannot be forced. Caeterae potentiae possunt capi, non tamen
voluntas. But the common received opinion is, that both the one and the other
must concur for the effecting of any free work. Insomuch, that it is
impossible to perform any action of importance, unless that both do intend
the same. We must pluck the reins of both, hold both of them in our hands, if
we mean to rule and govern the soul as we ought; the Understanding
directing, and the Will operating. And therefore a devout King, after that he
has begged understanding of God, that he may be able to study and meditate on
the observance of his divine Law, for the conservation of himself, and his
kingdom; finding that this is not sufficient if the Will should draw another
way, let him presently pray unto him, that he incline his Will, and so dispose
thereof, that he may not only will his Will, but that he may take pleasure to
put it in practice. In strictness, and in rigor, that is not Wisdom, nor
deserves the name thereof, which is bung'd up in the Head, and goes not from
the Understanding to the hand, and from the Will to the Work. Non enim
sapientia est (says S. Bernard) quae quod sapit, non exercet; Wisdom without
practice is not Wisdom.

There are some of whom all men stick not to say, that he is of great
understanding, a man of admirable abilities, singular wisdom, etc. And yet no
man knows wherein his Knowledge lies, nor can discern his Wisdom in his
Actions. It is necessary that this opinion should be ratified and confirmed by
exterior Actions, and some public demonstrations. Of King David the holy
Ghost says, that he did govern his people with the understanding of his
hands. Et in intellectibus manuum suarum deduxit illos. It is a clear case
that the hands have no other particular understanding in a distinct manner, or
distinguished from that which the soul has; and this is in the Head, and not
in the hands. But the meaning of that place is, that in the Works of his
hands, and in all his Actions, the King manifested his great Understanding and
Wisdom: Which if it remain only in the husk, or shell, it is good for
nothing. Sicut fides, ita and sapientia, sine operibus mortua est; Wisdom
(says S. Bernard) is like Faith, without good Works it is dead. That King
therefore that shall have wisdom enough in, and for himself, and shall
execute and show the same in the government of his kingdom, and exercise the
same amongst his Subjects, he shall be great in all his kingdoms here on
Earth, and great likewise in the kingdom of Heaven.

Solomon, when God had given him wisdom, did not only attend the speculatiue
part, but the practicke; which is the principal thing in him that rules.
Eccl. 8.16.
Apposui cor meum, vt viderem sapientiam, and occupationem: (for so the
Septuagint translate it.) But rendered by the vulgar: I applied mine heart to
know wisdom, and to see the business that is done upon Earth; for in
Wisdom, and the good exercise thereof, consists all the good government of
a Commonwealth. This being presupposed, and what else in the subsequent
Chapters shall be spoken hereof, I say, That it is not required of Kings, that
they should be so wise and skillful in all Arts and Faculties, as King Solomon
was, and others, which make profession thereof; nor yet so illiterate, as the
Emperor Licinius, which was such an Idiot, and such a beast, that he knew not
how to firm or set his hand to any Deed, or Writing. Or as that other Michael
Balbo, which was such an enemy unto Learning, that he would neither study good
Letters himself, nor suffer the children of his time to be bred up therein.

That which is to be required of every good King, is; that he have so much
wisdom, as to be able to advise himself, and to make benefit of the Council
of others. That he be wise enough to know what is good and just, and what is
bad and ill, that he may use the one, and shun the other. Is enim moderatus est
sapiens (says Socrates) that has Courage to execute, and Will to do. On
those Bases, which the most wise King Solomon placed in the Temple, 1 Kings
7.29.
he commanded Lions, Oxen, and Cherubins to be engraven, in signification of
so many the like qualities which Kings ought to have, who sustain the whole
weight of a kingdom. He must be in perpetual labor, signified in the Ox; he
must be endued with courage, expressed in the Lion; and he must abound in
knowledge, notified in the Cherubin. Wherefore Cicero likewise makes mention;
Cicero in Orat. pro lege Manil.
Hae sunt (says that Heathen Orator) virtutes Imperatoriae, Labor in negotijs,
Fortitudo in periculis, Industria in agendo: To assist in businesses, to be
stout and valiant in dangers, to be dextrous and wise in acting, and above all,
to have a liberal will without subjection, and readily disposed for execution,
are virtues befitting an Emperor. For to govern well, great strength, great
courage, great wisdom, great power, and a great willingness will be
required. For, though a King know much, and can do much; yet, if he will not
exercise his knowledge, nor make use of his power, it is all one as if he
neither knew, nor could do any thing. The Leaper said to our Savior Christ,
Domine, si vis, potes me mundare; If thou will, thou can make me clean. And
Christ made him answer, not in word only, but in deed; Volo, mundare; I will,
be thou clean.

CHAP. VI. How Kings ought to carry themselves in those businesses, which their
understanding comprehends not.
IN regard that the Understanding is amongst all other faculties the Noblest,
it is that (without doubt) which does least render and yield it self, but is
most sencible of the offense it receives in submitting it self. Whereupon
oftentimes it sticks close to it is opinion, and what it has once
entertained, it obstinately maintains and defends. And therefore the
Philosopher, said; Amicus Plato, sed mayor Veritas: Plato is my friend, but the
truth more. In confirmation whereof we daily see, that the dearest and nearest
friends, and that are one and the same in their will and affection, in their
understanding and opinion are diverse and different. Each of them maintains
his own particular Tenet, and yet without offense continue still good friends.
In a word, in matter of Knowledge and Understanding, because it is a thing that
cannot be measured out by the yard, or meat out by inches, there is not that
Man, that can endure Maioria, or that another should go before him, or get the
start of him in that kind. Every one rests satisfied with his own
Understanding, and conceiues that his reason is the best; and few will be
brought to acknowledge, that they are in an error. And in a manner all men
flatter themselves with their own opinion, and thinking they are in the right,
they are so far from yielding, that they stiffely maintain what they have
undertaken and you shall not beat them out of it, as being persuaded that they
have the better end of the staff in their hands. And hence arise those earnest
contentions, and endless questions in your Consultations, and debating of
Causes, those cross incounters and differences in determining great
businesses, persisting violently in their opinion, though it be never so
contrary unto reason. And though this be a common infirmity, and a general
fault in all of what state and condition soever, yet your great persons in this
point run the greatest peril. For (as the son of Sirach says) all do
approve and celebrate their sayings, not in that only, wherein they speak
home to the purpose, but when they speak foolishly, and utter things not to
be spoken. Eccl. 13.23.
Locutus est dives, and omnes tacuerunt, and verbum illius vsque ad nubes
perducent: When a rich man speaks, every man holds his tongue, and look
what he says, they extol it to the clouds. For opinion being now, (as long
since) Mistress of the World; show ouerswaies substance, and authority checketh
reason. It is not Goodness, but Greatness, that strikes the stroke. But if a
Prince would be so holy, and so zealous of the good of his Kingdom, have he
never so able a brain, never so much Knowledge and Understanding,
(acknowledging what a large extent of Wisdom is required for the governing of
a Kingdom, as it ought to be governed) that he would be pleased to receive
some help and assistance, he has very secure and certain remedies in this
case, and all of them ordered and ordained by the Holy Ghost. The first is, To
beg of God (and that with a great deal of faith and Confidence) Light, and
Wisdom; Conforming himself to that of S. James; Si quis vestrum indiget
sapientia postulet a deo, James. 1.5.
qui dat omnibus affluenter, and non improperat and dabitur ei: If any of you
lack wisdom, let him ask of God that gives to all men liberally, and
vpbraideth not; and it shall be given him. And for as much as in Kings, this
acknowledgment is usually more difficult, for that they are free, and without
dependence on any in their own kingdoms, so much the more acceptable in this
kind are their prayers unto God. As King Solomon exemplifieth it unto us, who
confessing the shortness of his understanding, and his want of Wisdom, for
to govern so great a people that could not be numbered, nor counted for
multitude, acknowledging himself to be but as a little child, and that he
knew not how to go out, or come in, and humbly beseeching God, that he would
be pleased to supply this defect, he found so much favor in his sight that he
appeared unto him after a solemn sacrifice, and said; Postula quod vis, vt them
tibi. Ask, what I shall give thee. 1. King. 35.
And this young King with a great deal of thankfulness and submission, said;
Domine deus tu regnare fecisti servum tuum etc. O Lord my God, 2. Chron. 1.10.
thou have made thy Servant King in instead of David my father, etc. And thy
servant is in the midst of the people which thou have chosen, a great people
etc. Give therefore thy Servant an understanding heart, to judge thy people,
that I may discern between good and bad, and be able to go in and out before
thy people. And howbeit this discreet young King saw the door of Gods mercy
set thus wide open unto him, and what a liberal offer he had made unto him, to
bestow favors upon him according to the measure of his own desire, yet did
he neither set his eyes, nor his heart upon Gold, Silver, Riches, or long
life, but as one, that knew so well how to ask, desired that he would out of
his grace and mercy, give him the gift of Wisdom, that he might know how to
govern his State and Kingdoms, and to conserve them in peace and Justice. And
God was so well pleased with this his Petition, that he did not only bestow
that upon him, but many other blessings with it, and (as the Apostle says)
affluenter, in a great abundance making him the wisest, the discreetest, and
the greatest king, that ever was in the world. And besides, gave him all that
which he omitted to desire, or might have desired: To wit, long life, full of
prosperity, honor, and riches. He did not account of these, in comparison of
wisdom, and yet all those other favors were conferred upon him; Quia hoc
magis plaucit cordi tuo, and non postulasti diuitias, etc: Because this was in
thy heart, and thou have not asked riches, 2. Chron. 1.11.
wealth, or honor, nor yet have asked long life, but have asked Wisdom and
knowledge for thy self, that thou may judge my people, over whom I have made
thee King; Wisdom and Knowledge is granted unto thee, and I will give thee
Riches, and Wealth, and Honor, such as none of the Kings have had, that have
been before thee, neither shall any after thee have the like. This very
goodness, this same Wisdom, did his father David beg of God. Bonitatem, and
disciplinam and scientiam, doce me: Teach me good judgment and knowledge.
Psalm. 119.66.
Which is all that can be wished, or desired for to govern well. In a word,
most certain it is, that Wisdom is the gift of God, and that it is purchased
(as was that of Salomons) with humble perseuering, and confident prayer. God
can, and does make of Stones sons of Abraham, which (according to the Language
of the holy Scripture) are wise and prudent men. Sambucus says; Sambuc. in
prob.
that Apollo being consulted with touching the help of wisdom; made answer,
that he knew no other remedy for it but silence. For he that is ignorant of a
thing, by his talking, bewrays his ignorance: and by holding his peace is
reputed wise. Which the Holy Ghost confirms unto us in that place of the
Proverbs, where it is said; Stultus si tacuerit, Prou. 17.23.
sapiens reputabitur; and si compresserit labia sua, intelligens: A fool when
he holds his peace is counted wise, and he that shuts his lips, is
esteemed a man of Understanding. It is great wisdom in a man to know then how
to hold his peace, when he knows not how to speak to the business. And
great discretion in him, rather to cover his defect, then publish his
ignorance: Answearing unto that which a Law of the Partida delivers, Ley. 5.
Tit. 4. Part. 2.
speaking there of a King. E siel no fuere home de gran seso por lassus
palabras entendran los homes, lamengua que ha del. And if he shall not be a man
of great wisdom, by his words, the people will understand the want he has
thereof. Wisdoms defect is supplied by silence. And it is S. Gregory's censure
upon those words of Job: Vtinam taceretis, vt putaremini esse sapientes. Job.
13.5.
Oh that you would altogether bold your peace, and it should be your wisdom.
At least, it is the Counsel of the wise, that Kings ought to strive and
endeavor, that no man should know all their store, nor be able to fadome the
depth of that their sea of knowledge, for the danger of the discovery of a
deceit; for many times it imports more in those that are led away with
affection, and those likewise that are strangers, to be ignorant whither and
how far, the worth and wisdom of a Prince extends it self, then the
experience and proof thereof. And because sometimes upon occasion Kings are
forced to discover that, which otherwise were fit to be concealed, it is very
meet and convenient, that they should use few, grave, and well-weighed words,
making no show of their own proper satisfaction. Wherein wise men have found
much greatness, besides an augmentation of their wisdom, and prudence. Qui
moderatur sermones suos (says Solomon) doctus, Prou. 17.27.
and prudens est: He has knowledge, spares his words: Homer says, That in
Kings, and such as praeside and rule, short and full language delivered with
Majesty, is much to be applauded and commended. And Socrates gives this
Precept to his king; In all that thou shall say, think, or do, bear this
always in thy memory, that thou art a King, and therefore oughtst not either
to do, or say any thing, unworthy so great a name. Octauius Caesar, when he
was to speak to the Senate or people of Rome, did never perform that Office
but with a great deal of good Order in his words, and deliberation in his
matter, committing first to memory that which he was to say unto them. And if
the business were of great weight and consequence indeed, he brought his
papers along with him, and delivered them his mind in writing, because he
would say neither more, nor less, then what with premeditation he had resolved
to acquaint them with all.

And above all, the particular, (if not the only) remedy to solder all
breaches, and defaults of knowledge and experience in businesses, is that
receipt which we have from the son of Syrach, Eccl 32.19.
who advises his son not to determine any thing without Counsel. Fili,
sine consilio nihil facias, and post factum, non poenitebis. Which the Vulgar
renders thus; Do nothing without advice, and when thou have once done, repent
not. For if it hit right, the glory shall be thine; and if it miscarry, thou
shall find sufficient excuse. Cicero was wont to say, that he did esteem it a
greater honor unto him to err, following Platos opinion and counsel then to
happen right, and to hit the nail (as we say) on the head, by adhering to
others of less credit and reputation. Hilar. in Psalm. 118.
It is a rule of prudence (says S. Hilary) That a wise man should ask advice
in that he knows not. For, that man is very apt to err, that is not willing
to hear, and stands in his own light, that neither knows how to ask, nor how
to apply himself to other men's opinions. Being (as it is in the Proverb) Mas
ven Quatro ojos que dos: four eyes, see more then two. And with so many eyes
does a man see, and with so many ears does a man hear, by how many the more
friends he has to advise him. Do not (as many do, and have done) persuade
thy self, that thou know more then all the world besides; (an ordinary
disease in (Princes) who seeing themselves seated in such high thrones, to be
so rich, and so powerful, take themselves to be the wisest and prudentest men
upon earth. Yet let them know that they brought not from their mothers womb
more prudence or wisdom, Wis. 7.
then other ordinary folks. Nemo enim ex regibus aliud habuit natiuitatis
initium. King, and Clown, Rich and Poor, when they are borne, draw in the
common air, and being fashioned to be flesh after ten months compaction in
blood, fall upon the earth which is of like nature. The first voice vttred by
Kings, is Crying, as all others do. There is no King, that has any other
beginning of birth; For all men have one entrance unto life, and the like going
out. We come all into the world with our bare skins on our backs, and as naked
of knowledge, as clothes; being subject in the rest to industry, instruction,
and others counsel, and advice, which is that which supplieth the defects of
nature. Rational souls, are all of them equal and alike in their creation,
and essential perfection, though they differently discover themselves in some
bodies, more then in other some, in regard of the better or not so good
disposition of the Organs, and by consequence, their understandings come to be
differenced, and the conceits of the one, to be of a higher strain then the
other. A man shall see more clearly through a Crystal glass, then that
which is of a thicker and grosser metal. Our body is nothing else but a
glass; nor have all bodies this good disposition; Nor have Kings, jointly with
their power, the self same measure in their understanding, wisdom, and
prudence. But say they had; it will be no hurt to them, but a great deal of
good and advantage, to hear, and take advice. For, audiens sapiens, sapientio
rerit: Prou. 19.20.
A wise man by hearing, will be made the wiser. Audi consilium, vt sis sapiens
in nouissimis tuis. Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou may
be wise in the latter end. And never in hard and difficult businesses, should
any man (be he never so wise) refuse to take advise. And besides, it savors of
much wisdom; not to do any thing without it. Qui agunt omnia in Consilio,
reguntur sapientia: Prou. 13.10.
With the well advised (says the holy Ghost) is wisdom: And there is no man
so wise that is wise in all things. The best and skilfullest Physician in the
world knows not how to cure himself, neither will he trust only to his own
opinion, but calls another unto him, advises with him, takes his Counsel,
and puts himself under his cure. Eurigius king of the Goths, said in the
Toletane Council; Council. Tol.
That even those works, which in themselves were very good, and did much
import the Commonwealth, wereby no means to be done, or put in execution,
without the Counsel of those that were good Ministers, and well affected to
the State, upon pain not only of loss of discretion, but to be condemned as
the only ouerthrowers of the Action. Things being so various, and so many, and
weighty the businesses as are those which come under the hands of Kings, and
crave their care to be treated of, the success of them, must needs run a
great deal of danger, when there precedeth not some diligent and mature
Counsel. Kings (I assure you) had need have good both Counsailours and
Counsel, having so many eyes as they have upon them, some of jealousy, and
some of envy, so many that go about to deceive, and do deceive them; and
many, that do not love them as they ought; I say they had need of good both
Counsailours and Counsel, and such a Council as is more close and private,
as that of the Council of State, and sometimes, and in some cases with a
little more restriction and reservedness, making choice of one, two, or more
of their faithfullest and sufficientest Counselors, with whom they may freely
Communicate their greater, and lesser affairs, and be resolved by them in
matters of greater moment, and such as importe their own proper preservation,
and the augmentation of their Kingdom, such as the Historians of Augustus
paint forth unto us, which kind of course, the Princes before and since his
time have taken, and now at this present, do. From the poorest Plowman, to the
Potent'st Prince, from the meanest Shepherd, to the mightiest Monarke, there
is a necessity of this Counsel. And in effect, every one as he can,
(comformable to his Estate, and calling) must Consult with his Wife, his Son,
his Friend, or himself, (if his fortune afford him not a Companion, whom he
may trust, or make his Confident). How much does it concern Kings, who
possessing such great Estates, and being subject to so many Accidents, have
need of a more perfect and Complete Council. And not any thing so much
imports them for the conservation, and augmentation of their Kingdoms, as to
have about them just, prudent, and dis-interessed persons, to advise them with
a great deal of faithfulness, and love, and with free liberty of Language
to represent the truth of that, which to them, and their Commonwealth, is most
fitting and convenient. Who, for this purpose, Plut. in P. Aemil Arist. c. ^.
Mag. moral.
are as necessary as great treasures, and mighty Armies. That holy King David,
was more a fraid of the advice of one wise Counselor, which his son Absolon
had with him, then of all the Men of War that followed him and his fortunes.
Plutarke, and Aristole floute at Fortune in businesses that succeed well, when
men do govern themselves by good Counsel. And for this cause, they styled
Counsel the eye, of those things that are to come, because of its foresight.
And for that we have treated heretofore of the qualities of all sorts of
Counsailours, I now say; That with much deliberation and advise, Kings are to
make choice of those persons, which are to advise and Counsel them. For from
their hitting or missing the mark, resulteth the universal good or ill, of
the whole Kingdom.

It is the common received opinion, That the maturest and soundest Counsel,
is to be found in those men, that are grown wise, by their Age, and
experience, which is the natural Daughter of Time, and the Mother of good
Counsel. Tempus enim multam, and variam doctrinam parit. Eurip. lib. 12.
It is Euripides his saying; Suting with that of Job, In antiquis est
sapientia, and in multo tempore, prudentia: Seniore in Prouinciae congrega, and
eos interroga, facilius namque. inuenitur quod a pluribus Senioribus quaeritur.
In the ancient, is wisdom, and in much time, prudence. Long time, is a great
Master, which does graduate men in the knowledge of things, and makes them
wary, prudent, and circumspect, which is much (if not wholly) wanting in young
men. And therefore Aristotle says of them, that they are not good for
Counsel, because Wit, more then Wisdom in them, has it is force and Vigor.
Et tenero tractari pectore nescit, says Claudian. And S. Jerome is of the
mind, that young Wits, cannot weild weighty matters. And that their
Counsels, are rash and dangerous, like unto that they gave King Rehoboam; S.
Aug. ad fratres in erem. Ser. 14.
By whose inconsiderate advise he lost his Kingdom: The same course having
cost others as dear; as is proved unto us out of S. Austen. And therefore the
Grecians, Romans, Lacedaemonians, Carthaginians, and other Commonwealths which
were good obseruers of their Laws and Customs, did ordain; That a young man
how wise so ever he might seem to be, and of never so good and approved
judgment, should not be admitted to the Counsel Table, till he were past 50.
years of Age, who being adorned with Virtue, and experience, might assure them
that he would keep a Decorum in all his Actions, and perform his duty in
every respect. Heraclides in Politicis. Senec. Epist. 60. Bald. in cap. 1. de
renun.
Lex erat (says Heraclides) ne quis natus infra quinquaginta, vel magistratum
gerat, vel Legationem obiret. In fine, for Council Seneca and Baldus, affirm;
That the very shadow of an old man, is better then the eloquence of a young
man. But because good Counsels are not in our hands, but in Gods hands, who,
Psalm. 33.10.
as David says; Dissipat consilia gentium and reprobat consilia principum: The
Lord brings the Counsel of the Heathen to naught, he makes the devises of
Princes of none effect. Prou. 21.30.
And the wisest of Kings tells us. Non est sapientia, non est prudentia, non
est consilium contra Dominum: There is no Wisdom, no understanding, no
Counsel against the Lord. And in humane things, there are so many
Contingencies that man's wisdom is not always sufficient to determine the
best, nor to hit aright in his Counsels, unless the Holy Ghost be
interuenient, interpose it self, and assist in them. For let
Priuie-Counsellours beat out their brains with plodding and plotting, let
them be never so vigilant, never so studious, they shall err in their aim,
and shoot beside the burt, if he direct not the arrow of their Council and
wisdom; if he do not in Secret illighten their hearts; illuminate their
understanding, and dictate unto them, what they are to do. Which is done by
the infusiue gift of the Holy Spirit cooperating in us, which is a divine
impulsion which does eleuate and raise up our understanding to hit the white
and to choose that according to the rule the Divine Law) which is fit to be
followed, as also to be a voided. And this is the gift of Council given by God
unto his friends, and such as serve him truly, to the end that by his help,
they may light aright upon that; which of themselves they could never come
near. And he that is not Gods friend, nor studies by his Actions to be so, let
him shake hands with the Holy Ghost, let him bid this blessed Spirit farewell,
this divine gift; Greg. Nyss. lib. de lib. arbitrie.
which is the best (says Nissenus) and the most perfect, that is in Man: so
that for to give Counsel and Advice, years, experience, and gray hayres,
suffice not; unless his soul be as white as his head, and his conscience be
pure and clean from corruption. Cani enim sunt sensus hominis: The good
abilities, Galen decognosc. curand. animi morbis. cap. 3.
and wise apprehensions of man, are those true silver hairs, those hoary
locks, which countenance him, and add authority, unto him, and not those
snowie flakes, nor hoare-frost, that lies upon his bearde. Aetas Senectutis,
Vita immaculata: Wisd. 4.9.
Wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life, is old age. So the
wiseman renders it of virtuous old men: Galen says that they have the
faculty of aduising, and that of them we must ask Counsel. God Commanded
Moses, that he should make choice of the Elders of Israel to govern his
people. De senibus Israel, quos tu nosti, Numb. 11.16.
quod senes populi sint: Gather unto me 70. men of the Elders of Israel, whom
thou know to be the Elders of the people. Hoary-headed men (accompanied with
much virtue, an approved life, soundness of Religion, and much prudence) are
those that are worthy to give Counsel, and those which Kings are to make
choice of for their service. The Emperor Charles the fifth said it was fit,
that Princes should be served by men that were learned and virtuous, and that
the Counsel, and company of those which were not so, were very prejudicial
and hurtful. Counsailours likewise must be of that greatness of courage and
magnanimity, as may correspond with the Dignity royal. For Kings that have
not had in themselves any great courage, have still honored noble-minded
Counsailours, whereas the contrary have bin disgraced, and degraded of their
honors by Kings that were naturally magnanimous. For it is the condition of
cowardly hearts, and of base Counsailours en cuerpo, y alma (as they say) in
body, and soul; to propose unto their Kings base and unworthy means, for the
remedying of some mischiefs, whereon others follow, that are far greater.
And let them not persuade them, that this Age is barraine of virtuous
dispositions, and Noble minds, which produces, as well as former times,
whatsoever is necessary and needful for them. For, the divine prudence (to
which particularly appertains the conservation of kingdoms) is never drawn
dry, never waxes weary. And if such men are wanting, and appear not to the eye
of the world, it is, because they are not sought after, or not admitted to
Council, for the chastisement and punishment of our great and heinous sins.
Besides, this one benefit Kings have above others, that all good men would be
glad to serve them, and many do sue and seek after them, and offer their
service unto them; So that, they have store of choice, and may easily make good
election, if therein they will strip and cleanse themselves of their
affections, and passions, which Eclipse and darken the true judgment of man.
And these, that I now speak of, when they have found them, and made choice of
them to be of their Council; let them love them, honor them, and trust them.
And as they shall receive ease and honor by their good Advise; So let them
reward them, and conceive of them, as king Alexander did of his Master, and
Counselor Aristotle, of whom he said, that he ought no less respect unto
him, then unto his own father. For from his father he had his life, his
honor, and his kingdom; but from Aristotle, his Instructions, Counsels, and
directions, how he should order himself in all his affairs. And Scipio, does
attribute all the honor of his Victories to his faithful friend and
Counselor Laelius. And Cicero, to the Philosopher Publius, Cicero lib. 4.
epist. fam. epist. vltima.
for those notable things of his government, which he performed in his
Consullship: so that good and faithful Counsailours, are of great honor,
profit, and ease unto Kings. But let Kings take heed, least they strike a
fear into their Counselours, through their absolute and free condition, and
make them to withdraw themselves from aduising them what is fitting, by seeing
them so wedded to their own opinion, and to excuse themselves from giving
Counsel, for that they are dis-heartned and discountenanced by them for
delivering their minds freely for their profit, and honor. Of the Emperor
Adrian it is storyed, that he had so noble a condition, Vt libenter patiebatur
admoneri and corrigi vel ab humili persona: That he willingly submitted
himself to be admonished and reproved of the meanest person. It is proper to
gentile breasts, and generous hearts, to listen with delight to the good
reasons, and Counsels of others, though they be inferior in quality unto
them: for sometimes a poor man hits right, when a rich man misses the mark.
And a Country Clown may advise that, which a king knows not of. And if he do
persuade himself, that he knows all, and understands all, and that his
opinion alone is the certainest and surest, he but shuts the door to the
discovery of his error. One of the two things (says Hesiod) which every man
of reason, wisdom, and understanding, that shall be sufficient to govern
that, which shall be committed to his charge, ought to have; is a great
blandure, smoothness, and softness of heart, to follow the opinion, advise
and Counsel of those that are the wisest and know most. This blandure, and
docilitie, is likewise a part of Prudence, and we shall find it set down in
express words, in those two Petitions, which Solomon made unto God. For in the
second of the Chron. 2. Chron. 2.10.
It is written, that he said; Da mihi sapientiam: Give me wisdom. And in the
first of the Kings; Dabis ergo seruo tuo cor docile: 1. Kings. 3.9.
Give therefore thy servant an Understanding heart. Understanding, for to know,
and an obedient heart, for to hear the Advice of others. But this second part,
of being obedient to other men's opinions, is unprofitable for government,
without the first, which is prudence, and wisdom, for to choose and know the
best. For, by following bad Counsel, he shall err as much, as if he followed
his own proper error; and sometimes more. And I should hold it the less
evil, that a king were not ouerwise, if presuming that he is; he should rely
too much upon himself, and scorn to take counsel; then if he were less
wise, but knew how to benefit himself, and make good use of the Advice of
prudent and wise Counsailours. Aug. lib. 14. de Ciuit. Dei. cap. 13.
A Prince, of a docile and ingenious disposition, is well disposed to
intertaine all good Counsel and doctrine. He easily learneth the languages of
all those nations, which are under his Empire, and does all things with as much
facility, as if he had been bred up in every one of them. And therefore said
Herodotus; Omnia sapientibus facilia: To the wise, all things are easy. And
therefore your wise men, give the first place unto that man, who of himself
knows that which is fitting. And the second, to him, that knows how to follow
good Counsel. But he, that neither is wise, nor will be ruled by the wise,
they know not in what form to place him, Plato. in Thim.
nor what name to give him. Plato, calls them Children, and further says; That
such men, as are not wise, though they be never so aged, are still Children.
And Seneca proves, that they begin every day to live because they understand
no more, then the child that is newborn. And Strabo is of the same mind.
Strabo. in Geo. lib. 1.
Omnes Idiotae, and doctrinarum expertes, quodammodo pueri sunt appellandi, All
Idiots, and illiterate persons, are after a sort to be called Children. And
because in the Chapters that are to follow by and by, we are to treat more at
large of this matter, I conclude this with saying; That Kings for to hit the
nail on the head, and not to fail in the carriage of their businesses, must
always take counsel of wisemen, such as are of known virtue and experience;
and not give credit unto any, that prate and talk with a great deal of
liberty and license of those things they understand not, as if they were
graduated in the^ from their Mothers womb; And only for a more happy (in show)
than prudent wit: Lest that happen unto them, which befell king Ahab, who
admitted to his Council a false Prophet, that made great oftentation of that
spirit, which he had not. He put the government into his hands, and all was
governed by his Counsel. And because he did not speak by the spirit of God,
nor he himself well understood what he said, businesses went amiss, the
kingdom suffered, and it cost the king his life. It passes so sometimes that
Kings put the government into those men's hands which are lame, and neither know
nor can command. They require their voice, who have nothing but a voice: empty
barrels that sound loud, but have no fullness, and crave advice of those that
are least able to give it them. And if they themselves pay not for their folly,
yet at lest the kingdom suffers for it. And therefore we are not more to desire
any thing of God for the good government, conservation, and augme^tation of
Kings, and kingdoms, than that he will be pleased to furnish them, with good,
wise, and prudent Counsailours, such as are sound at the heart, clean from
corruption, and blameless in their conversation. For such as these, will serve
the^ in stead of Eyes, and understanding both, wherewith they may see, and
understand all that passes in their kingdoms. O how without eyes, how blind
is that king, who has imprudent, covetous, and ill inclined Ministers! And if
he will conserve himself and his kingdom well, he ought not so much to fly
from those Physicians, who either out of ignorance, or particular hatred,
approve, and consent to his eating of such meats as are hurtful and contrary
to his health, as from ignorant Counsailours, who either out of Adulation, or
for their particular Interest, make all that lawful, which his free and
absolute will shall lead him unto. For such Eare-wiggs as these, will quickly
spoil the prosperity of the kingdom, overthrow the life of the King, and
provoke the patience of the Subject.

CHAP. VII. A Prosecution of the former discourse, showing how Kings are to
take Counsel, and what signs they are to mark: and observe for their better
knowledge.
IT is a Proverb much celebrated amongst the Grecians; that Consiliu^ est res
sacra; Counsel is a sacred thing. And as D. Thomas declares it; it is a light
wherewith the holy Ghost illightneth the understanding, to choose the best.
Others say; That it is a science, which does weigh and consider, How, and When
things are to be done, that they may succeed well. Aristotle says, Arist.
Ethic. lib. 6.
That it is a well-weighed, and considered reason, whether such a thing shall
be done, or not done? And the Law de la Partida, That it is good Advice, which
a Man takes upon things that are doubtful, Ley. 1. and 2. Tit. 21. p. 1.
that they may succeed well. And indeed Counsel is in all things exceeding
necessary. For without it, can we neither treat of peace, nor war. Consilijs
tractanda sunt bella. Every purpose is established by Counsel, and with good
advise make war. It is the saying of the holy Ghost; Pro. 20.18
Ibi salus, vbi multa consilia: Much Counsel brings much safety. Nor can
there be any thing more prejudicial, nor any means more effectual to
destroy Kings and Kingdoms, than to alter and pervert Counsels. And this the
Prophet Micaiah teaches us in a vision which he had, in this form: 1 King.
22.19.
God represented himself, sitting on his Throne, and all the Host of Heaven
standing by him, on his right hand, and on his left, consulting with them, what
course he should take to destroy Ahab. And every one having delivered his
opinion, there came forth a malignant and lying spirit, like another Cayphas,
and gave his verdit, saying; I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in
the mouth of all his Prophets I will instruct the Counsailours of King Ahab,
and with a lie clothed with the appearance and likeness of truth, I will
deceive and destroy him. This course was approved, and held to be the fittest
and most effectual for the kings utter ruin and destruction. And albeit in
this divine Vision, and revelation, manifested for the dis-deceiuing of Kings,
and to put them out of their error, there were many things worthy observation,
and consideration, yet the principal note, (in my judgment) is; That neither
Ahabs want of understanding, nor his being headstrong nor wilful in his
opinion, nor his being ouer-rash, and unadvised in what he undertook, but his
own sins, and the sins of his people, had put him in that estate and condition,
that dismeriting Gods favor, and the light of heaven, the devil did deceive
him, guiding the tongues of his false Prophets, telling them falsehoods, for
truths; doubtful things, for things certain, and by persuading him, that
that which was to be his destruction, should turn unto his profit and honor.
S. Paul tells us, 2. Cor. 11.15.
that Satan often times transformes himself into an Angel of Light, and
represents lies and falsehoods unto us, in the shape and figure of truth. And
the mischief of it, is; That the same which the devil wrought upon Ahabs
Counsailours, feigned friends, and professed enemies, have, and do the like on
some occasions; procuring by secret means, to introduce persons, who making
profession to side and take part with the king, persuade him to do that, which
is least fitting for them, and most useful for their own ends. This is one of
the greatest darings, and insolences, that may in matter of State be
attempted. God free all good kings from such Counsels, and Counsailours. When
king David saw how his son Absolon persecuted him, and thought to go away
with the kingdom, he feared not any thing so much, as the plots and Counsel
of Achitophel, who was both a subtle Statist, and a valiant Soldier, and by
whose advise Absolon was wholly ruled and governed. For the repairing of which
mischief, he got Hushai the Archite, who was no whit inferior unto him in
valor, and prudence, in a dissembling and disguised manner, to offer his
service unto Absalon, and to work himself in to be of his Council of war,
and State, that he might be the better able, to oppose the able and sound
advice of Achitophel; as he did even then, when his Master had most need of his
service: By which discreet carriage, David was freed of his fear, 2. Sam.
15.31.
and Absalons businesses went backward, till himself, and his whole Army were
utterly ouerthrown. Which story ye may read more at large in the second of
Samuel. Two things therefore are to be considered for to know which is the best
and safest Counsel: The one on the Kings part, who craves it; the other, on
his part, that gives it. And on either part, that which most imports, is
pureness of intention, and a desire to encounter with Truth. Not like unto
those, who hearken unto good and disappassionated Counsels with passion, and
only desire to be advised, that the Council may conclude, what is merely
their Will, and not otherwise. And in their sittings at the Counsaile-Table,
which are ordained to this end, they do not so much treat, whether that, they
pretend, be just, or no? but with what color of Justice, they may effect what
they desire? The understanding (says Salust) which we will (and with better
reason, or more properly) term the Will, ought to be free and
dis-incumbranced of affection, or particular passions, as well in asking, as
giving Counsel. And because if there be any of this reigning in the breast, it
cannot always, nay scarce any long time be dissembled, but will like fire
break forth from under the ashes that cover it; fitting it is, That Kings
should seldom assist personally in Counsel; for their Voting in his
presence, is done with awfulnesse, and great respect; but in his absence, they
utter their minds with alittle more freenes, and liberty of language. And
evermore your first opinions of your Ministers, and Counsailours of State,
before they be touched with the Air of the Kings will, are the best and the
sincerest, as produced from that vnforst motion and natural inclination, which
is in their own particular hearts, and bosoms. If the King desires to have
this or that thing pass, and for to authorize and qualify this his desire, he
craves their Counsel, howbeit he meet with many which conform themselves
thereunto, and follow his gust and liking, yet such Counsel or advice in such
a Case, ought to be esteemed as little secure, as there is great reason for it
to hold it suspected: Especially, if the foresaid Counsailours, by some means
or other come to have an inckling, that this way the King is inclined, and this
is that, which will give him content. And though we might as well out of
Divine, as Humane Letters cite here many examples, for that this is a thing so
usual, and so well received both by Princes, and by Priuy-Counsailours; Or to
speak more truly and plainly, by those, that sooth, and flatter them; I will
only allege that, which passed with that unfortunate King Ahab; 1. Kings.
21.6.
who out of his proud and haughty spirit, and the desire that he had to make
war, and to take a place of importance from the King of Syria, propounded his
intent, or to say better his Content, to those of his counsel. The business
was no sooner in treaty, and the proposition for the undertaking of this
action proposed unto them, but forthwith 400. Counsailours with a joint consent
conformed themselves to his opinion. And to sooth up this his humor the more,
one amongst the rest bobb'd him in the mouth with an intolerable Lie,
affirming; that God had revealed unto him, that he should have the glory of
the day, and that the success of the battle should be prosperous unto him
This was apprehended with a great deal of content by the King, but was
finished with his unfortunate end, himself being slain in that battle, and
his Army routed and overthrown. By which we may see, how much it concerns
Kings, if they will receive good Counsel, that they dissemble (as much as
they can) their particular good will and liking in the business proposed. But
that, which is here of greater consideration, is the virtue, fidelity, and
truth of a Counsailour, a mind without passion, disinteressed, and pure. For
it oftentimes happens, that he that craves Counsel, has not his intention
so sound as is requisite, nor his judgment so strong, as to reduce him into
the right way, and being set in it, to follow the best. But to grow to a
Conclusion, that cannot fail, which Truth it self, our Savior Christ said in
his Gospel; A good tree, cannot bring forth had fruit: nor a bad tree good.
And the badge or cognizance of good or bad Counsel, shall doubtless be the
goodness, or badnesse, the wisdom, or ignorance of the Counsailour. And
therefore I importunately press, that it mainly imports a Prince, to beware,
of whom he takes Counsel. For by how much the more profitable is a wise and
upright Counsailour, by so much the more prejudicial is he, that is unjust,
and vnstreight. And therefore the Holy Ghost says; Tob. 4.19.
Consilum semper a sapiente perquire: Ask Counsel always of the wise. And
in another place; Eccl. 6.6.
Pacifici sint tibi multi, Consiliarius sit tibi vnus de mill. Amongst a 1000.
Men, scarce will there be found one, that is fit to give Counsel. For some
want wisdom, and prudence; other some, pureness, and cleanness of heart;
and a third sort, are so ouerswaied with passion, that they do not simply and
sincerely persuade the truth. A clear Example whereof we have in King Rehoboam,
the son and successor of King Solomon, who though he succeeded his father in
so rich a Kingdom, and so inured to peace, and obedience to their King, yet
notwithstanding was in an instant undone and utterly lost by bad both
Counsel, and Counsailours. For good Counselors, are the life and soul of a
Kingdom. And when it is not underpropped with such, like a body without a
soul, it presently sinkes and falls from it is state wherein it stood. And
therefore the holy King said. Psalm. 101.6.
Oculi mei ad fideles terrae, vt sedeant m^cum. Ambulans in via immaculata, hic
mihi ministrabit. Non habitabit in medio domus meae, qui facit superbiam: qui
loquitur iniqua, non direxit in conspectu oculorum meorum: Mine eyes shall be
upon the faithful of the Land that they may dwell with me. He that walks in
a perfect way, he shall serve me. He that works deceit, shall not dwell in
my house: he that tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight. And in this
particular, Kings ought to be very wary and circumspect. In the next Chapter we
will treat of the Care which they are to take in choosing their Counselors
of State; for the error in this one, is the fountain of all errors, and the
total Perdition of Kings and kingdoms.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Diligences, which Kings are to use in the Election of their
Ministers, and Counselors.
IT is a question, that has been much sifted and winowed amongst your Moral
Philosophers, as also your Divines; whether Election, be formally a work of
the Understanding, or the Will: Gregory Nyssenus says; That it is composed of
both parts; To wit, of the Act of the Will, and of the Understanding. And he
said well. For therein is required both a fulness of Knowledge, and a
freeness of Will. And it is the Doctrine of Diuus Thomas, who says; That it
is not of the will alone, but also of the Understanding, because the elective
Act of the Will, conference, consultation, and Judgment, is to precede; which
is the proper Act of the Understanding. But the mischief of it is; That in
Elections, we many times see the contrary, and what a strange diuorcement and
separation there is herein, from this true Philosophy. For that, which now a
days most of all discouers it self in these Elections, is our proper gust,
will, and affection. And therefore to remedy so great a malady, it shall be
requisite, that the Prince, who desires to tread sure, to hit the mark he
aims at, and to please God in those whom he electeth and calls to his
Counsel: that he follow the Example of our Savior Christ, written for our
instruction by the Evangelists S. Matthew, and S. Luke, who recounting the
Election of S. Peter and of S. Andrew, Mat. 4. Luke 4. and. 5.
and other the Apostles, as his principal Ministers, there preceded a long and
prolixe Oration, or prayer, full of fervor, of zeal, and of the Spirit, and
retired himself into the desert, and there fasted 40. days, Luke 6.12.
Et erat pernoctans in Oratione Dei. And continued all night in prayer unto
God. Which (as S. Ambrose, and other fathers have well observed) Christ did not
do, that he had any need of these Dispositions, and Preambles, for to iumpe
right in that Election; but to teach kings, and all other Princes, that if they
will hit right in their Elections, they are to use the like Diligences. They
are by good and pious works to procure this favor at Gods hands, and to
direct all their actions to this end. Nor would he, that this Election should
be left wholly to the declaration of those Saints, for our Savior did declare
himself more particularly in the 10. of S. Luke; Luke 10.2.
Where speaking with the 70 Disciples, which had nominated them, he said unto
them; Messis quidem multa, operarij autem pauci; rogate ergo Dominum Messis, vt
mittat operarios in messem suam: The Harvest truly is great, but the Laborers
are few; Pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth
Laborers into his Harvest. And though in those former times, these words were
very seasonable, yet now in this present age, it is necessity is better known,
as likewise the truth thereof. For, the Haruests being so many, and so great, I
mean, so great and so many the variety, and multitude of important businesses
for the welfare of the Commonwealth, the Laborers are very few. But to
express my self a little more fully, I say, That very few are they, that
enter, or seek to enter into Offices, for to labor and pains, but for to
live at their pleasure, and to heap up riches, that they may increase the more
in ambition, and more freely take their ease. The remedy of this, consists
in that, which our Savior Christ commands us; To wit: That we indefatigably
pray unto him, that he will be pleased to send forth faithful Ministers and
good Laborers into his Commonwealth. Ministers, of known trust, zeal, and
virtue, to whom may suit the name of Counselors, and not of Babblers; of
worthy men, and not of wordly men. And kings, to whom properly this Office of
Election does belong, must put the more force, and insist the more in this
prayer begging that which the wisest of Kings, Solomon petitioned of God, Da
mihi sedium tuarum assistricem sapientiam, vt mecum fit, Wised. 9.10.
and mecum laboret, vt sciam quid sit acceptum coram te omni tempore: O God of
my fathers, send me wisdom out of thy holy heavens, and from the Throne of
thy Glory, that being present, she may labor with me, that I may know what is
pleasant unto thee, etc. This wise and discreet king, was not contented with
that guide and light which humane wisdom might afford him, but had recourse
by prayer to that divine Light and Wisdom, which is that that guides Kings
without stumbling, or fear of falling into error. For as Wisdom says of her
self; Per me reges regnant, etc: Prou. 8.15.
By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice. As if she should have said:
By the hand and Light, which I reach forth unto Kings, they go rightly on in
their judgments, and their Elections, so that they reign, and conserve
themselves in quiet possession of their Kingdoms. The drift of my discourse is
this; That when a King shall come to elect and make choice of his Ministers,
his first care must be, to pray heartily unto God, that he will direct this
his choice and election. And so much the more diligence he ought to use
therein, by how much of more importance and of greater quality the Minister
shall be, that is to be employed.

After Prayer, which is divine, other humane diligences, are to be followed.
Whereof the chiefest is, that the Prince inform himself of the good
sufficiency, the honest life, and fair carriage of those, whom he is to
choose. And that herein, he may not be deceived, it is necessary, that with
Christ he go up unto the Mount; That is, To eleuate his Consideration unto God
and to avoid vulgar opinions; To strip himself of passion, and not to strike
hands with those, that are not Gods friends; To forget all kindred, and
Alliance; Not to take in the infectious Air of fond affection; Not to apply
himself to that, which the importunat intercessions and requests of a
favorite, or kinsman shall seek to draw from him for their private benefit;
Nor to hearken to the negotiation of cunning and subtle pretenders, but only
to the good of the Commonwealth, and the quick dispatch of businesses, and
other the like offices, that are to be exercised by men of their place. And
albeit, it was my purpose, not to serve my self, in this discourse, but with
the Testimonies and Examples of holy Scripture, and the Doctors that are
Expositors thereupon; Yet can I not omit to exemplify here in one, of King
Don Philip, the second of this name, whose soul does rest in peace, being that
for his great prudence, and zeal to Justice, and for his good government, all
the Kings of the world may acknowledge him their Master. The case is this; A
President of his time, having proposed a Person for a place, relating unto him
the qualities, which concurred in him, for the meriting thereof, he farther
added; That the Lady Infanta, did much desire this provision should be made
him. Heereunto his Majesty with a great deal of judgment, and gravity, made
answer. Y mi hija que sabe desso? What? Has my Daughter a hand in this? Can she
judge of his worth. Giving his President by this his Answer to understand, that
he should not have alleged unto him that, for to make a good election, which
should pass the bounds of the consideration of those parts and qualities,
wherewith he was to be furnished, were his pretension never so much favored
by the mediation and intercession of great persons. And heereunto I farther
add, that a king should in no hand content himself with the bare knowledge of
those only, whom he knows by fight, and walk daily up and down in his
Court, but that he should take leisure to inform himself of as many as he
can, and to follow the ancient custom, in giving order to his Generals,
Vice-kings, Prelates, and Governors of every Province, to give him information
of the best and sufficientst subjects that are in their Government, and that
after due consultation had with them, they should nominate three or four unto
him, that from amongst many good, he might choose the best. And the rest to
be listed, and taken notice of, that upon occasion they might receive
employment. From whence likewise this good will arise, that All, in all parts,
great, and small, will study the Science and Art of good government, fly Vice,
and follow Virtue, that they may in their due time be numbered amongst the
Chosen. Let a King go, Con su spassos contados (as they say) with a slow
foot, in those Elections, which he is to make, giving way unto Time, and to
information. Which he ought willingly to hear, neither in all giving credit
to all; nor being (as many are) too incredulous. Let him remit things to Trial
and Examination, it being a thing needful for him so to do. For, if it be
not wisdom, to lend a facile ear to all that we hear, for, the wise man
says: Qui cito credit, leuis est cord; So likewise does it betoken little
prudence, to live always suspicious and distrustful. Something must be left
to Experience. But to come to the qualifying of persons, if the one's qualities
be of ten, the other of nine quilates, and all of them necessary for the
Office of a Counselor, the first ought to be preferred, though the other out
strip him in Estate, in favor, in riches, and greatness. For, in that
Ministry, there ought respect to be had only to the advantages of
sufficiency, and not of power. Nor services, albeit two be equal in
sufficiency, must loose their place, and right. But that he, who has done
the greater services for his King and Country, ought to be preferred before
the other. Now there is this difference (amongst many others) betwixt a good
Prince, and him that is not so; that a good Prince, conferrs his Offices,
according to the sufficiency and virtue of the Minister he makes choice of;
the other upon favor, and humane respects, using therein his power, but not
attending distributive Justice, which rewards every one according to his
deserts, without respect either unto persons, or particular intents.

CHAP. IX. Of the Qualities, which Kings are to consider in those, whom they
are to make choice of for Ministers and Counselors.
WE may very well answer that which is here questioned with that which is
recounted in the 18. Chapter of Exodus, where it is said; That Iethro, seeing
his son in law, Moses wearyed and tired out in the government of that great
body of Gods people, and that it was more then one man's work, to give
sufficient dispatch to so many businesses, did advise him, to choose but a
certain number of Ministers and Counselors, that might help to ease him of
that burden, which was too heavy for his shoulders, Exodus 18. and. 18.
Vltra vires tuas est negotium, solus illud non poteris sustinere. This thing
is too heavy for thee; Thou art not able to perform it thy self alone.
Cadendo cades (says another Letter) By falling, thou shall fall, and all this
people, that is with thee. Daras de ojos (as they say) a cada passo. Thou must
look well about thee. And jointly with this, he propounded the qualities,
which he ought to consider in those, whom he was to choose for that
Ministry. Proinde ex omni plebe, viros sapientes and timentes deum, in quibus
sit veritas. Or as another letter has it; Exodus 18.21.
Viros veridicos, and qui oderint avaritiam: Thou shall provide out of all the
people able men, such as fear God; men of truth, hating Covetousness, etc.
Now, let us go pondering every word in particular, and in them, the qualities
of Ministers. The first is Provide; Which signifies not only to provide, but
to foresee, and consider. For, the election of a Minister is a business of
great providence, and consideration, and the most important and necessary for
a King in matter of government. On the good, or bad Election of Counselors,
depends the whole honor and profit both of King, and Kingdom. And he that
erres in this, must necessarily err in all. For the spring of a fountain
being spoiled, all the water is spoiled. And a King failing in this Principle,
all goes to destruction. For without doubt, all good dispatch grows from the
force and virtue of good Counsel. Then therefore is a King held to be wise
and prudent, when he has wise and prudent Counsailours: He succeeds well
with all his Intentions, and inioyeth fame, credit, and reputation both with
his subjects, and with strangers. Of the one he is beloved and obayed, and of
the other dreaded and feared; and of all esteemed and commended: The whole
kingdom rests contented and satisfied. And though in something he sometime
err, none will believe it. But when Priuie-Counsailours are no such manner of
men, all murmur, and proclaim to the world; That there is not an able man in
all the Counsel, and if in some one thing or other he hap to have good
success, few or none will give credit thereunto, but rather conceive, it was
done by Chance.

The sacred Text says farther; De omni plebe: Out of all the People. As if he
should have said out of all the 12. Tribes, or families of this people; thereby
to give us to understand; That for to make a good Election, it is requisite,
that there should not remain a nooke, or corner in all his kingdoms, where
diligence should not be used (as before has been said) to search out the
fittest Ministers. And likewise it may in this word, be given us to understand,
that in matter of Election, we are not to have respect to Lineage, Kindred, or
Parentage, but to virtue, sufficiency, and courage, accompained with other
good qualities, which adapt a man to be a Counselor. And therefore it is said
anon after, Viros sapientes, Wisemen; men of understanding heads, and stout
hearts, which dare boldly and plainly to speak the truth, and to maintain
and put it in execution, when they see fit time: for your pusillanimous and
white-liuerd persons are not fit Ministers for a State. Noli quaerere fieri
iudex, nisi valeas virtute irrumpere iniquitates. He that has not a face, to
outface a Lie, and to defend the truth, let him never take upon him the Office
of a Minister of Justice. In the book of Daniel it is storyed, that King
Nabucodonozor was resolved to have done some cruel chastisement upon his
Princes, and Counselors, for that having asked them the Interpretation of a
troublesome dream he had, none of them could declare the meaning of it. And
howbeit they told him, that they could not tell what to make of it, and plainly
confessed the truth, yet notwithstanding the King conceived, that he had good
reason to except against them. For (thought he) if you know it, and for fear
will not tell it me, ye are Cowards; And if you know it not, ye are ignorant;
and either of these is a great fault in Counsailours, and afford sufficient
cause, why ye should be punished; in that ye would offer to take that Office
upon ye; which first of all has need of stoutnesse of courage; and secondly,
to be learned and expert in so many and various things, as a King has occasion
to use ye in. And therefore that wise Iethro, after the word Viros, Men, puts,
sapientes, Wise Or as the 70. and others translate it, potentes fortes. Because
in Ministers and Counselors of State, strength, courage, constancy, and
wisdom, should walk hand in hand. The Courts and Palaces of Kings and
Princes, that which they are least stored with all, is Truth. They scarce know
her face, nay not so much as of what color or complexion she is, the onley
Minions there made of, being flatteries, and lies. A wise and stout man, is
daunted with nothing, is never troubled, nor altered, he stands upon his own
worth and sincerity, and is Lord and Master of his reason, he speaks with
liberty and freedom, he represents the truth to his King, and maintains it,
Pie quedo (as they say) stiffely and stoutly, without respect to any thing, no
not so much as his own proper life, he overthrows plots, discouers the
impostures, deceits and Lies of flatterers; for the which he had need of
courage and wisdom.

Now let us see, what that wisdom is, which a King is to require in his
Ministers. Not worldly wisdom, whereof S. Bernard says, That those which
enjoy it, boasting themselves thereof, very wisely go to Hell. The question
that I ask is; Whether, they should be Philosophers, Divines, or Lawyers, or
in what kind of faculties, they should be wise? Heereunto first I answer; that
questionless, it would be a great help to the making of a good Counselor to
be seen in these Sciences, and to have spent some time of study in them. But
in case they have no skill in these it shall suffice, that they are wise in
that which belongs unto that Ministry, for which they are nominated and
called; to wit: To be a Counsailour, which is a person, that is fit,
sufficient, and able, for that charge which he is to administer. That he have
a nimble wit, and quick apprehension, for without that, the rest serves to
little purpose. Whereas he that is furnished therewith, with a little help,
attaineth to much; He knows things past, understands the present, and gives
his judgment of things to come. That he be well read in ancient and modern
Histories, wherein are contained the sentences and opinions of wise men of
elder times, by which they ordered their Commonwealths, and maintained them in
Peace. For this kind of reading, does indoctrinate more in a day, then
Experience has taught others in many years, which must by no means be
wanting in a Counselor for that ordinarily in them, are found Prudence,
Authority, and Experience: That he have happy memory, which is the Archiue of
the Sciences and Treasure of Truths; for without it, to read and study, is
(as they say) Coger aequa en un harnero, to gather water in a sieve; and it
imports much, in regard of the diversity of businesses, and persons, with
whom he is to treat. That he have travailed, and scene foreign Countries.
That he be skilled in the Languages, and have in all of them the Art and
garb of speaking and discoursing well. That he more esteem the service of his
King, and the public good, then his own private gain. That he be courteous,
humble, affable, and yet of a good spirit. That he lend an attentive care, and
that he keep that gate open for great and small, rich, and poor. But above
all these, he must be of approved virtue, for without it, all the rest are of
no esteem. He that shall have more, or less of these qualities, which are
for all in Common, shall be the more, or less sufficient Counselor. As for
Vice-royes, Governors, Ambassadors and other great Governments of the
Kingdom, such are to be chosen, who together with the foresaid qualities have
studied, and spent some years in the School of experience, and having been
conversant at the Kings elbow, and in his Court, and Counsels, not only for
the greatness of those minds, and stomachs which are bred there, (a necessary
quality for to occupy great places, and not to be bred up with a poor
portion of Treating, and Understanding, which begets minds according to the
same measure) but likewise, because there by their Treating with Kings,
Princes, and other great persons assisting them in their Counsels and grave
consultations, communicating with great Ministers, and Counselors of State,
diverse cases and businesses, the Practick of all affairs, is thereby the
more, and better apprehended; As your practitioners in Physic by conferring
with great Physicians. He therefore, that shall have both Learning, and
Experience, shall amongst all men be the most remarkable. But, Quis est hic,
and laudabimus eum: Show me this Man, and we will commend him. For Man's life
is short, the Art long, and experience hard to be achieved. But to sum up
this discourse, and give an end thereunto, I say: That he that is to be made
a Counselor of War, should therein have been exercised many years. And
that he, that is of the Council of State, should have a full knowledge of all,
and should be very dextrous in matters of government, both public, and
particular, and well verst in military discipline, because he is to consult
both of war, and peace. Which because they are things so opposite, and
contrary, a man cannot judge well in the one unless he know and understand
aright the other. As we shall show hereafter when we shall more in particular
treat of this Counsel.

Other qualities, are competible more in especial to Judges Justices, and
Presidents, to whom that particularly appertains, which is delivered in that
word, Sapientes; That they well understand the faculty of the Laws, and that
corresponding with their name, they be Iuris-prudentes, well seen in all
matters, carrying an even hand toward all, and administering Justice without
partiality: Deuteronomy. 16.18.19.
Vt iudicent populum justo iudicio, nec in alteram partem declinent, nec
accipiant personam, nec munera: That they may judge the people with just
judgment that they wrest not judgment, nor respect, neither take a gift. For
this briberie and Corruption, is that dust, which blindes the Judges, and that
plague, which consumes a Commonwealth. Moreover, they must be wise men,
clean and sound at heart, and of much truth. All of them qualities, which all
Nations required in their Ministers, expressing them in their Herogliffes.
Diodor. Sic. lib. 2. rerum antiq cap. 1.
Of the Egyptians Diodorus Siculus reports, That they had their Council and
Audience in a great Hall, where there sat thirty Counselors or Judges. Et in
medi^ iudicandi Princeps, cuius a collo suspensa veritas penderet, and oculis
esset sub clausis, librorum numero circumstante: And in the midst of them sat
the President with his eyes shut, a number of books standing round about him,
and Truth hanging about his neck, Aelian de Var. Hist. lib. 14.
curiously cut (as Aelian expresses it) in a Pectorall Sapphire, like unto that
which God fashioned for the adorning of his Minister and President Aaron,
wherein were engraven these words, Hurim, and Thummim. Exodus 28.30.
Which some interpret to be Iudicium, and Veritas: Judgment, and Truth. But
S. Jerome, would have it to signify Doctrinam, and Veritatem, Learning, and
Truth. For these three things, Judgment, Learning, and Truth, are much about
one, and in them consists the whole perfection of a Minister; In quibus sit
Veritas. For in the breast of a good Judge, there must neither reign passion,
nor affection, but the pure Truth, which he cannot possibly avoid, unless he
will wrong nature it self. For our soul is naturally inclined to Truth. And
it is so proper to a wise and prudent Man, that he that does not say it,
vnsaies himself. And certain it is, that the government of a Kingdom, is so
much the more good or ill, by how much the truth therein, has more, or less
place. For if businesses be not seasoned therewith, as meats are with salt,
neither the poor shall be defended from the oppression of the rich, nor the
rich possess their goods in safety; men and women's honors shall run danger,
and no one person can promise to himself security. And therefore it is so
much the more needful, that a judge should treat Truth, and desire that all
should do the like; by how much the more are they that abhor it, and seek
to conceal it; an old disease, which was almost borne with us into the world.
And if Judges shall not favor Truth, and plain dealing; treachery, and Lying
will reign and bear rule. Let Kings take heed how they choose men that are
fearful and timorous to be their Ministers, who out of cowardice and
pusillanimitie, hide the Truth, and dare not bring her forth to Light. For, as
she is the foundation of Justice, and Christian judgment, if a Judge shall
not love it with his heart, tracke the steps of it, and draw it out of that
dark dungeon wherein she lies, Justice will be in danger of being crush't,
and falsehood will prevail. As in that perverse Judgment in Christ's cause,
where the Judge was so far from being desirous to know the truth, that he
did not know what kind of thing it was; And therefore demanded in the face of
the open Court; Quid est Veritas? What is Truth? To whom, that divine wisdom
made no answer, perceiving him to be such a fool, as to be ignorant of the
first undoubted Principle of Justice; and suffering himself to be carried away
with false accusations, and feigned relations, which had no bulk nor body in
them, no substance in the world, nor any show, save of a poor shadow, to be
thus misled.

Librorum numero circumstante. The President before specified, had a great many
of books about him; To show how much it imports, that Judges, and Presidents
be Learned, and well read in the books of their faculty. Epiphanius says;
That he saw a Statua of Truth, which in it is forehead had two letters, the
first, and the last, of the Greek Alphabet; in it is mouth other two; and other
two in it is breast; and so through all the parts of it is body to it is very
feet. So that this was all enamelled with Letters, as the other was rounded
with books. Thereby, giving us to understand that that Man, which is truly the
man he ought to be, and is to advise and govern others, his head, hands, and
feet, must be stuck full of Letters. He must be learned from the sole of the
foot, to the Crown of the head, full of Letters he must be; for in the
discourses of the Understanding, in the working of the hands, and in the
moving of the feet, we may easily guess, whether a man be wise, or no;
Whether he has studied, or does study; For though a man be never so wise,
never so learned, he still forgets somewhat. So that, it is not enough for
him to have studied, but it is requisite, that he still continue his study, that
he may repair with that which he learneth, the loss of that which he
forgets. As in a natural body, that, by daily eating and drinking is
restored, which is by our natural heat consumed. Et oculis esset subclausis.
His eyes (which are the windows by which Passion enters unto the soul) were
shut. Because he should not be led away with the respect to those about him.
For, he must not have an eye and respect to the Estate and condition of
persons, to do more favor (when it comes to point of Justice) to one, then
another. And for this reason, the said Egyptians, did ordinarily paint
Justice, without a Head. The Head, is the common seat of all the Senses;
signifying thereby, that by no one sense, a Judge should open a door to
Passion, but that he should place them all in heaven without respect to any
thing upon earth. And this, is not to respect persons, but Justice.

Plut. lib. 1. Stobaeus Serus. 46.
Plutarke in his Moralls, reports of the Thebans, That in their Courts of
Justice, they had the Pictures drawn of certain reverend old men, sitting in
their due order, and in the midst the President; all of them without hands, and
their eyes fixed on heaven. To intimate that they should always stand in the
presence of the Lord, from whence is to come that Light, which is to clear the
eyes of their intentions, avoiding to cast them down toward the ground, that
the Vapor of humane respects which is raised from thence, may not cloud and
darken the sight of their understanding. They must be old, and wise, because
they are to judge with mature Counsel, which accompanyeth that age. And as it
is ordered by their Laws, they must have neither eyes, to see, nor hands, to
receive bribes. And if they would cut off their wives hands too, the cause
would be the better justified. For in them, your bribes find an open gate, and
are so easy to be known in this kind of trading, that there are few or none,
but take notice of it. They have the slight of hand, and (like Gypsies) have a
fine facility in deceiving, and not hard to be wrought upon to gain by this
ungodly course. And look what business they labor to effect, they are
usually the least justifiable; And if they are disposed to favor this man, or
that cause, and will but set their friends, and wits roundly to work, and do
their best, they will shrewdly put a Judge to his shifts, and drive him to
that straight, that Justice shall hardly escape a fall. I would have judges
therefore with their hands off, and their eyes out, least that befall them,
which did a couple of their place, and quality, who came to see the Process
of a famous, but false, and loose woman, who perceiving that the reasons of the
Relator did work little upon them, appealed, para vista de ojos, that she
might appear face to face, and in her information, when she came Ore tenus,
she cunningly discovered her beauty, by a careless letting fall of her
mantle, and so bewitched them therewith, that allowing for good those powerful
witnesses of her eyes, and face, they released her, and gave her for free. But
to say the truth, it was her looseness that freed her, and their lightness,
that condemned them; making that fault light, which before weighed heavy. And
how shall he freely administer Justice, who has his heart captiuated, and in
the power of him, and her, that can turn and wind him, which way they list
and wrest him from goodness? More Judges have bin undone by Lightness, then
by Cruelty. The one begets fear the other contempt. And by the way, let
them take this lesson a long with them, that not only in reality of truth they
conserve their credit without spot, but likewise in appearance procure to give
such good Examples that the world may not justly charge them, no not with so
much as a discomposed look, neither in the open street, nor Court of Justice;
for every bend from their brow, or every smile from their countenance, is the
Common peoples Almanac, wher-by they make conjecture, whether it is like to be
fair, or foul weather; reading in the face favor to one, and rigor to
another. Wherefore, as their place is great, so is their peril; The way is
slippery wherein they tread, and therefore had need look well to their feet.
Woe be unto that Judge, which sees, and sees not; sees the best, and follows
the worst; suffering his reason to be subdued by passion, and himself by one
poor slender hair of a handsome woman, to be led by the nose whether she
will lead him. For a good face, is a tacit kind of recommendation, a fair
superscription, and a silent deceit, which troubles the clearenesse of the
mind, making white appear to be black, and what is just, Exodus 23.8. Leuit.
19.15.
to be unjust: which was the cause, why God commanded the Judges of Israel,
that they should remove their eyes from the persons of those that were brought
before them, and place them wholly on the matter which they were to judge. And
for the same reason, did the Judges of Areopagus, hear all sorts of causes,
were they civil, or criminal in the dark, by putting out the Candles. And
your Athenians did sentence their suits behind certain Curtains, which might
hinder their sight. The Lacedaemonians, they were a little stricter laced; for
they did not only deny eyes to those that went to Law, and sued in their
courts, but also debard them of ears; and because they would prohibit them
the power of informing the justness of their cause, but that they should make
their Plea by writing. Ne, si coram iudicibus loquerentur, facilius eos
fletibus, aut actionibus, efficacique modo dicendi demulcerent: Least, if
themselves should be permitted to speak before the Judges, they might the more
easily soften and mollify their hearts, by their tears action, and words. And
it seems that God does approve for the better this manner of judging, when he
says; Non secundum visionem oculorum iudicabit, Isay. 11.3.
nec secundum auditum aurium arguet: He shall not judge after the sight of his
eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ear. Sed judicabit in justitia
pauperes, and arguet in aequitate pro mansuetis terrae: But with righteousness
shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity, for the meek of the
earth. With justice and truth he must reprove and confound those, who with
fictions, with colors, and studied artifices, pretend to make that just, or
probable, which has no show of justice, or truth. For there are some Lawyers,
so full of Quirkes, and subtilties, that they wrest the true sense and meaning
of the Laws, striving to bring them to their bent, haling them (as they say)
by the hair to that part whereunto themselves are willing to incline; either
to that, which a favorite, or powerful person pretends, or to him, that
will bribe most; whereby suites in Law, are made everlasting, much money is
consumed, men's States miserably wasted, or at least the true knowledge of the
cause obscured, as well de facto, as de jure; both in matter of fact, and of
Law. A Judge therefore ought to be very attentive to all businesses, that are
brought before him, and to have Lynx his eyes to watch whether the Torrent will
tend of a Pleader transported with affection, and of a cauillous Relator, armed
with a 100. Witty quillets, subtle and acute Allegations, wherewith they
shadow the light, and scatter clouds of darkness over the cause that is
pleaded. He that is set over others, must have wisdom and courage, to make
resistance against them, and to disarme them, rebutting the blow by his
Arguments, and with the true and solid sense of the Laws themselves. Eccl. 7.
And therefore Ecclesiasticus, would not have that man to take upon him to be a
Judge, that has not spirit and metal in him, to contest with the stoutest of
them, and to do Justice Secundum allegata and probata, according to all right,
and law. For many times there is more cunning and wisdom required for to
undo those knots, and to facilitate those difficulties, which these wrangling
Lawyers put in their Plea, then to resolve the doubt in the Case it self. And
if he be to deal with persons of power, and great Courtiers, he must either
break through this net which they pitch for him with force, or with some
slight or other seek to avoid it, rather then that favor, and power, on the
one side, or subtle shifts, and Law quirkes, on the other should stifle
Justice. Isay. 58.6.
For, in these cases it is written. Dissolve colligationes impietatis: Loose
the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the
oppressed go free. For the son of God himself (to be an example unto
Judges) did proceed in this manner with the Devil. For this purpose (says S.
John) was the Son of God manifested, John. 3.8.
that he might destroy the works of the Devil. Whereby he showed no less
courage, then gained reputation. And it is one of the most prejudicial things
that can befall Commonwealths, to seek to honor such persons in whom do not
concure those qualities, nor the knowledge of such Ministers, and giving them
the Title of Counselors, which have neither that sufficiency of knowledge,
nor wisdom, which is necessary for to give a good and sound opinion in grave
and weighty matters. And as it were a foolish and unadvised thing in him, that
has need of a pair of shoes to go to look them at a Barbers, and not at a
shomakers shop* so is the case alike, when we leave wise and experienced men
in a Commonwealth lurking in a corner, and put those into eminent places,
which neither know how to begin, nor end businesses, nor what course in the
world they are to take. That which is fittest for them, but much more for a
King and kingdom, is to let them alone in their ignorance. Quia tu scientiam
repulisti, Hose. 4.6.
repellam and ego te, (says God.) Because thou have rejected knowledge, I will
also reject thee. For one foolish Minister alone is an intolerable burden for
a Kingdom. Arenam and salem, Eccl. 22.15.
and massam ferri, facilius est far, quam hominem imprudentem, and fatuum:
Sand, and salt, and a mass of iron, is easier to be borne, then a man without
understanding. Three things (says he) which are the heauiest to bear, are
more easy to be borne, and with more patience to be endured, then the
imprudencies of an unwise and foolish Minister.

CHAP. X. He continues the Discourse of the qualities of Ministers, and
Counselors.
THe last words of Iethros Advice were, Et qui oderint Auaritiam: hating
Covetousness. A quality no less necessary, then those before specified. The
70. Interpreters translate it. Et qui odio habent superbiam: Hating pride.
There are some men, which rake up a great deal of wealth, and are covetous
only to keep, and make the heap the bigger, living for this cause miserably
unto themselves, and deeply indebted to their back and belly. Others there
are, that scrape and scratch, by hook, or by crook, all the money they can
finger that they may afterward prodigally spend it, and maintain their vain
pride, and ostentation. But in what sort so ever men be covetous, sure I am;
That Covetousness is one of the worst notes, and basest marks, wherewith
Kings Ministers, and Counsailours of State, can be branded. Auaro, Eccl. 10.9.
nihil est Scelestius: (says Ecclesiasticus) There is not a more wicked thing
then a covetous man. And from those that are touched with this infection, Kings
are to fly as from a plague or Pestilence, and be very circumspect and wary,
that they be not admitted to the Council Table; and to remove those from
thence, that have received any bribe. For it is an incurable disease, a
contagious corruption, which like a Leprosy goes from one to another, and
clingeth close to the soul. Besides to receive, is a sweet thing, and leaves
the hand so sauory, and so well seasoned, that it has no sooner received one
gift, but it is presently ready for another, a third, a fourth, and so in
infinitum. And the end of that which is past, is but a disposition for that
which is to come. Like a hungry Curre, who has no sooner chopped up one morsel,
but he is ready for another. And he perhaps, who at first was contented with a
little, and could say: Esto basta, y sobra. This is enough, and too much,
afterward much, too much, and more then too much will not satisfy his hungry
mawe; Infinita enim est et insatiabilis cupiditatis natura: Arist. 2. Pol. cap.
5. Eccl. 5.10.
Infinite (says Aristotle) and insatiable is the gut of covetousness. And the
Holy Ghost tells us; Auarus non implebitur pecunia. He that loves silver,
shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loves abundance, with
increase. For it is a kind of salt and brackish water wherewith covetous man's
thirst cannot be quenched, for when he has taken this, and that other, and a
world of things, he gapes still for more. He is better satisfied by denying him
that which he desires, then by giving him that, which he craves. And
therefore public Ministers (if we will credit Divinity) should be so noble
and so free, that they should not only not be covetous, but quite opposite
thereunto, and to hold a particular hatred, and perpetual enmity with
covetousness. That they should not only not receive gifts and presents, but
that they should hate, and abhor them and cause those to be informed against,
that either shall give a bribe or pretend to give. For most true is that saying
of the son of Sirack. Eccl. 20.29.
Munera and dona excaecant oculos Iudicum. Presents and gifts, blind the eyes
of wise. How sone is a covetous man blinded, when he beholdes the bait of his
Passion? Nor is there any thing more often repeated in sacred and profane
writ, then the putting us in mind of force, and efficacy which gifts have to
wrest Justice, and pervert judgment. Moses says of them, That they blind the
eyes of the wise; and that they turn and wind the words of good men, chopping
and changing one for another, to serve their purpose. Exodus 23.8.
Qui quaerit Locupletari, peruertit oculum suum. The gift blinds the wise,
and peruerteth the words of the righteous. By which is understood the
Intention, which is easily wrested, when interest puts to a helping hand, which
is that Loade-stone, which draws the iron after it, and causes them to err
that suffer themselves to be carried away therewith. If a Judge be couetously
given, he will soon vary his opinion, and make no scruple to condemn the
poor, who has nothing to give him, and absolve the rich, who gives him all
that he has. For money is an able Advocate, and pleads hard. And Justice
(says Isidore) is strangled with gold. The times are ill, when that which
cannot be obtained by Justice, must be procured by Money. Five hundred years
and more was Greece governed by Lycurgus his Laws, to the great happiness of
the Naturalls of that Country and admiration of strangers, without the breach
of any one Law; by means whereof, that Commonwealth was sustained with
admirable peace, and Justice, because private interest had no power with the
Judges of the Land. But when money came to bear sway, and that men took
pleasure therein, and made it their happiness, the Commonwealth was made
unhappy, and the Laws, and Justice, were trodden under foot. He (says the
wise man) that is greedy of gain, troubles his own house. Qui autem odit
munera, Prou. 15.27.
viuet: But he that hates gifts, shall live. And I do not see, how he can
live, who receiving so much, so often, and of so many, sees himself so laden,
and so environed and beset with obligations, which are so opposite and contrary
one to another. I say (contrary) because the Pretenders are so amongst
themselves, who aspiring to one and the same thing, wherein it is impossible
he should content all of them, every one offers according to his Talent, and
the desire he has to obtain his suite. And many times, though they give
never so much, they remain frustrated of their pretension, and become enemies
to that Minister, murmuring and complaining of him, (and that with a great
deal of reason) all the days of their life. Woe unto the Covetous man, who
(as the Scripture says) sets his soul to sale. Eccl. 10.10.
Animam quoque venalem habet. It is a most wretched case, and a most lamentable
misery, that a man's avarice and covetousness should be so great, that he
should sell his soul for the greediness of money: Besides, there is another
great Contradiction, from which it is not possible for to free themselves. For,
if they will faithfully perform their Office, they cannot favor any, save him
that has most right and justice on his side. And this they must do gratis, and
without any other kind of interest, then that, which the being of a good and
faithful Minister carries with it: Again, if they do not aid and help him,
who by gifts has bound them unto him, they fowly and shamefully deceive both
him, and themselves; and must needs fall into one of these two inconveniences;
Either to be ungrateful, if they do not do for him that gave; or unjust, If
they do contrary unto Justice. So that which way soever they receive a gift,
they go away with it with an evil Conscience, and in plain English, are
thieves by qualification. So that great Lawyer, Paris de Puteo calls them, and
says; Paris de Put. de Sindic. c. 2. number. 3.
That there are more in your public Audiences, and open Courts, then in your
Towns, and villages.

And that just man Job affirms; Job. 12.6. Luc. de Pena in l. Iudices. Cod.
de Dignitat. lib. 12.

Isay. 1.23. Deuteronomy. 27.25.


That the Tribunalls of robbers prosper. One calls them Usurers, another,
Pirates. And Lucas de Pena, says, That they are far worse, because they rob
and steal under color of Law, and public authority. In a word, God, who
knows them better then all the world besides, calls them disloyal companions
of thieves, which desire gifts, and love Retributions. And from heaven he
throws down his Curse upon them, whereunto on earth all the people say, Amen.

But let them be called by what name or Title you will, let them never so much
have the name of judges, their works will speak what they are. If they do
Justice, and judge according to their just Laws, then are they Judges, and
deserve so to be. But if they do the contrary, they bear the name of Thieves,
and are unworthy that Office. There being represented unto David the rigourous
chastisement of these kind of men, he beggeth thus of God. Psalm 26.9.
Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men; In whose hands
is mischeife, and their right hand is full of bribes. Let these theeuish hands
(says the Emperor Constantine) cease at last to steal; let them cease I say;
And if they will not cease, and give over stealing, let them be cut off, and
set upon the gallows top. Neither let Kings cease, to make diligent search
after them, and to execute justice against them in the most rigorous manner.
And if they will not amend, let them (a Gods name) be soundly punished. For it
is a foul and abominable Vice, pernicious, and pestilent, and which does much
mar and deface the Luster of whatsoever Minister, be he never so illustrious
and great. And therefore in the Civil Law, L. ff ad l. Iul. rep. l. 3. ff. de
recep etc.
it has the name of Sordes given it; which signifies foulness, or
beastliness. The Emperor Alexander Severus, (a great subduer of this vice)
when he saw any Minister noted thereof, his choler rose, and his stomach
began to turn, and did provoke him to vomit, as if he had seen some
loathsome stinking thing. And for such kind of corrupt men he would usually
say, he had ever a fingar in readiness, to pluck out their eyes. And for the
better informing himself of the truth of these businesses, he made choice of
some virtuous and intelligent persons, whom he sent secretly as Spies into
several parts of the Kingdom (which all wise Kings ought to do) giving them
good Intertainment for the defraying of their charges, to the end, that they
might truly inform him of all whatsoever passed, as how his Ministers behaved
themselves in their government, how in their Offices? Saying; That if they did
abuse them, it was not enough to remove them only, and put other in their
places; but for example sake, severely likewise to punish them. He gave all his
Officers good honest maintenance, and sufficient allowance, and would by no
means permit, that any Magistracy, or public Office, should be bought and
sold. For he, that buys of me (said he) must of necessity sell to another,
for to quit his Cost, as also to make his best profit and benefit thereof. Such
as these, buy cheap in the gross, and sell dear by retaile. And so it is,
that he that buys a tree for money, can hardly afford the fruit for nothing.

Iul. fen. C. ad Legem Iul. rep. l. 10. and. 22. Tit. 5. lib. 3.
The Emperor Theodosius made hereupon a Law worthy so noble a Prince, and
deserving here to be set down, as a Pattern for Kings. We will (says he)
and ordain, that those be appointed Governors of our Provinces, who shall be
found worthy those places, charging and commanding, that they be not conferred
either for ambition, or bribes, or promises, or for any price, that shall be
given for them, but merely for that they are men of an honorable and virtuous
disposition, and of a good and approved life. And these, whom you (my
President) shall choose, or we our selves upon your report, we will, that they
who are admitted to these Offices, shall solemnly swear, and firmly promise,
that for the said preferments, or places of charge and government, they have
never given, nor promised any thing for them, neither shall give hereafter
either openly, or under hand, either directly, or indirectly. Neither shall
they take, or receive any thing, but shall rest contented with their Salaries,
and Pensions, Nor shall pocket any bribe in public, or private, not only
during their Office, but neither before nor after, etc. These are the very
words of the Law it self.

Diverse other ancient, and Modern Laws, and decrees have been made,
generally prohibiting all kind of gifts and bribes, upon pain of diverse very
greiuous punishments, to be inflicted upon those, that either take, or give
bribes. As paying double what was promised, or given; deprivation of Office;
The treble value of what was given; Then (upon the increasing of the abuse) a
quadruple value. And after that, Confiscation of goods, banishment, and open
infamy. Justinian, added heereunto the punishment of Whipping. And the
Emperor Valens, and Valentinianus, farther increased the same, commanding,
they should be burned. And the now Emperors of Iapan, did lately execute the
said Law upon one of his Favorites Secretaries for taking of a bribe; and him
that bribed him, (who was Gouerner of a Kingdom) he caused to be beheaded.
Plato, would make it a ruled case: Plat. lib. 2 de Legibus.

Act. 24 25.1.


That that Judge should dye the death, that should take a bribe, yet
notwithstanding neither the fear of death, of judgment, nor of hell it self,
is sufficient to repress the love of money Disputante Paulo de judicio futuro,
tremefactus est Felix: Paul reasoning of the judgment to come, Felix trembled,
who was President or Ruler of Cesarea. And yet the fear of that terrible day
of judgment, was not able to bridle his Covetousness. He trembled for fear,
and yet his eyes, and heart, were placed upon that money which he hoped to
receive from that blessed Apostle. Fear is not of force, to detain the
Covetous; For Covetousness, is a huge great river which if it once begin to
make it is Current, be it which way it will, there is no withholding of it. If
you stop it is course one way, Number. 21.12.
it breaks out another way. So it did with that naughty Prophet, who hasted
with great fury to curse Gods people, that he might finger his promised gold.
And though an Angel stood before him, and stopp't his way, he took another
way, and brake through thick and thin (as they say) that he might not loose
his reward; Joseph. de Antiq. lib. 4. cap. 5.
so far (says Josephus) did the promises and gifts of the Moabites prevail
with him, that he chose rather for his private interest, to please a King of
the earth, then him of Heaven. The Kings of Spain have likewise made some
Laws with very sharp and rigorous punishments, but all not worth a pin,
because they are not executed. So that this bad custom alone, is of more
force, then all the laws. These are written with ink, on paper; Those, with
letters of gold on the heart. The Laws threaten with roughness and rigor;
Money persuades with softness and gentleness, and carries men's minds after
it without contradiction. The Laws, have few to defend them, and to put them
in execution. But this evil custom, is of more force then the Law, and has
stronger Abettors. In a word, terrible are the forces and skirmishes of this
foul assaulting vice, become now as it were natural unto us, and more used in
these, then any other Times whatsoever. Demosthenes ask't the Athenians (and
those which are, may ask of those that have bin) what were in those times
which are not in these? And himself makes the answer, That one thing was now
wanting unto them; whereby those that lived then, always went away with the
victory, and maintained their liberty. Which was; The perpetual hatred which
they bore unto those, who suffered themselves to be corrupted with money. In
stead whereof, it is now come to that pass, that to receive a bribe, is only
a nine days wonder; if the same be confessed, it is made a matter of laughter;
if proved, he that receives, receives a pardon for it; and he that informs,
sent away with a flea in his ear, and in stead of a reward, receives a round
check for his labor, and grows a hated man, and troublesome member in a
Commonwealth. But unfortunate is that Commonwealth, where Corruption lives
uncontrolled. And because this Vice goes daily taking deep root, and grows
still stronger and stronger, inuenting new impudencies, new slightes and
subtilties, it is needful that Kings should hunt Counter, and find out some
new Trick, to take these old ones in the Trap. And this one (me thinks) would
be a pretty remedy for this disease; That a Law were made, That of all those,
that should be nominated for Ministers and Officers public and particular in
any Tribunal, or Ministry what soever as well of Justice, and government, as
of the public Treasury, there should an Inventory be taken (by some deputed
for that purpose) of all their rents, and goods moveable, and immovable, and
when they are to take their oath (as the fashion is) at their entrance into
their Office, the said Inuentory should be presented in open Court, and there
they made to swear, and take a solemn oath that this is a true Inventory,
and that their Estate is thus and thus, neither more nor less, or much there
abouts, to the end that when their states come to be increased, and their
wealth makes a great noise in the world, it may (upon better inquiry) be
known how, and which way, they came by it. For experience daily teaches us,
that your Judges, your Exchequer men, and other public Officers, enter into
the Office with little, and go out with much. And I would, that the Kings
Attorney general, or one of like nature, should enter an Action against all
those Augmentations of their Estates whereof they should not be able to render
a good Account. I could likewise wish, that they might be sworn to that Law of
Theodosius; That they neither gave, nor promised, by themselves, or by any
other person, or persons, Bald. in l. 1. c. de haered: vel Action vendit.
Diseque el fisco tiene Accion contra los toles bienes.

Bell delito ded coecho qualquiera puede seracusado durante el Officio y
despues. 2. ff. de Calumniatore.


any thing at all, for the foresaid Offices: Neither that they shall receive
any thing of free gift, be it offered with never so good a will. Which oath, the
Ancient Romans swore unto. And if at any time it shall be proved against them,
that they have either given, or taken, that they incur the punishment of
privation of Office, and Confiscation of goods. And this Course being taken,
these cannot offend again; and if their dealing has been upright and fair
(as good men will not refuse a just trial, but rather (out of love to
goodness) embrace it,) God forbid but they should be well rewarded by the
State, for their good and faithful service. And this is no new doctrine, but
shall find it (if we look back to former times) practiced long a go. And
the Emperor Antoninus Pius, did likewise ordain, that all Liuetenants, and
Gouerners before they went to serve in their Residencies and Offices, they
should bring in an Inventory of all they had, that when the time of their
Government was expired, by coating and comparing the one with the other, they
might see how and in what manner they thriued thereupon. Audistis (says he)
Praefectum Praetorij nostri ante Triduum quam fieret, mendicum, and pauperem:
sed subito diuitem factum. Vnde (quaeso) nisi de visceribus Reip. qui ob hanc
causam Prouincias sibi datas credunt, vt luxurientur and diuites fiant? etc.
You have heard that our Praetorian Prefect, some few days since was a very
beggar, but now suddenly become rich. Whence (I pray) should this come but
from out the bowels of the Commonwealth; who for this cause think Provinces
are committed unto them, that they may therein riot, and grow rich? Setting at
naught the Laws, the respect unto their Kings, their fear toward God, and
the shame of the world. Truly (says Plato) that public Minister may be had in
suspicion, who in his office is grown rich. For he that only gets by lawful
means can hardly live at so high a rate, as some of his fellows do, build
such sumptuous and costly houses, and leave so fair and great an estate behind
him to his Heir. And he, who herein does more then he can, will likewise do
more then he ought. For he, that will seek to out-doe his means, will not
stick to out-doe his honesty. In a word, gifts have evermore bred a jealousy
of Corruption; and in Judges, esteemed the foulest fault. Oh, of how little
worth is a l^ttle gift; and yet what a great hurt, to a Ministers honor?
Nazian. in Orat. 23.
A gift (says Nazianzene) is a secret Tyrant, which does subdue, and tread all
under foot. And to give, is of all other the greatest Tyranny, and the
greatest violence. It is Senecas Counsel; That, he, Seneca. de Benefi.
that will enjoy his own freedom, must not receive another benefit. Fot to
give, is to in-slaue; And the receiver, is the giuers slave. Gifts, are but
Gyues and chains wrought of strong linkes: The ending of one, being the
beginning of another. And where the first ends, the second begins. And this (as
they say) dispone la trabaion para otros muchos; serves but as a Timber piece
to couple and fasten many others. Take heed therefore (says the Emperor
Justinian of receiving gifts, which quit our liberty, In Auth. Vt Iudices
sine quoque 2.
blind our understanding, incline our wills, and defame our honor. But make
thou much of clean hands; for he that shall keep his hands clean, and shall
not suffer himself to be corrupted by private Interest, shall have much honor
and fame in this life, and a great place provided for him in that other. Qui
excutit manus suas ab omni munere, iste in excelsis habitabit and Regem in
decore suo videbunt oculi eius: he that shakes his hands from holding of
bribes, he shall dwell on high; Isay. 33.15.
And his eyes shall see the King in his beauty. All this, and more shall they
attain to, that are truly of pure heart, and clean hands.

All this (say they) that you say, is true. We confess as much. But withal we
must tell you, That that which we receive is subsidium gratuitum, a free gift,
a mere gratuitie, with a great deal of love, and good liking of the Giver.
And we affirm, That all (for the most part) that is given, is respective, and
is in that Predicament, which the Logicians term, Ad aliquid. Whereby he that
receives a courtesy, is bound to return a courtesy. And those which give,
hope to receive from such Ministers, that which they cannot justly give them.
With these conditions, a gift is lawful, and esteemed to be lawfully received,
when it comes free, vnclogg'd, disinteressed, without pretension, and without
respect of requital, or reference to any recompense or retribution. That is a
gift, which goes dis-roabed of all respects which is neither a friend nor
kindsman, nor kindswoman of the party that gives it, and has no obligation, no
Interest, no necessity, but is all pure love, and is freely given of grace,
only to do him good, that receives it, The rest is Usury, Loan, bribery, and
hope of gain. And if they will see that this is true, let them come down from
that high place wherein they are, let a Visitation go forth against them, and
they shall quickly see, how every man longs and desires, that that may be
returned to the Owners, which they have got by foul play. It is a great
blindness in Ministers, to imagine, that what is given them, proceeds from
liberality, and out of the good will and love they bear unto them. God he
knows, it is no such matter, but what they do in this kind, is only to
corrupt them, and to oblige them to do that, which they neither may, nor ought.
Let them believe me, and not deceive themselves. For to give, and receive, is a
cunning piece of business, a thing of great artifice, wit, and subtlety, and
on whatsoever occasion it works, it works Miracles. But in case gifts should
not corrupt, at least they appease, and move affection. Being (as that wise
King Solomon says) like unto the waves of the Sea, which make the tallest ship
to reele, be she never so well ballasted. And waves never come single. And, if
they be strong waves indeed, they ouerturne her, and sink her in the Sea.
Reprom ssio nequissima multos perdidit, Eccl. 29.
and Commouit illos, quasi fluctus maris. Let them look well to themselves,
that receive gifts, for they run a great deal of hazard; let them take heed,
least some storm arise that may drown their ship, even then (as often has
been seen) when she is deepest and richest laden. And let them not trust to
their taking in secret, nor of such, and such a person; for the Divine Sun of
Justice, whom they offend, will discover and bring all to light. And though no
body should see or know it, it is enough that God, and his own Conscience
knows it, which are two sure Witnesses, besides many other, which time will
produce.

They likewise allege, That they have leave and license of their Kings to
receive gifts. Whereunto, first of all I answer; that it is not to be believed,
that Christian Kings will grant such Licenses as these, which are so preiudic
all, pernicious, scandalous, and so contrary to the Common good, and good
government of their Kingdoms. Secondly I say; (speaking with that reverence
and respect, which is due unto the authority of Kings) that it cannot be
grounded on good Divinity, that they may give any such leave or license unto
their Ministers. Again, they urge, that sometimes, in some particular case,
gifts have been given to some great Priuado, or favorite of the King. It may
be so; But sure I am, that to no Counselor of Justice, can it ever justly be,
or may be done. But because this will fall within the compass of our ensuing
discourse; I will cite those words; Timentes Deum. Fearing God: Which follow
anon after the beginning. For well will it suite, that with these, we conclude
this Chapter because the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom. And from
whence, as from their fountain, are derived all those other good qualities,
that are in man. Timor Domini super omnia se superposuit: There is none above
him that fears the Lord. Et beatus homo, Eccl. 25.10.
cui donatum est, habere illum: And happy is that man, to whom it is given. For
he, that has the fear of God has all the good that can be desired. Plenitudo
sapientiae est, Eccl. 1.16.
timere Deum: To fear the Lord is fulness of wisdom. He that would be a
general Scholar in all kind of knowledge, be well seen in all the Arts and
Sciences, and have all those good parts and qualities, combined and joined
together, let him love and fear God. For he that fears him, and has him
always before his eyes, has liberty and power to overcome the fear and
dread of the mighty, whereof the World does stand (and all for want of this
fear) too much in awe. Among the Laws of Moses, Josephus relates one,
wherein he wills Judges that they should above all things prefer Justice;
and that without respect to any man's person, or dignity, they should equally
judge all; For they having (as they have) here upon earth, the power of God,
they ought not to fear any other but him. He that preuaricates Justice in
relation to great persons, makes them greater and more powerful then God; who
gives us this short but stout Lesson; Fear not him, that can kill the body,
and take away thy life, but fear thou him, that can kill the soul, and
deprive thee of life everlasting. And in another place, he says, Thou shall
not forsake the poor, for fear of the rich, Exodus
nor judge unjustly, nor do the thing that is unequal, for fear of the
powerful, but keep justice in it is true weight and measure; without any
humane respect, or vain fear. King Iehosaphat advises the Judges of Israel,
that in their judgments, they fear none but God alone, and all the
Law-giuers, as Lycurgus Solon, Numa, and a number of others, together with the
chiefest of all, Moses, who governed Commonwealths, and made Laws, founded
them with Religion, and the fear of God. These are the first and last Letters
of the Laws of Christian government, wherewith that wise King did sum up the
book of those, which he made for the government of Men. Deum time, and
mandata eius obserua: hoc est omnis homo. Eccl. 12.13.
Fear God, and keep his Commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.
With this he receives the stabilitie and permanencie of man. The contrary
whereof, is to be a beast and worse then a beast; According to that of S.
Bernard; Ber. ser. 20. in Cant.
Ergo si hoc est omnis homo, absque, hoc nihil est homo: If this be the whole
duty of man, without this man is nothing. But as a man, that has no use of
reason, breaks all laws, Facile deuiat a justitia, qui in causis non Deum,
sed homines formidat: He easily swarues from Justice, which in causes, fears
not God, but Man. I will here conclude with that which Esaias says; Isay. 9.6.
A wonderful Counselor is the mighty God. And he is to be our chief
Counselor and more inward with us then any King or Counselor. And Kings and
Counselors are to crave his Council. For Council being his gift, he does
not communicate the same to any, save such as love, and fear him, and take
Council of his divine Law. As did that holy King. Consilium meum
Iustificationes tuae. Let every one enter into his Council of knowledge, let
him consult himself the best that he can; yet when he has done all that he
can, let him advise with the Law of God; For if he do not know well how to
advise himself, how shall he give Counsel to others? And he that knows not
how to rule and govern himself, how shall he command a whole kingdom? Qui
sibi nequam est, cui alij bonus erit? Eccl. 14.5.
He that is evil to himself, to whom will he be good? Alexander said He
hated that wise man, that was not wise for himself.

CHAP. XI. Of other Courses and means, which Kings may take for the notice of
such persons, in whom the said Qualities concur.
ONe of the greatest mischiefs incident unto Kingdoms is; That Kings have not
true notice given them of worthy persons, for to employ them in his service. A
great cause whereof is, that your undeserving, or (at least) less sufficient,
are clapped in betwixt them, and home; Those are the men, that are most
intermitted, take most upon them, and procure by their Negociating and
Plotting, to occupy the best places, and not contenting themselves therewith,
seek to shut the door against men of merit, and to keep them out, to the end
that their own defects, by this course, may receive the less discovery.
Contraria juxta sep^sita, magis elucescunt.
For this is the nature of things opposite each to other, that the nearer they
are one to the other, the more excellent lays it is Contraryes defect, the more
open. Now to occur to this mischief, wise Iethro advised his son in Law,
that he should seek out men of good parts, and choose them (as we said before)
from amongst all the people. And we shall better perceive, what that Counsel
comprehends, if we will but consider that other place of Deuteronomy; Where
Moses discoursing with the people, what diligence he had used on his part, it
is there mentioned, that he spoke unto them, and admonished them (to the end
that the Election of the Ministers might take the better) that they themselves
likewise would use their diligences, and then give him notice of those persons,
which they held in greatest esteem amongst them, and were (in the general
opinion) the ablest men. Date ex vobis viros sapientes, and gnaros, and quorum
Conuersatio sit probata in Tribubus vestris, vt ponam eos vobis Principes: Take
ye wise men and understanding, Deuteronomy. 1.13.
and known amongst your Tribes, and I will make them Rulers over you. And
indeed, the best and surest course, that Kings can take, to come to that notice
or knowledge they desire, is to lay hold on those persons, whose approbation
is so notorious, that all the people give good Testimony of them. For, (as a
wise man has well observed) the general opinion, is that Touchstone, which
proves or reproves. For, it cannot be, that One should deceive All. And
happily from hence grew that Common Adage Vox populi, vox Dei: The Peoples
voice, is Gods voice. We must give Credit to the fame and report that goes of
Men. For (as Tacitus says) she sometimes makes the choice of Ministers; it
being his meaning, that this satisfaction should be given to the people, that
those, that are to govern them, should be chosen and elected by that common
fame, and good report, that goes of them. And here by the way let me tell you,
that it is not much amiss, that some Offices, and Preferments be in a
dissembled kind of disguise, purposely published before they be bestowed, to
see how it will be entertained and received by the people; to whom it is fit
some satisfaction should be given, as being the body that is to be commanded.
This is a Trick of State, whereof (upon some occasions) Fernando, surnamed the
Wise, made good Use. For when he was to go any great Voyage, undertake any
War, or attempt some new Enterprise, or any other action of importance, he
would not publish, nor justify the same to the world, till he had used some
art and cunning, employing some persons fit for that purpose (before his
designs were thoroughly understood) to give it out; That the King should do
well to make such, or such a war, to make this or that provision, for this,
or that reason. So that first of all, the vulgar were made acquainted therewith
and rested satisfied with the reasons that were rendered for it. And then
afterward it coming to be published, that the King had done, or would do
such a thing, it is incredible to believe, with how much joy, love, and
applause of the people, and whole Kingdom, this his Resolution was received.
But mistake me not I pray; I do not say, that this is to be done always, but
on some occasions, or great preparations. And Kings in this case, must have a
care, that they have faithful Centinells, that may truly certify them, how
that News takes, and what exception (if any arise) they make against it, and
upon what grounds, that if any thing had been omitted, it might be amended A
President (not unlike to this) had the Roman Commonwealth in those it is first
flourishing days. Which did cause their Laws to be set up in public for 27.
days together before they should be of force, to the end, that the people
might peruse them, and think well upon them. How much more ought this Course
to be taken in Legibus viuentibus: in those living Laws which are your greater
and principaller sort of Ministers, and such as are to command and govern a
Commonwealth who ought to be well beloved, and well received of the people,
that they may love them, respect them, and believe them, in all they shall say,
as they would their own fathers?

I well perceive, that there may be much deceit in the world, and that there
are some men so subtle and so cunning that only with a pen in their hand, they
make themselves Masters of other men's studies, and labors, and by this trick
gain the credit and opinion of able and sufficient men, when as indeed they
are nothing less. And this deceit takes more in matter of learning and
wisdom, which (as we said before) cannot be measured out with the yard. And
in no place is this so common, as in the Courts of Kings, where your purpurated
persons (says Seneca) meaning those, that abound in riches, and other
corporal ornaments, stand a loofe of from the Vulgar and yet use to be vulgar
in their understanding, to the prejudice of the good and true esteem of
things; and amongst these kind of men, those easily get the name and fame of
wise, who talk boldly, and spinne out a large discourse of those things, which
they well understand not. And it is daily seen, that some of these
superficial fellows have been preferred to better places by these their
false ostentations, and feigned knowledge, then great Learned Clerks, by
showing themselves humble-minded, temperate in their talk, and moderate in
their conversation, could ever attain unto. And if this did happen only in
those Sciences and faculties, which they call depone lucrando, which are
studied for to get temporal riches, it were tolerable, because for this end,
opinion is of more profit for them, then Truth. But the grief of it is, that
this passes forward even unto those, that are professors of that Science,
which, as it is in it self superior, so ought it to make those, which
profess the same superior in mind and understanding, and make them much more
to esteem the truth, and existency of wisdom and knowledge, then false
opinion, falsely gained amongst the less wiser sort of men. Now, for the
avoiding of these inconveniences, it imports much, that a King do not rely
too much upon the opinions of the Vulgar, which in particular are various, and
ill grounded, but when they shall hear it generally spoken, that such a one is
an eminent man in this, or that other thing, and that he has not his fellow in
the kingdom for these and these abilities, let the Counsel be called, the
Party thus recommended, examined, and let the King take information from them,
that are every way as able as he, even in that wherein he professes himself
his crafts-master, whether they give up the same verdit of him, or no; So that
the fame, and opinion of a good Soldiers, of a good Captain, and of a good
Governor, must be confirmed by the Testimony of those that are the best both
Soldiers, Captains, and Governors. By this line, may you level, and by this
course secure the approbation of all other Offices. And in those whose
sufficiency may be seen, and measured out by the suruay of Officialls, there
cannot be so much deceit therein; but in those, who are to serve a King and
State, with great studies, and with the knowledge of diverse faculties, as are
your greater dignities, and Ecclesiastical functions, where (as we are taught
by the Apostle S. Paul) there is necessarily required great learning, great
integrity of life, and great prudence: and therefore had more need of
examination and trial. And I hold it for a great inconvenience, that the
judgment of things of so high a nature should be remitted to the relation of
those, who are not only far from being able to judge, but scarce know how to
speak truly of them. By means whereof it is very usual with them, to suffer
themselves to be overcome by deceit, and ouerswaied with passion, holding those
for the best and worthiest, and recommending them to the King for those high
Ministeries and Offices, to whom, either they, or their friends, and
kinse-folke, bear most affection, or are most beholding. But opinion ought not
to carry these things, unless it be confirmed with very good, and sure
Testimonies.

Much of this mischief will be remedied, if for these and such like great
Dignities and Offices, we should not rely only upon Fame, or that voice and
report, which comes a far off, and sometimes painted over with apparencies, and
in the mask and disguise of truth, being nothing else, save mere passion, but
that we should look a little nearer into the inside of these persons, and grow
by communication into a fuller knowledge of them. Not that knowledge, which
some Ministers speak of, who are said to know only those whom they prefer,
or are willing to prefer, and only for that they have heard them talk in
ordinary matters of complement, and base flatteries, which they use more, which
have all their wisdom in their lips, then those that are truly grave and
learned men. Men's wits, are not like the water of a fountain, which, at the
first draught, our palate finds to be thick, or thin, salt, or sweet. It is
like a Sea, without a bottom; or like unto a deep river, to know whose depth,
we must wade through it from side to side. Sicut aqua profunda, Sic consilium
in cord viri, Prou. 20.5.
(says the holy Ghost) Counsel in the heart of a man, is like a deep water:
Sed homo sapiens exhauriet illud: But a man of understanding will draw it out.
And it is the learned, and wise, that must make judgment of wise, and learned
men. In the sacred history of Genesis, we read, that when the holy Patriarch
Isaac determined to give the benediction of the primogenitureship to his elder
son Esau, Jacob came athwart him, and feigned himself to be Esau, (whom his
aged father meant to bless) and in a distinct and clear voice said unto him;
I am thy first begotten son Esau; Genesis 27.21.
To whom the Patriarch made answer; Thy voice seems not to be the voice of
Esau, but of Jacob. And therefore, Accede huc, vt tangam te fili mi: Come near
I pray thee that I may feel thee (my son) whether thou be my very son
Esau, or not? Many there are, who boast themselves to be elder brothers in
virtue, and learning, and with tricks and devices, clad themselves (to show) in
sheep clothing, but inwardly are ravening Wolves, and with gifts and
presents, (as Jacob here did) incline, or pervert the minds of Ministers,
that they give them credit, and belief, stealing by this means the blessing
away, and getting prioritie of place, being indeed younger brothers in their
deserts. And we are to consider that in this History, there did concur two
things, which were sufficient to deceive the Patriarch. The first, that he was
blind or at least very dimme-sighted; For (as we said before) when this
propounding or nominating of such persons, is left to the will of those, that
are blind, or ignorant in these matters, there is not any thing done therein,
which is not full of deceit. The second, That the voice was far different, from
the person whom he felt. The like usually happens in that matter which we
have now in hand. For there shall go a voice, and fame, and a true opinion of
such a man, that he has very worthy parts, but coming upon the first sight to
those Ministers, which are to prefer him, he seems to be another manner of
man, from that which he truly is. And the reason of it is, for that (like the
blind) they only feel, touch, and examine these wise men, when as indeed
they should conform themselves to the settled voice, and received opinion of
the learned, who are better seen in these matters, and have a deeper knowledge
of them. Anciently, the people did meet all together, and with a general and
common voice did nominate him to be their Bishop whom they thought to be the
fittest man, and most worthy the Episcopal Sea. And this was then held the
fairest and surest Course. For (to speak morally) it is not likely (as we said
before) that one single man, should deceive so many, nor draw the votes and
suffrages of all the whole multitude unto him, unless he had parts and
abilities deserving this their approbation. Many most holy men, and great
Prelates, as Ambroses, Gregory's, Chrysostomes, and other learned, and grave
Divines, have received their preferments by such Nominations as these. But this
kind of Election (now some years since) was reduced (esteeming it the fittest
and the surest way) to the voices, and suffrages of your Deanes and Chapters of
Cathedral Churches. But, because in humane things there is such little
stabilitie and firmness, your popular dissensions enforced them (for the
greater ease and quiet of the Commonwealth) that your Kings (by concession of
the chief Bishops) should have the nominating of them. And no doubt, but it
was well ordained by them, in regard, that as those their Royal persons, are
of so superior a degree, and so free from respects of humane businesses (for
these are wont to work upon the minds of particular men) so the nomination,
that passes through their hands, is by much the more certain. For, as they
are Kings and Rulers over the people, God does inlighten them (so as they do
not dis-deserue this light, or be rebellious unto him, for the making of a good
and judicious choice.) Diuinatio in labijs regis, Prou. 16.10.
in iudicio non errabit os ejus: A divine sentence is in the lips of the King,
and his mouth shall not err in judgment. For, if he be a good and virtuous
King, God does assuredly assist his Actions, directing him by an especial
grace, and particular favor, that he may not err in a business of so great
importance. And this does oblige them to look well what they do, and to take a
great deal of care and good heed in the nomination of them. And let Kings take
this into their consideration, that being such, as they ought to be, they have
in some measure a kind of prophetical gift, that they may not (will they but
strip themselves of passion, and crave Gods holy assistance) err in their
judgment. Oh, what a necessity is there in them to live well, since that from
the innocence of their life, arises ordinarily a hitting right in their
Actions, true Intelligence, and a good dispatch in their Negociations.

CHAP. XII. How Kings ought to carry themselves toward those Ministers, whom
they find sufficient for the government both of peace, and of war.
IN the Creation of the vaste Universe, God showed his great Omnipotency, and
his infinite wisdom in the disposition of those things, which he placed
therein, with such a concordance and harmony, that Diuus Thomas confesses
that it could not be mended, without some dissonancie, and iarring. And he
cites the example of a well tuned Vial, wherein it is not possible to strain
a string, but the consonancie in all the rest is quite marred. This was that
which the Wise man said; That with weight, number, and measure, God had
created, and ordered all his Creatures. So that the parts of the Universe, have
amongst themselves that proportion, that in every one, and all jointly, there
are found these three Circumstances, weight, number and measure. But that,
which is spoken in the book of Wisdom, touching the government of all this
huge Machina, is of greater consideration. For God touching (as being
infinitely powerful) the extremes and ends of all things in the disposing of
them, he does it with a great deal of sweetness. He did set an inviolable
Law, a settled and determinate Seat (as being the Author of Nature) to nature
it self; to the end, that every thing conseruing it self with in it is own
proper bounds and limits, it should not be confounded with the rest. And from
hence grew a most sweet and pleasing harmony of all this great frame of the
World, so well tuned, and so well ordered, that it alone voyceth and Proclaymeth
the wisdom, and omnipotency of the Creator. What a goodly thing is it, to
see the continual Motion of the Celestial bodies? The perpetual influence,
fixednesse, and resplendour of the Planets and of other stars? The fire, in
it is sphere? The Air, the Water, and the Earth, in their most firm and stable
Mansions? And only by virtue of that first Law which God settled in his first
Creation? Out of this Composture, and admirable accord, and agreement of things
natural, is to be drawn the political consent and atonement of a
Commonwealth, appointing to every one his site, his place, and his certain
limits of Jurisdiction for that Office, that shall be put upon him, without
once thinking to have it altered or changed. And it is the observation of the
wise, and men of much experience, that if it might be inuiolably kept, and
might be established as an inuariable and unchangeable decree in the breast of
the King and his Counselors, that those of one Counsel should not be
transferred and put over to another; nor be removed from that wherein they are
already placed, unless it be to your Presidentships of your Chanceries, and
Visits of the Kingdom, and that they themselves of every particular Council
should have the nominating of their Presidents, it would in matter of
government be of great importance. First of all, by these means would cease
those anxieties, vexations, and cares, wherewith all of them live, of being
translated from one Council to another; as also that extraordinary negociating
and laboring for this end and purpose. Those that are of the Council of
Hazienda, pretend to be preferred to that of the Indies, and de los Ordines.
And when they have attained to these, they aspire to that of Castile. So that
out of this ambitious humor none of them stick fast, or keep firm footing;
but from the very first day, wherein they enter into one of these Counsels,
their minds are wandering, pretending to better themselves by chopping and
changing from Council to Council. And the mischief of it is; That in these
Pretensions, they wast and spend that time, which they should bestow in
studying those points, which belong to their own Tribunal. For the curing of
this sore, in the Council of the Indies, in former times, those Counselors
had a larger allowance and greater Pension, then any of the other Counsels,
obliging them thereby to settle themselves where they were placed, without
pretending to budge, or to leap from one Council into another, making
themselves thereby capable of all those difficult businesses of the Indies,
which good effect then ceased, when the Salaries were made all a like. And if
this Order which I speak of, had been well and truly kept, the disorder which
is in these pretensions of change, had been remedied, and men would have been
more practicke, and better seen in those businesses, which are treated in
every one of them, being so different, and of so great consequence, and so hard
to be understood, that they will require the study and assistance of many
years to understand and know them aright. And (as the holy Ghost says) it is
contrary to the rules of good government, and of prudence, to put one upon
that he understands not, and to commit weighty affairs unto him, who
undertaking them (as being tied thereunto by his employment) knows not whether
he be in the right, or no, though perhaps he presume he is. Likewise, there
should be much more care had in the provision of those places of other
Audiencies, and inferior Courts of Chancerie, to the end that in them might
be bred up such subjects, in quality, learning, and virtue, that out of them,
Election might be made of fit men for greater Counsels.

And that the Presidents should be chosen out of the said Counsels in which
they were bred up, it is very convenient, and grounded upon good reason, For,
having been conversant in them some years, by the concourse of so many
things, as daily offer themselves, thereby will be better known, their talent,
and capacity, their truth, their treating, their integrity, and all the worth
and parts of their person, whereby the election that shall be made, will be
much the better, more certain in the things undertaken, and more safe and
secure in matter of conscience. And who is he can doubt, but that those
Counsailours, which have been for a long time in your supremer Counsels, will
have greater knowledge of the quality and substance of those businesses, which
are treated in them, together with those necessary circumstances, which make
for their better expedition. Besides, they will more prefectly know the State,
wherein the businesses of that Tribunal stand, without being driven to have
recourse unto others to be better informed, spending and loosing much time
therein. Again, they know, (which is a matter of no small consideration) the
rest of the Counsailours, as also their condition, their ability, their
cleanness of hands and heart, and their good, or bad parts, for there, better
then else where, are they discovered. And this knowledge is very necessary in
Presidents, for to deliberate, and make choice upon all occasions, of the
fittest persons, that are to be trusted, with businesses of importance. And it
is of no less consequence to take notice of the suitors and pretenders, for to
know how to carry themselves toward them, and to take particular knowledge of
the good customs, ceremonies, preheminencies and privileges of those
Counsels, that they may be kept and observed, and that the authority of the
Tribunal may be maintained, and all discordes and Competitions a voyded.

All these things are learned with time, and that experience which every one
has of his proper Council, wherein it is very requisite, that the President
be a Master and not a Scholar, as he is, who enters newly into a Council
though he have served many years in another: and of no little inconvenience
are the novelties, which they both attempt and do, who are admitted without
this experience, being desirous to accommodate, and order things according to
the measure of their own discourse. And howbeit the want of experience be in
Counsailours a matter of much consideration, and may be tolerated and borne
withal in some; yet in realtie of truth, the lack thereof in a President, is
intolerable, and very prejudicial to the whole Commonwealth; And from thence
arise many great mischiefs, and those remediless. For some out of ignorance,
and some out of flattery, do lean to their opinion, whereby many unjust
decrees pass, whilst the experienced and wiser sort, (which evermore are the
fewer) have not power equal to their sufficiency, to turn the course of the
stream. And for th s reason, so many difficulties offer themselves, so many
differences are raised amongst them, and so many resolutions delayed and put
off, (and peradventure err in the end too,) which would have required a quick
and speedy Dispatch. But when a President has that experience which is
needful, he will not g^ue way to these delays; but being privy to his own
sufficiency, and confident that he is in the right, look what he presses and
affirms, the authority of his person and place, will make it good, and
strike a great, if not the only stroke, in the business. For these and
diverse other reasons, in all well-gouerned Commonwealths and Communities, I
wou^d have them make choice (for Government) of such subjects as have been
bred up, and lived some years in them; for they cannot but have a great
advantage of those that are strangers thereunto, though otherwise of equal
parts. And this is the trace and tracke of the Holy Ghost, marked out unto us
by S. Paul; Heb. 5.1.
Omnis enim Pontifex ex hominibus assumptus p^o hominibus constituitur: For
every high Priest, taken from among men, is ordained for men. For it matetreth
much, that the head be of the same substance as is the body, and that all the
members be of one and the same kind, not to have a head of gold, a body of
brass, and feet of clay, like unto Nabuchodonazars image, but that all the
whole body be one and the self same flesh and bone, all of the same matter and
informed with the same form. That bundle of sheafes which Joseph saw; his
(like the King-sheafe) lifting up his head higher then the rest, and (if we may
believe the Rabbis) reaching as high as heaven, and those of his brethren
prostrate on the ground, doing homage thereunto, is the Emblem of the body of
a Council and it is President like unto that of king Pharaoh. And the sacred
Text does not say, that that tall and high sheafe, was different in matter from
the rest, but that all were of the same ear, and stalk; giving us thereby to
understand, that he, that is to be the Head or President of the whole body of a
Council, though he be to be higher then the rest, in the dignity and hight of
his Office, yet for all this, God would not, that he should be made of any
other kind of matter then were the rest of the members; That he should not be
some great block-headed Lord, or a man without wit, or learning, that in his
carriage and manner of life, he should seem to be cut out of another piece of
cloth, but that he should be of the self same quality, fashion, and
profession. And that the President of every Council, should be chosen from
amongst the Counsailours themselves, that they be molded out of the same Mass
and lump, as well the feet, as the head, that there go (as we say) but a
pair of sheares between them, and that they be clad all in one and the same
liuerie. And God giving order to his Viceroy (and in it, to all Kings) how he
was to choose a President, that should be the Head and ruler over his people,
says thus unto him; Eum constitues, Deuteronomy. 17.15.
quem Dominus tuus elegerit, de numero fratrum tuorum: Thou shall in any wise
set him King over thee, whom thy Lord thy God shall choose; One, from among thy
brethren, shall thou set King over thee. And howbeit God had here expressed
himself so plainly, and that he himself had the nominating of the person,
and therefore there could be no error in the Election, yet it seems God was
not satisfied heerewith, but comes presently with another Prouiso, and a second
Mandatum, saying. Thou may not set a stranger over thee (hominem alterius
gentis) which is not thy brother. He must not be of another people, or of
another family; As if he should have said, not of another Council. Chrysostom.
hom. 10. in Genesim.
Doubtless (says S. Chrysostom) this is a business of great consequence;
and we are to insist much thereupon, considering that God himself, does
recommend and repeat it so often unto us, to the end that it may be imprinted
in the hearts of Kings. And in Reason of State, and matter of government, it is
the greatest benefit they can do to their Kingdoms. And therefore amongst
other those great and many favors which God promised to confer upon his
people, (speaking unto them in the similitude of the Vine) he indeareth this as
the greatest, That he will set a guard about them, and Gardiners or
vineyard-keepers, that shall be within the precincts thereof. Hose. 2.15.
Dabo ei vinitores ex eodem loco: I will give her, her Vineyards from thence,
and the valley of Achor, for a door of hope. But (my good Lord) within the
precincts of a Vineyard, what can be had there but hedges and Vineplants? Had
it not been better to give unto this Vineyard a lusty strong Laborour, to
dress and prune it, and to keep and defend it from passengers? The Chalde,
expounds this place very well, For in stead of Vinitores, he puts Gubernatores,
Which, are Rulers and Presidents. And for to be, as they ought to be, we have
said already, that they should be uniform with the members. For if they be the
Vine, he must likewise be a Vine, that must be their Head. Christ himself,
that he might be the President and Head of that Apostolical Council where the
Apostles were as tender plants, and had the same proprieties, made himself a
Vine, to conform himself unto them. Ego sum vitis vera and vos palmites: I am
the true Vine, and ye the branches: Ioh. 15.5.
To the end that Kings may understand, and all the World may know, of how great
importance it is, that the Members and Head, Counsailours, and Presidents,
should in their qualities and conditions, be very conformable, sithence that
herein he would not dispense with himself, much less therefore with others,
and for this cause Presidents ought still to be chosen out of the same
Counsels, Ex eodem loco, eiusdem gentis, and de numero fratrum suorum: Out of
the same place, the same people, and from amongst their brethren. And if
Counsailours might have the hope of such increase of honor in their persons,
it would make them much better then they are, and they would study to win
themselves credit, and to cumply in all things with their obligation, serving
with carefullnesse and satisfaction, as well to give their Kings good content,
as that they again, might take notice thereof, and in their greatest occasions
employ them in their service. This rule did that great gouerner of Gods people
Moses observe, who having (as we said) used diligence for to seek out
persons, which might help him, furnished with those qualites aforementioned,
made a distribution and division amongst them, allotting them places and
Offices, answearable to their Talent. And which is worthy the noting, that (as
he himself affirms in another place) the noblest, and wisest amongst them he
made rulers over the rest. For, when in noblemen, concur the qualities of
wisdom, and prudence, and other the Virtues, there is a great deal of
reason, nay a strong obligation lies upon it, that Presidentships, and the
greatest dignities, and places of honor, should be bestowed upon them;
especially, when not degenerating from the Virtue of their Ancestors, but
surpassing them therein, they have the advantage of nobleness of blood, upon
which virtue (like a Diamond set in gold) shows it self the better and
appears the more beautiful. The words of that most wise Lawgiver, whereon
this discourse will be the better grounded, are these; Tuli de Tribubus
vestris, Deus. 1.15.
viros sapientes, and nobiles, and constitui eos Principes, Tribunes, and
Centuriones, and Quinquegenarios, ac Decanos, qui docerent vos singula: I took
the chief of your Tribes, wise men and known, and made them Heads over ye,
Captains over thousands, and Captains over hundreds, and Captains over
fifties, and Officers amongst your Tribes. Out of every Tribe he chose the
worthiest and most sufficient men, and made them Heads and Presidents in that
government. And he, that was so zealous of the Laws and good government,
valiant Mattathias, 1 Mac. 2.
in that provision of Offices, which he distributed, at his death, he said of
Simon: Scio quod vir consilij est, ipsum audite semper. And because he was so
wise a Counsailour, he made him President of the Council. Judas Machabaeus
fortis viribus a juuentute sua: Judas Machabaeus, was a valiant man from his
youth, he had been always bred up in the wars, Sit vobis princeps militiae;
and therefore he made him General of the Army. For (as Plato says) Quilibet
ad ea idoneus est, inquibus sapit: Every man is fittest for those things, Plato.
wherein he has best skill. Now, when kings shall have found out such fit
persons (as have bin by us propounded) they are to distribute and order their
Counsels and Counsailours, and to appoint their President, charging them to
keep every one his proper place, and Station, and that they envy not one
another nor sue to be preferred to a supremer Council, and to have a care that
each man in his own Council be rewarded according to his good services. For
it is impossible, but, that he that treats in all businesses, must needs err
in some, nor can he, that is over charged with businesses give good
satisfaction unto all. But there are some, that love to double their files, and
would, if they could, have a 100. Offices at once pretending, that there is
want of fit men for those Offices, seeking that they may be doubled,
re-doubled, and quadrupled on themselves. They are like unto another Gerion, of
whom it is said, that he is in Hell, because he would be Three, instead of
One. What will become then of those, that would be twenty yea a hundred, nay
enjoy all the Offices in a Kingdom? These had need of another far greater
Hell, if that be not hell enough, they have already.

With the foresaid distinction and division of Council and Counsailours, far
better and more speedily will businesses be dispatched, and the King shall be
at more ease in his person, and more at quiet in Conscience. And the
Counsailours themselves, shall lead an easier life, have less time of
trouble, and more to study on State-businesses, whereby with moderate pains,
they shall give a quicker Dispatch to those things which come under their
debating. Let this therefore serve as a Conclusion to this discourse; that in no
kind of hand, Offices be doubled upon one particular person, nor put out of
their hinges, by the passion or pretension of those, that have a hand therein,
nor let Counselors be chopped and changed, from one place, to another, nor
your Counsels confounded. For this argues but small satisfaction in the
Ministers, and much distrustfullnesse in the Prince. But let us pass on.

CHAP. XIII. The Author prosecutes the same subject, and shows how Kings ought
to carry themselves with their Counsels and Counsailours.
THis Order being thus settled for Kings, they likewise are to have a care,
that they keep it, by not altering businesses, nor removing either them, or
the men therein employed, out of their proper places, for from the trucking and
bartring of these things, from this chopping and changing, great
inconuenien^es, and mighty troubles, are wont to rise in government. What a
strange thing would it be, nay, what wou^d become of us all, if that order
which God placed (as we told you) in this Machina of the World should be
altered? if the earth should get up above the Air, and the Air should pass
beyond the Sphere of fire, what were this, but to destroy the World? So good
government in like manner is destroyed, by the Ambition and Covetousness of
those, who not contented with their employments and places, draw businesses out
of their right Current, for to make themselves Lords and Masters of all, and to
pursue, by this means, their idle vanities, ambitious humors, and particular
interest. The Holy Ghost, in that Mystical book of the Canticles, compares
the Government of the Church to a well ordered Army, or pitched field, where the
pikes are ranked on the one side, the shot on the other, the horse in a third,
and all the rest in their due places appointed for them. And in this well
ordring and marshalling of the Men, consists the strength of an Army. A
Christian, and Church-like Commonwealth, by the good order that is kept
therein, is as a terrible as an Army with Banners to it is Enemies, and as
beautiful as Tirzah, Cant. 6.4,
and comely as Jerusalem, in the sight both of God, and Man. And when Kings do
hit right the distribution of their Offices, and in giving to every one, that
which is fitting for him, according to his condition and quality, most
certain it is, that every man shall get advantage thereby and prove more
excellent in his proper place and Office, than those can be, who have been
employed in other Offices and places. And that they, who have been deputed to
such a Council, and well exercised therein, shall far better know what
belongs thereunto, than those that have not had experience and knowledge
thereof. Evermore presupposing, that with the foresaid care and diligence,
choice has been made of the most sufficient. For which reason, we are to
give credit to every one in particular, and to all jointly in their
Ministeries, as to selected persons, and such as are their crafts-Masters, in
these kind of matters. For (as the holy Ghost says) Vnusquisque in art sua
sapiens est: Eccl.
Every one is wise in his own Art, knowing therein both how to speak, and
do. According to this ground, Kings cannot do any thing better or surer for
the good government of their kingdoms, and satisfaction of their Consciences,
than to give credit to each Council in that which appertains unto them, and
to leave unto their ordinary Councillors and Councels the Dispatch of all
your running businesses without any particular Consultation, unless it shall
more nearly concern the State, whereof as the king ought only to be the
Judge, and to give his resolution, what he will have therein to be done; So
likewise must he lend them his hand and authority, as far forth as is
fitting, proportionable to the bulk and quality of their Office, without
which they cannot well exercise the same. Where as not to give them that, which
they justly deserve, is a great impediment to their complying with the
substantial part of their obligation, and gives occasion to others, not to
yield them obedience and respect, which are the raynes of that bridle,
wherewith the people are to be restrained and ruled. And together with this,
they themselves must help to sustain the weight and charge of government,
wherein they have so great a portion. The Emperor Charles the fifth of glorious
memory, was much commended for the great care he took in conserving the
authority of his Ministers. And it is not to be doubted, but those ancient
grave Ministers, whom the people reuerenceth and respects for the place
wherein they are, and for the opinion which they have gained by their years
and experience, and for the authority they have to do either well, or ill,
and for that power they possess, and which the Laws grant unto them over men's
lives, and goods, may do much in authorizing, or disauthorizing not only all
that they do, but even the Prince himself. Hence will issue this other
benefit, that a great part of your Audiences (too ordinary a trouble with
Kings) will be much lessened, whereby they shall be the more disoccupied, and
recover greater force and strength for to treat of weightier affairs, not
wasting and spending the time in matters of lesser moment. And this bad and old
custom ought to have it is legs broken, and hereafter be disinabled for
attributing unto Kings those resolutions, that are disagreeable and displeasing
to the people. For albeit those inevitable offenses and distastes, which
sometimes cannot be avoided, ought to be endured and passed over with
dissimulation, for the public good, yet is it not safe to procure them for
every particular thing, nor that all men should know, that all their damages
and hindrances proceed from the supreme will of the king. And it is as old,
as usual a fashion with your Ministers, when the people murmr at them, (I
cannot tell whether it be done with that wisdom and loyalty which they owe
to their King) to lay the fault on their superior, and the people easily
intertaineth it, and apprehends it, to be so. Whereupon they throw all the
stones, that they can at him, and although they cannot reach him, yet is it not
fit, that they should grow to that insolency and contempt.

Let Kings, by all possible means excuse those Iuntas, or References, which
have lately been introduced for the deciding of businesses; a thing as ill
received in common, as desired by the Ministers; and that for many reasons.
First, that the people, and the Parties, may not think, or say, that it is
done to oppress them, by putting businesses out of their Course, and
recommending them to a few selected persons, that they may so end them, as he
desires, who has the nominating of them. Secondly, that they may not draw
upon themselves the hatred and burden of those resolutions they shall take, if
they shall be either in offense and distaste of the people, or of the Party
whom it concerns. Thirdly, because there is no cause or reason, why they,
that are trusted with all other public businesses, should not likewise be
trusted with particular greiuances. Fourthly, be cause your ordinary Councels
have more experience of those businesses, which they treat daily, then your
Iuntas have, which are formed of different Councels, wherein usually, there are
many which scarce know the first Principles of that, whereof they are to treat,
and must be guided and directed by those, which are taken out of that Council,
which is acquainted with these kind of businesses. Or if they will not confess
this, by their ignorance, and by their Competition, they defer at least, if
not utterly overthrow the resolution that should be taken in the business.
For, being (as they are) composed of different Tribunalls, they neither love,
nor trust one another, neither know they how to yield each to other, but grow
stiff and obstinate, and attend only to show their wit and learning upon
those that are vnuerst in those affairs. Whilst in the mean while it
succeeds with men's businesses, as it does with those diseases and sicknesses,
which are discust and debated by many Physicians who whilst they are divided in
opinion, and one would have this, and another that, the time of the cure is
past. Fifthly, for the credit and authority of the King, as also of the
Councels themselves; for when that which belongs to these Counsailours and
their President, is taken out of their hands by artifice and cunning, and is
recommended to others, in no hand can be excused the note and suspicion, that
either the King has erred in the Election which he made of these his
Counselors, or that they do not do their duty, because that which did
properly appertain unto them, is taken from them, and put over to others. And
as it should be a fault in a Prince, not to trust his Ministers, if they
deserve to be trusted; so is it likewise, if they dismerit that trust, to
continue them in that place. And therefore that Minister from whom there can be
had no good satisfaction, let him be put out of his Office. For to keep him in
it, argues either weakness in a Prince, or an evil Conscience. Sixthly, That
that may not by your Discoursists, and Wits (as they call them) whereof Kings
Courts are full, divine before hand, what is treated in those Iuntas, which are
no sooner had, but the end of them is known; a thing which cannot but be of
infinite inconvenience for all affairs, and more particularly in those, which
as they are of more importance, so do they require more reservedness.
Seventhly, because Ministers may have time and place for to hear Negotiants,
which they cannot have, nor be able to remedy matters, nor to understand them,
unless they may have the hearing of them. And though this complaint, be
without fault on the Counsailours part, I am sure it is not without punishment
of those, that are to negociate with them. And lastly, because it is a great
error and intolerable burden, to tie two or three, to the dispatch of many
businesses of peace, and of war, of the Exchequer, and of the state, and of
diverse other things, which daily offer themselves; for, (as experience
teaches, reason requires, and inconvenience proclaims it) it is impossible
to give a good issue and dispatch to all, nay scarce to the least part of
businesses. For a man is not made of brass, that he should be able to endure
the trouble of so many Iuntas, at least his spirits will be so spent, that he
will be able to do little service in those that are last treated. Counsailours
know not, like Angels, Diuino intuitu, but as Men, by way of discourse and in
this they are tired out, and ouer-wrought; and it is not possible, that at the
latter end of the day, they should be so quick and nimble, as at the first
hour, after they have taken pains all the day long. For this virtue is
granted to spirits, which know and comprehend things without measure, or
wearisomnesse. Ma^s understanding is finite, and he said not ill, that said;
The sense, which is occupied in many things is weakened by every one of them.
And in that repartment and division, which that Evangelical father of his
family, made of the Talents amongst his servants he gave unto every one of
them, Secundum propriam virtutem. He measured their abilities, and conformable
thereunto imposed a charge upon them. How many do groan under the burden of
those offices, which they bear, without being able to undergo them; yet will
not they leave these, because their ambition does not leave them. But rather
applying themselves to the gust and Palate of their King, and out of a
disordinate desire they have to grow still greater and greater, they are well
content with load upon load, and never cry Ho, because they never think they
have enough. And so not complying (as indeed they cannot) with their
obligation, businesses are retarded, and go not on in that good way as they
should, and both they themselves, and they that put them into these places,
live with little or no security of conscience. But if it be the Kings will and
pleasure, and that he think it fit for his greater satisfaction that some one
particular man that is eminent in the profession of that business, which is to
be treated, shall treat thereof, and shall see and peruse it, a gods name (if
he will have it so) let his will be fulfilled: yet with all, let his Majesty
take his opinion, as of a particular person, and having received it, let it be
disputed, discussed, and debated by the body of the Council, such as have
been beaten in these kind of businesses, and are thoroughly acquainted with
these matters; for by this means, that which is pretended, shall the better be
effected, and many the forementioned inconveniences be excused. Amongst those
Ancient Romans, when that Commonwealth was sole Mistress of all the world, and
when it was likewise under the Empire and Command of one only Monarke, we
never read, that it ever admitted of more then the Ordinary Counsels for the
dispatch of businesses. Augustus Caesar, a Prince of excellent prudence, and
his great Minion Mecaenas, in matter of Counsel, can sufficiently confirm
this Doctrine, being that he himself was one of those, that treated businesses
in the ordinary Counsels. And he had a respect and consideration thereunto in
that extraordinary cause of Piso touching the death of Germanicus, Corn. Tacit.
wherein the judgment of the people, and the Senate was so much interessed.
Tiberius the Emperor who was one of the subtilest and craftiest Princes, that
ever the Roman Empire knew, would not for all his great strength of wit, and
cunning dissimulation, wherein he was his Arts-Master, venture upon any
innovation farther then this, to pass over his opinion to this, or that other
Council, but never appointed any particular Iunta for the same, as one who
knew very well, that only in so doing he should have but laded his own
shoulders with the weightinesse of the Case, and the success of the Cause.
Only your Iuntas, are to be used upon some great and extraordinary occasion,
and not upon every trifling business, as is now and has these many years
been in use, much more time being employed in particular Iuntas, then public
Counsels touching the persons of these Counsels. If the number be not
sufficient for the dispatch of businesses, let it rather be increased, then
that by this other course, he that is Master and Lord of all, should likewise
make himself Master of all wrongs and grieuances, and of that which the
aggrieued will conceive of him; which batching imagination of theirs, will
bring forth (that Cocatrice of Kings) most venomous hatred. By that, which we
have both read, seen and heard, it is easy to be collected, that this was
merely an Introduction of the Ambitious, who indeauoured by this means to
have all things pass through their hands, and depend upon their will. And
this, as if it had been a thing of inheritance, has gone along in descent from
one age to another, even to these present our times. That particular Council
which Kings formerly had, and in effect all of them still have, that more
reserved secret Council with whom they communicate their inwardest thoughts,
let it (a Gods name) be superior to all the rest, which supplying, as in those
three potentiae or faculties, the very place and soul as it were of the
Prince, it is very fit and convenient, that it should judge of the actions, and
Resolutions of all your Ordinary Counsels, and that they should all wait upon
this, and attend their pleasure, and that they should likewise treat of all
those great businesses, which the Ancient, and more especially, Augustus
Caesar, called Arcana imperij, Mysteries of State, and secrets of the kingdom.
But for the rest, let them be left to their Ordinary Counsels for so shall
they receive quicker dispatch, and all suits be more easily ended, and things
carried with less labor of the one, and fewer complaints of the other. And
let it likewise suffice even the greatest intermedlers of these Ministers, that
they have a hand in public businesses, without offering for their private
interest to draw things out of their ordinary course, and Common tracke
whereinto they were put, making themselves thereby hated and abhorred of all
those that have any thing to do with them. For at last they will come to sent
and wind out their driftes, to know all their doublings and shiftings, and to
watch them at every turn, and when they have them at advantage, never poor
Hare was so hardly followed by Hounds, as these will be pursued to death by
them, whom the others powerfullnesse with his Prince, did seek to crush and
keep under. It were well that these great Ministers, would weigh and consider
with themselves, that as they have their hands already too full of work, so
have they more complaints against them, then they would willingly hear of, and
more envy at the heels of them, then they can well shake of, and therefore
(if they were wise) they would avoid (as much as in them lies) to draw these
mischiefs more and more upon themselves.

In great resolutions indeed, Kings are not to give way, that they should be
taken out of the Counsels of State, and war, nor yet that they should be
concluded without them. For the glory of all good successful Actions shall be
his, as having their revolution and motion from him, as from their Primum
Mobile. Nor is it any wisdom in a King to lay the misfortunes and unhappy
Accidents, that may befall a State, upon his own shoulders; Which will be
qualified for such by his Privy Counselors, as finding themselves justly
offended, in that he has not imparted his mind unto them, nor communicated
with them in the Commonwealths affairs, especially if they be of consequence.
The principal cause, why there was ordained a Council of State, was; That it
might serve to help the king (whom principally this Body represents) to
bear the Popular charge, which evermore judges of things by the events; and
though now and then they fall out ill, and the people thereupon ready to
murmr and mutiny, yet are they the better bridled, and appeased by the power
and authority of these Counselors. The Office of a King has trouble enough
with it, burden enough, and therefore they should not advise him to lay more
upon himself without lawful and necessary cause. And because, when I treated
of the qualities of Counselors, I reserved those for this place, which more
properly appertain unto them that are of this Counsel, I will breifely
deliver what they are, and how necessary for those that are elected thereunto;
And I will content my self with no less, then those of that great
Commonwealths man, and Counselor, Pericles. And besides, to those which I
shall now speak of, may be reduced those, which are to be required in their
other Counsels; your Council of State, is a Council of Peace, and War; And
(as Plato says) is the soul of the Republike, and the very Anchor, whereon
wholly depends all the stabilitie, firmness, and assurance, of the State,
King, and Kingdom; it is perdition, or preservation. Whose chief aim, and
principal intent, is the good Government of the Commonwealth, and that it,
and every member thereof should live happily, and be conserved in peace, and
justice. And for this cause only are we to make war. Ob eam causam suscipienda
sunt bella, Cicer. Offi. lib. 1. Plat. Dial. 1. de Legibus. 1.
vt sine iniuria in pace vivatur. It is Cicero's saying. And the Emperor
Charles the fifth was wont to Say; That the Council of State, is the whole
wisdom, power, and understanding of the King; That it is his Eyes, his hands,
and his feet; And that himself, should often sit in Counsel and without it
not to do, or conclude any thing that is of any weight, or moment.

The qualities required to make a perfect Counse^ler in this Council are many;
As that he be a man of much courage, truth, and integrity, and well seen in
matters of State and Government, public, and private, of peace, and of war;
for he is to advise in all; A man of good years, great virtue, much
authority, and of no mean credit and reputation; That he be very skilful in
those businesses, which he treats; That he understand them well, and be his
Crafts-Master in that faculty. That he be of a prompt and sharp wit; That his
tongue be well hanged, and be able to express himself so happily, that he may
be truly understood. That he have a mind free from all by respects, that
neither Love, nor Fear, may detain him from uttering what he thinks; That
he bear an especial love and affection to his King; That he keep his hands
clean, and not suffer himself to be overcome by covetousness. For he, that
in whatsoever is propounded, presently apprehends what is best, and understands
what is proffitable, and convenient, yet neither knows, nor has fitting
words to declare himself, it is all one, as if he understood it not. And he
that can play both these parts passing well, yet loves not his Master, his
conservation and augmentation of honor, this man will hardly be true and
trusty unto him, and scarcely adiuse him to that which is fitting for him. But
suppose he has all these good qualities, yet if he give way to be won by the
love of money, and greediness of gain, all that shall be treated with him,
shall be saleable, no whit weighing the benefit, and authority of his King, if
the insatiable, hunger of riches be put in the scale. And I say moreover, that
he, that shall want these two qualities, and shall not love his King, and yet
love Covetousness, though he be indewed with all the rest, he shall thereby be
so much the worse, and more dangerous, for having his will depraved, and his
understanding ill affected, having these two Vices attending on him, how much
the more shall his sharpness of wit be, and the greater his force of
Eloquence, the worse effects will it work, and the more remediless. Let
Counselors therefore have these two qualities, Love of the heart and
cleanness of the hand, together with good natural parts, as a quick wit,
and nimble apprehension, for the speedier determining of present businesses,
and not only to give sudden, but sound advise in them. And that in future
cases, they may be able by natural discourse to give a guess, how things are
like to succeed; as also, that they may by good discourse, and debating of
businesses, attain unto those things, whereof as yet they have not had
particular experience. That they be prudent discerners of the better and the
worse in Cases doubtful, that they may not be to seek, but to go through
stitch therewith and be provided for all comers. In a word, let them be
excellent sudden speakers upon all occasions, assisted as well by a natural
kind of gift they have that way, as by the exercise of their wit. All which
will not serve the turn, nor make the Mill go so roundly as it would, unless
there be much amity amongst them, and a conformity of good agreement, and a
willing helping and assisting one of another in businesses. For, from
Competitions and Contestations amongst themselves, have insued the loss of
Kingdoms, and States, and other great losses and Calamities. Ley. 29. Tit. 9.
Part. 2.
They must be of one accord, and one will with their King, and still advise
him to the best, having an eye both to him and themselves, that they do not
err, or do any thing contrary to that which is right and just. And then is it
to be understood, that they bear true love to their King, and Country, and
that they apply themselves to all that, which concerns the common good, and
their own particular service, when they take joy and comfort, that they
concur, and run all one way without division or distraction. And if this
unity be not amongst them, it is to be imagined, that they love not so much
the King, and State, as their own private interest. Being thus qualified, they
shall be fit Ministers and Counselors for so great a Counsel, for they shall
thereby be able to rid as many businesses as shall be brought before them, and
give them good and quick dispatch, well understanding what is needful to be
done, and knowing as well how to declare themselves in that which they
understand.

And in this or any other Council, there ought (according to Fadrique Furio) a
care to be had, to examine the merits and dismerits of every one, informing
themselves of his life, behavior, and abilities, as also the Actions, of those
who without suing, deserve for their virtue, to have favor showen them; and
likewise to take notice of those who desire this preferment. And that for this
purpose there be a Register or Book kept of the merceds, and favors to be
conferred, and of the persons that are well deserving, to the end that those
honors and favors may be thrown upon them, according to the virtue,
sufficiency, and merits of the men. For he, that depriues Virtue of that
honor that is due thereunto, does (in Cato's opinion) deprive men, of virtue
it self. And when favors are afforded those which not deserve them, or are
forborne to be bestowed on those that merit them, virtue receives a great
affront, and the Commonwealth a notable loss. And it will prove the greater
if honor be added to the bad, and taken from the good; and that vice, shall be
better rewarded, then virtue. For where she is not esteemed, and rewarded, the
virtuous live like men affronted, and that are banished the Court. King
Nabucodonosor, Assuerus, and others, have kept such a book as this, wherein
were commanded to be recorded the services that were done them, and the persons
deserving, to the end they might gratify them, and cast their gracious favors
upon them. And this is very necessary in all well ordered Commonwealths, to the
end that all might endeavor to take pains, and study to deserve well. For
reward inciteth men to labor; And (as Salust says) were it not for hope of
reward, few or none would be good. It makes much likewise for the honor and
credit of Kings. For in no one thing can they gain themselves greater
reputation, then by honoring those, that are good, and virtuous.

The Romans had likewise another Council which was called by the name of
Censura, or Reforming of manners, which did not in the Commonwealth permit
public delinquents, which might cause either trouble, or scandal to the
State, and to the end, that such ill disposed persons, might not escape
punishment. For, where there is neither hope of reward, nor fear of
punishment, there can we have no good thing, no Commonwealth, nor no
Congregation of men to last and continue; when as the good and virtuous are not
rewarded, nor the lewd and seditious punished. For if one part of the body be
infirm, and be not helped in time, the malady extends it self, and goes
creeping and spreading it self over all the whole body. And therefore it is
fitting, that Ministers should have an eye, to see what vices, what disorders,
what ill corrupted manners disturb and molest a Kingdom, and to have a care
to cleanse and cure the Commonwealth of them, dealing with them for the
public good, as wise Physicians do for the Bodyes-safety Who, in the curing
of infirmities, for the securing of the whole, cauterize this or that member,
and if need be cut it off. Now your infirmities and diseases, which are
quickly known, are as easily cured (a great means of the remedy, resting in
the discovery.) but those which with time wax old, grow in a manner
incurable; (the Aliment, and fomenting of them, consisting most in their
concealment,) For as in suffering and dissembling a sore, it but rankles the
more, and of ill, becomes worse; So to bear with insolent offenders, and to
wink at their foul faults, is; as if a man should favor a wound too much,
whereby, as it, so do they daily grow worse and worse. For it is too too well
known, that to malignant dispositions, the more lenity, is but the more
license of offending, and open mercy proclaimed, Cruelty.

Let the end of this discourse be, that the Counsels and Counselors being
seated and settled in the form aforesaid, the King likewise apply himself to
treat truth with them, and to deal plainly with them, in whatsoever
businesses shall offer themselves to be debated of. And let him not persuade
himself, that there are too few of every Council, for if they be chosen and
selected men, few will suffice; and many, serve to no other end but to trouble
each other, and to delay businesses. For howbeit it be true, that it is
evermore good to hear the opinions of all for to ventilate and sifte out a
cause thoroughly, yet the determination ought to pass through the hands of a
few, but withal good, and experienced persons, that they may not err in their
sentence. Of the Emperor Alexander Seuerus, (who was a man of singular
wisdom) it is reported, that for the resolution of those businesses, which he
undertook, he called only unto him such Counselors, to whom such business
did more properly appertain, and had most knowledge and experience in that,
Aelius Lampr. in vita Alexan. Se ueri.
which was to be treated. Vnde si de Iure tractaretur, solos doctos in consilum
adhibebat; Si vero de re militari, milites veteres, and senes, ac been meritos,
and locorum peritos, etc. So that if it were a Law-businesse, he only called
the Learned in the Laws to Council, if of warfare, old beaten Soldiers, aged
and well-deseruing Captains, and of approved experience in their place. And so
in the rest. Arist. lib. 8. Polit. cap. 6.
For, as the Philosopher says; Impossible est, vel certe admodum difficile,
vt qui ipsa opera non tractat, perite valeat iudicare: It is impossible, or at
least certainly very hard, for to judge iudiciously of those things, wherein a
man was never yet imployd. But that which has been a man's Office, and
continual Exercise, in this he must needs be wise, and cannot choose but
speak well to the point. Quilibet ad ea idoneus est, Plato lib 21. de fortitud:
in quibus sapit (says Plato). Some there are, that are wise, but (like the
Trojans) too late; They know what is to be done, but are too long in doing it:
and therefore it is necessary to add hands to Counsel and force to wisdom;
yet still allowing the Council so much time, as things may come to their true
ripeness and maturitie; For (as it is in the Proverb) Harto presto se haze
lo, que bien se haze: That is quickly done that is well done. And very
necessary is that pause and breathing, wherewith Kings go ripening great
businesses; And exceeding fit it is, that they should go soberly to work,
take time and leisure enough, and that in their consultations they should use
feet of lead, but in the execution of them, hands of steel. Which being once
well grounded, and both the Conueniences, and Inconveniences thoroughly weighed,
(though in these great and weighty affairs, there are never some wanting, that
will follow that part, which has least ground for it, and yet persuade
themselves that they only are in the right, and that all the reason in the
world is on their side) let them go roundly to work, and after a concluded
consultation, let them show themselves constant in the execution thereof. For,
as another Philosopher said; Cunctanter aggrediendum est negotium, verum in
suscepto, Diog. Lacre.
constanter perseuerandum: A maine business must have a slow motion, but when
the wheels are once set a going, they must never stand still till it have
finished it is intended work. And the Prophet Esaias, Isay 11.2
joined the spirit of fortitude, to that of Council. For Counsel little
avails, that is deuoid of force and strength to execute. Vile est Consilium
(says Pope Gregory) cui robur fortitudinis deest: That Counsel is vile and
base; that wants true metal. Let Counsel I say be slow, and savor of the
lamp, but let the Execution, be quick as lightening. For, as mortal are those
wounds, and those diseases, to which remedy is given too late, as those, to
whom none is given at all. To what end therefore (I pray) serve your Iuntas,
upon Iuntas, reference upon reference, your long and large Consultations, your
viewings, and reuiewings, if after all this great ado, all is rolled and shut
up in paper? Whereas in all reason, nay and right too, how much the more time
there has been spent in consulting, so much the more speed and force ought
to be used in Executing. For, on good Counsel, and quick Execution, consist
your good ends, and all prosperous success.

CHAP. XIIII. It is demanded by way of Question, Whether Kings ought inuiolably
to observe the foresaid Order.
ARt, is Natures Ape, and imitates her all she can. And by so much the more
perfect an Artificer, and more cunning workman is he accounted, who shall
seem to come nearest in his work to that great Master and Maker of Nature,
and whatsoever is natural, wherein (as has already been said) is conserved
and kept that firm and constant Law, and first commandment, which he imposed
upon all things in the beginning of their creation. Who likewise has, and does
still keep a wonderful correspondency in those very things, conseruing them
in their operations, working and operating continually by their means and
help, and honoring them with the name and essence of secundary Causes, though
he himself be the primary natural cause in that working. So that the fire,
has always performed that Office, wherein God placed it, to wit; To burn, or
heat. And when he has been pleased to work these effects, he has made use
of them for that purpose, as well upon occasion of his wrath, and chasticement,
as of his love, and cherishment. When he was willing to destroy and consume
those Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19.24.
he did not make use of water but of fire, which he sent among them to execute
his judgment upon that occasion. And for to Regular, and make much of that
Mirror of patience Job, and to exercise him in that virtue, Ignis cecidit e
caelo, and tactas oues, puerosque consumpsit: The fire of God is fallen from
heaven, Job. 1.16.
and has burnt up the sheep, and the servants; etc. For to throw down the
house, and at one blow to kill all his children, that were met together to make
merry, he made use of the Wind. For to drown the world, he served himself
with the water, and in the desert, he drew water out of the Rock, to quench
the thirst of his people, and to preserve them from perishing. So that Life,
Death, and Health, which God can give solely of himself, yet will he have it
be wrought by the help and means of those secundary natural Causes. And even
at the day of judgment he will make use of all these, for the punishment of
the wicked, as we have it set down in the book of Wisdom; Wisd. 5.20.
Et pugnabit cum illo orbis terrarum contra insensatos: And the world shall
fight with him against the unwise. This order and natural Law, wherewith God
conserueth and governs the world, Kings ought to imitate and follow in the
government of their Commonwealths, giving their Ministers jurisdiction and
Authority proportionable to their Office, without the which they cannot well
exercise the same. And as long as these his Ministers shall go on in an orderly
Course, or shall imitate in their constancy those natural causes, and shall
be punctual and faithful in their Ministries, the government ought not to be
altered or receive any change. But when they shall fail in their obligation,
another order must be taken with them. And therefore I say, that in some cases,
the best and surest course that can be taken, is; That Kings proceed after
another kind of manner, by being served by other Ministers, and Counselors
that they may comply with that which tends to the service of God, and the good
of their kingdoms. Especially, when (as has bin said) Ministers abuse that
power which is given them and make it the means to afflict the good, and to
do other wrongs and injuries. And this, the sacred Scripture teaches us in
that History of Daniel, Dan. 3.27.
where it is reported, that when Shadrach, and his two Companions were cast
into the fiery fournace, the kings Ministers caused the fournace to be heated
so hot, that the flames of fire ascended some 49. Cubits high. But by how much
the more power the fire had for to burn those innocent children in that
occasion, by so much the more to the greater astonishment of the standers by,
God slaked the force thereof, causing that in that very place, where for to
consume these Saints, the fire was most kindled, a cool fresh air entered in,
and did refresh them. And the King himself, who came to see this wonder told
them, that he espied in the company of these three children a fourth man,
which seemed to be like unto the son of God. For indeed so it was, that this
his Divine goodnesses, did not content it self with deading the force of that
intensiue flame, but made means by his Angel, to come and free these
Innocents from that torment. Therein, instructing kings, That albeit it be fit,
that ordinarily, they should suffer business to pass by the hands of those
Ministers, to whom they belong; yet when the subject is extremly wronged, and
injustice offered by them against the Innocent, Kings ought not to respect the
Order and ordinary course of Law, but to take another course with them, and (if
need be) wholly to change and alter it, and in his own proper person, to direct
things to their due ends, taking from the fire it is Actiuitie and instead
thereof sending a pleasing cool gale of wind, as God did. For experience
teaches us, that this ill seed or bad race of Ministers, makes post-hast, and
quickly ouerrunnes a Commonwealth, as ill weeds do a ground, to the great
dishonor of kings, and diminution of their credit, and to the notable damage
and destruction of kingdoms. Oh how does it discover it self in these our
unhappy and miserable times, how much more, and how many Cubits higher then it
was wont, does the fire of Ambition, and Avarice, mount in many Ministers, who
grow by this means to be so great, and so high, that they quite loose the
sight of themselves, and go beyond the reach of their own knowledge, being in
a manner besides themselves puffed up with their promotion, and the high places
they possess, seeming to be another kind of men, then they were wont to be.
And this their folly and madness extends it self so far, that they will not
suffer themselves (forsooth) to be seen, or known, by those, whom not long
since (God he knows) they adored as Gods, but now are grown so proud, and
into so good a conceit of themselves, that they think themselves to be
something more then men. Of these, S Bernard gives this admirable good note;
You shall see (says he) many in the Church of God, as also in Kings Courts,
without nobleness made noble, and of poor, become rich, to be suddenly puffed
up with pride, forgetting their former Estate, to be ashamed of their
Ancestors, and disdainful toward their poor kinsefolke, and by a strong
hand, and with lies and falsehoods, they seek and procure that, which Nature
has denied them, and being not noble by birth, nor innobled by virtue, set a
good face on the matter and by such art and cunning as they will use, would
seem to the world to be great Princes, and to be well descended, fetching
their feigned Pedigrees, as far as Noah's flood: Far unlike unto him, who by
his virtue came from a Potter, to be a King; who, that he might not forget,
whence he came, and yet represent what he was, caused to be set on his
Court-cupboord vessels of earth, with this Letter; Haec fecimus: These we once
made; and vessels of gold, with this other Letter; Ista facimus: These we now
make. I say, that it is a matter of much importance, (and I purposly forbear
to speak so much as I know in this point) for the conservation of Kingdoms.
As also how fit it is, that their Majesty's, both in regard of that respect
which is due unto Kings, and to the right and true administration of Justice,
should by their severity, temper and moderate the excess of those, which
cloth themselves with the Kings royal command, as with a garment, and bear
themselves too insolently-high upon the Title of their Offices; and under
color and zeal to the service of their Kings, will make themselves their
Tutors, Masters of their liberty, Lords, over their vassalls, and sole
Commanders of the whole Kingdom like unto that great Leuiathan, or huge Whale
in the Sea, of whom holy Job says; Before his face, is poverty, and want, for
he spoyleth and deuoureth all that stands in his way, Job. 40.18.
and trusts that he can draw up Jordan into his Mouth.

CHAP. XV. Whether it be fitting for Kings, to use much the remitting of
businesses?
ALthough in the former Chapter something has been spoken, which may tend to
this Question, yet shall it be necessary to answer here thereunto in a more
direct and clearer manner. And howbeit the word, remitting, or referring, does
seem to notify the care and poruidence, which a Prince owes unto businesses,
certain it is, that it shall well beseem him, sometimes so to do. For,
amongst many other the miseries of humane nature, this is one, that it is
forces, as well internal, as external, as well of the Soul, as of the body
are much limited, and restrained, and have much need of many helps. Wherefore
I say, that Kings not being able (as they are not) to attend of themselves so
many businesses as howerly occur, nor to comprehend so great variety and
difference of things, they ought to remit some, nay many of them, to persons
deputed for their ease, and discharge of their Consciences. Let a King examine
those businesses, which are fit to be reserved for himself. And those that
he cannot, let him remit them unto others, because of himself he is not able
to dispatch all of them.

And in favor of this Doctrine; we have Iethro's Counsel to his son in
Law Moses. Who seeing him so ouer-imployed in the businesses of his people to
his intolerable trouble, said unto him; Stulto labor consumeris, Exodus 18.18.
elige tibi Viros, etc. Thou wearyest thy self greatly, and this people that
is with thee, provide thee men, etc. I need not repeat all unto you, having
spoken thereof largely heretofore. I shall now therefore represent unto you,
That there are two kinds of Remitting.

The one for to unload himself of that charge and trouble, that he may live
himself at ease, and out of his authority lay the burden upon others, and
command them to end such or such a business. Which is now too commonly used
and practiced. For every on, as much as in him lies, strives to be superior
in this kind; Taking that to himself which is most pleasing, and easiest for
him, and remitting the hardest and harshest to other men's hands: And hence it
happens, that from thc first remitting the King makes, your poor Negociants,
like so many Tennis-balls, are tossed from one to another. Nay, their fortune is
far worse; for the Ball which is racketed by the one Player, the other with
great nimblenesse and care, runs forth to receive it: But the poor
Negociant, who in these Remitments, serves in stead of the Ball, they do not
only not receive him readily, but shut the door upon him, obliging him to
solicit his entrance, one while by favor, another while by gifts. And
although this be too usual a practice in all Tribunalls; and with all Judges,
and upon all differences of businesses, yet is it there most practiced, where
matters of goods and Titles of Lands are treated, wherein the Pretenders do
not only sweat and take a great deal of pains, but are forced to pay as
much for the dispatch of ten thousand Marauedies, as if they were so many
Ducats. And this may be confirmed with the example of a poor honest widow,
who (as it is well known) spent much time, and that little money which she
had, in Negociating the dispatch of a small debt. And when after a long and
tedious suite, she had at last got an order against her Adversary, yet was
she never the nearer getting of her money, for that it was ordered in Court,
that she should be paid out of such Rents, which upon some pre-morgage, or
some other cunning Conveyance, could not be recovered. These remittings, I do
not find how they can be defended, or salued in the Sacred Scripture. But
there are many reasons for the condemning of them, and for the obliging of
kings to limit, and remedy them.

The other kind of remitting, is; When either the order and quality of the
business, or the lawful Impediment of him that remitteth, does so require it.
For which we have our Savior CHRIST'S warrant in that admirable conversion of
the blessed Apostle Saint Paul. For albeit he himself, by his powerful hand
threw him down from off his Horse, and made him so far forth to yield
himself his, that he uttered these words so full of submission; Domine, Act.
9.6.
quid me vis facere? Lord, what will thou that I do? Yet did he not then give
him a present absolute Dispatch, but remitted him over to another Disciple,
which was named Ananias. It being held fit it should be so for those reasons
which are rendered by the Saints, and holy Fathers. The like course he took
with Cornelius the Centurion in that great business of his Salvation, Act. 10
5.
putting him over to Saint Peter. Luke 17.12
And when he saw the Petition of those ten Lepers, who besought him, that he
would make them whole; howbeit he granted them their request for the recovery
of their health, yet did he remit them over to the Priests, and Commanded them
to present themselves before them, because in those kind of infirmities,
Leuit. 13.
they were to be Arbitrary Judges, what was to be done in that case. And to the
Disciples of John Baptist which he sent unto him, when he was in prison, to the
end that they might inform themselves who he was, and whether it was he that
should come, or were to look for another? He remitted them back to their
Master with this Answer; Ite, renunciate Ioanni, quae audistis, and vidistis:
Go and show John what things ye hear and see. As if he should have said,
Mat. 11.4.
For as much as John is my Voice, by him is the truth to be declared, which you
seek after touching the Divinity of my Person. All these Remittings were
plain, and dispatched without reply; And those doubtless condemned, which are
now daily used, passing things over from one to another, as if men were to
deal with children, who asking a company of them, that are playing together;
Is your Mother at home? All make answer; This boy can tell you, or that other
boy can tell you. So that many men's lives are ended, before their businesses
can be ended. Their suites growing older then them selves; wasting both their
wealth, and their persons to no purpose.

It is recounted in the Acts of the Apostles; Act. 6.2.
That they being so busily employed in the Preaching of the Gospel that they
could not jointly with it attend those works of Charity, and Almes-deedes,
which were exercised in the Primitive Church, by feeding those that were
converted, they did remit the care thereof to seven Deacons chosen out from
amongst them all for that Ministry. And here is to be considered a point of
Doctrine of great importance. That the Apostles (as there it is mentioned)
albeit they saw what a great charge they had, and how much trouble with daily
Preaching, and continual Praying, they did neither omit, nor remit this
business, but were wonderful careful, that those to whom this care was
remitted, should be persons of great approbation, and fulfilled with the Holy
Ghost, and with wisdom, as were S. Steven, and others, which were elected, and
joined in Commission with him. Considerate ergo fratres, viros ex vobis boni
testimonij Septem, plenos Spiritu Sancto, and sapientia, quos constituamus
super hoc opus, etc. Wherefore brethren, Look you out among you seven men of
honest report, and full of the Holy Ghost, and of wisdom, which we appoint to
this business. Which is a Lesson for Kings, that when they understand, that
the persons, to whom they use to remit businesses, are not such as they ought
to be, either for their want of wisdom, or experience in those things, or that
their mind is not clear and free from passion, and covetousness, they in no
manner of wise discharge their Consciences in making such remitments and
references, but ought rather to reserve the dispatch thereof unto themselves, or
to remit them to such Ministers, that are able to give good satisfaction
therein, and of whose goodness, and sufficiency, the world renders public
Testimony. In a word, I am of opinion, that to remit businesses, is a matter of
necessity, in regard of the shortness of our understanding, which is imbroiled
and mightily hindered with this multiplicitie of affairs, and oftentimes
choked and stifled, and made defective in those matters, that are most
necessary. And as for our bodily strength, the force thereof is so small, and
so weak, that we had need to preserve the same, by easing it of that burden,
which is too heavy for it to bear. Yet withal there must a great care be had,
that these remitments, be not made merely, that the King might live at ease,
and be idle, but because weighty businesses, and such as have need of new
Examination, and new diligencies, do require it; or because the King (as
already has been said) may have some lawful impediment. Let Kings have
recourse unto God, and he will illighten them, and their faces shall not suffer
confusion, Psalm. 2.10.
nor their Kingdoms see alterations, ruins, nor destructions. Erudimini, qui
iudicatis terram: Be wise therefore ye Kings; be learned, ye Judges of the
earth.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Sense of the sight; That is: Of those businesses, which
Kings ought to reserve for their own view, and dispatch with their own hands.
ARistotle says that the soul is, Arist. 3. de anim. Text. 37. l^ct 13. and
D. Tho. Vniuersae creaturae homo est praestantissimus vt inter membra oculus.
D. Chrysostom. in Hom. 15. in Joan
Quodam modo dum omnia, in a manner all things, in regard of the Understanding,
which in it comprehends all whatsoever. And the same may likewise be said of
the sense of the sight, wherein is cyphred the greatness of the Universe, for
therein is enclosed all whatsoever is visible in the world, as the Heavens, the
Earth, Elements, Birds, Plants, Beasts, etc. And all that (be it more, or
less) enters into our Soul by this door. It is the most principal part of
the head, the most artificial, and the most excellent, and most precious of
all other the Senses; because it is action is more lively and spirit-full, and
gives us more to know and understand the differences of things. By the eyes,
are manifested a great part of the affections, and passions of the Mind. In
oculis animus inhabitat: The minds habitation (says Pliny) is in the eyes. In
them is seated Clemency, Mercy, Anger, Hatred, Love, Sorrow, Joy, and the like.
Ex visu, Plin. lib. 11. c. 31. Eccl. 19.26.
cognoscitur vir: We may know a man by his looks. As whether he be wise, or
foolish; simple, or malicious; etc. These, are those windows, by which the
light enters into the Understanding; and which show the good, or bad
disposition both of body, and Soul. And there are not some wanting, who
affirm, that they are the first, which God, and Nature delineate and paint
forth in that tender paste and soft dough of the Creature, as being the most
principal, the most beautiful, and the most delicate. And therefore that
Divine Artizan, did place a greater guard about that for it is safety, then
about all the rest. And therefore Aristotle says; That we make more reckoning
of this sense, then of all the other. It Is Site, or place, which is the highest
and most eminent in the head, does declare it is greater dignity, and is in
man, as is the Sun, and Moon, in the world. Quod sol, Ambr lib. 6. Exam.
and luna in Coelo, hoc sunt oculi in homine (says S. Ambrose). The use of the
sight is twofold. One material, and gross, which only attends things, as
they thus materially represent themselves, without making any farther
discourse, or Consideration; And this kind of seeing is common to all creatures
both rational, and irrational, indewed with or without reason.

The other is more elevated, and more spiritual, and flies a higher pitch, as
when it discernes things with Advice, and discourse, and when it perceiues what
that is, that it sees, and this appertains only unto Man. But in Kings, and
those that are good Governors, the consideration thereof must extend it self
a great deal farther; As to treat of the remedy, which those things require,
and stand in need of, which they have seen. But not like those Kings, that
visited holy Job, who although they saw him, and were seven days with him, yet
did they not see, what they saw; My meaning is, That albeit they did see the
great affliction, and extreme misery, wherein poor Job was, their eyes passed
it slightly over, they did not dwell upon it, nor took any course to give him
remedy. And when this is not done, their seeing, is no seeing, but are like
unto those spoken of by the Psalmist; That have eyes, and see not, Dull Idols.
To this purpose, there is a pretty place in the first of the Machabees, where,
after the Author has made report, of the great wickedness, and Tyrannies,
which that accursed King Antiochus, and his Ministers, exercised in Jerusalem,
and in other Cities and Towns of the Kingdom of Iudaea, of that great
Captain Mattathias, and his five Sons, he speaks thus; Hi vederunt mala,
quae fiebant in populo Judah, and in Jerusalem which the vulgar renders thus,
Now when they saw the blasphemies, 1. Mac. 2.6.
which were committed in Judah and Jerusalem. These (says he) saw the evils,
that were committed in Jerusalem; And my thinks here must the question be
asked, Why all they of that Commonwealth, suffering so many oppressions, and
so many afflictions, in their Houses in their own Persons, and those of their
children, only Mattathias, and his Sons, are here said to have seen these
evils, and these blasphemies? The answer hereunto, makes notably for our
purpose, because it expresses that, which we go enforcing; To wit, That to see
businesses, is truly and properly, to understand them, and to put our helping
hand unto them. And because Mattathias, and his Sons, were the only men that
were sensible of the hard measure they received, and the first that rose up,
and opposed themselves against the fury of the Tyrant, for the remedying their
so many and so great Calamities, that sacred Historian says, That they only
had eyes, and saw the affliction of Gods people. This kind of sight best be
fitteth Kings, as they are heads of their Kingdoms and Commonwealths, and it
is likewise necessary, that they have their sight, Large, Clear, and Sharp,
that they may reach to see even those things, that are most secret, and most
remote, as does that princely bird the Eagle, which houering aloft in the air
descryes the fishes, that are in the deep: Or be like unto that Maiesticall
Creature the Lion, who both waking, and sleeping, keeps his eyes open. The
Holy Ghost says; That a wise man has his eyes in his head. Eccl. 2.14.
Sapientis oculi in capite eius. And it seems, that by Contrapositions, he
would give us thereby to understand, that a fool has his eyes in his feet.
Which as they discover but little, so are they liable to a thousand offenses,
and deceits. But the wise man beholds from high and as from a Watchtower
discouers things a far off; and is thereby better able to take notice of
them, and more punctually to comply with his obligation to the state, and to
that which need shall require in those accidents that may occur. This is
that sight, which (as before has been said) befitteth Kings, for that they
are the Heads of their Commonwealths, and therefore are to reserve for their
own view those the more weighty businesses of their subjects; there being a
great deal of reason, that they should see them (as they say) with their own
eyes. For this end, are those Visitations ordained, and those Entrances in
State, which Kings are wont to make into the Cities, and Provinces of their
Kingdoms. When the arrogant and vain presumption of men grew to that pass,
that for to celebrate their name, they went about to build that proud Tower of
Babel, with intent to touch even heaven it self with the top thereof, and to
live free from all fear of a second flood, that sacred History tells us;
Descendit autem Dominus vt videret Ciuitatem, Genesis 11.5.
and Turim, quam aedificauerint filij Adam: That the Lord came down to see the
City and tower, which the sons of men builded. God came down himself to see
this their so great insollencie that he might punish them accordingly, as he
did with such a confusion of languages, that one could not understand another,
and were amongst themselves, as so many strangers, without being able to
communicate and converse together; so that they were driven to divide
themselves into different Countries, and were scattred from thence upon all the
earth. And in the said History of Genesis, we read, that when that abominable
filthiness of the Sodomites, grew to that highth of impudency, that it provoked
God unto Wrath, and in a manner bound him to consume them with fire from
heaven, he uttered unto Abraham these words worthy the noting: Genesis 18.20.
Clamor Sodomorum and Gomorrhaeorum multiplicat in est, and peccatum eorum
aggrauiatum est nimis. Descendam, and videbo, vtrum clamorem, qui venit ad me,
opere compleuerint, an non est ita, vt sciam: Because the cry of Sodom and
Gomorrha is great, and because their sin is exceeding grievous, I will go
down now and see, whether they have done altogether according to the cry,
which is come unto me; And if not, that I may know. As if he should have said;
Howbeit the abomination of these accursed Sodomites and Gomorrhaeans, has so
far increased, that it does cry aloud unto me for vengeance and chasticement,
and has pierced the heavens, and come unto mine ears, yet notwithstanding,
(because it is a thing that concerns a whole Commonwealth, and a business of
that weight, as to deserve exemplary punishment,) I will go down and see,
whether it be so or no, as the report goes of it. Though most certain it is,
that God has no need to come down from heaven, to take a particular view of
the things of this world, for he is present in all places, here, and there, and
every where, he fills all, sees all, and with his infinite wisdom
comprehends all. But the Scripture speaks in this kind of language, that it
may accommodate it self to the style and capacity of men, for to instruct
Kings in this place, that grave and weighty businesses, they are not to
transfer them over unto others, but of, and by themselves to see and look
unto them, nor ought they too be to facile in giving credit to fame, and report
(especially of the vulgar) without having first fully informed himself
thereof, and that by themselves they should be able to dis-deceiue themselves,
and to see, and consider things with attention, and with a desire to search out
the truth, and to rectify what is amiss.

In the Kingdoms of Castile, there is a very commendable custom, and of great
authority, and Majesty, worthy those most prudent Kings which first ordained
it. And this is that Consulta, which every friday toward the Evening, the
President of Castile makes with those of his Majesty's Council Royal, wherein
an Account is given unto his Majesty of all the weightiest businesses, and
wherein the opinion and the authority Royal is necessary. And this is not
without example in the sacred Scripture. For in the first chapter of Deuteronomy. it
is written; That when that great Lawgiver Moses had named for good and quick
dispatch such Counselors (as before specified) giving them in charge what
they were to keep and observe, and how to administer Justice with equality,
and without exception of persons, he told them; Quod si difficile vobis visum
aliquid fuerit, Deuteronomy. 1.17.
referte ad me and ego audiam. The cause that is too hard for you, bring unto
me, and I will hear it, You shall consult with me in that case, that I may
hear it, and take such course therein as is fitting. And if to this so
commendable a Consulta of every Friday weekly, there should be added another
Meeting some certain days in the year, to the end that the President, and
those of the Kings Camaera, should carry with them the Consulta of the Offices,
and should treat and confer thereof by word of mouth with our Lord the King,
it would be one of the most important things (in the judgment and opinion of
many grave men, whom I have consulted with in this particular) that could be
orordained for the good of these Kingdoms. Whereby many of those
inconveniences would be avoided, which wise and Christian Counselors have
found out by many years experience. And none of the meanest (amongst the rest)
is the remitting by writing so weighty and important a thing, as the Election
of Officers, recommending the same to a dead Letter, which can make no reply.
And that paper, which passes through so many hands, cannot come so clean, as
it should but be sullyed, especially if it come to such hands as are not clean,
but corrupted with gifts, and presents. And because this Course is taken, the
love and respect due to their Kings is lost, who like Creatures to their
Creator, ought to acknowledge all that they have from his hands. Whereas now,
they give this respect unto his Majesty's Ministers, with whom they have held
correspondency, as knowing that their Provision must solely pass through their
hands, and that their good or bad dispatch consistes in them, or in a less
full, or more effectual Relation, enclosed in the paper of their Consulta.
Which cannot be carried thus, when the President, and those of the Camera shall
have propounded the same, and delivered their opinions in the presence of their
King. And questionless, they that by this means should be provided for, would
esteem in more, and treat with more punctuality and truth, the things
appertaining to his Office, considering that the King himself takes
particular knowledge of them. For (as we said before) it is very meet and
convenient, that Kings should know, and communicate with, if not all, yet at
least those, who are to be placed in your greater kind of Offices, and
dignities. And amongst all other businesses, this is that, which with most
reason does require the Kings eyes and presence, his remembrance, and mature
Counsel; For such are the Citizens as are their Governors, and the
Parishioners, as their Pastors. And though this perhaps cannot be performed so
punctually and precisely, as were to be wished, yet at least it will be
needful, that those persons, of whom they take testimony, and receive
information in so grave and weighty a business, should be of that prudence,
learning, and authority, and so beyond all exception, that the world, (which
is apt to take exceptions) may be persuaded, that the Election could not but be
passing good, being that it past through such judicious men's hands. For,
whatsoever shall come forth decreed by them, it is not fitting, that it should
be subject to their censures, who either have not the said qualities, or are
much inferior in them, or fail in their zeal to God, or their Loyalty and
Love, to their King being Narcissus-like, inamoured with their own shadow, and
led away with the blindness of their passion. Woe be unto that Commonwealth,
King, and Kingdom, where one out of blindness, or self willfull-nesse, shall
undo that, which other men have done with many, and those the clearest eyes.
For (as the Wise man says) Vnus aedificans, and vnus destruens, Eccl. 34.24.
quid prodest illis, nisi labor? When one builds, and another breaks down,
what profit have they then but labor?

CHAP. XVII. He prosecuteth the same matter and shows, how Kings ought to
carry themselves, toward those, that find themselves aggrieued?
Having spoken of some Cases, reserved for Kings, and such as require their
sight and presence, it here now offers it self in this place, to know how a
King ought to carry himself toward those that find themselves iniuryed and
aggreiued. And in the opinion of understanding people, it seems, that nothing
is more properly his, then to quit wrongs, and remove injuries. For, if we
shall but consider that first beginning which Kings had, that which the Ancient
said of them, and that which the holy Scripture teaches us, we shall find,
that this Occupation is very properly theirs, and that this Care appertains of
right to their greatness. That most wise King Solomon, in the fourth of
Ecclesiastes, says; That when he saw the tears of the Innocent, and the
wrongs they received, and no body to help them, or to speak so much as a good
word for them, it seemed a thing more terrible unto him, then to dye, or never
to have been borne. Eccl. 4.1.
Vidi calumnias quae sub caelo geruntur, and lachrymas innocentium, and neminem
Consolatorum, neque posse resistere eorum violentiae, cunctorum auxilio
destitutos, and laudaui magis mortuos, quam vinentes, and foeliciorem vtroque
iudicaui, qui nec dum natus est. I turned and considered all the oppressions
that are wrought under the sun; And behold the tears of the oppressed, and
none comfort them; And lo the strength is of the hand of them, that
oppress them, and none comfort them: Wherefore I praised the dead, which
now are dead, above the living which are yet alive; And I count him better then
them both, which has not yet been. And not only King Solomon, but even God
himself was so highly offended with those wrongs and oppressions, which the
children of Israel suffered in Egypt, that he thought it a thing worthy his
presence, and his coming down from heaven to see the same with his own eyes.
Vidi afflictionem populi mei in Egypto, Exodus 3.7.8.
and clamorem eius audiui propter duritiem eorum, qui praesunt operibus et
sciens dolorem eius, descendi, vt liberem eum. I have seen the trouble of my
people, which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry, because of their
Taske-Masters; And for I know their sorrows, therefore I am come down to
deliver them, etc. Teaching Kings, That in matter of grieuances, and oppression
of the Innocent, they are not content to themselves, with remitting them over
unto others, but to look thereunto themselves; And (if need were) to come from
forth their princely palaces, and to forgo for a while their pleasures and
their ease, till they have reformed what is amiss. The first words the divine
Scripture storieth, which the first King, whom God chose for his people, said,
were these, 1. Sam. 11.5.
Quid habet populus, quod plorat? What ayleth this people, that they weep? Who
no sooner saw himself Crowned King, and put by Gods hand into the possession of
that kingdom, but applying himself to that which he ought first of all to do
(as one of the mainest points of his duty) he hearkened unto the cries of the
people, who were oppressed by the Philistims, and with great speed, and
fervent zeal, did roundly set himself to the redressing of that oppression.
And I verily persuade my self, that all good Kings would do the like, if they
should see their subjects ready to fall into their enemies hands, with whom
they wage open war. But from those more close and secret enemies, which are
together with us subjects, Citizens, neighbors, Countrymen and Ministers of
the same Kings, and of whom there is held so much trust and confidence, who
goes about to free the wronged? What reparation is there for received injuries?
Are they not much greater then those, that the Philistims offered to Gods
people, and more remediless? As for professed Enemies, against them we may
make open resistance, and every man, that is not unnatural, or a Traitor to
his Country, will put to his helping hand, and seek to repel force by force,
and revenge the wrongs that are done them. But for these our domestic enemies,
these our home-borne foes, and feigned friends, who under the show of
friendship, and under cloak and color of being the Kings Ministers, oppress
the poor, and such as have little power to oppose their greatness, who shall
be able to resist them? If he, that suffers, shall pretend to do it, does he
not put himself in manifest danger of suffering much more? if not of loosing
all that he has? And it is worthy your consideration, that in those words
related in Exodus, it is not said, that God went down to see, and remedy the
wrongs which that Tyrant king Pharaoh did unto the children of Israel, but that
which was offered them by his chief Ministers; Propter duritiem eorum, qui
praesunt. For the hard-heartednesse, and cruelty of those, which were set in
authority over them. As if he should have said, The Affronts and Injuries done
by a Kings principal Officers, are not so easily remedyed, as those of
particular men. They require a powerful hand, they require Gods presence, and
assistance, and will crave a Kings especial care. For your Counsels cannot
do it, nay are not able for to do it of themselves alone, be they the
greatest and the highest in the Kingdom; be they never so zealous of Justice,
never such true lovers thereof, and never so desirous to do right. And the
reason thereof (in my poor opinion) is, for that in regard the burden of
ordinary businesses is so great, that only they are not able to attend the
quitting of those agrauios and greiuances, with that speedines and efficacy,
as were needful, but rather that they themselves, without so much as once
dreaming thereof, do use to make them far greater then otherwise they would
be, for want of time, and strength of body, to cumply with so many and so
great businesses. And it oftentimes so comes to pass, that those that sue
for relief, in stead of being eased of their wrongs, receive further wrong,
either because they cannot find fit place and time to be heard, or because
being heard, they are soon forgot, or because they that wrong them, find
means to cover their faults. And if they cannot cover them, and so should be
liable unto punishment, yet they that lent them their hand to lift them up to
the place wherein they are, will likewise lend them a hand to defend their
disorders. And it has been already, and is yet daily to be seen, that a
Judge in Commission, who for his wickedness and evil dealing deserved
exceeding great chastisement; yet, for that he has his Patron and Angel of
Guard (for in your greater Tribunalls, these are never wanting) the business
is hushed, and the party peccant never questioned. And because he shall not be
disgraced, if the matter prove foul against him, by putting him out of his
place, he that took him into his protection, will intercede in his behalf to
have him removed from that Office, and preferred to a better; A case certainly
worthy both punishment, and remedy, if there be any upon earth. And if there be
any help to be had, it must be by the sight and presence of the King, for
without this, it is not to be hoped for.

The Courts of Kings, (much more then other places) are full of humane
respects, and these have taken so great a head and are grown so strong, that
in businesses they overthrow that, which truth and justice ought to uphold. And
therefore my advise unto Kings is, that being they are men, that are or may be
free (if they will themselves) from these poor respective considerations, and
are supreme Lords, and absolute sovereigns in their kingdoms, they would be
pleased, to dis-agrauiate those that are iniuryed, respecting only wronged
right, and oppressed Truth. But because such as are wronged, and find
themselves agrieued, have not that easy access and entrance into Princes
Courts, or to their persons, either in regard of their great and weighty
Employments, or some other lawful Impediments, it shall much importe, that in
their Courts, they should have some person, or persons, of great zeal and
approved virtue and prudence to whom those that are agrieued should have
recourse. For many suffer much, that cannot come to be admitted to the sight,
or speech of their King, whereas, if there should be a person appointed for to
hear their Complaints, they would cry out with open mouth for justice, and
should be righted in their received wrongs. And that person, or persons thus
deputed by their Majesty's, having first well weighed and examined the reasons
of their Complaints, should afterward represent the same unto their Kings, and
give them true information thereof, to the end that they may forthwith by
express Command, put thereunto a speedy and fitting remedy. And this (I
assure you) would be a great bridle to restrain the insufferable insolency,
and Avarice of Princes Ministers; Who (questionless) would carry themselves
much more fairly and uprightly, when as they shall know, that their disorders
shall faithfully be represented. Whereas (on the contrary) it is not to be
imagined with what a bold, nay impudent daringnes they outface goodness, when
as they conceive that of their kings, which was vttred by that unwise and
foolish Atheist; Psalm. 14.1.
In cord suo non est deus. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God.
Or that, which those ignorant and troublesome friends of Job, breathed forth
against God himself; Circa cardines coeli perambulat, Job 22.14.
nec nostra considerat. He walks in the Circle of heaven, and the clouds
hide him, that he cannot see, and consider the things upon earth. Or which
those other wicked Villains vented; Non videbit dominus, neque intelliget Deus
Jacob. Psalm. 94.7.
The Lord shall not see, neither will the God of Jacob regard it. So in like
sort say these bad Ministers, Tush this shall never come to our Kings
knowledge, he is taking his pleasure in his gardens, he is thinking on his
Hawking and Hunting, or some other sports and pastimes to recreate himself
withal; nor shall Tricks, and inventions be wanting unto us to stop up all the
passages to his ears; but say open way should be made, and that the King
should take notice of this, or that misdemeanour, it shall be dawbd up so
handsomely, such a fair varnish set upon it, and so full of excuses, that it
will be all one, as if he had never heard of it, or any such thing bin at all.
Presuming, that Kings, rather then they will be troubled with businesses of
clamor and noise, will (for their own ease) slightly pass them over.
Wherein, as they have oftentimes found themselves, so it is fit they should
still, be deceived. And truly to no man, can with better Title this Entrance be
given, nor this golden key to the Kings Chamber be committed, then to him, who
with the integrity and zeal of an Elias, should trample and tread these
Monsters under foot; and roundly and thoroughly to take this care to task,
which (without al doubt) would be one of the gratefullest, and most acceptable
services, which can be done unto God both in matter of piety, and of pity.
But what shall I say of the Kings happiness in this case? With nothing can he
more secure his conscience, then with this. As one who is bound, out of the
duty of his place, to have a watchful eye over all his Ministers, but more
narrowly and nearly, to look into the water of those that are the great Ones;
being likewise obliged graciously and patiently to hear those, that shall
complain of them, it not proceeding out of spleen and malice, but out of a
desire, to justify the truth, to make good a good cause, and that the fault
may be punished, with whom the fault is truly found. For, when the subjects
just Complaints are not heard, besides that his conscience is charged and
clogged therewith, the Ministers themselves become thereby much more absolute,
and more insolently Imperious; Insomuch that the subject seeing, that they are
neither heard, nor eased of their grieuances, they grow desperate. And what
fruits despair bring forth, I need not tell kings, that know either men, or
books. There is not in holy Scripture any one thing more often repeated, then
the particular care which God has of the oppressed. In the seventy second
Psalm, where the Greatnesses of King Solomon are set forth, but more
particularly those magnificencies of that true King Solomon, Jesus Christ,
whose figure he was, amongst other his Excellencies, for the which he ought to
be much esteemed, beloved, and adored of all the Kings of the earth, and served
by all the nations of the world, this which follows is not the least. Psalm.
72.11.
Adorabunt eum omnes reges terrae, omnes gentes seruient ei, quia liberauit
pauperem a potente, pauperem, cui non erat adiutor. All Kings shall worship
him, all nations shall serve him, For he shall deliver the poor, when he
cries; the needy also, and him that has no helper. And in another place he
makes the like repetition. Ex vsuris, and iniquitate redimet animas eorum;
Propter miseriam inopum, et gemitum pauperum, Psalm. 12.5.
nunc exurgam dicit dominus. Now for the oppression of the needy, and for the
sighs of the poor, I will up (says the Lord) and will set at liberty him,
whom the wicked has snared. And in the first Chap. of Esaias, it seems that
God does proclaim a plenary Indulgence, and full Iubile unto those Kings, and
Governors, who apply themselves to the easing of the oppressed. Isay. 1.18.
Subuenite oppresso, iudicate populo, defendite viduam, et venite arguite me;
dicit dominus, si fuerint peccata vestra vt coccineum, quasi nix dealb ab
untur, at si fuerint rubra quasi vermiculus, velut lana, alba erunt. Relieve
the oppressed, judge the fatherless, and defend the widow, though your sins
were as crymson, they shall be made white as snow: though they were red like
skarlet, they shall be as wool, you see then, that all sins are forgiven that
King, that is a Lover of Justice, and a friend unto the poor and needy, that
takes pains in relieuing the oppressed, and in defending the widow, and
protecting the distressed. They may stand with God in judgment, and allege
for themselves his Justice and his righteousness, who have dealt justly and
uprightly with their subjects, and mantained the weak and needy, against those
powerful Tyrants, which seek to swallow them up, as your greater fishes do
the lesser. Qui deuorant plebem meam, Psalm. 14.4.
sicut escam panis. Who eat up my people, as they eat bread. And howbeit
Justice ought to be one and the same both to poor, and rich, yet God does more
particularly recommend unto their care and charge that of the poor. For (as it
is in the Proverb. Quiebra sa soga por lo mas delgado: Where the cord is
slendrest there it breaks soonest. For a powerful man will defend himself
by his power, and great men by their greatness; And would to God, that they
had no more to back them then a just defense: for then the poor should not
need to stand in fear of them. But that is now to passeable in these times,
which the Apostle Saint James found fault with in his. Iam. 2.6.
Quod diuites per potentiam opprimunt vos, et ipsi trahunt vos ad iudicium:
That the rich oppress the poor by tyranny, and draw them before the
iudgement-seates.

When Kings do cumply with this their obligation, when they free the
oppressed, and defend the wronged Orphane, and Widow, God sends down upon
them his light, his grace, and other extraordinary gifts, whereby they and
their states, are conserved and maintained: Whose ruin and perdition does
evermore succeed through the default of him that governs: for if Kings would
govern according unto equity and justice, they and their kingdoms should be,
as it were, in a manner perpetual and immortal. For (as it is in the Proverbs
of Solomon) Rex, Prou. 29.14.
qui iudicat in veritate pauperes, Thronus eius in aeternum firmabitur: A King,
that judges the poor in truth, his throne shall be established for ever.
Whereas on the contrary, most certain it is, that the King and kingdom have
but a short continuance, where the Judges and Ministers are swayed by passion,
and thereby the subjects abused. It is the saying of the holy Ghost; Eccl. 10.8.
Regnum a gente in gentem transfertur propter iniustitias, et iniurias, et
contumelias, et dolos: Because of unrighteous dealing, and wrongs, and riches
gotten by deceit, the Kingdom is transferred from one people to another. No
one thing draws such assured and apparent perils of war upon kingdoms, as
the wrongs that are d^ne to the poorer sort of subjects. Clamor eorum, in aures
domini Exercituum introiuit: Iam. 5.4.
The cries of them, have entered into the ears of the Lord of Hosts. And there,
before his Counsel of War, they present their Memorialls, and their
Petitions, with such a loud language, and discomposed delivery, that they
pierce through his ears, when they call upon him, saying; since thou art the
Lord God of Hoasts, raise thou Armies both in Heaven and Earth, and revenge
thou those the open wrongs that are offered unto us. And these Petitions,
commonly find there such quick dispatch, that presently he nominateth
Captains, leuieth forces, and forms a mighty Army of enemies, to disturb,
and destroy that kingdom. And though some may conceive, that the cause of
those and the like troubles, are the cross Incounters of Kings and Princes
amongst themselves, or the greedy desire of war for spoil and pillage, which
pardons no manner of persons, yet in realtie of truth it is not so, but the
wrongs of Ministers, exercised upon the poor, the fatherless, and the widow,
are the occasion, that huge and powerful Hosts of enemies, in their revenge,
enter the gates of a Kingdom and make wast and havoc thereof. For this cause
were the Amalechites captiuated, and put to the sword, and for the same
likewise the soldiers entered into Iudaea, and sacked it.

Whence we draw this clear and conclusiue truth, that the best and the safest
course to conserve a kingdom, to gain others, and to abound in riches, is; to
undo wrongs done, not to dissemble injuries, to punish thefts and robberies,
and to execute justice toward all. Initium viae bonae, Prou 16.51
facere iustitiam: The first step to goodness, is to do Justice. For without
it, the foot that sets forward, falls backward; and a King has not where
withal to rely on his power, his forces, his wisdom, and experience in
government, if he be defective in this. For kingdoms last no longer, then
Justice lasts in them. And true it is, that there is no wind shut up in the
bowels of the earth, which causes therein such violent effects of
Earthquakes, as in those kingdoms, which think themselves surest and firmest
do the complaints, and greiuous sighs of the wronged poor. And therefore let
none whatsoever, be they Kings, great Ministers, or Counselors of State,
slightly reckon of the cries of the poor; For they referring their revenge to
God, they draw him down from Heaven to right their quarrel. And the basest,
and most barbarous man in the world, when he sees himself wronged, and can
find none upon earth to plead his cause, or to do him right, he presently
lifts up his eyes unto Heaven, and makes his address unto God, assuring
himself that his help will come from thence. And it was well said of a Wise
man; That the wronged are like unto those that are ready to be drowned, who if
they fasten upon any thing, never let it go: so these men, when they are in
danger to be sunk by being forcibly kept under water by the oppressors hand,
lay fast hold on complaints, cries, sighs, and tears, as the last remedy
allotted them by God; who says: That he will hear the petitions, and receive
the Memorialls of the afflicted, which are written with tears. A maxilla enim
ascendunt vsque ad caelum. Ecel.
For from the cheek, they ascend up to heaven. They trill down the cheeks,
till they fall to the ground, and from thence they mount up as high as Heaven:
for being water, they rise as much as they fall. And when God sees they have
reason on their side, and that they only call unto him for justice, (it being
so proper an Attribute unto him) in the end he grants, and signs their
request. Nor is it much, that he should show them this favor, his bowels
being moved to compassion, in seeing his creatures in such extremities of
affliction. Let Kings therefore beware and take heed, and their Ministers
bethink themselves; that in such a case, an Inundation of tears, is of more
force, and more danger, then that of the swiftest Torrent upon a mighty flood.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the sense of hearing; And of the Audiences, which Kings ought
to give.
PVrsuing still the Metaphore of the head, whereon hitherto we have insisted,
occasion is now offered unto us, to treat of the sense of Hearing, which has
some certain excellencies above the rest. For thereby we come to understand
the hidden secrets of the heart, and the most inward thoughts of the Soul;
which being clad and apparrelled with that outside, and exterior part, the
Voice, and put upon the Hearing of that person, with whom we talk and
discourse, it knows that, which the understanding of neither Men, nor Angels
once is able to comprehend. And that which we have spoken of the sense of the
sight ought likewise to be said of this, For as far forth as is the perceiving
of a Voice, or some other noise, or sound by the hearing, so far is it common
as well to brutes beasts, as to Men. But it is proper only unto Man, by
hearing a significatiue voice, to discourse thereof, and to understand the
inward conceit of him that speaks: And from hence will we draw, what ought
to be heard by the Head of a Commonwealth: who is not only to content
himself with hearing the bare external Voice, but to hear it in such manner
as the holy Scripture tells us, God hears the voices of those, which call
upon him in the time of their trouble, which is a usual and plain kind of
Language in the Divine Writ. And when it is said, that God hears us, it is
jointly said, that he grants our petition; Whereof many Testimonies are
found in the Psalms of David, and in diverse other places. Caum inuocarem,
Psalm. 4.1. ibi. ver. 4.
exaudiuit me Deus iustitiae meae. Dominus exaudiet me, cum clamauero ad cum,
etc. The God of my righteousness heard me, when I called upon him. And anon
after. The Lord will hear, when I call unto him. In the twenty one of
Genesis, it is there twice repeated, that God heard the voice of Agars child,
who was Abraham's bondwoman, Genesis 21.17.
which the mother had left all alone in the wilderness of Bersheba under a
certain tree, and sitting down over against him a far off about a
bow-shoote, that she might not see him perish for want of water. Dixit enim
non videbo morientem puerum; For she said; I will not see the death of the
child. In the very next Verse following a double mention is made, That God
heard the voice of the child: Which was in effect to say, that he did releive
him, and refresh his thirsty Soul, and granted that, which the infant, and his
mother desired. And the Apostle Saint Paul, in that Epistle which he wrote to
the Hebrews says of our Savior Christ; That, Offerens preces ad deum cum
clamore velido, Heb. 5.7.
et lachrymis, exauditus est pro sua reuerentia. Offering up prayers and
supplications to God the father, with strong crying, and tears, he was also
heard in that which he feared. Which was all one, as if he should have said,
That his father dispatched him, and granted what he petitioned in that his
prayer. So that in rigor of holy Writ, Gods Hearing, and Gods Granting is all
one. But in that common Commerce with men, and in that style, which Kings and
their Ministers use, it is not so. For they hear, and hearing answer, that
they have heard that, which they never mean to grant. And there is no worse
Answer for a suitor, then to make this answer to his petition, That it has
been heard. And it is very fit, that they should reply in this kind of
phrase: for thereby is given to be understood the great obligation they have to
hear, as well those that have justice, as those that pretend to have it,
although they have it not. In signification whereof, the two ears are placed
on the two contrary sides of the head, one opposite to the other, because
affording one ear to the Plaintiff, we must reserve the other for the
defendant. And because God would have it so, that Hearing should be the
ordinary means for the receiving of the divine Light, and attaining to the
knowledge of those supreme truths, by so superexcellent and high a gift, as
that of faith, Romans 10.14.
Quomodo credent ei, quem non crediderunt? How shall they believe in him, of
whom they have not heard?) As also, that Kings may have an entire light of
humane Truths, it is requisite, that they should lend a willing care to those
that crave Audience of them. For in this sense, of all other (says Saint
Bernard) Truth has it is seat, and Mansion. Bern. in Cont. Ser. 28.
In auditu veritaes: Truth is in Hearing. And in example of this, he alleges
that which passed betwixt good old Isaac, and his two sons Esau, and Jacob;
who by reason of his old age, failing very much in all the rest of his senses,
that of his hearing continued still in it is full perfection: The other deceived
him, Genesis 27.22.
and this only told him the Truth. Vex quidem vex Jacob, manus autem, ma^^s
sunt Esau. The voice is Iaecobs voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau.
Wherein he was out. In Gods School, where faith is professed, great reckoning
is made of Hearing. Quia fides, ex auditu. Because faith comes by hearing. Romans
10 17.
For a man may hear, and believe, though he cannot see. But in the School of
the world, we must have all these (and all is little enough) We must see,
hear, and believe: And when Kings have both seen, and heard, and thoroughly
informed themselves of the whole State of the business, that they may not be
deceived in their judgment, then let them presently proceed to touch it (as
we say) with the hand, to fall roundly to work, and in that manner and form,
as shall seem most fitting, to finish, and make an end of it. Psalm ^02.19.20.
Domin^ de coeli in terram aspexit, vt audiret gemitus compeditorum etc. The
Lord looked down from the height of his Sanctuary. Out of the Heaven, did the
Lord behold the earth, that he might hear the mourning of the prisoner, and
deliver the children of death. This looking down of the Lord from the highest
Heavens, and from the throne of his glory, upon the earth, to hear the
grievous groanings, and pitiful complaints of poor wretched creatures, which
call and cry unto him for justice; should (my thinks) be an admirable good
lesson for Kings, that they should loose somewhat of their sportes and
recreations, and of that which delights the eye and the ear, to bestow them
both on those, who humbly petition him, that he will be pleased to both see,
and hear their cause. Of Philip King of Macedon (though some put it upon
Demetrius) it is reported by Plutarke in his life, that going one day abroad to
take his pleasure and pastime, an old woman came unto him, and besought him to
hear her, and to do her Justice. But he excusing himself, and telling her, he
was not now at leisure to hear her, she made answer. Proinde, ne^ Rex quidem
esse velis! Sir, if you be not at leisure to hear your subjects, and will not
give them leave to speak unto you, leave to be king; for there is no reason he
should be a king, that cannot find a time to cumply with his duty. Convinced
with this reason, without any more ado, he presently gave a gracious Audience
not only to her, but many more besides. For Kings, which do not hear, by
consequence do not understand; And not understanding they cannot govern; And
not governing, they neither are, nor can be Kings. The Cretans, painted their
God Jupiter without cares, because he was that supreme king, that gave laws,
and judged all. And therefore ought to carry an equal ear, and indifferently
to hear all parties after one and the same self manner. Other some, did allow
him ears, but so placed them withal, that they might hear those least, that
were behind him; Which was held a fault in their God; as likewise it is in
Kings, not to hear any but thosse that stand before them, or side by side are
still weighting at their elbow. Kings should hear as many as they possibly can,
and (which is the only comfort of suitors) in that gracious and pleasing kind
of manner that no man should depart discontented from their feet, being a maine
fundamental cause, to make all men to love, reverence, and esteem them; and
likewise to oblige Princes, to lend the more willing and patient ear to their
subjects. And of this subject, Pliny, in commendation of his Emperor Traiane,
tells us, that amidst so many cares of so great an Empire as his was, he spent
a great part of the day in giving Audience, and with such stilnes and quietness,
as if he had been idle, or had nothing to do. And that he knowing the content
that his subjects took in their often seeing of him, and speaking with him, so
much the more liberally, and longer, he afforded them occasion and place, for
to enjoy this their content. For nothing does so much please, and satisfy the
heart of a Prince, as to conceive, that he is beloved, and generally well
affected of all his subjects. Let a King then, (this course being taken)
persuade himself, that his people loves him, and desires to see him, and to
speak daily (if it were possible) with him. And that they take a great deal
of comfort, that they have seen him, and he heard them. And that of two things
which all desire, To wit; To be heard, and relieved; The first, intertaines,
and comfortes the suitor; and makes him, with a cheerful mind, to hope well
of the second. Let him hear, though it be but as he passes by from place to
place, and let him not let any day pass, without giving ordinary Audience at a
set hour, and for a set time. And in case any shall require a more particular
and private Audience, a gods name, let him grant it them; For every one of
these (to conceive the worst) cannot deceive him above once; And it is to be
supposed, that they will not be so uncivil, or so foolishly indiscreete, as to
crave the Kings private ear, but in a case of necessity, or where there is
some especial cause, or extraordinary reason for it. And I farther affirm,
that Audience being given in this manner, things will be carried more smoothly,
and with more ease on either part; For that which breaks down your Damn's in
your rivers, is the detention of the water. And the detayning of a Subject from
the presence and speech of his King, is that which does dishearten, and deiect
the minds of your negociants, and supplicants. And when they see, they so
seldom have Audience, and are put off from day to day, and that it costs them
so dear before they can be heard, they will, while they may, make use of that
present occasion, and then they talk world without end, and never give over,
because they are afraid they shall never have the like opportunity again. But
when those suitors shall know that they shall have ordinary hearing, on such
days, and such a set hour, and for so long a time, they will content
themselves, with giving much less trouble to their own tongues, and his
Majesty's ears. In a word, no man will deny; but say with me, that it is just
and meet, That he, that is to rule, and remedy all, ought likewise to hear
all and that all men should know as much; for, for the good, and hope thereof,
they principally obey, and love their King. And besides, a great part of that
concurse, and tedious trouble of Negociants, will by this mean, be cut off.
For, unless it be in ^ase of necessity, or some extraordinary occasion, no
man (I assure my self) will be so unmannerly as to offer to weary and tire out
his King. For it is naturally inbred in all, to fear and respect Greatness,
And therefore will not cause molestation to so great a Majesty but when they
cannot find any other means to negociate. In conclusion, facile Audience in
Kings, is such a virtue, as does supply (and that with a great deal of
advantage) the defect of many other virtues. And where there is no need of
that supply, it serves to give a greater luster and perfection to the rest, the
subject not having any other thing, that he more craves from, or desires in
his King. And questionless, use and custom, will make it more easy, though
at first it may seem somewhat troublesome unto him. King Antigonus, who was
father to the great Demetrius, was a proud, ambitious, covetous, cruel, and
effeminate Prince, and yet notwithstanding all these vices, and other his
weaknesses and infirmities, his subjects did bear with them, and did truly
serve and obey him, because he did never refuse to give them Audience, gave
them kind and fair answers, suffered himself to be seen often of them, and
did never show to any man a frowning look, or discontented Countenance.

This facile giving of Audience, does bring likewise with it another benefit
not so well understood perhaps, as it ought to be, by Kings and their
favorites. Which is; That thereby they receive the private aduertisements of
particular persons in such a convenient time and season, as is fitting for
them. For, in negociating, by retarding this Audience, either the occasion is
ouerslipt, or he wearyed out, that should advertise: And because the
aduertiser, (as there is great reason for it) would be oath that another man
should go away with the thanks and gratification, which is due unto himself
for his care and diligences used therein, he will negociate it by his own,
rather them another means, that he may not loose both his thanks, and his
labor. And because many times this Aduertiser, either dares not or holds it
not fit, to trust a paper therewith or other men's ears, all this may easily be
excused with a facile Audience. King Assuerus, Ester 2.11.
by knowing in time the treason which was plotted against him, by Bigthan and
Taresh, two of his Eunuchs, which kept the door, had his life thereby
preserved. And Publicola, Plut. in vitae Publicolae.
the Roman Consul saved his Country, by preventing in time the conspiracy of
Tarquinius, by giving easy access and Audience to Vindicius, an ordinary
serving man, who bewrayed unto him the treason of the Aquilij, and Vitellij,
together with Brutus his sons. And the like success had Pelopidas amongst
the Grecians, (as you may read in Plutarke) where he much recommendeth in
either of them, both Publicola, and Pelopidas, their kind and courteous using
of men, when they came to speak with them, and the easy and patient ear they
had from them. Whereas on the contrary, diverse Princes have utterly
overthrown themselves and their kingdoms by their hardness and harshnesse in
this kind, and have lost many a great and fair occasion, because they would
not hear, and examine in time those aduertisements which were given them, and
recommended to their better consideration. Last of all, admit that this should
not be altogether so just and convenient a course as I have here delivered unto
you, yet notwithstanding, because all men wish and desire it, my thinks this
one consideration, in all good reason of State should suffice, to have it be
held, to be both just, and convenient. For it is not possible that all both
good and bad, should err in this desire. And I dare be bold to say, that all
do hunger and thirst, cry and dye for this, except it be some few who may
feather their nest by the contrary, whose thriuing, and increase of wealth does
ordinarily consist, in clapping a lock on the kings ear, and barring the door
to his hearing, so that men can hardly and with a great deal of difficulty
come to speak unto him. And besides the foresaid benefits, by debarring men of
easy access to the king, all requital of their good service, either by
gracious words, or deeds, is quite taken from them; which certainly is a
jewel so worthy the wearing, that every one would willingly have it for
himself. And if kings do not know thus much, or that they are not told thereof,
it is by reason of that old mischeife which they suffer by not hearkening unto
truth, either in their Counselors or those Auisos, that are represented unto
them, or because those that are near about his Majesty and interessed in his
favor, will not let him be acquainted with any thing, save what they know will
please his humor, and give him most content, till the business itself break
out, and the error (like an imposthume) beginns to grow ripe, and the wound
(as we say) shows it self; then and never till then, is the smart of it felt:
Which is ill for the kingdom, and worse for the King. For, in these delicts and
excesses, the King, (in the peoples conceit) shall be the only man in fault, and
he that must pay for all. Dangerous is the State of Kings, dangerous the times,
but more dangerous the remedy, and the non-conueniencie for the now putting it
in practice. In ordinary, and public Audiences, let not Kings permit either
Ministers, Counselors, or Ambassadors to enter, for it will but make the
Commons complain, that that is taken away from them, which is theirs; And they
on the other side, being principal persons, will mutter and grumble, thinking
themselves wronged, and their worth vnderualewed, to have all one Audience with
the ordinary sort of people. So that with one and the same Act, he discontents
all of them. Let there be days, and hours, appointed for the one, and the
other naturalls, and strangers, and let every man know his set day, and hour.
For this being without distinction, what does it serve for, but multitude, and
confusion? And to have all of all sorts to assist there continually to hear
and nourish the Complaints of particular persons, and to make report thereof by
Letters to their several nations and Countries, and to put a Gloss upon them,
to show their own wit. And though this at the first sight, may seem to be a
thing of small importance, yet such a time may be taken, that it may prove a
matter of great consequence.

CHAP. XIX. He goes on with the same matter, Treating of the Audiences of
Ministers, and Counselors.
KIngs (says Xenophon) have many ears; For they hear by their own, and by
those of their Favorites, Ministers, and Counselors. And it is no more then
they stand in need of. For they must hear all, Great, and Small, Natural,
and Stranger, without acceptance of persons, these as well as those; and deny
no man their ears, lest they give them just cause to grieve and complain,
that for them only, there is neither King, Favorite, nor Minister to have
access unto. This Rapsodye, and multitude of ears, and the difference between
the one and the other, King David gives us to understand in that his Audience
which he craved of God. Domine, Exaudi orationem meam auribus percipe
obsecrationem meam. Psalm. 143.1.
Hear my prayer (O Lord) bow down thine ear, and hearken unto my
supplication. He says, Hear me, O Lord; but how, or in what manner? With thine
ears, I beseech thee. Tell me (thou holy king) why do thou say with thine
ears. Might not that phrase of speech been spared? Or would thou happily,
that God should hear thee with his eyes, or his mouth? No certainly, But
because it is a usual custom with Kings, that govern great Monarchies, who
by reason of the variety and multitude of businesses, cannot by themselves
give ear unto all, and inform themselves of the truth, to remit part of them
to others, that they may hear the Parties, and informing themselves of the
business, may send it afterward to the Consulta there to be debated. One comes
with his Memorial to the King; The King wills him to speak unto the
President, or to such a Secretary, that he may inform. But David here says;
Remit me not O Lord unto any other, for remissions, are remissions, the very
word telling us, that to remit a business, is to make it remiss and slow, and
that there is used therein so much remission, that a man's life is oftentimes
ended, before his business. Auribus percipe: Do thou thy self hear me with
thine own ears, without remitting me to the hearing of others. But to hear
all, and in all parts, without remission to other men's ears, who can do this
save only God? And for my part, I am of opinion, that they alluded unto this,
who (as we told you) painted their God without ears; for to give us thereby
to understand, that it is peculiar only unto God to hear without ears, and
to hear all, without standing in need of other Oydos, or Oydores; For such a
necessity, were in God a defect. But in Kings it were a defect to do
otherwise; for they are notable to hear all of themselves, and therefore must
of force make use of other men's ears. And therefore, as Nature, in Man's body
has disposed different Members, necessary for it is proper conservation, as the
eyes to see, the ears to hear, the tongue to talk, the hands to work, the
feet to walk, and all of them to assist to the Empire of the soul. So in
like manner, this Mystical body of the Commonwealth, whereof the King is the
soul, and Head, must have it is members, which are those his Ministers, which
are Subject to the Empire of their king, by whom he disposes and executes
all that, which does conuene for it is Government, conservation, and
augmentation. Arist. de Anima.
Aristotle renders the reason, why your huge and extraordinary tall men are but
weak; And (as I take it) it is this. The rational Soul (says he) is solely
one, indivisible, and of a limited virtue or power, and that it cannot attain
to that strength and force, as to give vigor to those parts that are so far
distant and remote in a body, beyond measure, great. Now, if the body of this
Monarchy, be so vaste, and exceeding great, and goes daily increasing more and
more, and that the Soul of the King which is to govern it, to animate it, and
to give it life, does not increase, nor is multiplied, nor augmented, at least
in it is Ministers; How is it possible, that a King of himself alone should be
able to afford assistance to all? And to give life, and being, to so many
parts and members, that are set so far assunder? so great is the Office of a
king, especially, if he be Master of many Kingdoms, that it is too great a
Compass, for one man's reach, and it is not one man alone, that can fill and
occupy a whole Kingdom, and be present in all it is partnes. And therefore of
force he must make use of other folks help, and more particularly of those,
which serve him instead of ears, such as are all your superior Ministers of
Counsels. These great Officers are called in the Spanish, Oydores, of Oyr, To
hear; And the ears of the head, are called Oydoras, of their hearing; And
your Judges of the land, Oydores, Hearers of Men's causes And as they are alike
in name, so ought they likewise to be alike in Office, and to resemble the
Original, which it represents, to the life, and it is true nature. Now, what
Office is most proper and most natural to the ears? you will all grant me,
that it is to hear always, and never to be shut. Your eyes have their
portcullis, which they open, or shut, as they see cause. The mouth, has the
like; But the ears (like bountiful house keepers) have their doors still
open, and those leafes which they have on either side are never shut, never so
much as once wagge. And it is Pliny's observation; That only man, Plin. nature.
Hist, lib. 2.
of all other creatures has his ears immmobile, and with out any the least
moving. And Horace, holds it an ill sign to wagg them; but a worse, to stop
them, Sicut aspides surdae, obturantes aures suas. Psalm. 58.5.
Like deaf adders, stopping their ears, that they may not hear. sicut
Aspides, which are fierce and cruel creatures, and of whom it is said, that
they are borne as deaf as a door nail; and to this their natural deafenes,
they add another that is artificial, whereby they grow more deaf, by
poisoning that part, and by winding their tail close about their head, and
sometimes laying the one ear close to the ground, and stopping the other with
the tipp of their tail, that they may stop and damme up all the ways, by
which the Voice of the Charmer might enter in. Unto whom, David compares those
who being Oydos del Rey, the Kings ears, or (to speak in the usual phrase)
Oydores del Reyno, the Kingdoms ears, do shut and stop their ears, that
they may not give due and fitting Audience. Being naturally enemies to their
own profession, which is to hear; seeking out shifts and tricks, that the
Cries, and Complaints of the poor may not come to their ears. There is not
any cruelty comparable to this, to see a poor suitor trot up and down, a
month or two together, laboring to have Audience, and in stead of letting him
in, has the door still shut against him. Nature would not allow doors to the
ears, and yet these that are the Commonwealths ears, make profit of the
doors of their houses, and command them to be kept shut: your suitors they
come and go, but my sennior Oydor, my Lord judge, he that should have his
doors open, to give open hearing to all Comers, is shut up in his closet, and
cannot be spoken withal under a couple of Capons. The Tribunes of the people
of Rome (a Magistracy ordained for defending of the Communaltie) kept their
gates still open, that men at all hours, might upon all occasions, come and
treat with them. If that young man, Act. 22.21.
which was Saint Paul's sisters son, who heard the Conspiracy which the Jews
had plotted against him, and went to give advise thereof to the Magistrate, had
not found such easy entrance into the Tribunes house as he did, without doubt
it had cost Paul his life. For forty men, had taken a solemn oath to kill him
as he came forth of prison to his Trial; and bound themselves with a curse,
that they would neither eat, not drink, till they had killed him. Now, when
this young man came to the Chief Captain, and told him that he had something
to say unto him; The Text there says, that the Captain took him by the hand,
and went a part with him alone, and asked him; What have thou to show to me,
etc. With this facilenes, did the Ministers of that Heathen-people, give
Audience. How much more ought Christian Ministers to do the like? The open
door, and the giving of Audience in some open Hall, or in some outward Court,
whereunto all are admitted to enter, would give much content unto many; but
these close doors, and close Audience, to very few; which is purposely done
for to pleasure their friends and servants; for, from this their hard access,
and difficile entrance, they likewise make their gain, and are not ashamed now
to demand that for a fee, which if they were well served should be recompensed
with a halter And look what I have said of your Oydores, which are your Judges
in Chanceries, and other the chief Courts of Justice; I say the like of other
Ministers, who though they have not the same name, yet do they serve as ears
to their king. And then are their ears shut, and grown deaf, when they will
not hear; making thereby his Majesty to be found fault withal, and to
receive a hard censure from his subjects, when he is innocent and blameless,
and drawing a thousand other mischiefs upon the Commonwealth. And it is a
most shameful thing, and worthy reprehension, and redress, that when kings
shall be liberal in this kind, their Ministers should be so short and cutted,
and that a man should be at more cost and trouble to get Audience of them, and
to negociate a business, then of the king himself. And the mischief of it is,
that they procure and pretend now, as in former times, the greatest favors the
highest places, honors, and dignities, whilst in the mean while it is not
thought upon, nor taken into consideration, that besides the offense which is
done herein unto God and the Commonwealth, that it is one of the most
prejudicial things in the world for the quiet peace of States, and the
conservation of kingdoms. And this was well understood by Absolon the son of
David, and pretender to the Crown of Israel. Who perceiving, that the king his
father through his great employments in the Wars, could not so well attend his
giving Audience to all his subjects, and that they to whose charge and care it
was committed, did not cumply, therein with their obligation, he placed himself
at the entrance of the City, whether the suitours repaired, and seeing how
much they distasted it, that they had not that quick Audience and dispatch as
they expected, and desired, he insinuates himself into them, and speaking very
kindly, 2 Samuel 15.3.
and lovingly unto them, he told them. Videntur mihi Sermones tui boni and
iusti, sed non est qui te audiat constitutus a Rege: Thy matters are good and
righteous, but there is no man deputed of the King to hear thee. And this is
it, that puts all out of frame, and order. O quoth he, that I were made Judge
in the land, that every man which has any matter of controversy might come to
me, that I might do him Justice; etc. And it follows anon after in the Text;
Quod solicitabat corda virorum: That by this means he stale away the hearts of
the men of Israel. And that thereupon there shortly after insued a great
rebellion, which put the king, and the kingdom in great ieopardie. Which may
serve as a lesson for a good Minister, to teach them what they ought to do, and
not to think, they do that which they ought, when for fashion sake, they give
short and crowding Audiences, where that which enters in at one ear, goes out
(as they say) at another. But that so much time should be allowed for the
hearing of them, as the quality off the business shall require, without cutting
those off, who go rendering their reasons; For he that has not the patience to
hear them, either he not understands them, or is afraid to meddle with them.

With this therefore I conclude this, and the former discourse. That the first
Office of a King, is, To hear all his subjects. And it being supposed, that he
alone cannot do it, it is fit he should have Oydores, that should hear for
him, and be his ears. And for that as by the ears of the head, there runn's
along a certain secret nerve, by means whereof that which is heard, is
presently conuaied to the brain, there to be registered, and consulted on by
the Common sense. So these Oydores, ought to hold their secret Consulta,
wherein they ought to make relation unto the King of all that they have heard.
But let them weigh with all, what a short Cut it is from the ear to the
brain, and the small stay that is made in this Journey, or passage; to the end
that by this natural course, which is so quick, and speedy, they may see their
error, and perceive what a great fault it is, to retarde their Consultations,
to show themselves thick of hearing, and to have their ears shut, or rather
the Oydores themselves shut up, and not to be spoken withal. Some would feign
excuse these Audiences, with the impertinencies of those that crave them, which
sometimes are very large and tedious and to as little purpose, as they are too
too importune, and unseasonable. But to this answer; That your high and
eminent places, bring with them this trouble and charge; And (as the Apostle
Saint Paul said) that it is a great token of prudence to know how to bear with
the foolish, and to have suffrance and patience with those, that are none of
the wisest. Libenter enim suffertis insipientes, 2 Cor. 11.19.
cum sitis ipsi sapientes: For ye suffer fools gladly because that ye are
wise. And because he that is most wise, is most offended with ignorance, let
him know, that he meriteth much in dissembling it, when it is fitting so to
do: for to say the truth (as the same Apostle affirms, Gods good and
faithful Ministers have obligation, both to the Wise, and to the foolish.
Sapientibus and insipientibus debitorsum. Romans 1.14.
I am debtor both to the wise men, and to the unwise. In the History of the
Kings is set down the dissimulation, wherewith the women of Tecoa spoke unto
King David, and how importunate and tedious she was in telling her tale, and
withal the Kings great patience in hearing her out, and his not being offened
with the craft and cunning wherewith she came unto him; albeit the business
was of that weight and moment, that his great Captain Ioab durst not propound
it unto him. Audi tacens, Eccl. 22.7.
simul and quaerens. Give ear, and be still; and when thou doubtest, ask.
This Counsel concerns all, but more particularly Kings, and their
Ministers, who are to hear, and be silent, to ask, and ask again, till they
have fully informed themselves of the truth of the case. For this is rather an
honor, then dishonor unto Kings, and great Ministers. Prou. 25.1.
For, as the holy Ghost says; Gloria regum est in vestigare sermonem. The
Kings honor, is to search out a thing. Of him, that speaks not, nor asks a
question of him that speaks, it may be conceived, that he does not hear him;
For these two senses are so near of kin, that (as the Philosopher observes)
he that is borne dumb, is also deaf; And not only this, but likewise, that
the speech being taken away, the hearing is lost with it. The cause whereof
(according to Lactantius) is; for that the Organ, by which the Air is
received, and wherewith the Voice is formed, holds such Correspondencie with
that which goes unto the hearing, that if the first be shut or stopped, the
exercise of the second is likewise hindered. Upon information, and hearing,
follows in the next place, doing of Justice, whereof we will treat in the
Chapters following.

CHAP. XX. Of the Virtue of Justice, the natural sister, and Companion of
Kings.
We told you in the former Chapter that Hearing was the precisest, and
directest means for the doing of Justice. And therefore falls fitly out here
to treat thereof. Your Ancient Hieroglyfinists, as also your Saints, in their
writings, treating of this Virtue, compare it to a pair of weights or scales
with it is two balances. And it seems, that Nature herself made this
Ectypum, or Exemplar, this portrayture or delineation, shadowing it out in
every one of us, by giving us two ears, like unto those two balances, whose
truth depends on the Examen, or Aequilibrium, that tongue or needle, which
stands uppermost in the beam of the balance; making my application in this
manner, that the two ears, standing like two balances, on either side of the
head, they have their rule of truth from the supremest and highest part
thereof, where stands the tongue or needle of reason, and the judgment of
those things to their true weight, and measure, which are put into these
Intellectaull balances. To discourse therefore of Justice, is very essential
to that which has already been treated touching a Commonwealth; For (as we
told you in our very first Chapter) A Republic, or Commonwealth, is a
Congregation of many men, subject to the same Laws and Government, which is
not possible to be conserved, if Justice therein shall be wanting. Which gives
to every one, that which is his own, keeps men within the bounds of good
Order and Discipline, and bridles those by reason, which transported by their
unruly appetites, (like headstrong iades) would live without it, admitting no
curb, no manner of control, but following that Law of Viuat, qui vincit: Let
him wear a Crown, that winn's it. If Men would but observe that first rule of
the Law natural, consecrated by the mouth of our divine Master Christ. Quod
tibi non vis, Math. 7.12.
alteri ne feceris. Et quaecunque vultis vt faciant vobis homines, eadem facite
illis: Offer not that to another which thou would not have done to thy
self. And therefore, whatsoever ye would, that men should do to you, even so
do ye to them. There needed no other bullwarkes, or fortifications, to live
quietly and peaceably in the world. But after this same Lolium crept in, this
Tare, of Meum, and Tuum; the Cooler (as Chrysostom calls it) of Charity, the
Seminary of discordes and dissension, and the fountain of all mischief; men
found themselves obliged, nay enforced, to seek out some such means, or manner
of living, whereby every one might quietly and peaceably enjoy that, which he
held to be his own. And for this cause, they resolved to lead a joint life
together, submitting themselves to one and the same Laws, and subiecting
themselves to one and the same King, who should likewise keep and observe
them, and by justice conserve nourish, and maintain all other necessary
virtues for the augmentation and conservation of Common wealths. And for this
end, was given unto Kings that great power, which they have, holding in one
hand the balance of Justice, and in the other, the sword of power. Which that
naked weapon does represent, which is borne before them, when they enter with
authority and State into their Cities. And alluding either unto this, or those
ancient Insignia of your Judges, the Apostle Saint Paul says; Romans 13.3.
Vis non timere potestatem? Bonum fac: non enim sine causa gladium portat: Will thou be without fear of the power? Do well. For the Magistrate bears not
the sword for naught. Herodotus tells us that, which Cicero delivers unto us.
Cicero.
Eadem fuit legum constituendarum causa, quae regum. That one and the self
same, was the cause and Motive, of ordaining Laws, and Creating Kings. Whence
it follows, that there neither can be any Commonwealth without Justice, nor
any one that can deserve to be a King, unless he maintain and conserve it.
And though he may seem to be a King, yet in realitie of truth he is not.
Because he wants that principal attribute, that should make him be so; As a
painted man, which is no man, cannot properly be said to be a Man. The holy
Scripture, styles those Hypocrites, which do not administer Justice, for they
have no more in them of Kings, then the apparent, or outward show, as the
Scepter and the Crown, and other their regal roabes, and ornaments. And it is
worthy your consideration, and it is no more then what their holy Doctors and
learned Interpreters of divine Letters have observed; That a good King, and
Justice, are brothers and sisters, and so nearly twinn'd that you can scarce
make mention of the one, without the other. The Prophet Esaias, representing the
fervent desire of all the world, and the voices and cries of the Patriarchs,
who with such instance and earnestness did call for the coming of the Son
of God, says; Rorate coeli desuper, Esaias. 45.2.
and nubes pluant iustum, and iustitia eriatur simul: Ye heavens, send the deaw
from above, and let the clouds drop down righteousness, let the earth open,
and let salvation and Justice grow forth, let it bring them forth together.
And in another place, as if God did answer these the desires of the Just, he
says; Ierem. 23.5.
Ecce dies veniunt, dicit dominus, and suscitabo David germen iustum and
regnabit Rex, and Sapiens erit, and faciet iudicium, et iustitiam in terra,
Behold, the days come (says the Lord) that I will raise unto David a
righteous branch, and a King shall reign, and prosper, and shall execute
judgment, 3 King. 3.
and Justice in the earth. And in the third book of the Kings, God being
willing to grace and autorize the person of Solomon, who was the Type and
figure of the true King of Kings, our Savior Jesus Christ, had no sooner the
Crown set on his head, and the possession of the Kingdom settled upon him, but
there was presently offered and put into his hands a great occasion for to show
his prudence and wisdom, and his great nobleness and courage for to do
justice. The Case was a common and known Case; it was betwixt two women, that
were friends and Companions, who leading a lewd and dishonest life, were
delivered or brought to bed both at one time, and sleeping together in one bed,
the one of them being oppressed with a heavy sleep, ouer-layd her child, and
when she awaked, she found it to be dead. And at the same instant, without
being felt, or perceived bv her Companion, she puts me the dead child by her,
and took the living child to her self. But this theft could not be so
covered, for all her cunning carriage, but that the other knew, that the dead
child which was laid by her side, was not hers, but the living. The other with
a great deal of impudency, and dissimulation deny'de it. And because they
could not agree upon the business, they resolved to go to King Solomon before
whom the business was continued with the like stiffenesse, and obstinate
contestation, giving each other the Lie, and other the like bold and uncivil
speeches as is usual with such kind of women. The King, finding no more
proof nor reason of credit in the one, then the other, commanded a caruing
Knife to be brought into the open Court, and that dividing the living child
in the middst, the one half should be given to the one, and the other to the
other. Thereupon, the true Mother, trembling and quaking, and feeling that
knife already in her own bowels, which was to part her child in twain,
besought the King, that this his sentence might not be executed, but that the
child might be delivered over whole to the other. Which being well weighed and
considered by this wise King, and good Iusticer, he knew thereby, that she was
the true Mother and so gave order, that the child should be restored unto her.
And the holy Scripture says; That the same of this notable piece of Justice
was divulged far and near, and that there grew thence a great respect in all
the people of Israel toward this their most prudent King, who had with so much
judgment and wisdom, administered Justice. Audiait itaque omnis Israel
iudicium, quod iudicasset Rex, 3. King. 3.28.
et timuerunt Regem, videntes sapientiam Dei esse in illo ad faciendum
iudicium. All Israel heard the judgment, which the King had judged, and they
feared the King; for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to do
Justice. So that, when they saw how just a King he was, and with what a deal
of vprightnes, he did administer Justice, the people shouted for joy, and cried
out, that his wisdom was from heaven, and though he were then very young, they
began to fear and reverence him very much. And therefore if a king will be
beloved, esteemed, and respected of his subjects, he must be a just King. For,
most certain it is, that if Kings will pretend honor, authority, credit,
estimation, and respect, they cannot take any better course for it, then by
giving to every one, that which appertains unto him, with a just hand. Summum
in regibus bonum est (says Saint Gregory) iustitiam colere, Greg. lib. 7.
Epist. 120:
ac sua cuique iura seruare: It is the greatest goodness, and highest
commendation in Kings, to honor justice, and let every man enjoy his proper
rightes, and privileges. And so it is, that there is not any thing, whereby
Kings do more gain the Common voice, for the augmentation of their
authority, and increase of their Estates, or that does more incline the minds
of their subjects to respect, and obedience, then to know, that they are wise,
sincere, full of integrity, and of great zeal in the administration of Justice
For then all will willingly obey him, and heartily love him, living in an
assured hope that all his actions, will be measured, weighed, and crowned with
Equity, and Justice.

Let therefore the Conclusion of this discourse be; That (according to Plato)
the greatest praise, that can be given to a King, is in consideration of this
Virtue; for, (as we will show you by and by) it imbraceth all virtues in it
self. And there is not any Title more honorable, or that does so quadrare, so
square; and suit; with a King, as that of lust. whereby a King is made as it
were a God upon earth, and becomes like unto him in rewarding, and punishing.
Anaxagoras, and Homer, called Kings, Iovis discipulos, Jupiters Scholars;
because in imitation of the Gods, they did administer Justice. And anciently,
they were termed sacratissimi, most sacred. In effect, Justice is a virtue,
truly regal, and most proper unto Kings, because it appertains unto them by
Office, and does constitute them in their being of Kings; Diodor. Sicul. lib.
4. c. 1.
for without it, they cannot be. And therefore your Egyptian Theologians, with
one and the same symbol, which was an open-Eye, did signify both a king, and
Justice. For neither a king, without it; nor it, without a King, can perform
their office. And therefore Plato calls her the Ouerseer, Plato lib. 9.
delegibus.
and the Revenger of all things, in regard of that great vigilancie which Kings
ought to have in executing Justice, and in seeing and knowing, what passes in
the kingdom: for kingdoms for this cause are content to become subject unto
them, out of a confidence they have, that they shall be protected by them. This
is the thing (says Osorrus) that Kings must look unto; Osor: lib 4 de reg.
Instit.
This must be their chief care and study. In studium iustitia, omnes regis
curae et cogitationes, omnes labores, atque vigiliae, omnia denique studia
consumenda sunt. Ea namque a principio Reges creauit. The doing, or not doing
of Justice, is that, which either sets up, or pulls down Kings. And that King,
must make a new conquest of Kingdoms, If those, which he has already gained,
be not conserved and defended by the force and power of Justice, which, is the
maine pillar, and only prop to speak of, that vphodeth Kingdoms, without
which they cannot long last and continue. For God will most justly punish them,
by taking those from them, which they have, if they dissimulate iniustices, and
if they suffer themselves to be carried away contrary to all right and reason,
and permit notorious faults to pass without punishment: Other faults are not
so much risented in Kings, and Kingdoms are content to tolerate them, be they
never so great. But should they have never so many other good parts, if they
be faulty in this, which is of so great importance, they shall presently see
and perceive a public face of sorrow, and a general discontent in all their
subjects. And God oftentimes, makes it a means for the punishment, and
amendment of Kings and Kingdoms. It is the saying of Jesus the son of
Syrach; That by Counsel, Eccl. 10.8.
and Justice, Kingdoms are maintained. And for default thereof, Scepters and
Crowns, are lost, and Kingdoms transferred from one people to another. And
those brought to serve, which were borne to command. But the King that
administreth Justice, without respect of persons, shall have his succession
perpetual: for that is the very ground and foundation of a Throne royal.
Prou. 25.5.
Aufer impietatem de vultu regis, et firmahitur Iustitia thronus eius. Take
away the wicked from the King, and his throne shall be established in
righteousness. That is, His Issue, his House, and his Kingdom. Justice is that
which foundeth Kingdoms, which enlarges them, and conserueth them; That which
establishes peace, and resists war. Without it, there is neither King nor
Kingdom, nor Common-wealthe, nor City, nor any other Community which can be
conserved. And all whatsoever that have been ruined and destroyed, has been
for want of Justice. For this cause the Kings of Egypt, and in imi^^tion of
them, some others, did (which all good Kings ought to do) swear their
Presidents, Ministers, and Magistrates, that they should not obey their
mandatums, nor execute their orders and decrees, if they found in them, that
they commanded any thing contrary unto Justice, and the Laws of the Kingdom.
Philip the Fair, King of France, and his successor Charles the seventh,
enacted a Law, that the Judges should make no reckoning of the Kings Letters
nor those his royal scedules, unless they seemed unto them to be just, and
lawful. The Catholic Kings, Don Fernando, and Donna Isabella, and their
Nephew, Charles the fifth, by their well ordained Laws, Magistracies, and
Tribunals of so much power and authority, exceeded all before them, that
favored Justice. Which were augmented and enlarged by King Philip the second,
who was more particularly zealous of Justice. And his son King Philip the
third, was a great favorer and lover of Justice, and obseruer of the Laws,
submitting unto them his person, and his goods, Who might very well say, that
which the Emperor Traiane said, conferring great power on his Governor in
Rome; Thou shall use this sword, in our name, and for Us, as long as we shall
command that which is just; and against us, if we shall command the contrary.
For it is always to be presumed of the Intention of Kings, that they evermore
command Justice to be done, but never the contrary, though it make against
themselves. David gave thanks unto God, that he had set him in the way of
Justice; that is, That he had given him an upright heart, and informed his
understanding with so right a rule, that it inclined his disposition to do
justice, though it were against himself. The cause (says Diuus Thomas) why
God, for so many years did enlarge the Empire and Monarchy of the Romans,
with so much power, so much treasure, and so many great victories, was; for
that their rectitude and justice, which they observed toward all. But in that
instant, that they fell from this, their Empire likewise began to fall. Of
these Examples, all Histories, both humane, and divine, are very full; yet all
will not serve the turn, they do little, or no good. Let Gods mercy supply
this defect, and work this good. And let not the poor be discouraged and
disheartened, but let them comfort and cheer up themselves with this, that
their righteousness, and their patience shall not perish for ever. God has
spoke the word, and he will keep it. Psalm. 10.17.18.20.
The poor says the Psalmist, shall not always be forgotten, nor shall the
hope of the afflicted perish for ever. For he will take the matter into his
own hands, and will break the arm of the wicked and malicious, and will
help the fatherless and poor unto their right, that the man of earth be no
more exalted against them. Woe unto those, that are rulers of the people. Woe
unto those, that are unjust Kings; Which make Laws like Spiders cobwebbs;
whereinto, little starueling flies, fall and die; but your fat Bulls of Basan
break through, and bear them away in triumph on their horns. But that we
may touch no more upon this string, we will here hold our hand; and and go
on, in treating of Justice, and it is parts; A matter no less profitable, then
necessary, for Kings, and their Ministers.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Parts of Justice in common, and in particular of Justice
commutatiue.
D. Tho. 1. p q. 21 artic. 1 and. ^. 2 q. 61. art. 3. ^o^o de Iustitia. and
just lib. 3. Arist: 5. Ethic. cap. 2.1. Mat. 5.20. and 6. and 1.
TO the end that we may proceed with more distinction and clearenesse in this
Chapter, we are to presuppose with Diuus Thomas, and others, that Justice may
be said to be in Common two manner of ways. First of all under this general
name of Justice, is comprehended all kind of virtue, and thereof in this
sense, says the Philosopher, that Iustitia est omnis virtus; Justice includes
in it self all sorts of virtues whatsoever so that a just Man, and a virtuous
man is all one. And in this sense Christ conceived it, when he said, Nisi
abundauerit Iustitia; Except your righteousness exceed, etc. And in another
place; Attendite ne iustitiam vestram faciatis coram hominibus. Take heed that
ye do not boast your righteousness before men, to be seen of them. Of
justice, considered thus in the general, we will not now treat of in this
place; for in rigor and strictness, this is not true justice, though it have
some similitude therewith. Now Justice is taken after another manner for a
particular virtue. To wit, that, which is one of the four Cardinal virtues,
which has for it is object and end (as we shall tell you by and by) to give
unto every man that which is his right and his due. Of this (which is properly
Justice) do we here mean to treat; of whose Excellencies, all books are
full, and whereof, the Ancients said; That it is a celestial and divine
virtue, seated by God, in the minds of men. Vlpian says; That it is, Constans
et perpetua voluntas, quae tribuit cuique suum; A constant and perpetual Will,
Lib. 1. ff De Just. and i^:
attributing to every man his own. Plato he goes a little farther; adding,
that it is, singular, et vnicum donum, etc. The only singular gift, and the
greatest good, that God communicated unto Mortals here upon earth. For, from
thence arises Peace and Concord. This is it is work, and the end it
pretends; According to that of Esaias; Opus iustitiae pax. Esaias 32.17.
And the work of justice shall be peace, even the work of Justice and
quietness, and assurance for ever. And God himself, the Author, Cause, and
fountain of Justice, the first Title, and name that he took, when he created
the world, before that he had created Angels, men, and Beasts, was that of
Judge. Whereby we are to understand, that there was a Judge, and Justice in the
world, before any other thing was created. For, to have created a world,
without a Judge, or justice to govern it, and to punish humane excesses and
disorders, had been to make a den of Thiefes, and Robbers. For all Kingdoms
and Commonwealths, without Justice (says Saint Austen) had been nothing
else, but so many Armies, of Out-Lawes, Rebels, and highway Robbers. Aug.
lib. 4. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 14.
Remota Iustitia, quid sunt regna, nisi magna latrocinia. Take away Justice,
and what are kingdoms, but Latrocinatious, all kind of theft's, spoils, and
rogueries? Certain it is, that the first Judge, and Minister of Justice, that
was in the world, was God himself, who appointed Laws, and Precepts, who did
rule and govern without Kings, or other their substitutes, till Noah's time;
who was the first Governor of his people, to whom he gave order that he should
live in justice and righteousness; doing the like afterward to Moses, and
after him, to his anointed Kings. And therefore Esaias styles him Legislatorem,
a Lawgiver. Dominus Legifer noster; The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our
Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us. etc. And then in those days,
by the sole power and hand of their Kings, was Justice administered; And they
were called Judges, because they did judge according to the Laws; Isidor. lib.
Etymol.
And they took this name from Justice it self. Iudex dictus est, quasi ius
dicens populo: non ergo est Iudex, si iustitia in eo non est: He is called
Judge, of judging the people uprightly: And he is no Judge, if Justice be not
in him. His Object is Ius, or that which is just and lawful. And his office,
to offend no man; to do right unto all, to give every one that, which is his;
and what of right belongs unto him. This Justice has power to determine, how,
how much, and when, the good are to be rewarded and the bad punished; it is the
harmony of all good government, and whereby the world is sustained; and
wherewith as with meat and drink, the life of man is preserved. And if
Justice should fail, the world would presently return to that Chaos, and
confusion, wherein it was at the first. And for that this Virtue, is so
necessary for man's life, Aug. de Doctr. Christ.
Saint Austen says, that your ancient Kings did build and consecrate a Temple
thereunto. And that on the high Altar, there were engraven certain Letters,
which spoke thus: Justice, that is upright, and free from love, or hatred, is
the strongest chain, that a Kingdom has. Which suteth with that, Aristeas in
Hist.
which one of the seventy Interpreters told King Ptolomy (as Aristeas
reports it) who being demanded by him, how he might sustain himself in his
Kingdom, and hold concord and good correspondencie with so great a multitude
and variety of men, as were therein, replied: By preserving Justice, and
giving to every one what was fitting, and not otherwise. And this is so
manifest a truth, that Plutarch affirms; That not Jupiter himself, though
the greatest of the Pagan Gods, could be a good Governor without Justice. Ambr.
lib. 2. in Luc. Aug. lib. de du^de. abus.
In it (says S. Ambrose) is found the Concordancie of all virtues and without
it, there is neither consonancy, nor harmony. It is the Mistress of Man's life,
the extirper of Vice, the mother of peace, the defense of the Kingdom, the
treasure of a Commonwealth, the joy of men, the comfort of the poor, the cure
of the sick, Cicero: lib. 31 de Officijs. Plut in Moral. lib. de Doctr. pri^.
Lact. Tirm^lib. 3 cap. 22. and lib. lib. 5. cap 5. Scot. lib. 4. Distin. 46. q.
3. Anselm: in Prosolog. Plutarc: in Agesilao.
and the medicine of the soul. Cicero, calls her the Queen and Lady of the
Virtues: Plutarke would have her to be in respect of the rest, as the Sun
amongst the Stars. Firmianus affirms, that she is the mother of them all.
And as the Mother is before the Daughters; So Justice has the precedencie of
all other Virtues. Scotus, surnamed the Subtle, together with Anselmus say;
that if between Gods justice and mercy, there were any precedencie, Justice
would have the prime place. In fine, it is the foundation and ground of all
other virtues, and by which all ought to be regulated and ordered. And we
cannot indeare it more, then in saying; That if Justice should fail, all the
Virtues would fail. And if that only be kept, there will be little need of
the other. So said King Agesilaus. And it is Aristotle's Tenent; Arist: 3. Top.
cap. 2. 1.
That if Justice were publicly and truly administered, Fortitude, and other the
Virtues, would be superfluous. For one not iniurying another, all would be
peace, love, and charity. And it is a virtue very natural unto Man, who, in
his own nature, abhors Vice, and loves goodness, and what is honest. And
therefore amongst other things that are controuerted, Cicero says, Cicero lib.
1. de Leg:
that there is not any thing more certain to be known, then that Man was
borne for to do Justice. It is she that ordaines things for the common good,
and the good of our neighbor. And by how much the common is greater then the
particular; So much does this Virtue exceed others, that are ordained to a
particular person, or a man's own self. Finally, it is very necessary for the
conservation of the body, and the Salvation of the Soul. S. Tho. 2.^. q. So.
Art. 1.
Diuus Thomas, and others, whose names I silence say; That 24. Virtues side,
and take part with her, which they term Adiutrices, Helpers, which do serve
and accompany her in all her Actions. And making use of them, as of
Counsaylours, and Aduisers, she determines what is just, the good which is to
be followed, and the ill which is to be avoided, there being nothing, that has
not need of it is favor, Gregor. 6. quae. tu^r modis. 11. q. 3. de re iud. in
6. cap. 1.
and help. For, (according to Saint Gregory) it has four most potent
opposites, which make the rod of Justice to bow, and turn crooked, and to
falsify the tongue and beam of the balance. To wit; Hatred, Favor, Fear
and Interest. Now Justice is divided into two parts, which are, the honor of
God, and the love of our neighbor. Aristotle, did likewise consider two other
parts of Justice. One common, which is ordained for the Commonwealth, and the
other particular which is instituted for our neighbor. Which by another name,
they call Equity, which man using with reason, deals so with others, as he
would be dealt withal himself, upon the Common, which imbraceth and includes
all the rest, Patri. de Reg. lib. 8. Tit. 2.
Patritius founded his Commonwealth; And Plato his, upon the particular.
Others divide it into four parts, or species, into Divine, Natural, Civil,
and Judicial. Which the Schoolmen do define and declare at large, unto whom I
remit the Reader. But laying aside these divisions, Scolastici cum D. Tho. 2.2
q 80 art. 1.
which make not for our purpose, the most proper and essential division of
Justice, is into Commutatiue, and Distributive. Which (as Diuus Thomas says)
are the parts Subiectiuae or subiectiue parts of this Justice; that is to say,
it is essential Species. And therefore we will treat of these two, and that very
briefly. And first in the first place of the Commutatiue, and in the second of
the distributive.

Justice Commutatiue, Contractiue, or Venditiue, (for all these names your
Authors give it, for the matter of Commutations, Arist. 10. Met: Tit. 18.
Contracts and Sales, wherein it is exercised, is considered betwixt two, party
and party, which are a part of that whole body of the Commonwealth, which
give, and take, between themselves, by way of Contract, or Sale. It Is end, and
object, is equality, and proportion, between that, which is given; and that,
which is received; without respect unto the persons which buy, and sell, but to
that which is contracted, sold, or commutated, that there may be an equality
and proportion had, betwixt that, which is given, and taken. And when in this
there is a defection, it is contrary to Commutatiue Justice. The distributive,
is considered between the whole, and it is parts. The. Medium of this Virtue,
does not consist in the equaltie of thing to thing, but of the things to the
persons; for, as one person surpasses another, so the thing, which is given to
such a person, exceeds that part, which is given to another person. So that
there is an equality of proportion between that, which is more, and that
which is less; but not an equality of quantity, to wit; So much to the one,
as to the other. For those, which in a Commonwealth, are not equal in
dignity, and desert, ought not equally to enjoy the Common goods thereof, when
they are reparted and divided by the hand of distributive Justice; As we shall
show you by and by, when we come to speak of the Commutatiue, which treates of
equalizing and according that, which men's disordinate appetites, and boundless
covetousness does disconcerte, and put out of order, every one being desirous
to usurp that for himself, which of right appertains, and belongs to
another, whence arise your cosenages and deceits in humane Contracts, and
whence do resulte those contentions, dissensions, and suits in Law. And to
occur and meet with these inconveniences, from the Alcalde of the poorest
Village, to the highest and supremest Tribunal, those pretenders may appeal,
if they cannot obtain Justice in those inferior Courts. And therefore in
Castile, in the Counsel Royal it is called by way of excellency, Conscio de
Iusticia The Counsel of Justice. And in all well ordered Monarchies and
Commonwealths, Exodus 18. Deuteronomy. 1.
there is evermore careful provision made for this necessity, dispersing in
diverse Tribunalls, the fittest men for administering Justice, as we have
formerly related of that great Lawgiver Moses. And in the second book of the
Chro. it is said of King Iehosaphat, that he appointed Audiences, and
Tribunalls in all the principal Cities of his kingdom, and those ever at
their very gates and entrance, that the Negociants and suitors might the more
easily meet with the Ministers of Justice (for this is the chiefest provision,
which a King should make for kis Kingdom) indearing to them all the faithful
administration thereof, and that with such grave words, and such effectual
reasons, that they deserve to be written in golden Letters upon all the seats
and Tribunalls of your Judges. 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
Videte, quid faciatis; non enim hominis exercetis iudicium, sed Domini; Et
quodcunque iudicaueritis, in vos redundabit. Sit timor domini vobiscum, and cum
diligentia cuncta facite; non est enim apud dominum deum nostrum iniquitas, nec
personarum acceptio, nec cupido munerum: Take heed what ye do, for ye
execute not the judgment of man, but of the Lord; and he will be with ye in
the cause and judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon ye.
Take heed, and do it; for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God;
neither respect of persons, nor receiving of reward. The first thing that he
admonishes them of, is; Videte, quid faciatis. Take heed, what ye do. Look
well about ye, and have an eye to what ye do. Hear, see, and consider, take
time and leisure, be not ouer-hasty in sentencing a suit, till ye have studied
the case well and thoroughly, and are able as well to satisfy others, as your
selves. Using that care and circumspection, Job. 29.16.
as did that just man Job. Causam, quam nesciebam, diligentissime inuestigabam.
When I knew not the cause, I sought it out diligently; As if his life had lain
upon it. Alciat says; That the Tribunes had at the gates of their houses the
Image of a King, sitting in his throane, having hands, but no eyes; And
certain Statuas about him, seeming to be Judges, having eyes, but no hands;
Whereby they declared the Office of a King, and the duty of Judges, painting
him with hands, and them without them; but with as many eyes as that fabulous
Argos had; or like unto those Mystical beasts, Apoc. 4.7.
which Saint John saw full of eyes within, and on every side. To show that they
should study, see, and examine causes, and all whatsoever passes in the
Commonwealth, and to inform the King thereof; who is to have hands, and
Arms, courage, and power, for execution.

Again, that good King puts them in mind that it is not man's, but Gods Office
that they take in hand, whose proper Office is to judge: And therefore in the
Scripture, your Judges are called Gods. And since that they are his
Lieuetenants, let them labor for to do Justice, as God himself does. For I
must be so bold as to tell them, that there is a reuiewing of the business,
and a place of Appealing in the supreme Counsel of his divine Justice. And
there the Party pretending does not deposite his thousand and five hundred
ducats, but the Judge, who lies at stake for it, and if he shall Judge amiss,
he is to pay all costs and charges, and suit of Court. Quodcunque
iudicaueritis, (says that good King) in vos redundabit. Whatsoever ye shall
judge it shall light upon your selfs. He threatens that, which God delivers
in the book of Wisdom to the Kings and Judges of the earth: Audite ergo
Reges, and intelligite Iudices terrae: Hear me, ye that rule and govern the
world, and ye that glory in the multitude of nations that are subject unto
you, and understand, that the power that ye have is from God, and that he is
to make a Quaere, and inquire of your Actions and thoughts. And for that being
his Ministers, ye have not judged according to his will, nor kept his laws,
nor done Justice, Wisd. 6.5.
Horrendae and cito apperebit vobis: Horibly, and suddenly will he appear unto
you. He that is most low shall find mercy with him, but the mighty, shall be
mightily tormented. All these are the words of the wisdom of Solomon, and
which are not to escape the memory of Kings, and their Ministers. And
Iehosophat, as a remedy unto all; prescribes unto his Judges and
Counselors, one good Counsel, and sound advise, which is this; That in all
the sentences they shall pronounce, that they set before their eyes the fear
of God. Chrysostom. in Sermon. Joan Bapt. Aug. ad fratres in Erem. ser. 35.
For, (as both Saint Chrysostom and S. Austin affirm) it is easy for him to
swarne from Justice, who fears not God in what he does. As likewise, that
they should dispatch businesses with diligence. For there are some, that
endeavor to eternize suits. And why they do so, God, and the world knows.
Bribery and Corruption are the Raemoras, that stop the course of Justice, and
the cause, that suits are so long depending before they be brought to a
conclusion; to the confusion and undoing of those that follow them, who are
feign, by deferring, to deferring, and putting over from hearing to hearing, to
sell their very clothes from their backs to wage Law. And when at last with
much ado, they have sentence past on their side, they are never a whit the
better for it, but is converted into gall and bitterness, for that his suit
has cost him seuentimes more, then it was worth. Amos 6.12.
To such Judges as these, suteth that of the Prophet Amos: Conuertistis in
amaritudinem, Iudicium; and fructum iustitiae in Absinthium: Ye have turned
judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into worme-wood.
Furthermore, says that good King; Consider that ye occupy Gods place, who
wrongeth no man, nor is an Accepter of Persons. Ye must administer Justice
equally to all, giving to every one, that which is his, and of right belongs
unto him, without any other humane respect. For Justice acknowledges neither
Father nor Mother nor friend, but mere Truth. Cleon took leave of his
friends, when he was made a Judge. And Themistocles refused Magistracy, saying
That he would not possess that place, where his friends could not be in better
condition with him, then his foes. Lastly, he tells them, that he would not have
them to be covetous, nor receivers of rewards. And therefore are they pictu'rd
without hands, because they should not have the faculty and gift of taking. Non
accipies personam, nec manera. Deuteronomy. 16.19.
It is Moses his Advise in Deuteronomy. Wrest not thou the Law, nor respect any
person, neither take reward. For the reward blinds the eyes of the wise, and
peruerteth the words of the Just. Justice should be like unto the sun, whose
light costs us nothing, and is neither bought, nor sold. Non licet in di^i
(says Saint Austin) vendere iustum iudicium: It becomes not a judge, to sell
just judgment: All this appertains to Commutatiue Justice; And to that
obligation likewise which kings have to cumply with whatsoever bargains or
contracts have bin formally made, without acceptance of persons, for he is not
to regard them, but the truth. To this Justice, appertains likewise, the
giving, and paying of soldiers, their reward, and their pay: For they do
tacitly make a contract with their Prince to serve him in that Ministry for so
many Ducatts a month; And this is due unto them in all Justice and right. For
otherwise, there should not be an equality, between a Soldiers pains and
his pay. Nor ought he to put them off with delays, remitting the remuneration
of their service to other Ministers, seeing that they serve them in their own
persons, and that the obligation is reciprocal. And therefore a certain bold
Soldier told Augustus Caesar, who thought he had done him a great favor in
recommending him by a fauourit of his to those of the Counsel of war, that
they might hear him, and do him Justice; Sir (said he) when your Honor and
Authority ran so much hazard, and your person put to great peril, did I
depute another in my place to fight for me? And therewith all vnbuttoning his
dublet, he showed him the wounds which he had received in his body in his
defense. By which he obliged him to hear his cause himself, and to give
present order that he should be well and truly paid. And when they in the
service of their king, shall do more then they are bound unto, as some which
vnder-go brave and noble attempts, ieoparding their life's in such kind of
desperate enterprises, howbeit commutatiue Justice obliges not to give them
more then their ordinary pay, yet in a just gratification, it is required of
Kings, that they should reward and honor them; according to the quality of
their persons, and services. For a just King, ought not to leave any service
unrewarded, nor any fault unpunished. For Praemium, Paenae, Reward, and
Punishment, are those two Plummets, which keep the clock of the Commonwealth
in good Order.

But to give a conclusion to this first part, I say; That Justice ought to be
in all, and with all, all equal and complete. And for this cause she is called
Flos, a flower. Giving us thereby to understand, that to all she should be
Florida, fresh and flourishing. Not being like a dry rotten stick to some, and
full of sweetness to others. And as in a tree, after the flower follows the
fruit; So likewise is it to be conceived, that in kings and Judges, this Virtue
is not true, if it consist only in the leaf and the flower, and do not come
to bear fruit. And therefore in the sacred Scripture, those that do not as
well in deed, as in show, truly and uprightly administer Justice, are called
Hypocrites; for that they have no more of Kings and Judges, then the bare name,
and Title. They ought to be Vina Lex, and Ius animatum; the very life and soul
of the Law, that Men may come unto them, not as to a Man, but as to equity,
and justice it self. They must have their plummet and their Lines run even
and level toward all: Their Vare, or rod of Justice, must not be too short
for some, and too long for other some. Let Right strike the stroke, and let no
man be denied Justice. For this is to be Kings, and Judges; this, to be common
fathers to all, poor and rich, great and small, mean and mighty. Deuteronomy. 1.16.
Audite illos (says God) et quod iustum est, iudicate, sieve Ciuis ille sit,
sieve perigrinus, nulla erit distantia per sonarum, ita paruum audietis, vt
magnum, nec accipietis cuiusquam personam quia dei iudicium est. Hear the
controversies between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man
and his brother, and the stranger that is with him. Ye shall have no respect
of (...) in judgment, but shall hear the small as well as the great; ye shall
not fear the face of man, for the Judgment is Gods.

CHAP. XXII. Of Justice Distributive.
IT appertains to distributive Justice (as we told you in the former Chapter)
to repart and divide in a convenient and fitting manner the goods, the honors,
dignities and Offices of the Commonwealth. For (as Dionysius says) Bonum, est
diffusinum: Good, is a diffusiue kind of thing, it is a scatterer, and of it
self, a spreader of it self. And by how much the greater the good is, by so
much with the greater force does it communicate it self. And hence does it
come to pass, that God is so liberal and so exceeding bountiful as he is
(that I may not say prodigal) with men, by communicating himself unto them by
all possible means, even to the communicating of himself by that most
excellent and highest kind of manner, that he could possible devise, which
was, by giving himself to himself, and by submitting himself so low as to
become true man, that man might be exalted so high, as to be made equal with
God, by that ineffable and divine union, which the Divines call Hypostaticall.
So that you see, that Good, in its own condition and nature, has this
property with it to be communicable, and by so much the more, by how much the
more great it is. And herein, kings ought to be like unto God, whose place they
supply here on earth; for certainly, by so much the more properly shall they
participate of good Kings, by how much the more they shall have of this (...)
quality. And so much the nearer shall they resemble God, with by how much the
more liberality they shall repart and diffuse these outward goods, whose
distribution appertains unto them. And ^o him cannot the name of King truly
suit, who has not always a willing mind, and as it were a longing desire, to
communicate himself. Now, for to temper and moderate this general longing,
and inflamed desire, and this so natural and proper and appetite, of bestowing
and dividing the riches, and common goods of the Commonwealth, this part of
Justice, which they call Distributive was held the most necessary. Which
Aristotle says, either is, or ought to be in a King, as in such a Lordly
subject, and person, to whom this repartition and communication, properly
belongs. Wherein, above all other things, Kings ought to use most
circumspection, prudence, and care, for that therein, they usually suffer most
cosenage, and deceit: For, in regard that to give, is in it self so pleasing
and delightful a thing; and so properly appertaining to their greatness, and
State, they do easily let loose the reins to this noble desire, and send
gifts this way and that way, in such post haste, that within a few days they
run themselves out of all, and draw dry not only the Kings particular wealth
and treasure, but the riches of the whole kingdom, were they never so great.
So that, what is done in this kind with so much content and pleasure, ought to
be done but now and then: for such great courtesies, and extraordinary
kindnesses, must not be made too common, for fear of drawing on a dis-esteeme
of them; nor done but in their due time and season, not unadvisedly,
beforehand, and upon no merit or desert, but when others want and necessity,
and his own honor and nobleness, shall oblige him to express his bounty:
And in good sooth, there is not any Moathe, which does so consume, nor any
Caterpiller or Grasse-hopper, that does so crop and destroy the power of well
doing, and the virtue of Liberality, as the loose hand, that can hold nothing,
and in a lavish and disproportionable manner scatters it is Donatiues, with so
unequal a distribution, that the dignity of the gift, is drowned in the
indiscretion of the giver. And therefore, as it is in the Spanish Proverb.
which speaks very well to this purpose; Part dar, y tener, seso es menester: A
very good brain it will crave, to know when to spend, when to save. Yet
mistake me not I beseech you, for it is no pa^^ of my me^ning, no^ did it ever
come within my thought, or desire, to persuade Kings to be close fisted, and
covetous, a Vice to be hated and abhorred in all men, but in them much more.
That which I say it; That, to the end that may not be wanting unto Kings; which
does so much importe them and is so proper unto them, as to give rewards, and
bestow f^ it is fit, that they should do these things so, that they may be
able to do them often. And according to the old saying; To give so at one
time, as we may give a^ another* Your Trees in holy Scripture, are sometimes
taken for the Hieroglyffe, or Emblem of Kings, for that they are in some
things like unto them; Whereof, we shall speak hereafter. But that, which makes
now for our present purpose, is; That the tree, showing such a la^genes,
spreadingnes, and bountifullnesse, in discovering it a fruit through it is
boughs and branches, and it is inuiting us, and presenting it is provision unto
us, first in the flower and blossom, to the end we may come to gather that
fruit, which yearly it brings forth in its due time and season; and yet
notwithstanding, hides and concealeth it is roots all that it can, because
there lies that fountain, from whence all this good does spring. As also, for
that if in that part it should suffer any hurt or detriment, all the rest would
cease; nor would it flourish and fructify any more. And I am of opinion that
(...) Kings cannot content themselves with conferring of favors, and bestowing
of gifts out of those fruits and (...) ^s, Which shall arise out of their
yearly revenues, but that the very rents, rayzes, Rayz. is properly the root
of a tree, or any, other plant. Metophorictlly Rayzes, are inheritances, or
possessions, in lands, houses, or immouable goods, because these cannot be
rooted out, nor removed from place to place as your moveable goods may be.
Bien^ rayzes del Reyno. is Crown Land, which neither can nor ought to be
alienated Conarr. verb. Rayzes. b. Iuro. reales. is a certain royal rent,
raised throughout a whole Kingdom; so called a Iure for the obligation
subjects have to maintain their Kings. In consideration whereof they are bound
to administer justice truly, and to keep them in peace. Ib. Verb. Iuro. Dan.
4.17.
and juros reales, shall be given away in perpetuity, or for one or two life's,
which is a kind of rooting or gr^bbing up of the tree; the King shall thereby
be dis^nabled, and deprived for ever of the fruit of those mercedes and
favors, which he might from time to time, not only yearly, but daily, and
howerly, have afforded many of his good and well deserving subjects. As did
that other, who, because they should not trouble him with coming unto him, to
crave of the fruit, of a very good tree which he had in his Garden, caused it
to be rooted up, and to be sent amongst them, to make their best of it; whose
fruit, had he let the tree stand, might have plea^u^d a many, and that many a
time and often, whereas (...) it could but content a few for the present, and
peradventure, not so well pleased neither, because thereby all (...) was taken
from them of having the like again. Alexander the great, who was very liberal
in his gifts, said once to this purpose* I like not that Gardener, that pulls up
the trees of his garden by the root: Giving thereby to understand, that a King
is a fair beautiful, and dainty delicate Garden, wherein (like so many trees)
are planted, the King^ rents, and (...), and whiles the rayzes, be ready of
them, shall (...) and whole, they may yield good store of fruit, but if they
come once to be rooted up, they presently grow thy, and wither away. In the
fourth Chapter of the Prophecy of D^ie^ is set down that (...), wherein the
King of Babylon Nabucodon^sor, saw that huge high ^ee whose top did reach up to
Heaven, and whose boughs did stretch and extend themselves to the uttermost
ends of all the earth, and so laden with ^ir, that there was provision and
sustenance sufficient for all the Men and beasts of the world, and was a shadow
and shelter unto all that came under it. And Daniel, by the help of the divine
Spirit, declaring this dream, told him; Arborem, quam vidisti* tu es Rex. The
tree that thou saw, is thou, O King. That tree, was an express
signification, of that King, and of the Vastnes and greatness of his
Monarchy, and of that which conueneth, and is proper to such Monarckes. Which
is: To communicate their fruit to all, To sustain and maintain their
subjects, and to hugg, and defend them under the shadow of their wings; And
this is said to have been, and to have contineued with that Monarke; whilst
the tree stood whole and sound: But the Dream, and it is declaration, proceeded
farther, and Daniel told the King; That after he had seen the beauty and
greatness of that tree, he heard likewise a most strong and fearful voice
from Heaven, pronouncing a most heavy and rigorous sentence, that the tree
should be hewn down, and the boughs lopt off, and so wholly and utterly
destroyed, that the creatures that came thither and were fed and maintained by
it is fruit, fled thence, and forsook it. Yet the stump of the roots thereof
was left in the earth, and bound about with a bond of brass, and iron, etc. In
this dream, were signified three things, declared by the self same Prophet,
with the same Spirit of God. First, The fall of that King and Kingdom, in
those lopt boughs, and the hewing of it down, and leaving it fruitless;
Secondly, That which usually befalls Kings, who not having wherewithal to
give, all those do leave and forsake him, which before did follow him.
Thirdly, That when the roots remain, there is hope that it may be restored,
and return to its former greatness: As was to be seen in this King, whom God
so severely punished for his sins. For the roots of the said tree remained
still whole and sound, and were a most certain prognostication, and assured
hope, that he was to be restored to his former Estate. So that when in
Kingdoms, the Rayzes of the rents royal, remain whole and entire, though in
the giving away of the fruits* there be much bounty and liberality used,
those breaches may be made up again, which are occasioned by so large a hand;
But when the rayzes are grub'd up, when the root that should give sap and
life, is gone, there is not any means of restoration to be made or found,
though Kings should charge their Kingdoms with never such excessive tributes,
and draw (as they say) the very heart blood from forth their subjects bodies.
In a word therefore, there ought to be had in giving* Order, Moderation, and
Temperance; For a Prince, that gives without these conditions, is not Liberal,
but Prodigal, a great scatterer and waster, and if not contenting himself
with the fruits of the tree, he will have a pull at the roots, Lord have
mercy on that Land, for it is to be feared, that King will turn Destroyer.
Giving has it is times, it is tax, it is ^umes, and it is orderly manner in the
doing thereof. The excess whereof, does cross and contradict distributive
Justice. Wherein is to be considered the kings ability; then the services and
merits of the persons; and last of all the Distribution it self, which must be
done with discretion and prudence. For all must not be thrown upon one either
part, or party; nor kings be like rivers; which rising out of their bedds,
breaking forth beyond their bounds, undo some, and enrich others; robbing
many, to raise one. God free every good Commonwealth from such distributions
as these, which are rather destructions then distributions, and actions of
Injustice, not of Justice. And God (I beseech him) so illighten the
understanding and hearts of Kings, that they may in an orderly kind of manner
confer their favors, and give rather reasonable rewards to many, then
extrauagant ones to a few. For the rain does then most good, when all have the
comfort of it. But when it powers down in one place alone, that marrs and
spoils all. Some grounds for want thereof are parched and dried up; and other
some, by too much, are overflowed, and made fruitless. In like manner a King,
showring down all the water of his liberality upon one particular person, it
cannot but breed a general discontent and ^anguishment, in all the rest of
his subjects. And more is the hurt, which resulteth from those, that are
offended with the great favors conferred on others, then the good that arises
from those that are benefited by them. For the first never forget the wrong
they think they have received; And the second treat of that they have
received, as of a due debt. And all these, and a great many more inconveniences
grow from the not true observing of this distributive Justice. Let Kings
confer favors on their public Ministers, and upon such persons, as have
done them great and notable services, both in Peace, and in War: for this
will be well pleasing, and very acceptable unto all, and will oblige them all
to new services; And such a general content will it cause in all sorts of
people, that it will make them to brook with the better patience those great
favors, which are undeservedly done unto others, being in themselves men of no
merit in the world* I would not have Kings to be too much carried away with the
inclination of their own minds, for as they are Kings, they will evermore be
apt to give much. But I would have them to place their eyes, as also their
consideration, upon the quality of the person, to whom they give, according to
the rules of Distributive Justice. For from that in the receiver, and this in
the Giver, is formed that Temperance, Moderation, and Equity, which gives
liberality it is being, and makes it to be a virtue Heroical, and worthy Kings;
Which, if it be failing in either of these, the one, or the other, it shall
merit no such name; as you shall see by and by, when we come to conclude this
discourse; wherein we advertise those that give, that it shall be much
prudence, and make likewise much for the good of the party himself, that
receives, to go leysurely along with him in these Mercedes, and favors. For
this difference* I find to be between offenses, and punishments, favors, and
benefits, that the first are done but once, because in discretion they will not
go daily nourishing the passion of those who receive the harm thereby, and
stand in fear lest the like ill might happen unto them selves. As for the
second, it is fitting that they be done often, giving now a little, and then a
little, that it may the better penetrate the palate, and please the taste of
him that receives them; As in our bodily meats* and drinks, bit after bit,
and draught after draught, agrees better with our health, and taste, then
gross feeding and fall cups. Besides, this fair and frequent distribution,
cannot but cause a more settled love in those persons on whom they are
bestowed, as also in those, who live in expectation of the like.

CHAP. XXIII. How, and in what sort, Limitation in giving, may suit with the
Greatness of Kings.
NOw I see the reply, and the Argument, which may be made against that, which
we have mentioned in the former Chapter. For this same sising of Kings favors,
and these same short bounds of bounty, wherein some would shut them up, seems
no way compatible with the authority and greatness of Kings; Especially on
such occasions, wherein they are forced to bestow them upon persons that are
deseruingly qualified for them, and that have done notable services, who are
not to be gratified with small gifts; nor may that seem to be much, which is
given but once. First of all I answer hereunto, that it stands with good
reason, that they, who have spent their means, and the better and greater part
of their lives, in the service of their King and Commonwealth, should be
recompensed according to the quality of their persons and services, when Kings
are well able to do it, without putting themselves in necessity, or charging
their subjects (which they too usually do) with extraordinary Impositions. And
if it be well considered, the maine drift of our former Chapter was, that
things might be so ordered, that Kings might have wherewithal to give upon such
like occasions. That therefore which I say, is this; That they ought to hold
their hand in those Gifts, which they give merely upon their own pleasure and
humor, that they may the better cumply with those which lie upon them by way
of obligation. For they, that have under their charge and Command such a
multitude and number of subjects, it is not meet, that they should confer
many and great favors upon a few, and few or none upon many; showing grace
unto some with that, which in Justice is due unto others, whose often sweats,
perpetual labor, and extreme need, serve now for riches, regalos,
intertainments, and annual rents to those, who in all the whole course of
their life, never knew what it was to moyle and toil, or to take any pains
for the Commonwealth. Nay, which is more (and it grieueth my soul to speak
it) the sweat, and blood of poor laboring men, is converted into rose^water,
for to feed their delights and pleasures, and that in such wastfull, riotous,
and loose intertainments, as certainly beseems not Christians but Epicures
and Sardanapalians, Amos. 6.1.
who did deny the immortality of the soul. Woe unto them (says God) that
are at ease in Syon, woe unto you great Potentates and Rulers over the people,
who enter in state into the Temples, and go thence in pomp: who delight in
lasciviousness, lying upon bedds of yuory: who eat the Lambe^ of the flock
and the Calfes out of the stall; who drink wine in bowls, and annoint
themselves with the chief ointments; who sing to the sound of the Violls, and
invent to themselves instruments of Music; no man in the mean while being
sorry for the afflictions of Joseph, or taking pity and compassion of those
poor miserable wretches, who must wring and smart to maintain these their
idle and unnecessary vanities. But the world will be altered with these men one
day, and a time shall come, wherein (as that Princely Prophet says. Psalm.
58.10.11.
) Laet^bitur justus, cum viderit vindictam; manus suas la^abit in sanguine
peccatorum: The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he shall
wash his hands in the blood of the wicked. And men shall say, Verily there is
fruit for the righteous; doubtless there is a God, that judges in the earth.
Then shall Lazarus rejoice and be glad in Abraham's bosom; and the rich Glutton
lying in Hell, shall beg a dropp of cold water and have no body to give it
him. And if any man should say unto me that the Grandeza, and Greatness of
Kings, requires, that great rewards should be given both to the one, and the
other. My answer unto him is; That nothing better becomes Kings, for the
conseruing of their Greatness, then to know that they are but men, and that
they cannot stand in Competition with God, whose fountain of riches, is
infinite, and is able to fill and satisfy all, and never can be drawn dry,
though it be imparted and distributed to never so many. Whereas that of men, is
but like unto the water of a Cisterne, which by being communicated to many is
diminished and exhausted. King Nabucodonosor, and other Kings (of whose falls,
there is mention made in the Scripture) for default of this knowledge, fell from
their estates: And let that tree, whose top touched heaven, and whose boughs
did ouerspread the whole world (whereof we so lately made mention) serve now
the second time for an Example, which going about to embrace all in it is own
arms, and to give sustenance in abundance to all, and pretending to exalt it
self as high as heaven, did pay the price of this it is pride, authority, and
Signorie: and did so far provoke Gods anger against it, that he commanded it
to be hewn down, and that being laid level with the earth, it might
acknowledge, how much limited, and how short was it is power. Sithence therefore
that it is not possible for Kings to use much liberality and bounty toward
all, there is a great deal of reason, why they should forbear voluntary
Donatiues for to discharge obligatory paiments; whereunto in rigor of Justice,
he is strictly bound. James. 5.4.
The Apostle Saint James says; That the debtes, which are due unto them, that
have done service, cry unto God, and that the tears of the poor ascend up
unto Heaven, to the end that from thence may come forth a writ of Execution
against those, that have been the cause thereof. And your Catholic and
Christian King are not to place their greatness and authority, on that, as
did your Heathen Kings, and those that were without the light of faith. Who
pretended nothing else in their gifts and favors, but vainglory, and the
idle applause of the world. According to that saying of our Savior Jesus
Christ. Luke 22.25.
Reges gentium dominantur^orum and quipotestatem habent super eos, benefici
vocantur. The Kings of the Gentiles reign over them, and they that bear rule
over them, are called Bountiful. True authority, and Greatness, does not
consist, in Magnificencies, and Prodigalities, which are not regular, and ruled
by reason: Which requires, to cumply first with what is due, and that neither
Kings, nor their subjects, should thrust themselves in^ necessity and want, to
satisfy the ambition and covetousness of those, who (as Solomon says) like
unto Horse-leaches; Prou. 30.15.
Semper dicunt, Affer, Affer, still cry; Give, Give. That, which distributive
Justice requires, is; That Kings should repart the common goods of the
Republicke, conformeable to the meritts and services of every one; preferring
always the public, before any particular good, and jointly with this, that
they go clinching the hand for a while, that they may afterward stretch it
out more at large, when it shall be fitting for them so to do. And this is
Liberality, that virtuous and noble Mean, between those vicious Extremes,
Avarice, and Prodigality.

When our Savior Christ had sufficiently fed that great multitude which
followed him into the desert, they no sooner found themselves full, but they
presently resolved amongst themselves to make him their king. And this their
determination, grew from two things which they saw to be in him. The one his
noble disposition* in affording them such free and plentiful intertainment;
The other for his great prudence and good government, in giving order that the
pieces of bread, and other the fragments that were left, John 6.13.
should be gathered up. Colligite, qu^ superouerunt fragmeta, ne pereant.
Gather up the broaken meat, which remains, that nothing be lost. Nor did he
do this, that he had need to set it up, or keep it to serve at some othere
time upon the like occasion; for he could (as often as he would have made bread
of stones; but to instruct, and teach Kings to know both to spend, and save,
to give, and hoord up, where, how and when it is fitting, in regard that their
power is limited.

Moreover Kings are to consider that they, who at one clap receive much from
them, grow so fat and pursie, that they are not able to serve and follow them
as they were wont, and sometimes they retire themselves, and nere return
again, to see either King or Court, unless mere Covetousness, and
greediness of gain draw them thither to beg, more and more, Genesis 8.7.
and to cramme their purses. Being like unto that Crow which Noah sent out of
the Arc, who as soon as he had found firm footing, and whereon to feed his
fill, never came back again. Kings Palaces are like Noah's Arc, where there is
a great diversity in the Conditions of men; and generally you shall meet
there with more Crows, then Doves. And here, I will with your good leave, take
a little liberty, to divert my self from the Testimonies of Holy Scripture,
to those of Great Kings and Monarckes, some of one nation, and some of another.
And the first, that I shall begin withal, shall be king Don Alonso of Sicily,
who walking along by the Seaside, caused many gobbets of flesh, some great,
and some small, mingled one amongst another to be brought unto him, and still
as the Crows (which were many) came about him, to some he threw out the
lesser, to other the larger morsells. Those that went away with the great
gobbets, came no more in sight, but fled their way; but those that had but a
small pittance, and were not so full gorged, they followed the King whether so
ever he went, and never forsook him. Who told those that were then about him;
In this (my Masters) ye may see, how much it imports Kings to distribute
their favors with moderation and temper. Philip King of Macedon, did much
reprehend his son Alexander for being too lavish of his favors, and too
excessive in his gifts. Telling him, that thereby he perverted the minds of
those, that were to serve him, who in stead of serving him with that love and
loyalty which in duty they were bound unto, they would now only serve him for
their own particular interest, and proper commodity making, by this means,
affection and fidelity become a kind of trading, and merchandising. And
certainly so it is, that when men's minds make interest their Aim, and daily
to get more and more, they become saleable, and tender their service to those,
that will give them most. And they, which do thus accustom themselves to crave
and take, the love of friendship and that thankful acknowledgement, which is
due to the Doner, is turned into interessed Love; which is called by the name
of Concupisence, And are (as the Comicke Poet says) like unto those lewd
huswifes which, Amore carent, munus amantis amant; Love not so much the man, as
his money, nor his person, as his purse. You shall seldom see a man, that is
(as they say) a Pediguenno, a craving Companion, one that is still begging one
thing or other, that has not some touch of Covetousness, and some tincture
more or less of vnthankefullnesse. For, in regard that these men love
themselves, and their own interest so well, they have not one drop of love
left for others, and if any do remain, they confer it on a third person,
through whose hands, that which they pretend is to pass. And the King, and
Prince, to whom all is due, rest deprived of two things, that are the most
substantial and of most importance for the conservation, perpetuation, and
augmentation of his Kingdom, which are their subjects Love, and Thanks. For
the truest kind of Reigning and the likest to Gods kingdom, is to gain the
hearts of their subjects, and to make themselves (as much as in them lies)
Lords and Masters of their good Wills. And it is our daily experience, to see
persons that have been highly and richly gratified, and extraordinarily well
rewarded* to have proud very unthankful. For, this fault great benefits have
with them, and such as are dis-equall to the deserts of those persons that
receive them, that they are not thankfully accepted of; And those that are
benefitted, to the end that they may not bewray this their imperfection (being
such, as it is no less, then so great a sin, as ingratitude) they soon
learn to forget them; but those that are conferred on others, never slip out
of their remembrance. In a word, of all that that is begged, and of all them
that beg, few there are, that forbear to go this way. In confirmation
whereof, we may allege here that question, which Christ made to one of those
ten Leapers which he healed, showing himself not half well pleased with the
rest of his fellows. Nonne december mundati sunt, Et nouem vbi sunt? Non est
inuentus, qui rediret and daret gloriam Deo, nisi hic Alienigena: Luke 17.17.
Are there not ten cleansed? But where are the nine? There is none found, that
returned to give God praise, save this stranger. In Kings Palaces, your
strangers and those that are newly come to Court, are your only thankful men*
For those, that are well acquainted with the Court, familiarly attend the
person of the King, and are still assistent unto him upon all occasion, never
acknowledge the favors that are done them, be they never so great: They are
always craving, but are never satisfied; they swallow down whole rivers, and
wonder not at it; they think all Jordan is too little for them, and that they
shall no sooner open their mouth; but they must presently sup it up. And the
reason hereof, is; because they verily persuade themselves, that all whatsoever
you give them, (be it never so much) is due unto them for their services, and
their daily Assistencies. I therefore say, (and therein say but the truth,)
That one of the greatest happinesses, that can befall Kings, is; to be served
by noble persons, and men of honor gente granada (as the Spaniards term
them) jolly, strong, lusty people, proper, comely men, and persons of best and
most account both for riches and honor. But this is the mischeife of it, that
this gold, which should make such a glorious show in Court, and shine both in
honor and goodness, is canckred and rusted by Avarice and Ambition, which
eats into all men's minds, and wholly possesses them. So that from the
highest to the lowest, they are all well read in the School of Covetousness,
Dissimulation, and deceit; And your Priests, and those that wear Miters on
their heads, are not in this kind the meanest Scholars amongst them. All
complain, they are not rewarded, that they have nothing given them, and if
they have any thing given them they think it is all too little. And betwixt
this their complaining, and their thankful acceptance, there is set up such a
strong partition, that it neither suffers them to acknowledge a benefit, nor
to intertaine it with that thankfulness as they ought. All now a days attend
their own interest, and not their kings service; Who may say that of them,
which God spoke by Malachie; Malach. 1.10.
Who is there even among you, that would shut the doors of my house, or kindle
but a coal on mine Altar in vain? Not one, I assure you, but will be well
paid for his pains. There is not that Sexton, that Cloister Cleanser, nor
scullion of the Kitchen, but will have good wages, and other ayudes de costa,
or by-helps. This great train (says Seneca) of servants and Attendants, seek
not so much after a Master, as Money, a friend, as a fortune. Miserable is the
condition of kings, whom none love for themselves but for their own ends, and
the good they expect from them; so that this their private interest failing
them, their services fail with it, and likewise fails (so says S. Isidore)
that love and Loyalty which is due unto them, Non sunt fideles, quos munus, non
gratia copulat, nam cito deserunt, nisi semper accipiant; Those whom Lucre, not
Love linketh, cannot be faithful. For unless they be still on the taking
hand, they vanish, and are quickly gone* Yet is it not my intent and purpose in
that which I have said, to condemn those who demand their pay and
satisfaction for their services, to relieve their necessities. For therein they
do but use that lawful course which is appointed for them by way of petition.
Howbeit, Aristotle, Plato, and other Philosophers, would have subjects to be
solicitous not in sueing, but in serving. And I farther affirm, that Princes
are to take it to their charge, to content those that have done them good
service; it being the principal Office of distributive Justice, carefully and
vigilantly to distribute riches and honors, to those that have deserved them.
And this undoubtedly, is one of the most effectual means for the good
government of a Commonwealth; For, as those three divine virtues, Faith, Hope,
and Love, are increased and augmented by praying unto God; so on the contrary,
are they lessned and diminished by sueing unto Men. For when subjects serve,
and not sueing obtain that which they deserve, humane Faith, Hope, and Love,
is augmented in them; because thereby, they are taught to rely on the virtue
and wisdom of their Sovereign, who applies himself to every man's meritts,
and the justness and uprightness of his cause; For which cause they will love
him much, but much more, when he gives without being importuned with petitions.
And it seemeeth unto them that he gives not more willingly, then he does
wisely, in applying himself only to reason and Justice, and not to the
importunate Petitions of Pretenders. And therefore Kings are not to content
themselves only with paying that which they owe, and to do mercedes and
favors to them that serve them; but that these should likewise go accompanied
with Love and Good Will; for with remuneration are the services requited; and
with Love, are they obliged to do them still more and better service. In that
Case, which the Scripture recounteth of King Assuerus, who, one night being not
able to sleep and take his rest, commanded Lights to be brought in, and some
that were about him, to take that book, and read unto him, wherein were
written the notable things that past in his reign, and amongst the rest, there
was mention made of a great piece of service, which Mardochee did him, freeing
him from that death, which two of his Eunuchs had plotted against him, by
discovering this their treason, demanded of those there present; What honor
and dignity has been given to Mordochee for this his fidelity toward me,
and the good service he has done me? And the Kings servants that ministered
unto him, said; There is nothing done for him. Whereupon, he presently bestowed
upon him such great honors and dignities, that unless he should have given him
his kingdom, he could not well have given him more. Thus was this good servant
rewarded, honored, and graced by his Lord and Master, who without being
importuned, graciously called his good services to remembrance, and honored
him above all the Princes of his Kingdom. And I could wish, that all that are
rewarded by their Kings, might receive their recompense upon the like good
terms of Reason, and Justice. But now a days, poor and slender services
(the more is the pity) find copious, and plentiful rewards; and those
(ordinarily) accompanied with ingratitude; A thing, which Nature it self
abhors; And which ties Gods hands from giving, who is so liberal and so
rich; and dryes up that ouerflowing fountain of his boundless mercies, from
affording us any farther favor, or Comfort.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the repartment and Division which is to be used in the
Conferring of Offices; And of the knowledge of such persons, as ought to be
nominated for the said Offices.
Arist. lib. 8. ^th. cap. 10.
LEt us consider a King (says the Philosopher) in his Kingdom, as we would a
father of many children in his family. Societas enim Patris ad filios, Regni
prae se fert effigiem: The society of a father toward his children,
represents the true form of a kingdom. Let any man compare the power royal
to what he will, and (according to Aristotle's opinion) he shall find no one
thing that does fit so well with it, or gives it so much fulness, as the
Title of father, who day and night beats his brains, and imployes all his
whole study on that, which is most fitting for his children regarding more the
good which he may be able to do them, then any profit that he expects to
receive from them. How many times whilst his children, are a bed and a sleep,
does the father lie awake, casting, and devising with himself, how he may
mantayne them, and better them in their Estate? What a deal of care does he
take to get his daughter a good Husband, who is dearer unto him, then himself?
Great is his care; but much more ought the care of a king to be in giving to
their kingdom, good, faithful, and diligent Ministers, to the end that they
may do all possible diligences, (as has been said heretofore) fixing
always their eyes on the Common good, and directing likewise their own
particular in the same way. That which I would say, (to express it in plainer
terms) is this; That they are not to subject the Offices to the commodity of
the men, but to seek out men, that are fit and sufficient for them. When Saul
was resolved to recommend unto David that Duel, or single Combat against the
Giant Goliath, the better to accommodate him, as also therein to honor him the
more, he put his own raiment upon him, and an helment of brass upon his
head, and a brigandine, and all the rest of his own complete Armor; but
David, who was a man of little stature, and not accustomed to be shut up in
harness, found the weight thereof to be too heavy for him, and very
troublesome to his body; yet notwithstanding, to obey the Kings Command, and
that he might not seem to reject the honor the king was pleased to do him,
he was willing to make trial, Si armatus posset incedere; Whether he could
go in it, or no? for he had never proved it. But when he found he could
hardly go in it, and that he had not the free liberty and command of his
body, he said unto the King; 1. Kings. 17.29.
Non possum sic incedere, quia non vsum habeo: I cannot go with these; for I
am not accumstomed. And therefore rather made choice to betake himself to his
sheepheards staff, his stones, and his sling, which he knew well how to use,
then to put on the Kings royal raiment, together with his rich Armor, and
afterward to give an ill account of what was committed unto him. But where
shall you meet with the man in these days, that is like unto David? Nor is it
fit for Kings, in this particular to imitate Saul, for we daily see notable
Losses in matters of War, and Peace; by accommodating and honoring such
persons with Offices, as had never been trained up in them, wanting that
sufficiency of knowledge, which is fitting for the administration of them. As
for your Prebends, and other Ecclesiastical Dignities, whose nomination
appertains unto Kings, they had need take the greater care therein by so
much the more, by how much spiritual things, are of more importance, then
Temporal. Your ancient Canons and Counsels will be your direction in this
case, and teach ye, what ye are to do and do enforce it, with such weighty
and effectual reasons, that they are worthy to be read, and considered by
Kings, when they make the like Elections, or Nominations, to the end that they
may not err therein. And here will I bring to their remembrance, that which
God did, when that famous and ancient Tabernacle was to be built, Exodus 31.4.
which was to be a figure of his holy Church. Who (as the Scripture tells us)
nominated Bezaleel a curious workman in all manner of workmanship, whom he
filled with his holy Spirit, and indewed him with wisdom and knowledge from
heaven, that he might finish that work, and bring it to perfection, God
himself having drawn the plot, and being the chief, and principal Contriuer
thereof. And if for that dead Edifice, for which humane skill and dexterity
might seem to have been sufficient, there was made choice of a man of such
singular wisdom, and such admirable parts, as is there mentioned in Exodus;
for the government of a kingdom, for the ordring of a Commonwealth, for to
put every thing in it is right place, and to administer Justice equally to all,
giving every one that which is his; things all of them of such great
importance, and which do so much beautify and grace this mystical body of
the Church, what ministers will it be necessary, that Kings should seek out
and inquire after? Namely Men, that are full of the spirit of God, wise
understanding men, good Christians, and adorned with all manner of Virtues. And
if they will not believe me, let them look upon that first Election, which the
Apostles made, when Judas turned Apostata, despayr'd, and hung himself. In
which Election, they made choice of Saint Mathias, a man well known, as one
that had been bred up amongst them, and from whom they had received very good
satisfaction. Oportet ex his viris, Act. 1.21.
qui nobiscum sunt congregati, in omni tempore, quo dominus etc. Testem
resurrectionis eius nobiscum fieri vnum ex istis. Wherefore of these men, which
have accompanied with us, all the time, that the Lord Jesus was conversant
amongst us, etc. Must one of them be made a Witness with us of his
Resurrection. I say, that when Kings find sufficient parts and aduantagious
abilities in those whom they know, and have near about them, and in their
Court, the Election may in all likelihood seem to light more safely and
happily upon them, then any other. For they, who being still in our eye,
discover no faults, it may be presumed, that they have not any; For if they
had, in such persons they would hardly be hid. And let this be exemplified in
some, nay many of those your pictures which being beheld a far off seem to
be curious pieces, but drawing near unto them, appear to be but course work,
and discover great faults. And therefore Diogenes said, Prou. 17.2^.
you must stand aloof to look upon great Statuas; And I say; That he who in
his speech, seems to be wise and discreet, ought to be taken for no less.
For by a man's silent reservedness, and holding his peace, it is not much, if
he pass for a wise man; because the Holy Ghost says; Stultus quoque si
tacuerit, sapiens reputabitur: Even a fool, when he holds his peace, is
counted wise. In like manner, may he seem to be a good Man, that is a great
way from us, because we neither see his deeds, nor hear his words. And
peradventure, for this reason it was ordained, that the Pope could not be
chosen, unless he had been one of the number and fellowship of those
Cardinals there present at the time of the Election. And when kings, cannot
meet with sufficient persons amongst those whom they know, they must look
others out, though they be farther off. For so did the wisest King that ever
was, King Solomon; who used diligences out of his own Kingdom, for to seek
out the best Artificers, and such as were the fittest and ablest men for the
building of the Temple. He could not content himself with good workmen only,
but he sought out those likewise, that were the best, and the worthiest. The
like course ought Kings to take; who always, in those Elections that they
make, for the building and upholding of this Edifice of the Church, should not
content themselves with electing only those that are good, but in seeking out
the best and the worthiest. Whereby their Conscience shall rest the more
secure, and freer from opinion. Whereas in doing the contrary, those that are
the wisest, and the most learned, affirm; That their Conscience is not only
charged therewith but that they are likewise bound to the restitution of the
robbery, that is therein done to the Church. And it is a lamentable thing, that
for to pleasure a private subject, that he may eat and drink his fill, and
triumph in his pleasures, a King should put himself in hazard of going to
Hell. But above all the foresaid diligences, Kings ought to have recourse unto
Prayers and supplications, beseeching Almighty God that he will illuminate
their understandings that they may elect the best. For so did the Apostles; who
being to pick out two of of the best out of the whole pack of those that were
there, at the time, when they were to proceed to the Election, they betook
themselves to prayer, uttering these words so full of meekness and humility;
Tu domine, qui nosti corda omnium, Act. 1.24.
Ostende, quem elegeris ex his duobus vnum, accipere locum Ministerij huius:
Thou Lord, which know the hearts of all men, show whether of these two, thou
have chosen, that he may take the room of this Administration, and
Apostleship. For, being that men's goodness and sufficiency, principally
consists in the inwardst part of the heart, which is so close, and so subject
to change, that God only can truly know it, it is fit, that we should refer
the Main of these our Elections to him, to the end that they may be guided by
his Holy Spirit, and that he may be the chief and principal Elector in them.

This, which we have said touching provision of those that are known in Court,
it seems, that it may open a gap for those that are tumultuous Pretenders,
and ambitious Courtiers, to carry all before them, and let nothing that falls,
escape their fingers. For these are much better known, then those wise and
virtuous men, who ordinarily live retired, and attend more to the Complying
with obligations of their profession, and function, then to the Compliments of
those, who spend their whole life in pretensions. And it happens not once, nor
twice, but daily, and ordinarily, that they who follow the Court, and frequent
Princes Palaces, have not so much followed their studies, and frequented the
schools. And few there are of them, which take pleasure in reading of books,
to inform their knowledge, and to supply that, which is defective in them,
concerning the knowledge of businesses, and the true understanding and
execution of their Offices. But the misery of it is, that if a wise and
prudent Man shall seek to make his entrance and access to the King, the
Porters will shut the door against him. And fools having such free entrance
it is no wonder that wise men are kept out. As it happened to that wise
Philosopher who being clad in a mean but honest habit, pressed amongst the
rest to the Kings Antecamera, or withdrawing Chamber, where he used to give
Audience, having very necessary occasion to speak unto him. But as he offered
to come in, the Porter still clappt the door against him, and would not suffer
him to enter. He being a discreet man, presently entered into the reckoning of
it, and seeing how the world went, shifted himself out of the company, and
changing his poor, for a rich Habit, and being in the fashion as others use to
be, that are not known, to make them selves known in Court, way was made him,
and he presently let in. And at his going in, he kissed his cloak, and said;
Honoro honorantem me, quia quod virtus non potuit, vestis obtinuit: I honor
thee, that have honored me, for what virtue could not effect, my costly
clothing has obtained; For he that is rich and well clad, is commonly the
best known and most respected.

Vir been vestitus, pro vestibus, esse peritus
Creditur a mill, quamuis Idiota sit ille.
He that goes, in gay Clothes,
A wise man is held to be;
Though some know, there is not so
Arrant a Cocks-combe, as he.
Et sapiens, non accedit ad fores, quas durus Ianitor obsidet: But your Men
that are wise, discreet, and virtuous, bear not so base a mind, as to go
thither, where they either know or have cause to fear, that they shall be
debarred of entrance: so that for the most part, the most deserving, are the
least known. To this point therefore I reply, that those men, which are to be
nominated for Offices, and Dignities, may be known two manner of ways; First,
by that good fame and report which goes of them, and that opinion of virtue,
learning, and wisdom, which the world holds of them. Which we may rightly
compare to the sweet and fragrant odor of that precious and costly ointment,
which the blessed Mary Magdalen powered forth on our Saviors feet; John 12.3.
Whereof it was said; Replet^ est domus ex odore vnguenti: That the whole house
was filled with the Savor of the ointment. When either in Court, City or
Country, there is found a man, who is like a sweet Savor in the nostrills of
all men, and bears about him, and scatters in what company soever he comes, a
most odoriferous and pleasing perfume of his Virtue, Holiness, and Learning
(which is as Saint Paul says of himself, and his fellow Laborers, 2 Cor. 2,
15.
the sweet savor of Christ) there is no need to seek for any other
knowledge, or to make any farther Inquiry; for this is sufficient of it self
to make choice of him, and to confer upon him the greatest Offices of trust;
It being safer to put them into his hands, then into many of those men, that
are more in his Majesty's eye, and by sight better known unto him. For the
best knowledge of man is by the ear. And he that will not believe me, let him
read Saint Austin, August:
who in a Letter which he wrote to Saint Jerome, having expressed the great
desire and content that he should take in the knowledge and sight of him,
corrects that speech of his, saying; That he had not spoken well, in saying;
That he did not know him, because he had seen his most learned books wherein
were represented unto him his very heart and soul. In like manner, he that
shall be known by the like fame, or by the learned books, that he has
written; Or if he be a soldier, by the great and noble Acts that he has
done, or by his good government, in those places of Command which he has
held; Such a one I say, is sufficiently well known, though he had never put
his head within the Court gates, or seen the Palaces of Kings. The second
kind of knowledge, is that which your ambitious and solicitous pretenders do
give of themselves, who are ordinary Attendants and Assistents in the Courts
and palaces of Kings and Princes, and the houses of their Ministers, seeking to
insinuate themselves into their grace and favor, by flatteries, Compliments,
and Lies, and oftentimes by gifts and subornations, against which the door is
never shut, because they carry about them (if need be) the Master Key, not a
gilded key, but a key of pure gold, whose bitts and wards are of diamonds, by
which they make their way, remove all difficulties, open the cunningst locks,
and enter the strongest castles. This is not that knowledge, which is here
required for conferring Offices upon them, but rather to shut them out of all:
For it is to be presupposed, that these who do thus negociate, and pay soundly
for their places, must make their best profit of them and sell at dear rates,
that they may the sooner get out of debt, and have wherewith all to maintain
themselves, their wives, their children, and their family. But to these kind
of men, Kings may (and with a great deal of reason) use by way of answer,
those words of our Savior Christ: Amen, Mat. 28.12.
Amen, dico vobis, nescio vos: Verily, verily, I say unto you, I know you not.

I will here likewise lay open one notable Cosenage and deceit, which kings,
usually suffer by the cunning plots, and bold impudencies of pretenders, and
by the favor of those which put to their helping hand, and give them their
best furtherance; And this it is: That when any of these pretenders is privy
to himself, that he has not the like parts of Learning and Virtue and other
abilities, as others have, to mount at the first flight to those high places,
whereunto their ambition aspireth, they seek to enter into the basest and
meanest Offices, and that by base and vile means, either by buying them with
their money, as good cheap as they can; and when their purse cannot stretch so
far, work themselves in by the Codpisse, by matching with this or that other
Courtiers Kinsewoman, and other the like humane respects, making these the
stepps for their preferrment. God deliver all good Kings from such kind of
Provisions; especially if they be preferred by them to places of Audience, and
of Justice; for therein shall they sin grievously, because they put men into
them, that are ignorant, and necessitated, who, for to relieve their wants, and
to maintain their Vanities, they, and their wives take bribes, and set Justice
out to sale. And so, not by degrees, and by little and little, but in all post
haste, (to the great prejudice of the Commonwealth) they go still ascending
to greater places, and higher Dignities, wherein they go on in doing greater
hurt and more mischief. And these kind of men, are like unto your Martinets,
which if they be not raised from the earth, are not able to fly, but being
raised never so little, they make a very high flight. So is it with these men,
who not having sufficiency for the meanest places, are no sooner raised a
little by favor, and by suborning, from that first Office which they no way
deserved, but they afterward make a higher pitch, and go away with the best
Offices in the Kingdom. And the error in this, is, for that Kings do think,
that they are put into those places for their merit, and good parts, when as
indeed it is far otherwise. Though sometimes also it comes so to pass, that
Kings knowing how that such a one is not fit for such a place, or such an
Office, that they may put him out of that, clap him into another better and
greater then the former, and which requires greater parts, and more
sufficiency; crossing that sentence of our Savior Christ (who is the eternal
wisdom of his father, and cannot lie:) That he, that is not trusty in a
little, is not to be trusted with much. Neither can he be held fit for the
greater places, that has not sufficiency in him for the lesser.

CHAP. XXV. Whether Honors, Offices, and Dignities, are to be conferred on
those, that sue for them?
TO men of much Learning, Virtue, and Quality, and that have been of some use
and service to the State; some Ministers do, and have said; why do you not sue
(Sir) for such, or such a place? Especially seeing that Kings love to be sued
unto; And that to sue, beg, and crave is so holy a thing, that God himself
knowing our necessities, wills us to ask Petite, and accipietis, Ask, John
and ye shall have. Besides, it seems to be a certain kind of pride, to
be willing to receive, without being desirous to sue. For to sue, is a sign of
humility. Wherefore, to seek to run any other course, savors of I know not
what singularity, rashness and presumption. Hereunto I answer, that there is a
great deal of difference betwixt sueing to God, and sueing to Men, and in the
craving of spiritual goods, and the craving of Temporal. For, in sueing to
God, we better our selves much, and those principal Virtues, Faith Hope, and
Charity, are much increased and augmented. For our Faith increases, when we
petition God, by acknowledging him to be the universal Lord of all things, who
only can fulfill our requests and desires. According to that of Saint Paul;
super abundanter quam petimus aut intelligimus; Ephesians. 3.10*
That is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask, or think;
etc. Likewise Hope, and Charity, receive thereby an Increase, because we hope,
for a good end of our petition* And for this cause do we likewise love God,
from whom we hope to receive the good, we desire. And this has the greater
force and truth with it, when we crave spiritual goods. And of these spoke
our Savior when he said; Pettite, and accipietis. And the Apostle S. James
says; James 1.5.
if any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, which gives to all men
liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him. But it is
conditional, and bounded with a Nihil ^aesitans; That he ask in faith, and
waver not. Which may likewise be understood of Temporal goods, as they are
ordained to a spiritual, and super-naturall end. But to ask of men, produces
far different effects. And therefore we are to consider, that for one of
these two ends men may ask temporal things; Either for to raise themselves,
or to remedy themselves. Of the latter of these, who demand their pay and
satisfaction for their services, for the remedying and relieuing of their
necessities, we have already said, that they are not to be blamed; but in
conscience, and Justice, we are to help them, and make them due satisfaction,
in that which of right belongs unto them. Of the former who seek to raise
themselves, they stand crouching and kneeling with cap in hand to obtain their
purpose, being very dextrous and diligent in doing courtesies, obsequious in
their outward behavior, kissing the hand, and making Congies down to the
ground, and prostrating themselves at the feet of those, who they think may
do them good, dawbing their Compliments with base and servile flatteries. Of
which kind of men, the Holy Ghost says; Est qui nequiter h^miliat se, and
interiora eius plena sunt dolo. Eccl. 19.25*
There is some, that being about wicked purposes, do bow down themselves,
whose inward parts, burn altogether with deceit: Being like unto your birds
of rapine, who though it be natural unto them to fly up and down in the
air, yet are content to stoop and abase themselves, the better to seize on
their prey. Which is even to a letter or (as they say) to a hair the very
same, that Kings David said: Psalm. 10.10.
Inclinauitse, and cadet, cum dominatus fuerit pauperum: He crowcheth, and
boweth, and therefore heaps of poor do fall by his might. Or, as it is in
the Original: vt dominetur pauperum. He humbles himself, that thereby he may
grow great, and come to domineere and swagger over the poor. For all their
reuerences and adorations, serve to no other end, but to raise themselves upon
the wings of their ambition, that when they are in a good place, they may
stoop the freer to their pray: So that those, who but yesterday had them at
their feet, see them now towering over their heads, and loose the sight of
them; whom they adore thus raised, as those before adored them, when but
lately, like poor snakes, they licked the dust with their tongue, and trayled
their belly on the ground. And growing now warm in the bosom of greatness,
sting those most, who did most foster and cherish them. And these men, though
they negociate well with men, and get what they pretend, yet do they not
obtain any thing at Gods hands, who never grants unto them what they desire
for such like ends. Iam. 4.3:
According to that of Saint James; ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask
amiss, that ye might lay the same out on your pleasures. Howbeit sometimes it
is granted unto them for their further punishment and chasticement. For, as S.
Austen affirms; August.
Multa Deus concedit iratus, quae negaret propitius; God grants many things in
his wrath, which he denies in his love. And that, which is recounted of
Augustus Caesar, is not much amiss from the purpose, who being importuned to
bestow an Office upon one, who with great instance begged it of him, would by
no means give it him, but conferred it on another that never sued for it, but
did better deserve it. And he alleging the perseverance of his petitions, and
complaining, that he having been so long and earnest a suitor, he should
bestow it upon one that had never sought unto him for it; Caesar made him this
answer: Tu eras dignus qui peteres; ille, qui acciperet: Thou wast worthy, to
sue for it; but he, to have it. There are some things which may be received,
which may not so well be sued for, so says Vlpian in a certain Law of his;
Vlpian. l. 1. Vers^. Quadam enim ff. de v^rijs and extraor. Cognitio.
Pompinius, l. 2. ad finem, ff. de Orig. iuris.
Quadam enim, tametsi honest accipiantur, inhoneste tamen petuntur: There are
certain things (says he) which albeit they may be honestly received, yet may
they be unhonestly desired. Kings are to bestow their favors, but others must
not sue for them. Hoc non peti, sed prastari solere, says another Law; it is
fit, good turns should be done, but not sued for to be done. And it was the
same man's saying; Inuitum, non ambientem, esse ad rempublicam assumendum: That
he, that was unwilling to receive honor, not he that did ambitiously seek
after it was to be preferred in the Commonwealth. And trust me, I cannot
search into the reason, why it should become a Custom, not to give, but to
those that ask; For neither they, that give, do gain thereby, nor they that
ask, are bettred thereby. For to give, is so much the more worthy praise, and
thanks, by how much the more liberally and freely it is given. And the Proverb
faith: Bis dat, qui cito dat: He doubles his gift, that gives quickly. Whereas
he, that stays looking and expecting to be sued unto, seems to give with an
ill will, and not so freely as he should. For (as Seneca truly says) there is
not any thing that costs a man dearer, then that which is bought by
entreaties, and petitionings. And therefore, as often as either offices, or
Rents, are bestowed on those, which deserve them, without making suite for
them, the whole body of the Commonwealth does commend and indeare the
rectitude, and just dealing of the Doner. And all good and virtuous men take
heart and encouragement thereby, and are filled with good hopes; and those,
which are otherwise, ashamed and confounded; and becomes the means many times
of making them turn over a new leaf, and leave their former lewd course of
life. But when this rigor and strictness is observed, of not giving to him
that asks not, though he merit and deserve the same, it seems to be made a
meritorious cause, to sue, and to negociate; and occasion given, that more care
should be placed in this, then in deserving well, whereby men's minds and
courages, have their edge abated, and are dishartened. For to ask, when it is
nor for the end aforesaid, it draws on this inconvenience with it. Which is
Aristotle's opinion, and is made good in all true reason of Moral Philosophy.
The Apostle S. Paul, quoteth a sentence, which our Savior Christ used often to
repeat; Beatius est magis dare, quam accipere: Far more excellent, and more
prayse-worthy is it, to give, then to take. And if not to take, be so good a
thing, much better shall it be, not to ask, for that this is, the ordinary
means to the other. And herein did the Saints of God glory much, and Saint
Paul says of himself; That he would rather live by the labor of his hands,
then be importunate in craving. And that great Prophet Samuel, that which he
did most prize and justify himself of before the people, was, that he had
faithfully performed his function, without craving or taking any thing. There
was a time, wherein the Roman Senate did ordain, that the Consullship, and
other the chief Magistracies, should not be given to any, save such as sued
for them. This Law, at first was good; for then, none durst presume to sue for
them, but those, who in the peoples opinion did well deserve them, and took it
for a great affront that they should receive a denial. So that by this means
every one did labor by his noble Actions to deserve that Dignity, as also
that all the people might think him worthy thereof. Afterward, this proved to
be a very pernicious Law; for, not those, who by their virtues, and heroical
Acts, did deserve this Honor; but those, that were the most powerful did sue
for it, whilst others, for fear of these, durst not show themselves in the
business, and so were utterly excluded from those honorable Offices. This
inconvenience, was taken notice of, and Publicola the Consul made a Law, upon
pain of death, wherewith he was to be punished, who without approbation from
the people of Rome, should sue for any of the said Offices. And likewise, for
the curbing of this Vice, was the Calphurnian Law enacted. But now (for our
sins) has crept in amongst us that Greekish infection, whereof I Socrates
says, Is^ ^r^t. de pace.
that Ambition at that time, was grown to that extreamitie, and to that hight,
that in stead of putting ambitious pretenders to death, those honorable places
were not bestowed but upon those, which did shame-fully sue for them, and could
best negociate by their power, purse, or friends, which is, was, and will be an
occasion in all times and places, that with scandalous corruption, and
Simoniacall trading, Offices, and Benefices shall be given and sold, to him
that will give most. Not the better person, but the better purse shall carry
it. The inconveniences, that follow the so much favoring of suitors, and being
vn-mindfull of those, who tend nothing else but to serve, and deserve well, are
very great, and not unknown to all those that are Statists, and good
Commonwealths men. And if the shortness, which I desire to observe in this
Discourse, did not hinder me, a large field would here discover it self unto
me, wherein to enter and expatiate my self, and might take occasion to treat
of the false hoods, shifts, deceits, and iniustices, which are daily used in
such like pretensions, and petitions, which have been the cause of the
destruction and ruin not only of particular Common wealths but of whole
Kingdoms. And this which I speak, is of so much truth, that some of the
Hebrew Doctors hold for certain, that the Monarchy of the House royal of
David was overthrown by giving credit to the malice and deceit of a covetous
pretender, and that of twelve Provinces which his heirs possessed, of those
twelve Tribes, two only remained entire unto him. The case was this; King
David, 2 Samuel 9.6.
having (in performance of that oath and promise, which he had made unto
Jonathan) given unto his son Mephibosheth, all those heredements, message,
and goods, which were King Saul's; And commanding Ziba, that he, and his
sons, and his servants, should serve him, and till his land for him, and
bring him in food to eat; there entered into Ziba's mind a devilish
pretension, 2. Sam. 16.3.
to beg all Mephibosheths estate for himself. And thereupon, took hold of
such an occasion, as seemed fittest unto him to work this his treachery and
deceit. When King David fled from his son Absalon to the mountains, Ziba
the servant of Mephibosheth met him with a couple of Asses sadled, and upon
them two hundred cakes of bread, and an hundred bunches of Raysons, and an
hundred of dried Figgs, and a bottle of Wine, and other the like commodities
for the refreshing of David and his followers. And having a Lie ready at hand,
which he had thought on before, he castes himself down at the Kings feet,
and telling him a thousand leasings, raised false witness against
Mephibosheth, informing his Majesty, that Mephibosheth was in Jerusalem, and
told him; This day shall the house of Israel restore me the Kingdom of my
father. Is it even so, said the King? Behold, Thine are all, that pertained
unto Mephibosheth. And truly, this business was strangely carried. For notable
was the facility, wherewith the King gave credit to the calumniation of this
pretender, and the remissness which he showed in punishing so loud a lie, and
so great a treason, when the truth of the matter, and the innocence of
Mephibosheth, was afterward made known unto him. And that, which I conceive
concerning this point, is; That the cause why he did not punish this so foul
a treachery, was; Either for that he was conscious to himself of the fault,
which he had committed in having given such easy belief there unto: or, for
that the roots of this suspicion, and jealousy, did remain still deeply
grounded in his heart. For the calumnies, and cautelous suggestions of
Pretenders, carry this mischief still with them, that they pierce even to the
very heart, and are hardly removed from the mind of him, that gives ear unto
them. Prou. 26.22.
Verba susurronis, quasi simplic^^, and ipsa perueniunt ad intima cordis: The
words of a Talebearer, are as flatterings, and they go down into the bowels
of the belly. And therefore the Holy Ghost advises us, that when such men come
to speak with us in secret, and to whisper things in our ear, that we should
not hearken unto them. Ibi. 25.
Quando submiserit vocem suam, ne credideris ei, quoniam septem nequitia sunt
in cord illius. Though he speaks favorably, believe him not, for there are
seven abominations in his heart. Which in plainer language, speaks thus unto
us; When a flatterer shall talk unto thee in a low voice, and whisper thee
softely in thine ear, that he may not be heard of the standers by, cast him
out for an eare-wigg, and do not give credit unto him; for there are seven,
nay seventy malicious purposes in that man's heart. And it would be a great joy
and comfort unto me, that God would discover unto Kings, these persons and
their devilish practices, that such base and unworthy people, might not under
the color and show of good and worthy men, thus abuse and deceive them. In a
word, men's hearts, and their tongues, do not always go together. Nor is the
speech, and the thought all one. Quia labia doloso in cord, and cord locuti
sunt. Psalm. 12.2.
They speak deceitfully every one with his neighbor, flattering with their
lips, and speak with a double heart. But God destroy such deceitful and
lying tongues, to the end that truth may find entrance in the Courts of
Kings. O, how many inconveniences would be excused, if those persons, to whom
the charge is committed of distributing Offices, and rewarding of services,
would take the care, to confer them on those that deserve them, and not on
those that negociate and sue for them; then would there not be so much
liberty, nor so many tricks used in petitioning, nor so many Orators in the
Court, in whom, by this suing unto them, covetousness increases, and the
hungry appetite of taking; whilst in the mean while all modesty and shame is
utterly lost. And I am verily persuaded, that kings many times, straightened by
earnest entreaties, and the importunate prayers of such as are in near places
about them, do undeserved favors, rewarding unworthy suitors, and leaving out
those that are worthy, because they do not offer to speak and sue unto them.
And that you may perceive that I do not speak this of mine own head, or that
it is a bird of mine own hatching, I will relate that here unto you, which
Saint Luke reports of an importunate woman, Luke 18.3.
who finding her self wronged, came to a secular Judge, that was an ill minded
man, and unjust, and was very earnest with him, crying still unto him; do me
Justice against mine Adversary: Which he would not of long time, but afterward
he said with himself; Though I fear not God, nor reverence man, yet because
this woman troubles me, I will do her right, lest at the last she come, and
make me weary. To beg, and sue, is an easiy office, especially, when
pretenders know, that hearing breeds wearisomnesse, and that by this means
they obtain that which they sue for, it being the nature of many men, and more
particularly of Kings that love their ease, to be quick in their grants, for
the avoiding of further trouble. Our Saviors Disciples, were much troubled,
and their ears were even tired out, with hearing the clamourous voice of the
Cana^itish woman, and entreated Christ, that he would dispatch her, that they
might be rid of her. And we usually see, that your importunate suitors, be it
just, or unjust, obtain their purpose. And I know not, whether I may blame
them most, or those that put them to it, to be importunate in this, or that, be
it right, or be it wrong. God knows where the fault lies, and will reward
every one, as he deserves.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the sense of Smelling; That is: of the Prudence of Kings.
THe sense of smelling, is likewise in the head and the nose, it is adjoining
Instrument; which both in divine, and humane letters bear the signification of
Prudence. In the seventh Chapter of Salomons Song, where is represented unto us
the beauty of the Spouse, amongst other graces there recommended and indeared,
the nose is not the least. Cant. 7.4.
Nasus tuus (says her beloved) Sicut Turris Libani, quae respicit contra
Damascum: Thy nose, is as the Tower of Lebanon, which looks toward Damascus.
And the Expositors upon this book of the Canticles, do stand much upon these
words, for that they seem to be much contrary unto that, which should extol
and set forth a beauty to it is full perfection For in very deed, a huge and
disproportionable nose, both seems, and is, a foul and ougly thing. And
therefore those interpreters say, that it is not to be understood in that first
sense which offers it self unto us, which is grammatical; but in it is
mystical and spiritual signification, which by a general consent
represents unto us, the admirable prudence of the Church in the government of
Souls, a thing of greatest importance, and the most necessary, in Prelates and
Governors, and more particularly, in Kings, and Princes. Nasus tuus; sicut
Turris Libani: Thy nose is as the Tower of Lebanon; Which King Solomon built,
that from thence he might behold, and see, all whatsoever passed in Damascus.
From thence, might he discover his enemies, and their ambushes, and the thieves
lying in wait to rob Jerusalem. Of this Tower, they say, that it was very
high, even, and straight, and for to represent the beauty of the face of the
Spouse, it is (and with a great deal of propriety) said; That her nose is
like a Tower; for that, which does most beautify a City, or any other place
whatsoever, is a fair high Tower. In like manner in the face of any person,
the nose, which is that, which is elevated and lifted up above all the other
parts of the face, expresses great beauty, whereas, to be without a nose, or
to have it too hooked, or too flat, extraordinarily crooked, or extraordinarily
little, is a foul deformity. And therefore, the sum of all, that hitherto
has been said, is; That, what a goodly fair Tower does, in the adoring and
setting forth of a City, which does exceedingly grace and beautify the same;
The same does the nose in the face of the Spouse, which is so well
proportioned, that it much commends all the whole feature. And upon this*
Litterall, leans the spiritual sense of this place; which is: That this
Tower does denotate discretion, and prudence, which exalts it self above all
other the works of Virtue, and does grace and beautify them all. Many of the
Gentiles erected Fortune for their Goddess; It seeming unto them, that she
was the only Lady, and Mistress of all good, and bad success; But others,
which drew nearer unto Truth, and Reason, made a jest thereof, and said; That
it was not Fortune, that afforded happiness, and prosperity, but prudence;
and that she was rather Fortunes Mistress, and that her power did predominate
over the Stars. And therefore said another.

Iuuenal Satyr. 10
Nullum numen abest, si sit prudentia tecum. No Deity, no power, is wanting to
him, that is indewed with wisdom. Men of small understanding, and such as are
careless in their businesses, attribute Divinity to Fortune, that they may
free them selves from the note and imputation of carelessness, and imprudencie.
But the truth is, that fortune stays not behind, when prudence setts forward.
And therefore it was well said of Salust; Salust.
Vnus quisque est artifex fortunae sua; Every man is the worker out of his own
fortune. And the Spanish Proverb tells us, Que la buena diligencia, es la madre
de la buenauentura: That good diligence, is the mother of good success. So
that in very deed, there is neither good, nor bad Fortune, but it is the will
of God, that rules and gouerns all; and the care, and prudence, wherewith men
have recourse unto that, which is fit and convenient for them. And therefore is
prudence in Kings, of that great importance, and ought to be, (as we said of
the Spouses nose) like a high tower; and not according to that model as they
would have it, but it must be placed upon Mount Lebanon; to the end, that being
in so high and eminent a place, it may make the better discovery. Kings must
have an eye as well to that which is a far off, as that which is near at hand;
on this side, and on that; here, there, and every where. They must be ready
to supply upon this, or that other occasion; They must see, and foresee all.
Terentius.
Istud est sapere, non quod ante pedes modo est videre, sed etiam illa, quae
futura sunt, prospicere, said the Comicke: This, in realtie, is true wisdom,
not to see that only which is before his feet, but to foresee that also which
is to come. And this providence, circumspection, or prudencie, sound alike, and
are in a manner one, and the same thing. The Ancient did so artificially paint
prudencie, that she seemed to look every way, and to have her eyes fixed on
whatsoever did behold her. For prudence, as it is silent, so it is searching;
nothing escapes her knowledge. And it is a virtue that makes Kings like unto
God. For, as he, by his divine providence, does foresee all, and govern all
and has all things present before him, so they by their humane prudence, which
participateth of the divine, behold things past, dispose of things present, and
provide for things to come. Some call her Filiam Dei, Gods daughter, because it
seemed unto them, that she had something of the Deity in her, that she was
his Minister in the creation of the world, and disposition of all things, and
ought likewise to be the Mistress of Kings upon all their occasions. For (as
Aristotle, and Plato avouch) no man can govern well, that is not prudent. In
ancient times, the Common people were of opinion, that Prudence was annexed
unto Kings, and that they had a particular gift to foresee that, which was to
come. And such, as were provident, and prudent, they held to be Divine. True
it is, that wisdom is the gift of God, and we must crave it of him, as did
Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, and other wise Kings. Which to obtain, we must
shun and fly from sin; for, it is impossible that he should be prudent,
that is not virtuous. And so much has a man of prudence, as he has of
virtue. And according to this measure, shall the authority, credit, and
opinion be which he shall hold with the people. The Offices and effects,
which Prudence does, and causes, are many; And some of them are collected, out
of the many and various expositions which the Doctors attribute to this Tower,
and nose of the Spouse, which we will go disposing, by it is Paragraphes, in
this chapter.

. I. Of the Magnanimity of mind which Kings ought to have.
BY this high Tower, and nose of the Spouse, some understand the Pope; Quia in
facit Ecclesiae eminet: Because he is an eminent man in the face of the Church.
But Rabbi Kymki, and Philo Iudaus, will have it, by the self same reason, to
be understood of a King; Adding withal, that the nose does betoken Majesty,
Gravity, Longanimitie, and excellency of mind, wherein a King ought to
exceed all other. And therefore the Persians would never choose him to be
their King, who had not a hook nose like the Eagle, well shaped, and
proportioned, which is the ensign of a magnanimous mind. And hence it is,
that they say of the God of the Hebrews, that he has great and large
nostrils. So sounds that word of the Psalmist; Psalm. 103.8.
Longanimis, and multum misericors: id est, longus naribus. The Lord is
merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plentious in mercy: that is; Of
wide nostrills, full of sufferance and patience; for the smoke of fury and
choler does not so soon run up the chimney, as in those which have straight
and narrow nostrils, who are soon hot, and suddenly incensed to anger. And
the self same Philo says, that in the Leuiticall Law, they were not admitted
to the Preisthood, who had either a little, crooked, or disproportioned nose,
as being less fit for that Ministry. The one, are hot and choleric; the
other, ill-inclined. These again, which have too great a nose* are naturally
cruel, and proud, and these are mislik't of all; but that, as much commended,
which signifies magnanimity, bountifullnesse, and generousnes, and is of
sufficient largeness to suffer and dissemble anger, and not to have the
chimney choked with a little smoke. A quality, so much importing Kings, that
from thence did arise that Proverb; Qui nescit dissimulare nescit regnare: He
that knows not how to dissemble, knows not how to rule. And there was a King
of late times, which stickt not to say; that he would not have his son know
any more Learning, then that which this sentence does contain; for that it was
so good and profitable a Lesson for Princes. Tiberius Caesar, did glory in no
one thing more, then in the Art of Dissimulation, wherein he was so excellent,
that never any, upon any, though never so great occasions given by him, could
search into his intents, or diue into his thoughts. In the story of the Kings,
it is written; That at the very same time, that God commanded the possession
of the Kingdom, to be given unto Saul, which was the first King he had
nominated, some ill disposed persons, that were maliciously bent against him,
did murmr at him, and speak ill of him, seeming to scorn, and set light by
him. But God had given him such a measure of wisdom, and discretion, that
although all that they had said, came to his ear, Ipse vero dissimulabat se
audire: 1 King. 10.27.
Yet he held his peace, and would not seem to take notice of it. For, when
Kings come newly to their Crowns, and that the things of the Kingdom are not
yet thoroughly settled, it is great prudence to reserve with dissimulation the
punishment of great persons, that with better occasion, and in a better
coniuncture, he may proceed against them, as reason and Justice shall require.
That King shall not be accounted wise, that shall pretend execution of Justice
with the danger of Insurrections, and seditions; nor shall the justification of
his intent, suffice to execute his rashness in the means, unless he first
balance the business* and see which way the scale will incline; as to see,
how far he may rely upon the love of his subjects, and how the end may sort
with his designs, lest the danger of the scandal and disobedience, may prove
to be greater, then the profit that can arise from the execution of Justice.
For in such cases, it is great wisdom in a King* to conform himself
according to the times; And that that which at one time is worthy of
punishment, should be dissembled, and reserved to be punished at another time.
Which course (as Saluste reports) was, in Catilines time, taken with that
great and powerful Courtier, Crassus. Salust: In Anthem: Quomodo oportet Isid.
lib. 3. Senten. cap. 50.
The Emperor Justinian, he likewise aims at this mark: And it is the
Counsel, which S. Isidore gives unto Kings. The like did King David when Ioab
so treacherously slew Abner. Only to some few, that were very inward with him,
he discovered the reason, that moved him to dissemble the matter, and not to
punish him with death for the present, telling them with a great deal of
grief; Ego autem adhuc delicatus sum, and vnctus Rex: 2. Reg. 3.39.
I am this day weak, (or as the Hebrew renders it, tender) though anointed
King. As if he should have said; To see the affairs of my Crown and Kingdom
in that tender and ticklish estate wherein they stand, obliges me, not to make
that demonstration of rigor and justice, as the heynousnesse of this fact does
require. But the Lord shall reward the doer of evil accordding unto his
wickedness. Tribuat dominus facienti malum, iuxta malitiam suam. Here, is much
to be considered; the great care, which this King took in concealing his
purpose from the people, till some better occasion were offered; For, if he
should have declared himself before, and manifested his meaning to the world,
he might have put the whole Camp in danger of Mutining; or at least to have
showed themselves in defense of their Captain. This peril, he ouerpast by his
great prudence, dissembling the matter for that time, and deferring it till the
last vp-shut, when now the businesses of the Kingdom were better settled; For,
the most important point in government, is, to make use of Time, and occasion:
facilitating with silence and dissimulation, those orders and decrees, which
do cross the peoples humor, or that stand not with his liking that is
powerful with them; For if they should be divulged before their due time and
season, they would serve for nothing else, but to incense men's minds, and
peradventure to turn them against himself. Which certainly might well have
been David's case with Ioab, if he had showed himself offended, and openly
vented his spleen against him, whilst he had his sword in his hand, and stood
so fair in the peoples affection; who in that hurre might have done (God he
knows what) for the advancing of his ambitious ends. In such cases, it is
great prudence in a Prince, (contineuing still firm and constant in his
purpose) to benefit himself by dissimulation, waiting for a fit time and
season, when without danger he may unmask himself, and with the safety of
his realm and person, put his resolution in execution. A word well kept, and
fittly spoken, is (says Solomon) like apples of gold, Prou. 25.11.
in pictures of silver; which does not only shine and give a glorious luster,
but works it is effect, and discovers the art and cunning of it is Master.
And King David having heard the reproachful words, and reuiling terms which
Shimei to the very face of him, and in a loud voice, vttred in the presence of
those that were with him, wisely dissembled his railing, and was angry with
Abishai, because he was earnest with him, that he might presently take due
chasticement of him, and revenge the great affront he had done him, and would
by no means give consent, that any one of all his Army should once move or
stir against him. For, that holy King thought it fit in his wisdom, to
leave him to that occasion, which he afterward specified to his son
Solomon; that he might teach Kings these two things. First to rely on God, and
to attend his leisure, who will do that for them, which they cannot do for
themselves; As he did in that known case of Moses brothers murmuring against
him, which he himself so mildely and fayrely dissembled. But God, to whose
account runn's the honor of his Ministers, took the cause into his own
hands. Secondly; That it is not fit to be solicitous in appointing Judges, and
Informers, at all hours, and in all places, against such, as in some
occasions, assume liberty of speech, and freely utter their minds. For, as
another said; In free places, and persons that are likewise freeborn, we
cannot at all times exercise that slavery upon them, as to clap a Lock and
chain upon their tongues. Who could have done this better, then that
omnipotent King Christ Jesus, when those licentious and loose-tongued
Libertines, reproached him with such sharp and bitter Tau^ts as touched him to
the quick in his honor, and yet even then with what a royal mind, and
princely reportment did he carry himself, in those few mild and moderate
words, which he spoke unto them. Kings ought not to express any alteration,
turbation, or discomposure, for those things which they see, nor to be startled
every foot with that, which they hear, nor to show themselves offended at
that, which is muttred and murmured of them. But let them (a god's name) mend
that, which is amiss, and then their muttering and murmuring will cease of it
self. Here likewise Kings are taught, not to be curious inquirers after
those, that speak ill of them, nor to give ear to every idle complaint; For
if it be once perceived, that their ears irche after this, infinite will the
number of Delators, and Informers be. In the reign of Tiberius, and of Nero,
more then in any other were these Sycophants and privy Accusers favored; and
things were then so glazed over, that they had set spies, that should curiously
observe the semblance, which every one made of his Actions, even to the
knitting of the brow, biting the lip or the like, which kind of carriage,
served as a condemnation, and was severely punished. But it is fitter for
Tyrants then Christian Kings, to stand thus in fear of the tongues of the
vulgar, it being the part of a magnanimous mind, to know how to forget, and
forgive injuries, especially those of the tongue, to whose jurisdiction, the
most powerful, are most subject. And if they should revenge this wrong upon
account, the number would be so great, and rise to such an infinite sum, that
they may quickly being their Monarchy to an end. That which most imports for
their own and their Empires quiet, is to shake all kind of suspicion out of
their mind; and whatsoever others think of them and their affairs, they
ought to be so far from being troubled therewith, that it should no whit move
them. Seneca. lib. de ira. cap. 33.
Holding it to be (as Seneca says) the sweetest manner of pardon, to pretend
ignorance of the delict, and to examine with care his own care^ese carriage,
and open neglects, if he have committed any, and if not, not to care a pin what
they say. For the Vulgar is a beast of many heads, and as it is impossible to
satisfy al of them, so is there no reason, that they should have an Account
given them of that which the Prince does. It is sufficient, that the wiser and
grauer sort, know, and esteem both him, and his proceedings. This was the
doctrine of that great King, Philip the second, who wrote unto his Viceroy in
Naples, as follows: Necessario es, que gouerneys de manera, quae todos buenos
y malos, no se quexe^ de vos. It is requisite, you should so carry your self in
your government, that all, as well good as bad, may not complain of you. And
this was another of his which he delivered to his successor, Forc, oso sera,
que los malos nos mur ^^uren, y aborreZ^^^; Lo que a nos^^^^ t^ (...) de
^^nera, que tambien n^ nos aborre (...) ^^enos: It cannot otherwise be, but
that the bad will (...), and (...) us; But that which belongs unto us, is, To
proceed so, that the good may not likewise hate us. And this King very well
understood, that it is proper unto Kings (as Alexander said) to do well, and
to hear ill. Yet are they not to imagine, that th^^ which is causeless said
against them, can any whit diminish or lessen their honor; For it stands not
with their condition and greatness, that none should speak ill of them, but
that they should do no ill: And then no such thing can be said of them, but by
the way of falsehood and lying, which will soon vanish. Yet notwithstanding will
I not say, nor shall it once enter into my thought, to approve the impudency
and insolency of the licentious Satyrists but rather hold them worthy of
severe punishment, especially when they touch upon the persons of Kings, whom
all their subjects, both by Gods Law, and the Law of nature, ought to respect,
honor, and obey. Yet withal I say, that it is great prudence, to dissemble
upon some occasions, be they never so great, and to be close and secret in
their intentions, till they see a fit time to inflict punishment, and when it
may be done with least noise. For some men sometimes, seeking to suppress the
fire, by turning and stirring the sticks, inflame it the more. And if at any
time upon urgent occasions, and upon the odiousness and foulness of this or
that other fact, (reason and justice so requiring it) they shall be forced to
use severe punishment, let it be mingled with moderation and mildness, that
all men may understand, that it does not arise out of anger and displeasure,
but out of zeal and love to the public good, which forces them thereunto,
and obliges them in conscience thus rigorously to proceed against them.
Chrysostom. in Mat. lib. 5. de Ciuit. dei. Cap. 20.
For (as Saint Chrysostom says) Qui cum causa non irascitur, peccat, He
sins in not being angry, that has just cause to be angry. And then (says
Saint Austin) shall a Prince be happy, when his subjects shall perceive, that
he punishes not only upon just ground; Seneca. lib. 1. de Clement. cap. 22.
but (as Seneca says) non tanquam probet, sed tanquam inuit^^, and cum magno
tormento ad castigandum veniat: That it grieueth him to the very Soul, that he
is driven contrary to his nature and disposition, to let the sentence of death,
or other torment; to pass upon them. And when they shall know, that in this
punishment, he only pretends the conservation of the Commonwealth, and not
the revenging of any particular wrong or offense done unto himself. And that,
if he do extend his pardon, it is not for that he is willing to leave sin
unpunished, but because he pretends the amendment of the delinquent. And
more especially, when they see, that he recompenceth with benefits, the rigor
and sharpness of his chasticements by throwing favors on a brother, a father
or a son of that party, whose Head he has commanded to be taken from his
shoulders. Which gracious dealing will assure the people of the sweetness of
the Princes nature, and his pitiful disposition, nor will they attribute the
justice he shall do upon them to cruelty. The conclusion of this Discourse
shall be, this; That it is of great importance, that all men should know, that
nothing can be hid from the King, be it never so close and secret, for the many
and private diligences which he uses for intelligence, by the means of sundry
persons of all sorts, high and low, of all Estates and qualities, (whom the
wisest and the waryest cannot avoyde) deputed by his Majesty diligently to
labor to hear, and understand the rumors and complaints of the people, and
the good and ill, that is either said or done, and to give him advise thereof,
that he may inform himself of the truth of them, and apply such remedies, as
he in his wisdom shall think fit. And let all men know, that there was never
any thing so closely carried, which either early or late, at one time, or
other, has not (by good diligences used) bin brought to light, and made known
to the king. Eccl. 10.20.
And therefore my advise unto thee, shallbe that which Solomon gives thee; Curse
not the King, no not in thy thought: For a bird of the air, shall carry the
voice, and that which has wings, shall tell the matter. And when thou think
thy self safest, then shall thou be taken in the snare. And let Kings likewise
know* that if they (...) a mind to see, and know all, they ought also to be
mild, and merciful in punishing, mingling mercy with seueri^^^. For it is
fit and necessary, that he th^^ desires to know all, should likewise dissemble,
and pardon much.

. II. Of the Blandure, Gentleness, and Love, which Kings ought to have.
THis blandure, and gentleness, is likewise an Effect of prudence, and
Magnanimity, and is a Lordly kind of virtue, and which has made many
excellent, and memorable in the world. As Alexander the great, whom nothing
made so great, as that his Excellency of mind, which he had, in pardoning
those whom not only himself, but all the world knew, had justly deserved his
displeasure. He, that is gentle of heart, and (like David) meeke-spirited,
nothing troubles him, nothing alters him, but always keeps his judgment
firm and enytre, that he may the more freely judge of that, which is worthy
of pardon, or punishment, and is a quality very proper, and well beseeming
royal Majesty. Many great Monarckes and Kings have had this in high esteem,
and made it the top of their glory, for by this means, they came to be as
great in the love of their subjects, as in their rule and Command. Of whose
examples humane Histories are full; but I shall only cite those are that
Divine, which neither add, nor diminish, by indeering things more then they
deserve. Where it is storyed of that great Captain and Governor of Gods
people, that he was of the mildest and peaceablest condition, and of so soft
and sweet a ^^ture, that the world afforded not his like: Erat Moses vir
mitissimus, Number. 12.3.
super omnes h^mines, qui morabantur in terra: Moses was very meek, above all
the men, which were upon the face of the earth. And he of all other, had most
need of this most noble quality, for to bear with the bitter taunts, and
reproachful words of that stiff-necked, and unthankful people. And this is
indeared by Saint Ambrose, Ambr. lib. 2. Offi. cap. 7.
and Philo Iudaeus, both of them affirming; That toward God only, he showed
himself as stout as a Lion, and full of courage, resisting the vengeance, that
God would have taken of his people, but with them, was as meek and gentle as a
Lamb. A generous breast, and the courteous and plain carriage of Kings
ouercometh all, pacifieth all, and leuelleth the vneuenest and crookedest
dispositions. Which we may well exemplify in Jacob, and David. Of the former
the Scripture says; Genesis 27.11.
Erat homo lenis: He was a smoth man. He was smooth in his countenance, sweet
in his conversation, and naturally of a generous and peaceable condition. Now
see, what he got by this; He gained his fathers blessing, his brothers birth
right, his Uncles daughters and wealth, and the good will and love of all men.
And of David, it is said; Erat rufus, and pulcher aspectu, facieque decera: 1
King. 16.12.
That he was ruddy, and withal, of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to
look to. He was of a lovely and gracious aspect, mild, affable, and above
all, a great friend unto goodness and well doing, only with his pleasing
presence, he drew the eyes of all the people after him, who ioyed in the sight
of him; And with this, did he win their hearts, got their good wills, and
gained the kingdom. When by a good and painful industry, and a sweet
behavior, the hearts are first seized on, it is an easy matter to conquer
Kingdoms. In the sacred History of the Machabees, 1 Macab. ^.
are recounted the heroyicall Acts which that great Captain Judas, and his
brethren, atcheiued in Spain, the Kings and Kingdoms which they subdued; the
(...) which they conquered, and made tributary to their Empire; and the great
treasure of gold and silver, which they purchased. And all this they effected
by their good Counsel, gentleness, and patience; giving Kings thereby to
understand, that if they be of a meek, peaceable, and noble condition, they
shall be Lords and Masters of men's wealths, and hearts. And this made Polibius
to say; that a courteous and peaceable King, conquers all with quietness,
every man being willing to yield and submit himself to a soft and generous
disposition, that is free from anger, and full of clemency. And this is that
Legacy which God allotted and left unto them long ago in the old Testament.
Mansueti, haereditabunt terram: Psalm. 37.11.
The meek shall inherit the earth. And afterward, in the new Testament, he
renewes this promise: Ipsi possidebunt terram: Mat. 5.5.
They shall inherit the earth. They shall be Lords of the earth; That is: of
the men upon earth, and of their possessions. For, by this earth which God
promises unto them, S. Bernard understands the same earth, whereof men are
formed. And it is usual in Scripture, to call men earth. And thereby is
likewise understood, that of this world, which we here inhabit, the
possessions thereof, it is government, Scepter and Monarchy, for all this, is
but a Patrimony, bequeathed to a kind, smooth, and loving nature. The best
Titles, that a King can present before God, for to pretend the preservation,
and perpetuity of his Kingdom, are meekness, and gentleness. These David
represented unto him, when he petitioned him, that he would be pleased to
continue and confirm his kingdom in his son. Memento Domine David, Psalm.
131.1.
and omnis mansuetudinis eius: Lord remember David, and all his lowly carriage.
Whose heart, was not haughty, nor his eyes lofty, but behaved and quieted
himself, as a child that is weaned of his Mother. And presently God collated
this benefit upon him, saying; Com cumpleti fuerint dies tui, sus^^^bo semen
tuum post ^e, 2 King. 7.12.
and firm^bo regnam eius: When thy days be fullfilled, and thou shall sleep
with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out
of thy bowels, and I will establish his Kingdom. Such effects does the smooth
breast, and soft heart of a King work; And this is so sure a Tenet, that for
to keep a Kingdom secure, and to be Lord of many more, there needs no other
claim, then that which Love and Gentleness makes. For, in regard that the
heart of man is generous, it will not be led by the neck with a halter, nor
will subjects long endure the yoke of a Tyrannizing and proud Lord: whereas on
the contrary, they are easily led a long, by a smooth and gentle hand. And
reason teaches us as much; for by how much the more easily is the heart of man
moved by conueniences, then by menaces, by fair means then by foul, by so
much the better is it to govern by meekness and gentleness, then by force
and rigor. Whence we draw this Conclusion, That too much sharpness, and
excess of rigor in a Prince, procures hatred; and affability and clemency,
Love. Which is that, which Kings ought most to seek after, as by and by we
shall show unto you, when we come to tell you, that these two qualities of
blandure, and clemency, so befitting a supreme Lord, are quite contrary to
that good expedition of Justice, and that integrity, which God does require in
a Judge; whom he wills and commands. That in matter of judgment, he
shall not pity the case of the poor: According to which Instruction, it of
force follows, that a King must represent two contrary persons; that of a
kind and pitiful Father; and that of a just, and angry Judge. For, if in his
own nature, he be kind, and tender hearted, there is not that offender,
which will not be set free by the power of Entreaties, and Tears, weapons;
wherewith the hardest and cruellest hearts suffer themselves to be overcome.
And if he be otherwise, what can the delinquents hopes end in, but death and
despair? Again, if he be virtuous, and severe, it is impossible that he
should not hate the vicious, and grow into choler, when he shall hear of
their cruel outrages and insolences. Now, Hier. Sup. Ierom. 22. Aug. lib. 5.
de Ciuit. cap. 24. Isid. lib. 3. Sent. cap. 52. S. Th. 2. 2. q. 137 art. 2. ad
2.
what remedy in this case is to be used? Saint Ierom, and Saint Austen, are of
opinion, that a King, by his own person, is to punish, and premiate, to
execute chasticement with justice, and to mitigate it with mercy. Nor is it
unworthy our consideration, nor liable to inconueniencie, that a King should
represent two persons, so contrary in show, as judging with Justice, and
Mercy. For two virtues cannot be contrary. And as the Saints and holy Doctors
say, (and they are in the right) Mercy does not hinder the execution of
Justice, but it moderateth the cruelty of the punishment. And it is very
necessary in a good Judge, that he should have a true and faithful pair of
balance in his hands, and in either scale to put rigor, and equity, that he
may know how to correct the one by the other. The Kings of Portugal,
(especially Don Iuan the third) did use to judge Capital crimes, accompanied
with his Council, and were always accounted fathers of the people, because with
them, Justice, and Mercy, walked hand in hand; showing themselves just in
punishing the fault, and merciful in mitigating the punishment. By which
means, they were of all, both feared and beloved. And let not Kings persuade
themselves, that this does lessen their authority, and take of from their
greatness, but gives an addition; and the oftener they sit in judgment, they
shall do God the more service, and the Kingdom more good: And in conscience,
the surest and safest course, for that reciprocal obligation, which is between
the King and his subjects. For they owe obedience, service, and acknowledgement
to him, as their Lord and Master. And he unto them, Justice, Defense and
Protection. For to this end and purpose, do they pay him so many great
Tributes, and Taxes. Nor is it enough for him to do it by others, but he must
also do it by himself. For, neither that great Governor of Gods people,
Moses, nor any other after him, is, in all the whole body of the Bible to be
found, that ever yet condemned the occupation of judging the people, to be
unworthy royal Majesty nor contrary to the reputation of a King. I know no
other prejudice in it, save that it is impossible for one sole man, to undergo
so great a task. And this impossibility arises from the multitude of
subjects; and in that case, they advise, That a King should not wholly take
away his hand from the doing of Justice, but that the lesser and more ordinary
businesses, he should remit and referr them to different Ministers, and the
weightier causes, take to his own charge, and be present in person, when they
come to be sit upon, and determined; as formerly have done the wisest and
greatest Monarkes, that ever were in the world. Who did ever equal King
Solomon, in wisdom, greatness, and Majesty? yet did he hold it no disgrace
unto him, to humble himself to hear suitors, judge their causes and to do
them Justice. The Kings of the Hebrew people, were called Judges, because they
did glory in nothing so much, as to hear, and judge the people. And in all
Nations, this has always been the principal Office appertaining unto Kings.
And the Holy Ghost says; That the King, Prou. 29.14.
that faithfully judges the poor, his throne shall be established for ever.

. III. That it much imports Kings, to have the good Love and affection of
their Subjects.
KIngs, (as already has been said) are the Heads of their Kingdoms; Their
Estates serve them as Members; Without which it is impossible they should be
that, which their name speaks them. And therefore, it is not only convenient,
but necessary, that they should seek to gain the good wills of all, suting
themselves, (though they force their own) to the nature of their subjects, and
beholding them, as if they were his children. Which is the best course to keep
them well affected, and contented, and to be beloved, and obayed by them. Which
they may easily do, if they will but think themselves, that they are
sheepheards, and fathers of those people, which God has recommended unto them,
easing them of those wrongs and grieuances, which they unjustly suffer; laying
no more upon them, then they are able to bear; suffering them, when reason
shall require, to take their ease and their quiet; and helping to sustain
them, when they grow poor, and are decayed. Plato tells us, That for a Prince
to be good, and to be beloved of all, he must bestow all his love, and his
whole heart, upon the Commonwealth; his will, on the Gods; his secret, on his
friends; and his Time, on businesses. For, by thus reparting himself with all,
he shall have a part in all, by all of them coming to unite themselves with
him. Only in this good Correspondency of Love between Kings, and their
subjects, wise Periander places all the safety, and good fortune of Kings and
Kingdoms. Agesilaus, King of Lacedaemon, was once asked the question, How a
King might live secure; For that it is oftentimes seen, that neither multitude
of servants, nor a guard of Halbardiers can defend them from violence? To which
demand, he returned this answer: Si suis populis ita imperet, vt parents
filijs; If he so rule over his people, as a father does over his children. The
King that loves his subjects, and is again beloved by them, need no guarde,
they are his guard. For Love, where it is true and faithful, plainesheth the
knottiest piece of timber, smootheth the roughest and most vnhewen disposition,
and makes all fair, safe, and peaceable. It is a most strong wall, and more
durable, yea then Kings themselves. With this, no difficulty can offer it self
unto them, which they may not overcome; no danger, whose impetuousnesse they
may not oppose; no command, which they will not obey. For as Kings desire no
more of their subjects, but to be well served by them; so subjects, pretend
nothing from their Kings, but to be beloved by them. And indeed, the one
depends on the other. For, if a King love not his subjects, he shall neither
be well served, beloved, nor obayed by them. And as little, if he love himself
too much. For the more care he takes of himself and attends his own
particular, so much the more his subjects love departs from him. For the
harmony of a Commonwealth consists, in that all should live by the Kings
favor, and they by their subjects love. For they ought to be vigilant in all
that belongs to their service: and Kings most watchful in that, which
concerns their general good: So that none is to have less part in the King,
then the King himself. And because it is impossible to content all, by reason
not only of their different, but contrary natures, it is necessary at least to
content the most. There are two differences of States, or two sorts of people,
to be considered in a Kingdom; The Citizens, (or which comprehends all) the
common people: Or your Peers, and such as either are persons of Title, or
aspire to be. It shall be good discretion and prudence, to procure to content
the people, (especially in a Kings first entrance into his reign) in that
which is reasonable and honest. And if their demands shall be otherwise, to
dissemble with them, and to take time to consider of it, and so by little and
little, let their blood go cooling. This was the Counsel of your old
Counsailours. Which had it been followed by that young King Rehoboam, his
people had not rebelled against him, 3 King. 11.
nor he in the beginning of his Empire, (before he was scarce warm in his
throne) have lost ten Tribes of the Twelve. The Common people, are always
grumbling, and complaining, and ready to run into rebellion, as being
fearelesse, in regard of their multitude, and careless, for that they have
little or nothing to loose. The Minor Pliny, after that he had made a large
Catalogue of the natural virtues of the Emperor Traiane, after that he had
shown what great account he made of the Common people, he says; Let not a
Prince deceive himself, in thinking, that he is not to make any reckoning of
the common people; for without them he cannot sustain, nor defend his Empire.
And in vain shall he procure other help, for that were to seek to live with
a head, without a body; which besides that it were monstrous, it must needs
toter and tumble down with it is own weight, because it has nothing to bear
it up. And if Kings will needs know what kind of thing the Common people is,
and what able to do upon all changes and alterations, let them take into their
consideration, that which passed at the arraignment and death of our Savior
Christ, where there was not that Rule of reason of State in the vilest manner,
which was not then practiced. And the first stone that the Princes of the
Scribes and Pharisees moved against him, was the people; for they knew well
enough, that without them they could not awe, and fear Pilate, nor move him by
their accusations, and false witnesses to condemn him. In the next place, they
had recourse to the particular conueniency of the Judge, that he should not be
a friend unto Caesar, but should loose his love, if upon this occasion the
people should rise and rebel; by which trick they inclined him to their
party, and wrought him to prefer his private Interest, before public
Justice, and his own preservation, before that which was both honest and
reasonable. Again, it is more secure, to procure the favor and love of the
people, and more easy to effect his purpose by them. More secure, because
without their love and assistance, no alteration in the state can take effect.
This their love does uphold Kings, and gets them the opinion of good and
virtuous Princes. This qualifieth all wrongs, or makes the offenders pay
soundly for them, against whom none dare seem to be singular. Lastly, for that
the common people; having only respect to their particular profit and their
own private Interest, cannot desire nor pretend that, which your greater
Peers, and principal men of the State do, who always (out of their ambition)
aspire to more, and stand beating their brains, how they may compass that,
which their imagination tells them they want; And by so much the more does this
their Ambition increase, in how much the greater place they are, and in a near
possibility of that which they desire. I said (before) more easy; because the
people content themselves with aequalitie (and this likewise makes well for
Kings) with the administration of Justice with common ease and rest, with
plenty, and with the mildness, gentleness, and peaceablenesse of him that
rules over them. Now, that Kings may procure this popular love, it is fit they
should make choice of such Ministers, as are well beloved of the people, that
will hear them with patience; comfort, and hearten them up, that they may the
more willingly bear the burdens that are laid upon them, the Tributes, Taxes,
and troubles of the Kingdom, which in the end must light all upon them. For it
is not to be doubted, and experience teaches the truth of it, That the
Ministers and servants of a Prince, make him either beloved, or hated; And all
their defects or Virtues turn to his hurt, or profit. And let not Kings make
slight reckoning thereof, nor let them color it over with Reasons of State;
For he, that once begins to be ha^ed out of an ill conceived opinion, they
charge him withal that is either well, or ill done. For, there is nothing, be
it never so good, which being ill interpreted, may not change it is first
quality in the eyes of men, who judge things by apparences: Which is another
principal cause, why Princes ought to procure the love of the people. For, in
conclusion, most certain it is, that the Common people, is not only the Judge
of Kings, but is their Attourny, also whose censure none of them can escape;
And is that Minister, which God makes choice of for to punish them in their
name and fame, which is the greatest of all Temporal punishments. Suting with
that which we said heretofore of the voice of the people, that it is the voice
of God. For his divine Majesty uses this as a means to torment those, who
have no other superior upon earth. And therefore it behooves them to prevent
this mischief, and to win unto them the peoples affection by as many ways
as possibly they can devise, as by their own proper person with some; with
other some, by their favorites and familiar friends; and with all by their
Ministers. For, there is not such a Tully, nor Demosthenes, withal their
eloquence, for to praise, or disprayse the Actions of a King, either to salve,
or condemn them, as is the peoples love, or hatred. A great cause likewise of
procuring this love, and to win the hearts of the people, and to give them
all good content, will be, if Kings would be but pleased, who are Lords of many
Kingdoms, and Provinces, to have near about them natural Ministers and
Counsaylours of all the said several Kingdoms, and Provinces; For
Commonwealths, and kingdoms, risent it exceedingly, to see themselves cast
out of administration* and government, when they do not see at the Kings
elbow, or in his Counsel any one of their own nation, and country,
conceiving, that they do either basely esteem of them, or that they dare not
trust them; Whence, the one ingendreth hatred, and the other, desires
liberty. Let a King therefore consider with himself, that he is a public
person, and that he ought not to make himself particular; that he is a
natural Citizen of all his Kingdoms and Provinces; and therefore ought not
willingly to make himself a stranger to any one of them. That he is a father
to them all, and therefore must not show himself a Step-father to any. And
therefore let him still have some one natural child of every Province in his
Council. For, it is a great vnhapines to a kingdom, not to have any one child
of theirs (amongst so many) by the Kings side, with whom the Naturalls thereof
may hold the better correspondencie. For these more speedily, and with more
diligence and love, treat and dispatch their businesses, then strangers either
can or will, who must be sued unto, and will do nothing but upon earnest
entreaty, or by force and compulsion, or like good wary Merchants, by trading
for ready money. Let Kings weigh with themselves, that it is as natural a work
in them to afforde favor unto all, as in a tree to afford fruit* And it is a
great glory to a king, to oblige all nations to love him. For that King much
deceives himself, who will make himself King of this, or that Province, and
no more; Sithence, that God himself, whom he represents on earth, professes
himself, to be Lord of the one, and the other, and of all. And therefore, he that
is Lord of many, should not throw all his love and affection on a few. Let him
in such sort confer his favors on the one, that he may not give occasion of
affront and disgrace to the other. For, these general favors, make much for
the honor and estimation of Kings. It faring with them, as it does with those
trees, when all sorts of passengers, go gathering, and inioying their fruits.

I say farther that for the augmentation and conservation of the love of
Commonwealths, and Kingdoms, toward their Kings, (a maine and principal
point, which ought to be esteemed in more, then other great treasures) it will
be very convenient (and is the Counsel of persons of great prudencie,
thoroughly acquainted with Kings, and Kingdoms) that they should have some
person, or persons of these good parts and qualities; To wit: Men of good
natural abilities, and of great wisdom, to whom in particular, they should
ommit the care to hear those that are wronged, and malcontent. For the
graces and favors of Kings, as proceeding from humane power, which cannot do
all it would, have evermore been less in number then the pretenders. And
therefore must of force follow, that there must needs be a great number of
discontented persons in all Kingdoms, even in the best, and most sweetly
governed. Some holding themselves wronged, induced thereunto by their own
opinion; others, by disfavors; Some, by bad dispatch; others, by delays; And
some, (and those perhapps the most) by finding themselves deceived in their
pretensions; A thing that ought much to be thought on, though there be few,
that take pleasure to hear on that ear. These men, I say, troubled with
cares, and transported with passion, thrust themselves into all Companies,
great, and small, high, and low, entering into discourse with Malcontents, and
laying open their wounds unto them; which kind of men, I would have to be
kindly dealt withal, that the Kings Ministers, should give them the hearing,
that they should temper and allay this their passion, that they should hearten
and encourage them, and indeed make show in some things to go hand in hand
with them, though it be in some sort against their king and Master, seeking
reasons to maintain their part, and that he cannot blame them if they
complain, having so much cause, laying the fault either on the iniquity of
the times, or the carelessenesse of those, through whose fingers these things
were to pass; and that, as it was no fault of the Kings, for not having been
truly informed, so can he not but rest well assured of their good bowels, and
sound intention to his Majesty and the State. This is a cunning artifice, and
admirable art, against that deadly poison, of those men's hatred and discontent,
which repute themselves wronged and disgraced. And the better will this take
with them, if this care be committed to such either person, or persons, that
are well liked and beloved of the people, and have together with their natural
grace, the grace of heaven, a gift which Kings can neither give, nor take away;
howbeit, they give that grace and favor, whence resulteth the peoples respect.
For, it will not always serve the turn, to be beloved of all; nor will this
general love sometimes excuse him from being hated of many. And therefore in
this the grace of heaven must be sought after, and such a man made choice of,
as has this natural gift; for by the help thereof, he shall be the better
beloved, and over them all have the more command. This Counsel, was well
esteemed and approved by that wise and prudent King, Don Philip the second, as
a very necessary, and convenient means for to temper men's minds, and to get
general notice of all that passes, either in word or deed, and thereupon be
able to give all possible remedy thereunto. And this advice pleased him so
well, that he committed the execution thereof to him that gave it him and
purposely remitted some businesses unto him, that he might have the better
occasion to sound men's minds, and to effect what he pretended by that kind of
course: And in short time gave good satisfaction by the proof, and made known
to his Majesty how much good was enclosed in this Artifice, for the
conservation of Kings, and Kingdoms.

. IIII. Of the sagacitie, sharpness of wit, and quickness of apprehension,
which Kings ought to have.
GEnebrard, and other grave Authors say; That this statly Tower, and nose of
the Spouse, whereof we discourse, signifies those, which govern the Church,
or the Kingdom, and such as excel the rest in understanding, judgment,
sagacitie, and prudence. The Egyptians likewise in their Hieroglyphics, by a
high rising nose, understand a wise and sage mind, that has an eye unto
dangers, fore-sees mischiefs, and takes order for them in time, that it may
not be overtaken by them. And such a one as this, a King ought to have. And
certain it is, that if that old Serpent had not had that hap in that first
deceit, exercised on our first Mother Eve, it had been needelesse for one man
to watch another and to be so wary and circumspect, as now they are. But
because he, with such great craft, and subtletie, did power forth this his
poison into the original fountain of our nature, it was necessary that
against this his venom, we should take this Antidote and Treacle, for a
preservative, and prevent one poison, by another. And as Treacle, being made of
poison, serves as a remedy against poison it self; so, for to resist that
poison which that Serpent by his subtletie, scattred and spread abroad amongst
us; it is needful, that men, following the Counsel, which our Savior
Christ gave unto his Disciples; Be ye wise as Serpents, and harmless as
Doves; should join these two together. For of these two, is made that fine
Treacle, whereof we intend to speak. Not of simplicity alone, nor prudence
alone, but of both together. This is that true and perfect Confection; for
prudence, without a sound and harmless Intention, is but mere craft and
subtletie, (as Aristotle says) and produces nothing but tricks and devises,
to delude and deceive. And a plain and sincere intention, deuoyd of prudence,
does but deceive and damnifie a man's self. I mean particular persons. For in
Kings this want of wariness, and prudent sagacitie, will procure greater hurt
to the general affairs of the Commonwealth. Too notorious and well known is
that sentence of the glorious S. Jerome; Sancta rusticitas solum sibi prodest:
Holy plainness and simplicity, does only profit a man's self, That is; some
particular person. But Kings besides their good intention, and sincerity of
mind, must have prudence and sagacitie, for to resist the plots and traps of
the ambitious, who still lie in wait, watching a fit occasion for to deceive
them, unless they be minded to loose their reputation, their authority, and
their Kingdom all at once. This is not a Prognostication, broached out of mine
own brain, but vented by the holy ghost; That an imprudent King, Eccl. 10.3.
shall ruin a Kingdom. Rex insipiens, perdet populum suum: An unwise King,
destroys his people. The Prophet Esaias, after he had made a recapitulation of
the graces and gifts of wisdom, understanding, counsel, might, knowledge,
and diverse other wherewith the Holy Ghost was to adorn the person of our
Savior Christ, that King of Kings, and lively pattern and true example of all
good Kings, Esaias 11.3.
says; Et replebit eum spiritus timoris Domini: And the spirit of the fear of
the Lord* shall rest upon him: Now the Hebrew Rabins, whom Paguinus, and
Vatablus follow, read; Olfactio odoratus eius, erit cum timore Domini: Ita
Isido. Cla^^us.
The pleasant sent of his sweet odor, shall be with the fear of the Lord.
That is to say; Together with the fear of the Lord, and all other virtues, he
shall have an admirable understanding, and a dainty delicate judgment* Odorari
faciam eum: I will make him to sent and wind out* So that he shall nose out
any thing whatsoever, though never so far off, and without seeing, or hearing
them, be they never so secret and hid, shall make a right and true judgment of
things. By this quickness of sent, they understand that nimblenesse of
apprehension, sharpness of understanding, and sagacitie, which a King ought
to have: (borowing the Metaphore from your Line-hound, or blood-hound, who
running upon the sent, and nosing the footing of what he is put upon, discouers
the game he pursues, be it in the thickest brakes, and closest bushes in the
Forest.) He must be so subtle and so quick of sent, that nothing must
escape his knowledge, nothing be hidden from his understanding; he must like a
Surgeon, search into the depth of the wound: there is no mystery so secret,
which he must not pry, and diue into, he must nose from a far the
impstoures, artifices, fraudulent dealings, and cunning disguises of those that
go about to deceive him. When we will signify such a man's trace, or which way
he tends, We usually say; Ya yo avia olido algo desso: Now I begin to smell
his drift. I have an inckling what he intends. But Kings must have more then
an Inckling; they must have a full knowledge of all; There must not be that
thing in the world, which mainely concerns them, and their Kingdoms, which
they must not wind and sift out. And from that high place, wherein they are
seated, they are, like sentinalls in a Watchtower, to see, and make discovery,
of all the cunning practices, and devilish plots devised against them, and of
the slye and subtle carriage of such crafty and double-dealing men, with whom
they treat, be they Naturells, or Strangers. For (as it is in the Proverb) La
nistad del anno, viuen con art y enganno; y la otra part, con enganno, y
art: One half part of the year, they live by art, and deceit; The other
half part, by deceit, and art. And because these workers of mischief, arm
themselves with the more care, and lie in closer ambush against Kings, and
their great Estates; it is necessary that they likewise should stand upon their
guard, and be very vigilant and circumspect, not only for to discover their
proiects, and to defend themselves from their designs, but to take them in the
manner; Or (as it is in the Spanish proverb) Cogerles con el hurtoen las manos:
Whilst the theft is yet in their hands, to lay hold on them. One of the
greatest Attributes and noblest Titles, which holy Job, gives unto God, is
that, where he says, Apprehendit sapientes in astutia eorum: Job. 5.12.
That he takes the wise in their own craftiness. He well understands upon
what point insist the Sophistries and fallacies of the wise men of this world;
and at what mark their Counsels aim; Job. 12.
Et consilia prauorum dissipat: He disappointeth the devises of the crafty; and
scattreth the Counsayles of the wicked. Rex, qui sedet in solio, dissipat omne
malum, intuitu suo.
And what they have forged in their hearts, he hammereth in that sort, that
they shall not fulfill their desires. Cogitationes malignorum: The cogitations
of the wicked; So says another letter. He calls them Malignos, that are men
of a noble heart, That have a thousand turnings, and windings. Another Letter
has Versutorum; Variable, often changing, subtle, shifting: being all of them
true Epithetes of a double disposed, and crafty generation. Ne possint implere
manus eorum, Ibi.
quod coeperunt: That their hands cannot perform their enterprise, nor make an
end of the web, which they have begun to weaue, but their Counsel is carried
headlong; meeting with darkness in the day time, being taken in their own
net, as Absalon was with his own hair; never being able to set the same foot
forward again. Christ, calls these kind of men, Foxes, which never go on in
a straight and direct way, but crossing from one side to another and making
many doubles; as he does, that has doubling thoughts, and plays, with the
Fox, Wyly, beguile ye. And by this beast, did the Egyptians signify that
man, which uses double dealing, and i^ his words and works, is nothing but
impostures, tricks, and devices; Vae duplici cord, Eccl. 2.12.
and labijs scolestis terram ^^gredienti d^aebus vijs: Woe to the double heart,
to deceitful lips, and to the sinner, that goes two ways. To deal with
these men will be required a great deal of prudence and sagacitie, a
Countermine must be made, and a pit dug whereinto they may fall, and that
like silk-wormes, they might be wrapped and inuolued in the same bottom, that
themselves have wrought, to their utter undoing. Prou. 11.6.
In insidijs fuis ^^p^^^ur iniqui (says the wise man.) The transgressors
shall be taken in their own naughtiness. Their plots and proiects shall make
for their final perdition. When the Pharisees with soft and smooth words
questioned our Savior Jesus Christ, what should be done with that woman, whom
they had newly taken in the Act of adultery, made use of that his admirable
prudence and wisdom, accompanied with the simplicity and harmelessenes of
the Dove; saying unto them. John 8.7.
Qui sine peccato est vestrum, pri^us in illam lapidem mittat: He that is
without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her. And presently
thereupon, he stouped down, and fell to writing with his finger on the ground,
to the end, that without making them farther ashamed, being convicted by their
own conscience, they might one by one get them gone, and leave the poor woman
free. These men came armed with the Serpentine subtletie of the Devil, and
presuppossing that he would have absolved her of that crime, they would then
have accused him for an infringer and breaker of the Law; And in case he
should have condemned her, they would have charged him with cruelty. But our
Savior was every way well provided for them, and to this their pestiferous
poison, he applied the pure and perfect Treacle of his prudence. The like trick
they would have put upon him, and with no less cunning, when they demanded of
him; whether it were lawful to pay tribute unto Caesar, or no? Conuincing them
with the very same piece of money, which they brought unto him; telling them;
Reddite ergo quae sunt Caesaris Caesari; Mat. 22.21.
and quae sunt Dei, Deo: Render therefore unto Caesar, the things which are
Caesar's, and unto God, the things, that are Gods. It is a great happiness for
prudent Kings, and for those Princes also, that have not as yet gained with all
men the opinion of wise, that some occasions might be offered unto them,
wherein they might catch these crafty and subtle Foxes; And they ought
purposely to hunt after them, and to perform some exterior, and public
actions in order to this end: And so to carry them, that all the people may
take notice of them. For thereby, they shall gain a great deal of authority
and reputation throughout the Kingdom. And of all, both subjects, and
strangers, be feared and esteemed, for men of wisdom, worth, and prudence. As
it befell King Solomon at his first coming to the Crown, 3 King. 28.
when the people of Israel perceived the discretion and prudence, wherewith he
had proceeded in deciding that difference between the two women, touching the
living child, which each of them pretended. Insomuch that when they saw how
wisely, and how justly it was carried by him, they shouted all for joy, saying;
surely, the wisdom of God is in him; And from thence forth they began to
respect, and fear him. Yet mistake me not, I beseech ye; For, I do not say,
that Kings should desire, that any ill should betide any man; but that they
ought, and may desire, that some such occasion might be offered unto them,
wherein they might show their zeal and love unto Justice, and manifest to the
world, that they are wise enough of themselves to execute the same. For there
is nothing, that makes a King more worthy of his Monarchy, as to win, by
means of his good Counsel and government, greater credit and authority, then
what he had, when he began first to govern: For a kingdom is only the gift of
fortune; but this other, argues his own wisdom, and judgment.

But that, which I shall conclude this point withal, is this; That this
prudence and sagacitie of the Serpent, so much commended by Christ, joined with
the Doves simplicity, produces two effects of much importance in kings, which
are these Neither to deceive, nor to be deceived. Simplicity, is without welt
or guard, plain and true, and knows not how to deceive any man. Prudence, on
the other side, is very wary and circumspect, and will not suffer her self to
be deceived by any man. Nay, it goes a little farther; for it perfecteth the
whole essence and being of prudence, and causes a certain dexterity in the
dispatch of businesses, which is a great help unto Princes, and is the only
Mistress to make them to understand and judge things aright. And likewise to see
and discern them by outward actions, and the exterior senses. The eye, the
foot, the hand, shall not wag, move, or stir, but it shall discover the
inward thought. Lastly, it is it is proper office, (Reason assisting and the
discourse of the understanding) to anticipate occasions, and to divert in time
the evil that may happen; For, (as Tully says, and very truly) Nihil turpius
in sapiente est, quam dicere, non putaram: Nor ought it to be the Language of
kings to say; I did not think on such a thing, I did not dream, that things
would have fallen out thus, and thus; or that I did not thoroughly understand
the business. For, in Kings, it is no less shame to suffer themselves to be
deceived, or to be overcome by Arts, and tricks, then to be subdued in the
open field by force of Arms. Kings therefore, being necessarily to hear, and
negociate with so many and so sundry persons, to free themselves from the
slightes and subtleties of some, must make use of this circumspection and
sagacitie. Homer represents unto us a most prudent Prince, who (though
unlearned) yet for that he was very crafty and subtle, did govern very well,
and freed himself from many great dangers. Subtletie and Sagacity, accompanied
(I say) with a sound intention, and a good conscience, (for that is it, we
aim at in government) proceeds not from sagacity, and subtletie, but from
goodness and Justice.

. V. Of the Discretion, which Kings ought to have.
B^de: in Job Greg. Pastor. p. 1. c 11.
VEnerable Beda, and S Gregory say, of the nose and it is nostrills; that they
are the Instrument, or Conduite, to convey all sorts of sents up to the head;
And that they are purposely placed in so high a Station, that they may the
better discern the good and the bad. And they signify thereby the virtue of
discretion, which is the knowledge of good and ill, and by Reasons help,
distinguishes the one from the other. Per nasum, discretio exprimitur, per
quam virtutes eligimus, and delecta reprobamus: By the nose, is understood
discretion, by which we make choice of virtue, and reject our pleasures. And
is of that great excellency, that the Ancient made her Reginam virtutum: the
Queen of the Virtues; reducing all the rest unto it. Another called her the
Mother. A third, the fountain or wellspring of the Virtues; A fourth, will
have every particular virtue to bear the name of Discretion. And there is not
one wanting, who affirms that these did not hit the mark aright; for far
better (says he) might they have said, that there is no virtue at all,
without discretion. For albeit the Virtues in themselves be perfect and full,
and do qualify the person that possesses them, as Fortitude, makes a man
valiant; Justice, makes a man just; Wisdom makes a man wise. And so in the
rest; Yet if the use of discretion be wanting to any one of these, they loose
their Punctum and medium; wherein they consist and light upon the extremes. So
the Liberal turns Prodigal; the Valiant, foole-hardy; The wise, imprudent;
and the Just, injurious. Ber. in Cant. Ser. 49.
Discretio (says S. Bernard) omni virtuti ordinem ponit: Discretion, is the
rule, by which every virtue is directed. And in matter of Counsel the Vote of
discretion strikes a great stroke; for it distinguishes falsehood from truth;
things certain, from things doubtful; and from amidst what is ill, makes
choice of that which is good. It qualifieth all things, and puts them in their
punto, and proper being. And the Philosopher says; That it is a virtue proper
unto Kings, Princes, and Governors, Arist. 3. Polit. c. 3.
to whom by office it belongs to intermeddle and have a hand in such a world of
businesses, as require their direction and discretion; wherewithal they must
help themselves for the better disposing, and ordering to a good end the
affairs of the Commonwealth. It is a near neighbor unto prudence, and
bordereth much upon her, these virtues (as we said before) being so inchained,
and interlinked one with another that we cannot touch one piece, without
trenching upon the other. And are both so necessary, that though I should say
never so much of them, I could not out-speake them.

But to come to the point; Let the first point of advise and discretion in a
King be; not to trust so much to his own wisdom and discretion, as to
forbear, out of a presumption of his own sufficiency, to treat and consult
businesses with persons of prudence and understanding. For, being that so many
and so various are the cases, which daily offer themselves unto Kings, and so
grave and weighty the businesses, whereof they treat, they must be canuased
to and fro, and well and thoroughly debated, for the better ordering and settling
of them; making former errors, to serve as Land-markes, for the avoiding of
those to come. And like a wise and experienced Physician, let him apply that
medicine there, and in that case, where, for want thereof he had formerly
erred. Out of ignorance, to draw knowledge; out of errors, certainties, and
out of bad successes, Arist. lib. 2. Rhetor. c. 9.
future warnings, is admirable discretion. Ex praeteritis conjicientes
iudicamus: (says Aristotle) By coniecturing of things past, we come to make
our judgment of things to come. And it is a very good course to divine by
that which is past; and in Kings exceeding necessary; to draw experience from
sometimes, for other some; And to beware (as they say) not one^y by other men's
harms, but likewise by their own. For, let a man be never so wary, never so
circumspect, and let him watch and look about, as if his life lay on it, he
must either fall, or has fallen at some one time or other, or has erred in
this, or that particular, whereby his designs have been frustrated, or has
seen, or read the downe-fals of others. And therefore shall he show himself
very discreet, if he shall gather a Doctrine out of these, and make such good
use of them that they may serve unto him for a warning; Castigasti me Domin^^,
and eruditus sum: O Lord, thou have chastised me, and aster that, Ier. 31.18.
I was instructed. For, (as it is in the Proverb) De los escarmentados, salen
los arteros: No men, are more their Craft-Masters, than thoe that have been
most bitten. Nor is it much, that a man of reason and understanding discoursing
with himself of forepassed passages, should benefit himself by comparing
cases past, with cases present, and by experience and knowledge of those which
heretofore have been remediless, he may apply remedy to those, which
threaten future mischief: Sithence that brute beasts (as it is observed,
Isidor. lib. 4. Epist. Polyb.
by S. Isidore, and Polybius) who have no discourse; but only a natural
instinct, leading them to their conservation, make use of the like kind of
Accidents, not only when they themselves fall into some quag-mire, or
otherwise have run the danger of this bait; or that net; but even then also,
when they see others fall before them, they hang an arse, and will not easily
suffer themselves to be drawn into the like danger, but hold that place ever,
after in suspicion, where they have seen their fellows endangered, and shun
(all that they can) that hole, or bog, whereinto they have once either fallen,
or been myred. And shall not men of understanding, and good discourse, which
hear, and see, what other men suffer, as likewise the great hurt, which they
themselves have received by the like cause, shall not they (I say) grow wise by
other men's harms, and their own; shall not they seek to shun and avoid (as
much as in them lies) the like inconveniences, but that some pleasing thing
shall be no sooner propounded unto them, but forthwith they will suffer
themselves to fall into the pit, and to be taken in the snare, that lies before
them, and will not offer to fly therfro, nor forbear to eat of that deceiving
food, whereunto they are invited, and know for certain, that never any did
come off with safety? He, that by the forepassed Accidents, and falls of
others, or of himself, does not take advise and warning, the name of beast,
nay of a senseless creature, will better befit him, then of a discreet and
well-aduised man. This is that complaint, which Moses made of that foolish
people. Vtinam saperent, and intelligerent, ac nouissima prouiderent: Would to
God, that they would call to mind, and make use, of the so many, and various
successes, which they have seen, and past through, and that quoting the
present, with the past, they would be provident in that, which is to come;
especially, since the wise man says; That the thing, that has been, Eccl.
1.9.
is that which shall be; and that, which is done, is that which shall be done;
and that there is no new thing under the Sun. Let the conclusion therefore of
this discourse be, first; That it is not here required of a discreet King,
that he should bear about him in his sleeue good luck, and draw out when he
lifts a fair lot, and a certain and happy success in all his businesses;
for this is only, and wholly, in Gods hands, and not in his. And therefore to
require any such thing of him, were great indiscretion: but that he should
enter into them (if time will give him leave) with sound advise, and mature
deliberation, and to intertaine them till he be able to bring his purposes to
pass; And, si fit periculum in mora: If there be danger in delay, and that
they will not suffer the deferring, let him call to mind the success of
former businesses, and let him well consider with himself, what in like cases
has usually succeeded, and accordingly let him settle in the present, and
provide in the future, that which is most fitting, evermore having respect to
the justness of his cause, relying altogether upon God, and humbly beseeching
him, that he will direct him in all his ways. For (as it is in the Proverbs)
Cor hominis disponit viam suam, Prou. 16.9.
sed Domini est, dirigere gressus eius: A man's heart deuiseth his way; but the
Lord directs his steps. Suting with that common saying; Homo proponit, and
Deus disponit. Man purposes, but God disposes. The second thing required of
him is; That he look well about him, that he diligently observe the manner of
government throughout his whole kingdom, and that he have a watchful eye on
his public Ministers, and Counsailours of State; and more particularly upon
those, that are in highest place and authority, and have his ear most; And
that he likewise labor to know the qualities, conditions, and natural
dispositions of those, that now are, and to confer and compare them with
those of former times that he has seen, and known, or has heard, and read
of in Histories; to the end, that by the knowledge of the affections, and
natural inclinations of those, he may prognosticate the end whereunto these
tend; and by those passages and proiects of precedent times, make a divination
of the designs of the present. For, this prudentia in principe, quodammodo
diuinatio est: Plutar. in Pompon. Attic.
This prudence and discretion in a Prince, is a kind of divination. And let
them not tell me that men's manners, are changed with their names; nor their
natural inclinations with the declination of times, and that there is no
correspondency betwixt those that are now, and those of old, for (as Cornelius
Tacitus says, who was a singular Master in this science, speaking of his own
times, in respect of the former) the men are other, but not their manners. They
are now, as they were then; and then as now. Well may it be, that for some
considerations, men may repress, and cover their affections more at one time,
then another, but not, that they are not one and the same, those of this time
and that; and that early or late they do not the same work, they anciently
did. For, from one and the same causes, it must necessarily follow, that we
must see one and the same effects. Let Kings therefore see (once more I speak
it) and consider well the estate wherein stand the affairs of their Kingdom,
how it is in the government, in their Ministers, and their Counselors, what
their affections, natural inclinations, passions, ambitions, desires, and the
like, and make a judgment of the one and the other, of the present, and the
past, and they shall find, that these, and those, great and small, and all one
with another tread in one and the same steps, and aim all at that fair white,
of their own black and foul Interest. And weighing likewise with themselves,
that some, if not most of those Kings and Monarkes, that have gone along in
that track and held the like course of government, and made use of the like
Ministers, either have been ruined thereby, or brought near unto it, let them
stand aloof from it, or them, or ought else whatsoever whereby they may either
see, or know, other their predecessors have been utterly overthrown. For,
most certain it is, that by the effects of Cases past, we may know what were
the causes of them; and how in the like, the like may likewise succeed. The
science and knowledge of Kings, is like unto that of Astrology, wherein are
better skilled those of latter then former times, in regard of those many
proofs and experiences, which they have seen, heard, and read. History
therefore and experience, being the fountains of humane wisdom, Princes
ought to peruse Histories, and procure to know how it has succeeded with
others, that thereby they may take advice and warning in cases to come; and
from this experience and knowledge of men's natural inclinations and
affections, to draw thence a doctrine, for to moderate their own, and to know
other men's dispositions, and withal, to take notice, that the natural
dispositions of the men of these times, are not more strong and able to resist
their appetites, but are more weak in the natural, and less perfect in the
spiritual, then those of our Ancestors. Whence that follows, which we said
before, that by the Knowledge of the past, we may prognosticate of the
present, if we have once seen, and made trial, that it fell out so with
other men of the like state, and condition. So that it may be collected, by
what has hitherto been delivered, how necessary it is, that a King, or
supreme Lord, should exercise himself for some few years, in the study of
the various Lections of Histories, and may (if he will) come by them, to know
the customs, and inclinations of foreign nations, as well of those, that are
free States, as those that are under subjection; with whom he must endure so
many demands, and Answers. To the end that the variety of Accidents, may no
whit afflict, nor trouble him. For it were a kind of disparagement to a great
Prince, to admire any novelty whatsoever, or to seem a stranger, to the
strangest Accidents, that shall occur unto him. And he must necessarily
suffer this, and other great inconveniences and deceits in matters of State, if
he be not well advanced in the knowledge of them, and with the people, with
whom he is to treat. For many are they, that pretend to deceive him, and will
not suffer the truth to come to his ears in it is naked nature, but shadowed
with some color, as shall make best for their pretension. For to cut off which
mischief, histories serve the turn, which supply the want of experience, and
set before his eyes in a short piece of paper the successes of an age so large
and of such a length, that many lives cannot reach thereunto. A thing very
necessary in Kings, whereby to find themselves prepared for the present, and
provided for the future. For he, that has still before his eyes what is past,
is seldom deceived in that which is to come. And he, that shall turn over
the Histories of former times, shall meet with the novelties of the present;
as also with those truths which Sycophants conceal, and such as are not
flatterers dare not to tell him. Only Histories, without fear or dread,
speak plain language to Kings, and yet remain as whole, sound, and entire,
as they were before.

Another point of Discretion, is; That for as much as the advice and wisdom,
and more particularly in Kings and persons of great name and rank, is great,
they should not intermeddle in small matters, nor show themselves in your
lesser occasions, where the glory is none, and the loss of reputation great,
not only if they be overcome, but also if they do not overcome to their great
advantage. They ought not likewise lightly and without very good ground to
thrust themselves into businesses of great consequence, and of that danger and
difficulty, that they shall not afterward know well how to wind themselves
out of them: For it argues but a small talent of wisdom, to know dangers then
only, when a man is in the midst of them: And savors of much leuitie, to put
himself desperately upon cases of adventure. And this is no other Counsel,
then that which a very grave and wise man, gave the Emperor Vespasian,
deserving to be written in letters of gold, and in the Cabbinies of Kings. Qui
magnarum rerum consilia suscipiunt, aestimare debent, Refert. Cor. Tacit Annal.
lib. 8.
an quod inchoatur reip: vtile, ipsis gloriosum, aut promptum effectu, aut
certe non arduumsit. They that advise and consult the undertaking of great
enterprises, ought to weigh and consider with themselves, whether that they go
about, be profitable or no for the commonwealth, honorable for themselves, or
whether it may easily be effected, or at least without any great difficulty?
And this is a Lecture, which Christ reads unto all, aduising us, that before
we begin any business of importance, we enter into an account and reckoning
with our selves, whether we be able to go through with it, or not, and when
having well weighed the difficulties, dangeres and expenses we must be at,
we shall find it to be of more charge then profit, to let it alone. So shall
we rid our selves of a great deal of care, and excuse the murmurings and
censure of the people, who will much risent it, that in businesses, wherein the
wealth, peace, and reputation of a Kingdom is interessed, Kings should
adventure for the gaining of a little, to put themselves in hazard of loosing
much. As likewise, because thereby is given occasion, of measuring the extent
and limits of the power of Kings, and of plainly manifesting to the open view
of the world, that they cannot always do what they would nor against whom
they will, and therefore must not give way, that men should enter into
judgment, that their power cannot reach whither they themselves will have it,
but ought always and by all means they can, to maintain the credit and
estimation of their power, and greatness. The words of our Savior Christ, are
these; Which of you disposed to build a Tower, Luke 14.
sits not down before, and counts the cost, whether he have sufficient to
perform it? Lest after he has laid the foundation, and is not able to go
through with it, all that behold him, begin to mock him, saying; This man began
to build, and was not able to make an end. Or what King going to make war
against another King, sits not down first, and casts in his mind,
whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him, that comes against him
with twenty thousand, etc.

The like I say of competitions, whether this, or that other does this, or that
better? Though it be in matters of recreation. For all occasions of incounters
with Kings are in any hand to be avoided. And it likewise seems ill in point
of policy, that they in any kind should have any competition with their
vassalls. Poru. 20.3.
And King Solomon sets it down for a point of policy; for that it is a thing
unworthy authority Royal. It is a man's honor (says he) to keep himself
from strife. Alexander the Great, being asked the question, whether he would go
and sport himself at the Olympic games with the rest of the Great ones of his
Court? made answer; yes, if there were other Kings with whom I might contend.

Yet would I not have Kings so far to mistake me, as to understand that they
may not enterprise great things, and have competence with others, that are as
great, or greater then themselves, following their stepps and imitating their
heroycall Actions; nay, it is a point rather of Discretion, and wisdom, in a
prudent King, to tread in the track of their Ancestors, that walked in the
right way, and to set before their eyes the good things that they did, that
according thereunto they may take the like resolution in the like Cases. The
Romans were so religious in the Precedents and Examples of their
Predecessors, that they made them the line and rule of all their Actions, and
made them as a Law to be kept and observed, and could not depart ther-fro
without the foul note of ignominy, governing new enterprises, by former old
Actions. Neither ought a King likewise to esteem so meanly and so basely of
himself, as to think, that he is not able to do as much as others have done
in times past. For if they of old, had had that mind and conceit of
themselves, in calling to mind the brave and noble deeds, which they have
either heard, or read in Histories of their Ancestors, they would not have
imitated them, as many of them have, in their great and glorious Acts. And
certain it is, that never any man did any such illustrious and heroycall
Action heretofore, which might not be done by another. And therefore, the
Actions of Kings being such, as conduce to the service of God and the welfare
of the Commonwealth, it will conuene very well (the said circumstances being
duly considered) to commence and give a beginning unto them, to the end that
fortune, or (to say better) God, putting a helping hand to our good diligence
and industry, may give unto them a full and perfect end. It was the saying of
King Agesilaus: That fortune, in great affairs, and high enterprises, never
showed her self liberal and generous, but when she met with noble and
generous minds. And it has been often seen, that men loose, at least let
slip, many things, not because they are not able to atcheiue them, but because
they want courage to undergo them. And let them not only content themselves
with the bare reading of them, but endeavor to be like those famous Captains,
in matter of war; those great Commonwealths, in matter of government; and
those Christan Politicians, in matter of State. For examples persuade much. And
albeit that Homer says, that great enterprises are sooner spoken of, then
done; easily uttered, but hardly executed, yet let Princes do their best,
which will be no small matter. For thereby, their subjects will receive
benefit, their successors bear them envy, and their enemies stand in fear of
them.

Now let us draw out of this discourse that discretion, which is a virtue so
necessary, that when it is wanting, good is converted into ill; and virtue,
into Vice; and where a man thought to win fame, in stead thereof, grows
infamous, affronted, and ashamed. For discretion, works in man that effect,
as salt does in flesh, which dryes up the moisture, draws forth the blood, and
keeps it from corruption. As does salt, so does discretion, keep man free
from perturbations, or any unseemliness and discomposure, in any Action
whatsoever he undergoes. Christ recommended this virtue to his Disciples,
Mark. 9.49.
when he commanded them to have salt within themselves. This was in the
Gospel. But long before in the Leuiticall Law, Leuit. 2.13.
it was commanded; that every Sacrifice, should be salted with salt. The
words, are these; Ezech. 43.24.
Every oblation of thy meat offering, shall thou season with salt, neither
shall thou suffer the salt of the Covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy
meat offering: With all thine offering, thou shall offer salt. Giving us thereby
to understand the wisdom and discretion, wherewith he would have us to serve
him. And Saint Paul charge us, not to utter that word which shall not be
seasoned with the salt of wisdom, and discretion. A quality very necessary
and requisite in all, but more particularly, and without comparison with much
more advantage in Kings, as has wisely been observed by Anselmus, and
venerable Bede. In that safe conduct, which Artaxerxes gave unto Esdras,
wherein was set down in a list, all the allowances that they were to make him,
and what provisions he was to have along with him, Esdras 6.
and though in the rest there was a limitation, Sal ver o absque mensura; yet
was he to have salt without measure. He was not stinted in that. For in all
things belonging unto Kings, there is such a proportion, tax, or measure set
upon them; but there are no bounds, no limitts to be set upon their wisdom
and discretion. Let them (a Gods name) have that without measure, without
limitation. For, let them have never so much, it is no more then they have
need of. God, of his goodness, give them as much as is needful for them,
and that shall suffice them. And let us extract this, out of all that which
has been said touching this sense of smelling, that there are two sorts, or
two kinds of prudence, (according to S. Basil.) The one good, and the other
bad; The one of flesh, and blood; and the other of spirit, and life. Of the
former, do the wise men of this world boast. For they denominate that man to
be wise, that is crafty and subtle, a slye, cunning Companion, that by
ouer-reaching, and damnifying his neighbor, procures his own private profit.
The one (says Saint Paul) kills, the other quickens; This brings death, Romans
8.8.
that life. Nam prudentia carnis, mors est; prudentia autem spiritus, pax and
vita: For, to be carnally minded, is death; but to be spiritually minded, is
life and peace. Let that then be condemned for ill, and let that suffice, which
has been spoken thereof. And let us set up our rest upon this, which is such
and so good, that no virtue without it, is pleasing and acceptable unto God, as
no Sacrifice was without salt. So that chastity, and cleanness it self, a
virtue so high prized by God, and allianced so nearly with the Angels, is of
no reckoning without prudence. And that his best beloved, Mat. 25.
beautifullest, and fairest Spouse, should she be wanting in this, he would
repudiate her, and abhor her. We read in Saint Mathewes Gospel, of ten
handsome Virgins, well attyred and fitted for to attend the bride-gromes
coming, whereof five of them, for their imprudencie, Ambr. lib. 2: de been. c.
14.
were shut out, and not suffered to go in with him to the wedding. So that, it
is good for all; and without it, all is as nothing. Omnia operatur prudentia:
(says S. Ambrose) Wisdom works all things. It does not only put man's
reason and will in the right way, direct his forces and faculties, and order
all his actions; but without it, man is no man, but the Counterfaite, and
figure of a man. For therein consists the absoluteness and perfection of
man, and that similitude and likeness, which he has with God, in his being
capable of Reason, and prudence. By his Memory he makes that, which is past,
present; by his wisdom, he foresees that which is to come; and by his
Counsel and advise, he disposes and orders the present estate of things,
which are those parts of prudence, which we specified before.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the sense of Tasting, and of the virtue of Temperance, and how
well it befitteth Kings.
AMongst the many miseries, which accompaine man, even from the cradle to his
grave, and from his mothers womb, to that of the Earth, the mother of us all,
that hungry appetite and precise necessity of eating, and drinking is not the
least. It is (as S. Isidore says) a rigorous, a cruel and importunat
creditour; Nullus hominis tam importunus exactor est, Isidor:
quam venture; body suscipit, and cras exigit: There is not any so earnest and
eager an Exactor on man, as is the belly; It receives to day, and requires the
same again to morrow. It is continually demanding that troublesome tribute of
meat and drink, of recreation and pleasure, and all other things necessary
for the body; for all these pass, and are registered, under the sense of the
Taste. Which, albeit it be less noble then the rest, yet is it more necessary
then all of them. For (as S. Ierom says, and experience teaches) without it
we cannot live long, but without the other we may. Aristotle says, that this
sense directs it is eye to these two objects; to the pleasure it receives in
eating, and to the delight it takes in drinking. Both being very powerful,
and walking still hand in hand, the one seconding the other, taking their
several turns. And their Signorie so far extends it self, that it trenches
upon the rest of the senses, and all of them are willing to accompaine him. For
Hearing, Seeing, and Smelling, neither like us, nor last long, unless they
have the fellowship of the Taste. Yet are they differenced in this, that the
Species of those things, that are to be seen, heard, and smelt, are to pass
by the Medium, or means of another kind of transparent body, as is the Air.
Whereas those that are to be tasted, are to touch immediately upon the tongue,
and to have their dwelling and abiding in the palate, that it may the better
relish and distinguish the several sorts of Tastes. And it is worthy our
observation, that in that part of the Head, which is the mouth, where
principally the Taste has it is seat, though it is Jurisdiction be so short,
and so curtall'd, that it scarce occupies the least space of the Tongue, and
that it is delight is so short, that it indureth but for a moment, yet it should
come to be of that power and force, that it forced the wise man to say; That it
was insatiable. And though it always has, and does still show it is rule and
Empire over all mortal men, yet does it make it is greatest ostentation in
Kings, in Princes, and your great and principal persons, who are most subject
to it is Command. Some compare it to the fire, whereinto the more fuel you
fling, the more infinite is it is power, and rests never satisfied. In like
manner, such a Tyrant is the Taste, that be our riches, rents and patrimonies
never so great, like fire, it wastes and consumes them, though it self remain
still whole and entire, without being lessened or diminished. Nor will I here
cite the Examples of profane Kings and Emperors given over to the pleasure of
their palate and sensual delights, to the loss of great Estates and
Kingdoms, and the scandal of their subjects; because my purpose is to quote
some places of the sacred Scripture, dictated by the Holy Ghost, the Author of
Truth. It is reported of King Solomon, that being so wise, so rich, and so
powerful a Prince, that he did in such sort let loose the reins to his
unbridled appetite, as if there were not the least footing of wisdom, or
reason to be found in him. He himself says as much in Ecclesiastes, Eccl. 2.1.
where (as one that saw at last his own error) he expresses his mind in
this manner; Dixi in cord meo: Vadam and affluam delicijs, and fruar bonis: I
said in mine heart, Go to now, (for so the vulgar renders it) I will prove
thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure. I said so, and as I said, so I did.
Vadam; I will go; That is to say, after my appetite, I will abound in wealth,
I will enjoy the good things of this world, by which are understood all sorts
of delights, and pleasures, as eating, drinking, intertainments, recreations,
sportes, and pastimes, and whatsoever in that kind may be conceived or
imagined. Eccl. 2.10.
Omnia quae desiderauerunt oculi mei non negaui eis; etc. Whatsoever mine eyes
desired, I kept not from them; I withheld not my heart from any joy. For my
heart rejoiced in all; etc. And at last, he concludes with this saying; Quis
ita deuorauit, and delicijs affluit, Ibi. 25*
vt ego: Who, of all the Kings that ever were in the world, could eat more
then I? Or who could hasten more thereunto then I, having the world so much at
will, and more then all they had? Was it not a thousand pities (think you) to
see so wise a King to become Tributary and subject to so vile a slave as is the
belly? I have often times mused and wondered with my self at the blindness of
our noble men of these times, who making it such a point of honor, and
standing so strictly upon it, not to pay any tax, or tribute, though it amount
not to above a blanke, and that they will sooner loose their lives, then
acknowledge themselves Tributaries, and yet that these the more noble and
greater Lords they are, should the more glory to be Tributaries, and render and
submit themselves most, to this infamous tribute, and tyrannical tax, which
is paid to the palate? What sumptuous tables? What costly diet? What dainty
dishes? What exquisite curiosities? What rich and precious wines? What Regalos?
And what recreations, more befitting Heathens, then Christians? And all, for to
pay the Taste this unlawful custom? Which in plain language, is a greater
task, and a greater Tribute, then the poorest labourer, or the meanest hedger
and ditcher is seassed at. For, when he pays this Tribute, it is only with a
piece of household bread, and a dish of small drink, and other the like poor
contentments, denying to his Taste those excessive Tributes, which your Kings
and greater persons pay, being in this particular better gentlemen then they. O
the blindness of our Christian Nobility! Let me put this question unto you;
when the Collector of Subsedyes comes to a poor husbandmans house, to demand
so much of him as he is seassed at, if he should pay him more then is due unto
him by the Law, or any Act ordained in that kind, or should be earnest with
him to take more then he is set at, would not all men think him to be a
fool, and a very simple fellow? The like error do they commit, who consume
their goods, their lands, and their whole Estates in serving the belly, and
satisfying the Taste with such diversity of delicate Viands, and choice wines,
when as they may well pay this Tribute with that little, or small modicum,
mentioned by the Apostle; Habentes alimenta, and quibus tegamur, 1 Timothy 6.8.
his contenti simus: Having food, and raiment, let us be therewith contented.
And with this, let us go daily redeeming those seassements and Tributes, which
were imposed upon us by sin, and in particular this sin of eating and
drinking, wherewith so often every day we make such large payments. And if we
cannot quit the whole score, let us do herein, like your bad paymasters, who
do huck and pinch, and pay as little as they can. But this (the more is the
pity) is not in use amongst them. For men, when they are called upon to pay
either private debts, or public seassements, they drive the demander off with
delays, and when they should make payment, fall a caffling, and refuse to lay
down what is due. But in eating, and drinking, they will pay much more then is
due, and press the belly to take more, then either it is willing, or able to
receive. When Caesar's Collectors came to demand Tribute of our Savior Jesus
Christ, he put this question to Saint Peter; Reges terrae, a quibus accipiunt
Tributum, vel censum? A filijs, an ab Alienis? The kings of the earth, of whom
do they receive Tribute? Of the Children, or of strangers? To whom Peter
answered; of strangers. Thereupon our Savior persently replies, Ergo liberi
sunt filij: Therefore the children are free. And if Kings and their children
are, and ought to be free from this royal Tribute; it stands with much more
reason, that they should be freed (as much as is possible) from the Tribute of
their proper gusts and pleasures, which is much more prejudicial unto them,
then that can be, should they pay it. For that payment is made but once a year
at most, or from half year to half year, and it is paid in money; But this
is daily and howerly, and must be paid with a man's wealth, with his Health,
with his life, and with his honor. A man cannot lap up in a little piece of
paper the misbehauiours and misdemeanors which Princes have fallen into, by
giving themselves to riotous banqueting, nor the excesses, which they have
been forced to commit, when they have broke the bounds of Temperance. Prou.
30.22.
There are two things (says the Wise man) which disquieteth the world, and
turns it topsie-turuy; Prou. 31.4.
To see a slave when he reigns; And a fool, when he is filled with meat.
And therefore the said Wiseman forbids wine unto Kings. And Seneca does much
reprove Alexander the Great, Senec. epist. 84.
and Marcus Antonius, for their distemper in their diet; A thing so unworthy
the royal dignity, that Cicero did affirm, Cicero. Philip. 2. Orat. 4.
that cruditie of the stomach in Princes, was a great indignity, and
altogether unbeseeming them. For, by delighting in drinking, they dull their
spirits, enfeeble their strength, and discover a thousand weaknesses to the
world, the concealing whereof did import them very much, and nearly concern
them. King Solomon says in his Proverbs, Much more strong is that man, which
ouercomes himself, and subdues his own affections, then he that gets
great victories over his enemies: Suting with that vulgar saying; Fortior est
qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit moenia. And therefore, it not so much
imports Kings, to conquer others, and to make themselves Lords of new
Provinces and Kingdoms, as not to become perpetual slaves to their proper
gustes and appetites. For this does not fit and suit so well with the
greatness of their Office, nor is eating in it self so generous an Act, that
they ought so much to prize and esteem it. In the book of the Judges, Judge.
9.8.
we find a Parable of the trees, who having resolved with themselves to choose
a King, to whom all the rest should owe homage, they came first to the Olive,
afterward to the Fig Tree, and lastly to the Vine, entreating them that they
would be pleased to take the Crown upon them, and to reign over them. The
first answered; That he could not leave his fatness, to go to be promoted
over the Trees; The Fig Tree, he excused himself in the like manner, saying;
He could not forsake his sweetness, and his good fruit, for the inioying of
a Crown; And the Vine, he plainly told them, that he would not leave his wine,
which cheereth God, and Man, to become a King. The purpose and intent of
Parables, (according to the doctrine of glorious S. Austin, and other holy
Doctors) is, to infold in them the truth. And in this is it given Kings to
understand, that excess in their Tastes and delicious meats, is not
compatible with their Estate, nor does it become a Crown Royal, (that we may
say all we can, though we somewhat exceed from the object of the Taste) to
loose it is time in pleasures, and pastimes, but that in that very instant,
wherein Kings take them, they should as suddenly leave them; in regard, that
they have so many and so great businesses committed to their charge, wherein if
they should bestow all their time, they have scarce time enough. Which
requiring (so much as it does) the assistance, and observation of kings, if
they should mis-spend this time in sports and intertainements, they must of
necessity want time for that which is more necessary; and be driven
(considering that there is not any thing, that does cause a greater relaxation,
and distraction in the understanding, and that more abateth the edge and vigor
of grave and weighty consideration, then sports, pastimes, and pleasing of
their own gustes and palates) to neglect State-businesses, unless they will
be pleased to use them seldom, and with moderation. Insomuch, that they being
to repart and divide the time between themselves and the Commonwealth, they
should so employ it, that it might not be wanting unto them for their
businesses, nor super-abound unto them for their Vices.

Yet for all this do not I pretend (it being the least part of my meaning) to
take from Kings their intertainments, but rather much desire that they would
take them with moderation, and without neglecting businesses of State, and
after that they shall have fully cumply'de with the Commonwealths affairs. To
the end, that all the world may see, that these their pleasures, are not as
principal, but accessory, and as an ayuda de costa, an aid and help, the
better to bear their trouble, and to wade through that wearisomenesse, which
the continual assistance on grave and weighty occasions, causes.
Intertainments and sports must be like unto salt, wherewith if your meat be
sprinkled but a little, and in a moderate kind of manner, it makes them
sauoury, and seasons them in that good sort, that they do not only relish,
but digest the better and breed better nutriment. But if your band be too
heavy, and that you lay on load (as they say) without measure, or moderation,
it marrs your meat, and makes it sower and unsavory. And for mine own part, I
am of opinion, that there was never any time, wherein Kings had more cause, or
greater obligation to moderate their pleasure, then at this present, it being
the only thing that is now in request amongst your great persons, and the
only talk that passes amongst them, how they shall pass the time. My
thinks, that time is here represented unto me, which the Apostle Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 3.1.
inspired by the Holy Ghost, did prophecy, and foretell unto us; That in the
last days, perilous times shall come (which are now wholly and truly ours)
wherein men shall be lovers of their own selves, and their pleasures, more
then lovers of God; and shall regard more their own particular then either
their neighbor, Justice, or the common good. In a word, they shall take more
care to fulfill their lusts and their delights, then to please God, and
therefore shall fall into innumerable sins. The Apostle Saint Peter and Saint
Jude, do much indeare the great evils which usually arise from corporal
pleasures, and the terrible chasticements which are reserved for those, that
give themselves over unto them. The unjust (says Saint Peter) the Lord will
reserve unto the day of judgment to be punished; 2 Pet. 2.9.
but chiefly them, that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, that
are presumptuous, Jude 1.4.
self willed, etc. And Jude he pronounces condemnation against those ungodly
men, that turn the grace of God into lasciviousness, etc. And this has, and
does still increase daily in such sort, that the madness and dotage of those
wicked times seems to be again renewed in the world, Wisd. 2.1.
mentioned in the book of Wisdom, where a company of gallants, and boon
Companions, banketting and making merry amongst themselves, vttred this
Epicuraean; Exiguum, and cum taedio est Tempus vitae nostrae: Our life is short
and tedious, and in the death of man there is no remedy, Ibi. 6.
neither was there any known to have returned from the grave, etc. Venite
ergo, and fruamur bonis quaesunt: Come on therefore, let us enjoy the good
things that are present. Let us eat and drink, quaffe and carowse, and be
merry, and let us speedily use the creatures like as in youth. Ibi. 7.
Vino pretioso, and vnguentis nos impleamus. Let us fill our selves with costly
wines, and ointments. Let us be puruayours and Caterers to our own bodies, let
us provide the pleasingest objects for our eyes, the sauourest meats for our
tastes, the sweetest Music for our ears, the softest silks for our feeling,
and the daintiest perfumes for our smelling. Ibi. 8.
Corone mus nos rosis, antequam marcescant, nullum pratum fit, quod non
pertranseat luxuria nostra. Let us Crown our selves with rose-budds, before
they be withered. And let no flower of the spring pass by us. Let none of us
go with out his part of voluptuousness; and let us leave tokens of our
ioyfullnesse in every place. Let God do what he list in Heaven, and let us
laugh and be merry here on earth. We have but a little time to live, let us
therefore take our pleasures, while we may. This is all the care, the wantons
of this world take, who do not think, that there in an eternity, only they
study how they may best enjoy themselves and their pleasures, not once
dreaming, that there is a God, or a judgment to come to make them stand in awe
of him, but as men, that make a scoff and jest of that other world, and that
other life, they wholly wed themselves to this. Making that good which Solomon
said; Eccl. 8.15.
Quod non esset homini bonum sub sole, nisi quod comederet, and biberet, atque
gauderet: Man, has no better thing under the Sun, then to eat and to drink,
and to be merry; A Language only beseeming such men, as are to be carbonadoed
for hell, and made a dish for the Devil; for their disseruice toward God, and
their service to their belly. Which kind of men Saint Paul lamenteth with
tears flowing from his heart, as being enemies to the Cross of Christ, and
abhorred of God, and his Saints.

CHAP. XXVIII. When, and at what time, sports and pastimes, are worthyest
reprehension in Kings.
TO every thing, there is a season (says the Wiseman). There is a time to
weep, and a time to laugh. A time for recreation, and a time for labor.
Tempus plangendi, and Tempus saltandi; Tempus amplexandi, Eccl. 3.5.
and Tempus long fieri ab amplexibus: A time to mourn and a time to dance. A
time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing. The Chalde Paraphrase
reads; Opportunitas omni rei: There is an opportunity, or fit season for
every thing. And this opportunity is a great matter in all whatsoever we do,
for it teaches us to take our due time and season. To weep, when we should
laugh, is a ridiculous thing; And to laugh when we should shed tears, is no
less. For Kings to play away so many thousand Ducatts, and to spend, I know
not what, merely for their own pleasure, whilst their soldiers are ready to
perish through hunger for want of pay, and their household Servants run in
debt, because they cannot receive their wages in due time, this sorteth not
with that rule, which the wise man would have us to observe. And is it not I
pray you a disproportionable and unseasonable thing, to spend the time in
intertainments, and sports, which is due unto public causes, and businesses
of State? In the second book of the Kings is set down a notable case,
wherewith God was highly offended. And the case was this; Factum est autem,
vertente anno, eo tempore, quo solent Reges ad bella procedere, misit David
Ioab, and seruos suos cum eo, 2 King. ^1.1.
et vniuersum Israel, et vastauerunt filios Ammon, et obsederum Rabaa. David
autem remansis in Jerusalem. Dum hac agerentur, accidit, vt surgeret David de
strato s^^ post meridiem, et deambularet in solario demus regiae, viditque
mulierem se lauantem ex aduerso super solarium suum etc. And it came to pass,
that after the year was expired, at the time, when Kings go forth to battle,
that David sent Ioab, and his servants with him, and all Israel, and they
destroyed the children of Ammon, and besieged Rabbah. But David tarryed still
at Jerusalem. And it came to pass in an Evening tide, that David arose from
his bed, and walked upon the roof of the Kings house, and from the roof he
saw a woman washing her self, and the woman was very beautiful to look upon
etc. What a company of aggravating circumstances did here precede the sin
of David? It fell out about that time of the year when Kings used to go into
the field against their enemies, and to muster up their souldiars. But instead
of going himself in person, he sent forth his Captain Ioab, with all the
choice men of Israel, himself remaining in the mean while sporting and
recreating himself in his princely Palace. And not thinking on those cares,
which so dangerous a war did at that time require, he rose one day after
dinner from his Table, and went to walk in a gallerie or Tarras, that lay open
to the Sun, and from thence it was his chance to epsy Vriahs wife washing
and bathing of her self in a place of the like nature, right over against him,
who likewise on her part gave occasion to this sin, for that her husband
being abroad in the wars, and exposing himself to so many troubles and
perils, she should take pleasure in washing her hair, and in the curious
decking and dressing her person in a place, from whence she might be so easily
seen. Whom he no sooner saw but coueted, and no sooner made love unto, but he
inioyed her. And that he might possess her with the more safety, and cloak
the adultery the better, and the child wherewith, all she went, he gave
order for the making away of her husband; upon the neck whereof an infinite
number of other evils did ensue. When Kings wage war, and their subjects
fight their battles, hazarding therein their lives, or when any other common
calamities happen, as of Famine, or Pestilence, in their Kingdoms, they are
not them to follow their pleasures and intertainments, but to abstain from
them, and to show and make known to the world, that they have a fellow feeling
of these common evils, and general afflictions; For so did the King of
Niniue, as soon as he was informed what the Prophet Jonas had preached in his
Court, threatening them with the punishment which God would send upon that
City. And the holy Scripture says; That the King himself was the first man
that forsook his pleasures, laid his roabe from him, and covered him with
sackcloth, and sat in ashes, and caused it to be proclaimed through Nineue,
saying; Let neither man, Jonah. 3.6.
nor beast, heard nor flock taste any thing; let them not feed, nor drink
water. But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto
God; yea let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence
that is in their hands, etc. And this was the Course; that he took for to
appease Gods anger. When King David heard of the great slaughter which the
Pestilence had wrought in his Kingdom, sorrowing exceedingly, that the Plague
was so hot amongst his people, and showing, that it grieved his very heart and
soul, he cried out unto the Lord, 2 King. 24.17.
and said, Ego sum, qui peccaui, ego qui inique egi etc. Vertatur (obsecro)
manus tua contra me, et contra domum patris mei: I have sinned and I have done
wickedly, but these sheep what have they done? Let thine hand (I pray) be
against me, and against my fathers house. King Ioram reigning in Israel, there
was so great a Famine, and so sore a Dearth in that Kingdom, that two women by
consent did agree to kill their children, and to eat them by turns. Which the
King had no sooner heard of, but that he was so inwardly grieved therewith,
that in expression of his sorrow he rent his garments, (according to the
custom of the Hebrews on such like sad occasions, and put on sackcloth
within upon his flesh; 1 King. 14.43.
Because Prince Jonathan did but dip the tippe of his rod in the hony-combe,
when as his father King Saul, and all his men of war, were fighting against
the Philistines, God was much offended with it. Thereby, teaching Kings, that on
the like occasions, they ought to be the first that should abstain from their
pleasures and delights, signified by the Hony-combe: That valiant Captain
Vrias, was a good master of this doctrine, who being returned from the Army to
the Court, 2 King. 11.11.
called thither by the King, would by no means be persuaded to go home to his
own house, to refresh himself, and make merry with his wife, though his
Majesty willed him so to do; And the reason which he rendered, why he would
not do it, was this; Arca Dei, et Judah habitant in papili^nibus etc. The Arc,
and Israel and Judah, abiding in Tents, and my Lord Ioab with the whole Army
lying encamped in the open fields, without any other shelter, and being in that
great danger that they are: shall I then go into mine house to eat, and to
drink, and to lie with my wife? Por salutem tuam, et per salutem anima tuae,
non facium re^ haenc: As thou live, and as thy soul lives, I will not do
this thing. And not only in the common calamities of a whole Commonwealth, but
also in those particular ones of great persons, that have been serviceable to
the state, it is fit and requisite, and well will it become Kings, that they
make show of their sorrow, by laying aside their feastings, and all other kind
of solacings and mirthfull Intertainments. 2 King. 3.33.
When King David understood of the death of that brave Commander Abner, he wept
bitterly before the people, and commanded, that none should taste bread, or
ought else, till the Sun were down: saying unto his servants; Ibi. verse. 38.
Number ignoratis, quoniam princeps, et Maximum cecidit hodie in Israel? Know ye
not, that there is a Prince, and a great man fallen this day in Israel?

But some will say, that we do not well in aduising Kings or the Common people,
on sad occasions, to forbear their sports and pastimes, it seeming unto them,
that they ought rather then to seek after them for the diuerting of
melancholy, and banishing of sorrow; Urging Plu^ar^es authority, who
reprehendeth those men, who when they are already merrily disposed, hunt after
intertainments and pastimes, wishing them to do that, when they find
themselves sad and heavy, for then they have most need of it. Here unto, I
first of all answer, that the reason is not alike in a particular person, as in
a King, and a Commonwealth, which (as we said before) are to be considered
and understood, as a body, with it is Head. And as in a man's body, the head does
naturally feel the pain of the arm, the foot, or any other member; So
Kings, which are the Heads of the people, are to have a feeling of their
subjects miseries, and to pity the ill case, wherein they at any time are, as
if it were their own. And this was that, which moved the Apostle S. Paul to
say; Quando patitur vnum membrum, compatinutur omnia membra. 1 Cor. 12.26.
When one member suffers, all the members suffer with it. This is that
Trauazon, or coupling piece of timber in a Commonwealth, and this, both humane
policy, and man's natural disposition, does require, that when we see others
suffer we should suffer with them in our common compassion toward them. And
the Law of charity, goes somewhat farther and would stretch this obligation to
a greater and higher perfection, as was to be seen in the said Apostle. Quis
infirmatur, et ego non infirmor? 2. Cor. 11.29.
Quis scandalizatur, et ego non vror? Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is
offended, Cor. 11.2.29.
and I burn not? And in that which the Prophet Jeremy said, Ierem. 20.9.
who crossing the Kings humor, and opposing his vain pleasures and delights,
and representing the truth of things unto him, and what was fitting for him to
do, his heart was all on a flame, a burning fire was shut up in his bones, and
he was weary with bearing, and could not hold, so far was he transported,
and so mightily inflamed with the zeal of the Kings, and the Commonwealths
good.

Secondly I say; That (as before has been delivered by me) I do not pretend,
to debar Kings and Commonwealths of their pleasures and recreations; But my
desire is (which I wish with all my heart) that they may be such as may be
harmless and vn-offensiue, with out remordment and sting of Conscience, and
without the murmuration and notice of the people. And this may easily be done,
by doing of that which the glorious S. Jerome advises us to do, ex
necessitate virtutem: making a virtue of necessity; but I do not say ex
necessitate, but ex voluptate, virtutem: That is to say; I would have them to
place their delight and content in that, which is true virtue and godliness,
in cumplying with the obligations of their Office and Calling, in giving free
and frequent Audience, in hearing those that are wronged and oppressed, in
disposing of Offices, in Dispatching of businesses, or in causing them to be
dispatched, and to spend their time, or the most part thereof in these, and the
like, cumplying with that of that Royal Prophet: In virtute tua Laetabitur
Rex, Psalm. 21.1.
and super salutare tuum exultabit vehementer: The King shall joy in thy
strength, O Lord; And in thy Salvation, how greatly shall he rejoice? And from
thence will follow that, which presently follows in the next Verse;
Desiderium cordis eius tribuisti ei, Ibi. 2.
et voluntate labiorum eius non fraudasti eum: Thou have given him his hearts
desire, and have not withheld the request of his lips. King Solomon says of
himself, that he gave his desires as much as they could desire, and that he
gave himself over to his delights and contents with that freedom and liberty,
as suited with the greatness of so powerful a king. But that which he got thereby,
was not the content which he sought after, but distaste, irkesomnes, wearines,
grief, and vexatio^ of spirit; which he himself has left firmed and signed
with his own name, for an example not only to all kings, but to all the whole
world. Vidi in omnibus vanitatem, Eccl. 2.11.
et afflictionem animi, et nihil permanere sub sole: Behold, all was vanity,
and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun. Who could more
give themselves to their delights, and pleasures, then those, whom the book
of Wisdom speaks of, who with such a deal of care and greediness did
run after all the content, that the world could afford? Yet they say and
confess, that they were so vain and so false, and such a wearisomnesse unto
them, that they were quite tired out with them, and are now in hell for their
labor, and shall continue there for ever.

Thirdly, I say; That to the end our sports and intertainments may be the more
pleasing unto us, it is fit that they should be used with much moderation, and
very seldom. Feastings and banquetings, when they are too frequent and too
ordinary, they cause a weariness, and loathing; And as the glorious S. Ambrose
wisely says, Gratiores post famem epulae fiunt, quae assiduitate viluerant:
Feastings please most after fasting, which by assiduitie and continuance grow
into contempt. And here by the way occasion may be taken, to advise kings of
the remedy which they ought to apply in matter of Plays and Interludes, as well
in the quality of that which is represented, as in the requency wherewith they
are used; Comedies being now as common as our meat and drink. But I see, that
that succeeds now, which did in those more ancient times; Which though they
were often banished out of Rome, yet the times altering, they came to be
introduced and brought in again. And King Philip the second who is now in
glory, in the latter years of his reign did wholly prohibit them, and for the
better furthering of this his determination, he had many, and those very
effectual reasons for it. And that which of late has been observed, is, That
never in any time, has there been seen so much looseness and shamelessness
in youth, as since the time, they have been daily permitted to be played and
represented on the stage, and in those places, where is the greatest Audience,
there is the greatest dissoluteness of manners, especially among your younger
sort of people; For those their words, Accents, Tunes, Songs, wanton carriage
of the body, idle gestures, and actions, performed with so much artifice and
cunning, is no other thing (as the Prophet said) but to sow tares, and vicious
weeds in good ground, whence they ought with much care to be rooted out. And
very blind is that man, which does not see the danger that there is, in
provoking and stirring up wanton blood, with such lascivious behavior, being
able enough of it self to awaken the appetite of sensuality. Even those
dishonest pictures, which neither speak, nor move, do catch and lay hold on
our eyes, and dragge the Soul after them, especially, if they be drawn to the
life, and have the true postures and expressions of a wanton woman.
Questionless, they cannot choose but leave a lively impression in the Soul.
And I know not (I confess) what work of piety, or of charitable Alms for
Hospitalls, (to which use a great part of the Stage Players gaynes go) can
recompense this harm. For of more weight and moment, is one sin of theirs,
which is there committed; then all the Alms that are given throughout the
whole world. And we know, it is the Apostles rule, That we are not either to
do, or permit an evil, that good may come thereof. And that which I know is;
That they which enter in there, do not come thither to give an Alms, but for
those ends and purposes, which have been sufficiently delivered and
reprehended, by many holy Doctors, and famous Preachers. Nor does it boot
them to say; That the people, that spend their time in seeing of Comedies, are
there met together to see a harmless Interlude. Which were they not shut up
in that open Assembly, would perhaps be wandering abroad, committing worse
sins, which by this Intercourse are excused; for in this one particular, in
this very thing, is it plainly to be perceived, how bad Plays be, since for
their defense, they have need of the favor of avoiding a greater evil. And
in realitie of truth, they do not excuse, or divert sins, but sins are
there rather learned, the spectators carrying them away with them conceived in
their minds, by the ones vain apprehension, and the others foul and wanton
representation, and anon after, bring forth monstrous birthes. And in very
truth, the troubles, and temporal scourges, of war, famine, and pestilence;
the many Cities that are battred and beaten down to the ground, and destroyed;
the persecution and the continual wants and necessities of these Kingdoms,
do not require so many, and such contents, and reioycings; Eccl. 22.6.
Musica in luctu, importuna narratio, says the Holy Ghost; Music in mourning,
is as a tale out of season. Besides, we are to understand, that God sends
these his scourges, that we may feel his stripes, and repent, and amend our
sinful lives. And therefore the Prophet Esaias, represents the wrath which God
had conceived against his people, because they were not sensible of his
chasticements. Et non est reuersus ad percutientem se, et Dominum non
inquifierunt: The people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do
they seek the Lord of Hosts. Have ye seen the like dullness in any nation?
That God chastising them, they will not so much as turn back their eyes, and
crave pardon and forgiveness of him, that is whipping of them, and goes
increasing their punishment? There is no demonstration of sorrow in them, but
they go on still in their pleasures and delights. Isay 22.12.
Vocauit Dominus Deus, ad fletum, and ad planctum, ad caluitiem, and ad
cingulum sacci, et ecce gaudium, et laetitia, occidere vitulos, et iugulare
arietes, comedere carnes, et bibere vinum. Comedamus et bibamus, cras enim
moriemur: The Lord God of Hosts calls to weeping and to mourning, and to
baldness, and to girding with sack cloth; and behold joy and gladness slaying
oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine; Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall dye. God having called them to repentance with a
desire to pardon them, they answer him with quite contrary exercises, and in
stead of weeping, fall into extraordinary laughing; and in stead of sackcloth,
put on rich and glorious apparel; and in stead of fasting, betake themselves
to feasting; and in stead of sobbs, and sighs, to sports and pleasures. Which
preposterous kind of course did offend God in that high degree, that he
threatened to shut the gate of mercy against those that shut the door of their
hearts against sorrow, and repentance. Et reuelata est in auribus meis vox
Domini; Ibi. 14:
non dimittetur iniquitas haec vobis, donec moriamur, dicit Dominus: And it was
revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts; Surely this iniquity shall not be
purged from you, till ye dye, says the Lord of Hosts. In the book of the
Proverbs, God shows the like risentment, in these words; Quia vocaui, et
renuistis, Prou. 1.24.
extendi manum meam, et non fuit qui aspiceret; despexistis omne consilium
meum, et increpationes meas neglexistis, ego quoque in interitu vestro ridebo,
et subsannabo, cum vobis id, quod timebat is, aduenerit: Because I have called
and ye refused; I also stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; But ye
have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my reproof; I also will
laugh at your calamity. I will mock, when your fear comes. Those, whom
neither fair words, kind usage, loving inspirations, nor the powerful hand of
God, stretched out to punishment, cannot work upon, nor move to mourn, nor to
leave off their sports and pleasures, and their discomposed mirth and laughter;
the Lord says, that this their disrespectfullnesse of him, and shamelessenes
of their sins, shall never be forgiven them. And in stead of mourning, and
grieuing for them, he will laugh them to scorn, and make a mock of them,
when he shall see them fallen into the anguishment, and vexation of their
perdition, because they would not correspond with his gentle admonitions, nor
be reclaymed by those his fatherly chasticements, which were for the calling of
them home, and to make them to return from their evil ways. And if (besides
all that hitherto has been said) we shall but consider how deceitful and
vain are these pastimes and delights, we shall therewith likewise see, what
little reason Kings and men that are, (or at least ought to be in regard of the
gravity and greatness of their places) of a constant and settled disposition,
to be carried away with such idle toys which presently dis-appeare, and do not
only not give that fulness and satisfaction, which they promise; but rather,
as vicious thirst and hunger, which arises from a corrupt and evil humor,
increases the more, the more we either eat, or drink; so these temporal
delights, the more we use them, the more in seeking after them do we find our
selves mocked and deluded, and the less satisfied.

Let us conclude this point with the testimony of our Savior Jesus Christ,
and of that most wise King, Solomon, and of Saint Gregory the Great who citing
both the other, speaks thus. Voluptatum, nos fallacia nulla decipiat, nulla
vana laetitia seducat, in proximo namque est Iudex, qui dixit; Vae vobis qui
ridetis nunc, quia lugebitis, et flebitis. Hinc enim Solomon ait, Risus dolor
miscebitur, et extrema gaudijs luctus occupat. Hinc iterum dicit; Risum
reputaui errorem, et gaudio dixi; Quid frustra deciperis? Hinc rursus ait.
Greg. Hom. 10.
Cor sapientium vbi tristitia est, et cor stultorum, vbi laetitia: Let not the
falsehood of pleasures deceive us, nor vain joy seduce us; For there is a
Judge at hand, that pronounces this woeful sentence; Luke 6.25.
Woe unto you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and weep. And hence is it
that Solomon says; Prou: 14.13.
Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
heaviness. Hence again, Eccl. 2.2.
he that says; I said of laughter it is mad: And of mirth, Eccl. 7.4.
what does it? And that he says yet once again; The heart of the wise is in
the house of mourning, but the heart of fools, is in the house of mirth. But
continuing our discourse concerning Kings, and things so generally received and
entertained, as sports, pastimes, and temporal delights; rigorous is that
qualification, which the greatest, and most approved qualifiers of Heaven and
earth, have left firmed and signed unto us with their own hands and names.
That mirror of Wisdom, King Solomon, or (to say better) the Holy Ghost
speaking by him; Our Savior Jesus Christ, the true wisdom of his father, and
that great Bishop and Doctor of the Church, S. Gregory, plainly tell us, That
those delights and merriments, which are so well received in the world, are but
lies, and mocks, and prognostications of evils to come; and that they have
their reception and residence in the hearts of fools, and that they remain
banished from those, that are truly wise. These Authentical persons have said
it, and all the Saints of God have confirmed the same, both by example, and
doctrine. And I, whilst I am now writing of this subject (though the meanest
of a thousand) am verily persuaded, that my pen cannot do better service, then
to justify Gods cause, and to make the faults of Kings the more without
excuse, and to let the mighty know, that they shall be mightily punished. And
since that I cannot take away the use of these things, give me leave to advise
you of the abuse, and if it shall not be of force to work an amendment, yet
let it so far prevail with you as to put you out of your error; And to take
it into your consideration, that in the way to Heaven you are to meet and
encounter with many dangers, and that the Devil is wonderful busy and
careful in setting of his gynn's and his snares, without our laying in the way
these new stumbling blocks, to break our own necks, and to make the way more
dangerous, and to add new occasions of sinning, whereby to put the business
of our Salvation in the more contingencie and hazard. Here, might I take
occasion to say something of that Temperance, which should temper and moderate
the excesses of the taste. Whereof we will speak, when we come to treat of the
sense of Touching. And now let us pass to another Ministry, which likewise
belongs unto the Taste, from the Office and function of the Tongue, it being one
of it is principal properties, to speak, divided by these ensuing Paragrahpes.

. I. Of the Language and Truth, which Kings, and wherewith Kings, are to
treat, and to be treated with.
THe brain, as Minister to all the rest of the senses, sends to the Tongue two
sorts of members, the one soft, and smooth, for to taste our meats withal, and
to know and distinguish (as already has been said) the several sorts of
savors and relishes, which the Taste intertaineth: The other somewhat more
stiff and strong, for to turn and wind the tongue, and to move it with that
nimble motion, as we see, as likewise to hold back the spring, and to
restrain and lock it fast, when it is not fitting for the tongue to speak.
This is the Master-key, (as we may term it) and the ordinary Mistress of
Nature, which by the help of one only Instrument, performs diverse Offices;
As of the Air, to refrigerate and cool the heart, to refresh and comfort it,
and to make it breathe the better and with the more ease, and likewise, to
form our words, for without it, it is as impossible to speak, as without
breath to wind a Horn, or blow to play upon the Fife; The tongue serves us
for our taste, it serves to turn and roll our meat up and down in our mouth;
it serves to cleanse the roof thereof, gumm's and teeth, it serves us to talk
withal, and to utter those conceits, which are hatched in the brain, which is
it is most proper Office; And though it be written of some, that they have
spoken without a tongue, yet this is the usual means of utterance, and the
ordinary instrument wherewith we pronounce our words, which are the thoughts
Interpreters. I omit here to treat, of good, or better language, or whether
this, or that, ought to be in greatest request, since the Master himself of
Eloquence says; Cicero Tusc. lib. 2.
That in every part, and place, we are to speak with those words, which are
there understood; And that such a people, or such a Nation, is Lord of a
Language, and may by a kind of prerogative power, either coin new, or call in
old words. It being like unto money of several Kingdoms, and Provinces, that
being current in one Country, which will not pass in another. And therefore
that language, ought to be spoken by us, which is generally approved, and
commonly used and received. And therefore many times men alter the fashion of
their Language, as they do of their clothes. And we our selves find, that in
this our Spanish tongue, we have made almost as many changes and alterations,
as we have of our garments, and are able to make two such different languages,
that the one should not understand the other. For, we make such have to invent
new words, and to take them upon loan from other Languages, that thinking
thereby to enrich it, we come to loose and forget our own natural Language. So
different is it (to some men's seeming) in these, from what it was informer
times. For the Spanish tongue in it self, is an humble and lowly language, if
they had not painted it over and adulterated it with new words; Not considering
in the mean while with themselves, that the best Language (according unto
Tully) is that, which we have been taught by our Mothers, and which chaste
Matrones, and those that have been well bred, speak samiliarly at home in
their own houses. And the reason of it, is, for that they having not gone
abroad out of their own Country, to foreign nations, not treated and
conuersed with strangers, they conserve the natural phrase and speech of their
own Town, or Country, without sophisticating their Language with new words, or
those that are not of ordinary use. And therefore it is fitting, that we
should speak in that, which is most passable, and which is best understood,
using sober, proper, and plain words; for words were ordained to that end,
that they might be well understood. He speaks best, and in the best Language,
that is best understood; not he, that shall speak in an uncouth style, and in
words that are neither in use, nor easy to be understood. It is a common
saying with us; Delos antiquos, auemos de imitar las virtudes, y delos
modernos, el Lenguaje: We are to imitate the ancient in their virtues: and the
Modern, in their Language. And Quintilian tells us, Loquendum, vt vulgus;
sentiendum, vt panci. We must speak, with the many; but think, with the
fewest. Many more therebe, which speak much in matter of tongues, and languages,
used throughout the world. But I will only treat of those, which imports
Kings, and Kingdoms. Such as is that truth and sincerity, wherewith they are
to treat, that faith and word, which they are to cumply withal, and that
secret, which they are to keep. Two things (says Pythagoras) did the moderate
men of the earth, receive from heaven, well worthy our consideration, in regard
of the great favor done them therein; The one, that they should have the power
to be able to do good unto others; And the other, to treat Truth. And that in
them they should hold competition with the Gods. Properties, both of them well
befitting Kings. Of the power, that Kings have, to do good unto their friends,
and to defend themselves from their enemies, we have already signified unto
you, how proper it is to the greatness of a King, and how like therein he is
unto God. But the said Philosopher being demanded, wherein man was likest unto
God, made answer; Quando veritatem sciuerit: When he shall know the Truth. For
God is truth it self: Refert. Hilar. de varia histor. Lib. 2.
And that man that treates truth, resembles him in nothing more; and it is so
proper to our understanding, that it intertaines it for it is object, and still
goes in search thereof; the contrary whereof, is repugnant to the nature, as
likewise to the essence and greatness of Kings, from whom we are ever to
expect the judgment of truth. Prou. 17.7.
Non decet Principem labium mentiens: Lying lips, becomes not a Prince. It is
the saying of a King; and of a King, that was a Solomon, who spoke with the
tongue of the Holy Ghost; and it is an avouched and ratified Conclusion, that
the pen and the tongue of a King, should always tell the truth, though it were
against himself: As likewise for to teach, and instruct his subjects that they
do the like; as also all others, that shall treat with them. For in vain
does he desire to hear truth, that will not deal truly; And perhapps for
this cause, the shortest of all other your words in almost all Languages, are
your Yea, and Nay. There can be no shifting, or doubling in them; no going
about the bush. These words will admit no other construction but a bare
affirmation, or negation. In the fewest words are the least falsehood; and the
least quarrel to be picked against them. Men cannot expatiate their excuses,
as they may where larger Language is used. And therefore the other, as it is
the shortest, so it is the surest way. Wherefore Kings ought all ways, and in
all, and with all, to treat truth; being that it may be vttred with so much
ease and facility, and to suffer himself to be plainly understood; Contrary
to the Tenent of a sort of vp-start Heretics, which these Times term
Politicians, who for to make good their Policy, and Tyrannical government,
affirm; That a King may, for reason of State, if he see it may make for the
conservation thereof, Dissemble, deceive, break his word, and plight his
faith, without any purpose or meaning to keep it; fraud, dissimulation, and
deceit, of what condition soever it be, being contrary unto truth, and contrary
to the Law of nature, which in all that it treates, requires truth; and
contrary to the Divine Law, which condemns him, that speaks not the truth,
but goes about to deceive. And our Savior Christ, calls King Herod Fox,
reproving his wily shifts, and deep dissimulations, and more particularly, in
putting on a face of sorrow before his Guestes that he feasted, when he
commanded John Baptist's head to be smitten off, it being the only thing that
he most desired. And he likewise condemns those Pharisaicall Hypocrites,
who by exterior shows, would have that to be supposed of them, which they
never interained in their heart. D. Th. 2. 2. q. 111. art. 1.
And the Angelical Docter renders the reason of this Truth. To dissemble
(says he) is to lie in the deed, or thing it self. For a Lie, does not cease
to be a Lie, nor to alter it is nature, be it either in works, or in words. So
that a Lie may be found in the behavior, gesture or semblance, that one
makes, wherewith to deceive, and to give us to understand that, which is not;
As also in the manner of the word spoken, or some circumstance to be gathered
out of it. Now that which makes it culpable is the doubleness in the heart.
Aug. lib. de Mendacio ad Consentium. cap. 3.
Which S. Austen subtlely considers in that encounter of a man's meaning, with
his words; Wherein there ought to be all equality and consonancie; which is
not truly kept, when in our words, we shall say the contrary to that, which is
in our minds. Therefore a Christian King, or his Minister may silence some
things, cast a cloak over them, and not suffer themselves to be vaderstood,
and cunningly to dissemble that, which they know of them, as long as they shall
think it necessary to be kept close and secret, for the good expedition of
that which is in Treaty; But a King, or his Minister may not faigne, deceive,
dissemble, or to give that to be understood by any open Act of his, which he
had not in his heart and bosom to do. All which has no place in that, which
appertains unto Faith, wherein, by the Law of God, we have obligation, not
only to believe, but also to confess, with all truth and plainness, that
which we believe, without giving to understand, by the least word, or gesture,
ought to the contrary; nor for the least moment of time, though thereby we
might save our lives. Whereby, Kings, and Christian Ministers are admonished,
how they may use dissimulation, how far, and for what time, without treading
in the path of their private profit, through which your Politicians pretend to
lead them, leaving the high way of Truth, wherewith accords whatsoever is
just and right, and shunneth all manner of lying, which Truth and Time will at
last bring to light. It was the saying of King Theopompus; That kingdoms, and
great Estates, were conserved by Kings speaking Truth, and by suffering others
to speak the Truth unto them. For, they being those, whom it most imports to
hear truths, none hear less. King Antiochus, all the time of his reign,
said; that he did not remember, that ever he had heard any more then one only
truth. It being the plague of Kings and Princes to have that verified in their
Palaces and Courts, which was delivered by Democritus, Quod veritas in
profundo puteo demersa latet: That Truth lies buried in a deep pit. You shall
scarce meet with one in an Age, that dare tell Kings the Truth, there being so
many about them, that sooth them up with lies and flatteries. Seneca says;
That of ten hundred thousand soldiers, which Artaxerxes had in his Army, there
was but one only that told him the truth in a case wherein all the rest did
lie. And amongst innumerable Prophets, which concealed the truth from the king,
only Michab made bold to tell it him. And only Solon did the like with king
Croesus. Seldom times does the truth enter into the Kings privy chamber, and
when it enters, they scare express it in that bare and naked manner as did John
Baptist. And for this cause, did Demetrius the Philosopher wish king Ptolomie,
to read books and Histories, which treated of Precepts for Kings, and
Captains, for they would tell him that which none durst deliver unto him.
Socrates said; That there was notany one, that made open protestation to speak
the truth, that attained (as he did) to the age of 70. years. And certain it
is, that Kings cannot endure to hear those plain and naked truths, which the
common people, and other their subjects are able to tell them, and prove unto
them; nor must they that are in place prestume to utter them, for fear of
indangering their authority, and reputation; And therefore it is fit, that
they should have some such persons about them, which should both hear, and
understand them, and take their time to inform them of them. And this is a
ruled, Case, taken out of those great Instructions, and wise Aphorisms, which
Mecaenas gave to Augustus, worthy to be taken notice of, and to be kept and
observed, as coming from so great a Counsailour, and proposed to a Prince, who
was so wise in this kind. To wit; That Kings, ought to give liberty and way,
that their subjects upon occasion might be admitted to tell them the Truth,
assuring them on their part, that they will not be offended with that which
they shall say unto them. For, it is permitted unto a Physician to prescribe
corrasiues, and to cut away the dead flesh till it come to the quick; And it
may as well be lawful for a good subject, a faithful Minister and Counselor
of state, to speak freely unto his King with respect and reverence to their
royal dignity) the truth of that they think, and to condemn him in his
judgment, or otherwise, when he shall go about to do any thing contrary to
justice, and reason. Nor ought this to seem offensive to any man, nor to the
King himself, who (if he have a Christian feeling) will approve in his mind
and understanding the reasons that they shall represent unto him; so that if he
be willing to hear the truths they shall tell him, it may turn much to his
profit. And if he like not well of it there is no harm done, neither does he
receive any prejudice by it. And if he shall think it fit for the furthering
of his ends to follow the Counsel of any, let him commend, and honor that
person. For by that plot, which he shall have devised, and invented, he shall
gain honor and greatness by it. And it is meet and convenient, that he
should encourage both him, and others with thanks, and rewards. Because this
is the sun, which gives life, and the heat, which warmes good wits, and
makes them active, and nimble. And in case he shall not admit of his advise,
let him not disgrace him, nor find fault with him for his good will, and the
desire that he has to do him service. But like a great Prince (wherein he
shall show his goodness) let his eye rather look on the good desire and
affection wherewith he does it, then on the effect thereof; As likewise,
because others may not be disheartened, for there is not any the poorest plant,
that has not some virtue in it; nor any brain so barrene, whence at one time
or other some fruit may not be gathered for the public good.

I conclude then this first point of that plain and sincere truth, which Kings
are to treat, and wherewith they are to be treated, in signifying unto them,
that their own and the Kingdoms safety relyes on searching out the truth, and
in having those about them which will freely speak it (a thing so necessary
for to govern uprightly) and to reward him (though it cost him well) that
shall tell him. For Kings shall meet with few, that will tell it them (as they
say) for a song. For, considering the danger whereinto they put themselves by
speaking the truth, it costs them much. And it is an old and ancient kind of
cosenage and deceit, which Kings and Princes suffer in not hearing truths,
contenting themselves with applause and adulation of that only which pleases
their humor, though it be in things of much importance, and such as nearly
concern them. Sozomen. Tri. part. lib. 1. cap. 7.
A notable example whereof, we have in the Tri-partite History, (reported by
Sozomenus) of the Emperor Constantine the great, who being one day desirous to
make trial of the integrity, and truth of those that served him, he called
them all before him, and told them; My good friends, it is now many years,
that I have lived under the observance of the Christian Law, but now I grow
weary of it, for it is a very painful and troublesome thing to submit our
neck to the yoke of the Gospel and to submit our self to a Law, that will
nor allow us so much liberty, as to swerve one tittle from it. I pray you, let
me have your opinions in it, for we, for our part, are resolved what we will
do. When the Emperor had thus expressed himself, those that were flatterers
and Sycophants, and time pleasers, said unto him; We think your Majesty
shall do well in so doing, and we shall be obedient to what you shall ordain
therein. But those good and faithful servants, which desired the good and
prosperous estate of their Prince both in soul and body, humbly besought him
on their knees, saying; Sir For Gods honor, and your own, do not do so vile
a thing, for it is neither fitting, nor lawful, nor shall we follow you
therein, or serve you one day longer. Then did the Emperor know by this, which
were good servants, and of greatest trust, and presently dismissed the other;
Credens, nunquam eos, circa principem suum fore debitos, qui fuerunt Dei sui
fic paratissimi proditores: Persuading himself, that they would never be
faithful to their Prince, that would so soon turn traitors unto God. And if
Kings would know how true this is, and the error wherein they live, by having
the truth kept from them, let them at some one time or other (when they see
fit) make show to affect the contrary to that, which before they were hot upon,
and did earnestly desire; and then shall they see, that those very men, which
approved the one, will likewise make good the other, and then will they know
how in the one, or in the other, nay in all, they are deceived by them; or at
least, that they dare not plainly and simply tell him that truth, which their
hearts think. If they be Ministers and Counselors of State, if they once
find out their Kings humor, and the air that most delights his care, they
play upon that string: If they be bedchamber men, or the like familiar
Attendants about his person, they have naturally a servile inclination, and
make it their common custom to intertaine him with matters of mirth, of
iollitie, and intertaynment: if they be his friends, of his favorites, they
also are not without their applauding and adulation, and by so much the more to
be suspected, by how much the greater it is. But what if all these shall join
to abuse a good King? Then this misery likewise comes of it. That what a few
of them shall begin to say, all the rest will approve it. And if Kings (as they
cannot without being known) could but hear their talk and conversation, they
might hear and know many truths, they should know the minds of many, and the
desires of all, and they would rejoice in knowing the truth of that, which none
durst tell them. For some, nay many of them, will report what they hear, and
amongst themselves speak plainly the truth one to another, so as they be sure
that the King cannot hear them. This would be somewhat, if not much remedyed,
if Kings would but do that, which we but even now delivered of the Emperor
Constantine the Great, who would not suffer that Minister or Fauourit that he
had once caught in a Lie ever to see his face any more, but wholly dismissed him
from his services: For both in wisdom and Christianity, it is to be
presumed, that in all or always that he can, at least as often as it touches
his own particular, he will not make him a faithful relation, and living in
this just jealousy and suspicion of his truth, and plain dealing, with much
scruple of conscience, and in great danger, does that King live which gives him
his care, or vpholds him is his office. But let us pause here, and pass to
that second point, which is the faith and word, which Kings ought to keep.

. II. That Kings ought to keep their faith, and word.
THis word Faith, in our Common Language, signifies Credit; And sometimes
Faith, is taken for that belief, which we give unto that, which others tell
us. And other whiles, for that, which others give unto that, which we tell
them. And to say, that a man is such a one, is Hombre de fee, a man of faith,
is all one, as if we should say, that he is a man of Credit, and that we give
faith and credit to that he says Marcus Tullius, who knew better then all the
Latinists besides, the proper signification and elegancie of the Latin words,
says: That fides, is so called, quasi fiat, quod dictum est, That faith, has
it is denomination, from not failing in our word. And hence it is, that men
having shown themselves honest in doing that which they had past their word
they would do, we grew in the end, to give faith and credit unto them. And
this humane faith, being taken in this sense, is so necessary, that people were
not able to live, nor converse together, or hold any commerce or traffic, if
they should not give Faith and credit one to another. For the conservation
whereof, it is very fitting, that every one should make good his word, by his
works, and to see that faithfully performed and indeed, for which he has
part his honest word and promise. And by how much the more noble a man is, so
much the more obligation he has, to keep this his faith and word. And if
not, see the offense which is taken at it, when men are taxed with this fault,
who are satisfied with no less, then with taking away that man's life, that
goes about to take away another man's faith and credit, by telling him, he
lies. And it is a thing much to be laughed at, (or to say better much to be
lamented) to see the great folly and rash proceeding which passes in this
kind, and concerning this matter for they acknowledging in these their Laws,
and Duels, what a great obligation they have to maintain this their faith,
reputation, and credit, by always saying, and treating truth, upon the very
least aspersion, shadow, or note of falsehood, they risent it so much, that
they stick not to fall into a worse sin such as is a very Lie it self, a
loud lie, by lying so easily, and ordinarily, as some do. I ask the
question; which is worse, to be lame, or crooked, or to say such a one is so,
when as there is no such thing? Certainly, it is much worse to be so, then to
be said, to be so. And to him, that is not so, me thinks he should make but
little reckoning of what they say in that kind; and should rather endeavor to
fly from any default in himself, then from the bare opinion and shadow
thereof. Now a lie, being a greater ill, and a far fouler default then all
these, men fall so easily thereinto, and make so little scruple of Lying, and
more Lying, vying Lie upon lie; yea even those, that will lay down their life,
rather then endure that men should tell them they Lie, though themselves know
they lie, and that they lie not, who tell them they lie, being only offended
with them, that they will not take a Lie, for a truth; or at least let them go
away with it, without the least reproof or contradiction, which ingenious
natures can hardly endure, especially when they know that they are in the
right, and the other in the wrong. Certainly, of all other Vices, Lying, is
the most unworthy noble and gentle blood. And it is such a Labrinth, that the
more a man seeks to get out of it, the more he finds himself out of the way.
So that a man striving to get out of one lie, falls into another, and from that
to a third, and all of them worse then the former. Here I will advertise by
the way, that it is a common and usual Language with your Courtiers, which may
seem to carrye a show of truth, but indeed is full of lies and falsehood. And
this it is: When they will cumply in words, with them who recommend themselves
or their suites unto them, they say; Sir use you your best diligences, for I
will do my part, and God knows, that I have, and do that, which belongs to
me; And true it is; for God knows, that his part, is to lie, and only to
compliment with this poor pretender, and to do nothing at all in that, which
he pretends. I apply my self, to that old and ancient language of the
Noblemen of Castile, engraven on the sword, of Cid Rui DiaZ. Si, fi, no, no,
yea yea nay, nay, which is a Lesson, that is taught us by our Savior Christ in
his holy Gospel. This is that, which befitteth all men, but more especially
Kings; for, to indeare this or that man's truth, we usually say, Que tiene
palabra de Rey: That a King cannot keep his word, better then he does, or is
more precise of his promise. And therefore I hold for certain, that that which
Plato yields unto Kings and Magistrates concerning this point, if it be well
understood, is not to lie, but to use stratagemes and politic devises, for to
defeat and deceive the enemies spies, and Intelligencers. And I very well
remember that my self communicating this conceit, upon occasion, with one of
the learned men, and greatest Platonists, that this Age afforded, he approved
of it, and did much commend it; for, as concerning that truth and faith,
whereof we now treat, Plato himself, and all other the good Philosophers,
teach the rigor and strictness, wherewith men ought to keep their word. In
the book of Joshua, is recounted the craft, wherewith the Ghibeonites, moved
the Princes of Israel to plight them their faith, that they would do them no
harm. And though afterward this their cunning dealing was discovered and
brought to light, and that all the people were willing, that this promise
should not be kept; yet the Princes of the people made answer thereunto, that
they could not but cumply with their word, especially having confirmed it with
an oath. Iurauimus eis in nomine Domini Dei Israel, Josh. 9.15.
and idcirco non possumus eos contingere. We have sworn unto them by the Lord
God of Israel, and therefore we may not hurt them. And because many years
after, King Saul (out of a zeal to the good of his people) broake that their
word and promise, there fell upon him and his people a great famine, which
continued for the space of three years. King Don Sancho, whom they slew by
treason, confessed; that that death, lighted worthily upon him, because he had
broaken his word, given to his father King Don Fernando, to pass the partition
made with his brethren; And the constancy of David is known to all, in
keeping that his word, which all the while he lived he gave to Shimei, that
he would not put him to death, according to the desert of his irreuerent
language, and disrespect to his person. And both divine, and humane Letters are
full of the severe chasticements, which God has inflicted upon those, who have
not been faithful in the keeping of their faith and word. For, being that he
himself is most faithful, and does boast himself to be so, he will likewise
that men should be so one toward another. S. Isidore, with a great number of
words, affirms; Isidor. lib. 2. Synonimorum. D. Th. 2.2. q. 100. art. 4. ad 5.
That we ought not to deceive any man: and that all infidelity, is sin; That
no man ought to fail in that which he has promised; That it is requisite in
all men, that their works concur with their words, without admitting any
exception more then in two Cases; As when that which is promised, cannot be
performed without sin; Or when the businesses, or the persons, admit some
notable change. And he cites the example of Saint Paul; Who promised to go to
Corinth, 2 Cor. 1.19.
but could not be as good as his word, for those lawful impediments, which
hindered this his intended Journey. Whence, it follows; That things continuing
in the same Estate, a man may not, for the conueniences of his private profit,
be wanting to his promise: And to maintain the contrary, is to lay trapps
against the truth of faith, and to arm policy against the religion of an
oath. In a word, all do resolve, that all promises are to be kept, and that no
deceit or faithless dealing ought to be tolerated. And the reason, whereupon
they ground it, is common; for that fidelitas est fundamentum Iustitiae;
Faithfulness is the foundation of Justice, and all Contractation; And that
this being taken away, all commerce amongst men, must expire with it, without
the which the world cannot be conserved. For they, not resting assured, that
that which is promised, shall be performed, they will not trust one another.
Marcus Tullius, says very well, that this humane faith is so necessary amongst
men, that, even Thieues and Pirates could not live, if they were not true
amongst themselves, and kept their word one with another. And though all, even
the meanest, ought to keep their word, yet much more carefully ought Kings;
and Princes; for there is nothing more unworthy them, then to fail in their
faith, and word, which above all earthly things they ought to keep, and cumply
with all, because they are as Gods upon earth, and the Head of their people.
Wherefore, their single word ought to be as an Oracle, and to be more firm,
sure, and of greater credit, then any bond or obligation whatsoever that is
sealed and signed with an oath. Let the Politicians say what they please, and
that it is good and sound advise, that a Prince, for to conserve his State, may
do an act contrary to Faith and Religion, and neither keep his word, nor oath;
yet must I be bold to tell them, that this is wicked, ungodly, and beastly
Counsel, and contrary to the whole School of learned Doctors, and holy
fathers; who affirm: that a Prince is bound to keep his word, though he take
not an oath for the performance thereof, but much more if he shall swear, and
bind it by an oath. And if they will not yield to this, let these Politicians
pluck off their mask, and let those that be their sectuaries, speak plain
language, and tell me what they think of those Princes, (as of Sigismund, and
others) who made no reckoning of that they promise and swear, when as by the
breach thereof, they have been utterly overthrown, when they most assured
themselves of Victory. I doubt not but they will hold it for a foolish reason
of State. For by this falsifying, Princes shall presently loose all their
cerdit and reputation, and all their cunning shall not profit them, for they
will never afterward be believed. As it is in one of the laws of the Partida.
L. 3. Tit. 4. Part. 2.
No le creerian los homes, que le oyessen maguer que dixessen verdad. Men will
not believe, what they hear from them, though they speak truth. Titus Liuius,
holds it a barbarous Act, That Princes should tie their faithfulness to
Fortune, to run along with the times, and to shift sails with every wind.
For by this means the word of a Prince will come to be like unto the Lesbian
rule, August. in Apolog.
which changes and alters it self, according to the building, and is
crooked, and straight, short, or long, suitable to the bigness or proportion of
the stone, or timber which the carpenter, or mason, heweth, or cutteth.

But let us conclude this second point, with this; That realitie, and
sincerity both in words and deeds, is very necessary for all sorts of
persons, but more particularly, for Kings and Princes, who should rather see
Heaven and earth to fail, then that they should fail in their promises. Let
them first well weigh and consider with themselves, what they either say, or
promise, that it be agreeable to the Law of God, and to the precepts of the
Church, but afterward, let them infallibly observe and keep the same. For in
this, consists the conservation, and augmentation of great States; And is
that true reason of State, which makes Kings more powerful, more rich, more
esteemed, and more obeyed. For he that keeps his faith, and his word, holds
the hearts of men in his hand, is Master of all their wealth, and all because
they rest assured, that they may confidently rely upon his faith and word.
Whereas, by the contrary, has insued the destruction of Commonwealths, the
distrustfullnesse of their subjects, the scorn and contempt of their enemies,
and the jealousy of their friends and confederates, who all hang and depend
upon the truth of his words, and the performance of his Contracts. And this
being once lost, with it he loses his credit, and after that all goes to
wrack with it. For Malignitas (says the Wise man) euertet seeds potentium:
Malignitie or ill-mindednesse, Wisd. 5.14.
(which is nothing else, but a Lie or deceit) shall overthrow the seats of
the Mighty. And Cicero says; That it is a most wicked and abominable thing,
to break that word, which conserueth a sociable life betwixt man and man. For
(as Aristotle affirms) Pacts and Covenants, being broaken and violated, there
is taken away from amongst men, the use, trading, and commerce of things.
These, and the like effects, cause in a King, either the keeping, or loosing of
his Credit. But of no less importance is that third point, which follows in
the next place, concerning secrecy.

. III. Of that secrecy which Kings, and their Ministers ought to keep.
IT is likewise the Tongues Office, to hold it is peace. And as it is not of
the least difficulty, so in nothing more does man's wisdom and prudence show
it self. Plato, will not have him held to be a wise man, Diog. Laert. de Vit.
Philos. Pliny lib. 8. n^^ur. bis. cap. 25 Cocodrillo.
that knows not how to hold his peace. Diogenes Laertius; that there is no
greater token of a Fool, then to be loose-tongued, and lavish of talk;
Neminem stultum tacere posse: It is impossible for a fool, to hold his peace.
The Ancient, esteemed him a God upon earth, that was a friend to silence,
representing him in a creature of that Region, which has no tongue. Implying
thereby, that that man is the lively image and true picture of God, whose
discretion teaches him, how, when, and where, to hold his peace: Alluding
happily unto that of David, who finding eyes, ears, and hands in God, Psalm.
62.11.
seems not to find that he had a tongue. For, as he is God, he never spoke
but once. Semel locutus est Deus: God has spoaken once. And the Spouse
speaks much of all the parts of her beloved, but of his Tongue, as if he had
no such thing. And he, that shall not speak a word out of season, nor say any
more then what is fitting, it may be said of that man, that he has no
Tongue. And therefore did that holy King David so often beg of God, that he
would open his mouth with his own hand, and so order his Tongue that he might
not speak, but when he would have him, and that he would teach him what, and
how to speak. Illius labia aperit (says S. Austen) qui non solum, quod
loquitur, sed etiam quando, and vbi, and cui loquatur, attendit: God opens that
man's lips, who attends not only what he speaks, but also when, where, and
to whom he speaks. Merito igitur sapiens est (adds the same holy father)
qui accipit a Domino, quo tempore loquendum sit: Deservedly therefore is he to
be held a wise man, which receives instruction from the Lord, when he ought to
speak. And the Scripture says; Vir sapiens tacebit vsque ad tempus: A wise
man will hold his peace till he see his time. Nay Christ himself, that King
of Kings says of himself by the Prophet Esaias; Isay. 50.4.
that his eternal Father gave him an exceeding wise and prudent tongue. Dedit
mihi Dominus linguam eruditam: The Lord God, has given me a learned tongue;
Or, as the Hebrew renders it, Eruditiorum; The tongue of the learned; Not an
ordinary tongue, but such a Tongue, wherein was to be found the wisdom, and
prudence of all the wise men of the world, and from whence all might learn. Vt
sciam sustentare eum, qui lapsus est verbo: That I may know how to uphold him,
that has slipped in his word; Or (as the 70. translate it) Vt sciam quando
oporteat loqui verbum: That I should know how to speak a word in season to him
that is weary. So that a wise, discreet, and prudent Tongue, and such a one as
is given by God, is that, which knows when to speak, and when to hold it is
peace. Teaching Kings, who are in a manner Gods, at least Gods Liuetenants,
should in this particular imitate him. That they should have a wise Tongue, to
know when to open the door of the lips, and when to shut them, what to utter,
and what to conceal. For, this is the Learning and wisdom of the Tongue,
either to speak, or be silent, as shall fute best with time, and occasion.
Tempus tacendi, and tempus loquendi: It is Salomons; Eccl. 3.7.
A time to keep silence, and a time to speak. And in Kings, this is so much
the more important, by how much the more grave and weighty are those
businesses, which are treated with them. For, it does not only benefit them,
in not having their purposes prevented, not their designs overthrown, but
likewise winn's them much authority and credit. For the world will stand as it
were astonished and amazed, and men will wonder at that, which they both do,
and say, and out of every kind of gesture, or word of theirs, will make a
Mystery, deliver their judgments, and draw thence a thousand discourses, all
which are but cranes and pullyes to make them mount higher in opinion, and
reputation. Likewise, when Ministers shall take notice, that their King knows
how to hear, and how to hold his peace, and in it is due time, to execute his
intentions, they live in a great deal the more awe and fear, lest such and
such things (wherein they do amiss) might come to his knowledge: And when
they see, that he knows how to conceal a secret, till it is fit time and
season, it keeps them within their Compass, and is the only bridle, that
restraines them from doing ill, either by way of oppression (whereunto great
Ministers are too much subject) or otherwise. And therefore, it shall much
concern a King, not only to be secret in those things, which might cause some
inconvenience, if he should speak of them, and make them known, but also in
those things, which bring no profit by their publication. For, if they shall
once perceive, that their King cannot conceal, what is delivered unto him
under the seal of silence, in prejudice of this, or that particular party, no
man will date to inform, and advise him of that, which may redound to Gods
service, and the good of the Commonwealth. And so like bad gamesters, they
will for want of keeping close their cards, let their contrary win the game,
by discovering their hand. A Kings heart, should be so deep and profound, that
none should be able to pry into it, not to know what is hidden there. And
therefore he must have such a secret heart, as S. Austen speaks of; August.
Psalm. 63. ver. 7.
Coraltum: That is, Cor secretum: or (as others read it) profundum, an
inscrutable heart; or so deep, that none shall be able to diue into it. And
some compare a kings heart unto punctum, a little point or prick, which to
divide, or to draw any thing out of it, is (if not impossible at least very
difficult. The heart of a king, must be closed and shut up, like this punctum,
whence there shall be an impossibility, or at least a great deal of difficulty,
Prou. 21.1.
in extracting any one word, or secret, reco^mended unto him. Solomon says;
That the hearts of Kings, are in the hands of God; and are guided and directed
by him. And that therefore their secrets and mysteries, are not to be divulged,
and made common, no not to his nearest Minions and Favorites; and when at
most, but to some one particular priuado, and that upon very good and just
cause. Our Savior Christ, once, (upon necessary occasion) discovered a secret
to his great Priuado, or favorite, S. John, but it was with these
circumstances; That he told it him in his ear, forbidding him to speak
thereof unto any. And because, neither by signs, or any other outward
demonstration, he might make it known, he bound up all his senses in a deep
and profound sleep, to the end, that by none of them, he might express that,
which it behooued him to conceal. Great is the importancie of secrecy, and
the authority which it gives to the judgments, and motives of those that
govern. For, if all might know the causes, which move a Prince to make this or
that provision, to give, this this or judgment, to pardon, or to punish, to
crave, or to give, many censures would pass upon it, and it might cause many
scandalls and alterations in a Common wealth. And therefore it much concerns
so supreme a Majesty not to suffer the secret which is shut up in his bosom,
to be published to the world. And in some cases, it may come to be a mortal
sin, when such things as are advertised a king, and such Memorials as are given
him firmed and signed with this or that man's hand, he shall show them to the
parties, whom they touch and concern, be they Ministers, or favorites, in
regard of the great hurt, opposition, and dissension, which there-fro may
arise. But he may do this, in case it may well sort with the secret it self,
to take out the pithe and substance of it, and without showing any firm, or
vttring any word whereby the Author may be known, and show it to the
Delinquent (if so he think fit) for his correction, and amendment. And when
he finds that to be true which has been told him, and that it cannot be
denied, let him apply a due and fitting remedy. For many times Dissimulation in
the Prince (not seeming to take notice of a fault) causes but the more
dissoluteness in the subject.

This is so far forth, as concerns Kings, Caelius. Lib. 13. Lectio antiq.
c. 5.
for whom may suffice, that advice of Caelius Rodiginus, who tells them more at
large, how considerate they ought to be in this particular. For many Cities and
Kingdoms have been lost and overthrown for want of secrecy.

But let us now begin to speak of Ministers, and Secretaries of State, in whom
usually lies the greater fault. And to whom, by their Office, secrecy more
properly belongs. The name it self expresing as much. For, out of that
obligation which they have to be secret, they are called Secretaries, and are
the Archiues and Cabinets of the secrets of the King, and the kingdom. Though
this name through the soothing and flattery of your suitors, He means the
Escrinanos, and Notaries of Spain,
has falsely extended it self to those, which neither keep secret, nor
treat of such businesses as require secrecy. And it is fit, that these names
should not be thus confounded, or that that Honor and Title should be given to
him, to whom by Office it not appertains. Secretaryes I say, shut up with
that secrecy, Apoc. 5.1.
as was that book of those secret Mysteries which Saint John found sealed with
seven seals, which none, Tobit. 12.7.
but the King himself could open. Sacramentum Regis bonum est (said the Angel
Raphael to Toby) opera autem Dei reuelare, honorificum est: It is good to keep
close the secret of a King, but it is honorable to reveal the work of God.
Which is as much to say, as that the determinations of a King should be kept
secret, but that the effects and execution of them should be published and made
manifest, when it is fitting for the service of God, and the Kingdom. For a
Kings secret, is his heart, and till that God shall move him to express it by
some outward work, there is no reason that any one else should discover it. To
reveal a secret, is by the Laws of God, and Nature, and by all men generally
condemned, and all Laws, and Nations, do severely punish the same, for the
great hurt, and many inconveniences, that may follow thereupon. The Laws, they
are defrauded, the resolutions of Kings, they are hindered; their enemies, they
are advertised; their friends they are offended; men's minds, they are
perturbed; kingdoms, they are altered; peace; that is lost; the delinquents,
they are not punished; And lastly all public and private businesses are
overthrown. And there is not any thing, that goes cross, or amiss in a
State, or that miscarryes or is lost, but by the revealing of the secrets of
Kings, and of their Counsels. As that great Chancellor Gerson told the King
of France, touching the ill success of some things in his time, for that some
of his Ministers did publish that which was treated and determined at the
Counsell-Table. And the like befell Enrique, King of Portugal; Who, because
he was deaf, they were faigne to speak so loud unto him, Valor. lib. 2.
Mirabi. Caepola; Simancus de rep. lib 7 cap. 14. and cap. 15.
that all men might hear what they said. Valerius Maximus much commends the
secrecy of the Roman Senate, and says, that for this cause, that Consistory
was held in high esteem, and that it was a great occasion of enlarging their
Empire. And they, and the Persians, did keep with that faith the secrets of
their Kings, that there was no fear of plumping them, or being able to draw
any thing from them, no not so much as the least word, whereby to discover the
business. Use, together with the fear of punishment, and hazard of their
lives, had so settled and confirmed this silence in them. For, they did punish
no offense with greater rigor, then that of vnfaithfullnesse, in matters of
secrecy; and with a great deal of reason, because it is in so near a degree
unto Treason; and I think, I should not say amiss, if I styled it in the
highest. Oser. lib. 8. de Regis institutione.
Regis proditor, and Patriae euersor astimandus est (says Osorius) such a one,
is to be hled a Traitor to the King, and a subuerter of the state. A Law of
the Partida says; Ley. 5. Tit. 9. p. 2. in fine. Ibi. Faria traycion. Excepto
encaso detraycion y heregia, culo qual por dottrina de santo Thomas se puedes
did. 21. and did. 10. q. 2. artic. 3. q. 1. ad. 2 L. 5. Tit. lib. 2.
That those Counselors, which reveal their Kings secrets, commit treason;
yea, though secrecy be not inionyed them, nor they charged there with. But
he, that takes an oath to be secret, and reuealeth any thing contrary
thereunto; besides that he is a perjured and infamous person, he sins
mortally, and is bound to satisfaction of all the harm, that shall happen
thereby, and incurres the punishment of deprivation of his Office. For, if he
be sworn to secrecy, or be made a Secretary, and has silence for the seal
of his Office, he is justly deprived thereof, if he use it amiss. And the Law
of the Recopilation says, that he is liable to that punishment which the King
will inflict upon him, according to the quality of the offense, or the hurt
thereby received. And the Imperial Law, (chapter the first, Quibus modis
feudum amittit.) that he shall loose the sea, which he holds of his Lord.
Plutarke reports of Philipides, that he being in great grace and favor with
Lysimachus, King of Lacademonia, begged no other boon of him but this; That he
would not recommend any secret unto him; As one that knew very well that saying
of one of the wise men of Greece: That there was not any thing of more
difficulty, then to be silent in matters of secrecy. As also, for that it
being communicated to others, though it come to be discovered by another
fault, and none of his, yet the imputation is laid as well upon him, that was
silent, as on him that revealed; and so must suffer for another man's error.
And in case any man shall incur any just suspicion thereof, let the King
withdraw his favor from him, dismiss him the Court, and put another in his
place, that shall be more secret; for that which they most pretend, is their
fidelity in this point. And howbeit, they have never so many other virtues,
and good abilities, yet wanting this, they want all; and are of no use, no more
then were those vessels in Gods House, which had no Couers to their mouths.
For such open vessels are they, that cannot keep close a secret, and
altogether unworthy the service of kings. The substance and virtue of your
flowers goes out in vapors and exhalations of the Lymbecke; And heat passes
out through the mouth of the furnace: and a secret from between the lips of a
Fool; it being a kind of disease amongst those that know least, to talk
most, and to vent through their mouth, whatsoever they have in their heart. In
ore fatuorum, Eccl. 21.26.
Cor illorum (says the Wise man) and in cord sapientium, os illorum: The
heart of fools is in their mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in their
hearts. Cogitauerunt, Psalm. 72.
et locuti sunt. Look what a Fool has in his head, he will presently out
with it. But a wise man, will not speak all that he knows. And therefore your
Naturallists say; that Nature placed two veins in the Tongue; the one going to
the heart, the other to the brain. To the end that that which remains secret
in the heart, the Tongue should not utter, save what reason and the
understanding have first registered, conformable to that Order, which is
between the faculties of the Soul, and of the Body, it being fit that the
Imagination should first conceive, and the Tongue afterward bring forth: that
think, the other speak. Not like unto that fool, who unadvisedly, and
without premeditation, Psalm. 52.2.
went all day long babbling up and down. Tota die iniustitiam cogitauit lingua
tua: Thy tongue, all day-long, deuiseth mischief. That is, whatsoever it
imagines, it easily vttreth, nay sometimes the Tongue speaks without book,
and runs riot, before ever it is a ware. But let us conclude this with that of
Solomon; That Death, and Life, Prou. 18.21.
are in the power of the tongue; A dangerous weapon in the hands of him, that
is not Master thereof, and knows not how to rule it. For all Man's good, or
ill, consists in the good, or ill use of this Instrument. The well governing
whereof, is like a good Pilot, that governs a ship; and the ill guiding of
it, like a dangerous rock whereon men split their honor, and often loose
their lives. And therefore the Devil left patient Job, when all the rest of
his body was wounded with sores, his tongue whole and sound: Not with intent to
do him any kindness therein, but because he knew very well, that that alone
was sufficient, if he were careless thereof, for to make him loose his
honor, his life, and his soul: For all these lie in the power of the Tongue.
Prou. 13.3:
Qui in consideratus est, ad loquendum, sentiet mala: He that opens wide his
lips, shall have destruction. And the plagues which shall befall him, will be
so remediless, that he shall not meet with any medicine to cure them. Nor is
there any defense against the careless negligences of a babbling tongue which
are so many, that the Holy Ghost styles such a kind of tongue, the
University, or School of wickedness. Vniuersitas iniquitatis. Iam. 3.6.
Wherein is read a Lecture of all the Vices. Whereas on the contrary, Vir
prudens secreta non prodit; Tacenda enim tacet, et loquenda loquitur: Seneca.
lib 4. de Virtut.
A wise man will not betray a secret; But silenceth those things, that are to
be silenced, and utters those things, that are to be uttered.

It is worthy our weighing, how much imports the wariness in our words, for
Gods honor, and the Kings credit and authority, which is much abused and
lessened by futile, and flippant tongues, to the great hurt of a kingdom, and
the good government of the Commonwealth. And let Kings correct this so great a
disorder in the disclosing of secrets, either out of their respect to such and
such persons, or for their particular Interests, or out of the weakness of a
slippery tongue. Let Priuie-Counsellours (I say) and Secretaries of State,
bridle their tongues; If not, let Kings, if they can, restrain them. And if
they cannot do it of themselves, let them petition God, as David did; In camo
et fraeno maxillas eorum constringe: Psalm 31.92. James 3.8.
Hold in their mouth with bit and bridle. For I am of Saint James his belief;
Nullus hominum domare potest: The tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly
evil. I say moreover that the harms which the Tongue does, are so many, and
in such a diverse manner, that the evil consists not only in speaking, but
many times likewise in being silent, and saying nothing; by forbearing to
speak the truth in that which is fitting, and when it ought to speak, (as
already has been said) and in not reproving and amending his neighbor, being
obliged, thereunto, by the Law Natural, Divine and Positive; And in not
reprehending Murmurers, and Backbiters; for then, for a man to hold his peace,
and not to check them for it, is to consent and concur with them, and to
approve that which they say. And S. Bernard tells us, that he cannot determine
which of the two is worser; Detrahere, Bern. lib. 2. de Conside. ad Eugen.
aut detrahentem audire, quid horum damnabilius sit, non facile dixerim: To
detract, or to hear him that detracteth, which is the more damnable, I cannot
easily define. But more especially in Kings and persons of authority, who with
a blast only of their breath, or with a sower look, may make them hold their
peace. I leave the charge of this unto them, and charge their consciencs with
it. And for the discharge of mine own, I will now advertise them of another
sort of people, whom for their tongue and talk none can exceed.

. IIII. Of Flatterers, and their Flatteries.
AMongst those infinite hurtes, and mischiefs which an evil tongue causes,
one amongst the rest, and not the least, is that of Adulation and flattery.
Which is so much the greater, by how much the more dissembled and feigned it
is. The sacred Scripture terms it absolutely a sin, and says, that a
flatterer, is absolutely a sinner. So some do paraphrase upon that Verse;
Oleum autem peccatoris: The oil, or balm of a sinner. For in it is included
all sorts of sin whatsoever, and above all a great neglect and contempt of
God: for although this be to be seen in all kind of sins, yet does it more
particularly express it self in those, which draw not with them any delight,
which they do as it were unprofitably, and sine pretio; for it brings them no
profit at all, unless (when most) a little Vanity, which they more esteem,
then God. These, that they may gain the kings elbowe, or that they may not be
put from it, speak always unto him in favor of that, which he desires; and
all their Artifice and cunning is, to conceal the Truth, and that the door
may be shut against him, that may tell it him, or those that know not (like
themselves) how to please the Kings palate. And being confident, that they will
give ear to every word which they speak, they lay falsehoods and lies athwart
their way, fathering such Actions of Prowess and valor upon Kings, that they
have much ado to for-beare laughing, that hear their folly. For there are
some praises, that are dis-prayses, and redound much to the disgrace and
dishonor of Princes. For by those untruths, wherewith they sooth and flatter
them, they breed suspicion of that good which is in them. And because they make
pleasing the mark whereat they shoot, they never look, whether it be a lie,
or a truth, which they deliver, nor have an eye more unto good, then ill; just
or unjust, against God, or his neighbor, all is one: Cannonizing their King
for a Saint, though they know the contrary. These (says Nazianzene) are like
to your Sorcerers of Egypt, which were about Pharaohs person, who with feigned
Prodigies, did pretend to ease his heart of that grief which those plagues did
cause in him. Ambitious and proud men are these, which thus resist the truth,
and that they may not fall from their bias, oppose themselves to those that
speak the truth, and mind nothing else, but to cast a fair color on those
things, whereunto they see their Prince stands affected. They come of the race
of your Cameleons, which live by the air, and cloth themselves with the
color of that whereunto they approach nearest. If they see the King troubled,
they are troubled; if merry, they are merry; if sad, they are sad; Having their
tears as near at hand, as their smiles, for to deceive him; And the better to
content him, they change themselves into a thousand colors: in all they
imitate him: in all do they labor to represent him to the true life. There is
not that glass, which so lively represents the face, the semblance, and
actions of those that look therein, as the flatterer (who is that shadow which
always follows the body of him he flattereth) does his Kings countenance,
his motions, his postures, his gestures, his saying, and his doings. For, as
they see him either say, or do, so do they. Being like unto the Echo, which
answers to the last syllable of every word that is voyced in the Air. These
are the Kings Echos, which answer him in all, not only in that which the voice
sounds; but in that which they imagine to be to his liking: Being herein very
like unto those lying Hypocrites which think one thing, and make show of
another. But they are presently discovered, and this their second intention
soon understood, which is, To lie, and flatter, to make themselves gracious,
and to bring their businesses the better about, though it be to the hurt of
others. With one single truth, they will dawbe over a thousand lies; As
perfumers do a great deal of Leather, with a little Ciuit. And thus soothing
and suppling the ears of Princes with a subtle softness, and deceitful
sweetness, thy power lies into them, and working them with a gentle hand, they
pass for truths, Whilst these false perswaders falsify the Truth, and are
worse members in a Commonwealth then those that falsify the Kings Coin; and
sin more grievously then those that bear false witness. For these, by their
testification, deceive only the Judge, that is to sentence the cause; but
these with their fair and false flatteries, not only cozen and deceive Kings,
but corrupt and infect them, and make them to persevere in their errors. Per
dulces sermones, and benedictiones, Romans 16.18.
seducunt Corda innocentium (says S. Paul) by good words, and fair speeches
they deceive the hearts of the simple. And therefore with the greater and more
grievous punishments ought they to be punished. They are not so squezy
stomackt, as to make dainty of Lying, nor make they any bones to tell an
untruth, if thereby they think they may please. And as soon will they lay
hold on a Lie, as a truth, so as they rest well apayd therewith to whom they
vent their flattery and their Leasings. And some are so trained and bred up to
them that they take delight to hear them, and do as verily believe them, as
they do their Creed. And so close does this falsehood cleave unto them, that
without any occasion or cause given they lean thereunto, and steadfastly
believe, that they have that goodness in them, which they want, and not that
badnesse, wherein they exceed. For, being senseless of their own defects,
they no sooner hear themselves commended but they are presently puffed up, and
conceit themselves to surpass all other Princes. And thus do they live all
their life long deluded, taking themselves to be othewise, then they are, being
abused and undone, by Lies, and flatteries; Whence it is now grown to be a
Proverb; Princeps, qui libenter audit verba mendacij, Prou. 29.12.
omnes Ministros habet impios: If a Ruler hearken to Lies, all his servants are
wicked. For every man will frame his Tongue, according to his ear and feed
him with that fruit, which they know best pleases his palate. It being a
dangerous disease in Kings, not to endure the truth; and as mortal in the
subjects, that they know not well, how to acquaint them therewith. The one,
because they mind no other thing; The other because they dare not speak their
mind. Many seekeing to please them, most to flatter them, and some not to
contradict them, being loath to distaste them, of whose help and favor they
may stand in need, having so much the kings ear, and such great power in
Court. They know that the bread of Lies is sauory, and that flatterers are too
well heard, that they buzze into Kings ears a thousand fictions and
falsehoods, which they themselves invent, and by their smooth carriage of them,
persuade them to be truths. And for that Kings (usually) treat with few, they
cannot be informed of the truth, and so are forced to believe those, who of
purpose seek to deceive them. And therefore the wise men of Athens did set such
a watch about their Kings, that flatterers should not be suffered to speak
with them. For these their smooth words, their adulations, and flatteries when
they are once received by the ear, do not slightly pass away, entering in at
one ear, and going out at another, but they cleave unto the Soul, and make
their way even to the innermost part of the heart, and there make their seat,
and abode. Verba susurronis, quasi simplicia, Prou. 26.22.
and ipsa perueniunt ad intima cordis: The words of a Talebearer, carry a
fair show, but they are as wounds, and they go down into the innermost parts
of the belly. And albeit they be cast out, and do not wholly either possess,
or persuade us, as knowing of what stamp they are, and in what mould they are
cast, yet at least they leave behind them a kind of guste, and content, and
with that wherewith they seem to please, they kill. As water does those, that
are sick of a Hectick-feuer, which they drink with so much pleasure, and
swallow down with so much greediness: so these men come to taste that, which
turns to their own hurt. Crossing the opinion of Job; who would have none to
taste that, which being tasted, should occasion his death. Of your rich red
wine, the wise man says, that it is pleasant and sweet in the going down,
but afterward that it biteth and gnaweth in the belly, like a Serpent; In like
manner, soothing is very sweet and sauory, and and seems least sower, to
those, that are most powerful, and, although they see the poison that it is
mingled with, yet they drink it down with a good will, and their servants
will be sure to serve them with the best and the strongest, contrary to that
precept of Gods, which says; Prou. 31.4.5.
Noli vinum dare regibus: Give not wine unto Kings, lest they drink, and
forget the Law, and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted. Let Kings
therefore take heed of these flatterers, and false deceivers, who pretend no
more then to uphold themselves in their place, and grace, and to receive
thanks for doing ill. And the misery of it is, that they find this to be a
good way for their rising in Court, and to grow in favor with Princes; and the
only sure course, whereby to shape and work out their advancement. Plutarke
says, That it is the fashion and Language of vile and base people, Plut.
Moral. lib. de Amico, and affectatore.
and besides many other infamous names and foul Attributes, that he gives
them, he declares, them to be of as base condition, as are your slaves, which
of necessity must cumply in all their Actions, and their Answers with their
Masters liking, and pleasure. The doing whereof, were there no other slavery,
is slavery enough of it self. But in some cases, it may be somewhat more
tolerable, as when their flatteries shall do little or no hurt, and when as
their lies and untruths shall tend to no other end, but merriment, and to
intertaine, and please him whom they serve. But in the rest it is Treason and
Treachery. L. 5. Tit. 13. par. 2.
King Don Alonso (surnamed the Wise) in a Law of the Partida, says. Que si
alguno, etc. That if any one should speak words of Leasing and of flattery to
the King, that he should not be suffered to come near him. For such kind of
men, are like like unto their tamer sort of Bees, that are housed in their
hiues, which have honey in their mouths, but wound with their stings. They
speak sweet words, but their tongues are full of poison; Psalm. 140.3.
Venenum aspidum sub labijs eorum: Ierem. 9.
The poison of Aspes is under their lips. Sagitta vulnerans, lingua eorum:
Their tongue is as an arrow shot out. And they bend their tongue, like their
bow, for lies. Hieroni. Epist. 88.
They are worse (says Saint Ierom) then Scorpions, who woo us with their
face, and wound us with their tail. And therefore the Prophet EZechiel,
discoursing of Kings, advises them, saying; Look well to your selves, for you
dwell among Scorpions. And well was that holy King acquainted with their ill
condition, who did cast them off from him, when he said; Depart from me ye
wicked. Job. 19.22.
Quare persequimini me, and carnibus meis saturamini? Why do ye persecute me
(says Job) and are not satisfied with my flesh? Other Creatures, (though never
so fierce, and cruel) content themselves with feeding on dead carcasses; but
these must live and be sustained by living flesh, and like your birds of
rapine, prey upon the bosoms and hearts of Kings. Nullum quidem animantium
genus (says Plutarke) assentatoribus est perniciosius: Plut. in Moral. lib. de
Educan. liberis*
No creature so dangerous as is the flatterer. Diogenes and Bias, both great,
Philosophers, were of opinion, that, amongst your wild beasts, the most
hurtful, and which did bite sorest, were the Tyrant, and the Tale bearer, but
amongst your tame ones, and such as are bred by hand, the flatterer. The
Scripture terms flattering, biting. They are snarling Currs; Qui wordent
dentibus suis: Which bite with their teeth. They come toward you with a
fleering Countenance, but no sooner have you in their reach, but they snap at
you. And therefore a great Monarch, to one that made toward him, with a
seigned smile, and fawning look, when he came near him, gave him, (as to a
Dog) a Kick, saying; Cur me mordes? Why do thou bite me? Isocrates
affirms, that there is not any Pestilence more pernicious and praeiudiciall
to Kings, then the flatterer; and advises them, that they should shun them
that applaud all that they say, or do; but should cherish and make much of
those who in good terms tell them their errors; for these are true friends
and loyal subjects; and those other, kind enemies and familiar Traitors, who
with the soft silken scarf of smooth-tongued flattery gently strangle them,
receiving, but not perceiving their death, like little children that insensibly
fall asleep, being lulled in their nurses lapps. And they are by so much the
more dangerous (says S. Gregory) by how much the less they are known and
understood. Gregor. in regist. lib. 4. cap. 82.
Kings carefully guard their royal persons, with many guardes of Porters,
halbardeers, and Soldiars. But there is no guard set, nor no door shut against
these false friends, these domesticke enemies; for those their soft words,
oyled over with adulation, are those darts, and brass Ordnance wherewith they
kill and slay. Molliti sunt sermones eius* Psalm. 5.5.21.
super oleum, and ipsi sunt iacula. The words of his mouth were smoother then
butter, but war was in his heart, his words were softer then oil, yet were
they drawn swords. They are men, that carry two faces under one hood, they are
counterfaite doblones that have two several stampes, but neither of them
gold, which God abhorteth, and throws them a thousand Leagues off from him,
such is the hatred he bears unto them. Spiritus enim sanctus effugiet fictum:
Wisd. 1.5.
For the holy Spirit of discipline, will fly deceit, and will not abide, when
unrighteousness comes in. Therein, teaching discreet Kings, how they ought
to avoyde this kind of vain men, and dissembling dispositions, whose pills of
poison, are confectioned with Sugar, and fairly, but falsely gilded over. The
Emperor Tiberius, was such an enemy unto them, and to whatsoever did savor
of flattery, that never either in public or in secret, did he give way to
intertayning any speed with them, and held those hearts to be base and vile,
which did use the like feigned courtesies. And the two Sever Alexander and
Septimus. did severely prosecute these beasts and pursued them to the death, as
most mischeiuous to a Commonwealth. Theodoricus, stabd one of his servants,
because thinking thereby to please him, and to curry favor with him, he had
changed his Religion. And the Athenians, beheaded an Ambassador of theirs,
whom they employed to the King of Persia, because in an insinuating and
flattering kind of fashion, he made his entrance, when he came to have his
Audience, with great submissions, and thereupon enacted a Law, whereby they
condemned flatterers to death. And the Emperors, Arcadius and Honorius
ordained the like in their Laws. And good King David did well instruct Kings,
2 Kings. 1.15.
how they were to deal with these Traitors, in that rigorous chasticement,
which he exercised on an Amalakite, who thought to win his favor by
bringing him news of Saul's death whom presently there upon the place in his
own presence, he caused to be slain. This kingly Prophet, did hate them
exceedingly, and was much the more wary and heedefull of them, as being the
Devils Ministers, and being instructed by him, in the trade of counterfeite
gilding, and laying oil colors on rusty iron, wherein he had so played the
cunning merchant with our first parents, and met with such good and rich
Indyes. And therefore did so earnestly beg of God, that not one drop of that
oil of these Traders with Hell, might touch his head. Psalm. 141.5.
Oleum autem peccatoris, non impinguet caput meum: Let not their precious oil
make same my head. For that soft and sweet ointment of theirs, is full of
poison. Others, translate it, Non frangat: Let it not break my head. For,
though their words seem to be like oil, or Balsamum that is powered forth, yet
are they sharp arrows, and deadly Darts. This oil, or Balsamum (says
Casiodorus) is flattery, which is an invention of the Devils to bereave men
of their senses. He took this course with the first of men, and neither has,
nor will give over till he have made an end (if he can) with the last. For
great is that ungodly gain which he makes by this kind of merchandise. With
this pleasant bath, and mouth-oyntment he came to our first parents, and began
to smooth, and annoint them with his enticing flatteries, telling them, that
they should be no whit inferior unto God, if they would but taste of the
forbidden fruit. They (unfortunate therein) believed it, And who is he, that
knows not what a bad bargain they made of it, and what great loss they
sustained? And what an ill market, they make, and what they loose by their
trading, who by these fomentations, suffer the crown of their head to be
anointed? The fall of that Prince, is very near at hand, if not very
certain, that lets his cares lie open to the like lies; for by listening unto
Sycophants and Flatterers, good kings have become bad, and by dancing after
their pipe, and governing themselves by their advise, Kings and kingdoms have
come to ruin. Commodum, inuenem imperatorem, perdiderunt: (says Herodian.
Herodia. lib. 1.
) They undid thereby the young Emperor Commodus. They likewise (says
Plutarke) were the cause of the disastrous death of Julius Caesar, Plut. in
vita, Mar. Brut.
and of diverse others. And as some wise and holy Saints have observed, many
more Kings and kingdoms have been undone by flatterers, then by the wars;
for they are the roots and beginning of all mischiefs, and all the public
miseries of Commonwealths, Ansel. epist. ad Romans c. 6.
are to be attributed unto them. Let Kings in this particular be well advised
and not suffer themselves to be deceived, nor to have dust thrown in their
eyes, that they may not see the hurt, which flattery causes. Cicero lib. de
Amicitia.
S. Ierom says, that it is an unlucky star, and an unfortunate fate, or
Constellation, that this leads the soul and heart aside with flatteries, and
carrie^ them which way they list. Augustine.
For although by fits, we s^^ the face of our own shame un masked, and kno^
our selves to be unworthy of what we hear, yet inwardly we rejoice thereat;
like unto those, who by fortune tellers, being told their good fortune, take
pleasure in hearing of it, though they find it afterward to be bad.

Tom. 8. in. Psalm. ^^,
The remedy against this, is that which the Holy Ghost sets down unto us. To
wit; That we should sow our ears with bushes and thorns, that they may
pain and prick his tongue that shall come to court them with flatteries. Let
Kings have reprehension and chasticement in readiness against these plotters
and impostors. 2. Hier. ad Sabian.
Plus enim persequitur lingua adulatoris, quam manus interfectoris: For a
flatterers tongue does more harm, then a murderers hand. Seneca in his
Epistles, tells us how exceedingly Alexander the Great was incensed against his
friends, because they told him, Seneca. epist. 124.
that he was the Son of a God. He told them they ly'd. And he was in the
right. For all that flatter, lie; and that is not to be believed which they
say, but that which every man knows of himself, and what his own conscience
dictates unto him: And what good does their commendation do me, if that
accuse me? And in case that they do not do this base office, but that they
themselves sooth up themselves, and believe that of themselves, which they are
not, this, of all other adulation, is the worst, and the most incurable,
because it arises from self-love, and a proper estimation of our own worth,
which is that inward flatterer which we all bear about us in our own bosoms,
and are willing to intertane his false persuasions. For he that is flattered
by another, does sometimes know, that all is Lies and adulation, which they
tell him, and makes a game and scoff of it, which he does not do, when it
proceeds from himself, but does rather desire, that all would favor him in
this his opinion; And it is a strange thing, and much to be wondered at, that
without himself, and in another, a man should to easily perceive adulation,
and should not see it in himself. But the reason of it is; That some do rest
so well satisfied of themselves, that all whatsoever they imagine in their own
conceit, they opinion it to be truly in them, and to be their due.

Let us therefore conclude this discourse, with aduising Kings, that it is
baseness in a breast and heart that is truly noble and royal, to suffer
himself to be so lightly led away by men of such vile thoughts, and base
pretensions, which follow more a Prince his fortune, then his Person. They
fear not his hurt, nor pity his pains, for that they are Traitors, and
easily vary from their faith and loyalty, and pass over to another. They
flatter this man, and backbite that: They sooth one, and flout another. Their
tongues, are like double sawes, which saw on both sides, which coming and
going, cut wheresoever they come, and slice and mince all that they light upon,
not sparing any man. There is no trusting of these men, nor can we safely have
ought to do with them; for, to serve their turn, they have still two contrary
weapons ready at hand, and with one and the same Prince, make use of them both.
One while they lie, and another while speak truth, but flatter in both. Their
tongue droppeth forth words of honey, and their lips are canded with Sugar; for
they know, that in Kings houses much sweet meats are spent, and they hold him
that shall season things with a contrary relish for their palate, to be
offensive and troublesome, and it will not go down with them, so harsh does
it seem unto them in the swallowing. King Ahab renders no other reason of his
hatred toward the Prophet Micah, but because he did not speak pleasing
things, and such as did agree with his guste and palate; for he th^^ is
accustomed to this kind of diet, will hardly be brou^^t to digest any other. 2 Chronicles. 18.7.
Quia non prophetat mihi bonum, (...) malum (says the text.) There is yet one
man, by who^ we may inquire of the Lord; But I hate him, for h^^ never
prophesies good unto me, but always evil. He had signified some truths
unto him, but he did not like well of them; for those ears, that have been
accustomed to flatteries, will hardly endure to be told their own, and to
hear that, which may dis-deceiue them, and put them out of their error. But
this wicked King paid the price of his solly, at no less a rate then his life.
For these his false Prophets, and flatterers, led him along into the doors of
death, as fools by fair words are led unto the stocks. But he, that is a
good King, will not suffer himself to be carried away with every wind, nor be
moved with soothing and artificial words; and all such, as are ^f a generous
mind, and of a grave and constant disposition and men of reckoning and
authority, are enemies to su^^ kind of lightness, and mere strangers to all
manner of leasings and adulation. This being so, we ought not only to keep
the doors of our ears shut against these th^^r accursed tongues, but of our
houses against these va^^e and lying Sycophants, and to desire of God, that he
will be pleased to illighten the understanding of Kings and Princes, that they
may get at least out of this blindness wherein they live, and that he will
free them from those oare-wiggs, and incroaching flatterers who only for to
please, and for their particular Interest, celebrate their evil actions, and
approve for lawful, all their disordinate appetites. Whilst they, out of
seelinesse, or wilfulness, will not see the truth of that saying; Qui te
l^^atum de cunt, ipsi te decipiunt. etc. They, which call thee blessed, Esaias.
3.12.
cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy pa^^es.

Lastly, That we may put an end to this discourse, I say, That there are
another sort of flatterers, which they call Iesters, and men of pleasure, very
hurtful and prejudicial both in the Commonwealth, and Kings Courts; And by
so much the more, by how much the more ear is given unto them. Their
Laughters, their applause, their flatteries, and their fooleries, are all Lies;
one word crossing another, and their last reasons incountring with their first,
and by laying hold on all, confound themselves in the end in all. Their Office
is to persecute the truth; and wheresoever they are, there is heard nothing but
Music, songs, and enchantments of lies and falsehoods, wherewith they
deceive, and fill men's heads with air. He has small store of brain (says a
wise man) which hearkens unto such kind of idle Companions; who, for that they
find they have entrance into the Courts and Palaces of Kings, loose all
shame, and fear, and assume unto themselves the liberty to run this large
course of life, whereby they thrive so well, and get their bread with so much
ease. Solomon, amongst those beasts, which represent the Actions and gestures
of men, which live by their tricks, and sustain themselves by their art and
industry, reckons up the Ape. And according to the Hebrew truth, and
Pagninus his translation, that word Stellio signifies as much. And says
thereof, that it has it is reception in Kings houses. Stellio manibus nititur,
and moratur in adibus regis. And thereby understand this lineage of mimick men,
which li^^ merely by their industry, exercising a thousand ^pis^^ gestures
before Kings and Princes to please them all they can, and to make them to laugh
and be merry. They are birds of rapine, having long bills, and double paws,
^^^zing on what they see, and you must part with something to them either by
fair means, or by force, upon pa^^e of putting you in fear, that they will
speak that of you, which they do of others. These ill conditioned birds, are
usually bred in high places, although, like lewd women, they stoop to all,
admit of all, and take of all, with a pretension to deceive all, fitting every
one according to hi^ humor, soothing that sin, whereunto they see the part
most affected. They are traitors of their tongue, coggin^ Companions, and
lying Knaves, who, a man has no soon^ turned his back, but they scoff most
at him, that giu^ them most; and nor only rob him of his money, but (...)
honor, and go laughing away at their own folly; They are Rogues by consent,
Villains by permission, Knaves Cum priuilegio, instruments of the Devil, and
Hawkes-meate for Hell; Deserving to be banished for ever from the presence of
Kings, and men of authority. But the grief of it is; That the more they lie,
the more they are believed; and the more impudently and uncivilly they talk,
they are the better heard. Unhappy are they in themselves, and as unhappy they
that hear them: The one; in their tongues, the other, in their ears. But they
shall not remain without punishment, for their Harpes and their Ghitterns,
their Lutes, and their Vialls, their singing of new and lascivious songs, their
descanting upon other men's lives, their lies, and their flatteries, in that sad
and miserable hour of their death, shall be turned into sighs and groans,
into roarings and howlings, and into hideous and fearful shrikes, as they
write of the Sirens, to whom Esaias compares them; Who in their life time sing
sweetly, and deceive the hearing with their sweet notes, and murder the men
that listen to them; but afterward die themselves, bellowing forth terrible
and rauing outcries. For then, does that blood fail and forsake them, which
did cheer their heart. In like manner, the Sea-beasts, of this Sea of the
world, when this their natural heat shall go decaying, and their blood shall
wax cold and frozen within them, they will depart hence with horrible anguish
of Soul, terrible gripings of the heart, stinging vexations of conscience,
rauing yellings, and shreike upon shrieke, one ouertaking another tearing the
very soul in sunder, caused by their evil Conscience, which never leaves
racking and tormenting them, till it have brought them down to the deep pit
of Hell, where they shall abide for ever weeping and gnashing their teeth.
Where I will now leave them, and pass on to the sense of Touching; which
though it be the first in being, yet is it the last, that comes to be handled.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Sense of Touching.
OF those five Senses, which Nature gave unto the Creatures, in these two,
Tasting, and Touching, man exceeds all the rest; but in those other three,
Seeing, Hearing, and Smelling, is exceeded by many. And amongst all the five,
the most animal, material, gross, and brutall, is the Touching, as also all
those delights which by it are inioyed. Arist. 3. Ethi. 8. cap. 10.
Aristotle says; That they are sensual, beastly, and base, as likewise are
those of the Taste. It has, as the rest, the Original and beginning of it is
Sensation in the brain, and from thence, goes to this, and to all the nerves
of sensibilitie, that are either more, or less subtle and delicate, according
to their several necessities. It is a wonderful thing that our of this trunk
only, nay this little chip, (m^^) Nature should hew and cut out so many
Materials, for instruments for such prime and subtle Operations, as those of
the senses and so different, that it is impossible for one exterior sense to
do that, which another does. And therefore, speaking of the Head, whence all,
and every one have their sensible Instrument; it is fitting, that we should
likewise say something of Touching, and to set down it is Office; which is, to
have a sense and feeling of the four primarie Qualities, Frigiditie,
Calidirie, Humidi^^^ and Siccitie; and some other, which from a mixture with
these do arise, as are hard, soft, rough, plain, sharp, flat; great, little;
And in a word, all that whatsoever, that is known and discerned by touching.
It has no set place, or determinate situation in the body, but is equally
scattred and diffused throughout the whole bulk of man, by virtue of a nerve,
which like a fine thine net does over spread and comprehend the whole lump or
mass, both within, and without; by means whereof, it has a feeling in all
the parts, but there the more and the better, where the body is more soft and
tender, whereunto assisteth the subtiller, Arist. lib. 2. de ^ui. c. 17. and 27.
and colder blood. Aristotle says; That it is the first of the senses, and the
foundation of all the other four, and that there is not any creature, but has
it. And as we said of the Taste, they say of this, that it is so necessary, that
without it, no living Creature can live; But without some of the other may. And
in man, in regard of the goodness of his Complexion, which in him is better
then in other Creatures, it is more subtle and delicate, then in any one, or
all of them; and far more certain, and less liable to be deceived; and
supplieth (as Nissenus affirms) the defects of the other. Greg. Nit. de homi.
opifici.
Et videtur datus a Natura propter caecos: And it seems to be given by Nature,
for the good and benefit of blind men. For when that spiritfull sense of the
sight fails them, which should be their Guide, they make use of this more
gross and material sense by groping and feeling the walls. Is caecus est, and
manu tentans, (said Saint Peter) and S. Ambrose; Quod Tactu probamus, 2 Pet.
Ambr. lib. 6. Exam c. 9.
quae oculis probare non possumus. That we prove those things by Touching,
which we cannot try by the eyes.

Some of the qualities of this sense, which appertain to Kings, has already
been handled in those that went before; all of them, having their delight,
which we commonly call Guste, or Taste. That which remains, is to advise
them, to beware thereof, if they will not die by their own hands; for it is an
ill and unruly beast, and makes men brutish and beastly. S. Basil says
thereof; That of all the other senses it is the most pernicious, Basil. lib. de
ver^ Virginit.
because it trailes and draggs the rest after it, or seemed to have hired them,
to serve it in it is pleasures and delights, making them pay it tribute and
custom of all their gains and commodities. For, that which the eyes see, the
ears, hear, the nose smells, and the heart desires, is only therewith to
serve this sense, letting it share with them, and inuiting it to take part of
their best and choysest morsells. The rest have recourse but to one thing;
this, to all; nothing comes amiss to it, it lays hand on all. The rest are but
as the Media, and breues dispositiones. But this is the finis, or end, which
all do pretend. To touch that, which is not lawful, does discompose and put
the heart out of order and confounds man's soul. For thence (says S.
Bernard) first arise evil thoughts, foul motions, Bern. de interi^. domo. c.
39.
then consent, next Act, and lastly Death. It is not fit we should suffer flax
to come to near, the flame, nor is it it convenient, that man should Regalar
and cocker up himself with this sense; for that presently such sparkles thence
fly forth, as inflame the body, and set the soul on fire. And therefore it is
requisite that we carry a hard hand upon this sense, and look well thereunto.
For even in the plainest and euenest way man often times stumbles, how much
more where there is apparent danger. And let not kings think, because they are
kings, that they are free from this Tyrant, but in that they are kings, are so
daintilie bread, so deliciously sed, and make so much of themselves, they are
more subject thereunto, for that their natural condition, conformes it self
more to it is guste, and pleasure, and is a great friend of Regalas of
daintiness, and nice usage, of fine linen, soft raiment, choice deliacies,
and all that which causes delight, and provoke pleasure. And in Courts, and
Kings Palaces, and in the houses of Princes and great Persons, Luke 7.25.
these things are in greatest request. Ecce, qui in vest pretiosa sunt and
delicijs, in domibus Regum sunt. Behold, they which are gorgeously apparelled,
and live delicately, are in Kings Courts. So says our Savior Christ. And many
dangers do they run, who measure out all their life by the Compass of
Contents, and pass times, that go clothed in Silks and Veluetts and are
continually conversant amidst the sweetest perfumes, the purest Holland, the
finest Damask, and the richest clothes of Silk and Gold. Yet for all this
do not I say, That Princes, and great Lords, living in this State and Pomp,
cannot eo nomine be saved, but to show that in all Estates there is a great
deal of danger; but much more in your daintier, and nicer sort of people: Nor
will I with all my force strain this unto Kings, as well witting, what their
Estate and Greatness, does admit and require. And that as Nature did
difference them from the rest both in blood, and birth, so likewise ought there
to be a distinction in their diet, raiment, and in the furnishing and adorning
of their houses. But I say that which cannot be denied, that in excuse of this
their state and conueniencie, they take unto themselves herein too large a
license, and pass to soon from the foot, to the hand; and from the hand, to
the mouth; making of an inch an ell, and of an, elll an Aker. So hard a matter
is in for great Princes to moderate themselves, and use a mean. And that
Heathen was not much wide of the mark, who said in the Senate, That that is an
unfortunate Estate, that obliges a man to live always up to the eyes grazing
in his pleasures and delights: And that it is a very bad O men, for a man, to
live all his life time, according to the savor and guste of his palate.
Consuetudinem nullam peiorem esse, quam vt semper vinat quis ad voluptatem:
There is not any custom so bad, as that of a man's living according to his own
pleasure. Such men, are rather to be pitied, then envied; for there is not
that h^^res of their contents and delights, which does not pay it is tribute of
tears and sorrow. Only for to please and satisfy this sense, and to recreate
that of the sight, have so many Arts been invented, so many sorts of Trades,
and Tradesmen set a work, so much variety of fashions and costly clothes,
such a world of curious Silks, Lawnes, Cambricks, and Hollands, such large
beds, rich bedding, sumptuous bed-steds, so sensual, and so over nice and
dainty, that it may well be questioned whether is greater, the costlinesse or
the curiosity; the richness, or the riot occasioned by them? Nor (which is
the misery of it) is it yet known, whether or how far this Humor will
extend it self. But sure I am, that thereby houses are disordred, much monyes
consumed, ancient Inheritances sold away, and a thousand other inconveniences
introduced. And (to say the truth) this sense has not need of so much
nicetie, but abuse has now brought it to that pass, that it has no sooner a
liking to a thing, but it greedily runn's after it, as a beast that is put into
a fresh ground, runs up and down, smelling out the choice grass, and will
not bite but at the sweetest. But he that does Regalor, and pamper up this
sense most, does most of all make it his enemy; Which will never give him over
till it have undone him. This is so large a Theme, and so copious a subject,
that if I should here write and set down all that, which in this kind would
fairly offer it self, I must be driven much to enlarge my pen. But it is not
my Intent, to set my cloth on the Tenters, nor in this little Loome to weaue
large Histories, and long discourses, but only to give a short touch, and
away, of the effects, which this sense causes, and of the miseries and
misfortunes, which are incident to Touching, and that all the work, and pains
which it does and takes for it is friends, and best well-wishers, is not so
freely bestowed, nor that good assurance given thereof, but that this it is
momentary pleasure, makes quick payment, in groans, in diseases, and in
Temporal, and Eternal Death; The condition of the obligation being drawn and
signed by no worse a Scriuener then Saint Paul; Romans 8.13.
Si enim secundum carnem vixeritis, moricimui: For if ye live after the flesh,
ye shall dye. We have examples of Kings good store, and of ancient and
modern Kingdoms, foreign, and domestic. The first shall be of Charles the
8. King of France, in whom voluptuousness and delights, wrought so great an
alteration in that his most fortunate and happy entrance, which he made into
Italy; where without putting hand to his sword, he became Master of all the
whole Kingdom of Naples, and did so amuze and affright all the World, that the
Great Turk was afraid of being overrun by him, and many of his Commanders,
which had the keeping of his Fortes on that Coast, forsook them and fled. And
if that King had but well followed that Enterprise, he had been Lord of all
Greece. But being a young Gentileman, he suffered himself to be overcome by
the Dainties and Delicacies of that Country, spending his Time in delights,
banquets, shows, maskings, dancings, and feastings; So that he, who had so
soon ^^ed the world with fear, was as soon overcome by yielding to the
pleasure of this sense. For he and his did so glut themselves with the fruits
of that Country, and so followed the delights of the flesh, that having entered
victorious, they became subject, and were subdued by that now and loathsome
disease, which possesses the whole body, and to dissemble it is name, they call
it Corrimiento, which in plain English, is the French Pocks. There, and then
it was, where and when it first began to rage, and from thence spread it self
hither and thither, and now is so generally known in all parts of the world,
and which by Touching one^y cleaues close unto man. And this, had it is (...)
land beginning in carnal delight, as it was resolved in a Consultation of
Physicians, which King Don Alonso called together in Toledo (which is another
notable Example) who having won that City from the ^owes, and many other
places, Don Alons the sixth of Castile and Leons. Vide Fernan Perez. lib. 2.
Tit. 4. cap. 5.
joining themselves in the victory, laid aside their Arms, and gave
themselves in that manner to their pleasures and delights, that within a few
days they were grown so lazye and so weak, that they were not able to fight,
nor to bear arms against the enemy; and being forced to take them up in a
certain skirmish, which they had near unto Veles, they were overthrown and
shamefully put to flight, leaving dead in the place the son of their King.
Who being very sensible of this so great an infamy, consulted his Physicians,
what should be the cause of this so great a weakness both in the strength and
courage of his soldiars, who in the first encounter having showed themselves as
fierce as Lions, in this last conflict seemed as fearful as Hares. Who
answered him with that will ^h^ Pliny speaks of the Romans, Plin. not. Hist.
lib. 2. cap. 3.
who fell from their ancient greatness, because in their meat, drink, and
apparel, and in the delicacies of their bathes, and company keeping with
women, they exceeded all those, whom before they had overcome. And therefore,
Vincendo, victi sumus: We are overcome, by ouercoming. And thereupon, that
good King forthwith commanded the oaths to be destroyed, together with the
houses of pleasure, gardens, and other the like places of recreasion, wherewith
that damage was in part repaired. In these two things, daintiness in diet,
and wantoning with women, the Devil imploies his utmost strength and force,
that he may quit those of it, and utterly dis-inable them, that give
themselves thereunto. And this was that Counsel and Advice, which that member
of Satan, and false Prophet, Balaam gave to the King of Moab; That in those
places, through which the children of Israel were to pass, he should appoint
certain of his fairest women to be there in readiness, to receive and
intertaine them, to cherish and make much of them, and to inuit them to eat
and drink with them, as the only means to draw them on to their destruction
as it afterward fell out. Number. 25.1.
This is pointed at in Numbers but set forth more at large in Josephus. Joseph
de Antiq. lib. 4. cap. 5.
Where it is added, That those are not to be feared, which give themselves to
the like gustes and delights, for in waxing weary of the clattering of armor,
and taking pleasure in the sound of music, in putting off harness, and
putting on silks; in changing a field-Tent, for a soft bed; and forsaking the
conversation of soldiars, and Captains, to follow the company of women, they
stuck a nail in the wheel of their fortunes. These are examples, that cannot
be excepted against; But much less that which follows of King Solomon, whose
pomp, music, dancings, feastings, huntings, dainties, delights, and
passe-times, were such, as he himself, inspired by the Holy Ghost, reckons up.
Now that, which he got by all these, what was it? Only this, that these Vices,
and wanton delights, made him forget himself, and to blot out all the good of
his felicity, and that good correspondence, which he held with God, and in
such sor^ did turn his brains, that he came to committ idolatry, and to
call his salvation in question. And therefore let every one command his flesh,
as he would command his slave, lest it make him a slave. For to him that
yields himself thereunto, it is a fierce; to him, that fears it, a cruel;
and to him, that delivers the keys of his liberty up unto him, a dominering
Tyrant, which like a haltred beast, it hales after him. There are two remedies
found, for the curing of so many damages and disorders, as we perceive to be
in this sense of Touching, and that of the Taste. One general for all; which is
Temperance, whereof we will treat by and by; The other more particular,
drawn from the example of Kings, whereof we will discourse hereafter.

. I. Of Temperance.
THe Office of Temperance, is to keep a man from flying out, and to make him
not to incline to a little more, or a little less, but to live always in very
good Order, not exceeding in any thing the bounds of Reason. Cicero lib. 2. de
sin. Aug. lib. de moribus.
Est moderatio Cupiditatum, rationi obediens: It consists in a certain
moderation and mediocritie in pleasures and delights, from which a Temperate
man abstaineth, refrayning from superfluities and excesses, using things
according to necessity, and not according to his appetite. And it is that rule
and Compass, which does mete and measure out the desires of man, that they may
not pass from their point and Center, not suffering the heart, like the Raven,
to flesh it self on the dead flesh of sensual delights. Dionis.
S. Dionisius says; That it serves to incline a Man to all good; according to
the rule of reason; as well in that which appertains to the sense of
Touching, as of the Taste, that it may not, like an unbridled colte, break out
into those two unruly appetites, whose operations are so furious and vehement,
that in earth, water and air, they leave nothing safe and secure; and
therefore had need of this great virtue, to restrain their disorders, and
concupiscences. These are those that make the cruellest war against both body
and soul; and this is that, which bridleth, tempreth, and moderateth her in
her Excesses. S. Prosper lib. 3. de vita Contemp. cap 19.
Temperantia (says Prosperus) temperantem facit, abstinentem parcum, sobrium,
moderatum, pudicum, tacitum, serium, and verecundum: Temperance makes a man
temperate, abstemious, sparing, sober, moderate, modest, silent, serious, and
yet shamefac't. It is a Virtue worthy Kings and Princes, and much commended by
the Saints, and many are those Virtues which accompany it; As modesty,
shamefastness, chastity, abstinence, fair and comely behavior, moderation,
sobriety, gravity, and humility. Aristotle calls it, Arist 6. Ethic. cap 5.
and 6.
Conseruatricem prudentiae, and sapientiae, the Conservresse of prudence and
wisdom. For intemperance in eating and drinking, or in any other kind of
delight, does overthrow the brain, dull the understanding, darken the
judgment, blunt the best and sharpest wit, and makes man, as it were, a beast,
as is to be seen by experience. Quotidiano experimento probatur (says Pope
Leo) potus satietate, S. Leo. Sermon. de Ieiun.
aciem mentis obtundi, and vigorem cordis hebetari: It is made good by daily
experience, that facietie of drink, dulleth the edge of the mind, and
blunteth the vigor of the heart. Temperance likewise preserves the health,
and makes man's life more long, more sound, and more pleasing. For, to be
Princes, and Monarkes, and Lords of all the world, and whatsoever therein is,
is not sufficient to content them, if they want their health, which is of more
worth then all the world besides. Melior est pauper sanus, Eccl. 30.14.
and fortis viribus quam dives imbecillis; and corpus validum, quam census
immensus: Better is the poor, being sound and strong of Constitution, then a
rich man, that is afflicted in his body. Health, and good state of body, are
above all gold; and a strong body, above infinite wealth. In distempering the
humors, the Lotts of men's Estates are changed. The sick man, be he never so
great a Lord, would be content to change States, to have a poor plough-mans
health. To what use serve Kingdoms, Signories, and great treasures, if, day
and night, a King lead a more miserable life, then a day-Labourer? To what use
serve his rich bed and down pillowes, if he can take no rest in them? To what
use serve his delicate Cates, and dainty dishes, if he no sooner sees them,
but loathes them? To what use serve his rich and precious wines, if he must be
driven to drink Barly-water? Or what guste and content can he take in any
thing, whose taste is as bitter as gall? Or how can he have contentment in
these outward things, that has it not within himself? Julius Caesar wearyed
out with his want of health, did hate and abhor his life. For, (as the wise
man says) Melior est mors, quam vita amara: Better is Death, then a bitter
life. A sick life, is no life; nor is there any happiness, where health is
wanting. And all things without it, are as nothing. For to live without pain,
is more to be prized then all. And this does Temperance effect. This preserved
Marcus Valerius more then a hundred years sound in judgment, and strong in
body; And by this Socrates lived all his life time free from sicknesses and
diseases. It was the saying of the elder Cate, that he governed his house,
increased his wealth, preserved his health, and in larged his life, by
Temperance. In multis escis erit infirmitas (says Ecclesiasticus) Qui autem
abstinens est, adijciet vitam: Exceste of meats brings sickness; By
surfeiting have many perished, but he, that takes heed, prolongeth his life.
King Ma^sinoja, was wonderful temperate, his fare was ordinary and with out
curiosity, which made him live so sound and so healthy, that, at 87. years of
age, he begat a Son, and at 94. wanne a battle, wherein he showed himself
a very good Soldiar, but a better Captain. And therefore let those dis-deceiue
themselves, and acknowledge their error, who think they shall preserve their
life, by faring deliciously. Pliny says of grass; Plin.
That, Quanto peius tractatur, tanto prouenit melius: The worse it is used, the
better it proves. As with it, so is it with man. Homo sicut faenum: Man is but
as grass, or as the flower of the field; Which is no sooner up, but is cut
down; no sooner flourishes, but it fades; and all it is beauty no sooner
appears, but it perishes, and withers away, and is no more to be seen.
And the more we make of much our selves, the less while we live. We are
always crazy; soon down, but not so soon up; Quickly fall into a disease,
but long ere we can get out of it; Loosing our strength, before we come to it,
and waxing old, before ever we be aware of it. But if a man will lay aside
this Cockering and pampering up of himself, and habituate himself to labor
and travail, he shall pass his life the better. For health never dwells with
delights; nor strength, join hands with choice fare. Nor shall he ever do
any famous Acts, and worthy renown, that fears to take pains, and is willing
to take his ease. The Emperor Hadrian, was singular herein. Frigora enim, and
tempestates, ita patienter tulit, vt nunquam caput tegeret: He did endure
colds, and all kind of foul weather with that patience, that he never put on
his hatt, but always went bare-headed. And Alexander the Great, would tell his
Soldiers that it was for lazy Companions, and effeminate fellows, to apply
themselves to the pleasures and contentments of this life; but for Noble
hearts, and generous spirits, to accustom themselves to labor, and to take
pains. In a word, Temperance is a virtue very necessary for all estates; it
will suit well with all: but more particularly with Kings, and Princes, and
great persons; because it is in it self a virtue so gentleman-like, so worthy
Noble persons, and so proper for royal Majesty. As likewise, for that they
live, as they do, amidst so many regalos, and delights, so many curious
meats, and a thousand other occasions, whereby, if they do not arm
themselves with this virtue, not only their lives, but their souls, are like
to incur the great danger. For like thieves in a man's own house, or close
traitors lurking in secret corners, some while one, some while another, are
never from their elbow, till they deliver them over into the hands of death; or
at least hoxe their courage, and cut off their health. Which in good Kings so
much imports, and which all men desire may be long and prosperous. The want
whereof in a particular person imports little; but in them it mattereth much,
in regard of the great loss which the Commonwealth thereby receives. For on
their welfare, depends the general comfort and government of the whole
kingdom, which when it is wanting in them, that want is common to all.

Let then the conclusion of this discourse be, That Kings ought to keep an
orderly and temperate diet, having more regard to the law of Nature, and unto
Christian reason, then to their greatness of state, and Majesty of Empire; And
to carry themselves amidst so many occasions of pleasures and delights with
that modesty and moderation, as if they were without them, if they have a
mind to preserve their bodies and their souls healths; and to give unto all a
good example; which is another (as already has been said) so powerful a
remedy for to persuade other Princes and Potentates of his kingdom, to the
embracing of this virtue. And besides that observation of Hipocrates, Quod
plures cecidit gula, quam gladius: That surfeiting has killed more then the
sword. Let those that place all their care in these their delights and
pleasures, consider that saying of Cato, That our much carfulness in this,
causes much forgetfulness of God. And there are some that count it an honor
and reputation unto them to eat and to drink, (though Sanitas est animae and
corporis sobrius potus) and because they are great in estate, they will also be
great feeders. Which indeed is not Greatness, nor Lordlinesse, but great
baseness, and unbeseeming their authority, to suffer themselves to be given
to gluttony, and to the excess of eating and drinking. Saint Bernard did
bless himself, and much wonder, at so much time and wealth as herein was
spent; and at so many Cooks, and other Officers, herein employed. And that he
should be the most commended, and best rewarded, that could invent any other
new kind of choice dish, then had by gluttonies curious enquiry been as yet
found out. And all to give gust to the Gust, and to please the palate, with the
loss of their honor, the wasting of their wealth, and to their great hurt
both of bodies and souls. But these must I inroll in the list of unfortunate
persons, Eccl. 10.17.
and account that kingdom happy (as the wise man says) where the King and his
Peers live soberly and temperately. Beata terra, cuius Rex nobilis est, and
cuius Principes vescuntur in tempore suo, ad reficiendum, and non luxuriandum:
Blessed art thou (O Land) when thy King is the son of Nobles, and thy Princes
eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness.

. II. Of another remedy against excesses, and superfluities, depending on the
example of Kings.
A King being (as has been said) the soul and heart of a kingdom, and like
another Sun, which with its light and motion, affoords light and health to
the world; being the true picture and lively Image of God upon earth; and he
that is most (being just) like unto him, has a great and precise obligation
lying upon him, both by his life and example, to give life unto his kingdom,
and to set himself, as a pattern, before his subjects, that, and they, being
that mystical body, whereof he is the head. And see what dependencie the
members in man's body have on the head; the same, or little less, have
subjects on their Kings. And if that be sound and good, it is well with all the
members; but if ill affected, all of them suffer with it. The Proverb says,
Cum caput dolet, catera membra dolent. When the head aketh, the rest of the
members ache with it. And as it is so true, as nothing more, so is it more in
Commonwealths, then men's bodies. For, as the humors of these are in or out of
order, according to those which the head communicates unto them. So likewise
the composition of a whole kingdom, depends on the good or ill composition
of their King and Head. Whence it follows, that the same necessity which a
body has of a good head, the very selfsame has a kingdom of a good King;
being that he as he is King (as already has been delivered) does therein
supply the Office of the Head. And therefore it was well said of Plato, That
the inclining of a King to good, or ill, is the inclining of the whole
kingdom, according to his scale or balance; they bend all the same way, and
follow him, as the shadow does the body. Mouetur cu^ Principe mobile vulgus: As
the Prince moves, so does the wavering multitude. In vain do we seek to
rectify the shadow, if the body be crooked. The waves of the sea, go that way
as the wind drives them; and the vulgar are led along by the example of those
their Kings, that govern them. Aquae multae populi sunt: The common people are
as many waters. The spirit and wind that moves them, is the King, who with
great force carries the minds of his subjects this way or that way, as best
pleases him. By only seeing Saint Peter abstain from some meat, and eat of
other some, without commanding it, or saying any thing thereof to those new
converted Christians, Galat. 2.14.
Saint Paul says, that he carried them away, and drew them to do the like.
For, there is neither Law, nor Precept, nor force, can be compared with that
which the example of a King works upon his subjects, forcing them to imitate
and follow him. King Manasses (says the sacred Text) fecit malum coram Domino:
He did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord; for he forsook him to
follow strange Gods, like unto the abomination of the heathen. And anon after
draws thence this consequence or conclusion: 2 Chronicles. 33.9.
Igitur Manasses seduxit populum, vt faceret malum: So Manasses made Judah, and
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, and do worse then the heathen, etc. But
tell me, I pray, how came it to pass, that this King should cast such a mist
before his subjects eyes, that he should thus deceive them, and make them do
as he did? For we do not find there, that he said any one word unto them, or
induced them thereunto by any other diligences, whereby to persuade them to
commit the like sin. Though he did not, yet he did enough, in doing that
which he did, as being their King and Head. For, as the Sovereign does, so
does the subject. King Hamor, and Prince Shechem his son, by their bare
example only persuaded their people the Shechemites, to leave that law,
wherein they had been bred and brought up, and to entertain that of the
Hebrews, though it turned to the loss of all their lives. Of Kings, says a
Roman Philosopher, Quaecunque vitia ipsi concipiunt, ea infundunt in
civitates; Julius lib. 3. de Legibus.
plus exemplo, quam peccato nocent: Whatsoever vices they conceive, they infuse
the same into their Cities, offending more by their example then by their
sin. By the sin, they do but aggrauate and wrong their own conscience;
but by the example, the consciences of all the common people, which have no
other eyes whereby they see, no other rule or square whereby to rule and
govern themselves in their actions; Nor is there any other means, whereby
vices are communicated with more facility, and larger license. And therefore
it concerns them very much, not to make any the least breach in good manners,
nor to turn (though never so little aside) from the way of virtue. For they
cannot build up so fast by their good, as they pull down by their bad example.
Besides, the vulgar judge their vicious actions, for virtuous; their bad, for
good. And if not so, then will they justify their own looseness, by laying
the same on their King: He does thus and thus, And why should not I? This same
Regis ad exemplum, runs over all the world; and men are willing enough to
make their advantage of it. Of Dionysius the Siracusan, Plutarch reports,
that at first he was very studious, and much given to his book, and whilst
he so continued, all his subjects applied themselves to the exercise of good
letters. But growing weary of so good a work, he left off his learning, and
betook himself to the vice of gaming and wantonness; and presently all his
subjects, as if they had been bewitched, began to loath their books, and fall
to vice. Isidorus says of the Ethiopians, that they were such Apish
counterfeits of their Kings, that they held it a kind of reproach and infamy,
that if their King did want a member, or were lame, all his household servants
were likewise of that fashion; and would willingly mayme and dismember
themselves that they might be like unto their King.

I say therefore again; Let Kings look well unto that which they affect, and
whereunto they are inclined; for the same will his Subjects affect, and
thereunto will they all be inclined. And therefore Isocrates did counsel his
King, that he should love and esteem the Arts, and such Offices as might be
most profitable for the commonwealth, and should abhor the contrary; for
these would bring him augmentation of honor, when those other would be
forgotten, or but ripped up to his shame; that he should approve good, and
reprove bad customs, and evil manners, that these might fall, and those other
be in use. For in regard that the King is Censor morum, he that censures our
manners and behavior, and sets down and determines, which we are to fly,
which to follow: Look which he approves, and keeps, are kept and approved
by all, and every one does his best to excel therein. And those which he shall
reprove and mislike, all men will shun and avoid them. And more
particularly, these two pernicious ones, which appertain to Tasting and
Touching, I desire to have them be condemned and reproved by the example of
Kings; such as are excess in sumptuousness of apparel, and in meats and
drinks, and the like public and common vices. For, by these two abuses, great
Monarchies have been ruined, and overthrown.

Let us fall a little upon the first; wherein is such excess and superfluity
in this age, as never more. Howbeit, as it was not wanting to former times, so
was there a great deal of care taken for the reforming thereof. Your Romans
made Laws, for to moderate the expenses and excesses of apparel and diet.
The imperial Laws of the kingdom, and those of the Partida prohibit it, and
many other prematicas and Statute Laws, which have been made thereupon, and
confirmed by Act of Parliament. And the sacred Scripture likewise in many
places does condemn it. And therefore a remedy in this kind (if possibly it
can be procured) is very needful: For excess, does not serve so much for
sustentation, as for pomp and ostentation, wherewith is fomented Ambition,
vaineglory, concupiscence, and dishonestie, even to the falling into those
vices, that were never before seen, or used. Their expense, that increases,
and their substance decreaseth: what wealth can a man have, that will suffice
for the arraying and apparrelling of women, as also for the clothing of men,
which is no less vicious, and expencefull then theirs? What does it benefit
us, that the riches of our times are greater then those of our predecessors,
if our expenses be more excessive? By running on in this lavish course, great
and ancient houses have been brought to nothing, and new ones have started up
in their room, borne and bred in bad Trades, and worse manners, who always
have a smacke with them, or some touch or other of their former meaner fortune.
And for this cause only, are there so many misfortunes and disorders in the
houses of many your ordinary and common sort of people, and even in some of
those that are of meaner rank. For they had rather perish and undo
themselves, then to be accounted needy and poor. And without doubt, the most
of their substance is spent in meat, and clothes. Which vice shame would
moderate in them. But the fear of seeming to be of less ability then their
neighbors, has quite altered the case, and serves to help them on to their
ruin. For every one counts it a disgrace unto him, that he shall not go as
well clad as his neighbor, and eat as good meat, and drink as good drink
as he does, though he pay soundly for it, both in his honor and estate. And
hence proceed your briberies, corruptions, subornations, and injustice. For
necessity, the mother of vice, and that which makes (as we say) the old wife
trott; putts them so hard to their shifts, that for to free themselves from
want, there is not that wickedness which they will not give way unto; and all,
because they will not lack these instruments of their gustes, nor want the
appearance of Majesty in their houses.

And another no less mischief then the former, is the inequality in the
estates, and qualities of the persons; and the equality wherewith the said
accoutrements both in meat and apparel is used. For (as Plato says) in a
well ordered commonwealth, all ought to be equal. And yet we see, that mean
women, that have neither means nor quality, wear Kittles, Peticoates, and
Gowns of cloth of gold, and rich imbroderies, that Queens can scarce wear
better. And as for our ordinary sort of men, there are very few of them, but
will go in such good clothes, that Kings can not be better clad. Of the
Emperor Tiberius Caesar, Tacitus reports, that by a Decree of the Senate, he
did prohibit men the wearing of gowns of silk, saying, That they did
disgrace themselves by putting on such an effeminate habit. And of the
Emperor Aurelius it is noted, that he did not only not wear silk, but
would not so much as suffer any to be in his wardrope, saying, That he would
not buy clothes at the weight of gold. And Lampridius says, That the first
Emperor that ever had any Wardrobe, was that wicked and luxurious Emperor
Heliogabalus. Scipio Aphricanus, and Alexander Magnus, were very singular in
this careless manly wear, whereof others are so curiously careful. And let
us say no more hereof, then what Isocrates said, writing to his King, Have a
care (says he) of the things of particular persons, and think that those that
live at high and excessive rates, waste and spend out of thy treasure; and that
those that take pains to scrape up a little mucke, and to get into some wealth
by their thrift, are the only men that fill your coffers, and increase your
treasure. For the Subjects purse is as the Kings own purse, if he rule and
govern well. But when men shall not have means sufficient for to supply that
excess in diet, and clothes, which vice and man's foolish pride has
introduced, how is it possible that they should serve and assist their King in
the necessary occasions of the kingdom? it is impossible but that there must
be a failing in the one, being that the ends are so opposite. How can they have
any heart or guste for the one, having placed all their care and content in the
other? And questionless, if these superfluities were taken away, the Subject
would have wealth enough, and then it would never grieve them to part with part
thereof to their Kings, or to spend it in his service. But that which is now
permitted amongst us, is the same which the Romans permitted, and procured in
the Nations, they had subdued, for to consume and eat them out, and to keep
them in the better obedience. But in their own commonwealth they did evermore
fear it, and seek to excuse it. What Prince has there ever been, either of
those that were held to be good or indifferent, that did not treat of this
remedy? Not any. Yet they did most of them err in the manner.

Now, to remedy this excess, experience has and does show unto us, that it
is not the penalty, nor rigor of the Laws and Statutes that our Ancestors
seemed to have erred in, who by those penalties alone, thought to amend these
extrauagancies in their subjects. But the cure of this exorbitancie is that
which the Ancient did prescribe, and we have declared, touching the example of
Kings, and of their imitation. The desire of giving them content, is more
powerful with them then the fear of punishment. This doctrine Tacitus taught,
rendering the reason of that temperance and moderation, which was in the
Emperor Vespasian his time in clothes and diet, and in the vicious
superfluity of these vices. And after that he has gone varying from one
reason to another, he says, That this Prince was the principal Author of that
sparingnesse and thriftinesse amongst the Romans of those times in their
wastfull expenses; by exercising himself in that their ancient manner of
lining in matter of maintenance, apparel and the like. And hence it succeeded,
that all his subjects did the like, conforming themselves according to his
fashion, their respect to their Prince, and their desire to imitate him,
prevailing more with them, then the punishment or fear of the Laws. And this
is a sure and sound point of doctrine, and of that great consequence, that it
never ought to slip out of the memory and good liking of Kings, and their
principal Ministers, as being the mirror or looking glass wherein the
Subjects see and behold whether their manners be foul or fair, become or not
become them, according to the liking which they take from their superiors.

Of Augustus Caesar, Dion reports, That because he would not wear such
clothes, as were prohibited by his Laws, there was not a man in all his Empire
that did offer to put them on. Componitur Orbis (says Claudian) Regis ad
exemplar, nec sic inflectere sensus Humanos edicta valent, quam vita regentis.
The whole world shapes and fashions it self according to the pattern their
King sets before them; nor can Edicts and Decrees work so much upon men's
humors, as the life of him that rules. Of all the reasons whatsoever that the
wit of man can devise, there is not any more effectual to persuade hard and
difficult things, then the example of Kings. Let therefore a Prince lay a more
hard and cruel punishment upon them, then either imprisonment, banishment, or
some sound fine, or pecuniary mulct, as not to do them any grace or favor, or
not to afford a good look on him, that shall not imitate and follow his
fashion. For there is no man such a fool, that will loose the fruit of his
hope, for not apparelling himself after this or that manner, as he sees the
Prince himself is contented to go. Let Kings amend this fault in themselves,
and then his Peers, and other their inferiors, will not be ashamed to imitate
them. I pray tell me, if men of the baser and meaner condition should only be
those, that were vicious in their meat and clothes, who would imitate them
therein? Assuredly none. All would be Noblemen, or Gentlemen, or at least seem
to be so in their fashion and apparel, howbeit they would be less curious
and dainty, if they saw those that were noble, or gentile, go only plain and
handsome. That ancient Roman, pure, neat, clean, and comely attire of those
who conquered the world, did then wholly loose it self, when your great and
Noble persons of that commonwealth left it off. For in all things, but more
especially in those that are vicious, men seek to make a fairer show then
their estate will bear, and thereby procure to content and please their Kings
under whom they live; knowing that there is no intercession or favor like unto
that, as the fimiliancie of manners, and the kindred which this does cause. Let
Kings, by their example, cut off the use of costly clothes and sumptuous
banquets, and whatsoever in that kind is vicious and superfluous, and they
shall straightway see, how a great part of the greediness of gain, and
covetousness of money will cease, and many other evils and mischiefs which
proceed from thence, which would not be sought after nor esteemed, were it not
for the execution of the appetite, and fulfilling of our pleasures. And for
this end and purpose, money is kept with such great anxietie and trouble, but
procured and sought after with much more; because it is the master and
commander of all pleasures and delights whatsoever. For which we will buy and
sell, and give all that we have.

The second point concerning vices and sins, common and public, the hurt
that comes thereby is well known both to God and man, and is harder to be
reformed then the former. That, is moderated either with age or necessity; but
this, neither necessity nor time can lessen, but with it increases, and
shoots forth new sprigges and suckers, never before seen, nor used in the
world, against which neither suffice Laws nor Statutes. And that doctrine of
Tacitus is now come to be verified, That there is not any greater sign of
corruption of manners, then multiplicitie of Laws. And we now live in those
dangerous times, whereof Saint Paul speaks; and I know not whether I may be
so bold as to say, That it is likewise an argument or sign, that the Subject
is near it is end, or at least daily grows decaying, wherein these signs and
tokens are to be seen; One disorder begetting another, which is the order
which Nature keeps with things that are to perish, till at last all comes to
ruin; and this universal fabric sinkes to the bottom, never more to be
repaired. I wot well, that whilst there be men, there must be vices, and
sins, and that few or none will cease to be that which they are, in regard
of humane weakness, and man's propension and inclination to sin, and that
there are not any remedies which will serve and turn wholly to cure and cut
them off, it being a thing impossible, for that their beginning and cause does
proceed from Nature it self being corrupted. That which the worth and wisdom
of Kings, and their Ministers, may be able to effect, is; That they may daily
prove less and less prejudicial to the public: and that the dissembling of
abuses in the beginning, before they take head, be not a cause of seeing our
selves brought to that estate, which Salust writes Rome was found in in
Catilines time, there being so good cause for to fear it. As also that they
will draw after them Gods comminations and chastisements. When a kingdom
(says he) comes to the corruption of manners, that men do pamper and
apparel themselves in curious manner, like women, and make no reckoning of
their honesty, but deal therewith as with any other thing that is vendible,
or set out to sale; and that exquisite things, for to please the palate, are
diligently sought after both by sea and land; that they betake themselves to
their ease and sleep, before the due time of their rest and sleep be come;
that after their bellies be as full as ever they can hold, they never cease
craving and cramming till it be noone; that they do not forbear from eating
and drinking, till they be either hungry or thirsty; not that they ease
themselves out of weariness, or keep themselves warm against the extremity
of the weather: but that they do all these things out of viciousness, and
before there is need; well may that Empire be given for lost, and that it is
drawing near to its last gasp. For the people thereof, when their own means
shall fail them, for to fulfill their appetites, out of a thirsting and greedy
desire of these things, what mischiefs will not they move, or what villainies
will not they attempt? For the mind that has been ill, and long accustomed
to delights, can hardly be without them. And, that they may enjoy them, by
hook or by crook, by one means or another, though never so unjust and
unlawful, they will make a shift to get themselves into money, though they
spend it afterward idly and vainly in that profuse and lavish manner, for which
they did intend it.

Let every good King beg of God, and let us all join in the same prayer,
that in our times, it may not come to these terms, and that Kings will strive
and study to quench these sparks before they break forth into a flame, and
to put out the fire whilst it is but newly kindled, lest it take hold on the
whole building, and help come too late. And because there are so many sorts
of vices, that it is not possible to procure an universal cure for them all;
that which is likeliest to do most good, will be that self same medicine
mentioned before in diet and apparel, to wit, the good example of Kings; and
in imitation of them, that of the great Lords of the land, and those that are
nearest in Court about their persons; joining herewith the fear of their
disfavor: letting them both see and know, that the vicious fall backward, and
the virtuous come forward in honor; and that only virtue is the true means
and surest way to bring men to great place and preferrement in the
commonwealth. Let Kings hate these idle droanes, these honey-suckers of other
men's labors, that live all upon the waste and spoil. Which kind of people,
even in reason of state, are not good for the quiet of a kingdom, in regard of
the evil cogitations and dangerous devises that are bred in their minds, and
in their time break out. I would have this imitation to be the remedy for
this so great an ill; for neither penalties nor fear of punishment will do
any good upon them. For he that will not forbear to sin for fear of Gods
Law, will hardly refrain from man's. Let Kings therefore say and do those
things, that they would have their Subjects say and do. And let their
favorites, and those that are nearest about them, run the like course, and
let it extend to the better sort, and those that are of rank and quality; for
by this mean it will descend to those likewise that are of meaner condition:
and then shall they see, how much more good it will work, then either laws or
punishment. And this is the more natural of the two; for the one is founded
upon imitation, and the other grounded upon fear. And men do more easily
imitate those better things which they see actually put in execution, then
depart from those worser things, which they either hear or know to be
prohibited. And when they shall see that their superiors, and those that are
in place and authority, command one thing and do another, they neither dread
their threatenings, nor obey their commandments. For perceiving that they do
but imitate their actions, they persuade themselves that none can, without
blushing, punish the same sin in them. Salust did advise Caesar in the
entrance to his Empire, that if he would order his commonwealth aright, he
should first of all begin with reformation in himself, and his; (as Pliny
says) Vita Principis censura est, eaque perpetua; ad hanc dirigimur, Plin.
Jun. lib. Epist. ad semp. Rufum.
ad hanc conuertimur. The life of a Prince is a perpetual censure; and
according thereunto do we guide and govern our selves. And let it not seem
unto any, that this remedy of the imitation of Kings is slow, and long, and
will ask a great deal of time; for where there is met together, as it were in
it is center, whatsoever may corrupt and hurt that, which is capable of being
corrupted, when as neither Kings nor their Laws are able to hinder it, in
vain is it endeavored, or to be imagined, that that may be cured in a few
years, which has layen sick so many. But till such time, as men grow up like
new plants, and have accustomed themselves to virtue, to the end, that through
the tenderness of their youth they may not grow awry; Being therein likewise
helped, by the example of their betters; for there is not any Artifice, so
powerful and effectual, as that of imitation, which I now speak of; for it
being a cure so conformable unto nature, it will work by degrees; whereof we
shall not know the benefit, till we have enjoyed it.

And because there are both diseased persons, Chrysostom. hom. 19. in Genesis
and diseases (as Saint Chrysostom has observed) which are neither remedied
by sweet potions, nor purged away by bitter pills; A maine reason whereof is,
because they themselves are not willing to be cured, nor will admit of the
example of Kings, nor the fear of their Laws: it is fit this other remedy
should be used, of punishment and chastisement, without dissimulation. For many
times the motive of sinning is the facility of forgiving. And it is a known
case, that people by punishment become obedient; but by pardoning, proud and
insolent. The ill and vicious, are so possessed and enabled in their vices, by
their long continuance, that if Kings should not show some metal and courage,
they would possess the world, and carry all things away before them, in that
violent manner, that the good should not be able to live amongst the^. Bald. in
l. Prouinciarum C, de ferijs.
By chastising the bad, (says Baldus) the good live in safety. And for this
cause (and not in vain) according to Plato, and others, were Laws instituted,
and regal power, the stroke of the sword, the discipline of the Clergy, and
the common hangmans whip, all of them as necessary for man's life, as those 4.
Elements, by which we live and breathe. Let Kings take this from me, and
believe it, That that commonwealth is in great danger, where the Kings
reputation goes decaying; and the force of Justice loses it is strength. For
thereby vices assume license unto themselves; and their owners persevere, and
go on in them. Here a remiss Prince is a sharp sword, and does never more
grievously punish then when he does most pardon. Punishment and chastisement
only offend the delinquent; but remission, la ley, al Rey, y la Gray, the Law,
King, and people. By remission, Laws and Kings grow in contempt, and the whole
commonwealth infected. Whereas by chastisement the Law is obeyed and kept; the
King feared and honored; and the kingdom maintained in peace and justice. I
do not treat here of those cruel and rigorous punishments which some severe
Judges inflict, for remedies and cures of so much rigor, are violent, and do
sooner kill, and make an end of their Subjects, then heal and recover them by
little and little. Wherefore in point of correction, a commonwealth must use a
great deal of caution and prudence. And for that he who pretends by maine
strength to resist the furious current of a swift river; or by roughness, to
tame a headstrong horse, shall show himself as insolent, as impertinent;
rigor with gentleness, and justice with mercy, will do well: which if they
go not hand in hand, and kiss each other, they are both but the occasion of
greater corruption. For it is an erroneous discourse in those that think, that
public conservation consists in the execution of cruel chastisements, and
sharp and rigorous sentences, be they of death or otherwise; For these do
rather dispeople, and desolate, then correct and amend a kingdom. And as it is
a sign of bad Physicians, or of a corrupt and infectious air, to see many
fall sick, and dye; so likewise is it of careless Ministers, and ill
prevention, and of a contagious corruption of vices, and evil manners, when
there are many criminal judgments, many punishments, and cruel
chastisements. And who is he that knows the principal cause thereof? it may
be this, or it may be that, or all together, howsoever I am sure it is all
ill. And in a word, so great, so universal, and so pernicious an ill, that if
Christian Kings carry not a very watchful eye over their Subjects manners, in
not suffering them to fly out, they shall not, when they would, be able to
refrain them, and remedy what is amiss; for evil custom being once
habituated (according unto Galen, and others) is an acquired nature, and
engenders an habit, which being man's natural inclination, carries him along
after it; and so great is his inclination to delights, and so many the
prouocations, and ill examples which draw him thereunto, and pour oil as it
were upon that fire, that if there be not the more diligence and care used in
the quenching of it, it must necessarily spread it self abroad, and extend it
self daily more and more, and more especially into those Cities and countries
where there is much commerce and trading in Merchandise, and in the Courts of
Kings, where there is such a concourse of diverse and sundry nations, there
being not any one of them which has not it is proper and peculiar virtues, as
also it is proper and peculiar vices. Their virtues men hardly take hold on; but
their vices, those cleave easily unto them of themselves: and by this their
Commerce and Trading, remain engraven in their hearts. And what was before but
an inclination, being now become a custom, vice engenders vice; and one
appetite makes way for another. Lycurgus says, That it more imports a State
to see that it is Cities be not infected with the ill customs and manners of
Strangers, then to preserve them from the plague, the pestilence, or other the
like contagious diseases. For these, Time asswageth and consumes; but those,
are with time increased and augmented. Three Ambassadors of the Cretans, each
of them being of a different Sect, made their joint entrance into Rome. The
Senate gave them audience. And Cato being there, whom (for his great
authority) they did much reverence, and was indeed as an Oracle amongst them,
gave his vote, and opinion, that he would have them dispatched thence with all
possible speed, before the corruption of their manners should corrupt the
Roman Commonwealth.

This care ought Kings to take; and so much the rather, for that they have
never a Cato, that will tell them; never a Counselor that will advise them,
that in no kind of manner, nor upon any occasion whatsoever, ought they either
in their Court, or kingdom, suffer any man (no though he be an Ambassador)
to reside there, being different in his Religion, manners, and Ceremonies. For
their treating and conuersing with us, serves to no other purpose, but to bring
in vices, and banish virtues, to work upon weak and wavering minds, and to
draw the natural Subjects of another Prince, from Gods true worship, and due
observance of his divine Law. And this was the care of the Ancients of those
times, who would never give consent and allowance, that there should be any
thing entertained or received into their commonwealths, whereby men's minds
might grow cold, or be withdrawn in any one point or tittle from the worship
and adoration of their Gods. And very fit for these times were that Law of the
Persians, which did punish him with death, that should bring in any new use, or
strange custom. And the Cretans, did in their ordinary Letanies desire, that
no new custom might enter into their city, which is as a contagious disease,
and cleaves as close as the plague or pestilence. Nor did the Laws of Egypt
permit any new tune in their Music, or any new kind of song, unless they
were first examined by those that were in place of government. For (as Plato
affirms) a Commonwealth, as well as Music, Plato Dial. 2. de Legibus.
admits changes; And that for the avoiding of this mischief, it ought not
to be permitted, that there should be introduced any new kind of tunes, or
Music, together wherewith men's minds receive some change and alteration.
Aristotle did advise those that would be virtuous, that they should not use
Music, nor musical instruments, to incite them to be vicious. For Music
being a divine gift, and very powerful to move the hearts of men, and to
persuade the thing that is sung, if they accustom themselves to play and sing
holy lessons, and honest songs, they thereby accustom themselves to be honest
and virtuous. And therefore anciently your Kings, as David, the Prophets, and
Priests, the better to apply themselves to contemplation, did use Music,
wherewith they suspended their senses, and remained as it were swallowed up in
God. In a word, many men have therewith been robbed of their souls, and of
their honors, and daily much hurt does ensue thereby. For it is able to do
much, and great is the force and power which it has over men's manners. And if
you will not believe me, observe but the hurt, which your new wanton tunes,
together with the lascivious words, and gesticulations used in them, have
wrought of late amongst not only the common, but better sort of people.

Now to shut up all that has been said in three points. First of all I say,
that it much imports, that a Prince be good in himself; for that all men
make their Imitation after that pattern that he sets before them. And for
this cause, God placed him in so high and eminent a place, to the end that by
the resplendour of his virtues, he should give light to the whole kingdom;
and that both by his life and example, he should exemplify and indoctrinate
his Subjects: for it is not only included in the name and office of King, to
rule and govern the kingdom by good and who some Laws, but likewise to teach
and instruct the people by his virtues. This ought to be (say Socrates and
Plato) the end and aim of Kings, to direct their Subjects in the truth, they
practicing it first themselves, which is the strongest and forciblest argument
to persuade it. For the execution of that which is persuaded and commanded,
does secure the passage, does make the work sauourie, and does facilitate the
trouble. Secondly, to the end that the Laws may be the better kept, Kings
must obey, and keep them; for it will seem an unjust thing in them, to
establish and ordain that, which themselves will not keep and observe. They
must do as Lycurgus did, who never enacted any thing which he himself did not
punctually perform. And it was a Roman Edict; Use el Rey de la Ley, que
hiziere para la gray: Let the King that law keep, which he makes for his
sheep. Lastly, that they be very careful and watchful over the whole
kingdom, but more particularly over the Court; for from thence is diffused all
the good, or ill; as likewise in curtalling the excesses of apparel, the
superfluities of feasts and banquets, of gaming, of sports, and pastimes, of
lightness in behavior, of licentiousness in courting of women, and of those
wastefull expenses which might very well be excused, in weddings, in jewels,
and dressings both in the women and the men. Then began Rome to grow rank in
Luxury, and profaneness, when your gilded bed-steds, your costly pauilions,
your stately canopies, your rich hangings, your curious tables, your glorious
cupboords of plate, your gybing Iesters, and your various Instruments of
Music were brought in, which were then in great use and request, for to
provoke and stir up the appetite in those their tedious and sumptuous
suppers; as if, for to go to hell, there were need of such a wind-lace, or
wheeling about, the way being (as it is) so easy and direct, that a man may go
it blindfold. Causes all of them of just fear, and forerunners likewise of
the ruin and perdition of any Monarchy whatsoever, as they have been
heretofore of others that have been overthrown by the like means.

But to conclude with this sense, and to shut up the door likewise to all the
rest; we are to presuppose that, which is very common both in divine and
humane Letters, That by the hands, wherein particularly consists the Touching,
are understood works; because they are the Instruments by which they are done.
Moses delivering unto us, that the Hebrews did see the wonders which God had
wrought in their favor, says, Viderunt manum magnam, quam exercuerat Dominus:
Exodus 14.31.
They saw that great work (which the original renders, that great hand) which
the Lord exercised upon the Egyptians. And besides this, Pier. lib. 35. Tit.
Opus.
it has another signification (as is observed by Pierius Valerianus) an open
hand, being the Symbol of eloquence; expressing that efficacy, and perswasiue
power that lies in well couched words. Works and words being both very
necessary in Kings, Execution in the one; and Elocution in the other. And
because all Princes cannot perform these offices of doing and saying, by
themselves, they must have another tongue, and other hands, by which they must
speak, and do; and the tongue whereby they must speak, and the hands,
whereby they must touch, and handle all things (for their own are not able to
do it) must be their favorites. Policratus, in his book directed to
Traiane, says, That your great Lords in Court, and Kings favorites, are the
hands of the kingdom. And, as in man's body, they are naturally disposed, and
ready prepared for to succor and assist all the other members; so they should
be at hand for to help and relieve all the necessities of the kingdom, and to
be the foremost in all dangers, and a thousand other occasions that will offer
themselves, which neither are, nor can be wanting to Kings and kingdoms. And
therefore the Philosopher said of the hands, that they are the Instrument of
Instruments. For without them nothing can be done; neither can Kings of
themselves do all. They have need of their Ministers, and Favorites, which are
their feet, and their hands. In the subsequent Chapters, we shall discourse
somewhat a little of them. God grant, that little, or somewhat, what ere it
be, may work some good. And first of all we will treat, whether it be
fitting to have Favorites.

CHAP. XXXI. Whether it be fit for Kings to have Favorites.
Favorites being (as they are) the workmanship of Kings, receiving their form
and fashion from their good liking; which creatures of their making, we have
mentioned in the former Chapter. We shall handsomely fall here upon that which
in this is put to the question. Nor is the answer thereunto very easy. For a
Favorite being of the same nature, as a particular friend, and friendship
being to be inter aequales, between those that are of equal condition, it
seems that those that are Subjects and servants to their King and Master can
not hold it with him; whom they are to behold, and treat with, with a great
deal of reverence, respecting always his royal Majesty, which (according to
that other Poet) No cabe en un saco con el Amor; is not in one and the same
sack with love. And without love, there is no friendship. True it is that
Aristotle and some other Philosophers affirm, that this difference may easily
be reconciled, forasmuch as he that is in the higher and more eminent place,
may stoop so low, and fashion himself in that even measure to his Inferior,
that they may both remain upon equal terms. But this can hardly square and
suite well with Kings toward their Favorites. For, as it were an indecorum,
and unseemly thing in a humane body, that the head should abase it self, and
become equal with the shoulder; so, were it prodigious and monstrous, that
Kings, which are Heads, and hold that Sovereignty which God has given them,
should stoop so low to their Subjects, that the eminency should not appear
which they have over them. And that other means which may be used in raising a
subject, or Favorite to that hight that he may be equal with his King,
brings with that a great inconvenience. For a Crown and Scepter royal,
cannot endure any fellowship with equality. And therefore these two means may
pare and fit well with friends, that having professed friendship, when their
estates were equal, the one grows inferior to the other, either good
fortune, or good diligence, having preferred his fellow and friend. But with
Kings there cannot be held this correspondency and equality. And it is King
Salomons counsel, who says; That it is not fitting for any man to entertain
friendship and communication, with those that are too mighty. Ditiori te, ne
socius fueris; Quid communicabit cacabus ad ollam? Quando enim se colliserint,
confringetur: Have no fellowship with one that is mightier and richer then thy
self. For how agree the Kettle and the earthen Pot together? For, if the one
be smitten against the other, it shall be broken. And again, if you will but
diligently observe the sacred history of the Kings which were over Gods people,
you shall there find little mention of Favorites. On the other side, it will
likewise seem unreasonable, that kings should be debarred that, without which
(to all men's seeming) man's life cannot be well past over. Nemo sine amicis,
spectet vinere; (said the said Philosopher) Let no man look to live without
friends. And the holy Scriptures are full of the commodity, and benefit, which
faithful friends afford, being as necessary for the life of man, as fire, and
water; and for no estate so important, as for that of Kings, who for that they
have so many, so weighty, and so secret businesses, their estate were
intolerable, and more then they were able to bear, if they might not have the
liberty of having friends, with whom they might communicate, and by whom they
might receive some ease, of those troubles, and care, which great offices
(ordinarily) bring with them.

Now for to give satisfaction unto that which is here pretended to be auerred,
we are to consider, That Aristotle, and other, both Philosophers and Divines
teach (which is no more then what experience plainly proves unto us) That
there are two sorts of Love, or friendship; The one Interessall, or cum
foenore, whose end, is its proper profit. The other has with it a more gentile
and noble intent, which is, to love and wish well to that which deserves to
be beloved: and this is called Amor amicitiae, the love of friendship. The
other, Amor concupiscentiae, the love of concupiscence. And with very good
reason, for that therein there is not to be found the face of true friendship.
From these two Loves, as from two diverse roots, spring forth two different
sorts of Favorites. The one, who for their great parts and quailties have
deserved to carry after them, not only the good wills and affections of their
equals, but even of Kings themselves. And when these abilities are so
extraordinary and aduantagious, no man can deem it inconvenient that Kings
should more particularly, and in a more extraordinary manner, apply their
affection unto them. Nay, it would rather lay a spot and blemish upon them, if
notice should be taken, that they equally entertain all, or not esteem and
prize them most that merit most to be esteemed. For in all good reason; there
is no greater inequality, then to equal all alike.

Plato said very well, That there is not any virtue of that force and
efficacy, for to catch and steal away men's hearts. Nor herein do we need the
testimonies of Philosophers, for the holy Ghost says, Vt mors, est dilectio,
love is strong as death. The coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a
most vehement flame, it bears all away before it. And in this its force and
strength, friendship and love are much alike. And building on this ground, I
say; That very well there may be said to be friendship between a King and a
Favorite; for that their souls have in their birth and beginning, or (as I may
say, their first original) equal nobleness. And your noblest friendship
proceeds from the soul. Very famous and much celebrated was that friendship
betwixt Prince Jonathan (the only heir of the kingdom) and that worthy noble
David. And so great was the love that was between them, that the sacred
Scripture says, 1. Reg. 18.2.
That anima Ionathae conglutinata erat animae David, and dilexit eum Ionathas
quasi animam suam. The soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David; and
that Jonathan loved him, as his own soul. And I further affirm, that it is
very fit and convenient that Kings should love those with advantage, that have
the advantage of others in virtue, wisdom, and learning. And such should be
those, that serve and attend the persons of Princes; for ordinarily, out of
that Nursery are these plants your Favorites drawn. When Nabuchadnezzar, King
of Babylon, besieged and took by force of arms the City of Jerusalem, he
carried away from thence great spoils of gold and silver; but that, which he
much more prized then all this Treasure, were the sons of the chiefest
Noblemen, and such as were lineally descended of the Kings of that kingdom;
and gave especial order, that they should choose and cull out those that had
the best and ablest parts, both of nature and acquisition; those that were of
the best disposition, the most learned, and best taught, to the end that being
accompanied with these good qualities, they might merit to attend in the Court
and Chamber of the King. Dan. 1.3.
Et ait Rex Asphenez Praeposito Eunuchorum, vt introduceret de filijs Israel,
and de semine Regio, and Tyrannorum pueros, in quibus nulla esset macula,
decoros forma, and eruditos omni sapientia, cautos scientia, and doctos
disciplina, and qui possent stare in palatio Regis: And the King spoke unto
Ashpenez, the Master of his Eunuchs, that he should bring certain of the
children of Israel, and of the Kings seed, and of the Princes; Children in whom
was no blemish, but well-fauoured, and skillful in all wisdom, and cunning in
knowledge, and understanding, Science, and such as had ability in them to
stand in the Kings palace. And this election fell out so luckily, and proved to
be of that profit and benefit, that amongst those which (indewed with these
qualities) were made choice of, for to serve the King, there were three of them
did excel, but one more then all the rest, not only in virtue, but in the
knowledge likewise of secret businesses, and matters of State and government,
which was Daniel; who so well deserved to be a Favorite to those Kings of
Babylon, and more especially to Darius, that he did not content himself with
making him only a privy Counselor, but the prime man amongst them. For
having set over the kingdom an 120. Princes, which should be over the whole
kingdom, and over these, three Presidents (of whom, Daniel was first) that the
Princes might give account unto them, that the King might have no damage; And
as he was the greatest Subject and Favorite in the world, so was he
superior in the virtues and qualities of his person. Igitur Daniel superabat
omnes Principes and satrapas, quia Spiritus Domini amplior erat in illo: Dan.
6.3.
Therefore was Daniel preferred before the Presidents and Princes, because an
excellent spirit was in him. The holy Scripture likewise tells us, that Joseph
was such a Favorite of King Pharaoh, that he gave him absolute power over all
his kingdom, and commanded, that in public pomp he should ride in the Kings
own Chariot, and in his own seat, and have a Crier go before to proclaim
the favor that the King was pleased to do him. Dixit quoque Rex Aegypti ad
Joseph; Genesis 41.44.
Ego sum Pharaoh, absque tuo imperio non mouebit quisquam manum, aut pedem in
omni terra. And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without thee shall
no man lift up his hand, or foot, in all the land of Egypt. And well did he
deserve this honor, for by his great industry and wisdom, he freed that
King and kingdom from that terrible famine, besides those many other great and
troublesome employments, wherein he was busied for the space of seven years
together. In the fourth book of kings, we read that Naaman, who was Captain
of the host of the King of Syria, was the only Favorite of the King; Erat vir
magnus apud Dominum suum, and honoratum: 4. Reg. 5.1.
He was a great man with his Master, and honorable. And rendering the reason
of this his great priuacie with his King, and the honor he had done him, it is
there specified; Per illum enim dedit dominus salutem Syriae; erat enim vir
fortis. Because by him the Lord had given deliverance unto Syria; and was also
a mighty man in valor. For all the life and soul that kingdom had, came from
him, God using him as his instrument for his puisance and prudence. And when
Favorites are of these aduantagtous abilities, those reasons and
inconveniences do cease (before mentioned) touching the disequalitie of Kings,
with their Inferiors. For virtue has this excellence and pre-eminence; that
from the very dust of the earth it does lift up men unto honor, and does raise
them to that height, that it equals them, and sets them cheek by iole with
the greatest Princes in the world. Eccl: 11.1.
Sapientia humiliati, exaltabit caput illius, and in medio magnatum considere
illum faciet: Wisdom lifts up the head of him, that is of low degree, and
makes him to sit among great men. Anna, that was mother to that great Priest
and Prophet Samuel, amongst other things which she sung in the praise of God,
and his great power, this was one worthy the observation, and well befitting
the subject we have in hand; 1. King. 2.8.
Dominus suscitat de puluere egenum, and de stercore eleuat panperem, vt sedeat
cum Principibus, and solium gloriae teneat: The Lord raises the poor out of
the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set him among
Princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory. The like note sings that
Kingly Prophet David: Suscitans a terra inopem, Psalm. 113.7.
vt collocet eum cum Principibus populi sui: He raises up the poor out of the
dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill. And King Solomon his son
seconds this of his father in this short Antheme: Seruus sapiens, dominabitur
filijs stultu: A wise servant shall have rule over a son that causes shame.
Prou. 17.2.
So great is the force of wisdom and discretion, that it does not only
exalt, and raise to greatness, men that are free borne (though in a poor
mean cottage) but brings even the basest slaves to be Lords over their own
Masters. A certain Philosopher being taken captive, was brought forth into the
open Market to be sold, and they that were to buy him, demanded of him, what
he could do; He told them, That the best thing that he was skild in, was, to
command his Masters. In many places of Scripture, is repeated and confirmed the
Testimony of King Salomons great power and wisdom; And amongst other things,
which are mentioned of the Majesty of his house and Court, it is said; That
therein he had a great many Princes, whose names are registered in the third
book of the Kings. And amongst them there is but one only that is made
remarkable by the name and title of the Kings Favorite and friend. Zabud,
filius Nathan, amicus Regis; And Zabud, the son of Nathan, was principal
Officer, and the Kings friend. Some Translations in the place of principal
Officer, put Priest. And these two titles of Priest, and the Kings friend, are
therefore thus joined together, that they may give us to understand, that the
friendship and affection toward a Favorite, should take it is growth from that
learning and virtue which is annexed to the state and condition of the Priest.
And in the first book of the Chronicles, in that Catalogue, which is there
made of those which bare principal offices in King David's Court, it is only
said of Hushai the Archite, that he was the Kings companion. And in the second
book of the Kings, are set down at large the great and many reasons, why
Hushai on his part might well deserve this Title. Our Savior Christ likewise
seemed to make show of his more particular affection to Peter, John, and James,
making choice of them from among the twelve, to retire himself in private with
them, and to make them witnesses of his glorious transfiguration; and
afterward of diverse other particular things. Whence it seems that they might
have the name of Favorites; but not without great grounds, and those
extraordinary virtues, wherein they out-shined others. Howbeit the choice and
election of this supreme King, is not to be ruled and measured out by that of
the Kings of this world; for they can not by the alone power of their love
better men, nor afford them necessary parts, whereby to merit to be their
friends. But this true King and Lord of all, in placing his good will and
affection on those whom he is pleased to make choice of for his friends, does
likewise indow and adorn them with strong abilities, whereby to be accounted
worthy of his friendship and favor. Whereas with the Favorites of the Kings
of this world, it fares clean contrary. For those, which before they were
Favorites, were good and honest, by their priuacie, and great power with their
King, have come to be stark naught; and the more footing they have in the
Kings friendship, they are usually the less worthy of it. Whereof we shall
more in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XXXII. Of another sort of Favorites.
THose most learned books, which the glorious Saint Austen writ, De Ciuitate
Dei, lay before us two sorts of love: That love which man bears unto God,
even to the contemning and despising of himself; And from this is the
constitution and fabric of that holy City of Jerusalem; under which name, is
understood the good concord and agreement of the Christian Church and
commonwealth, as also of all Christian souls. The other love is that which
every one bears to himself, in that high manner and excess, that it
reaches even to the contemning and despising of God. And from this is built
that City of Babylon, which is as much to say, as Confusion; and signifies
that, which every sinner has within himself, as also that which is in ill
ordered commonwealths. And therefore (as we said in the former Chapter) that
from those two Loves of friendship and concupiscence, did issue forth two sorts
of Favorites: The one good and profitable; the other, bad and covetous: So,
considering Love, not in respect of outward things, but in respect of it self,
it differenceth the use of Favorites, according to the different means and
ends, wherewith, and for which they are made choice of: And the use likewise,
which they make thereof, when they see they are thus advanced, and received
into favor. The means have the denomination of their goodness, or badnesse,
from their end. Whence it follows, that when Kings shall make choice of their
Favorites by good means, not out of a selfe-humour, or womanish kind of
longing, nor for to please his own proper affection, but that they may comply
the better with those obligations, which they have to the good dispatch of
businesses, and to have one to help them to bear the burden that lies upon
them; As this end is good, so of force must the means likewise be. For to
obtain good ends, bad means are not taken. And therefore Kings shall do
well, in taking such Favorites unto them, as shall be sollicitous, and
careful in the dispatching of businesses, faithful in their services, and
endowed with such parts before specified, as were those Favorites, recommended
unto you in the former Chapter. For Joseph (as we told you) grew in favor with
King Pharaoh, for his great wisdom, and for his supernatural knowledge of
things to come, and revealing such secret mysteries as other his Ministers
could not tell what to make of them. The like befell Daniel, with the Caldean,
and Macedonian Kings; for before ever he became a Favorite, they saw his great
wisdom and constancy in the true service of his God, his singular prudence,
and those other his good gifts, which are recorded in the book of his
prophesies. The extraordinary graces of Peter, John, and James, who is he that
is ignorant of them? Being that the Evangelists say of Saint Peter, that his
extraordinary love was examined, and proved in those so often repeated
questions: Petre amas me? Simon Iohannis, diligis me plus his? And again,
Simon Iohannis, amas me? And the Apostle Saint James was the first of the
Apostles, that by his blood and death gave testimony of this his love. And
Saint John showed no less, at his last Supper, at his passion, and at the
foot of the Cross, having followed and accompanied his Master even to his
death, when the rest fled and forsook him. But when Kings make not choice of
their Favorites for the foresaid ends, and for the public good, but for their
own particular gusts and humors, and to let loose the reins with more
liberty and freedom to their own delights and pleasures, such kind of
Favorites set usually before them the same ends, and commonly prefer their
own private gustes and interests before those of their Kings, or the public
good of the commonwealth, and come to be the firebrands and destruction of
States. This lesson the holy Scripture does likewise teach us, whose mysteries
are so high and so deep, that even in that which it silenceth, it speaks
unto us; and in saying little, instructs much. I have much observed that
which is recounted in the History of Esther, touching the priuacie of that
proud and unfortunate Haman, Joseph. de Antiq. lib 1. cap. 6. 1. Reg. 15. 33.
whom King Assuerus raised from so low a degree, and from so wicked a race, as
he came of. For (according to Josephus) he descended from that Amalakite whom
the Prophet Samuel caused to be hewn in pieces. And for that it is the
condition of Kings, when they once begin to favor a man, to make him like
froath to rise and swell, this favorite grew to that height through his Kings
grace and favor, that all the Subjects of that Monarch respected him as a God,
and kneeled down in his presence, his person being much more adored, served,
and feared, then the Kings; because the King had put the staff (as they say)
into his hands, giving him the absolute command over all his estates; insomuch
that neither in, nor out of Court, nor elsewhere, was there ought done, but by
the order of Haman; and the King himself held him in the place of a father.
And for that Vanity is the daughter of Pride, all this his great favor and
priuacie with his Prince, did but make the more for his own hurt, as does the
Ants wings, for hers; or like those of Icarus, which being of wax, the nearer
they came to the Sun, the sooner they melted, working then his death and
downfall, when he was at the highest. For Haman came to hang, and dye on that
gallows which he had provided for Mardoche, and for no other offense in the
world, but because he would not bow the knee unto him, and adore him as the
rest did. So that (if you mark the Story) Hamans own greatness and power
was the axe, which did frame and hew out that gallows, whereon himself was
hanged. And having often thought with my self on this man's end, and
considering likewise the beginning of this his priuacie, I do not find, that
it was for the excellency of his merits, or for any heroical virtues that
were in him; such as were those which King Pharaoh, Nabuchadnezzar, and Darius
did consider in those their Favorites, which they made choice of, but for some
particular guste and liking, that his King took to him. For the Scripture
speaks not one word, nor makes not any the least mention of the merits of
this Favorite, nor of any notable thing, that he had done either for the good
of the kingdom, or the service of his King; but rather without any preambles
to that purpose, in the very entrance of the third Chapter we read thus. Rex
Assuerus exaltauit Aman, filium Amadathi, Esther 3.1.
qui erat de stirpe Agag, and posuit solium eius super omnes Principes quos
habebat, cunctique serui Regis, qui in foribus Palatij versabantur, flectebant
genua, et adorabant Aman: King Assuerus did promote Haman the son of
Amedatha, the Agagite, and advanced him, and set his seat above all the
Princes that were with him. And all the Kings servants, that were in the Kings
gate, bowed, and reverenced Haman. And in this so true a relation, and so fully
setting forth the priuacie of this great Favorite, without any foundation or
ground of desert; the Scripture thereby has instructed us, how inconsiderately
this King did proceed in the choice which he made. But he did correct this his
error, by opening his eyes, and inflicting that punishment upon him which he
deserved, and is there set down. I could wish that Favorites would likewise
open their eyes, and consider with themselves, that the happiness which they
hold, is but borrowed ware, lent unto them but for a short time, and that they
neither use, nor possess it as their own proper good or inheritance. And
being that by one means or other, it must leave them, that they would not
wholly give themselves over thereunto; for it forsakes few without their
final ruin. Let them bite upon this bit, and with the remembrance thereof,
bridle their pride and insolency, lest (howsoever they flatter themselves)
that hand may pull them down, which raised them up. For there are some, which
will never be able to endure this their felicity and happiness, but one way
or other, will work their overthrow, and make them pay the price of their
ambition at too dear a rate: Nay the King himself will sometimes put to his
helping hand, as we see King Assuerus did, who after that he had made Haman
his only Favorite, and raised him to that highth of honor, as could not well
be more, turned his face from him, and did so much distaste him, for his sower
and insolent behavior, that for to make him stoop and hang the head, he
commanded him to be hanged upon the same gallows that he had set up for
another, who had deserved well both of the King and State. The Emperor
Alexander did the like, who waxing weary of the arrogancy of one of his
Favorites, and not being able longer to endure it, caused him to be staked,
and the stake to be set on the top of an high hill; giving him a death
answerable to his vanity. For, although Kings love them, and in some sort
acknowledge a kind of beholdingness, yet they usually withdraw their favor
quite from them, and are oftentimes ashamed of their choice; whereunto being
added the complaints of the people, and other principal persons, offended with
the injuries offered unto them, remove that scandal, by removing their
Favorite, and make them satisfaction by making him be punished, never in this
case aduising with any, nor so much as hearing what the Favorite in his own
discharge can say for himself; for in such desperate cases, when things are
brought to that extremity, Kings use to take that course as your Pretomedici,
and skilfuller sort of Physicians do with their inferiors who in weighty and
urgent occasions fall speedily to work themselves, without any further
consultation; but in ordinary diseases, hear, resolve, and consult with
others. Again, let Favorites, for their learning, read the Histories, and
peruse the general book of Time, and they shall there find a thousand of
these examples, and other as many fair warnings, worthy their sight and
knowledge, for the admonishing of men, for to fear their priuacie with Kings,
and to tremble at humane prosperity, and the security wherein they live. And
he that shall diligently read these things, will seek to come fairly off
from these his high fortunes and favors. For ordinarily, from a prosperous and
high-raised estate, great disasters have had their beginning; as from your
highest places come your greatest falls. And peradventure because this
desenganno, and dis-deceiuing of our selves, does so much import mankind, and
that men might live in this fear, God has and does permit of such like
examples, and admonitions. And it may likewise be believed, that such violent
and sudden accidents have not only happened through the default of those that
fall, or for want of wisdom, but by a divine providence and permission, for
their own particular sins; or for that God was willing, as being the master
workman, and only Potter of these our earthen vessels, to break these with
a rod of iron, and to choose others for vessels of honor, through which the
holy liquor of his Gospel, and other good graces, might be poured forth, and
diffused throughout the world.

CHAP. XXXIII. Whether it be fit for Kings to have any more then one Favorite.
THe name wherewith the Greeks named God, is derived from a word, which
signifies to see. So that to say God, is to say, He that sees. For, as the
Apostle Saint Paul, and faith teaches us; all is subject to Gods view; and
unto Kings, who are his Lieutenants here upon earth, nothing can conuene so
well with them, as to seem to the world, to have so quick and large a fight,
that they may see all whatsoever man's capacity is able to reach unto. And
because they cannot do this alone by themselves, Xenophon said very well and
wisely, that it was needful, that they should have other eyes, whereunto to
trust as much, as unto their own, and to see as it were by spectacles; for
Kings are so unhappy, that they cannot come to see all without them. And those
(as the same Philosopher said) are those friends and Favorites, who are to
see, and know that which passes in the world, as also what is needful in
commonwealths, and to give notice thereof unto their Kings, and to help them
to ordain, and execute that, which is fitting and convenient. And Favorites
being entertained (as we said before) for this end, and for the public good of
the commonwealth, it is requisite that Kings should not have one only, but
many. One day, some about the person of Alexander the Great, showed him a
marvelous fair Pomegranate, which being cut in two, discovered a great
company of kernels: and one of them asking him, of what he would wish to have
such store, as of those Pomegranate kernels which appeared unto him? He
answered, that he would wish that he might have so many Zopiri; This Zopirus
being a Favorite of his, and one that was very faithful unto him, and of
great abilities. For, it is not contrary to royal greatness, to have many,
but very necessary for the better dispatch of businesses. For if they should
pass only through the hands of the Prince, their dispatch would be very
slow, and subject likewise to many errors, whereinto they would ordinarily
run, for want of their care and assistance. Darius, King of Persia, took
three Favorites unto him, to whom the rest of the Princes rendered an account
of all the affairs of the kingdom. And from the beginning of the world, even
to this present time, Kings have had, some more, and others less. For this
must be regulated and ordered according to the greatness of the kingdoms. For
by how much the more they are in number and greatness, so much the more
increase have those weighty affairs which are necessarily to have their
recourse to their royal persons; and according to the measure of them, is
there an addition to be made of those, that are to assist and attend
businesses, to pass through all, to provide for all, and in all places. The
people of Israel, when Moses governed them, were all jointly together in one
body in form of an Army; and all that made not up so much as a mean
kingdom; and they remaining (as then they did) without possessions, encamped
in a desert, and being all Israelites, it seems in all likelihood, that their
ordinary businesses could not be either so many, or so great, as those which
are incident to a King, who is Lord and Master of diverse kingdoms and
Provinces, and of sundry several Nations. And yet notwithstanding, that great
Governor Moses, by nego^ating from morning until night, without diuerting
himself, could not give convenient dispatch unto all, but was forced (as is
before specified) to take unto him no less then seventy assistants, all chosen
men, and endewed with those good qualities, whereof we now treat. Let Kings
therefore have many for to aid and help them, and let them be the Ministers
of his mind, and the Conducts whereby to convey his will and pleasure to his
Subjects. For in the administration of public affairs, it is evermore to be
indeauoured, that many bear a part therein; As well for the common
satisfaction, that shall thereby be given unto all; as also for that they may
be able to make the better account of all businesses, be they never so many.
And likewise, for that few being instructed and experienced in them, occasion
may not be given, that (those failing) the commonwealth and public government
may thereby incur any danger. This was Augustus his conceit, delivered by
Suetonius; which that he might the better execute, and that his bounty might
enlarge it self toward the more persons; he invented new public Offices,
wherein to employ them. But I do not speak this, as inferring thereby, that
there should be so many, but that at least (for the foresaid reasons) there
should be some: And in conclusion, more then one, because it will be more
easy to negotiate with them, and less costly and troublesome; and be a
means, that the Prince may be the better eased, and freed in great part of
those cares and troubles, which otherwise must needs weary him out, and work
his unrest and disquiet. For his body is not made of brass, nor can he occur
to all occasion; Besides, being more then one, their competition will make them
the more both careful and fearful: as knowing that in case they shall grow
careless, there are persons enough besides of sufficiency to supply their
place; Whereas the opinion and conceit of the contrary, puffes him up with
pride, and undoes it is Master. For they fondly and foolishly persuade
themselves, that their King and Master cannot live and subsist without the
assistance of their wit, and that there is not that fault they commit, but must
be forgiven them, out of the necessity of their service. Forgetting in the
mean while, that their King may imagine them to be dead, and how that in such
a case, though it grieve him, yet must he provide himself of others. Let
Kings therefore be beaten from this their error, for he that shall otherwise
advise them, and seek to be the only man in their favor and service, and
take unto himself both the right side and the left, thrusting all others from
thence, and governing both high and low, letting nothing escape his fingers,
which he pretends out of the necessary use of his person, and so absolutely
to become Master of their wills, and to have that hand over their Kings, that
they must not look upon any, but with their Favorites eyes; such a Favorite
(I say) pretends to tyrannize a kingdom, and by little and little will go
crushing the Princes of the blood, the ancient Nobility; and such as are of
power to stand in their way, thrusting this man out of Court to day, and that
other to morrow, that he alone may rule all without any contradiction or
opposition in the world. Let every man say or think as they list, for mine
own part I am persuaded that this is his maine end and drift; And the cause
thereof is his fear of falling; knowing (besides his own consciousnes) that
there are not only one or two, but many in Court, that are able to supply his
place, and far better deserving then himself. Your Alchymists make gold: But
how? Only in the color; they will not let it come to the Touch, nor any other
real Essay; neither will they endure to have it compared with any other
mineral gold, for fear lest it should be discovered, that theirs has no
more but a bare show and appearance. Let Princes therefore assure themselves,
that those Favorites are but Alchimists, that will not admit of any other
company, as being privy to themselves, that their understanding is not such
pure gold, that it can abide the Touch, nor any real Essay. But say it should
pass for current, and that their minds were all made of pure gold, me thinks
they should advise and consider with themselves, that those that are ingenious
and wise men, will therefore the rather desire that there should be many: for,
by comparing the one with the other, the true light shines the more, and makes
it self known whether it be so or no. And only your fools, and such as are
unworthy of that they possess, are jealous of that good, which they fear to
loose, when by comparing they shall come to be known. God did not in vain
place so many members in man's body, and most of them double; had it not been
thereby to teach us, that many are needful in humane actions: and that one is
not able to do all, without an infinite deal of toil, extraordinary spending
of his spirits, and the sudden wasting and consuming of his body. And here will
suite very well to this our purpose, that which Tiberius affirmed, when
feigning not to be willing to accept of the Empire, he said, (going about the
bush to discover the minds of the Roman Nobility, and Senate) that he alone
of himself, was not sufficient nor yet with the help of another, for so great
a government. Whereupon, Salustius Crispus taking his Qu, a great Favorite of
his, starts me up, and makes me a long Harenga, or artificial oration;
showing that Signiorie and Empire could not well consist, without being
conferred upon one particular person (which is the maine foundation and
groundwork of the good and safety of a Monarchical government) and that
therein himself (if no body else would take the pains) would be as it were
another Joseph, his faithful Vice gerent: lest the resolution of things,
depending on the will of many, it might cause a distraction in businesses,
either by way of competition or of passion. In conclusion, after Tiberius had
heard this, and had thoroughly sounded their minds, he took occasion to tell
them, That in such a City as Rome was, sustained and vpheld by so many and
such illustrious persons, it was not fit that the businesses of State should be
remitted to one man alone, for many would much more easily execute the offices
and affairs of the commonwealth by a fellow-bearing of the burden. For, as
unity in some degrees is both profitable and pleasing; so in other some it is
hateful, and prejudicial. And therefore, (out of this consideration) I say,
That a King, as the supreme person, and principal Head of a kingdom, ought to
be one alone. For the covetousness of ruling being insatiable, and the nature
of power incommunicable, it is not possible that two Princes of equal
authority should continue any long time, but both of them suffer in the end,
or at least the businesses that are committed to their charge. But for
Favorites, there may be two, or three, or more, the unity remaining reserved
for the greater and supremer person. And likewise this plurality will not be
much amiss; for if any one of them shall by some accident fail, there be
others, whom the King knows, and they know him, that are fit for his service,
and that have good experience and knowledge of businesses, and all such matters
as are current and passable in the commonwealth, without being driven to seek
out new Ministers, or to instruct them what to do in a time of necessity,
when things go not well, but stand in ill Terms, laying otherwise hold on the
first that offer themselves unto them, to the overthrowing of the businesses in
hand, and the proper hurt and damage of their Lord and Master; at whose cost
and by mere erring in great matters, they must come to get their learning. Let
Kings (a Gods name) reserve for themselves those businesses that are of
greatest importance (for in this likewise must there be a settled course and
order) as is in all well governed kingdoms. Referring (as we said before) to
the ordinary Counsels and Tribunalls, ordinary businesses, consulting with
their Kings those that are of most importance; And these Kings by themselves
(as before mentioned) ought to dispatch, if therein they be not hindered by
default of their health, and not to remit and refer them to their Favorites;
who, in matter of Justice (were it but distributive) should have no kind of
power. For thereby they oppress those Tribunalls and seats of justice,
together with their Ministers and Officers, who, for that they know, they must
have much dependancy on the Favorite; if he shall have a hand in Courts of
Justice, and distribution of Offices, cannot but remain much oppressed, and
debarred of their liberty, and the more, if they have any pretension for their
own interest, or increasing of their estate and honor. And the reason of all
this will plainly appear, if we will but weigh those words of the wise man;
Per me Reges regnant, Prou. 8.15.
and Legum conditores iusta decernunt: Through me Kings reign, Through me
Councillors make just Laws. Whereby is given to understand, the particular
favor which God gives to the lawful Kings and Governors of their kingdoms
and commonwealths, to hit right in that which appertains unto government. And
therefore was it well said of that wise King Solomon; Prou. 16.10.
Diuinatio in labijs Regis, in iudicio, non errabit os eius: Prophecy is in
the lips of the King; his mouth shall not go wrong in judgment. And your
Divines are of opinion, that Kings have more help and aid from their Angels
of guard, then other men have. And besides all this, the public prayers that
are poured forth throughout all their kingdoms and Provinces, are of most
great use for Gods illightning of their understanding. And therefore for these
reasons aforesaid, although your Favorites and more secret Councillors of
State may be very learned and wise understanding men, yet is there a great
deal of reason, why in grave and weighty causes, they should crave and attend
their Kings opinion; esteeming it as the more certain, being it comes from a
head, so much favored by God, and so well assisted and strengthened on all
sides. Which does not concur in Favorites; for God has not made that
promise unto them, as he has unto Kings; nor (peradventure) do they deserve
it. And if he be the sole and only Favorite, much less can he presume,
that either his opinion or pains can be greater or surer then that of so many
learned Councillors and Counsels, that have met and sat thereupon, and have
spent so much time and study in State affairs. Nor is it to be imagined,
that when Councillors do consult, and crave their Kings opinion and
resolution, that they do it to that end, that they should receive it from
another inferior person; whom let Kings love them never so much, or confer
all that they can upon them, they cannot give them more understanding, or more
knowledge, nor a better mind and disposition, then what they have already; for
this is reserved for God only, as also it properly belongs unto him to give
light unto Kings, that they may give a fitting and direct answer to that point
wherein they are consulted, who always supplies them with that knowledge which
is needful for them, if they shall but beg it at his hands, and make good
use thereof. Hence are two things inferred, which are very sure and true. The
first, That Kings are bound in conscience to attend in their own person grave
and weighty businesses; for that this is their principal office; which is
evidently proved by this reason. Whosoever bears an Office, and has salarie
for the same, is thereby obliged to comply fully therewith, Sub poena peccati,
upon penalty of sinning. And by so much the more grievous shall the sin be,
by how much the greater is the Office, and by how much the more the stipend is
augmented. Now Kings (you will confess unto me) have the greater office, and
greater stipend in all things, and therefore shall they more grievously sin,
if they do not cumply therewith. And this is made good in the sixth of
Wisdom, where in these very words it is expressly said: Potentes potenter
tormenta patientur; Wisd. 6.5, 6.
and fortioribus fortior instat cruciatio: A sharp punishment shall be to them
that be in high places; and the mighty shall be mightily tormented. The
second; That Favorites are obliged, on pain of the said penalty, to serve
their Kings in their own persons well and faithfully in those businesses,
which they shall commit to their charge; and that in taking their pleasure and
ease, more then their Kings themselves, and substituting others to perform
that trust and charge which is put upon them, they cannot justly enjoy that
authority, nor those interests and profits which do result from their
priuacie. And let they themselves tell me, what title they have to enjoy so
much as they do, when they take less pains then their Kings, but pleasure
more? And to conclude with that which is here questioned in this Chapter, I
say, That admitting Favorites, to be such as they ought to be, it is fit
notwithstanding that there should be more then one, or two. For thereby Kings
shall have the more help, and out of that emulation and zeal, which is wont
to be amongst them, each of them will strive to be more considerate and
better advised in commanding others, and in begging and applying things to
himself, and his own private profit, and more solicitous in doing service to
the State, lest others might get the start of him in his Kings favor. And
howbeit the name of favorite seems not to endure a companion, yet, if they
fix their eyes on that which they ought, which is the common good of the
commonwealth, and the service of their Kings, it would never grieve them, that
there should be others to assist for the same end and purpose; but like that
great Favorite and friend of God, Moses, they would say, Vtinam omnes
prophetar^nt: Would to God they did all prophecy.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of the Conditions and Qualities of Favorites.
SVpposing that that then which has been said in the former Chapters, and
that Kings are to have such persons about them, who with propriety may hold
the name of friends (for such quality and condition must they be of, who
possess the bosom and soul of their Master by the communication of the
greatest and most secret affairs) and perform the office of Favorites; For,
although it be true, that it cannot properly be said, that Kings have friends,
for that all (save of their own rank) are inferior unto them; yet is it
likewise true, that the holy Scripture (as we showed you before) styles
Favorites, friends. For the force of love is of that great power, that it
remoueth and lifts up things from their point and center, giving the name of
friend to a servant and subject. Qui diligit cordis munditiam, Prou. 22.21.
propter gratiam labiorum suorum, habebit amicum Regem: He that loves
pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips, the King shall be his friend.
Aristotle does admit betwixt the King and his subject, a certain kind of
friendship, howbeit the disparitie and inequality be very great, your
Histories do celebrate the friendships of great Princes, held with their
particular subjects. And those which with other their equals are called
faithful friends; with Kings, carry the name of Loyall-Subiects. Which (for
that effect which we pretend) imports little this altering or changing of
the name. That which most imports and conueneth most, is, That we give you
some notice of those qualities which they ought to have, and of those signs,
whereby those may be known, that are fittest and best for so great a Ministry.

There are two qualities amongst the rest, which are precisely necessary in a
Favorite. And first I will set down the first. First of all then he must love
his King truly, and must not suffer himself to be overcome by covetousness,
and his own private interest. In the first particular, all do agree with
Aristotle and Plato. For no man can more faithfully give counsel, then he
that loves his King more then his gifts. Which of all other is the most
necessary to make one man trust another, and to believe that which he says.
For who will not credit that man whom he knows loves him, and in all that he
can, seeks to procure his good, without any respect to his own particular
interest? He (says Saint Gregory) that is fit to be a Favorite, must have a
love that is full, and dis-interessed. Nullus fidelior tibi ad consulendum esse
potest, Gregor. ex regist. li. 1 Epist. cap. 33.
quam qui non tua, sed te diligit: No man can be more faithful in aduising
thee, then he that loves not thine, but thee. This quality of Love and
friendship, Nazianzene likewise handles. Part. 2. Tit. 9. L. 5.
And a certain Law of the Partida makes mention thereof, saying, Que los, que
han de aconseiar los Reyes, han de ser amigos bien entendidos, y de buen seso:
That those, that are to counsel Kings, must be friends that have been
thoroughly known and tried, and that are of good understanding and judgment.
Solomon says, That he is a true Favorite indeed, that studies to walk in
cleanness of heart, and pureness of tongue; that is to say, when he shall
place all his care in serving his King with Love; and informing him nothing but
what is truth, and desiring him to walk in that way, which shall make most for
Gods service, and the good of the kingdom; Qualities sufficient for Favorites
to insinuate themselves into the grace and favor of good Princes. Saint John,
in the Apocalypse, sets before us (though somewhat darkly shadowed) a picture
of good Favorites and Councellers. Which were certain old men, clothed in
white, wearing Crowns on their heads. To be somewhat ancient, and well
stricken in years, was a quality wont to be required in those that were to
advise Kings, and give them good counsel, in regard of their great experience
and mature judgment, which commonly accompanies such kind of men. And they
are said to be clothed in white, because this color signifies a pure heart,
and a clear conscience, wherewith they ought to be as it were apparrelled and
adorned. How can he give good counsel that is not clothed in white? That has
not Cor candidum, a white and upright heart, pure and clean from those
affections and passions that may smutt and sullye it? And it is there likewise
set down, that every one of them had like a King, a Crown upon his head. To
give us thereby to understand, that he that is to give counsel unto Kings,
for the maintaining and upholding of a kingdom, and to remedy what is therein
amiss, may in some sort conceit himself to be a King; my meaning is, that he
is to give counsel, as if he himself were the King, and to advise for him,
as he would for himself, were he in his place: And that he is to give his
vote and opinion, as if the kingdom were his. And to be so free from expecting
or respecting his own particular interest, as if he were King himself. Who
neither expects nor pretends any merced, or reward, nor any addition of
honor, or otherwise in his kingdom, for that he has already attained to the
highest and supremest dignity, which is the Crown. In like manner, Kings
Favorites, and Counselors should live as free from pretensions, as if
(having already got the Crown) they had nothing more to pretend. Whose breast
and bosom must be as white and as pure as whiteness it self. And will be the
better able to judge betwixt white and black, right and wrong, by reason of
their many years, and long experience.

This kind of servants and friends, which must be the life and soul of their
actions; let Kings be very careful how they make choice of them, and receive
them into favor. For there is not any one thing, that does so much manifest a
Kings mind, as the election which he makes of his Favorites and Councillors
of State. For by them is his natural inclination as well known, as in a
workman, by his manufactures, is discovered the Art and Trade whereunto he is
most inclined. And therefore I shall make bold to advise Kings, that they make
such their Favorites, that are men of worth, wise, prudent, dis-interessed,
and of a noble and generous disposition. For by their choice, men make
judgment of their King accordingly. And likewise when the Kings grace and
favor shall fall upon good Subjects, his own glory will be the greater. Let
Kings (laying aside all affection) choose such as are men of knowledge and
experience, and that are powerful in persuading, and dissuading. That know how
to go in and out, with good satisfaction, amidst those so many, so diverse, and
such important businesses, as daily offer themselves; and to give good,
subtle, and grave answers, both by word of mouth, and by writing, to such
Ambassadors, and other great persons, that shall come to treat and negociate
with them. That have seen and read much, and have a general knowledge in all
things, but more particularly in the countries and Provinces that are under
their Kings command. That know what forces they are able to make, and to
understand the strength as well of their friends, as of their foes. Let them be
of a frank and liberal mind. For this virtue the common people much love and
affect, and are wonderfully well satisfied therewith. And on the contrary,
covetousness is much hated and abhorred by them. Let them (I say) be
bountiful, and desirous to do good to all in common, and to every one in
particular. In a word, let them be men well known to be faithful and trusty,
and such as love their Kings so well, as that they will prefer their
authority and reputation before their own, and study and endeavor in all,
and above all, what may make most for their good and advantage. That they be
wise, discreet, experienced, patient, without passion, disinteressed, and more
zealous of the public good, then of their private profit. For if they shall
regard their own interest and proper commodity, they are neither good for the
service of their Kings, nor for the government of the commonwealth. For, in
going about to measure out their priuacie by the yard of their particular
profit, they will make merchandise of all; and their doing good to others,
shall be for the benefiting of themselves. Nothing coming under their hands,
whereof (that they may not be accounted bad Cooks) they will not lick their
own fingers. The clingenst and strongest affection, is that of covetousness;
it is like the headache, which hinders the free use of man's faculties and
senses, not suffering him to do any thing that is good. And though it be
true, that there are other vices, of greater offense to God, and more hurtful
to a man's neighbor, yet this has I know not what mischief in it, and more
particularly in public persons, which does show it self more openly then all
the rest, and does breed, and nourish other sins, as the root does the
tree. Radix omnium malorum cupiditas; Quidam appetentes, 1. Tim. 6.
errauerunt a fide: Covetousness of money, is the root of all evil. Which
while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and tangled themselves with
many sorrows. Ex auaritia profecto (says Saint Ambrose) septem nequitiae
procreantur: Ambr. in Apelog. cap. 4.
scilicet, Proditio, fraus, fallacia, periurium, inquietudo, violentia, and
contra misericordiam, obduratio: There are seven kind of sins that proceed
from covetousness. viz. Treason, Fraud, deceit, Perjury, Inquietude, Violence,
and (which shuts the door to all pity and compassion) Hardness of heart.
Upon this foundation of covetousness, is built whatsoever tyrannical
imagination; and many through it, have, and do daily loose the faith, and that
loyalty which is due unto God, and their Kings. Auri cupiditas (says the same
Saint) materia est perfidiae; The love of gold is the cause of the loss of
faith. When this pulls a Favorite, it easily draws him aside, and carries him
headlong to all these vices; for it is of more force then the Lodestone, and
draws him more after them, then that does the iron; And is helped on the more
by the wind of vanity and ambition. The Philosopher Heraclitus says, That
those that serve Vanity and Covetousness, suddenly depart from Truth and
Justice, and hold that only for just and most right, which is directed aright
to their own private interest. And this only do they make their aim, in all
whatsoever they advise their King; as was to be seen in that so often repeated
case of King Assuerus, with his great Favorite Aman, of whom he demanded,
what grace and favor should be shown to that Subject, whom for his good
services, he desired to honor. Whereupon, the wind of vainglory working in
the head of him, and thinking this could be no man, but himself, showed
himself very magnificent and liberal in ordaining the honors and favors,
that were to be done unto him. The vain conceit of a covetous man, cuts out
for himself large thongs out of another man's leather. And when he grows a
little warm in the King his Masters bosom (poor snake as he was) with a
false and feigned love, he goes hunting after his commodity; and this
failing, his love also fails. For his heart stretches it self no farther to
love, then what his hands can come to take hold on. Elpan comido, y la compania
desecha (says the Proverb) No longer Cake, no longer company. Of such
friends, as these, the Prophet Michah bids us beware. For no friend, Micah 7.6.
Arist. lib. 8. Ethic. cap. 4.
that seeks his own gain, can ever (according unto Aristotle) be faithful
and loyal to his King. Let Kings (I say) consider once again, and have an
especial care, that those Favorites, whom he makes choice of for his
friends, be out of his own proper election, and approved by his own mind,
and by the opinion and fame of their virtue, and not intertaining them at any
time by the sole intercession of others, especially such as are great and
powerful, nor let them suffer themselves to be carried away with the secret
considerations of those familiar and particular persons which are about them,
nor by the insinuating and soothing persuasions of your flatterers and
Sycophants; Who, as they are men, work upon discourse, and corporal means,
altogether framing them in order to their own ends; Let them not give belief
and credit unto them, but to the common fame and good report that goes of them;
and thereon, let them place their ears and their understanding. For (as
Tacitus says) that is it which usually makes the best choice. For it is not to
be doubted, but that concerning such a ones virtues or goodness, we ought
rather to give credit to the general report, then to the voices of one or two.
For one, may easily be deceived, and deceive others by his tricks, and his
particular interest; but never yet could one deceive all; nor is it possible,
that all should in that their approbation, deceive another. As for those other
servants, which are to attend and weight upon the Kings person, more for
dignity of place, and for outward appearance and ostentation of greatness,
then for use and conueniencie; which likewise in their kind are very
necessary; let Kings a Gods name receive them into their service, either upon
the intercession of others, or out of other particular respects. For in this,
there is little hazard, and may easily chop and change them, if they prove not
good and fit for their turn. But in the choice of the former a great deal of
care must be taken, for the chopping and changing of them is very dangerous,
and unless there be very great cause for the doing of it, it breeds an opinion
of inconstancy; which as it cannot but be hurtful unto all, so is it of great
dishonor unto Kings, much weakening their authority. But say there be just
cause of removing them, why it is but as a Vomit; which howbeit it be true,
that it remoueth the malignant humor, and expells it from the stomach, yet
withal it carries the good likewise away with it, and makes an end of that
Subject it works upon, if it be too often used. For our horses we seek bits
and bridles, wherewith to make them to go well and handsomely, and if with
those they do not reign, and carry themselves according to our mind, we take
others; and when we find once that they are fitted as we would have them, we
never chop nor change, but still use the same. In like manner, it is not good
to chop and change either Favorites, or privy Councillors too often, but to
seek out such as are fit for their turn, and to carry such a hand over them,
as to bridle their insolency, and to reyne them in hard, if they find them
headstrong. For being that they are those horses which guide the chariot of a
Monarchy, if they be not well bridled, of a gentle and tender mouth, and an
easy reyne, they will play the iades, and break both their own necks and
their Masters. In a word, every King has, or at least represents two
persons, one public, the other private. And therefore his actions ought
likewise to be of two qualities. In those that are particular, let them proceed
therein as they will themselves, according to their own guste and pleasure;
but in those that are public, as shall make most for the public good. Having
still an eye to it is conservation and augmentation, and to the common
approbation of the people. And those qualities, which formerly we required in
Councellers of State, we here likewise conclude, that all of them are
necessary for Favorites. And if Kings peradventure (in regard of humane
imperfection) cannot meet with men so perfect, let them be as absolute, as
they can possibly light upon; at least, let them have these two qualities, of
love, and an unspotted life; And let not Kings content themselves that they
have them in a mediocritie, but in all perfection. For without these two, there
are not any Statuae^ so unprofitable, as are such men, being not good enough to
be staves, or to serve in the basest and vilest offices about a house, much
more unworthy to be Favorites, and privy Councillors.

And because the heart of man, which God has hid out of sight, to the end that
he might reserve it to be the seat and mansion of his love, is hard to be
known, and the thoughts thereof very secret and hid; for that by one and the
same instruments, it works and expresses it is conceits, be they false, or be
they true, it is necessary that by some means the truth or deceit of it is
words may be known, for to difference thereby the true love from the false.
Amongst other signs and conjectures whereof Kings may make use, for to know
the mind of those that are to hold so great and near a place about their
persons, and to treat and communicate with them as it were the secrets of
their souls; let them consider and observe very well, in what kind of manner
they do proceed, and have proceeded with those with whom they have formerly
held friendship, and to whom they stand indebted and obliged for courtesies
already done; if they shall see they carry themselves well toward them, and
perform all offices of true love and friendship, then may they be induced to
believe, that showing themselves loving and thankful to others, they will be
so toward them. And he that loves not him, whom he ought to love, out of
this or that other respect, will not love his King, do he never so much for
him. For this difference of more or less alters not the substance nor
condition. The true love of Favorites (they being such as they ought to be)
consists (as we said already) in loving their King dis-interessedly, and to
advertise him of all that, which is fitting and convenient for him, and that
all, or the most desire, that in their works and actions for their greater
perfection, there should be credit and estimation; And lastly, of all that
which (according to the more common opinion) requires reformation and
amendment (for only the works of the most high can be wholly inculpable) And
of that which may in some sort withdraw his Subjects love from him, and
aduising him thereof, work so with him for to gratify them in this or that
public benefit, whereby to wedge the peoples love the faster unto their Prince
and Sovereign. But false and feigned love, that runs a contrary course; it
always hunts after it is own commodity, it commends all, whatsoever his
Prince does; he excuses it in his presence, and qualifies it for good, just,
and convenient. Which being no other but a trick of Court-cunning, and though
they may well march under the standard of unknown enemies, yet are they
esteemed and rewarded as friends. And notwithstanding all this, their Kings
back is no sooner turned, but they murmr at him, or set others a work to
do it for them; Complaining, that in regard of the natural ill disposition of
Kings and great Princes cares (facile enough to hear smooth flatteries, but
too harsh and hard to hearken to the truth) they dare not for their lives tell
it him, nor adventure to give him the least distaste, though it concern him
never so near, and that they plainly see, the not doing of it cannot but
redound much to his hurt. And the true reason thereof is, for that the former,
love more the person of their Prince, then his fortune, and let him take it ill
or well, all is one, they will treat truth, especially in those things that may
concern his safety, or the good and quiet of his kingdom; and their good
mind, true heart, and plaine-honest meaning, make them bold to speak, without
fearing to offend, in that their good advice, which they shall give him. But
this second sort of Favorites love not his person, but his fortune; And these,
for their own proper interest, and that they may not hazard their hopes, dare
not speak the truth, though they see the danger before their eyes: as persons
that would easily alter their faith and loyalty, and take part with him whose
sword is strongest, and therefore care not though their King fall, so as they
may stand. And of such, it may be suspected that they desire a change, like
those which in gaming live by Baratos, who for their own benefit would have
fortune turn from the one to the other, their good wishes no longer following
their first man, as not hoping to have any more from him, then what they have
already received; not caring to see them blown up, one after another, so as
they may get by the bargain. And most certain it is, that those who so much
love themselves, and their own proper interest, there is no trusting of them;
for they have no love left either for their own Lord and Master, or any body
else. For such base souls, and vngenerate spirits, drowned and swallowed up in
those muddy materials of Interest, and Avarice, cannot love any other thing
with excellency, and in a noble fashion. And therefore it imports much, that
Favorites be dis roabed, and stripped quite and clean of all that, which goes
under the name of proper or self-love, private interest, useful friendship,
faction or kindred; and that they should be clothed with a wise and discreet
kind of goodness, which nor knows, nor can, nor will favor ought, but
virtue, and Justice, and that which is good and honest. It is likewise spoken
by way of Proverb, Quien ama a su Rey, ama a su gray: He that loves his King,
loves his flock. And he that is in the place of a Favorite, and so near
about his Kings person, ought to be as a common father to all his Subjects,
treating them as if they were his children, and procuring that not any one of
them may depart discontented from his presence, which would be the the only
Lodestone to draw all their love and affection toward him. So did that great
Favorite of the King of Syria, Naaman, whom all the people with a full and
open mouth, called Father, corresponding with him in the love of so many
sons, or children. For those that are seated in so high a place, have great
cause, for many reasons, to procure public love; and, together with the grace
of their Prince, to have the good wills and affections of the people; for this,
makes the other to be more durable and firm. For this is the natural misery
of great and powerful persons, that Envy and Greatness go always hand in
hand: the one still accompanying the other. And there is not any poison like
unto it, which moves and stirs up such violent pangs and passions in the
stomach, and more especially if it work upon the priuacie and inwardnesse of
Favorites with their Kings, as if that it self were not a true and sufficient
strong poison. Seeing that it is held for certain, that one word of a King,
nay (which is more) one angry look, or bended brow, has sent many a Favorite
to his grave. For (as Solomon says) the life of the Subject depends on the
countenance of the King. And if we will not believe him, let us see and observe
how many Favorites escape, which do not dye of that wound, or the fear
thereof; and more particularly with those Kings which are of that condition (as
one said) that there is not two fingers breadth between their smile and their
sword; to the end that this their priuacie might be had in the less esteem.
For your best Favorites are but like your better sort of fruits, which are
soonest subject to be worme-eaten. For Envy is a very worm, and has the same
qualities as a worm has; and spreads it self so far, that it extends it
self even to those that have been benefited by the Favorite; the
covetousness and risentment of that which they do not receive, working more
upon them then the Law of thankfulness, or of a grateful acknowledgement for
that, which they have received. So that we may say, That few are they who love
those from whose hand they have received some good, because it was no greater.
And those that have received none, that they are therein injured, and wronged.
So, that to qualify and temper this inconvenience, it shall be wisdom in
Favorites (and it will concern them to use all the means they can devise to
effect it) to procure to be wellbeloued. And no less in Kings to seek out
such as are modest, loving, affable, virtuous, honest, well beloved, and of a
grateful and thankful disposition.

CHAP. XXXV. How Kings ought to carry themselves toward their Favorites.
FOr to resolve this Question, and to give satisfaction to that which is here
proposed in this Chapter, it being a matter of so tender and dangerous a touch:
I will first lay for my foundation, a true point of doctrine in natural
Philosophy, celebrated with that sentence of the glorious Saint Austen; Amor
meus, pondus meum, illo feror, quocunque feror: The plummet which peaseth man,
and the wings wherewith the heart makes it is flight, is love, which does lead
the dance to all the other passions of the soul. And as those that sail in a
deep sea, with full sails, run on their course without any danger; but when
they draw near the shore, they take them down and ruffle them that they may
not run their ship upon some shelfe, or split it self against some rock; so
likewise, when the heart is lifted up unto the love of God, which is infinite
goodness, it may without peril plough the seas of this world, and with full
sails cut the Maine, without danger of shelues, quicksands, or rocks. For
(according to that saying of the glorious Saint Bernard) as the cause of our
loving God, is God himself: so, the measure of loving him, is to love him
without measure. Causa diligendi Deum, Deus est; modus dilectionis, fine modo
diligere. As the cause of our love is infinite; so must it be without tax or
limitation, wherein there can be no excess. But when the heart draws but
little water, and touches too close upon these things of the earth, which have
their goodness much limited, it will be high time, and very fit and
convenient, to strike the sails of our love, and to go on with a great deal
of caution and consideration, lest this our vessel should stick in the sands,
never to be gotten out again, or fall upon some rock or other of
unadvisedness and indiscretion. And this is so certain a truth, that albeit
the love to our parents be so natural, and obligatory, and so given us in
charge by God, with the promises of so many blessings on those children which
shall cumply with this love, and with so many threatenings on those that shall
fail therein; yet notwithstanding God himself will, that therein there should
be a limitation and moderation. Mat. 10.37.
Qui amat patrem, aut matrem, plus quam me, non est me diguus: He that loves
father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me. And the common old Adage
says, That friendship must go no further then vsque ad aras, and stop there.
And howbeit some would have the limit, which is here put to love, to be Death;
I say, that it is limit, is Reason, and obedience to Gods Commandments. For
when our Love shall come to encounter with them, it is to make a stand, and go
no further.

Our second ground or foundation whereon we shall build, is this, That in
Kings, next unto the love of God, and his Christian Religion, no love ought to
be like unto that, which they ought to bear unto their kingdoms, and
commonwealths; for the end, for which Kings were first instituted and ordained,
was the common good of their kingdoms. And as children have a natural
obligation to love their parents, because from them, they have received their
natural being; so Kings owe the like to their kingdoms and Commonwealths,
because next under God, they gave them their being of Kings, and that power and
authority, whereby they were to protect, defend, and augment them. Upon these
grounds and foundations must that love and friendship be laid, which is to be
held with Favorites. Loving them, and giving them power and authority,
conformable to that, which for this end shall be thought most convenient.
Senec. lib. 1. Epist. 3.
For albeit they (as Seneca says) keep the key of their Kings heart, and in
matters of secrecy and benefits, are preferred before the rest; yet this must
be done with a Christian kind of prudence and discretion. Having evermore an
especial care, that the force of his love be not so violent, and so
boundless, that to give content to one sole Favorite, he discontent all the
rest of his Subjects; and to show himself faithful and true unto him, break
that faith and truth, which he owes unto God, and his divine Law. And that he
proceed likewise therein with that freedom and liberty, that his Love may not
pass the bounds of reason, nor be (like some ships that are run on ground)
so surely settled, that he cannot get off when he will, and to turn that love
into hatred, and a full determination and resolution of punishment, when the
faults of a Favorite shall deserve his just displeasure Non habitabit in medio
domus meae, Psalm. 101.7.
qui facit superbiam, etc. Whosoever has a proud look, and an high stomach, I
will not suffer him. Mine eyes look unto such, as be faithful in the land,
that they may dwell with me. And whosoever leads a godly life, he shall be my
servant; but there shall no deceitful person dwell in my house. And he that
tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. As likewise it is just and meet,
that on the contrary, hatred, punishment, and chastisement, should be turned
into amity, love, and friendship, when the person hated, shall deserve well.
And this is the meaning of that ancient Proverb, Ama, tanquam osurus and odio
habe, tanquam amaturus. The drift and scope of all which is this; That when we
shall place our love and affection upon humane things, it be done with
aduisednesse, considering how subject they are to change and alteration. So
that, that which to day deserves our love, may to morrow deserve our hate: And
on the contrary, that which is disliked and abhorred, may merit our love, and
good esteem. And we have hereof a very good example in the foresaid King
Assuerus, who so soon turned that love which he bare unto Haman, into that
hatred, that he caused him to be hanged up; and Mar doche, that was condemned
to the gallows, he raised unto honor, and put him into that place of priuacie
and greatness, which proud Haman so lately enjoyed. Nor can Favorites have
cause to complain, if it be granted unto them, that their priuacie may reach
so far, that their Kings may love them, as they do their own royal persons.
But it is a doctrine received by all the Philosophers, That the rule of that
true friendship and love, which one man bears unto another, is to be measured
and considered by that which every man bears unto himself. And that which
equals it self in this, is very perfect love. Amicitiae lex prescribitur, vt
non minus, Aug. lib. 1. Soliloq. ca. 3.
nec plus quisquam, amicum suum, quam seipsum diligat. The Law of friendship
is, that a man should not love his friend less, or more, then himself. Nemo
(says Saint Paul) animam suam odio habet, sed nutrit, and fouet eam: Ephesians.
5.29.
No man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it. And
yet notwithstanding this self-love ought so to be ordered by reason, that
whenever it shall desire any thing contrary thereunto, it must sharply be
denied it. Acriter reijciendus est (says the learned Saint Chrysostom) In
like manner, when Favorites shall crave or desire any thing contrary to
reason, or the public good of the commonwealth, they must be denied, what
they demand, and Kings upon those occasions must show themselves severe and
austere toward them. And this doctrine is so clear and so plain, that our
Savior Christ left it for a pattern unto Princes, in that answer of his which
he gave unto his two kinsmen and Favorites, John and James, when he told
them; Nescitis, quid petatis; Potestis bibere calicem? etc. Ye know not what ye
ask. Can ye drink of the cup, etc. Non est meum dare vobis, sed quibus
paratum est a Patre meo. To sit on my right hand, Mark. 20.37.
and on my left hand, is not mine to give, but it shall be given unto them,
for whom it is prepared. And howbeit the words in this answer have so many
sundry expositions, and diverse constructions, as the Interpreters upon this
place do render; yet have I noted three things therein, worthy the
consideration, and of much conueniencie for Kings. In the first place, I
observe the tartness and sharpness of the answer, together with the
ill-aduised and indiscreete request of those two Favorites, set down in these
three words: Nescitis quid petatis: Ye know not what ye ask. And when
Favorites shall not weigh and consider with themselves, what, and how they
ask; Let Kings bethink themselves, what, and how they give. And let them not
give so much to one, as may give occasion to all the rest to murmr, and
complain. And let them likewise take into their consideration, that the common
condition of your Favorites, is like unto that of other particular men, still
to desire to better themselves in their estate and degree. And therefore it
shall be a great point of wisdom, not to grant unto them all that they shall
ask; as here our Savior Christ advises Kings. Wotting well, that though they
grant them their request, yet are they not contented therewith, but rather take
heart and courage unto them to crave more and more, and with greater
earnestness then they did before. For, Ambition and Covetousness are not
satisfied, nor slackened with abundance, but are like unto those that are sick
of the Dropsy, who the more they drink, the more they thirst. And besides
this heaping of honor upon honor, and gift upon gift, has a greater danger
with it, in regard of those persons that receive them. For most certain it is,
that the appetite of man is Hydropicall, which the more he drinks, the more
he thirsts; and the more he gets, the more he desires. And Princes may
give so much, that like Lucifer, they may come at last to covet and desire
that, which their Kings possess. What an honorable creature was he, and of
what singular parts, yet did he rebel against his Creator, out of Envy and
Pride, and only occasioned through those many graces and favors which God had
enriched him withal. And for that we are all of us creatures, the like may be
feared from us; Being that we are not so incapable of this, as was that Angel
of that which he desired. And it is fit, that we should leave our selves
something to give; for ordinarily we do all of us desire (a quality wherewith
man's appetite is well acquainted) and which has caused the greatest and the
foulest falls. For who is he, that would not (if he could) have command, and be
a King? And we ought likewise to keep something in our hands to bestow, that
we may not grow weary of serving, being we can expect no further favors, nor
look for any more rewards. For this also is very natural, and a fashion of
ancient standing with most men, to wax weary of standing at a stay, not
contenting themselves to continue that grace, place, and rewards, which they
have already acquired; but hold that for an affront, being now grown rich,
which before they would have taken for a great favor, when they were poor.
Thus do we grow unthankful; and thus do we grow forgetful, being vainly
carried away with the conceit of what we are. And we loose the sight of that
low and mean estate, wherein we were, by being raised to that highth and
eminency, wherein we see our selves to be seated. A natural fault in man's
eyesight, which knows not how to look downward; and as unwilling to look
backward, but as much forward as you will. But these forward birds, do well
deserve to have the wax, wherewith their wings are fastened, to be melted by
that very Sun, that gave them their first warmth and light, and by their fall
to be left an example to the world, to terrify others. And in case, for some
especial respect, Kings shall resolve with themselves, that all the beams of
their greatness shall illighten and give life to one particular person, let
the foundation of their favors be laid upon those qualities, deserts, and
services, which ought to concur on those persons on whom they purpose thus to
particularize.

Kings likewise are to consider the Petitions of those that sue unto them;
which is my second observation, and taught by Christ himself: Mark. 10.38.
Potestis bibere calecem, quem ego bihiturus sum? Can ye drink of the cup that
I drink of? Judging by himself, in this demand which he makes to these his
Favorites, who so rashly and unadvisedly came unto him to petition him for the
two principal places, that for to possess them, they should have all
sufficient and requisite necessaries; upon which point Christ examines them;
and the like examination ought Kings to make of those qualities, specified by
us, touching both Pretenders and Favorites.

The third thing which I recommend to your consideration, and which Christ
teaches Kings, is, the great caution and wariness which they are to use, in
not being too facile, in granting all that their Favorites shall require of
them. Which is to be gathered out of the last words of this his answer: Non
est meum dare vobis: It is not mine to give. Which, to my seeming, sounds
thus; It will not stand with my truth and justice, to give for kindreds-sake,
or other humane respects, that which my eternal Father has prepared for those
which deserve best. Kings ought to be very circumspect in promising, and not
over easy in granting; for, if he shall be facile in granting what others
shall desire, he may have cause to repent himself; and if he promises, he
loses his liberty. A great gentleman of quality, whom King Philip the second
much favored for his worthy parts, and great abilities, talking one day with
him, and walking a good while with his Majesty, after that he had discoursed
with him of diverse things, to the Kings so great good content and liking, that
he thought with himself, that there was now a fair occasion offered unto
him, to propound unto him (as he did) a business of his own. He told a friend
of his, anon after that he came from him, that is that very instant he
proposed it, he cast such a strange an dainster^ look toward him, as if he
had never seen him before. Which was no want of affection in the King toward
him, for he had had many sufficient testimonie^ thereof; but because it was
fitting for so wise and prudent a King to have that circumspection, lest this
his affection might minister occasion unto him to call his discretion in
question, in granting, or not granting that which either is not, or at least
shall seem unto him, not to be convenient for him. For Kings must have
recourse to these two things; To have a good and safe conscience with God, and
entire authority, and good opinion with men. For with none does that holy and
prudent counsel of Saint Paul suite more properly, then with them; 2. Cor.
8.21.
Prouidemus bona, non solum coram Deo, sed etiam coram hominibus: Providing for
honest things, not only in the sight of the Lord, but in the sight of men.
Which cannot be, when as Favorites either do all what they list of
themselves, or get their Kings to do it for them. When the Sensitive appetite
effects whatsoever it affects, the understanding (which is the souls king)
remains oppressed and disgraced, and with that foul note, which the kingly
Prophet David gives it; Homo, cum in honor esset, non intellexit, Psalm. 49.12.
comparatus est inmentis insipientibus and similis factus est illis: Man being
in honor has no understanding, he is like the beasts that perish. And
therefore when Kings out of their particular affection, or for the avoiding of
trouble, and the fulier inioying of their case and pleasure, shall give
absolute power to their Favorites to do and undo, as they please, presently
one blot or other (which they will hardly ever get out) will be laid upon
their royal persons. Nor need we herd to relate the hurt which comes thereby,
and the occasion which it gives unto the Subjects, neither to think nor speak
of their Princes with that respect which is fitting; especially when the
Favorites are none of those which help to bear the weight and burden of
businesses, but shake them off from their own shoulders, and lay them upon
other that are fitted to their hand, and of whom they rest well assured, that
they will do nothing but what they will have them to do, working their will
and pleasure in all that they are able. And this is not that which Kings and
Common wealths need: but it much imports, that their Favorites should be of
that good and quick dispatch in businesses, that all the people might love
them for it; for from the contrary great inconveniences are wont to arise. When
the Shechemites were so unmannerly and uncivil in their language against their
King Abimilech, amongst other things which they uttered and alleged against
him, they said this in scorn of him; Nunquid non est filius Ierobael, Iud 9 28.
and constituit Principem Zabul sernum suam super viros Hemor patris Sichem,
cur ergo seruiemus ei? Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? Is not he
the son of Ierubbaal, and Zebul his Officer? why should we serve him? etc.
They took it very ill, that the King should raise his servant Zabul to that
height of honor and greatness, that he should be made Prince, as it were,
over all the people of Hemor and Sichem. And howbeit the natural obligation,
which Subjects owe to their Kings, is so great, that they are bound to obey
them in all that which is not against God; And that it is a token of great
noblenes, to suffer with a good courage, whatsoever burdens, be they never so
heavy, which they lay upon them; yet notwithstanding they have no such
obligation to their Favorites. For they may, for their pleasure, or their
profit, substitute other their Favorites, and oblige the people, that they
either negociate with, or buy out their negotiation of them. The History of
King Don I^^n the second of Castile, does afford sufficient examples of the
great persecutions that followed, by letting that his Favorite have so great a
hand in businesses. For the people seeing their King so led by the nose, as it
were, and to yield to all that he would have him do, were verily persuaded
that he was bewitch't; for he had such power over the will and understanding of
the King, that he neither understood what he gave, not knew not how, or at
least had not the face to deny him any thing, that he was willing either to
ask, or take; whilst like the unthankful yuie, he went sucking away all the
juice and sap of the tree, all that good Kings wealth and substance, his
being, his authority, and little less then his kingdom. And lost by this
means so much of his authority, that some of the Grandes of the kingdom, and
the Infantes, his brethren, and the Kings of Aragon, and Navarre, betook them
to their Arms, and made war against him; he seeing himself upon some
occasions disobeyed by his son and Prince, and forsaken of his wife and
Queen. Whereupon grew many civil broils, and all under the title and pretext
of recovering their liberty, and of pulling their necks from under the yoke
of that slavery and subjection wherein they were, rendering that reason in
their excuse, which all the whole kingdom could but take notice of, That all
businesses past through his Favorites hands, and that the King did not
negociate in his own person. The prosecution whereof I remit to those
Histories that make mention thereof. And it cannot be denied, that this
Favorite notwithstanding had many good things in him, that might very well
deserve his Kings love; for he had served him valiantly in great and urgent
occasions, and had put his person and life in peril for his sake. But as his
priuacie and favor went increasing, so with it increased his ambition and
covetousness, and that in that high degree, that he grew hateful to the whole
kingdom; and in the end no less odious to the King himself: who coming at
length unto himself, fell into the account of those damages and losses, which
he had received in his kingdom, both in his reputation and authority, by
putting the reins wholly into his hands, taking thereby too much liberty to
himself, and ruling the State as he listed. The Grandes represented to his
Majesty the abuses that insued thereupon, as the engrossing of the greater
Offices, and selling of the lesser, and ouerswaying the Courts of Justice; And
using many other effectual persuasions, grounded upon other just complaints,
proposing for remedy and redress thereof, the interest and profit that might
accrue unto him, by calling him to account, and that he might thereby get into
his hands an infinite deal of treasure; the King liked very well of their
propositions, and admitting their reasons, he fell off from his Favorite,
waging war against him with his own money, wherewith he thought, if need
should serve, to sustain and uphold himself. This slippery footing have all
those things which have not their hold-fast in God. For they turn to the hurt
of those that put their trust in them. And it is his mercy to mankind, that
they should pay for it in this life, howsoever they speed in the life to come;
which we will leave to Gods justice, and the strict account that will be taken
of them. In conclusion, this great Favorite dyed, being fallen from his
priuacie with his Prince, deprived of all that wealth and treasure which he had
so greedily scraped together, ending his life with a great deal of sorrow and
discontent, and to the great rejoicing of his opposites. Though this did not
serve for a warning to those that came after him, but without fear of the like
terrible and desperate falls, they ran themselves out of breath in the
pursuit of the like priuacie. Ioh. 3.29.
Saint John Baptist (we know) was Christ's great Favorite; and the Gospel
styles him to be Amicus Sponsi, the friend of the Bridegroom. But his great
goodness and holiness of life did the more gloriously show it self in this,
that by how much the more Christ did in-greaten and authorize him, by so much
the more did he lessen and humiliate himself; and labored by all possible
means, by diminishing his own, to increase the authority and credit of his
Lord and Master, saying, Illum oportet crescere, Ioh. 3.30.
me autem minui: He must increase, but I must decrease: And this is that glass
wherein the Favorites of Kings are to look; taking into their consideration,
that by how much the more they seek to greaten themselves, in making
ostentation of their power and authority; by so much the more they lessen and
dis-authorise that of their Kings, with whom, is so dangerous any whatsoever
show, or shadow, of equality, or competition, that even in the highest top of
priuacie, the more certain, and less reparable, usually, is the fall. How
iocond, and how well contented went Haman out of the palace, when Queen Esther
invited him to dine with the King and her self. When lo, the very next day
after they draggd him from that banquet and royal Table to the gallows. And
therefore let no man trust or rely on the favor of Kings, be he never so
rich, or never so fortunate; for in them it is ordinarily seen, that all these
fair shows are commonly converted into manifest demonstrations of hatred.

Out of all this that hitherto has been said, let Favorites make unto
themselves this use and instruction, to know the danger and slipperinesse of
the place wherein they stand, even then when they find themselves most of all
inthronized. For most true is that saying, of, Fulmen petit culmen; The highest
Towers, and the highest hills are most of all subject to Jones thunderbolts,
and lightning. And let Kings likewise take this into their consideration by way
of advice, That when they shall have found their Favorites to be furnished
with those qualities before specified, and that they are such, that thereby
they may merit their grace and favor, and so great, both place and part in
their heart, it stands with very good reason, that they shou d be honored by
them with particular mercedes and favors, because they help them to bear the
burden of their cares, and are exposed to great dangers, and greater enuyings;
as it happened to that great Favorite of the King of Persia, whom the Princes
of his kingdom did pretend to remove from the Kings elbow, and to put him in
the den amidst the Lions, that by them he might be there rent in pieces.
Whereof, no other cause could be found against him, but his Kings favor,
bearing envy to his priuacie (that common Moath to high places) from which
none, be he never so good, never so honest, can escape. For, it is very
natural in men to risent, that he should outstrip them, who but yesterday
was their fellow and companion. They hold that honor for an injury, that is
done to their equal, and think themselves go backward, and loose of their
authority and reputation, if another be preferred before them. Which is such
an offense, that God presently takes notice of it, and passes it not over
without punishment. For this priuacie with Kings is a thing of his disposing,
and for such ends as he pretends; and there is not any Subject, that rises to
such great place, but that he must pass through the weights and balance of
his divine providence, who chooses these, and refuses those, using them as
means to work his secretends. Prou. 29.26.
Many (says Solomon) seek the Rulers favor, but every man's judgment comes
from the Lord. The election comes from God, it is not so much the King, that
chooses them, as God, who moves his heart thereunto. And if he do uphold them
with his powerful hand, in vain is it for others to go about to trippe up
their heels. For (as Saint Cyprian says) Calamitas sine remedio est, Cypr. de
zelo, and liuo.
odisse foelicem. To hate an happy and fortunate man, is a misfortune beyord
all remedy; it is a torment and putrefaction of the heart, which is ever
gnawing and martyring of the soul.

CHAP. XXXVI. Whether the Kinsfolk and friends of Favorites are to be
excluded from Offices.
THis place requires that we auerre that, which amongst discreet persons, and
such as are zealous of the common good, is usually called in question, and made
a doubt: To wit, whether or no, it be inconvenient, that the Kinsfolk,
friends, and followers of Kings Favorites should be put into places of Office
and Government? For, it cannot but seem an unreasonable thing, that those who
have such parts and qualities as well deserve to be employed in such places of
charge and command, should therefore only and eo nomine, be excluded from
them, for that they have alliance and friendship with the said Favorites.
Being that this, in it self, is not ill. Besides the love and affection which
Kings bear unto their Favorites, cannot (like your bad-made-clothes) so
shrink upon themselves, or be so straight-laced, that it shall not likewise
extend it self to the friends and allies of those, to whom they profess so
much love. Again, a good, if not a greater part of these men's happiness and
content, consists in being able to do good, and to raise their friends.

But for the better satisfying of this doubt, it is fit that we should first
consider and distinguish of the quality of the persons of this Alliance and
friendship with those Favorites, as also of the condition and quality of
those offices. For in your offices there are some of grace, and some of
Justice. In the distribution of the former, we are to look no further then to
grace, and the Kings good will and pleasure. In the latter to that distribution
which is agreeable to distributive Justice. There is likewise a great
difference in the persons. For some are of better qualities and deserts, then
other some. And these are in all provisions that are made to be first
preferred, be they, or be they not, of kin and acquaintance with the
Favorites. And there are many good reasons that make for their part. Others
there are, that are inferior in merit, and the foresaid qualities; and these
in no wise, may or ought to be preferred for the kindred or friendship which
they hold with Favorites. For it were a sin of accepting of persons, which
is contrary to distributive Justice. Others there are, that are every way
equal with the rest of the pretenders; and on this Hinge, hangs the force of
the Question. Now if they shall stand in this equality, and upon these equal
terms with the rest, in those qualities that are fitting for Office, it
seems that they should receive some wrong, in being excluded without any
fault of theirs; For it is no fault, to be the friend or kinsman of a
Favorite. To this doubt, the answer would be made the more difficult, if your
Favorites through their too much ambition and covetousness had not taught us
the great inconveniences which result in a Commonwealth, by opening this door
unto them, and conferring the said Offices on their friends and Allies, under
color and pretext that they are as well deserving as others. First of all, for
that Kings, as Shepherds and common parents of the whole Commonwealth, are to
make a distribution of honors, and of wealth, equally reparting and dividing
them, in that indifferent manner, that they may reach to all houses and
families, or at least to extend them as far as they are able. Like a good
Husbandman, who, that he may have a good and plentiful crop, throws and
scatters his seed on this side, and that side, and every where. Secondly, for
that it is a very odious thing, and which breeds bad blood, and ingendreth
ill humors in those who only in regard of this their kindred and friendship,
see themselves deprived and dedebarred of that, which they might otherwise
challenge by desert. And others on the other side, when they see that they can
neither come to be kinsmen, nor friends, nor of familiar acquaintance with
Favorites (which are the references that must prefer them) the first nature
having denied it them; the other their bad fortune, or the Favorites
disaffection, seeing themselves hopeless of all help and remedy, either they
run themselves headlong into some desperate attempt, or at least fall to
flagge in their virtue; either of which cannot choose but be of great
inconvenience to the Commonwealth. Thirdly, for that it is not fitting, that
Favorites should come to be very powerful, either in their own proper wealth
and substance, or in the greatness and strength of their friends and Allies. For
the more they increase in these, the more do their Kings decrease; and
sometimes it has been seen to grow to that excess, that powerful Princes
have seen, or at least imagined themselves to be of lesser power then they
could have wished it, or had been needful to have repressed, and cut short the
ambitious wings, and high flowne insolences of their Favorites. Fourthly, for
that under this color, occasion might be given to Favorites to dispose in
such sort of the government of kingdoms, that Kings should not come to the
knowledge of ought that passes in them, be it good or bad, more then shall
stand with the good liking of their Favorites, and make most for their own
ends. So that, neither those that are wronged, shall find means to be
righted; nor those that are zealous of the common good, and of their Kings
authority and reputation, be admitted to advertise and give notice unto him,
of that which does most concern him. For Kings, by reason of their
retiredness, cannot come to the full knowledge of all that passes. One of the
things wherewith they charged that great Favorite of King Don Iuan, in that
sentence which they pronounced against him, was, That he had put into the
offices of the Kings house, and without his house, and in places of government,
persons that were tied and wedged to his house, either by fee-tayle, or by
friendship. I refer my self to that, which the sentence says, speaking in
the person of King Don Iuan the second. And it is not to be doubted, that when
Favorites shall wholly apply themselves to seize upon all the Ports, thereby
to know all, and so to stop up all the doors and passages, that none can
come to negociate with their Kings, but by their hands, it is no other but a
binding of their Kings hands, and to oppress them with a palliated and cloaked
kind of tyranny, with relation to their private Interest. And because from our
very first entrance into this our discourse, our purpose was to confirm
whatsoever we proposed, by the testimonies of holy Scripture, to the end that
no man upon any false presupposall, should so much as surmise, or think, that
we go about to tread too near upon the heels of Favorites, I will likewise
remit my self in this particular, to that Letter registered in the Scripture,
which that great King Artaxerxes wrote to all the Dukes and Princes, and to all
his vassalls of 127. Provinces of his kingdoms, wherein with indeared reason
he propounds the insolences and tyrannies, exercised by Favorites, who
using amiss the favors and mercedes, which their Kings do them, seek to all
things before them, with a high hand. And for that the holy Ghost would have
all this set down in the sacred History, we may here very well intersert some
part thereof, which is well worthy the noting, Multi, Esther 16.2.
bonitate principum, and honor, etc. Many, the more often they are honored
with the great bounty of their gracious Princes, the more proud they are waxen;
And endeavor to hurt not our Subjects only, but not being able to bear
abundance, do take in hand to practice also against those that do them good.
And take not only thankfulness from among men, but also lifted up with the
glorious words of lewd persons that were never good, they think to escape the
justice of God, that sees all things, and hates evil. Oftentimes also, the
fair speech of our friends put in trust to manage the affairs, have caused
many that are in authority to be partakers of innocent blood, and has
inwrapped them in remediless calamities. Beguiling with the falsehood and
deceit of their lewd disposition, the innocence and goodness of Princes, etc.
And it oftentimes comes to pass, that the good actions and intentions of
Kings are hindered, and the light of their Justice eclipsed, by the
interposition of some terrestrial body, which does darken the glory thereof,
as the interuention of the earth, obscureth the Sun. And the public
misfortunes which befall the commonwealth, and the particular wrongs and
iniustices, which men by this means must endure, even under the reign of a
just and religious King, make his Empire hateful; for it is a natural
property incident to the vulgar, when any misfortune shall befall a State, to
remove the blame from themselves, and to lay the fault upon those that are of
greater rank and quality. But to return to our intended purpose, I say, That
in the Offices of Justice (I mean) wherein distributive Justice requires
consideration of merit, way is not to be given to the friends and kinsfolk of
Favorites, but respect rather to be had to the common good, wherein is to be
used the fore-specified wariness and circumspection. And in such sort may the
risentment and complaints of the kingdom increase, that howbeit the said
friends and kinsmen, should in their abilities have the advantage of others,
yet ought they to be excluded. For this reason, in point of weal public, is
of more weight and consequence, then any sufficiency whatsoever in those other
pretenders. Marry, in those other offices which we call Offices of grace, (for
that they neither have the administration of Justice, nor government, the hand
may be stretched out in a freer manner unto those that have any reference of
amity or alliance unto Favorites. But these offices are but few, and of no
great importance; and in case an exact consideration should be had, there
being not that office, be it never so small, wherein a man shall not meet
with some opposites and pretenders, we must not be too hasty, but hold the
hand awhile, that fitting provision might be made according to the qualities
and merits of the person. One, that was a principal Counselor of State,
certified a certain grave and worthy person, that he being Alcalde de Corte,
the common hangmans office fell void, and that he was so earnestly sued unto,
and such intercessions therein used, that he was faigne to make two, the better
to cumply with his own obligation, and their importunity. And of the
Catholic Queen Donna Isabel, it is said, That when she governed the State,
together with King Don Fernando, her husband, there fell by chance a paper from
forth her sleeue, wherein she had written with her own hand; Let the Cryars
place of such a City be bestowed upon such a one, for that he has the best
voice. And if in so mean an office, these Catholic and prudent Princes had
such great care and respect to the qualities of the persons; what care ought
there to be had in those of Justice and government? What in Ecclesiastical
dignities, which are the pillars of our sacred Religion? When the day of that
strict and rigorous account shall come, which God shall require at their hands,
they will then see how much this did import them.

Let then the final resolution of this question be, That supposing that the
natural inclination of Favorites, is to benefit all, and that those that are
nearest unto them, for what respect soever it be, are to be preferred unto
Honors and Offices, I will not straighten them so much, nor my words, and
counsel, and seem to be too much republike, and entire, in condemning all
their actions; for that it has been a thing always permitted to those that
are put in such high places. But I would not have it pass for a rule, in the
provision of public offices, through which have past such persons as well
understood what belonged to State affairs, and the conservation of Kings, and
their kingdoms, and that were complete in all kind of good learning and
knowledge; who witting, that those, who had power with their Kings, would
favor those that were theirs, out of that inclination which is common to all
men, have not stickt to say, that this may be done, but with this
consideration, that it be not to the hurt of the commonwealth. For there is
not that ground, plant, or man, so barren, but has some virtue in it, and is
good for some Ministry or other. In confirmation whereof, we are likewise to
consider, that in natural things, there is not any so vile, and so base, which
always, and at all times is unprofitable. And there are some cases, wherein
Experience has taught the profit, that may be taken therefro, for the use and
conservation of man's life. And on the other side, there is nothing so precious,
so estimable, and so wholesome, which is always, and at all times, profitable.
For there are some, as also some infirmities, which would prove mortal, should
they be applied unto them. And therefore man's prudence does come to consist in
this, to know it is quality, and to understand aright the estate and complexion
of the man, and according thereunto to make use thereof, and of it is virtue.
And therefore he that has (by his Kings favor) the supreme disposal of all,
let him consider and know, either by himself, or by others that are his
confident friends, (being as free, as free may be, from natural affections)
the dispositions and inclinations of men, and together with this, the quality
of the offices, and persons, which are to govern, and be governed; and let
him imply every one in that, for which he shall be found fit and good. And
keeping this course, he shall cumply with his own inclination, and natural
desires. And shall therein do his King and country good service. But for a
conclusion and vpshot of all that is past, let those aduertisements serve,
which follow in the subsequent Chapter.

CHAP. XXXVII: The Conclusion of the former Discourse, with some Aduertisements
for Kings and Favorites.
ALL those that write of the qualities of a good Prince, do agree in this,
that he ought to have his will free, independent, subject only to God, and his
divine Law; without subiecting, or submitting it to any other love. For it
booteth little, that he be Lord of many kingdoms, if he be a slave to that
which he extremely loves. That he ought to be of a good courage, and of a
sound and settled iungement, not suffering a superior, or equal in his
government: For (as we said in the beginning of this Discourse) kingdoms are
by so much the more sustained, and augmented, by how much the more near they
approach to the government of one. Whereas on the contrary, they run much
hazard, when the reins of the Empire are divided, and put into several hands.
The Romans never enjoyed so much peace and plenty, as after that Augustus
Caesar was declared sole Lord of the Empire, without dependence on any other.
Which advise (amongst many other good instructions) the Emperor Charles the
fifth gave likewise unto the King his Son, to wit, That he should be a very
precise lover of Truth; That he should not give himself over unto Idleness;
And that he should always show himself a free and independent King; not only
in appearance, but in substance. For it is very proper unto Kings to rule, not
to be ruled. And to administer their kingdoms themselves by their own will,
and not by another. For he will not be said to be a King, who being to
command, and correct all, should easily suffer himself to be led away, and
governed by others. And therefore it is fit, that he should always stand upon
his own bottom, and in none of his actions express himself to depend on the
aid and opinion of others. For this were to acknowledge a Superior, or a
Companion in government, and to discover his own weakness. Infirma enim est
potentia (says Patritius) quae alienis viribus nititur: Patri, to. 2. li. 21.
Tit. 3.
That Is but a poor power, that must be vnder-propt by the strength of others.
In stead whereof, I would have him to sit in Council, and to treat and
communicate businesses with such persons to whom it appertains, as heretofore
I said. Saying only now, That that King is in a miserable and lamentable case,
that must depend on another help. Upon a certain occasion, Alexander the
Great said; Se malle mori, quam regnare rogando: That he had rather die, then
reign by supplicating and entreating. And no otherwise does that King reign,
who shows himself a Coward, and suffers the excellency of his courage to be
overwhelmed and carried away with the current of hard and difficult things,
which many times offer themselves, leaving the resolution of all to the mercy
and favor of others, by whose helping hand it seems that he lives and
reigns. This (said the Emperor Vespasian) is to dye standing. And as that
King is dead, which leaves that to another which he can do himself, and
which does properly appertain unto his office; and as he shall not truly
cumply with his obligation, if he should go about to draw solely to himself
the government of his whole kingdom; much less in like manner shall he cumply
therewith, if he should cast off all care from himself, and rely wholly upon
others. For Extremes, in all things, are ill. And an extreme thing it were,
that he should take upon himself the whole weight and burden of businesses,
and to have all things pass through his own hands; it being likewise no
less, if he should shift off all from his own shoulders, and put his hand to
nothing, as did Vitellius, and Iouinianus, who did in such sort dis-loade
themselves of their offices, and rid their hands of all matter of government,
that all was ordered and governed by other men's arbitrament, and none of
theirs. Of the former it is reported, that he forgot that he was Emperor. And
of the other, that he intended nothing but eating and drinking, gaming and
whoring. So that both of them came to such miserable ends, as their retchlesse
and careless kind of living had deserved. Childericke, King of France, and
third of that name, is (and not without just cause) condemned by the writers of
those times, for that he did wholly quit himself of businesses, and led so
idle and unprofitable a life, that he took care of nothing, recommending all
to his great Favorite Pipine, who did rule and govern him as he listed. And
there was not any meeting or conversation throughout the kingdom, wherein men
did not mutter and murmr at it. For their nimble and active nature could by
no means endure, that their King should be but the shadow of a King, and stand
for a Cipher, sheltering himself under the shade of another. Which could not
choose (considering how usual a thing it is) but put spirit into Pipine, and
add metal to his power. For it is very proper to the condition of men, the
more high they are in place and dignity, to desire the more honor, and the
more wealth. There are but few of your great and powerful persons, which are
not hydropicall, and do not thirst after new honors, and new aduancements;
And some have proceeded so far in their pretensions, that they have presumed
(as this Favorite did) to quit the King of his Crown. Willingly hearkening
unto those flatterers about him, which did whisper this in his ear, and egg
him on unto it. It likewise began to be treated of amongst the great Lords of
that kingdom, How much better command and rule were in one Head, then in two:
And how that all kingdoms had evermore a desire to have but one Prince; And
that all prudent and wise men, have (in reason of State) held this government
to be the best and surest; and that it was not fit, that the uniform body of a
commonwealth, or kingdom, should be subject and obedient to two Heads: To
wit, that one should enjoy the name and title of King, and the other possess
the power. And that it were better that all should obey one, that had wisdom
and experience, and that had been bred up in businesses, and the mannaging of
State-affaires, whereby to govern them in peace and Justice. And sithence,
that in Pipine these qualities did concur, and that on him all the businesses
of importance did depend, it were good that he should be their King, and that
Childericke should take his ease and pleasure. Hereupon they treated with
Pipine, who though he gave ear unto what they said, yet would not rashly
adventure himself to accept of the Crown, unless Pope Zacharias might first
be consulted therein. Whereupon they sent their Ambassadors, who had
instruction to render such reasons to the Pope, that might move him to approve
thereof, and judging Childericke to be unfit for the government, might absolve
the French of their oath which they had taken, and that obedience which they
ought to their King, and that he should deprive him of the kingdom, and
further declare, That since Pipine did rule and command all, and had so many
good indowments, that he might likewise be invested with the title of King.
And the Archbishop of Maguncia was the man, that was nominated to set the
Crown on his head, and to declare him to be King of all France. Being thus
backed, they summoned a Parliament, degraded the poor seely king, and thrust
him into a Monastery, and Pipine was sworn and proclaimed King of those so
many kingdoms and Signories, as were then subject to the Crown of France.
There remains testimony hereof in the Decretals. C. Alius 16. q.
Hence had it is first beginning, and that hand and power given unto Popes, in
so great a business, as the setting up and pulling down of Kings; and which
is more, of creating new Emperors, and depriving the old ones of their Empire.
Whereof there are many examples. And that which this Pope did with that King,
who had no more then that vmbratill, and apparent power, other Popes afterward
did the like with Henry's and Fredericks, and other Tyrants of great puisance
and power. The one offend in the more: the other in the less. The one, out of
the ambition that they have to be Kings, that they may command, and do all,
loose all, and so go to hell. And the other go the same way, for that they will
not be (as they should be) Kings, but give themselves wholly unto idleness.
It was the Emperor Galba's utter overthrow, that he had put the whole
government into only three men's hands, which he brought along with him,
possessing them with so much power, that he was not Master of himself,
depending still upon their will, and through that great authority which they
had, they overthrew all whatsoever their King did ordain, thrusting their
arms (as we say) up to the elbowes in all affairs, and making use of their
present fortune. And for that this unfortunate Emperor could take notice of no
more, then what he had from them; for none (without their permission) could,
or see, or speak with him, they made him to do that, which that other Potter
did, who going about to make a pot, to boil meat in, made a Jar, to put
drink in. And he thinking to substitute Judges, that should administer
Justice, appointed thieves in their place, which robbed the Commonwealth. All
which was imputed unto him. And for that Vanity is the mother of so many vices,
all this their great favor served to no other use, but to cause their
Sovereign to commit many actions of injustice, and indiscretion, and of
unheard of, and unthought of wrongs, violently breaking through the ordinary
course of Justice. By which exorbitant proceedings, this imprudent Emperor
grew to be hated and abhorred of all, and not being able longer to bear with
him, they deprived him at once of his life, and Empire. And these kind of
Caterpillars (said the Emperor Sigismund) make those Kings unfortunate, Aeneas
Siluester de doct. Sigismund.
that put their affiance in them. At this careless ward, lived at first
Agesilaus, King of the Lacedaemonians, though afterward (like a wise Prince)
he did rectify this error. And the case was this; He let his friend and
Favorite Lisander carry a great hand over him, and did honor him in all that
he could, expressing always much love unto him; Lysander puffed up herewith,
took great state upon him, being attended with a great train, and manifesting
in his very gate a kind of extraordinary gravity and Majesty; and all did so
far forth serve and obey him, that it seemed he had usurped the dignity
royal, and the Empire, leaving good honest Agesilaus only the bare Titulary
name of King. Which his Majesty taking into his consideration, to the end that
the people might not say, that he reigned by Lysanders help, he withdrew the
dispatch of businesses from forth his hands, and would not remit any thing unto
him, and if he spoke to him touching this or that business, he made as if he
did not hear him, or not well understand him, dispatching all himself, to the
good contentment of his Subjects. Hereupon Lysander began to cast up his
accounts with himself, and forbore from that time forward to confer favors,
or to promise Offices; and told such suitors as came unto him, that they should
go themselves to petition the King, and would by no means permit, that they
should accompany him to Court, as before. And yet notwithstanding all this, he
assisted very carefully in all such services, as were by his Majesty
recommended unto him, without any the least show of coffeehouse. Within a
while after occasion was offered unto him to speak with the King; and talking
with him, he told him; O King, how well have thou learned to make thy friends
less? yes (quoth the King) when they will make themselves too great. The King
played his part well, so did the Favorite, and all ought to do the like.
Kings must bore a hole in that ship with their own hand, to stop it is course,
when it hoyseth it is sails too high, and goes with too still a gale. For the
taking notice of their Favorites ambition, is that ballast, which does secure
them against those their winds, and puffes of vanity.

Let then the first advice, and which is of greatest importance for Kings and
Christian kingdoms, be that which (amongst other) the Catholic King of
Spain, and Emperor Charles the fifth, left unto his son King Philip the
second, wherein with many indeared and effectual words, he recommends unto him
the observing, augmenting, and defending of the Christian faith, in all his
kingdoms, States, and Signiories, severely punishing with all rigor and
justice, without exception of persons, all such as should be either suspected
or found culpable in points of Heresies, Errors, and depraved Sects, contrary
to the Catholic faith. For therein consists all our good words, all of
them, worthy consideration, and worthy so Catholic a Prince, esteemed,
approved, and perpetually observed by his most happy son (howbeit to his
great cost.) As one, that knew very well, that in the observance of Religion,
and Catholic faith, all the happiness that we can hope for in this or that
other life, depends thereupon, and has it is sure ground and foundation. Heb.
11.1.
And therefore Saint Paul calls it Substantiam rerum sperandarum, etc. Faith is
the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen, etc.
For it is the foundation whereupon is built in our souls all our spiritual
good: insomuch that the self same Apostle said, Sine fide, etc. Without faith
it is impossible to please God. And seeing it is a Jewel of such great worth
and value, Kings are to make that esteem of it, that they do not only
retain it, but maintain and defend it, especially in their own kingdoms,
and in all other places, where they have any power. For besides the obligation,
which they have, as Christian Kings, it concerns them likewise in their own
proper interest. For in giving way to their Subjects, that they be not
faithful unto God, it will pull that punishment upon them, that they shall not
be loyal unto them. And most certain it is, that they who shall not cumply
with the greater obligation, shall easily fail in the letter. And this is made
clear unto us in the sacred History of the Kings; where, whosoever shall
diligently observe the same, he shall find, That after Jeroboam, King of
Israel, 3. King. 13.
had set up those Idols in Dan, and Bethel, of purpose to withdraw the people
from the true worship of God, were commended and continued (as there we may
read) the treasons and rebellions of the Subjects against their Kings. For
this unfortunate Prince thought with himself, that for to settle and secure
himself in the kingdom by those ten Tribes, which had rebelled, and made
choice of him for their King, that it would be a good means to induce them to
his devotion, to draw them to forgo the adoration of the true God, which they
were wont to perform in the holy City, and Temple of Jerusalem, and to humble
and prostrate themselves before those Idols. But the just vengeance of God
ouertooke him; for instantly thereupon he lost his eldest son, who dyed a
violent death. For Baasha, the son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar,
conspired against him, and smote him at Gibbethon, and anon after all the house
of Jeroboam, not leaving unto him any that breathed. And not only he, and
his, did miscarry, but the whole kingdom was laid waste and desolate for that
sin, and led away captive. And as when one man has received from another
some extraordinary great wrong, he can hardly forget it: so, upon all
occasions, wherein mention is made of the sins of the Kings, which afterward
succeeded, and of the punishment which they deserved for them, still is the
remembrance revived of this most grievous sin of Ieroboams, and are
attributed unto him, as being the first that opened the gappe unto them. And
all those troubles which are there particularly set down in those sacred
books, befell that kingdom for a punishment to them, and a warning to all
Christian Kings, that by how much the greater light they have for to know the
excellency of Faith, and the truth of Christian Religion; so much the less
are they to be obeyed, and the more severely to be punished, if they should be
wanting to so great and so apparent an obligation. Let Christian Kings
therefore know, that if they shall continue firm in the faith, and cause all
their subjects to continue constant therein, God will protect both King and
people, and will establish their kingdoms, and all shall obey and fear them;
but if they shall fail therein, all runs to wrack, and utter ruin. So that,
as a nail, if you will have it to hold, must be fastened in some other thing
that is firm and strong, lest it, and all that hangs thereon, come tumbling
down to the ground. So in like manner, if a King will uphold himself firm
and sure in his power, Majesty, and greatness, he must be firmly fixed to
the faith, strongly united with God, and close wedged to his divine will: but
if he begin once to sink, or shrink in this, all his kingdoms, or whatsoever
depend thereon, come tumbling down to the ground, with a sudden and fearful
fall. For nothing does more uphold a sociable life, a Monarchy, and kingdom,
then Religion linked with Justice. Noah for his Religion and Justice, was after
the Flood obeyed by all. The Romans, for the upholding and enlarging of their
Empire, held not any means comparable to that of Religion and Justice, wherein
they surpassed all of those times. The Emperor Seuerus being at the point of
death (which is a time for men to speak truth) ended his life with these
words, Firmum imperium filijs meis relinquo, si boni erunt; Imbecille, si mali:
A strong Empire leave I to my Sons, if they prove good; a weak, if bad. For
the greatest force and strength of a kingdom, both for the present, and the
future, is the virtue of it is king. So that with no lime and sand are the walls
and foundations of States more firm and surely settled for lasting and
continuance, then with a Kings virtue and goodness. Which is that recompense
and reward which God promised to his most faithful servant David, for his
virtue. Firmaboregnum ei^s and st^^ili^^ ebronum regni eius in sempitern^^: I
will establish his kingdom, and I will stablish the throne of his kingdom for
ever. That is, the title and dignity of a King should be continued and
confirmed unto him, tanquam in vsum and proprietatem, for ever and ever. This
firmness in the faith, and this observance of Religion and Justice, are those
(...) pillars and columns, which being truly cumplyed withal, do not only
uphold for the present, but do likewise increase and perpetuate kingdoms. 3.
Reg. 22.
If good King Iehosaphat had not entered into league and amity with King Ahab
the Idolater, it had not fallen out with him so ill as it did, nor his ^i^e
been put to that danger as it was. 1. Mac. 8.9.
Judas Machab^^s heard ^^ll of the great and famous deeds that the Romans had
c^^e in fears of Arms, being a stranger. Nation to Gods people. Whereupon he
sent his Ambassadors unto them, to make a perpetual league and confederation
with them. Wherewith God was much displeased, and so hurtful unto them was
this ^^^^tie and alliance, that many have observed, that after this Peace was
concluded between them, Judas never after obtained any victory over his
enemies, but was slain in the first battle that he fought. And some say, the
like succeeded to both his brothers, Jonathan and Simeon.

Let us draw then from this discourse and sound advice of this Catholic
Emperor, how much it imports Kings to maintain their faith and Religion,
and to conserve and uphold the same in all their kingdoms and dominions. Now
for to conserve the faith, it is likewise requisite, that there be great care
had in procuring, that the commonwealth be purged and cleansed of it is vices
and sins. For (as the Apostle Saint Paul says) when vices grow to that head
and rankness, that they come to make men to be of a bad and corrupt
conscience, they go disposing such to suffer shipwreck in the faith; as it
has happened in these our times, in many parts of Europe.

The second advice that I shall give unto Kings, is, that they carry themselves
so in the dispatch of businesses, that notice may not be taken, that they are
dispatched by any other arbitrament, but their own. For most certain it is,
that if it come to be known, that all the Orders that come forth, pass
through the Favorites hands, and as he shall give direction, they loose much
of their force and efficacy* and the King much of his reputation and credit.
His subjects will grow to contemn him; and strangers will make little
reckoning of him; and many other mischiefs will ensue thereupon. Amongst the
Romans it was held for a great affront and dishonor, that the Emperor should
dispatch (as they say) porcarta-pacio, by a note book, or some penned thing
for him; or (like some young practitioner in physic) by his Masters Recipes.
And therefore in those general processions, which they made, they besought God
that he would not punish them, by giving them Princes, which had need to be
ruled and guided by Governors and Tutors. For they knew well enough, that when
God is angry, offended with the sins of the people, he punishes them, by
sending them Princes without knowledge and wisdom; that are not able to
govern of themselves, but to do as others shall advise them. Wherein they did
confess and acknowledge, That to be a King, consists in being known and
reverenced of all; to be an independent Lord, not relying upon any other; whose
Mandates and Decrees all should subscribe unto and obey; whom all should seek
unto, with whom all should negociate, that are pretenders; from whose
liberality, resolution, and will, they only should acknowledge all the graces
and favors that are done them, and from no other hand. For if they should give
way thereunto, their Subjects will be induced easily to believe, that together
with this, they will give away their greatness, and minister occasion to loose
that common love and respect which solely and properly is due unto them. For
Subjects usually honor no other Sun, but that from which they receive their
light. They naturally abhor that man, that does them hurt; and love that
person, who does them good, be he what he will be, good or bad, all is one.
They call God Optimum maximum, because he both does, and is able to do them
good. And he himself does glory therein, as being unwilling that men should
acknowledge the good they receive, from any other. What wisdom then can there
be in that King, that shall suffer a Favorite to have all the thanks, and
all the honor and glory of those favors and rewards, whereof he is the owner
and donor? Reserving for himself nothing but the scorn and contempt of his
Subjects, then the which there is no misery can be greater? God forbid that
Kings should permit any such lessening of their power and authority, which is
the necessariest thing that can be, for the conservation of their estates and
kingdoms. Likewise in regard of their own proper particular, it will be a
very good lesson for them; for if their subjects are beholding for the good
they receive, unto another, they will love him more then them; and when
occasion shall serve, will not stick to show it, though it be to their own
hurt. Examples hereof, there are good store amongst those ancient Kings and
kingdoms of elder times, that by this means have been overthrown and
brought to ruin. We find it storied, that the Emperor Claudius, at the
intercession and instance of Agrippina, made such a one General of his Army;
Cornelius Tacitus touches upon this Mystery, and says of him, that he was a
man of much fame and renown, and very expert in military discipline; yet
knowing very well withal, by whose good will and furtherance, that command was
conferred upon him, he could not (when occasion should offer) be behind hand
for so great an honor done unto him, but recompense it to the utmost of his
power. Such great places of employment ought to be bestowed by no hand, but by
Kings, and that immediately, lest another may go away with the thanks. And he
shall do well, if he take the like course in all other Offices that are in
his gift; for (if it were possible) it is fit that all should stand bound and
obliged to him.

Let Kings likewise be advised, that they carry a watchful eye over those
that are ambitious, which are either so naturally, or by conuersing and
communicating with others, are made so (for this is an infectious disease) and
the more, the more it takes hold on great persons, and men of an extraordinary
spirit; for they are as dangerous as thieves, where there is store of treasure
to be had. For questionless such kind of men do usually labor to increase
their estate. For it is very natural to this passion, as to those other
affections, never to give over, till they come to the end and full satisfaction
of that which their appetite or desire represents unto them: neither the Law
of God, nor of thankfulness, sufficing to moderate their minds, and to keep
them within the due and lawful bounds of their duty. In that hour, and in
that very instant of their rising, nay, before they come to that greatness,
there is little trust to be given unto them; for nothing works upon them, but
their proper honor and profit. And all the rest they esteem as nothing, in
comparison of bettring their own fortune. But if of necessity some must be
raised to honor; Arist. lib: 5. pelit. c. 11.
Si quem extollere oporteat (says the Philosopher) non tamen eum, qui fit
moribus andax. Nam huiusmodi homines aptissimi sunt ad inuadendum circa res
omnes: Let them not be of base and mean condition, nor such as are naturally
proud and haughty, for being vainly transported with their favor and
priuacie, they think with themselves, that they have already clapped a nail in
fortunes wheel, and that they cannot fall from the top of their felicity. And
being thus blinded with their ambition, there is not any thing which they dare
not adventure on. Let Kings therefore well weigh and consider with themselves,
what manner of men they put into great places, and near about their persons,
that they may rely more on the goodness of their nature and disposition, then
on the Law of obligation and thankfulness; for these are but weak bonds, and
easily broken. And because I know not whether I shall hereafter come to light
upon the like occasion, I will here propose that Question, which is disputed
and doubted of by some (and may likewise serve for an Auiso unto Kings) whether
it be better that the great Lords should be far off from them, or near about
them? The Emperor Charles the fifth (of famous memory) amongst other
Aduertisements which he gave to his son Philip, one was, That he should not
let the great offices of the kingdom, nor places of great command rest any
long time in one man's hands, nor should put his Grandes and great Lords into
them, but Gentlemen of good quality, such as were creatures of his own
making. And as for his Grandes, he should honor them with some places and
offices near about his person, which would be a greater grace both to himself
and his Court.

Others are of a quite contrary opinion, and allege reasons for the
maintenance thereof. Great men (they say) if they be not like those little
ones, which Christ speaks of, are ordinarily of an extraordinary spirit, and
endeavor, all they can, increase of honor, till they come to occupy the
highest place. And then will it be seen, of what little esteem are those
great favors which they have already received. There is not that friendship,
that kindred, nor any other bond, be it never so strong, which is not broken,
through the greedy ambition of ascending to some higher throne. For to be a
King (says Euripides) all Law is broken. For this Appetite is of that force
and strength, that it breaks all Laws, both Divine and Humane. For proof
whereof, they cite many examples, which I purposely omit, that I may not
offend, and tire out the Reader. All of them admonishing Kings, that they
should thoroughly weigh and consider where, and in what places they put them.
For if they be near about their royal person, it is the torment of Tantalus
unto them, to see the war and the fruit so near their mouth (that greatness
and power I mean) and not to enjoy it; Which will but provoke a more hungry
appetite in those which do not possess it, and will break through hedge and
ditch, and run (as they say) through fire and water transported with this so
fair and beautiful a prize, as is set before their eyes; never being at quiet
till they come to enjoy it. For there is not that love to any thing here upon
earth, which does so much alter, suspend, and seize on the mind and heart of
man, as that of ruling and commanding, and to grow great therein. And when they
see things succeed not according to their mind, yet at least in satisfaction
of their envy, they will be well content that the waters should be troubled,
and the world be turned topsie-turuy, taking pleasure therein, though it be to
their own hurt. And what King can secure himself, that such ambitious
persons, being near about him, will not at one time or other attempt their
ends. For greatness (say they) after that it is once possessed, quits the
memory of the means, whereby it came to be so great, and finds a thousand
excuses for it is weakness in offending. And the rather, for that ill use has
taught all men this lesson; That the reputation of an honest man is not to be
preferred before his proper profit and greatness. Lastly, they say, That he
that overcomes, and makes good his claim by his sword, needs not to study
excuses, and to make Apologies; let those do that, that have the worst end of
the staff, and stand at the mercy of the Conqueror. In conclusion, they
resolve this question thus; That it is very fit that your great Noblemen
should rather live far from Court, then near about their King. For all of
them will be of good use, for the government of Provinces and Armies, whereby
both the one and the other will be secured. And when they cannot content them
in all that they would have, they may entertain them with these, which will be
a good means to divert their thoughts, and to bridle those Provinces that are
committed to their charge, with whom the Majesty and greatness of their
Governors will be able to do much: And there they are not of that danger. For
in kingdoms by succession, and well settled, and where there is no color of
wresting the Scepter out of the bloud-royall, there is no fear of trusting the
Grandes, and great Noblemen with these kind of Governments, but it is rather
requisite that it should be so. For, like unto stars in heaven, and their
influences on earth, they serve for ornament and conversation in those
kingdoms and Provinces, wherein there are ancient and noble Houses, for which
they are to seek out men of Noble blood, and good quality, and of known
greatness, to be conversant amongst them. For the Nobility of those
kingdoms and Provinces will think themselves not well dealt withal, if they
shall have but an ordinary man set over them to be their Governor, be he never
so wise, or never so valiant. For being that they are to attend all at the
gates of him that holds that place, they may esteem it as an injury to see
themselves obliged, to acknowledge homage unto him, whom out of that place they
would sense vouchsafe him their company. Besides, that greatness and
largeness of mind and heart, that knows not how to shrink, or be dejected
with adverse fortune (a thing so necessary in him that gouernes) will sooner
be found in these, then men of meaner rank. For (as Saint Jerome says) he
that owes much to his blood and family, will always bear that obligation
about him; and never fail therein. Again, he that is borne to command, will
be less insolent in his government, as having that noble quality from his
cradle, And the people on the other side will more willingly obey him, whom
they have always known to have lived in honor and greatness: And his
example will be of greater importance, to reform the disorders and abuses
that shall there be offered.

Over and above, they further add, That your Grandes and great Noblemen, may,
and have obligation to content themselves with their present estate, if they
will but weigh the difference of that it was, with that which it is now, did
not men that are now in honor grow forgetful of their former mean condition.
That grieuing them more, which falls short of their desire, then that does
please and content them, which fortune has with so liberal a hand bestowed on
them. For no man rests contented with his present estate and condition; nor do
we esteem that so much which we possess, as the lack of that we desire,
does torment us. And therefore do they say, that they are not so good to be
about Kings, and more particularly those which are so qualified; for they are
like a ling^ing kind of Caleature, or aguish Fever, which makes an end of us
before we are a ware of it, working it is effect, before we can look into the
cause. Or like unto the hand in a Clock, or Dyall, which tells out the hour,
and strikes, without perceiving how it moves or goes. Or like unto those plants
of your tallest trees, which grow to their full height, whilst neither our
eyes, nor our understanding can scarce comprehend, how this comes to pass, so
insensibly does it sproute and shoot up. This is the question, and these, in
brief, the conueniences, which (for mine own part) I know not what they are,
unless such conueniences as are proper to every one in their own estate. But
be it as it may be, and let them say what they list, let Kings resolve by the
illumination of that light which they have from heaven, on that which shall be
best for them. That which I say, is this. That it will well become them to live
with a great deal of wariness and circumspection, and not to trust or rely
too much upon fortune. For this Lady, howbeit sometimes she suffers her self
to be commanded by them, yet now and then she ouerrules them, as she does the
rest. And therefore it shall be good discretion and prudence to fear both
her, and her frequent mutabilities and changings, as it behooves every man to
do the like. For she, without any respect or distinction of persons, will
oftentimes lash out from that way and course wherein she is, and run a quite
contrary bias, and commit the current of those effects to time and Nature.

Let Kings likewise take heed, that they do not put offended persons into such
places, where they may revenge themselves; For a received wrong or injury
leaves still some roots behind, which, when occasion is offered, will bud
forth most bitter and venomous plants. Nor are there any rewards, or benefits,
be they never so great, that can blot out the print of that impression, which
an injury stampeth in the mind and heart of man. Courtesies are soon
forgotten by them; for it seems a troublesome thing unto them, to endure the
weight and burden of so great a debt and obligation; but a received wrong or
injury, that shall ever be remembered, because they hold revenge to be the
character of courage, and the badge of a noble mind and brave spirit. Puluere,
qui laedit, scribit, sed marmore laesus: He that does a wrong, writes it down
in dust; but he that receives it, in marble. Tacitus teaches us to know this
mind of man, and it is passions; telling us that the greatest and strongest
inclination in man, is to receive satisfaction of the injuries done unto them,
for thankfulness lies as a heavy load upon them; whereas they make light of
those benefits they receive. Esteeming the latter to be a diminution of their
greatness; and the sormer, to wit, revenge, to be a great gain unto them;
for they imagine, that they gain thereby in their authority, in their
reputation, and in the manifestation of their valor, when the world shall take
notice that they have righted themselves: Such as these can neither be good as
they are Favorites, nor as they are Councellers. For out of the desire and
pleasure they take in revenge, they will rather advise that which shall seem
convenient for the execution thereof, then for the authority and profit of the
Prince, whom they advise. They will advise him (I say) to venture himself upon
some voyage, to enter into a war, to go himself into the field with a royal
army, or to undergo some dangerous enterprise, for the better effecting of
their designs, plotting a thousand mischiefs to bring him unto ruin. And let
them say what they will, yet shall they never persuade me, that this proceeds
out of the love which they bear unto their King, and his increase of honor,
but out of hatred to his person, and their own proper satisfaction, thinking
that by that means they may work their revenge. And hereunto I add, that no
man can be found of so perfect a mind, of so temperate a nature, and so
virtuous, but that in the first place he will treat of his own business; and
that treating of this particular, the eye of his thought still aiming to hit
this white, will not stick to adventure any danger in hope of revenge. And
therefore I shall advise Kings, that of necessity must sometimes give ear and
credit to these or the like persons, if they chance to be preferred to great
places, that they be very careful how far forth they trust them, for they
are a dangerous kind of people, unsafe, and more covetous of their own
private interest, then careful of the public peril, or common hurt. For this
love unto themselves, and hatred unto others, covered and strewed over with the
cloud and ashes of injuries and offenses, either received or conceived, does
revive and quicken the coals by those blasts of favor and greatness that are
blown on them; procuring (though to others cost) to uphold themselves therein,
and to engage Kings in that which they pretend for their revenge and
satisfaction. God shield and protect Kings from such persons, as shall with the
snake take up their poison again, to vent the venom of their rancour and
revenge upon an old quarrel; and let them likewise take heed, how they employ
their forces, and their power, in countenancing and protecting those whom they
have offended and discontented.

This (says the said Emperor Charles the fifth) is an advice of great
importance, for the safety, quietude, and good government of kingdoms,
States, and Signiories; which for that they are so many, so great, and so far
distant one from another, it is impossible that they should be visited by your
self in person, so often as is requisite: And therefore I advise you, that you
have a great care that your Viceroyes and Governors that shall be sent
thither, be such, and of such parts, as shall conuene for such an employment,
men of experience, and conscience, of wisdom, prudence, and discretion, and
well seen in matters of State and Government: Well disposed, and free from
covetousness, briberie, and corruption; seeking out rather men for Offices,
then Offices for men. Lastly, let them be such persons, from whom you may
receive that good satisfaction, that by their residence there may be found no
miss of their Kings presence; For this is properly to be Vice-royes.
Moreover, you must instruct them in that which appertains unto them, for the
good government of the Commonwealth, and those Subjects which are committed to
their charge, maintaining them in equal justice, and good manners, giving them
good example by their own blameless conversation. There is nothing that does
so much oblige Vassals and Subjects to keep the Statutes and Laws which are
ordained, as to see them well kept and observed by their betters; And so it is,
that it is unjustly commanded, which he that commands keeps not himself, if
that which is commanded be good. And being good, why should it not be good for
him to keep it, that commands it? Bal. in l. 2 c. 8. Number. 4. C. de Serui.
For (as Baldus says) though the King be not liable to the Law, yet is he
liable to the rules of reason. This pious Emperor goes on, and wills his
son, that he should strictly recommend to his Viceroys charge, the
protecting, sheltring, and relieuing of the poor, the defending of the
fatherless and widow, and those that are destitute of friends, and have none
to help them. Whom some, that are in place and authority, are wont (and I
fear is too ordinary amongst them) to disfavor and disesteeme them, making
little or no reckoning at all of them. Being ignorant how vile and base a thing
it is, and how heroycall the contrary, and how much in imitation of God, to put
forth a charitable and pitiful hand to him that is brought low, and fallen
into misery, assisting him in his afflictions and troubles, freeing him from
wrongs and injuries, whose shield and buckler, he that gouernes, ought to be.
And he closes up this advertisement with wishing him to be very careful, that
his Viceroys and Governors exercise their offices as they ought, and not to
exceed the instructions that are given them, nor to usurp beyond their
authority, giving them this prouiso, that in doing the contrary, he shall
think that he is ill served by them, and that he give order to have it
remedied and amended, by his displeasure, and their punishment. And howbeit it
be true, that he ought not to give credit to all the complaints which are made
against such his Ministers (which are seldom wanting) yet in no hand that he
should refuse to hear them, and understand them, in forming himself fully of
the truth. For the not doing of it, will but minister occasion unto them, to be
more absolute, and to the Subjects to grow desperate, seeing themselves
oppressed by injustice and unconscionable dealing.

Likewise when Kings send an Ambassador to another Prince, they must look
well into the quality of the person whom they send. For in such an Embassage
he does not only treat of the businesses for which he goes, but likewise of
the honor and authority of the King, which sends him. And therefore it is
necessary that the persons that are nominated and declared to go on Embassage,
have many of those qualities, which we have mentioned in Viceroys and
Councillors of State. For if they shall not fill that place with the
greatness of their good abilities, it will be a great lessening to the credit
and reputation of the King, and the businesses will receive much hinderance, if
not utterly be overthrown. The Romans did make a mock of the Teutones,
counting them no better then fools, for sending an Ambassador unto them that
was a block-head, and of little or no experience.

Kings and great Princes, all that, from which glory and greatness resulteth
unto them, they ought to do it without any the least show of vanity,
accompanying it with such circumstances and consequencies, that it may seem
only to be done for the common good, the exaltation of the Commonwealth, and
the reputation of their Crown. In all times and places they must represent
much authority, gravity, and Majesty in their persons, and in their
Treaties, mixing it with affability and courtesy. To the end, that by the one
they may cause fear and respect, and by the other quit and remove that fear.
It is reported of Octauian the Emperor, that all the Ambassadors that
appeared in his presence, stood astonished betwixt fear and admiration; but no
sooner spoke he unto them, but they were wonderfully taken with his words, and
did not then so much fear, as affect him. For albeit the Majesty where with
he received them, was exceeding great, yet was his carriage toward them very
affable, and very courteous. In these two virtues, did excel that Catholic
King of Spain, Don Philip the second, whom for the representing of Majesty,
and regal authority, none did excel, and few equal. And in the carriage and
composition of his person, there was no defect to be found. Upon any accident
that befell him, were it good or bad, fortunate or unfortunate, there was never
any man that could perceive in him so much as a discomposed countenance, or any
other the least alteration. And he may be truly said to be a man, who is not
proud in prosperity, nor impatient in adversity. For it is a great sign of
Nobleness, and the undoubted mark of a royal mind, and Princely courage,
not to loose himself in his aduerser fortunes, but to show himself constant
against fortune, and to raise up his spirits, as this King did, being never
dejected with any outward Cross or misfortune, tha befell him. He did never
(being therein like unto to Xenophous Cyrus) show an ill countenance, or speak
an ill word unto any man. He was not so affable and familiar with his
Favorites, that any of them all durst presume to petition him in any thing
that was unjust; nor yet so austere and severe toward others as to make them
to forbear to prefer a just suite unto him. To his own Subjects he was
kind, to strangers noble; but withal, reserving still his authority and
greatness. For Kings ought not to be so harsh and intractable, as to make
themselves to be abhorred; nor so kind and courteous, as to cause themselves
to be contemned. Indeauouring all they can, not to fall into the extremes, by
showing too much love to some, and little or none at all to other some. For too
much severity ingendreth hatred, and too much familiarity breeds contempt.
Let them generally bear themselves in that respective manner toward all, that
they honor the better, love the meaner sort, and despise not the rest; but as
far as they are able, extend their grace and favor unto all. For that being
but little, which they have to give, in comparison of the many that are suitors,
and the great rewards which they pretend, they rest better satisfied with those
good words, and mannerly answers, that are given them, then with those favors
that are done them. For the generous hearts, modest countenances, and ingenious
dispositions of those noble spirits which follow Princes Courts, much more
risent the disfavor that is done them in receiving courtesies with disgrace,
then if they were denied them. And therefore it is good wholesome counsel, and
much importing Kings, to return a fair and equal answer unto all, according
to each man's quality and merit, and that they carry the same even hand in the
conferting of their favors, and in the manifestation of their love. And if
they shall in a more particular manner, express the same to some one
particular person, let him likewise more particularly deserve it. For never
shall that love be steadfast, where deserts are wanting in the party beloved.

I shall likewise advertise Kings, that they do not make such use of this
their great both office and power, as to assume unto themselves to be absolute,
and to cumply in all things with their affections and desires, nor to exercise
any other personal passion. For the use and custom of absolute power is
dangerous for Kings, odious to the subject, and offensive both to God and
Nature. And for that the last Kings of the Romans used this power, the name of
King grew so hateful, that those that afterward succeeded in the Roman
government, durst not take upon them the name of Kings, but that of Emperors.
Which is by so much the more absolute, by how much Imperare does differ from
Regere. Yet notwithstanding the people of Rome did not so much fear this name
of Emperor, as that of King, because those, that last bore that name,
exercised on them this their absolute power. So that it is not the name, nor
the office, but the ill using thereof that makes it odious. For it is neither
the Title, nor the Man, that moves or alters the honest meaning mind of the
plain down right subject, but deeds and actions, that are done contrary to
all right and reason. Whereas on the contrary, good usage, and good treatment
keeps them in love and peace, and draws them after him as it were in a
string, and to offer up for his sake a voluntary sacrifice of their lives. Let
Kings consider that the Crown speaks as much, which they wear on their heads
in form of a Sphericall round figure, which signifies limitem, or terminum, a
limit or bound, or rather that Circle, out of which it is not lawful for them
to go, no not one step. The Crowns (I say) that they wear, are Circles and
Limits, serving to put them in mind, that their power is limited and measured
out unto them, that they may not pass the bounds of reason nor do any thing,
but what is just and lawful. Let the great Kings and Potentates of the earth
moderate themselves, and refrain from making themselves Gods, by exercising
this their absolute power; let them acknowledge over them a God, as well on
earth, as in heaven. That he may not grow weary of their Monarchies and their
governments, as he did of that of the ancient Romans, and utterly overthrow
them, provoked and incited thereunto by the abuse of humane power. Seen Traged.
4.
For (as Seneca says) Quod non potest, vult posse, qui nimium potest. But the
God of heaven is very nice and tender in admitting companions in any kind of
manner whatsoever, but much more dainty in matter of jurisdiction and absolute
power, punishing the same with grievous chastisements, and many demonstrations
of his fearful anger and displeasure. Aristotle says, that through the
government of those that are too absolute in their rule and command, the
government is changed, kingdoms altered, and petty Princes rise up against
them, who in such sort abate and bring down their pride, that they come to
serve those, whom before they did command. Tully terms them, of all other,
the most miserable, which make their will a Law, and think that they may do
all that they can. Nero did then leave off to be cruel, when he understood
that he was permitted to do what he listed; and that many did approve all his
actions for good. It is the ancient language of adulation, to speak absolute
power unto Princes, and to persuade them to follow their own free will. But
this is a very dangerous thing, if they once give way thereunto, and let such
flatteries dwell in their ears; for the resolutions of such a power, will not
suffer themselves to be so subject, as they ought, to the judgment of reason,
nor humane discourse. In such a case, a power from heaven is more needful. And
this error is now come to be in such request, that to agree in all things with
the will and pleasure of Kings, is now made in the minds of some, not only a
means of hope, but esteemed as a great service, and pledge of merit, to
receive honors and rewards. But this deceitful means, whereby they think to
thrive, shall (when God shall see it fit) be the only knife to cut their
throats; for such kind of men never escape punishment, and most commonly
receive it from their Kings own hand. In strange and extraordinary cases, and
upon just occasions, and justifiable means, Kings may somewhat enlarge the
limits of their power, so as they do not go beyond that which reason and
Christian prudence permits. Plato says, that Prudence and power are to
embrace each other, and to walk hand in hand. Qualities which ought to
concur in a good King, signified in that Scepter with eyes, which Jeremy saw,
power being in the one, and wisdom in the other. And in that other old ancient
portraiture of a good King, being a Lion placed on the top of Mercuries Mace,
which is a Scepter with two Snakes twining about it; This, signifying prudence,
and wisdom, and that fortitude; which should never be separated from a King.
By his power, he is feared, respected, and obeyed; he commands, prohibites, and
executes. By his wisdom, he auerreth the truth of his actions, and does
nothing, but what is lawful. Wisdom tempereth power; and both together
uphold the world. But if power forsake the fellowship of wisdom, it grows to
be absolute, and runs into a thousand indiscretions, and commits as many
wrongs and injuries, wherewith it desolateth and destroys even the greatest
States. For, there is not that ill, wherein power does not exceed, if it have
not wisdom for it is bridle. And for that a powerful hand is so dangerous a
thing, Nature has ordained, and so ordered the business, that the brain
where wisdom has it is residence, should be placed over it. Which those
ancient Doctors amongst the Gentiles did point at, when they placed Minerua,
the Goddess of wisdom, upon Jupiters head, who, of all the Gods, is the most
powerful. And therefore it was well said of him, whosoever he were that said,
Que vale mas saber, que aver, y poder: Wealth and power are not comparable to
wisdom. Which saying is confirmed by the holy Ghost, Melior est sapientia,
Wis. 6.1. and 7.8.
quam vires. Et diuitias, nihil esse duxi in comparatione illius. Wisdom is
better then strength. I set more by her, then by kingdoms, and royal seats,
and count riches nothing in comparison of her. Ambr. 6. Exam. 1. c. 4. Aelian.
lib. 6. c. 21. de Animalibus. Job 38.36. Greg. 3. Moral. c. 4.
The advantage whereof, is signified in that Hierogliffe of the Cock, who with
his crowing, makes the Lion to fly. As Saint Ambrose, and Aelian have well
observed. And that wise and just man Job, does much commend him for his
knowledge and understanding. And Saint Gregory declares, that by him, is to
be understood a wise, and prudent man, who takes hold on a fit and convenient
time for businesses, and not only advises of, but preuenteth all dangers, and
whatsoever hurt may befall.

The particular and general experience which we have of Histories, teaches
us, how much it imports for the conservation and augmentation of a great
Empire and Monarchy, that he, that is Lord and Master thereof (if it lie
divided through diverse parts of the world, by seas, and enemies, in the midst
thereof) should strive and endeavor by all possible means to make himself
likewise Lord and Master of the sea: for thereby shall he come to be Lord and
Master of the Land. And an absolute dispenser of those things, wherewith we
sustain our selves, and live. For by the help of Navigations, we pass from
one part to another, and communicate of what they have by way of commerce or
otherwise: And by this means is made of many Provinces and kingdoms, yea,
even of the whole world, one sole City and commonwealth. This was the counsel
of Themistocles, and Plutarch makes it good, saying, Let no man deceive
himself, in imagining with himself, that Armies will suffice for to conserve
himself, and to make himself Lord of those kingdoms and Provinces, that have
the Sea to friend. For if he be not likewise provided, and well furnished with
a strong fleet at Sea, howbeit he may with a Land-armie overcome the
naturalls of those kingdoms or Provinces; yet it is impossible for him,
without the other, to make an entire conquest, and to go through with that
which he pretends. That disposes the Land to his will, and gives Laws
thereunto. The Carthaginians (says Polibius) were not ignorant of what great
consequence this was, for all kind of businesses, and therefore advises, That
that which a Prince ought to procure, whereby to come to be a great Monarch,
is, by a strong Navy, to make himself Lord of the Sea. For there are not any
forces that work such strange and great effects, or so much import, as these.
And all your Ancients held it for a Maxim, that without the command at Sea,
there was nothing safe or secure on the Land. Archidamus a great Captain, and
King of the Lacedaemonians, was wont to say; That those that are to deal with a
strong enemy, being powerful at sea, need not to put themselves upon the
fickleness of fortune, but to place all their care in maintaining their Navy;
for with this alone, will they be able to weary out the enemy, to quit him of
the succor of their friends, to debar him of Navigations, and of the
commodities thereof, and utterly by this to undo him. And (which may seem a
thing impossible) be able to beleaguer and girt in a whole kingdom, and to
take it (forcing it by famine and other wants) as if it were only one single
City that were besieged. For that (as Tacitus says) a strong fleet at sea,
is the Castle and Magasine of victuals. And therefore the Empire and Signiorie
of the Sea, by a powerful and commanding Navy, is held to be of much more
power and safety, then your Land-armies or Citie-garisons, which of force must
in the end yield unto him, which shall become Master of their ports, and
thereby hinder them of all commerce and traffic, and humane communicat^on:

And this was the advice which that great Monarch and Emperor Charles the
fifth gave likewise unto his son, to whom he left so many and such great
kingdoms, so far distant and divided one from another, with such large and
deep seas. He (says he) that is or will be Master of them, must have his
fleetes still in a readiness, well fitted and furnished, as well with good
tall ships, well rigged and manned, and all other necessary provision, as with
store of Galleys, for the safeguard and defense of his subjects, as also to
resist and offend Turks, Moors, and Pirates, because he cannot repose any
confidence or assurance in those Leagues and Truces which he shall make with
them. With this shall he keep them all in awe, when they shall see his great
forces at Sea, by which he may (as it were in an instant) from all parts send
succors and relief, and whatsoever else shall be needful: And it will be
no less then a hard rain, and cruel strong curb, for to bridle and
restrain the sinister intents and vain pretensions of such as shall plot
strange proiects, dangerous designs, and scandalous attempts. And utterly to
discourage them from undergoing any enterprise, or to undertake any action of
adventure, with hope of recovering such Towns or Provinces as they have lost,
or by landing of their men to encroach upon new. And say they should serve for
no other use, save to hinder the excursions of Pirates, and Sea-rouers, in these
our seas, only in regard of that, it could not choose but be a matter of
mighty consequence, and of wonderful great importance, considering the daily
incursions, losses, flaughters, the continual captiuatings, and robberies,
which they usually commit upon these our Coasts; so that if there were not a
fitting preparation, and sufficient defense of ships and Galleys, it were
impossible for us to occur against those necessities, and to be provided
against those new and strange accidents which may offer themselves in those
Estates, kingdoms, and Signiories, Seas, Coasts, frontiers, ports,
promontories, Castles, and forts, which we hold in them. Which by this our
continual navigations, and provision of good shipping, are well manned and
victualled, and sufficiently provided of arms, munition, and whatsoever else
is necessary, in fit and convenient both time and manner against all
occasions. Whereby the enemy perceiving how well they are provided for them,
dare not approach those places, nor touch upon them. Besides this easy and
short advice, there are many other causes that may move us not to be wanting
herein. In a word, it will put the enemy into a continual care, and drive him
to take a different resolution in those his ill-grounded motives and
pretensions. And howbeit it be true, that the charge is great, so likewise
great losses are thereby excused, and some such sometimes as can never be
repaired. So that, there is no passing to and fro without navigations, and the
using and maintaining of these fleetes.

They are the words of that victorious Emperor, which no King for want of
experience should dis-esteeme.

And for the better and fuller provision in this kind, it is very fit that
these Fleetes should have their particular rent approprietated unto them, and
that it should not, upon no occasion whatsoever, be spent or laid out in any
other thing. For a set and deputed treasure for this purpose, or the like, is
that which most imports for the good dispatch of businesses, and that they
may be done in their due time, and with less charge, and more profit. This
course did the Grecians take; and after them, the Romans. And of Augustus
Caesar, both Suetonius and Dyon report, that he was the first inuenter of a
perpetual military treasure, raised out of a certain kind of Tributes, which
out of his own curiosity he had sought and found out. For Soldiers and
warlike provisions, in your great Empires, require a particular treasure,
wherewith to be paid; which must not in any hand be otherwise employed, nor go
intermixed with those other expenses. Having persons of much experience and
honesty, appointed for the good managing and ordering of it, using their best
care and help, that it may be preserved and continued, and that it may not be
exhausted, and drawn dry. And more particularly Kings themselves, the Grandes
and Peers of the kingdom, as also the commonwealths, and your Cities, should
carefully look hereunto. Being that they do most participate of the profits
which issue from a war. And most certain it is, that nothing is more
necessary in a Monarchy, then this particular treasure, or that causes more
respect in our friends, or fear in our enemies. Or that with more commodity
and conueniencie, puts in execution all plots and proiects, in this, or that
other enterprise, of what quality or condition soever they be. And to this
advice I shall add that which follows.

All wise and prudent Princes in Empires, that are run out to waste, and
decrease of wealth, have evermore held it for the only remedy of their
reparation and conservation, to excuse unnecessary expenses; And that their
Ministers take this business into consultation, and to cast up all accounts,
and to see what the Kings rents and in-comes are for the defraying of the
charge he is at, and by comparing one with the other, and seeing how they will
answer each other, if they find the expense to exceed the In-come, to cast
about which way it may be best spared; and to husband the business so, that
there may be some overplus still remaining for the public treasury. For if by
disorder and ill government, the Kings coffers shall come to be empty, it will
be (if not impossible) at least very hard to fill them again. For if there be
daily more spent, then is to be, or can be had, that stock will in a short
time decay and come to nothing; as we see it fares in every other humane
subject, that has not fresh supply. Which lavish and unproportionable
spending, not living according to the rate of their rents, has been the
undoing of many particular houses and families, as also the impouerishing and
overthrowing of Empires and kingdoms. And therefore to avoid this
inconvenience, was that book of Accounts, or Memorial made, which the Ancient
called Breuiarium Imperij, a brief abridgement of the Empire, which Augustus
Caesar left to his successors; written with his own hand: wherein was
particularly set down in a true and just account, the full number of all the
kingdoms and Provinces of the whole Roman Empire; As likewise the number of
all the Citizens and Soldiers which were in every one of them, together with
their forces and strength, and to what quantity came all the rents and
tributes that he had, what aide-money and other helps he received from his
Confederates, and the whole charge he was at. As also his Councels ordained by
him, either for the enlarging or shortning of his hand in these his expenses.
So that having still before his eyes the wealth and substance of his Empire, he
might always see how the world went, and how to make his best benefit thereof,
for the conseruing and upholding of his Empire. Such a Register or rent-roll as
this, much imports Kings. It is said of that wise and prudent King, Don
Philip the second, that in his time he had such another as was this; And the
like ought all Kings to have, and at all times, but more especially when their
power is lessened, their rents diminished, their forces wasted, and those of
their enemies augmented. For we see the like care to be taken in particular
houses, and therefore ought much more to be looked into in Monarchies, which
are composed of all those houses and families; amongst which, that which spends
beyond it is means, consumes it self: For supposing such ^one has an 100. V.
Ducats of rent, or set revenue, and that every year ten thousand more is
spent, then the rent comes to, in a few years all will come to nothing, and by
running still on in debt, and taking no course to come out of it, by living
still at the same height, he must be enforced in the end to sell and deliver
over the luster, majesty, and greatness of his house to other families, which
were before little better then dust taken out of the dunghill. And most
certain it is, that they that will not cast up their accounts, and look
thoroughly into their estates, and see in what state they are, must be either
men that are willing to undo themselves, and their whole posterity; and must
be either Atheists, or almost as bad (if not worse) mere Epicures; who carry
in their mouths, and in their hearts those words of your vnthristie gallants:
Comedamus and bibamus, cras enim moriemur: Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye. Your Atheists, they propose an end unto themselves,
thinking by this their prodigality to procure unto themselves an immortality
of fame; But these and the like, who so inconsiderately run out of all, are
careless and negligent even of this, taking care only to eat, and to drink,
and to feast one another, without so much as thinking that there is another
world, or any honor, or fame in this: And spending their whole life in belly
cheer, and bezeling, they are never satisfied, but call in still for more,
till their crawes be ready to crack. And notwithstanding the excessive rents,
which some Kings have, and the great store of treasure that comes to their
coffers, besides the Tributes, Taxes, Imposts, and Subsedies that are duly
paid them, they are never out of debt, the Crowne-land lying impawned for the
payment thereof, and that for no small sums of money. Ordinary expenses are
ill husbanded; extraordinary, worse paid. The Cities, they are consumed;
Trading decayed; the Subjects out of breath and purse, and by having too much
imposed upon them, are grown (like ouer-laboured oxen) so poor, and so weak,
that they are no longer able to bear so great a burden. And yet all this to
them (though the Subject infinitely suffer) is no more then a drop of water
thrown into the sea, nor makes no more show. Which sea though it swallow up
all the fountains of the earth, all the brooks, and all the great and
principal rivers, and lesser springs, and this daily and hourly, and at all
times, yet we see the Sea is never a whit the more increased, nor grows
greater one year then another. But what should be the cause of this, let your
Naturalists, and your Kings, render such reasons as pleases them, in their
excuse; of mine own part, I am of opinion, that the Kings Exchequer is not
well ordered, making him not only a small, but a bad account; That there is a
great deal of disorder in the laying out of those moneys, whereof much might
be saved, if there were some orderly course taken for the dispending of them,
and employing them for their Kings best advantage. And I fear me, (which I
could wish were causeless) that a great part of this water which should come
directly to the Kings own cisterne, passes through broken pipes, that is,
through the hands of evil Ministers, which soake and suck unto themselves a
great part thereof, and no man the wiser, where the leake is, till it discover
it self. But it is now high time to grow to an end, and I will conclude this
Advertisement with that common Proverb, which speaks thus; Quien mucho
abarca, poco aprieta: The ouer-griping hand holds but little; suting with that
of ours, All covet, all loose. Or answering to that which that great Courtier
and Favorite Maecenas said, That great treasures and riches are both more and
better heaped up, and receive a fairer accumulation, by spending little, then
by scraping much.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Aduertisements for Favorites and Councellers of State.
THe Aduertisements for Favorites are these, the first, That they do not
priuar too much, who pretend their Kings favor, and that they do not bear
themselves too high thereupon, nor suffer themselves to be attended with a
great train of followers, thereby to make public demonstration of their
greatness. Boast not thy self too much, nor seem thou over vain, says the
holy Ghost to the Favorite, Ne gloriosus appareas coram Rege: Prou. 25.
Put not forth thy self in the presence of the King. For there is neither that
State, nor Prince, of that dull patience, that does not in the end grow
jealous, and fearful of the great power and authority of Favorites, and
more especially if they once begin to wax insolent, and abuse this their
greatness. For Kings are Companions, and fellow-seruants with us in their
affections, and natural passions; nay (by their leave be it spoken) more
subject then we are unto them; save that they suppress them more in outward
show, and make not that exterior demonstration of them, in regard of that
divinity, which they pretend, and represent. And all of them will be Masters
of their entire will and absolute power. And that Favorite is foully deceived,
and in a strange kind of error, who in Court, by his secret plots, and close
conueyance, pretends to possess his Kings heart, if he conceive by this
course to be the more secure. For very dangerous is that favor and place,
which is built upon such a foundation; and very ticklish the state of a
Favorite, when a King carries such respect unto him. And the reason of this
danger is drawn from man's nature it self (which cannot, but in Kings, be of
far greater force and strength) for there is not that man living, which does
not hate and abhor subjection. And this is so certain a truth, that I
persuade my self, that I may truly give this censure, and that I am no whit
mistaken therein; that the reason, why Kings do more willingly make and raise
up men unto honor and greatness for their own proper guste and appetite,
then for services and deserts, is, for that in the former, they show themselves
to be powerful, and to be owners of their own cloth, which they may cut out
to more, or less, as it pleases them; But to the second, they are debtors, a
thing that is hateful even to the best nature and disposition. And Favorites
likewise on their part, are not to have men, like swarms of Bees, to hiue
themselves in their portalls, and to hang about them in clusters, lest when
that day shall come (as come it will) wherein they shall fall, the world take
notice that it was his favor, and not his person that they followed. There are
few Ephestions, but many Crateri, in Court; many that will follow Alexanders
fortune, but few his particular person.

Let Favorites likewise receive this advice and counsel from the hand of the
Evangelist Saint John, which was one of the greatest Courtiers and Favorites,
which the King of heaven had. The thing that I shall recommend to their
consideration, is this; That when John fell down to worship, before the feet
of the Angel, which had opened great mysteries unto him, and shown him the
things which were shortly to be fulfilled, the Angel said unto him, Apoc. 22.9.
Vide ne feceris, conseruus enim tuus sum, and fratrum tuorum: See thou do it
not, for I am thy fellow servant, and the fellow-seruant of thy brethren, etc.
Let every Favorite apply this counsel to himself, and make use thereof; so
shall he be in grace with King and people, and when men shall go about as it
were to adore him, and to make him a little God almighty, in doing him worship
and honor, let him by no means give way thereunto, but meekly acknowledge
that he is but a creature, as they are, and prevent them with that answer of
the Angel, Vide ne feceris, conseruus tuus sum: Do not offer it, for I am
your fellow-seruant. And great is that obligation which they have, which are
raised to great place, to know themselves, and not to show themselves strangers
to those that have been their associates and companions in their meaner
fortunes, and with whom they have held private familiarity and friendship. And
not to be like unto Pharaohs Cup Bearer, who when he saw himself in that
favor and priuacie, which his fellow-prisoner Joseph had foretold, and
prognosticated unto him, never thought no more of it, but quite forgot both it
and him, as if there had been no such matter, or man. It argues extreme
lightness, and a naughty nature, that a man should hoyse sail and be gone,
when he has a fair wind, and not take him along with him, that has run
through all perils and dangers with him, and endured all brunts and storms
whatsoever. How shameful a thing then is it for them, who seeing themselves in
prosperity, turn away their face from him, who ran along with them in their
aduerser fortune. Especially considering they are not certain, how long this
calm will endure, and what a comfort it is in a storm, to have a true friend
to stick close unto him. For it is a usual thing, to see him lowermost to
day, that yesterday stood uppermost in Fortunes wheel. And the Moon, when it
is at full, fore-tells a wane; and therefore that which imports them most,
is, That they carry themselves in a gentile fashion toward all men, and that
their dealing be plain, and dis-interessed; whereby they shall not only keep
their old friends, but gain new, and may very well hope to be helped by them,
when they shall have occasion to use them. For they must think, that the sky
will not always be clear, clouds may arise, the Sun withdraw his light
(for Kings wills and affections, like other men's, are ambulatorie) and then in
what a poor case is a Favorite, if he be left, like a single proposition,
alone to himself: He cannot (if he be wise) but make this account with
himself, that the greatest power stirs up the greatest envy; and if many
combine against him (be he the greatest Favorite that ever was, or can be
supposed) they will shrewdly put him to his trumpes, and if they be of as noble
courage and wit, as they are nobly descended, they will heave him out of the
saddle, when he thinks he sits surest. For concealed hatred is worse then open
enmity. And therefore let him gain new friends, keep his old, and not loose
any one, of those he has gotten. For being left single, and alone, he shall
be like unto that white Crow in the Fable, whom the crows would not come
near, because of his color; nor the pigeons keep him company, in regard of
his greatness; so that all will fly from him, and in the time of his greatest
need he shall be left all alone. Vae soli: Woe be to him that is alone. And
the holy Ghost seems to take pity of him that is alone, for that if he
fall, he has no body to help him up.

Let Favorites likewise consider, that they are not, for that their King has
expressed his affection unto them, and professed himself to be their friend, to
think, that (like a dog in a slip) they may lead him whither and which way
they list. For there are many things to be done, which he is to do without
them. For (as Cicero says) that friendship which admits not exception in
some cases, is not so much Amicitia, as Coniuratio; Amity, as conspiracy. It
is observed by the learned Saint Ambrose, That true friendship is grounded upon
that which is just and honest; and is so limited, that if it break those
bounds, it does not only loose it is name, but affoords just cause for a man to
forgo his friend. Friendship is to be held; but always with this prouiso,
that the Laws of Justice and Charity be duly observed; and when ought,
contrary thereunto, is pretended, it is no longer said to be friendship;
though vows and protestations have past, for the better strengthening and
confirming of it. For if a King shall swear amiss, and contrary to the rules
of charity, he is not bound to cumply with his oath, nor is there any reason
for it in the world, why he should in such sort make delivery and reason of
his heart to his Favorite, and let him have so much the hand of him, as to
promise to stick unto him, or to stand his friend in those things that are
unlawful and unjust. As those Kings, Assuerus and Tiberius proceeded with
Haman and Scianus; who, out of the favor that they bore unto them, gave them
leave to revenge themselves of their enemies, and to execute all the tyrannies
and cruelties which they could devise or imagine, to satisfy their malice. A
fault which deserved rather (and afterward drew on) their speedier and greater
fall. And well does that Favorite deserve to be ruined, that shall presume to
pretend hazer raga (as they say) con suamo. To stand just in the same streake
or line with his Master. For if God, who surpasses in glory, and from whom it
is impossible to take the least atome thereof, and is able to turn all that he
has created into dust, will not admit of a companion in matter of adoration
and worship; How much more will Kings of the earth be offended, and now ill
must they take it, that any Subject should equal his shoulder, or share with
him in his greatness, being his honor is so shortened, and his power so
limited? For, if out of their love to the person of the Favorite, they bear
with him for a while, either for to show themselves thankful for his good
services, or happily to make him the instrument to work their revenge on others;
Yet these affections and proofs (which I speak of) being once passed over,
there enters presently in the place thereof, a natural fear and jealousy of
their authority and greatness; which does much more sway with them, then the
love and affection which they bear to the Favorites person. Envy likewise
she comes in, and plays her part (which is a near neighbor, and still ready
at hand in Princes Courts and Palaces) as if she were Attorney general of all
those great places, and fomes forth her venom, secretly lying in wait, and
watching her time to do mischief, stabbing suddenly, deaths wound being given
before it be dreamed on; and great is the hurt which this so near a neighbor
to the Kings elbow, does; and out of an inbred spleen) aymeth at nothing
more, then the downfall of Favorites. Complaints and grieuances, they also
make their appearance in Court, being the maine witnesses that Envy and
Passion bring into the Court, to make good their plea. Next after these, comes
in the respect (not to say the fear) of those that are discontented in all
states; for no King will be willing, that their Subjects upon this ground
should build their rebellion, and cause an alteration in the kingdom; and will
be as loath to be ball'd on, by grieved and discontented persons, upon justly
pretended complaints; nor will he be so unwise (for fear of other claps) to
favor one, to offend many. All of them being shrewd blows, for to allay, if
not quell the courage of the most passionate King toward his dearest
Favorite; and are such fierce and terrible conflicts, that they toss his
judgment to and fro, with far greater violence, then a strong raging wind
does the waves of the Sea.

Governors and such as sit at the stern of a Commonwealth, wealth, and such,
unto whom Kings have delivered up the keys of their heart, and hold the rudder
of the Monarchy in their hands, to steare and shape their course, as they will
themselves, there is no question to be made of it, but that they are in great
danger upon every storm that shall arise; for look what misfortune shall
befall the Commonwealth, the blame shall be laid upon them, and the fault
imputed either to their ill counsel, or their ignorance, or their passion: For
ordinarily (nay I may say continually) the misfortunes and ill successes of
Kings, and kingdoms, I say the cause of them is attributed to those that are
nearest and dearest about the Kings person, and possess the highest places.
And every one running along with the common opinion (and few are they which
have not a smacke or taste thereof) labors to lay the fault on his
neighbor, though he be of his own proper flesh and blood. And this is an
inheritance which we have from our father Adam. And no man is ashamed thereof:
for we are all of us his heirs; and therefore ought to endeavor (as much as in
them lies) that the peace and quiet of the kingdom be not disturbed or
troubled in the time of their government. As well for their glory and
reputation, to have in all their proceedings carried themselves in such sort,
that no ill accident has betided them, or any maine disgrace; as also for the
not subiecting of themselves to the uncertain chances of fortune, which are
ordinary upon every alteration, and may serve to work their ruin and
perdition. Let therefore those have an eye (I say it, and say it again) that
are Priuie-Councellours to their King, and more particularly the Favorite, to
whom he shall have delivered up the possession of his heart, that the advice
and counsel which they shall give unto him, be good, pure, and clear water,
issuing from forth a pure, clean, and disinteres^ed bosom. Such is the water
(says Aristotle) as is the earth, through which it passes; if through mines
of brimstone, it scaldes and burns, if through craggy rocks, it cooles and
stupefies; and if through salt pits, it is brinish and brackish. The like
judgment may we make of counsel; if it proceed from a breast and heart that
is soul and filthy, it teaches filthiness; if from a pure, and clean,
honesty, and cleanness; if from a liberal, it does good unto all; if from a
covetous, it advises nothing but gripping and wringing of the Subject. So that
counsel is figured forth unto us in water: which in it is softness, savor,
color, and sent, is perfectly known, whether the mine be good or bad, through
which it passes. And such is their opinion, and that which they advise, as is
the humor that is predominant in their stomach. Every one casts his eye upon
his own particular, approving and accounting that for just which tends to his
profit, and condemning the contrary. God deliver Kings from such Councillors,
and let them take heed that they do not err in their advise, and in those
medicines and remedies, which hey prescribe unto their Kings, for it is as it
were a remediless and irrecouerable error; and theirs must be the fault, and
many times the punishment, but always the note and infamy of their Kings
erring. Nor let those that have the Kings care, make a mockery of my words,
for it is a very dangerous and ticklish place that they possess. Where, to
err, is an easy thing; but to hit right, hard; and even then, when they least
think of it, their preciousest Jewels, their richest Mettalls, and their
greatest treasures are turned into coals, and the like trash, like those
moneys of your Hobgoblins, Fairies, and Robin good-fellowes. It is an old
thredbare saying, That ill counsel turns to the Councillors own hurt.
Consilium malum, consultori pessimum (says Plutarch. Plut. in Moral.
) And the holy Ghost, That the first, with whom ill counsel meets, Eccles.
27.30.
is it is Author. Facienti nequissimum consilium, super eum deuoluitur. For as
he that casts a stone on high, it shall fall upon his own head; And as he,
that smites with guile, wounds himself; And whosoever diggeth a pit, shall fall
therein; And he that lays a stone in his neighbors way, shall stumble
thereon: And he that lays a snare for another, shall be taken in it himself;
so, whosoever gives a wicked noisome counsel, it shall come upon himself, and he
shall not know from whence. Wicked counsel is like a whirlwinde, which turns
against himself, causing a very dangerous tempest against that very place from
whence it came. And therefore he that gives counsel, it imports him much,
that he give good and sound advice; for if it be not good, God does permit,
that it makes for their own great hurt and perdition. As it succeeded with
those Princes of Babylon, who so ill advised their King against just Daniel;
God so ordering the business, that the same ill that they intended against
him, fell upon themselves, their wives, and their children. When God is willing
to put his arms athwart, and to cross wicked purposes, little will avail all
the ill counsel in the world, be the pate, that hatcheth it, as wise and as
subtle as Achitophels. As it fared with that great Favorite of king Assuerus,
in that deuillish and malicious plot of his, which he had imagined, and
contrived against poor honest Mardochee. But this was to him, elsuenno del
perro (as it is in the Fable) like to the dogs dream. There was a dog that
did dream, that he was eating a good morsel of flesh, and as he was chopping
of it up, uttered some broken notes in his language, of the great content that
he took therein. His Master seeing him in this manner, takes up a good
cudgel, and soundly lamm's him; the dog awakes, finds himself deceived,
and runs whining away. Haman, carried away with the like conceit, prepares a
gallows for Mardochee, fifty cubits high, thinking thereon to hang him the
next day; but it was his ill luck to supply the place himself. Consilia enim
(says Saint Basil) quae contra bonos mores dantur, Basil in orat. 1^^ de
faelicit. and prudentia.
in propria capita eorum, qui consulunt, redundant: Those counsels that are
given contrary to good manners, light upon their heads, that gave them. And
therefore let Councillors be well advised, what counsel they give. Aelian
reports that there was a very ancient Law, and duly kept in the kingdom of
Persia, that if any should advise the King to any thing that was not
beneficial to his person, and the commonwealth, presently by the common Crier,
his ill counsel was published, and himself taken and stripped, and openly whipped
up and down the streets. And if there were such a Law in force here with us,
and as duly observed, I assure my self, that neither Kings would be so often
deceived, as now they are; nor would there be so many undertakers and
proiectors, who impudently presume to put into their heads, things that are so
pernicious to their own conscience, and the public good.

Supreme authority, Kings neither ought to give, nor Favorites take it. Let
them (as much as they can) conceal from the world, that great grace and favor
wherein they stand with their King; but if there shall be an impossibility in
that, yet there is none in this, to let pretenders know, that all consists in
the Prince; and to refer the conferring of all benefits, favors, and graces
unto him; and to let him have all the thanks, in matter of pensions, offices,
or rewards; and to attribute unto him, all those successes, that fall out well
and happily, and all other good and prudent resolutions; and to free him from
the blame of those that shall otherwise succeed. To treat him with much
reverence and respect; to bear him exceeding great love; And together with
these, to be wonderful solicitous and careful in all that shall concern his
service. All of them being notable and necessary qualities, for to conserve
Favorites in their Kings grace and good opinion, and to wedge their affection
unto them. For love must be the door, by which the grace of a Prince is to
enter. For he must love, that will be beloved. And having gained it by this
means, he must keep and preserve it, by reverence and humility in his
carriage, and by being faithful and diligent in his service. All which will be
lost by doing the contrary. And not only ought they to carry themselves thus
toward their Kings, but are also to esteem and honor all, of all estates, in
a fitting proportion, according to every man's quality and condition. Showing
himself liberal, solicitous, peaceable, patient, loving, kind, and courteous
toward all. All of them qualities that conserve a Kings favor, and gain the
peoples good will. A Favorite must be modest, affable, and afford a courteous
hearing unto all men. Besides, it is a part of Justice so to do, and a very
necessary means to come to the knowledge of all things, and to be the better
provided against whatsoever shall occur. Whereas on the contrary, to look to
be entreated, and sued unto, and not easy to be spoken withal, argues a
kind of pride and stateliness, which all abhor. This is the doctrine of
Tacitus, citing the example of Seianus, the Emperor Tiberius his great
Favorite; who being grown into grace with him, the better to conserve
himself therein, forthwith endeavored to favor and pleasure all your
principal and noble persons in their pretensions. For in all occurrences, he
conceived, he might expect more kindness from them, then from the baser and
meaner sort of people; whereby he came to be loved of the one, and feared of
the other; and by all of them, to be served and obeyed. Insomuch that there was
not any one who did not seek unto him to mediate and make intercession for
them, with Tiberius. And howbeit he was not ignorant, that he was superior to
them all, and inferior to none, yet did he never grow neglectfull of his
humble carriage, and reverent respect to his Prince, and a due regard unto all.
Hitherto he proceeded fairly, and went on well, and may serve for a pattern
and example for Favorites; but in the rest for a prouiso, and admonition for
Kings. For after that ambition and covetousness entered into his heart, that
consuming moath, and devouring worm of all goodness, he presently procured
the charge or place of Praefectus Praetorius, or Captainship of the Guard; and
within a short time grew to be so absolute therein, that he became as it were
Lord and Master of his Prince, and crushed all that stood in his way, or might
be of any impediment to his priuacie. He sought always to be with him, lest
others might creep in betwixt him and home, and possess his place: still
humbly beseeching him, that he would employ him in businesses of greatest
danger and trouble, and such as might redound most to the benefit of the
Emperors life and state. A maine point, wherewith to oblige his Prince unto
him, and to make him the more acceptable in his sight. For those that are
nearest about Kings, and are in greatest favor with him, ought in the greatest
dangers to set their foot foremost, and to be the forwardest adventurers. He did
seek to overcome Art, by Art, inducing Tiberius, to retire himself to places
of pleasure, that were remote and far from Court, to the end that whilst he
was recreating himself abroad, he might dispose of him, as it pleased him. He
told him, that solitude was the best and only course for the resolving of the
grave and weighty affairs of the Empire, which otherwise by diuersion might
receive the same hurt and hinderance, as they were wont to have heretofore. And
what with this, and with giving him to understand, that he would quit him of
all the ordinary cares and troubles of Court (most men usually desiring to
shun trouble, and to take their ease and pleasure) he persuaded him to go to
Capri, that he, in the mean while, might rule and govern all. And in the end
grew to be so great and powerful, and to take such state upon him, that he
would not give audience to any, reducing them to those terms, that they
should speak and negociate by writing, to the end that nothing might be
treated or resolved of, without his privy saying; That by reducing businesses
to papers and memorialls, answer might be given unto them with more
deliberation, and better consideration then by word of mouth. A mere Artifice,
and cunning trick of his own invention, to make himself absolute Master of
all, and (which is more) of the heart of his Prince. God deliver us from such
ambitious, interessed, and covetous Ministers, whose maine care, is their own
particular, and to heap up riches for himself, and his; and make it their
whole study and only end to keep and continue themselves in their kings grace
and favor; and to deal with their Prince, as the Ante does with the corn,
which that it may not grow again, and that he may the better and more
conveniently make profit thereof, presently eats out the heart of it. God
likewise free Kings, from this base subjection, and insensibilitie, and from
men of that quality and condition, which desire to rule and command all. For
the one cannot escape a storm; and the other must run great hazard of being
drowned therein.

Let the last advertisement be the example of a great Favorite, whose name is
Aurelius Cassidorus, borne in the Province of Calabria, and highly advanced in
Magistracies, and Governments of both Empires, Rome and Constantinople; who
being renowned for his cheualrie, and noble feats of arms, defended the
Islands of Sicily and Calabria from many, and those very powerful enemies. In
his younger years, he attained to all the liberal arts, in that perfection,
that he made the present and succeeding times, to admire him. And for his
great parts and abilities, was entertained by Theodoricus, King of the
Ostro-Gothes:; he was received into his service, and grew so far into his
favor, by reason of his understanding, wisdom, and dextrousnesse, in
treating businesses, that he first of all made him his Secretary; in which
Office, he behaved himself so well, that by degrees, he went climbing up to
the high Offices and dignities in the State; which in those days were not
conferred out of favor, but mere desert. From being Secretary, he came to be
Lord Chancellor, and Senator in the City of Rauenna, being honored besides
with diverse offices in the Kings Court. Afterward he was made Viceroy of the
Provinces of Sicilia and Calabria; and for addition of honor, had the title of
Pat^^^^e given him, which in those days was in great esteem. He was Lord
Treasurer, and Master of the Palace; which was as it were a superintendent over
the Palatines, being an order of Knights and Gentlemen, that had Offices, and
other pre^etainences in Court. He held the dignity of Prafect^us Praetorius,
being as it were the second person of the King; to whom, the weightiest
businesses of peace and war were remitted: and what therein he determined and
resolved upon, was received as an oracle that could not err. Though now
adays, little credit is given to the words of great persons and powerful
Ministers, and not without cause; for that many of them say, and do not;
promise much, and perform little. And your Favorites, which have great both
place and power about their Kings, are in such good opinion and credit likewise
with the world, that they presently believe whatsoever they say; and see what
they profess, is approved by them, as if it were a sentence pronounced from
the mouth of a most just Judge: And therefore they ought well and wisely to
consider what they speak, and not to enlarge themselves in words, putting
those that are pretenders in great good hopes. Which if they shall not
afterward take effect, will prove to be no other then that fair and
beautiful fruit, whose sight pleases the eye; but whose taste kills the
body. In conclusion, this Favorite, by round after round, clambred up to all
the honourablest offices, and greatest dignities of the kingdom. He came to
be Consul, which charge he administered with extraordinary integrity and
virtue. All the Magistracies, Offices, and Governments which he held, were but
as so many steps one to the other; which the Princes; under whom he served,
went still increasing and augmenting. For he carried himself so wisely and
discreetly in them, that there was not that office that he bore, which did not
make him the meritour and deseruer of another far greater and better then it.
And all did acknowledge and confess, that his merits and deserts were far
greater then all the offices put together which he enjoyed and administered. In
those whom he represented and recommended to his King, to the end that his
Majesty might confer some one favor or another upon them, he evermore had
an eye to the necessity of the office, and the quality of the person. Things
wherein Favorites ought to be very careful, when they employ their favor in
furthering any man; as whether they be moved thereunto upon a just or ill
affection, or by the sole virtue and merit of the person, etc. And not to
think with themselves, that because they are in great grace and favor with
their King, that it is lawful for them to violate the Law of Justice, which
ought to be equal to all, (which in eyes, not blinded with passion and
co^^etousnesse, she her self makes it plainly appear) and to thrust the
better deseruer besides that dignity and office which is due unto him. Which
is a Law that obliges all, for that it is a natural obligation, and has all
the Laws of reason on it is side, which are more powerful then either the will
of Kings, or their Favorites. The not keeping whereof, is but a large and
swift running fountain of complaints and distat^. The one, to see themselves
rejected, and excluded from public honors: The other, to see them put
forward, whom nature has not adopted, nor learning, nor virtue, but either
good or bad diligences. And that these shall have preser^en^^, and get the
start of other men, it is because either love or interest makes them to be held
more worth; when at the other, only for that they are not in the like favor,
or not so fit for their ends (for Favorites favor few, same such as will be
instruments of their wills) though otherwise they be of better parts, better
qualified, and of stronger abilities, are left unrewarded, and are quite
forgotten. And these that are thus made up in haste, and so suddenly raised
from that nothing, which they were, to that greatness wherein they are, must
of force sometimes with the same haste and speediness (though sore against
their wills) for the avoiding of inconveniences, be pulled down from this
their high seat, and placed in some other, that may seem to fute better with
them, wherein the like suspicion may justly be conceived of their
insufficiency.

This great Favorite had likewise so good a Head-peece, and knew so well how
to govern upon all occasions, and all the accidents of that age, as well the
good, as bad, the fortunate and unfortunate successes of those times, that
howbeit many were the changes of those Kings, yet was he still in the same
height of esteem, was superior unto fortune, being in all those alterations,
her Lord and Master. All the Kings of the Goths, whom he served, did him very
particular favors. And although King Theodoricus was a very fortunate and
valiant Prince, yet did a great part of his happiness and felicity consist in
this, in having his Favorite Cassiodorus always at his elbow, and in
receiving his good proiects, and sound advice which (when occasion offered)
were never wanting unto him. Sen lib. 10. Epist. 72.
That being (according unto Seneca) the best part of counsel, which comes in
it is due time and season; Whereas that comes toolate, and without any fruit,
which is not ready at hand. For occasion (whereunto we must occur)
oftentimes betakes her self to her wings, and flies out of our reach, if we be
not quick and nimble in laying hold on her foretop. So that all the while that
this Cassiodorus was in their service, their kingdom and Signorie continued in
a most flourishing estate. So much can a man of such courage and counsel do
in a commonwealth. For with such a Ministers presence, all things stand
upright, and go well and handsomely on; but in his absence, and when he is
wanting, all things go backward. For, being that all these things depend next
after God, on the worth and wisdom of him that has the managing of them; by
his death or absence, they run a great hazard of miscarrying, or suffer some
great hurt or detriment; as was to be seen in those successes of the Grecian
Empire; which (no sooner was that great governor Alexander dead, under whose
protection it went increasing, and lived in so much peace and security) but it
vanished like so much froath. For of how much the more price and esteem peace
is, by so much the more is it hazarded in the loss of those that maintain and
uphold it. Now this so excellent and worthy a Minister, when as nothing was
wanting unto him, save the putting on of a Kings Crown, refused it, became a
Friar, and took upon him the habit of the order of San Benito. And did so
exercise himself in continual prayer and contemplation, that even whilst he
lived here upon earth, they held him for a Saint. And if he were so worthy a
man in that age, serving the Kings of the earth, with so much punctualitie and
sincerity; it is not to be doubted, but that he was as precise in his
sanctity and holiness of life, when he rendered himself a slave, and servant
to his Lord and Master the King of heaven. For your excellent wits, which know
how to make advantage of all things, and that nothing comes amiss unto them,
when they are once resolved to serve God, they do truly humble themselves, and
with a strong determination, tread and trample the world under their feet, and
whatsoever therein is, and embrace and take hold on Christ. And being thus
occupied in holy exercises, laden with years, he departed out of this life,
to that which was eternal, having inioyed some years of that quietude and
abundance of peace, wherewith he did essay to die well, (which being so
dangerous, so difficult, and dark a passage, too little care is commonly had
therein) he passed from this short stride betwixt life and death, to the
eternity of such an estate, as we yet know not what it shall be, the extremes
being (as we see) so far distant.

All that has been hitherto said both in general and particular, concerning
a Monarchy, and kingdom, shall not be fruitless, nor the time lost, that
has been spent in the writing, or shall be spent in the reading of this
Treatise, if it be well and truly considered. For by the perusal thereof,
Kings and Princes may come to know a thousand several semblances of Ministers,
and disguised countenances of hypocritical Courtiers, and the diverse
dispositions and humors, as well of the ambitious as the covetous; their
affections, conditions, and natural inclinations, whether they be by nature of
great and vn^^uly spirits, or whether they be by fortune put into great
places. For this, without doubt, changes man from his first estate, and
apparrelleth him with other particular affections; And in the true knowledge of
these, consists the augmentation, conservation, and good gubernation of
kingdoms, and commonwealths: as also the reputation, credit, opinion, and
authority of Kings. In a word, they may out of these doctrines, and
aduertisements, collect and know how at one time the natural dispositions,
customs, and manners of the vulgar, stand affected, and how at another time
those that are not so vulgar, and of so low a rank, and how at all times to
make use of this knowledge, for the better increasing and enlarging of their
power and greatness; and how, and in what manner, they are to carry themselves
toward them; as also those other, that are to aid and assist in government.
For there is not any thing of more price, or more to be valued by Kings, then
this knowledge of the affections, as well for the discerning those of others,
as the moderating of their own. And as it were to make a judgment, and to
prognosticate by them, the end of the actions of those that are about, and
where they intend to make their stop, and set up their rest, be they foes, or
friends. And by the actions of those that are present (be they Confederates,
Ministers, and dependents) their ends, designs, and pretensions. And
particularly in those who cleave closer to their Kings fortune, then his
person. Points, whereon does hang the hinge, and wherein are included and shut
up, all both the particular and general passages of government, and of that
art, and science, which they call by the common name of Reason of State. And
although I know for certain, that there will not such be wanting, that will
laugh and scoff at these my Political Aduertisements; some because they would
be accounted the only men seen in this Science, and would make themselves the
only admired men amongst the vulgar, and that there is not any one that is a
professor in that Art, that understands their plots and designs: Others,
less malignant, as being ignorant of the secrets of this Science, judging it
to be an Art, full of impossibilities, will not trouble themselves
therewithal, nor look into the Mysteries thereof, as if by the effects, they
were not able to judge of the causes of things; and by the carriage and
success of former businesses, to divine of the ends and designs of those
which are now on foot. And others, far worse then these, who although they
come to know this truth, deny the same, and seek many colors both for the
disgracing of it, and the Author; and for no other reason in the world, but
because they are professed enemies, to whatsoever counsel, that is not of
their own hatching, fearing that it might quit something of the glory of their
ambition. And for that they will have nothing thought to be good, but what
issues from forth their own brain, they blaspheme (says Saint James) and
speak evil of that which they know not; and not only not admit and receive
that good which is propounded unto them; but (as that kingly Prophet says)
because they will neither understand nor hear it, like the Adder, they stop
their ears with the tail of their ignorance, fearing lest they should be
charmed by some superior wit, and better understanding. Yet notwithstanding,
fall back, fall edge, come what will of it, I have cumplyed with my desire,
and (which is more) with my obligation. And if it shall prove to be of any use,
profit, and service, for Kings, and for the great Councillors and Ministers of
their kingdoms (which have most need thereof) to whose service it goes
especially directed, and perhaps may be useful for those which are not in that
nature. And though happily it may not be available for amendment, yet may it
serve for a desenganno, and dis-deceiuing of those that are in an error. And
in case it shall not take this effect, there will be no harm done by
committing it to the Press, though it be afterward buried in the dust, as it
has befallen other far better things then these; And Time, which couers what
is past, and discouers what is to come, will in it is time discover this, and
such other things, as are not yet come to light. And for this cause, they
called Archimedes the Syracusan, The Inuenter of new Things, and the Register
of old. And certain it is, that amongst the Ancients, there was a great
agreement and Artifice in the government of some commonwealths, as was that of
the Egyptians, of the Athenians, of the Allmanes, and above all, of the Roman
Commonwealth; Which Saint Austen did so much admire. And men looking no further
then to that which is before them, have, in a manner, quite forgotten that, and
therefore it is fit that there should be some Remembrancer, that by putting
them in mind of that which is past, they may the better perform things for
the present, and provide for that which is to come. For (as Plato said, though
in another sense) all our knowledge is but a Recordation of things past; and
therein he said well. For a great part of those novelties, which are daily
introduced, are but old things, that have layen long in oblivion; and that
which is done to day, we find, is forgotten to morrow. And in the revolution
of time, comes (in after ages) to represent it self for new. And this (amongst
many others) was the maine cause which moved me to write this Treatise, and
which may encourage me to go on further, though I must confess, that my pen
has out run my intention, finding that I have thrust my foot deeper into the
stirrup, then I thought to have done; having made a volumne of that, which when
I first put p^^ to paper, I purposed should have ended in a short and little
Tract. But who can put a bridle unto love, or restrain zeal? and more
especially, when it is so natural and proper, as that which all, and every
one, does or ought to bear unto his own King and Lord. Adding thereunto mine
own particular respect, in regard of my nearer reference to his Majesty's
service? And no small spur hereunto, was my honest true meaning heart, and
the assurance of a good conscience, whose whole study and desire in this my
labor has been, to hit as right as I could upon that which might be most
convenient, for the augmentation, conservation, reputation, authority, and
greatness of Kings; as likewise, what I thought would be most necessary for
the welfare and good government of kingdoms and particular Commonwealths. For
this does depend on that. Though I conceive there be few that think thereon.
For most (I fear me) treat only their own business, making that the
principal, and all the rest accidental. Howbeit they will not stick to say,
and publish to the world, that they only attend the conservation of their
Kings and Commonwealths. Would to God that it might not be said of them, which
he himself said by the mouth of that his Prophet, and Prince of his people;
They honor me with their lip, Cor autem little long est a me: But their heart
is far from me. God I beseech thee, of thy infinite mercy, that the hearts
of Kings and their Ministers, may not be far off from thee; nor thou from
them; but that thou will vouchsafe to be evermore near at hand unto them, and
to favor them, and direct them in all their ways, to thy honor and glory.
Amen.

Laus Deo.
FJNJS.
Errata.
Page 7. line 26. A Certar, read Acertar. p. 13. l 31. his family, r. it is
family. p. 17. l. 35. denotate, r. denotateth. p. 24. l. 26. though, r.
thought. p. 33. l. 29. wootst, r. wot'st. p. 34. l. 34. men, r. man. p. 53. l.
19. sapientio rerit, r. sapientior erit. p. 71. l. 20. su spasses, r. sus
passos. p. 87. l 9. wise, r. the wise. ibid. l. 13. of force, r. of the force.
p 135. l. 1. Regular, r. Regalar. p. 136. l. 15. goodnesses, r. goodness. p.
151. l. 22. content to, r. to content. p. 156. l. 9. subject. r. subjects. p.
157. l. 20. sa soga, r. la soga. p. 175. l. 24. this answer, r. this I answer.
p. 142. l. 18. careesse, r. careless. p. 245. l. 3. seuerietie, r. severity.
ibid. l. 32. are that, r. that are. p. 261. l. 17. impostoures, r. impostures.
Ibid. l. 32. nistad, r. mistad. p. 273. l. 30. cabines, r. cabinets. p. 287. l.
14. therein, r. there is. p. 294. l. 30. requencie, r. frequencie. p. 320. l.
27. or judgment, r. or that judgment. p. 323. l. 11. inionyed, r. enjoined.
p. 344. l. 12. deliaces, r. delicasies. p. 352. l. 19. of much, r. much of.


