A POOR MAN'S MITE.

A letter of a Religious man of the Order of Saint BENEDICT, unto a Sister of
his, concerning the Rosarie or Psalter of our blessed Lady, Commonly called
the Beads.

IHS

Printed with license of Superiors. M.DC.XXXIX.

A Poor Man's Mite.
A Letter of a Religious Man of the Order of S. BENEDICT unto a sister of his
concerning the ROSARIE or PSALTER of our blessed LADY commonly called the
BEADS.
Dear Sister.
I Have sent you a small token of my no small love, a pair of plain Beads,
together with the explication thereof. The 1. Reg. 18, 19.
Prophet David used to sing certain spiritual Ditties or Songs to his Harp,
with which melody, he so appeased the spirit of fury, wherewith King Saul
was possessed, and grievously tormented: that notwithstanding he was so
incensed against David, that he would have slain him: he was feign to
forbear, for the great ease he enjoyed by his melody yea and whilst he
sang in his presence, he had no power to execute his wicked purpose upon him,
as if he had enchaunted him by the sweetness thereof, as indeed it seemed to
do. These Songs are called Psalms of Psallo a latin word, which in english
signifies to sing, because they were sung to the Harp, and the whole number
of them, are called David's Psalter. They are registered amongst the Books of
Canonical Scripture, and accounted a principal part thereof so mysterious,
that they are appliable and correspondent to all the affections and motions of
our mind whatsoever. They are spiritual Manna, Sapient. 16. verse. 20. Exodus
16. verse. 14. Number. 11. verse. 7.
having the taste of every good thing we can desire: In regard whereof a
certain Father affirms, whatsoever is contained in all the other Books of
holy Scripture, by way of Prophecy, Doctrine, or Example; is comprised in this
by way of spiritual Songs, and praises of God, the several Verses whereof
are, as it were, so many iaculatorie darts cast up to heaven; and therefore
they are altogether used in the Church-Seruice and in the Office of our blessed
Lady, commonly called the Primmer, and in the Manual of Prayers, as a most
sovereign and sanctified devotion to please God, and appease the fury of our
ghostly enemy the Devil, who like another Saul seeks the destruction of our
souls. The number of theses Psalms are one hundred and fifty, and are
called, as I said before, the Psalter of David.

To the imitation of this holy Psalter, the Church has ordained another divine
Psalter, called the Psalter of Jesus, commonly set in the latter end of the
Manual of Prayers consisting also of the like number, that is to say, fifteen
Petitions, with ten Inuocations to each Petition. And to the same imitation,
the Church has instituted yet another Psalter, of our blessed Lady, the
glorious Virgin Mary, commonly called the Rosarie or Psalter of our blessed
Lady, or the Beads, consisting of the like number of Aue Mary's, and is
divided into three parts, each part consisting of fifty Aue Mary's, whereunto
are added five Pater nosters, to wit, one between every ten Aue Mary's, and a
Creed at the end.

This Psalter is nothing inferior unto the other two: but rather so much the
more sovereign, by how much more excellent the words and mysteries thereof
are: The Pater noster for sanctity and pithynesse no Prayer comparable unto
it, proceeding from the sacred mouth of Christ, Matthew. 6. verse. 9. Luc. 1.
verse. 29.
and instituted by him as a general form of Prayer.

The Aue Mary, indicted by the most blessed Trinity, in heaven, and brought as
an Embassage, unto the earth by the Arch-angell Gabriel, (b) for most joyful
tidings of the Redemption of Mankind, the blessed Virgin Mary being saluted
and honored with the miraculous Motherhood of the Worlds Redeemer.

The Creed contains the twelve principal articles of our Faith, whereupon
as most certain and infallible foundations, our holy Catholic belief
(without which, Ephesians. 2. verse. 20. Hebr. 11. verse. 5.
it is impossible to please God) is built, and erected, and was composed by the
twelve Apostles, each of them making one several Article, which in regard
thereof, is called in Latin, S^mbo^um Apostolorum, that is to say, The Shot of
the Apostles, alluding to an Ordinary, whereas every one of the Commensals lay
down their shot or share. And as this Creed is a geuerall Sum of all our
belief: so are the Pater noster, and Aue Marie, general forms of prayer and
praisings of God, which may be applied to all the particular affections and
motions of our mind, whatsoever we desire to obtain at the hands of
Almighty God, as the Psalter of David may. And as our Savior Christ commended
the Pater noster unto us, saying: When you pray, pray thus, Our Father. etc. So
our blessed Lady in her Hymn of Magnificat, commended the Aue Marie unto us,
saying: For, behold from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed: for
with what words, I pray you, can we more properly and pleasingly to God and
Her, call her blessed, then by the Aue Marie, wherewithal the Angel Gabriel
was sent from Heaven to salute her so, as aforesaid?

The mystery of the number of prayers in this holy Rosarie or Psalter is this:
In the old Law, Leuit. 25. verse. 10.
before the coming of Christ, every Fiftieth year was a year of Iubile,
wherein there was a general forgiveness of all debts, crimes, and grieuances
whatsoever, and a reducing of all things to their former quality and state: in
which all grieuances being redressed, the whole earth did seem to rejoice, and
clap her hands, and therefore had the appellation of the year of Iubile, or
Iubilation, that is to say, of exceeding joy and iubilation: and this was
indeed a figure of the most ample remission of sins in the new Law, by the
Death and Passion of Christ Jesus, expressed more plainly by the descending of
the holy Ghost (the Fountain of Grace and Remission of sins) upon the
Apostles and Disciples of Christ, Fifty days after his Death and
Resurrection, upon the feast of Pentecost or Whitsunday, so called, in regard
of the number of fifty days.

Wherefore by the number of fifty Aues Mary's, whereof the third part of the
said Psalter consists, is aptly signified remission of sins. By the five
Pater nosters, is signified the five principal wounds of Christ, which five
wounds may be resembled to those Cities of refuge in the old Law, Dcuter. 15.
verse. 2.
as it were, places of Sanctuary for all Offenders to fly unto for refuge
against their persecuting Foes, either spiritual or corporal. By the ten Aue
Mary's between the Pater nosters, is signified the ten Commandments. By the
Creed is signified the Catholic Faith or Belief, out of which there is no
salvation, or possibility of pleasing God, as aforesaid: So that all this put
together signifies thus much, when we say this holy Psalter. We desire that
by the keeping of the ten Commandments signified by the ten Aue Mary's,
between the Pater nosters, We being of the Catholic Faith or Belief,
signified by the Creed, in the virtue of the five wounds and death of Christ,
signified by the five Pater nosters, we may obtain remission of our sins
signified by the fifty Aue Mary's, the number of remission of sins, as
aforesaid. Besides this, the Church adds her Benediction or Sanctification to
the Beads whereupon they are said, wherewithal I have caused yours to be
hallowed, to make them (being otherwise but plain) more precious unto you.

That the Church has such authority, you need not doubt, it being the use in
the old Law Number. 7. verse. 1.
to bless or hallow, not only the Temple and Altars, but also all Vestments
and Vtensils belonging to the service of God. And Saint Paul says (a) that
Creatures are or may be sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer, especially
that which is authorized and appointed by the Church of God to that end, as
this of the Beads is. Moreover, if there be any virtue in words (as certainly
there is) and if words can enchaunt Serpents, as it appears they can, out of
the prophet David (b) and many natural experiences there are of the same. Then
surely it is piously to be thought, that Almighty God is pleased to be, as it
were, enchaunted with these most sovereign prayers devoutly rehearsed, and
has caused our blessed Lady and his Saints to be so likewise: and no
marvel, though he make himself subject hereunto, 1. Tim. 4. verse. 5. Psalm.
57.
when he said to his servant Moses, (a) Let me go that my fury may be angry
against this people: as if Moses had forceably with holden him.

This Rosarie or Psalter of our blessed Lady, is adorned with fifteen most
pious and devout Meditations, to wit, of the five joyous, five dolorous, and
five glorious mysteries of our blessed Lady, well known to most Catholics and
used accordingly, with sundry other kinds of godly and devout Meditations:
amongst which I lighted of late upon certain most devout and ancient
Meditations in latin, called Rasarium aureum, the golden Rosarie, which, in my
opinion, does very well deserve that name. These have I translated into English
meeter, and sent unto you to stir up and sweetne^ your devotion so much the
more. Exodus 32. verse. 9.


If you object the Aue Mary, pronounced by the Angel Gabriel, is no prayer but
only a falutation? I answer, The Church has made it an express Prayer, by
adding unto the Salutation of the Angel, these words: Holy Mary mother of God,
pray for us sinners, now, and in the boure of our death. Amen. Which thing,
supposing the doctrine of the Invocation of Saints to be true, She may
lawfully do, and has great reason to do unto our blessed Lady as a general
prayer for all vies especially, considering the Salutation was intentionally
said as a prayer, before: and was more then insinuated for such by our Savior
Christ upon the Cross, saying to our blessed Lady of Saint John Joan. 19.
verse. 26.
Woman, behold thy Son: and to him of her, Behold thy Mother: by which words
he commended her mystically, not only to Saint John, but also to all others in
him, that are John's by grace and love of God, as he was by name, as a Mother
of intercesssion to God for them, and they as children confidently to entreat
it at her hands.

If your conceit suggest unto you, It is a dishonor to God to pray unto his
Mother? answer unto it, No more dishonor, then to desire one another prayers
here on earth, which is to the greater honor of God, commanded and commended
unto us in his sacred Word. If it urge, The Saints know not our prayers?
answer, They rejoice at the conversion of a Sinner: Therefore they know the
same. If the often repetitio^ of the same prayers seem vain? answer. It is
full of mystery and holy meditation, as is before declared; which
mysteriousnesse, together with the often repetition, do maruailously incite
the soul to fervor and devotion, if it be done with due attention. The
Angels use the repetition of Holy, holy, holy. Matthew. 26. verse. 44.
Our Savior Christ, went three several times together into the Garden and
prayed (as the text says) the same Prayer. In the 135. Psalm. the Prophet
David repeateth in every verse, for his mercy endures for ever. If one may use
often repetitio^ of one thing in the praise of God, Why not in prayer? This
being so, this holy Psalter of the Beads cannot be but a most acceptable
service and devotion to God, and to our blessed Lady the glorious Virgin Marie
the Mother of of God, and to all the Court of Heaven. And to our enemy the
Devil a great confusion, chasing him out of our hearts, or at least repressing
and much appeasing his deadly assaults and temptations against us, as that
Psalter of David did, as aforesaid, which was indeed, a lively figure of this.

Before every Meditation following say the first part of the Aue Marie till you
come to Jesus: Then say the Meditation in verse: then the other part of the Aue
Marie in order as it lies.

The golden Rosarie of the most glorious Virgin MARY.
Pater noster, Aue Maria, etc.
JESUS.
1. MAry of Virgins all most pure
Receive this golden Rosarie,
Decked with the life of thy sweet Son
Under a brief compendiarie.
JESUS.
2. Whom thou, a Virgin void of sin,
Conceiuedst of the holy Ghost,
When Gabriels news thou did believe,
Gayning thereby what Eve had lost.
JESUS.
3. Of whom thou being great with Child,
Unto Elizabeth did hie,
And John the Baptist in her womb
Did with thy presence sanctify.
JESUS.
4. Whom in the City Bethleem
Thou did bring forth with heavenly joy,
Free from those pains which evermore
Women in Chil birth do annoy.
JESUS.
5. Whom newly in a Stable borne
Thou did forth with as God. adore;
And with thy Virgins milk distst feed,
A thing most strange, never heard before.
JESUS.
6. Whom thou did wrapp in silly clowts,
And with brute beasts laid in a Manger;
And did him serve in what thou could,
To keep his tender Corpse from danger.
JESUS.
7. Whom troops of Angels, with great joy
And heavenly melody did praise;
Proclayming glory unto God,
And peace to Men on earth always.
JESUS.
8 Who^ being chief of Shepherds all,
The Shepherds of the field first found:
And finding, worshipped as their Lord
Though lying poorly on the ground.
JESUS.
9. Who did vouchsafe like sinful man,
To take the mark of Circumcision:
And eke the Name of Jesus sweet,
Our sinful souls Physician.
JESUS.
10. To whom three Kings did come with gifts
Of Gold, and Myrrh, and Frank^ncense,
Directed by a blazing star,
And him adored with reverence.
Pater noster, Aue Maria; etc.
JESUS.
1. Who being forty days of age,
Thou in the Temple did present
According unto Mose Law,
Making thy self obedient.
JESUS.
2. Whom flying Herodes persecution,
To Egypt thou by night did carry:
And after coming back from thence,
In Nazareth with him did tarry.
JESUS.
3. Whom in the Temple thou did lose
With many a tear and woeful heart,
But missing him, did seek him out.
And finding him, did glad depart.
JESUS.
4. Whom with the labor of thy hands,
In all his wa^ts thou did sustain:
And though thy means were very poor,
Yet did thou never once complain.
JESUS.
5. Whom John in Iordane did baptize
And pointing to him, thus did say:
Behold, the Lamb of God one hie,
That takes the sin of Man away.
JESUS.
6. Whom Satan in great subtilitie
Did tempt with sundry sorts of sin,
To try where he was God or Man,
But no way could prevail therein.
JESUS.
7. Who at thy motion did vouchsafe
To change pure Water into Wine,
Confirming his Disciples faith
By that strange miracle divine.
JESUS.
8. Who freed such as were possessed
With wicked spirits in body or mind,
Curing the sick and lame also,
And giving sight unto the blind.
JESUS.
9. Who raised Lazarus from the grave.
Restored to life the Widows son;
Brought home again the prodigal Child
That such a desperate race had run.
JESUS.
10. Who often with Sinners did converse,
And often with such did take repast,
And them unto repentance brought,
Forgiving all their sins at last.
Pater noster, Aue Maria, etc.
JESUS.
1. Whose feet the sinner Magdalen
Did wash with tears of love and grief,
And sorrowing deeply for her sins,
Obtained pardon and relief.
JESUS.
2. Who on the holy Mount of Thabor
Caused his body so to shine,
That blessed Peter, James, and John,
Did see his Majesty divine.
JESUS.
3. Whom store of people with applause
With boughs of palm strewing his way,
Did bring into Jerusalem,
But him forsook that very day.
JESUS.
2. Who, e're he eat the Pascall Lamb,
Washed his twelve Disciples feet,
Then fed them with his Flesh and Blood
In Sacrament of love most sweet.
JESUS.
5. Who in the Garden prostrate prayde
With sweat of water mixed with blood,
For fear of death, yet glad to die,
If to his Father it seemed good.
JESUS.
6. Whom vile and most malicious Knaves
Did take, and eke with cords did tie,
And brought him captive to the Judge.
Who then was Cayphas Bishop hie.
JESUS.
7. Whose comely face (O heinous crime)
With filthy spittle they berayde,
And with their firsts full many a blow
Most cruelly thereon they laid.
JESUS.
8. Whom they to Pilate did present
To be condemned and judged to dye,
Bringing false witness to that end,
Who did accuse him wrongfully.
JESUS.
9. Whom Pilate unto Herod sent,
To do with him what he best deemed,
Who for his silence sent him back,
Clad like a Fool and so esteemed.
JESUS.
10. Whose tender Flesfl with whips they tore:
Whose sacred Head they crowned with thorn,
In purple garments like a King,
And so saluted him in scorn.
Pater noster, Aue Maria, etc.
JESUS.
1. Whom wounded sore with cruel stripes,
The Soldiers lewdly did deride,
And eke the Jews with open mouth
Did cry to have him crucifide.
JESUS.
2. Whom as a Malefactor then,
Pilate condemned unto death,
Bearing his Cross upon his back,
Till he was spent and out of breath.
JESUS.
3. Whom on the Mount of Caluarie
They stripped naked to the skin;
And setting up the Cross an end,
Did nail him hands and feet therein.
JESUS.
4. Who for his Persecutors prayde
Unto his heavenly Father dear,
And stretched on the bloody Cross,
His pains most patie^tly did bear.
JESUS.
5. Who unto the repentant Thief,
Of all his sins full pardon gave,
With promise of eternal bliss,
Which he there hanging by did crave.
JESUS.
6. Who unto his Disciple John
Thee for his Mother did comend,
And him to thee as a dear Son
In mutual love for to depend.
JESUS.
7. Who when he seemed to complain.
His Father had him quite forsook,
His Foes blasphemed him the more
And no compassion on him took.
JESUS.
8. Who when he cried out, I thirst,
His forces being almost spent,
They gave him galle and vinegre,
That so they might him more torment.
JESUS.
9. Who by his Passion finishing
The prophecies of holy Writ,
Discharged the debt of Adams sin,
Paying his precious blood for it.
JESUS.
10. Who then into his Fathers hands
His sacred Spirit did commend,
Crying alowd with voice most shrill,
And so his blessed Life did end.
Pater noster, Aue Maria. etc.
JESUS.
1. Whose side a Soldier with his spear
Pearc'd, hanging dead upon the Rood,
And therewithal there gushed out
A stream of water mixed with blood.
JESUS.
2 Who being slain upon the Cross
His liuelesse Corpse did rest in peace:
His Soul went down to Limbo lake,
And did those captive souls release.
JESUS.
3. Whose sacred Body from the Cross
Joseph and Nicodemus took,
And buried it in noble sort,
When all men else had it forsook.
JESUS.
4. Who by his only power divine
Did rise again, being three days dead.
And thee, and his Disciples all,
With his appearance comforted.
JESUS.
5. Who, after forty days were past
Ascended into heaven hie,
And at his Fathers tight hand sits,
To reign with him eternally.
JESUS
6. Who sent from thence the holy Ghost
Upon the feast of Whitsontide,
Which, his Disciples being weak,
Inflam'de with love and fortifi'de.
JESUS.
7. Who thee unto his heavenly Throne,
When thou on earth thy time had been,
Assumpted both in Body and Soul,
To reign with him as heavens Queen.
JESUS.
8. Who at the latter Day shall come
And sit as Judge upon his Throne,
With rigor and severity
Judging the deeds of every one.
JESUS.
9. Who to the bad eternal pains.
And to the good eternal bliss,
Will justly judge without respect
Of any person that or this.
JESUS.
10. Who grant, that they, which do recite
This Golden Rosarie of thine,
May see the face of Him and Thee,
In heavenly bliss for aye to shine.
Credo in Deum Patrem, etc.
Another Letter to his Sister, concerning the Office of our blessed LADY.
commonly called the PRIMMER.
IT is said in the Gospel, that we must pray always: and Saint Paul
exhorts us to pray without intermission. The meaning of which words is not,
that we should do nothing else but pray, for that we cannot, nor ought not
to do. The meaning therefort of these places of holy Scripture, is, that we
should pray at certain set times, Luc. 1. v. 1.
1. These. 5. verse 17.
without omission or intermission. Such times did the Prophet David set to
himself, as appears by his own words: In the evening and morning or at
midday, Will I declare or set forth thy praise: and, Psalm. 118. v. 164. he
says, he did the like seven times a day.

Our holy Mother the Church, has ordained for Religious and Ecclesiastical
persons, a certain set Office or Service to be said to God, in every hour of
the day and night that so they may seem to pray always or without
intermission, as aforesaid. But because it were hard and over burdensome to
pray every natural hour of the day and night, which are in number twenty
four, She has put three natural hours into one hour, Psalm. 54. verse. 18.
calling it a Canonical or Ecclesiastical hour, and of these there are but
eight in a day and night. For every of which eight hours She has ordained a
several Service or Office of prayer and praising of God At midnight She has
ordained that to be said, which we call the Matins: At three a clock after
midnight, the Lauds: At six a clock in the moning, the Prime: At nine a
clock, the Third: At twelve, the Ninth: At six, the Euen-song, At nine, the
Compline, so that by this means they seem to pray always or without
intermission, according to the exhortation of the holy Scripture, as aforesaid.
Thus do Religious and Ecclesiastical persons serve God night and day, and do
by their profession bind themselves thereunto, and this is the public or
common Service and prayer of the whole Church dispersed thorowout the world,
whereof all such as are members of the Church are partakers, wheresoever they
are, though not present thereat, but more especially and effectually if they
be corporally present. And that is the reason why denout people resort to
Churches upon Sundays and Holy days, and many week days also, not only to
hear Mass, but also Matins and Euen-song.

Lay people are not bound to any such form of continual prayer or service;
but because it is a godly and devout exercise to imitate Religious and
Ecclesiastical persons herein, and makes them so much the more effectually
partakers thereof (it being the public Prayer or Service of the Church) by how
much the more devoutly they imitate the same: Therefore the Church has also
ordained a certain short, but very sweet Office or Service for them to say
also, after the same method or order, called the Office of our blessed Lady, or
the Primmer, consisting of those several eight hours, aforesaid. to wit,
Matins, Lauds, Prime. Third, Sixth, Ninth, Euensong, Compline. Such a book
(dear sister) I have sent you, whereby you may serve our Lord Jesus Christ and
his blessed Mother the glorious Virgin Mary, every our of the day and night, as
aforesaid, and so purchase the daily and hourly blessings of God. Not that I
would have you say these several Services in their proper several houtes, but
to say them all at two times in the day, in the Morning and Evening for your
Matins and Euen-song, as the custom is. Or if you cannot conveniently say them
at those times, then at such times as you can: And if you cannot conveniently
say the^ at all, make no scruple to omit the^, for none are bound but such as
bind themselves.

Moreover, besides the saying of these hours, to the imitation of Religious
persons, that so you may seem to pray always or without intermission, as
aforesaid: you may make another singular benefit by way of Meditation,
according to the Pictures set down and prefixed at the beginning of every
hour, to which end they are set there.

At your Matins you may meditate of the Annunciation or Salutation of our
blessed Lady by the Archangell Gabriel. At Lauds of our blessed Ladies
visitation of her cousin Saint Elizabeth. At Prime, of the Nativity or birth
of Christ. At Third, of the Circumcision of Christ, and of his blessed Name
Jesus. At Sixth, of the Purification of our blessed Lady, and Presentation of
Christ in the Temple. At Ninth, of the Adoration of the three Kings and their
gifts. At Euen-song, of the flight of our blessed Lady and Saint Joseph into
Egypt with little Jesus. At Compline, of our blessed Ladies glorious Assumption
body and soul into Heaven. These, with the several circumstances thereof, are
most sweet Meditations, fit to be used every day, and would be very comfortable
unto you, if you knew them perfectly, and were well instructed therein. And in
these exercises you show your self, as it were, one of our blessed Ladies
especial Hand-maides, or Wayting-women, attending upon her daily and hourly
in this Office or Service of hers, for such She has and must have, as
appears in the first Psalm of the second Nocturne at Matins, verse. 15.16.
and 17. and it is the fourth Psalm in your Primmer.

Another Letter to his Sister, concerning the Order of Saint Benedict, together
with a little Office of Saint BENEDICT.
According to the hours of the Primmer, as aforesaid.
When our blessed Father Saint Benedict departed this life, the very same
time, two religious men saw him ascend into heaven in a rich Robe, with bright
Lamps shining round about him, and a Man of a bright and venerable aspect
standing over him, who said unto them, while they were gazing on him: This is
the way which the beloved of our Lord, Benedict, ascends into Heaven.

By this way mystically is understood his religious Rule, or course of life,
which he instituted and began, and prescribed unto his Disciples. In this way,
not only Saint Benedict himself, but also all his Disciples and Followers
have walked, and do still walk as in a most ready and beaten way to heaven.
In this way have walked forty six Popes (for so many have theree been of
this holy Order or Rule) Emperors, four: Empresses, twenty two: Archbishops,
one thousand six hundred: Kings, forty: Queens, fifty one: Children of
Kings, one hundred forty six: Abbots being Doctors, fifteen thousand seven
hundred: Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, two hundred forty five: Apostles or
Co^uerters of Kingdoms and Countries, thirty; whereof our England was one,
Saint Gregory the Great Pope, and one of the four principal Doctors of the
Church, sending thirty Religious Monks of the Order of Saint Benedict, who
converted it, and established Catholic Religion therein, in that perfection
that it was called the Garden of Christendom, and Dowry of our blessed Lady,
the most glorious Virgin Mary. Saint Gregory being of the same Order himself,
and the glory, not only of his own Order, but of the universal Church, and
for that cause was surnamed the Great: and of venerable Bede called the Apostle
of the English Nation. Of this holy Order of Saint Benedict were also of
military Orders of Knights, for the defense of the Gospel by the sword, six.
Of Religious Orders twelve principal, besides diverse other lesser, all
branches of the holy Order of Saint Benedict, whereof there were in the world
of Monasteries of Men, thirty thousand: and of Women one thousand and five
hundred; who illuminated and filled all the western Church with learning and
virtue: it being the only Religious Order that was extant in the western
Church, the first fix hundred years after their beginning, which was about
eleven or twelve hundred years ago.

Unto this Religious Order, the Dominicans, Franciscans, and Jesuits, three
famous Orders of Religion, are in some part to attribute their beginnings,
Saint Dominicke was given to his barren mother, by the prayers of Saint
Dominick Abbot, of the Order of Saint Benedict, whose name for that cause his
Parents imposed upon him. Saint Franeis conceived the first project of his
religious course, in a Monastery of the Order of Saint Benedict. Saint
Ignatius (for so he is now newly canonized) received the first sparks of his
religious spirit, in a famous Monastery of Saint Benedict in Spain, called
Monteseratta. Of this Order there were of canonized or approved Saints, Fifty
five thousand five hundred and ten, in the time of Pope John the two and
twentieth, which was long ago, besides infinite others holy Men and reputed
Saints. And we have had five or six glorious Martyrs in these our days of our
small number here in England, Father Roberts, one of the first that were sent
hither in Mission, being one: (so happily did they begin) neither did any one
hitherto (thanks be to God) fall or miscarry, so happily have they gone
forwards.

The glory of the children is to be attributed, a great part of it, to the
Parents The branches, buds, blossoms and fruit of a Tree unto the Root. Of all
these aforesaid and infinite others, our most blessed Patron Saint Benedict is
the Father, the Founder, the Root. All these went the way of blessed Saint
Benedict, and so do likewise all those who join themselves unto him in this
holy Fraternity or Society of his, ordained for lay people, that are devoutly
affected unto the Order, as I understand you are one. Rejoice therefore and be
glad in our Lord Jesus, and in his glorious servant Saint Benedict, that you
are a blossom or bud of such a Tree, that has so replenished Heaven and Earth
with such noble Fruit, that you are a Child of such a Father, and have such
and so many worthy Brethren and Sisters in heaven and earth, those in Heaven
being ready to draw you unto them, by the golden chains of their intercession
and merits: and those on Earth, to lift you up with their charitable and
brotherly assistance, in what they ca^: these on Earth being bound so to do,
as long as you are of their fraternity, and walk with them in the way that
our blessed Father Saint Benedict did; and they in Heaven out of their
respective charity can do no less.

The office of the holy Father S. BENEDICT.
At Matins.
Thou, O Lord, wilt open my lips,
And my mouth shall declare thy praise.
O God, incline unto mine aid:
O Lord make haste to help me.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost:
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.
A Hymn.
A Vrora fair vnmask's her face,
And smiles upon the earth, to see
Saint Benedicts soul, adorn'ed with grace,
Ascend to Heaven so gloriously:
How gracious is he there above?
Who here on earth did shine so bright:
Whose wonders, stony hearts did move,
And gave to all the World, his light. Praise, honor, glory, without end,
To thee, O sacred Trinity:
Which Benedict, thy faithful friend,
Enjoys for all Eternity.
An Antheme.
There was a man of venerable life, blessed in grace and name, who even from
his Chilhood, bearing a grave mind, and transcending his age in virtuous
conversation, gave his mind to no voluptuousness.

Verse. Pray for us, O blessed Father Benedict.

Resp. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Crist.

A Prayer.
O God who did call the blessed Father, and Law maker Saint Benedict, from
all worldly tumults, to serve thee alone: grant to all, and specially such as
serve under his discipline, constant perseverance in virtue, and perfect
victory unto their end Through Jesus Christ thy Son, who with thee, lives
and reigns world without end. Amen.

At Prime.
O God incline unto my aid,
O Lord make haste to help me.
Glory be to the Father, etc.
A Hymn.
GReat Conductor in sacred War,
Who never conquered were by might:
Defend us with thy holy prayer,
And strengthen us, when we do fight.
Protect us from all sins disgrace,
Who made the Blackbird to retire:
Which fluttering came about thy face,
To tempt thee with unchaste desire
Praise, honor, glory, etc.
An Antheme.
Our powerful Lord, did so great a favor to blessed Benedict, that under one
Sun-beame he did see the whole world.

Verse. Pray for us, O blessed Father Benedict.

Resp. That we may be made worthy, etc.

A Prayer.
MAke us we beseech thee, O Lord, to imitate here the labors of the blessed
Father Saint Benedict, that there we may be partakers of his glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

At the third hour.
O God incline unto my aid:
O Lord make haste to help me.
Glory be to the Father, etc.
A Hymn.
TO free thee from unchaste desire,
Thy flesh the wounds of thorns endured:
And thus fire quenched was with fire,
And one wou^d with another cured
With sign of Cross a poisoned Cup,
Thou brak'st in two, with power Divine;
Which poyso^ thou had supped up,
But Death was weaker then lif's sign.
Praise, honor, glory, etc.
An Antheme.
The man of our Lord, Benedict, was of a pleasant countenance, and adorned with
Angelical gray hairs, and so great was the brightness that shined about him,
that being yet upon the Earth, he seemed to dwell in Heaven.

Verse. Pray for us, O blessed Father Benedict.

Resp. That we may be made worthy of the promise of Christ.

A Prayer.
WE beseech thee, O Lord; that the intercession of the blessed Abbot Saint
Benedict may so recommend us, that what by our own merits we cannot, by his
patronage we may obtain, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

At the sixth hour.
O God incline unto my aid:
O Lord make haste to help me.
Glory be to the Father, etc.
A Hymn.
A Monk there was, when others prayed,
Often pulled away from serving God:
Who afterward became most stayed
When he was touched with thy rod.
The Earth their bones did vomit out.
Who did in thy disfavor die.
But those to thee that were devout,
Did walk upon the wathers dry.
Praise, honor, glory, etc.
An Antheme.
The glorious Confessor of our Lord, Benedict, leading an Angelical life upon
earth, was made a mirour of good works to the world, and therefore rejoices
in heaven without end.

Verse. Pray for us, O blessed Father Benedict.

Resp. That we may be made Worthy, etc.

A Prayer.
O God, in whose power holy Saint Benedict made the dead members of a child to
revive, grant we beseech thee, that for is merits, we may by the breath of
thy Spirit be quickened from the death of our Souls: through Christ our Lord.
Amen.

At the ninth hour.
O God incline unto my aid:
O Lord make haste to help me.
Glory be to the Father, etc.
A Hymn.
THe compass of the World so round
He in a Sunne-beame did discrye;
Nothing on earth so strange was found
That was concealed from his eye.
O holy Saint! O heavenly Man!
To whom God did his secrets tell,
Who saw the soul of Saint German,
Ascend the Heavens, for aye to dwell,
Praise, honor, glory, etc.
An Antheme.
The man of God, Benedict, was replenished with the spirit of all righteous
men: pray he for all Professors of the Catholic Religion.

Verse. Pray for us, O blessed Father Benedict,

Resp. That we may be made worhy, etc.

A Prayer.
Grant us, we beseech thee O Lord, that with cheerful mind We may daily
celebrate the memory of thy blessed Confessor Benedict, whose life graced with
many miracles did well please thee: through Christ our Lord. Amen.

At Euen-song.
O God incline unto my aid:
O Lord make haste to help me.
Glory be to the Father, etc.
A Hymn.
HIs sisters soul, from sin most free,
And Beautified with heavenly love:
Fly up to heavens Throne he see,
In likeness of a milk white Dove.
O blessed Saints of God beloved,
Who lie in tomb'd both in one grave:
One heart you had, while here ye moved,
One glory now in Heaven have, Praise, honor, glory, etc.
An Antheme.
Toward the East appeared a straight way, reaching from his Cell, even unto
Heaven, and a Man of venerable feature, shining in brightness, standing,
thereby, demanded wose way that was? which they, confessing they, did not know;
he said unto them: This is the way by which Benedict, the beloved of our Lord
ascended to Heaven.

Verse. Pray for us, O blessed Father Benedict.

Resp. That we may be made worthy, etc.

A Prayer.
WE beseech thee, O almighty God, by the merits and prayers of the most
blessed Father Saint Benedict, and of his disciples Saint Placidus, and Saint
Maurus, and of the Virgin his sister Saint Scholastica, and of all holy Monks
and Nuns, which under his Banner and conduct fought for thee, that thou
would renew in us thy holy Spirit, by whose inspiratio^ we may make war
against the Flesh, the World, and the Devil and because the Palm of victory
cannot be achieved, without laborious battle; give us in adversity patience,
in temptation constancy, in perils Counsel: give us the purity of Chastity,
the desire of Poverty, the fruit of Obedience, and a firm purpose to observe
thy Commandments, so that being strengned with thy Consolation, and linked in
brotherly Charity, we may serve thee with one heart, and so pass over these
temporal things, that being crowned for our victories: we may deserve at last
in the co^pagnie of those Religious troops, to attain unto those eternal
good things: Through Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Co^mpline.
Convert us O Lord our Savior,
And auert thy wrath from us:
O God incline unto my aid:
O Lord make haste to help me.
Glory be to the Father, etc.
A Hymn.
BLessed Patriarch we thee pray,
And also crave in humble wise:
That unto Heaven thou shows the Way,
Whom thou the earth taught'st to despise.
Grant we may seek those joy above.
And mend in us what is amiss:
That living here in Christian love,
We may hereafter live in bliss.
Praise, honor, glory, without end,
To thee O sacred Trinity:
Which Benedict thy faithful friend,
Enjoys for all eternity, Amen.
An Antheme.
Let the whole compagnie of all the faithful rejoice for the glory of the
blessed Abbot Saint Benedict let the troops of Religious persons chiefly
exult, celebrating is memory upon earth, for whose society the Saints do joy
in Heaven.

Verse. Pray for us, O blessed Father Benedict.

Resp. That we may be made worthy, etc.

A Prayer.
PVrifie, O God, the hearts of all those, who forsaking worldly vanities, thou
have encouraged to aspire to the reward of a higher vocation, under the
discipline of their holy Patriarch and founder Saint Benedict, and power thy
grace into them, whereby they may persevere in thee, and by thy assistance
accomplish what by thy inspiration they have promised, that so atchieuing the
perfection, which they profess, they may also merit to attain to the reward,
by thee proposed, to such as should persevere in thee. Through our Lord
Jesus Christ, who with thee lives and reigns in unity of the holy Ghost
Amen.

A filial recommendation to the most blessed Father Saint Benedict.
O Most glorious Father Saint Benedict, the Governor and Leader of such as
profess Monastical discipline, hope, and solace of all them, that heartily
implore thy assistance; I humbly recommend me to thy holy protection, that for
the excellency of thy merits, thou will vouchsafe to defend me from all evils
hurtful to my soul: and that out of the abundance of thy piety, thou will
obtain for me the gift of compunction and tears, that I may worthily and
abundantly bewail my great wickedness and offenses, whereby I have oftentimes
even from my childhood, provoked to anger my loving and gracious Lord
Jesus Christ; and that I may also worthily praise and reverence thee: O most
precious Olive, and fruitful Vine in the house of God: O most solid vessel
adorned with all kinds of precious stones, chosen according to Gods own
heart, most sweet and with innumerable gifts of graces, like so many glistring
Pearls embellized: thee I beseech, thee I pray, thee with all the affection of
my heart, with all the desires of my soul I implore, that thou will vouchsafe,
to be mindful of me wretched sinner with Almighty God, that of his infinite
goodness, he will be pleased to forgive me all my sins, and conserve me in
virtues; and that for no cause or necessity whatsoever, he will suffer me to
depart from him; but that together with thee, O loving Father, he will admit
me into the company of his Saints, and to that blissful vision of himself,
where together with thee, and that glorious Army of Religious persons, who
fought under thy Banner, I may for ever enjoy the presence of my God, and my
Lord Jesus Christ, who with the Father, and the holy Ghost, lives and
reigns, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

