The book of common prayer, and adminystracion of the Sacraments, and other
rytes, and Ceremonies in the Church of England.

Londini, in officina EdoVardi Whitchurche.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

decorative border

The Contents of this book.
i. A Preface. ii. Of Ceremonies, why some be abolisshed, and some retained.
iii. The order how the Psalter is appointed to be read. iiii. The table for
thorder of the Psalms to be said at Morning and Evening prayer. v. The order
how the rest of holy Scripture is appointed to be read. vi. Proper Psalms and
Lessons at Morning and Evening prayer, for certain feasts and days. vii. An
Almanacke. viii. The table and Calendar for Psalms and Lessons, with
necessary Rules, apperteining to the same. ix. Thorder for Morning prayer and
Euenyng prayer, throughout the year. x. The Letany. xi. The Collectes,
Epistles and Gospelles, to be used at the mynystracyon of the holy Communyon,
throughoute the year. xii. Thorder of the ministracion of the holy Communyon.
xiii. Baptism both Public and Private. xiiii. Confyrmacyon, where also is a
Cathechysme for children. xv. Matrimony. xvi. Visitacion of the sick. xvii.
The Communion of the sick. xviii. Burial. xix. The thanks giving of women
after child birth. xx. A Comminacion against sinners, with certain prayers to
be used diverse times in the year.
The Preface.
THere was never any thing by the wit of man so well devised, or so sure
establysshed, (which in contynuaunce of time) has not been corrupted: as
(among other things) it may plainly appear by the common prayers in the
Church, commonly called divine service. The first original and ground
whereof, if a man would search out by the auncyente fathers, he shall find
that the same was not ordained but of a good purpose, and for a great
advancement of godlynes. For they so ordered the matter, that all the whole
Bible, (or the greatest part thereof) should be read over once in the year:
ente^dyng thereby, yt the Clergy, and specially such as were ministers of
the congregacyon, should (by often readyng and meditacyon of Gods word) be
styrred up to Godlynes themselves, and be more hable also to exhort other by
wholesome doctrine, and to confute them that were adversaries to the truth. And
further, that the people (by daily hearing of holy scripture read in ye church)
should contynually profyt more and more in the knowledge of God, and be the
more enflamed with the love of his true religyon. But these many years passed,
this godly and decente order of the auncyente fathers, has been so altered,
broken, and neglected, by plantyng in uncertain Stories, Legendes, Respondes,
Verses, vain Repeticions, Commemoracions, and Sinodalles, that commonly when
any book of ye Bible was begone, before three or four Chapters were read out,
al ye rest were unread. And in this sort the book of Esai was begone in
Aduent, and the book of Genesis in Septuagesima: but they were only begone,
and never read through. After a like sort were other books of holy scripture
used. And moreover, whereas Saint Paul would have such language spoken to the
people in the Church, as they might understand, and have profyt by hearing
the same: The service in this Church of England (these many years) have been
read in Latin to the people, which they understood not: so that they have
heard with their ears only, and their hearts, spirit and mind, have not
been edifyed thereby. And furthermore, notwythstandyng that the auncyente
fathers have divided the Psalms into seven porcyons, whereof every one was
called a Nocturne: now of late time a few of them have been daily said, and
often repeated, and the rest utterly omytted. Moreover, the noumbre and hardness
of the rules, called the Pie, and the manyfolde chaungeinges of the service,
was the cause, that to turn the book only, was so hard and intricate a
matter, that many times there was more busynes to find out what should be
read, then to read it when it was found out.

These inconveniences therefore considered, here is set forth such an order,
whereby the same shall be redressed. And for a readiness in this matter, here
is drawn out a Calendar for that purpose, which is plain and easy to be
understood, wherein (so much as may be) the reading of holy scriptures is so
set forth, that all things shall be done in order, without breaking one piece
thereof from an other. For this cause be cut of, Anthemes, Respondes,
Inuitatories, and such like things, as did break the continual course of
the reading of the scripture. Yet because there is no remedy, but that of
necessity there must be some rules: therefore certain rules are here set
furthe, which as they be few in number, so they be plain and easy to be
understood. So that here you have an order for prayer (as touching the
reading of holy scripture) much agreeable to the mind and purpose of tholde
fathers, and a great deal more profitable and commodious, then that which of
late was used. It is more profitable, because here are left out many things,
whereof some be untrue, some uncertain, some vain and supersticious, and is
ordained nothing to be read, but the very pure word of God, the holy
scriptures, or that which is euidentlye grounded upon the same: and that in
such a language and order, as is most easy and plain for the understanding,
both of the readers and hearers. It is also more commodious, both for the
shortness thereof, and for the playnnes of the order, and for that the rules be
few and easy. Furthermore, by this order, the Curates shall need none other
books for their publyque service, but this book and the Bible: By the means
whereof, the people shall not be at so great charge for books, as in times
past they have been.

And where heretofore there has been great diversity in saying and synging
in churches within this realm, some following Salisbury use, some Herforde use,
some the use of Bangor, some of York, and some of Lincoln: Now from hence
forth, all the whole Realm shall have but one use. And if any would judge
this way more paynfull, because that all things must be read upon the book,
whereas before by the reason of so often repeticion, they could say many
things by heart: If those men will weigh their labor, with the profit and
knowledge which daily they shall obtain by readyng upon the book, they will
not refuse the pain, in consideracion of the great profit that shall ensue
thereof.

And forasmuch as nothing can almost be so plainly set forth, but
doubts may rise in the use and practisyng of the same: To appease all such
diversity (if any arise) and for the resolucion of al doubts, concerning the
manner how to understand, do and execute the things contained in this
book: The parties that so doubt, or diversely take any thing, shall always
resort to the Bishop of the Dyocesse, who by his dyscrecion shall take
order for the quieting and appeasyng of the same, so that the same order be
not contrary to any thing contained in this book. And if the Bishop of the
Dyocesse be in any doubt, then may he send for the resolucion thereof unto
the Archebishoppe.

Though it be appointed in the aforewritten Preface, that all things shall be
read and song in the Church, in the English tongue, to the end that the
congregation may be thereby edyfyed: yet it is not mente, but when men say
Morning and Evening prayer privately, they may say the same in any language
that they themselves do understand.

And all Priests and Deacons, shall be bounded to say daily the morning and
Evening prayer, either privately or openly, except they be let by preaching,
studying of divinity, or by some other urgent cause.

And the Curate that ministers in every Parish Church, or Chapel, being at
home, and not being otherwise reasonablye let, shall say the same in the
Parish Church or Chapel where he ministers, and shall toll a bell thereto,
a convenient time before he begin, that such as be disposed may come to
hear Gods word, and to pray with him.

Of Ceremonies, why some be abolisshed, and some retained.
OF such Ceremonies as be used in the Church, and have had their beginning by
the institucyon of man: some at the first were of godly intent and purpose
devised, and yet at length turned to vanity and supersticio^: some entered into
the church by indiscreet devotion, and such a zele as was without knowledge:
and forbecuse they were winked at in the beginning, they grew daily to more
and more abuses: which not only for their unprofitableness, but also because
they have much blinded the people, and obscured the glory of god, are worthy to
be cut away and clean rejected. Other there be, which although they have
been devised by man, yet it is thought good to reserve them still, as well for a
decent order in the Churhe (for the which they were first devised) as because
they parteine to edificacion: whereunto all things done in the Church (as the
Apostle teaches) ought to be referred. And although the keeping or omittyng of
a Ceremony (in it self considered) is but a small thing: yet the wilful and
contempteous transgression and breaking of a common order and discipline, is no
small offense before god.

Let all things be done among you (says S. Paul) in a semely and due order.
The appointment of the which order parteineth not to private men: therefore no
man ought to take in hand, nor presume to appoynte or alter any publyke or
common order in Christ's church, except he be lawfullye called and aucthorized
thereunto.

And whereas in this our time, the minds of men are so diverse, that some
think it a great matter of conscience to depart from a piece of the least of
their Ceremonies (they be so addicted to their old customs:) and again on
the other side, some be so new fangled, that they would innouate all thing,
and so do despise thold, that nothing can like them, but that is new: it was
thought expediente, not so much to have respect how to please and satisfy
either of these parties, as how to please god, and profit them both. And yet
lest any man should be offended (whom good reason might satisfy) here be
certain causes rendered, why some of the accustomed Ceremonies be put away, and
some retained and kept still.

Some are put away, because the great excess and multitude of them has so
increased in these latter days, that the burden of them was intolerable:
whereof S. Augustyne in his time complained, that they were grown to such a
noumbre, that the state of Christian people was in worse case (concerning that
matter) then were the Jews. And he cou^sailed that such yoke and burden
should be taken away, as time waould serve quietly to do it.

But what would S. Augustyne have said, if he had seen the Ceremonies of late
days used among us; whereunto the multitude used in his time, was not to be
compared. This our excessive multitude of Ceremonies was so great, and many of
them so dark, that they did more co^founde and darken, then declare and set
forth Chiristes benefits unto us.

And besides this, Christ's gospel is not a Ceremonial law (as much of Moses
law was) but it is a religion to serve God, not in bondage of the figure or
shadow, but in the fredom of spirit, being content only with those
Ceremonies, which do serve to a decent order and godly discipline, and such as
be apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his duty to
god, by some notable and special significacion, whereby he might be edified.

Furthermore, the most weyghtie cause of thabolishement of certain Ceremonies
was, that they were so far abused, partly by the supersticious blyndnesse of
the rude and unlearned, and partly by the insatiable auaryce of such as sought
more their own lucre, then the glory of God: that the abuses could not well be
taken away, the thing remaining still. But now as concerning those persons,
which peradventure will be offended, for that some of thold Ceremonies are
retained still: if they considre that without some Ceremonies, it is not
possible to keep any order, or quiet discipline in the church: they shall
easily perceive just cause to reform their judgments. And if they think
much, that any of thold do remain, and would rather have all devised a new:
The^ such men granting some Ceremonies convenient to be had, surely where the
old may be well used, there they cannot reasonably reprove the old, only for
their age, without bewraying of their own folly. For in such a case, they ought
rather to have reverence unto the^ for their antiquity, if they will declare
the^ selves to be more studious of unity and concord, then of innouacions and
new fanglenes: which (as much as may be with the true setting forth of
Christ's religion) is always to be eschewed. Furthermore, such shall have no
just cause with ye Ceremonies reserved, to be offended. For as those be taken
away, which were most abused, and did burden men's consciences without any
cause: so the other that remain, are retained for a discipline and order,
which (upon just causes) may be altered and changed, and therefore are not to
be esteemed equal with gods law. And moreover, they be nether dark nor dombe
Ceremonies: but are so set forth, that every man may understand what they do
mean, and to what use they do serve. So that it is not like that they in time
to come, should be abused as the other have been. And in these our doings, we
condemn no other nations, nor prescribe any thing, but to our own people
only. For we think it convenient that every country should use such
Ceremonies, as they shall think best to the setting forth of Gods honor or
glory, and to the reducing of the people to a most perfect and Godly living,
without error or supersticion. And that they should put away other things
which from time to time they perceive to be most abused, as in men's
ordinances it often chances dyuersely in diverse countries.

An Act for the uniformity of common prayer, and administracion of the
Sacraments
WHere there has been a very Godly order set forth by authority of Parlame^t,
for common prayer and administracio^ of the Sacraments, to be used in the
mother tongue within this Church of England, agreeable to the word of God and
the primative Church, very comfortable to al good people, desyring to live in
Christen conversation, and most profitable to the state of this Realm: upon
the which, the mercy, favor, and blessyng of almighty god, is in no wise so
readilye and plenteously powered, as by common prayers, due using of the
Sacraments, and often preaching of the gospel, with the devotion of the
hearers: And yet this notwithstanding, a great noumbre of people, in diverse
parts of this realm, following their own sensuality, and living either
without knowledge or due fear of God, do wilfully and damnablye before
almighty God, absteyne and refuse to come to their Parish Churches and other
places, where common prayer, adminystracion of the Sacraments, and preaching
of the word of God is used, upon the Sundays and other days, ordained to be
holy days.

For reformacion hereof, be it enacted by the King our sovereign lord, with
thassent of the Lords and commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by
the authority of the same, that from, and after the feast of al Saints next
coming, al and every person and persons, enhabiting within this Realm, or any
other the kings Majesty's dominions, shall diligently and faithfully, (having
no lawefull or reasonable excuse to be absent) endeavor themselves to resort
to their Parish Church, or Chapel accustomed, or upon reasonable let thereof,
to some usual place, where common prayer and such service of God shall be used in
such time of let, upon every Sunday, and other days, ordained and used to be
kept as holy days, and then, and there to abide, ordrely, and soberly, during
the time of the common prayer, preachinges, or other service of God, there to
be used and ministered, upon pain of punishment by ye Censures of the church.

And for the due execucion hereof, the Kings most excellent majesty, the
Lords temporal, and all the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
does in Gods name, earnestlye require and charge all tharchbishoppes,
Bishops, and other Ordenaries, that they shall endeavor, themselves to the
vttermoste of their knowledges, that the due and true execucio^ hereof, may be
had throughoute their Dyocesses and charges, as they will answer before God,
for such evils and plages, wherewith almyghtie God may justly punish his
people, for neglecting this good and wholesome law.

And for their authority in this behalf, be it further likewise enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that all and synguler the same Archbishops, Bishops, and
al other their officers, exercisyng ecclesiastical iurisdiccion, as well in place
exempt, as not exempt, within their Dyocesses, shall have full power and
authority by this Act, to refourme, correct and punish, by Censures of the
church, all and synguler persons which shall offend within any their
iurisdiccions or Dyocesses, after the said feast of all saints next coming:
against this Act and statute, any other law, statute, privilege, liberty,
or provision heretofore made, had, or suffered, to the contrary notwithstanding.

And because there has ariesen in the use and exercise of the foresaid common
service in the Church heretofore set forth, diverse doubts for the fashion
and manner of the ministracion of the same, rather by the curiosity of the
minister and mistakers, then of any other worthy cause: therefore, as well for
the more plain and manifest explanacion hereof, as for the more perfeccion of
the said order of common service, in some places where it is necessari to make
the same prayer and fashion of service more earneste and fit to stire
christian people to ye true honoring of almighty God: The kings most excellent
majesty, with thassent of the lords and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by thauctoritie of the same, has caused the foresaid order of
common service, entitled, The book of Common prayer, to be faithfully and
godly perused, explaned, and made fully perfect: and by the foresaid authority,
has annexed and joined it, so explaned and perfected to this present statute,
adding also a form and manner of making and consecrating of Archebishops,
Bishops, priests and Deacons, to be of like force, authority and value, as the
same like foresaid book entitled, The book of Common prayer, was before: and
to be accepted, receued, used and esteemed in like sort and manner, and with the
same clauses of prousions and excepcions, to al ententes, construccions and
purposes, as by the Act of Parlamente made in the second year of the kings
Majesty's reign, was ordained, limited, expressed, and appointed for the
uniformity of service, and administracion of the Sacraments throughout the
realm, upon such several pains, as in the said Act of Parliament is expressed.
And the said former Act to stand in full force and strength, to all ententes
and construccions, and to be applied, practiced, and put in ure, to, and for
the establishing of the book of common prayer, now explained, and herunto
annexed: and also ye said form of making of Archbishops, Bishops, priests
and Deacons, hereunto annexed, as it was for ye former book. And by thautoritie
aforesaid it is now further enacted, that if any manner of person, or
persons, enhabiting, and being within this Realm, or any other the kings
Majesty's dominions, shall after the said feast of all Saints, willinglye,
and wittinglye, hear and be present at any other manner or form of common
prayer of administracion of the Sacraments, of making of ministers in the
churches, or of any other rites contained in the book annexed to this Act,
then is mentioned and set forth in the said book, or that is contrary to the
form of sundry provisions and excepcions, contained in the foresaid former
statute, and shall be thereof convicted, according to the laws of this realm,
before the Justices of Assise, Justices of Oyer, and Determiner, Justices of
peace in their Sessions, or any of them, by the verdict of twelve men, or by
his, or their own confession, or otherwise, shall for the first offense suffer
impriesonment for six months, without bail or maynprice: and for the
second offense, being likewise convicted, (as is above said,) empriesonment
for one whole year: and for the third offense, in like manner, empriesonment
during his or their lives. And for the more knowledge to be given hereof, and
better obseruacion of this law: Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that al and singular Curates, shall upon one Sunday every quarter of the year,
during one whole year next following the foresaid feast of al Saints next
coming, read this present Act in the Church, at the time of the most
assembly: and likewise once in every year following, at the same time declaring
unto the people by the authority of the scripture, home the mercy and goodness
of God has in all ages been showed to his people, in their necessities and
extremities, by means of hearty and faithful prayers made to almighty god,
specially where people be gathered together with one faith and mind, to offer
up their hearts by prayer, as the best Sacrifices that Christian men can
yield.

The Table and Calendar, expressing the order of the Psalms and Lessons, to be
said at the Morning and Evening prayer throughout the year, except certain
proper feasts, as the rules following, more plainly declare.
The order how the Psalter is appointed to be readde.
THe Psalter shall be read through, once every Month. And because that some
Months be longer then some other be, it is thought good to make them even,
by this means.

To every Month, shall be appointed (as concerning this purpose) just.xxx.
days.

And because January and March has one day above the said number, and
February which is placed between them both, has only.xxviii. days: February
shall borowe of either of the Months (of January and March) one day. And so
the Psalter which shall be read in February, must begin the last day of January,
and end the first day of March.

And whereas May, July, August, Octobre, and Decembre, have.xxxi. days a
piece: it is ordered that the same Psalms, shall be read the last day of the
said Months, which were read the day before. So that the Psalter may begin
again the first day of the next Months ensuing.

Now to know what Psalms shall be read every day, look in the Calendar, the
number that is appointed for the Psalms, and then find the same number in this
Table, and upon that number shall you see what Psalms shall be said at Morning
and Evening prayer.

And where the.Cxix. Psalm is divided into.xxii. porcyons, and is ouerlong to
be read at one time: it is so ordered, that at one time shall not be read
above four or five of the said porcyons, as you shall perceive to be noted in
this Table following.

And here is also to be noted, that in this Table, and in all other parts of
the service, where any Psalms are appointed, the number is expressed after the
great English Bible, which from the.ix. Psalm, unto the Cxlviii. Psalm
(following the division of the Hebrews) does varye in numbres from the common
Latin translacion.

The Table for the order of the Psalms to be said at Morning and Evening
prayer.
Morning prayer. Evening prayer. i i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. viii. ii ix.
x. xi. xii. xiii. xiiii. iii xv. xvi. xvii. xviii. iiii xix. xx. xxi. xxii.
xxiii. v xxiiii. xxv. xxvi. xxvii. xxviii. xxix. vi xxx xxxi. xxxii. xxxiii.
xxxiiii. vii xxxv. xxxvi. xxxvii. viii xxxviii. xxxix. xl. xli. xlii. xliii. ix
xliiii. xlv. xlvi. xlvii. xlviii. xlix. x l. li. lii. liii. liiii. lv. xi lvi.
lvii. lviii. lix. lx. lxi. xii lxii. lxiii. lxiiii. lxv. lxvi. lxvii. xiii
lxviii. lxix. lxx. xiiii lxxi. lxxii. lxxiii. lxxiiii. xv lxxv. lxxvi. lxxvii.
lxxviii. xvi lxxix. lxxx. lxxxi. lxxxii. lxxxiii. lxxxiiii. lxxxv. xvii lxxxvi.
lxxxvii. lxxxviii. lxxxix. xviii xc. xci. xcii. xciii. xciiii. xix xcvi. xcvii.
xcviii. xcix. c. ci. xx cii. ciii. ciiii. xxi cv. cvi. xxii cvii. cviii. cix.
xxiii cx. cxi. cxii. cxiii. cxiiii. cxv. xxiiii cxvi. cxvii. cxviii. cxix.
Inde. iiii. xxv Inde. v. Inde. iiii. xxvi Inde. v. Inde. iiii. xxvii cxx. cxxi.
cxxii. cxxiii. cxxiiii. cxxv. cxxvi. cxxvii. cxxviii. cxxix. cxxx cxxxi. xxviii
cxxxii. cxxxiii. cxxxiiii. cxxxv. cxxxvi. cxxxvii. cxxxviii. xxix cxxxix. cxl.
cxli. cxlii. cxliii. xxx cxliiii. cxlv. cxlvi. cxlvii cxlviii. cxlix cl

The order how the rest of holy scripture (beside the Psalter) is appointed to
be read.
I Hold Testament is appointed for the first Lessons, at Morning and Euenyng
prayer, and shall be read through, every year once, except certain books and
Chapyters, which be least edyfying, and might best be spared, and therefore be
left vnreadde.

The new testamente is appointed for the second Lessons at Morning and
Evening prayer, and shall be read over orderly every year thrice, beside the
Epistles and gospels: except the Apocalypse, out of the which there be only
certain Lessons appointed, upon diverse propre feasts.

And to know what lessons shall be read every day: find the day of the month
in the Calendar following, and there ye shall perceive the books and Chapyters
that shall be read for the Lessons both at Morning and Euenyng prayer.

And here is to be noted, that whenever there be any propre Psalms or
Lessons appointed for any feast, moveable or immovable: then the Psalms and
lessons, appointed in ye calendar, shall be omited for ye time.

Ye must note also, that the Collect, Epistle and Gospel, appointed for the
Sundaye, shall serve all the wieke after, except there fall some feast that
has his proper.

This is also to be noted, concerning the Leap years, that the.xxv. day of
February, which in Leap year, is counted for two days, shall in those two
days, alter neither Psalm nor lesson: but the same Psalms and lessons,
which be said the first day, shall also serve for the second day.

Also whersoeuer the beginning of any lesson, Epistle or Gospel is not
expressed: there ye must begin at the beinning of the Chapter.

And wheresoever is not expressed how far shall be read, there shall you
read to the end of the Chapter.

Proper Psalms and Lessons for diverse feasts and days, at Morning and
Evening prayer.
On Christmas day at morning prayer. Psalm. xix. Psalm. xlv. Psalm. lxxxv
The first Lesson. Esaye.ix. The.ii. Lesson. Luke.ii. unto And unto men a good
will At Evening prayer. Psalm. lxxxix Psalm. Cx. Psalm. Cxxxii.
The first Lesson. Esaie.vii. God spoke once again to Achas. etc. unto the
end. The second Lesson. Tit.iii. The kyndnesse and love. etc. unto. Foolyshe
questions. On saint Stephens day, at morning prayer The second Lesson.
Acts.vi. and.vii. Stephen full of faith and power. unto. And when forty
years were. etc. At Evening prayer. The second Lesson. Acts.vii. And when
forty years were expired, there appeared unto Moses. etc. unto. Stephen
full of the holy ghost. On saint John the eua^gelistes day, at Morni^g prayer.
The second Lesson. Apocalip.i. The whole Chapter. At Evening prayer. The
second Lesson. Apocalips.xxii. On the Innocents day, at morni^ng prayer. The
first Lesson. Ierem.xxxi. unto. Moreover I heard Ephraim. On the Circumcision
day, at morning prayer The first Lesson. Genesis.xvii. The second Lesson.
Roma.ii. At Evening prayer. The.i. Lesson. Deu.x. And now Israel. etc. The
second Lesson. Collossi.ii. On ye Epiphanie at Morning prayer. The first
Lesson. Esaye.lx. The second Lesson. Luke.iii. And it fortuned. etc. At Evening
prayer. The first Lesson. Esaye.xlix. The second Lesson. John.ii. After this he
went down to Capernaum. On Wednesday before Easter, at Euenyng prayer. The
first Lesson. Ozee.xiii. xiiii. On thursday before Easter, at Morning prayer.
The first Lesson. Daniel.ix. At Evening prayer. The first Lesson.
Jeremy.xxxi. On Good Fridaye, at Morning prayer. The first Lesson.
Genesis.xxii. At Evening prayer. The first lesson. Esaias.liii. On Easter even,
at Morning prayer. The first Lesson. zachary.ix. On Easter day, at Morning
prayer. Psalm. ii. Psalm. lvii. Psalm. cxi
The first lesson. Exo.xii. The second lesson. To.vi. At Evening prayer. Psalm.
cxiii Psalm. cxiiii. Psalm. cxviii.
The second lesson. Act.ii. On Mondaye in Easter weke, at Morning prayer. The
second Lesson. Math.xxviii. At Evening prayer. The second Lesson. Acts.iii. On
tuesdaye in Easter weke, at Morning prayer. The second Lesson. Lukexxiiii.
unto. And behold two of them. At Evening prayer. The second Lesson. i.
Corinth.xv. On the ascencyon day, at Morning prayer. Psalm. viii. Psalm. xv.
Psalm. xxi.
The second lesson. Ioh.xiiii. At Evening prayer. Psalm. xxiiii. Psalm.
lxviii. Psalm. Cviii.
The second lesson. Ephe.iiii. On Whitsunday, at morning prayer. Psalm. xlviii.
Psalm. lxvii.
The second lesson. Acts.x. Then Peter opened his. etc. At Evening prayer.
Psalm. Ciiii. Psalm. Cxlv.
The second Lesson. Act.xix It fortuned when Apollo went to Corinthum. etc.
unto After these things. On Trinity sunday, at Morning prayer. The first
lesson. Genesis.xviii. The second Lesson. Math.iii. Conversion of S. Paul, at
morning prayer. The second Lesson. Acts.xxii. unto. They heard him. At Evening
prayer. The second lesson. Acts.xxvi. Saint Barnabies day, at morning
prayer. The second lesson. Acts.xiiii. At Evening prayer. The second lesson.
Acts.xv. unto. After certain days. Saint John Baptistes day, at Morning
prayer. The first lesson. Malachi.iii. The second lesson. Math.iii. At Evening
prayer. The first lesson. Malachi.iiii. The second lesson. Math.xiiii. unto.
When Jesus heard. Saint Peter's day, at morning prayer. The second Lesson.
Acts.iii. At Evening prayer. The second Lesson. Acts.iiii. All saints day
at Morning prayer. The first lesson. Sapien.iii. unto. Blessed is rather the
barrayne. The second lesson. Hebre.xi. xii. Saints by faith subdued. unto. If
you endure chastising. At Evening prayer. The first lesson. Sapien.v. unto. His
Ielosie also. The second lesson. Apocalips.xix. unto. And I saw an Angel
stand.

A brief declaracion when every Term begins, and ends.

BE it known that Easter term begins always the.xviii. day after Easter,
rekening Easter day for one, and ends ye mondaye next after the Ascencyon
day.

Trinity term begins always the Friday next after Corpus Christi day, and
ends the wednesday fortnyght after.

Michelmas Term begins the nynth or tenth day of October, and ends
the.xxviii. or.xxix. day of Nouembre.

Hillarie term begins the.xxiii. or.xxiiii. day of January, and ends
the.xii. or.xiii. day of Februarye.

In Easter term on the Ascencion day. In Trinity term on the Nativity of.S.
John Baptist. In Michelmas term on alhallowes day and al souls day. In
Hillarye term, on Candlemas day: the kings Judges at Westminster do not use
to sit in judgment, nor upon any Sundays.

An Almanacke for.xix. years.
The year of our Lord. The Golden number. The epact The cicle of the sun.
Dominicall letter. Easter day. M.D.lii ^ iiii xxi C ^ xvii. April. M.D.liii ^
xv xxii A ii. April. M.D.liiii ^ xxvi xxiii G xxv. March M.D.lv ^ vii xxiiii
F xiiii. April. M.D.lvi ^ xviii xxv E ^ v. April. M.D.lvii ^ xxix xxvi C
xviii. April. M.D.lviii ^ xi xxvii B x. April. M.D.lix ^ xxii xxviii A xxvi.
March M.D.lx ^ iii i G ^ xiiii. April. M.D.lxi ^ xiiii ii E vi. April.
M.D.lxii ^ xxv iii D M.D.lxiii ^ xxvi iiii C M.D.lxiiii ^ xvii v B ^ M.D.lxv ^
xxviii vi G M.D.lxvi ^ ix vii F M.D.lxvii ^ xx viii E M.D.lxviii ^ i ix D ^
M.D.lxix ^ xii x B M.D.lxx ^ xxiii xi A

January has.xxxi. days.
Psalms. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. i. Lesson ii. Lesson. i. Lesson ii.
Lesson ^ A Kalend. Circumcisi i Ge. xvii Romans ii. Deute. x Collos. ii b iiii
No. ii Genes. i Mat. i Genes. ii Roma. i ^ c iii No. iii iii ii iiii ii d Pride.
No. iiii v iii vi iii ^ e Nonas. v vii iiii viii iiii ^ f viii Id. Epiphanie vi
Esaias. lx. Luke. iii Esai. xlix John. ii g vii Id. vii Gene. ix Math. v Genes.
xi Roma. v ^ A vi Id. viii xii vi xiii vi ^ b v Id. ix xiiii vii xv vii c iiii
Id. x xvi viii xvii viii xiii d iii Id. Sol in aqua. xi xviii ix xix ix ii e
Pride. Id. xii xx x xxi x f Idus. Hilarii. xiii xxii xi xxiii xi ^ g xix kl.
Februarii. xiiii xxiiii xii xxv xii A xviii kl. xv xxvi xiii xxvii xiii ^ b
xvii kl. xvi xxviii xiiii xxix xiiii ^ c xvi kl. Anthoni. xvii xxx xv xxxi xv d
xv kl. xviii xxxii xvi xxxiii xvi ^ e xiiii kl. xix xxxiiii xvii xxxv i. Corin.
i ^ f xiii kl. Fab. and Bast xx xxxvi xviii xxxvii ii g xii kl. Agnes. xxi
xxxix xix xxxix iii ^ A xi kl. Vincent. xxii xl xx xli iiii ^ b x kl. xxiii
xlii xxi xliii v c ix kl. xxiiii xliiii xxii xlv vi ^ d viii kl. Co^ Paul. xxv
xlvi Act. xxii xlvii Act. xxvi. e vii kl. xxvi xlviii ma. xxiii xlix i. Cor.
vii ^ f vi kl. xxvii l xxiiii Exodi. i. viii ^ g v kl. xxviii Exodi. ii xxv iii
ix A iiii kl. xxix iiii xxvi v x ^ b iii kl. xxx vi xxvii vii xi ^ c Pride. kl.
i viii xxviii ix xii

February has.xxviii. days.
Psalms. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. i. Lesson ii. Lesson. i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson d Kalend. ii Exodi. x. Mark. i. Exodi. xi i. cor. xiii xi e iiii No.
Puri. mary iii xii ii xiii xiiii xix f iii No. Blase. iiii xiiii iii xv xv ^ g
Pride. No. v xvi iiii xvii xvi A Nonas. Agathe. vi xviii v xix ii. Cori. i ^ b
viii Id. Doroth. vii xx vi xxi ii v c vii Id. viii xxii vii xxiii iii d vi Id.
ix xxiiii viii xxxii iiii xiii e v Id. x xxxiii ix xxxiiii v ii f iiii Id. Sol.
in Pis. xi xxxv x xl vi g iii Id. xii Le. xviii xi Leui. xix. vii ^ A Pride. Id.
xiii xx xii Nume. x. viii b Idus. Valentine. xiiii Number. xi. xiii xii ix xviii c
xvi kl. March. xv xiii xiiii xiiii x ^ d xv kl. xvi xv xv xvi xi e xiiii kl.
xvii xvii xvi xviii xii ^ f xiii kl. xviii xix Luke. di. i xx xiii ^ g xii kl.
xix xxi di. i xxii Galath. i A xi kl. Mildrede. xx xxiii ii xxiiii ii ^ b x kl.
xxi xxv iii xxvi iii i c ix kl. xxii xxvii iiii xxviii iiii d viii kl. The
place of the lepe year. xxiii xxix v xxx v ^ e vii kl. xxiiii xxxi vi xxxii vi.
f vi kl. (...) xxv xxxiii vii xxxiiii Ephesi i ^ g v kl. xxvi xxxv viii xxxvi
ii ^ A iiii kl. xxvii Deute. i ix Deute. ii iii b iii kl. xxviii iii x iiii
iiii ^ c (...) Kl. xxix v xi vi v

March has.xxxi. days.
Psalms. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson. i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson ^ d Kalend. David. xxx Deu. vii Luke xii. deu. viii Ephe. vi e vi No.
Chadde. i ix xiii x Philip. i ^ f v No. ii xi xiiii xii ii g iiii No. Adrian.
iii xiii xv xiiii iii ^ A iii No. iiii xv xvi xvi iiii ^ b Pride. No. v xvii
xvii xviii Collos. i c Nonas. vi xix xviii xx ii ^ d viii Id. vii xxi xix xxii
iii ^ e vii Id. viii xxiii xx xxiiii iiii f vi Id. ix xxv xxi xxvi i. thessa.
i. ^ g v Id. Equinoctiu^. x xxvii xxii xxviii ii ^ A iiii Id. Sol in arie^ xi
xxix xxiii xxx iii b iii Id. xii xxxi xxiiii xxxii iiii ^ c Pride. Id. xiii
xxxiii John. i xxxiiii v d Idus. xiiii Iosu. i ii Iosu. ii ii. these. i. ^ e
xvii kl. Aprilis. xv iii iii iii ii ^ f xvi kl. xvi iiii iiii iiii iii g xv kl.
xvii v v v i. timo. i ^ A xiiii kl. Edward. xviii vi vi vi ii. iii ^ b xiii kl.
xix vii vii vii iiii c xii kl. xx viii viii viii v ^ d xi kl. xxi ix ix ix vi ^
e x kl. xxii x x xi ii. timo. i f ix kl. Fast. xxiii xii xi xx ii ^ g viii kl.
Annunci. xxiiii xxi xii xxii iii A vii kl. xxv xxiii xiii xxiiii iiii ^ b vi
kl. xxvi Iudi. i xiiii Iudi. ii Titus. i ^ c v kl. xxvii iii xv iiii ii. iii d
iiii kl. xxviii v xvi vi Phile. i. ^ e iii kl. xxix vii xvii viii Heb. i. ^ f
(...). Kl. xxx ix xviii x ii

April has.xxx. days.
Psalms. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson. i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson g Kalend. i Iudic. xi Ioh. xix. Iudi. xii Heb. iii xi A iiii No. ii xiii
xx xiiii iiii b iii No. iii xv xxi xvi v xix c Pride. No. Ambrose iiii xvii
Acts. i xviii vi viii d Nonas. v xix ii xx vii xvi e viii Id. vi xxi iii Ruth.
i viii v f vii Id. vii Rut. ii iiii iii ix g vi Id. viii iiii v i. Reg. i x
xiii A v Id. ix i. Re. ii vi iii xi ii b iiii Id. Sol in tau x iiii vii v xii c
iii Id. xi vi viii vii xiii x d Pride. Id. xii viii ix ix Jacob. i e Idus. xiii
x x xi ii xviii f xviii Kl. Maii. xiiii xii xi xiii iii vii g xvii kl. xv xiiii
xii xv iiii A xvi kl. xvi xvi xiii xvii v xv b xv kl. xvii xviii xiiii xix i.
Pet. i iiii c xiiii kl. xviii xx xv xxi ii d xiii kl. xix xxii xvi xxiii iii
xii e xii kl. xx xxiiii xvii xxv iiii i f xi kl. xxi xxvi xviii xxvii v g x kl.
xxii xxviii xix xxix ii. Pet. i ix A ix kl. S. Georg xxiii xxx xx xxxi ii b
viii kl. xxiiii ii. Re. i xxi ii. Re. ii iii xvii c vii kl. (...) xxv iii xxii
iiii i. John. i vi d vi kl. xxvi v xxiii vi ii e v kl. xxvii vii xxiiii viii
iii xiiii f iiii kl. xxviii ix xxv x iiii iii g iii kl. xxix xi xxvi xii v A
Pride. kl. xxx xiii xxvii xiiii ii. iii. Ioh

May has.xxxi. days.
Psalms. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson. i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson ^ b Kalend Philip and Ia i ii. Re. xv Act. viii. ii. re. xvi Iuoas. i c
vi No. ii xvii xxviii xviii Roma. i ^ d v No. The cross. iii xix Math. i. xx
ii ^ e iiii No. iiii xxi ii xxii iii f iii No. v xxiii iii xxiiii iiii ^ g
Pride. No. vi iii. Re. i iiii iii. reg. i v ^ A Nonas John beuer vii ii v ii vi
b viii Id. viii iii vi iiii vii ^ c vii Id. ix v vii ix viii ^ d vi Id. x ix
viii x ix e v Id. Sol in Ge. xi xi ix xii x ^ f iiii Id. xii xiii x xiiii xi g
iii Id. xiii xv xi xvi xii ^ A Pride. Id. xiiii xvii xii xviii xiii ^ b Idus. xv
xix xiii xx xiiii c xvii kl. Iunii. xvi xxi xiiii xxii xv ^ d xvi kl. xvii
iiii. Re. i xv iiii. re. ii xvi ^ e xv kl. xviii iii xvi iiii i. Cor. i. f
xiiii kl. xix v xvii vi ii ^ g xiii kl. xx vii xviii viii iii ^ A xii kl.
Heline. xxi ix xix x iiii b xi kl. xxii xi xx xii v ^ c x kl. xxiii xiii xxi
xiiii vi d ix kl. xxiiii xv xxii xvi vii ^ e viii kl. xxv xvii xxiii xviii viii
^ f vii kl. xxvi xix xxiiii xx ix g vi kl. xxvii xxi xxv xxii x ^ A v kl.
xxviii xxiii xxvi xxiiii xi ^ b iiii kl. xxix xxv xxvii xxv xii c iii kl. xxx
i. Esdr. i. xxviii i. Esd. iii xiii d (...). Kl. xxx iii Mark. i iiii xiiii

June has.xxx. days.
Psalms. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. i. Lesson ii. Lesson i. Lesson ii.
Lesson. e Kalend. i i. esd. iiii Mar. ii. i. Esdr. v i. Cor. xv. ^ f iiii. No.
ii vi iii vi xvi ^ g iii. No. iii vii iiii vii ii. Cor. i. ^ A Pride. No. iiii
viii v viii ii ^ b Nonas v ix vi x iii c viii. Id. vi ii. Esd. i vii ii. esd.
iii iiii ^ d vii. Id. vii iiii viii v v ^ e vi. Id. viii vi ix viii vi f v. Id.
Edmond. ix ix x xiii vii ^ g iiii. Id. x Hester. i xi Heste. ii. viii A iii.
Id. Barnabe. xi iii Act. xiiii iiii Acts. xv. ^ b Pride. Id. xii v Mar. xii vi
ii. Cor. ix. ^ c (...) (...) in Can. xiii vii xiii viii x d xviii. kl. July.
xiiii ix xiiii Job. i xi ^ e xvii. kl. xv Job. ii xv iii xii ^ f xvi. kl. xvi
iiii xvi v xiii g xv. kl. xvii vi Luke. i vii Galath. i. ^ ^ xiiii. kl. xviii
viii ii ix ii ^ b xiii. kl. xix x iii xi iii c xii. kl. xx xii iiii xiii iiii ^
d xi. kl. Edward king xxi xiiii v xv v e x. kl. xxii xvi vi xvii xviii vi ^ f
ix. kl. Fast. xxiii xix vii xx Ephesi. i. ^ g viii. kl. (...) xxiiii Mal. iii.
Mat. iii Mal. iiii mat. xiiii. A vii. kl. xxv Job. xxi. Lu. viii. Job. xxii
Ephesians. ii. ^ b vi. kl. xxvi xxiii ix xxiiii xxv iii ^ c v. kl. xxvii 26.27 x
xxviii iiii d iiii. kl. Fast. xxviii xxix xi xxx v ^ e iii. kl. (...) xxix xxxi
Act. iii. xxxii Acts. iiii f (...) kl. xxx xxxiii Luke xii xxxiiii Ephesians. vi.

July has.xxxi. days.
Psalms. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. i. Lesson. ii. Lesson. i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson ^ g Kalend. i job. xxxv Luke xiii job. xxxvi Philip. i ^ A vi No.
Visitacio^ ii xxxvii xiiii xxxviii ii b v No. of our lady iii xxxix xv xi iii ^
c iiii No. iiii xli xvi xlii iiii ^ d iii No. v Prou. i xvii Prou. ii. Collos.
i e Pride. No. vi iii xviii iiii ii ^ f Nonas Dog days. vii v xix vi iii ^ g
viii Id. viii vii xx viii iiii A vii Id. ix ix xxi x i. thessa. i. ^ b vi Id. x
xi xxii xii ii c v Id. xi xiii xxiii xiiii iii xviii d iiii Id. xii xv xxiiii
xvi iiii ^ e iii Id. xiii xvii John. i xviii v f Pride. Id. Sol in Leo xiiii xix
ii xx ii. these. i ^ g Idus. Margarete xv xxi iii xxii ii ^ A xvii kl. August.
xvi xxiii iiii xxiiii iii b xvi kl. xvii xxv v xxvi i. timo. i ^ c xv kl. xviii
xxvii vi xxviii ii. iii i d xiiii kl. xix xxix vii xxx iiii e xiii kl. xx xxxi
viii Eccles. i v ^ f xii kl. xxi Eccle. ii. ix iii vi g xi kl. Mari mag. xxii
iiii x v ii. timo. i ^ A x kl. xxiii vi xi vii ii ^ b ix kl. Fast. xxiiii viii
xii ix iii c viii kl. (...) xxv x xiii xi iiii ^ d vii kl. xxvi xii xiiii
Ierem. i Titus. i ^ e vi kl. vii. sleper. xxvii Iere. ii. xv iii ii. iii f v
kl. xxviii iiii xvi v Phile. i ^ g iiii kl. xxix vi xvii vii Heb. i A iii kl.
xxx viii xviii ix ii ^ b Pride. Kl. xxx x xix xi iii

August has.xxxi. days.
Psalms. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. i. Lesson ii. Lesson i. Lesson ii.
Lesson. ^ c Kalend. Lammas. i Iere. xii Ioh. xx. Ier. xiii. Hebr. iiii ^ d
iiii. No. ii xiiii xxi xv v ^ e iii. No. iii xvi Acts. i. xvii vi f Pride. No.
iiii xviii ii xix vii ^ g Nonas. v xx iii xxi viii ^ A viii. Id. vi xxii iiii
xxiii ix b vii. Id. vii xxiiii v xxv x ^ c vi. Id. viii xxvi vi xxvii xi d v.
Id. ix xxviii vii xxix xii ^ e iiii. Id. S. Laurence x xxx viii xxxi xiii ^ f
iii. Id. xi xxxii ix xxxiii Iacobi. i. g Pride. Id. xii xxxiiii x xxxv ii ^ A
Idus xiii xxxvi xi xxxvii iii ^ b xix kl. Septe^bris. xiiii xxxviii xii xxxix
iiii c xviii. kl. Assu^p. mary xv xl xiii xli v ^ d xvii. kl. Sol in Vir. xvi
xlii xiiii xliii i. Petri. i. ^ e xvi. kl. xvii xliiii xv xlv. xlvi. ii f xv.
kl. xviii xlvii xvi xlviii iii ^ g xiiii. kl. xix xlix xvii l iiii A xiii. kl.
xx li xviii lii v ^ b xii. kl. Barnard. xxi Lame^. i. xix Lame^. ii ii. Pete.
i. ^ c xi. kl. xxii iii xx iiii ii d x. kl. Fast xxiii v xxi Ezech. ii iii ^ e
ix. kl. (...) xxiiii Ezec. iii. xxii vi i. John. i. ^ f viii. kl. xxv vii xxiii
xiii ii g vii. kl. xxvi xiiii xxiiii xviii iii ^ A vi. kl. xxvii xxxiii xxv
xxxiiii iiii b v. kl. Augustine. xxviii Danie. i xxvi Dani. ii. v ^ c iiii. kl.
xxix iii xxvii iiii ii. iii. Ioh. ^ d iii kl. xxx v xxviii vi Jude. i. e Pride.
kl xxx vii Math. i. viii Roma. i.

September has.xxx. days.
Psalms. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. i. Lesson ii. Lesson. i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson ^ f Kalend. i Dani. ix. Math. ii Danie. x Roma. ii ^ g iiii No. ii xi
iii xii iii A iii No. iii xiii iiii xiiii iiii ^ b Pride. No. iiii Ozee. i v
oze. ii. iii. v ^ c Nonas. Dog da. end v iiii vi v. vi vi d viii Id. vi vii vii
viii vii ^ e vii Id. vii ix viii x viii f vi Id. Nati. mary. viii xi ix xii ix
^ g v Id. ix xiii x xiiii x ^ A iiii Id. x Joel. i xi Joel. ii. xi b iii Id. xi
iii xii Amos. i. xii ^ c Pride. Id. xii Amos. ii xiii iii xiii ^ d Idus. xiii
iiii xiiii v xiiii e xviii kl. Octobre. xiiii vi xv vii xv ^ f xvii kl. Sol. in
Libra. xv viii xvi ix xvi ^ g xvi kl. xvi Abdias. i xvii Jonas. i. i. Cor. i. A
xv kl. xvii ion. ii. iii xviii iiii ii ^ b xiiii kl. xviii Miche. i xix Miche.
ii iii c xiii kl. xix iii xx iiii iiii ^ d xii kl. Fast. xx v xxi vi v ^ e xi
kl. S. Math^ xxi vii xxii Naum. i. vi. f x kl. xxii naum. ii xxiii iii vii ^ g
ix kl. xxiii Abacuc. i xxiiii Abacu. ii viii ^ A viii kl. xxiiii iii xxv Sopho.
i ix b vii kl. xxv Soph. ii xxvi iii x ^ c vi kl. xxvi Agge. i xxvii Agge. ii
xi d v kl. xxvii zacah. i xxviii zac. ii. iii. xii ^ e iiii kl. xxviii iii. v.
Mark. i. vi xiii ^ f iii kl. S Michael xxix vii ii viii xiiii g Pride Kl.
Hierome xxx ix iii x xv

Octobre has.xxxi. days.
Psalms. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. i. Lesson ii. Lesson. i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson ^ A Kalend. i zacha.xi. Mar. iiii zacha. xii i. cor. xvi ^ b vi No. ii
xiii v xiiii ii. Cor. i ^ c v No. iii Malac. i vi Malac. ii ii. ^ d iiii No.
Faith iiii iii vii iiii iii e iii No. v Tobi. i viii Tobi. ii. iiii ^ f Pride.
No. vi iii ix iiii v g Nonas. vii v x vi vi ^ A viii Id. viii vii xi viii vii ^
b vii Id. ix ix xii x viii c vi Id. x xi xiii xii ix d v Id. xi xiii xiiii
xiiii x ^ e iiii Id. xii Judith. i xv Iudit. ii. xi f iii Id. Edward. xiii iii
xvi iiii xii ^ g Pride. Id. Sol in scor xiiii v Luke di. i vi xiii ^ A Idus. xv
vii di. i viii Galath. i b xvii kl. November. xvi ix ii x ii ^ c xvi kl. xvii
xi iii xii iii d xv kl. Luke eua^ge xviii xiii iiii xiiii iiii xvii e xiiii kl.
xix xv v xvi v ^ f xiii kl. xx Sapie. i. vi Sapie. ii. vi. g xii kl. xxi iii
vii iiii Ephesi i ^ A xi kl. xxii v viii vi ii ^ b x kl. xxiii vii ix viii iii
c ix kl. xxiiii ix x x iiii ^ d viii kl. Chrispine xxv xi xi xii v e vii kl.
xxvi xiii xii xiii vi ^ f vi kl. Fast. xxvii xv xiii xvi Philip. i ^ g v kl.
Simo^ and (...) xxviii xvii xiiii xviii ii A iiii kl. xxix xix xv Eccle. i iii
^ b iii kl. xxx Eccle. ii xvi iii iiii ^ c Pride Kl. xxx iiii xvii v Colloss. i.

November has.xxx. days.
Psalms. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. i. Lesson ii. Lesson. i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson. d Kalend. Al saints i Sap. iii heb. 11.12 Sapie. v Apoc. xix ^ e iiii
No. ii Eccl. vi Lu. xviii Eccle. vii Collo. ii ^ f iii No. iii viii xix ix iii
g Pride. No. iiii x xx xi iiii ^ A Nonas. v xii xxi xiii i. thessa. i b viii Id.
Leonard. vi xiiii xxii xv ii ^ c vii Id. vii xvi xxiii xvii iii ^ d vi Id. viii
xviii xxiiii xix iiii e v Id. ix xx John. i xxi v ^ f iiii Id. x xxii ii xxiii
ii. these. i ^ g iii Id. Martin. xi xxiiii iii xxv ii A Pride. Id. xii xxvi iiii
xxvii iii ^ b Idus. Sol in sagit. xiii xxviii v xxix i. Tim. i ^ c xviii kl.
Decembre. xiiii xxx vi xxxi ii. iii d xvii kl. xv xxxii vii xxxiii iiii ^ e xvi
kl. xvi xxxiiii viii xxxv v f xv kl. xvii xxxvi ix xxxvii vi ^ g xiiii kl.
xviii xxxviii x xxxix ii. timo. i ^ A xiii kl. xix xl xi xli ii b xii kl. xx
xlii xii xliii. iii ^ c xi kl. xxi xliiii xiii xlv iiii ^ d x kl. xxii xlvi
xiiii xlvii. Titus. i. e ix kl. S. Clement. xxiii xlviii xv xlix ii. iii ^ f
viii kl. xxiiii l xvi li Philem. g vii kl. Katherine. xxv Baru. i xvii Baru. ii
Hebre. i. ^ A vi kl. xxvi iii xviii iiii ii ^ b v kl. xxvii v xix vi iii c iiii
kl. xxviii Esaye. i xx Esaias. ii. iiii ^ d iii kl. Fast. xxix iii xxi iiii v ^
e Pride Kl. Andrew xxx v Acts. i. vi vi

December has.xxxi. days.
Psalms. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. i. Lesson ii. Lesson. i. Lesson. ii.
Lesson. f Kalend. i Esai. vii Acts. ii. Esai. viii Heb. vii. ^ g iiii No. ii
ix iii x viii ^ A iii No. iii x iiii xii ix ^ b Pride. No. iiii xiii v xiiii x c
Nonas. Nicolas. v xv vi xvi xi ^ d viii Id. vi xvii di. vii xviii xii ^ e vii
Id. Concep ma. vii xix di. vii xx. xxi xiii f vi Id. viii xxii viii xxiii
James. i ^ g v Id. ix xxiiii ix xxv ii ^ A iiii Id. x xxvi x xxvii iii ^ b iii
Id. xi xxviii xi xxix iiii ^ c Pride. Id. Sol in cap xii xxx xii xxxi v ^ d
Idus. Lucie. xiii xxxii xiii xxxiii i. Petr. i. e xix kl. January. xiiii
xxxiiii xiiii xxxv ii. ^ f xviii kl. xv xxxvi xv xxxvii iii g xvii kl. xvi
xxxviii xvi xxxix iiii ^ A xvi kl. xvii xl xvii xli v ^ b xv kl. xviii xlii
xviii xliii ii. Pet. i. ^ c xiiii kl. xix xliiii xix xlv ii ^ d xiii kl. Fast.
xx xlvi xx xlvii iii ^ e xii kl. Thomas (...) xxi xlviii xxi xlix i. John. i f
xi kl. xxii l xxii li ii ^ g x kl. S. Clement. xxiii lii xxiii liii iii A ix
kl. Fast. xxiiii liii xxiiii lv iiii ^ b viii kl. Christmas. xxv Esai. ix.
Luke. ii. Esaias. vii Titu. iii ^ c vii kl. S. Stephen. xxvi lvi ac. vi. vii lvii
Act. vii. ^ d vi kl. S. John eua^ xxvii lviii Apoca. i. lix Apoc. xxii ^ e v
kl. Innocents. xxviii Ier. xxxi Act. xxv. Esa. lx i. John. v ^ f iiii kl. xxix
Esaias. lxi xxvi lxii ii. John. i g iii kl. xxx lxiii xxvii lxiiii iii. John. i ^
A (...) ka. xxx lxv xxviii lxvi Jude. i

The order where Morning and Evening prayer. shall be used and said.
The Morning and Evening prayer, shall be used in such place of the Church,
Chapel, or Chau^cel, and the Minister shall so turn hun, as the people may best
hear. And if there be any controversy therein, the matter shall be referred to
the ordenarye, and he or his deputy shall appoint the place, and the chauncels
shall remain, as they have done in times past.

And here is to be noted, that the Minister at the time of the communion, and
at all other times in his ministracion, shall use neither Albe, Vestment, nor
Cope: but being Archebisshop, or Bishop, he shall have and wear a rochet:
and being a Priest or Deacon, he shall have and wear a surples only.

An order for Morning prayer, daily throughoute the year.
At the beginning both of Morning prayer, and likewise of Evening prayer, the
Minister shall read with a loud voice, some one of these sentences of the
scriptures that follow. And then he shall say that, which is written after
the said sentences.

Ezechiel xviii.
AT what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the bottom
of his heart: I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance says the
Lord.

Psalm. li.
I do know mine own wickedness, and my sin is always against me.

Psalm. li.
Turn thy face away from our sins (O Lord) and blot out all our offenses.

Psalm. li
A sorrowful spirit, is a sacrifice to God: despise not (O Lord) humble and
contryte hearts.

Joel. ii
Rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God:
because he is gentle and merciful, he is paciente and of much mercy, and such
a one that is sorry for your affliccyons.

Dani. ix.
To thee O Lord God belongs mercy and forgeuenes: for we have gone away
from thee, and have not harkened to thy voice, whereby we might walk in thy
laws, which thou have appointed for us.

Ierem. ii
Correct us, O Lord and yet in thy judgment, not in thy furye, lest we
should be consumed and brought to nothing.

Math. iii
Amend your lives, for the kingdom of God is at hand.

Luke. xv.
I will go to my father and say to him: father, I have sinned against
heaven, and against thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy son.

Psa. cxlii
Enter not into judgment with thy servants, O lord, for no flesh is
righteous in thy sight.

i. John. i.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no
truth in us.

Dearly beloved brethren, the scripture moves us in sondrye places, to
acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we should
not dissemble, nor cloak them before the face of almyghtie God our heavenly
father, but confess them with an humble, lowely, penitent, and obedient heart:
to the end that we may obtain forgeuenes of the same by his infinite goodness
and mercy. And although we ought at all times, humbly to knowledge our sins
before God: yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and mete
together, to render thanks for the great benefits that we baue received at
his hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy
word, and to ask those things which be requisite and necessary, as well for
the body as the soul. Wherefore I pray and beseech you, as many as be here
present, to accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the throne
of the heavenly grace, saying after me.

A general confession, to be said of the whole congregation after the
Minister, kneelyng.

ALmighty and most merciful father, we have erred and straied from thy ways,
like lost sheep. We have followed to much the devises and desires of our own
hearts. We have offended against thy holy laws. We have left undone those
things which we ought to have done, and we have done those things which we
ought not to have done, and there is no health in us: but thou, O Lord, have
mercy upon us miserable offenders. Spare thou them O God, which confess their
faults. Restore thou them that be penitent, according to thy promyses declared
unto mankind, in Christ Jesus our Lord. And grant, O most merciful father,
for his sake, that we may hereafter live a godly, ryghteous, and sobre life, to
the glory of thy holy name. Amen.

The absolucion to be pronounced by the Minister alone.

ALmightye God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which desires not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wyckednes and live:
and has given power and commandment to his ministers, to declare and
pronounce to his people being penitent, the absolucion and remission of their
sins: he pardons and absolueth all them which truly repent, and
unfeignedly believe his holy gospel. Wherefore we beseech him to grant us true
repentance and his holy spirit, that those things may please him which we
do at this present, and that the rest of our life hereafter, may be pure and
holy: so that at the last we may come to his eternal joy, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The people shall answer. Amen.

Then shall the Minister begin the Lords prayer. with a loud voice.

OVre father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptacion. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Then likewise he shall say.

O Lord open thou our lips.

Answer. And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Priest. O God make speed to save us.

Answer. O Lord make have to help us.

Priest. Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

Praise ye the Lord.

Then shall be said or song this Psalm following.

O Come let us sing unto the Lord: let us heartily rejoice in the strength of
our salvation.

Let us come before his presence with thankesgeuyng: and show our self glad
in him with Psalms.

For the Lord is a great God: and a great king above al Gods.

In his hand are all the corners of the earth: and the strength of the hills
is his also.

The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands prepared the dry land.

O come, let us worship and fall down: and knele before the Lord our maker.

For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands.

To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: as in the
prouocacion, and as in the day of temptacyon in the wyldernes.

When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works.

Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said: it is a
people that do err in their hearts, for they have not known my ways.

Unto whom I swear in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end.
Amen.

Then shall follow certain Psalms in order, as they be appointed in a Table,
made for that purpose: except there be proper psalms appointed for that day.
And at thend of every Psalm throughoute the year, and likewise in thend of
Benedictus, Benedicite, Magnificat, and Nunc dimittis, shall be repeated.

Glory be to the father, and to the son. etc.

Then shall be read two Lessons distinctly with a loud voice, that the people
may hear. The first of the old Testamente, the second of the new. Like as
they be appointed by the Calendar, except there be proper Lessons assigned for
that day: the Minister that reads the Lesson, standing and turning him so,
as he may best be hard of al such as be present. And before every Lesson, the
Minister shall say thus. The first, second, third, or fourth Chapter of
Genesis, or Exodus, Matthew, Mark, or other like, as is appointed in the
Calendar. And in the end of every Chapter, he shall say.

Here ends such a Chapter, of such a Book.

And (to thend the people may the better hear) in such places where they do
sing, there shall the Lessons be song in a plain tune, after the manner of
distinct reading: and likewise the Epistle and Gospel.

After the first Lesson, shall follow Te deum laudamus, in English, daily
through the whole year.

Te deu^ laudamus
WE praise thee, O God: we knowledge thee to be the Lord.

All the earth does worship thee: the father everlasting.

To thee all Angels cry aloude: the heavens and all the powers therein.

To thee Cherubin and Seraphin, continually do cry.

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath.

Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty of thy glory.

The glorious company of the Apostles praise thee.

The goodly fellowship of the Prophets, praise thee.

The noble army of Martyrs, praise thee.

The holy Church throughout all the word, does knowledge thee.

The father of an infinite Majesty.

Thy honorable, true, and only son.

Also the holy ghost, the comforter.

Thou art the king of glory, O Christ.

Thou art the everlasting son of the father.

When thou tokest upon thee to deliver man, thou did not abhor the
vyrgins womb.

When thou had ouercomed the sharpenes of death, thou did open the kingdom
of heaven to al beleuers.

Thou syttest on the right hand of God, in the glory of the father.

We believe that thou shall come to be our judge.

We therefore pray thee, help thy servants, whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood.

Make them to be numbered with thy Saints in glory everlasting.

O Lord save thy people: and bless thine heritage.

Govern them and lift them up for ever.

Day by day we magnify thee.

And we worship thy name ever world without end.

Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin.

O Lord have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.

O Lord, let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee.

O lord, in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.

Or this canticle, Benedicite omnia opera domini domino.

Benedicite
O All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O ye Angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise ye him and magnify him
for ever, O ye heavens, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye waters that be above the fyrmament, bless ye the Lord, praise him and
magnify him for ever.

O all ye powers of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O ye Sun and moon, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye stars of heaven, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye showers and dew, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye wyndes of God, bless ye the lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye fire and heat, bless ye the lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye winter and summer, bless ye the lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye dewes and frostes, bless ye the lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye froste and cold, bless ye the lord: praise him and magnifye him for
ever.

O ye Ise and snow, bless ye the lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye nyghtes and days, bless ye the lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye light and darkness, bless ye the lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye lightninges and clouds, bless ye the lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O let the earth bless the lord: yea, let it praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye Mountains and hills, bless ye the lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O all ye grene things upon the earth, bless ye the lord: praise him and
magnify him for ever.

O ye wells, bless ye the lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye Seas and floudes, bless ye the lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye whales and all that move in the waters, bless ye the lord: praise him
and magnify him for ever.

O all ye fowls of the air, bless ye the lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O all ye beasts and cattle, bless ye the lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O ye children of men, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O let Israel bless the Lord: praise him and magnifye him for ever.

O ye Priests of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O ye servants of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O ye spirits and souls of the righteous, bless ye the Lord: praise him and
magnify him for ever.

O ye holy and humble men of heart, bless ye the Lord: praise him and
magnify him for ever.

O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify
him for ever.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the. etc. As it was in the
beginning, is now, and ever. etc.

And after the second Lesson, shall be used and said, Benedictus, in English as
follows.

Benedictus.
BLessed be the Lord God of Israel: for he has visited and redeemed his
people.

And has raised up a mighty salvation for us: in the house of his servant
David.

As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets: which have been sense the
world began.

That we should be saved from our enemies: and from the hands of all that
hate us.

To perform the mercy promised to our forefathers. and to remember his holy
covenant.

To perform the oath which he swear to our forefather Abraham: that he would
give us.

That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies: might serve him
without fear.

In holiness and righteousness before him: all the days of our life.

And thou child shalt be called the Prophet of the highest: for thou shall
go before the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways.

To give knowledge of salvation unto his people: for the remission of their
sins.

Through the tender mercy of our God: whereby the day spryng, from an high has
visited us.

To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: and
to guide our fete into the way of peace.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever. etc.

Or else this Psalm.

Iubilate deo. psa. c
O Be joyful in the lord (al ye lands:(serve the lord with gladness, and come
before his presence with a song

Be ye sure that the lord he is god: it is he that has made us, and not we our
selves, we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

O go your way into his gates with thankesgeuing, and into his courts with
praise: be thankful unto him, and speak good of his name.

For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures
from generation to generation.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the. etc. As it was in the
beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Then shall be said the Creed, by the Minister and the people, standing.

I Believe in god the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord. Which was conceived by the holy ghost, borne
of the virgin Marye. Suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead and
buried, he descended into hell. The third day he rose again from the dead. He
ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father
almightye. From thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe
in the holy ghost. The holy Catholyke Church. The communyon of Saynctes. The
forgiveness of sins. The resurreccyon of the body. And the life everlasting.
Amen.

And after that, these prayers following, as well at Euenyng prayer, as at Morning
prayer: all deuoutely knelyng. The Minister first pronouncyng with a loud
voice.

The Lord be with you.

Answer. And with thy spirit.

The Minister. Let us pray.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Then the Minister, Clerks and people, shall say the Lords prayer in
English, with a loud voice.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

Then the Minister standing up, shall say.

O lord show thy mercy upon us.

Answer. And grant us thy salvation.

Priest. O Lord save the king.

Answer. And mercifully hear us, when we call upon thee.

Priest. Indue thy ministers with righteousness.

Answer. And make thy chosen people joyful.

Priest. O lord save thy people.

Answer. And bless thine enheritaunce.

Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord.

Answer. Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou O
God.

Priest. O God, make clean our hearts within us.

Answer. And take not thine holy spirit from us.

Then shall follow three Collectes. The first of the day, which shall be the same
that is appointed at the Communion. The second for peace. The third for grace
to live well. And the two last Collectes shall never alter, but daily be said at
Morning prayer, throughout all the year as follows.

The second Collecte for Peace.

O God, which art aucthour of peace, and lover of concord, in knowledge of
whom stands our eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom: defend
us thy humble servants, in all assaults of our enemies, that we surely
trustyng in thy defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries: through
the might of of Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

The third Collect for grace.

O Lord our heavenly father, almighty and everlasting god, which have safely
brought us in the beginning of this day: defend us the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any
kind of danger: but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance,
to do always that is righteous in thy syghte: through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

An order for Evening prayer throughout the year.
The Priest shall say.

Our father which art.etc.

Then likewise he shall say.

O Lord open thou our lyppes.

Answer. And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Priest. O God make speed to save us.

Answer. Lord make have to help us.

Priest. Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

Praise ye the Lord.

Then Psalms in order as they be appointed in the Table for Psalms, except
there be proper Psalms appointed for that day. Then a Lesson of the old
Testamente as is appointed likewise in the Calendar, except there be proper
Lessons appointed for that day. After that, Magnificat, in English as follows.

Magnificat
MY soul does magnify the Lord: and my spirit has reioysed in God my
Savior.

For he has regarded the lowelines of his handmayden:

For behold from henceforth, al generacions shall call me blessed

For he that is mighty, has magnified me: and holy is his name.

And his mercy is on them that fear him: throughout al generacions.

He has showed strength with his arm: he has scattered the proud, in the
ymaginacyon of their hearts.

He has put down the mighty from their seat: and has exalted the humble and
meke.

He has filled the hungrye with good things: and the rich he has sent
emptye away.

He remembryng his mercy, has helped his servant Israel: as he promised to
our forefathers, Abraham and his seed for ever.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

Or else this Psalm.

Cantate domino. psa. xcviii
O Sing unto the Lord a new song: for he has done merueylous things.

With his own right hand, and with his holy arm: has he gotten himself the
victory.

The Lord declared his salvation: his ryghteouseness has he openly showed, in
the sight of the heathen.

He has remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: and all
the ends of the world have seen the salvation of our God.

Show your selves joyful unto the Lord all ye lands: sing, rejoice, and
give thanks.

Praise the Lord upon the harp: sing to the harp with a Psalm of
thankesgeuyng.

With trompettes also and shawmes: O show your selves joyful before the
Lord the king.

Let the sea make a noise and all that therein is: the round world, and they
that dwell therein.

Let the floudes clappe their hands, and let the hills be joyful together
before the Lord: for he is come to judge the earth.

With righteousness shall he judge the world: and the people with equity.

Glory be to the father. etc. As it was in the etc.

Then a Lesson of the new Testament. And after that ( Nunc dimittis) in
English, as follows.

Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace: according to thy word.

For mine eyes have seen: thy salvation.

Which thou have prepared: before the face of all people.

To be a light to lyghten the Gentyles: and to be the glory of thy people
Israel.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now. etc. Amen.

Or else this Psalm.

Deus misereatur. psalm lxvii.
GOd be merciful unto us, and bless us: and show us the light of his
countenance, and be merciful unto us.

That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all nations,

Let the people praise thee O God: yea let all the people praise thee.

O let the nacyons rejoice and be glad: for thou shalt judge the folk
righteously, and govern the nacyons upon earth.

Let the people praise thee O God: let all the people praise thee.

Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God, even our own God
shall give us his blessyng.

God shall bless us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now.etc.

Then shall follow the Creed, with other prayers as is before appointed at
Morning prayer after Benedictus. And with three Collectes: First of the day:
the second of peace: third for aid against all perilles, as hereafter
follows. Which two last Collectes shall be daily said at Euenyng prayer
without alteracion.

The second Collect at Evening prayer.

O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsayles and all just works
do proceed: give unto thy servants that peace, which the world cannot give:
that both our hearts may be set to obey thy commandments, and also that
by thee, we being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time
in rest and quyetnes, through the merits of Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

The third Collecte, for aid against all perilles.

LIghten our darkness we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy, defend
us from al perilles and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only
son our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

In the feasts of Christmas, the Epiphanie, saint Mathie, Easter,
Thassencion, Pentecost, Saint John Baptist, Saint James, Saint Bartholomew:
Saint Matthew, Saint Simon and Jude, Saint Andrew, and Trinity Sundaye:
shall be song or said immediately after Benedictus, this confession of our
Christen faith.

Quicu^que vult.
Whosoever will be saved: before al things it is necessary that he hold the
catholyke faith.

Which faith except every one do keep holy and undefiled: without doubt he
shall perish euerlastinglye.

And the catholic faith is this: that we worship one God in Trinity, and
Trinity in unity.

Neither confoundinge the persons: nor deuydinge the substance.

For there is one person of the father, another of the son: and another of
the holy ghost.

But the Godhead of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost is al one:
the glory equal, the majesty coeternal.

Such as the father is, such is the son: and such is the holy ghost.

The father uncreate, the son uncreate: and the holy ghost uncreate.

The father incomprehensible, the son incomprehensible: and the holy ghost
incomprehensible.

The father eternal, the son eternal: and the holy ghost eternal.

And yet they are not three eternalles: but one eternal.

As also there be not three incomprehensibles, nor three uncreated: but one
uncreated, and one incomprehensible.

So likewise the father is almighty, the son almighty: and the holy ghost
almighty.

And yet they are not three almighties: but one almighty.

So the father is God, the son is God: and the holy ghost is God.

And yet are they not three Gods: but one God.

So likewise the father is Lord, the son Lord: and the holy ghost Lord.

And yet not three Lords: but one Lord.

For like as we be compelled by the Christian verity: to acknowledge every
person by himself, to be god and Lord.

So are we forbidden by the catholic religion; to say there is. be three Gods
or three Lords.

The father is made of none: neither created nor begotten.

The son is of the father alone: not made, nor created, but begotten.

The holy ghost is of the father and of the son: neither made, nor created,
nor begotten, but procedinge.

So there is one father, not three fathers, one son, not three sons: one
holy ghost, not three holy ghostes.

And in this Trinity, none is before or after other: none is greater, nor less
then another.

But the whole three persons: be coeternal together and coequall.

So that in all things, as is aforesaid: the unity in Trinity, and the
Trinity in unity, is to be worshipped.

He therefore that will be saved: must thus think of the Trinity.

Furthermore, it is necessary to everlasting salvation: that he also believe
rightely in the incarnacion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

For the right faith is, that we believe and confess: that our Lord Jesus
Christ, the son of God, is god and man.

God of the substance of the father, begotten before the worlds: and man of
the substance of his mother, borne in the world.

Perfect God, and perfect man: of a reasonable soul: and humayne flesh
subsistinge.

Equal to the father as touching his Godhead: and inferioure to the father,
touching his manhood.

Who although he be God and man: yet he is not two, but one christ.

One, not by conversion of the godhead into flesh: but by taking of the
manhood into God.

One altogether, not by confusion of substance: but by unity of person.

For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man: so God and man is one
christ.

Who suffered for our salvation: descended into hell, role again the third
day from the dead.

He ascended into heaven, he sits on the right hand of the father, God
almyghtie: from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

At whose coming all men shall rise again with their bodies: and shall give
accoumpt for their own works.

And they that have done good, shall go into life everlasting: and they that
have done evil, into everlasting fire.

This is the Catholic faith: which except a man believe faithfully, he can not
be saved.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

Thus ends the order of Morning and Evening prayer, through the whole year.
Here follows the Letany to be used upon Sundaies, Wednesdaies, and Frydayes,
and at other times, when it shall be commanded by the Ordenarye.
O God the father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son, redemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son, redemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy ghost, proceeding from the father and the son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the holy ghost, proceeding from the father and the son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons, and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons, and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

Remember not lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefather, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From al evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnacion.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all blindness of heart, from pride, vain glory and hipocrisy, from envy,
hatered and malice, and al uncharitableness.

Good lord deliver us.

From fornicacion and al other deadly sin, and from all the deceites of the
world, the flesh and the devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightninges and tempests, from plage, pestilence, and famine, from
battle and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedicion and privy conspiracy, from the tyranny of the Bishop of
Rome, and all his detestable enormities, from all false doctrine and heresy,
from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnacion, by thy holy Nativity and
Cyrcumcision, by thy Baptysme, fasting, and temptacion.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony and bloody sweat, by thy cross and passion, by thy precious
death and burial, by thy glorious resurreccion and ascencion, and by the
coming of the holy ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulacion, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment.

Good lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us (O Lord God) and that it way please
thee to rule and govern thy holy church universally, in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep Edward the sixth thy servant, our king and
governor.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear and love, that
he may always have affyaunce in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory
over all his enemies.

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bisshops, Pastors, and Ministers of
the Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word: and that both by
their preaching and living, they may set it forth and show it accordyngly.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the counsel and all the
nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to mayntayn truth.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all nations unity, peace and concord.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give all thy people increase of grace, to hear
mekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affeccion, and to bring forth the
fruits of the spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring in to the way of truth, all such as have
erred and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak hearted, and to raise them up that fall, and finally to beat
down Satan under out fete.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help and comfort, all that be in
danger, necessity and tribulacion.

We beseech thee to hear us good lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travail by land or by water, all
weomen labouryng of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show
thy piety upon all priesoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherles children and
widows, and all that be desolate and oppresed.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutours and slaunderers,
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use, the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
spirit, to amend our lives according to the holy word.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

O lamb of God that take away the sins of the world:

Grant us thy peace.

O lamb of God that take away the sins of the world:

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

And lead us not into temptacion.

But deliver us from evil.

The versicle. O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

The answer. Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O God merciful father, that despysest not the sighing of a contrite heart nor
the desire of such as be sorrowful: mercifully assist our prayers that we make
before thee in all our troubles and aduersyties whenever they oppress us.
And graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtlety of the
devil or man works against us, be brought to naught, and by the providence of
thy goodness, they may be dispersed, ye we thy servants being hurt by no
persecucions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy church, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise, help us and deliver us for thy names sake.

O God we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us,
the noble works that thou dydst in their days, and in the old time before
them.

O Lord arise, help us and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost: as it was in
the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our affliccions.

Pietifully behold the sorrows of our heart.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O son of David, have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ, graciously hear us, O lord Christ.

The versicle. O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us.

The answer. As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.

WE humblye beseech thee, O father, mercifullye to look upon our infirmities,
and for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us al those evils that we
most righteously have deserved: and grant that in all our troubles we may
put our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in
holiness and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory: Through our only
mediator and advocate Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

For rain, if the time require.

O God heavenly father, which by thy son Jesus Christ have promised to all
the^ that seek thy kingdom and the righteousness thereof, all things
necessary to their bodyly suffenaunce: send us we beseech thee in this our
necessity, such moderate rain and showers, that we may receive the fruytes of
the earth to our comfort, and to thy honor: through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

For fair weather.

O Lord god, which for the sin of man did once drown all ye world, except
eight persons, and afterward of thy great mercy did promise never to destroy
it so again: we humbly beseech thee, that although we for our iniquities have
wortheli deserved this plague of rain and waters, yet upon our true
repentance, thou will send us such weather whereby we may receive the
fruits of the earth in due season, and learn both by thy punishment to amend
our lives, and for thy clemencye to give thee praise and glory: through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the time of dearth and famyne.

O God heavenly father, whose gift it is that the rain does fall, the earth is
fruitful, beasts increases and fishes do multiply: behold we beseech thee
thaffticcions of thy people, and grant that the scarcity and dearthe (which
we do now most iustelye suffer for our iniquity) may through thy goodness
be mercifullye turned into cheapenes and plenty, for the love of Jesus Christ
our Lord: to whom with thee and the holy ghost. etc.

Or thus.

O God merciful father, which in the time of Heliseus the Prophet, did
suddenly turn in Samaria, great scarcity and dearth into plenty and
cheapenes and extreme famine into abundaunce of victual: have pity upon us,
that now be punisshed for our sins with like adversity, increase the
fruits of the earth by thy heavenly benediccion. And grant, that we
receiving thy bountiful liberality, may use the same to thy glory, our
comfort, and relief of our nedye neighbors: through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

In the time of War.

O Almighty god, king of al kings, and governor of all things, whose power
no creature is hable to resist to whom it belongs justly to punyshe sinners,
and to be merciful to them that truly repent: save and deliver us (we humbly
beseech thee) from the hands of our enemies: abate their pride, assuage their
malice, and confound their devises, that we being armed with thy defense, may
be preserved evermore from al perils to gloryfye thee, which art the only
geuer of all victory: through the merits of thy only son Jesus Christ
our Lord.

In the time of any common plague or sickness.

O Almighty God: which in thy wrath in the time of king David, did slay
with the plague of pestilence.ix. and ten thousand, and yet remembryng thy
mercy did save the rest: have pity upon us miserable sinners, that now are
visited with great sickness and mortality, that like as thou did then
command thy Angel to cease from punishing: So it may now please thee to
withdraw from us this plague and greuouse sickness: through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

And the Letany shall ever end with this Collecte following.

Almighty God, which haste given us grace at this time with one accord to
make our common supplicacions unto thee, and dooest promise that when two or
three be gathered in thy name, thou will grant their requests: fulfill now
O Lord, the desires and petycyons of thy servants, as may be most
expedyente for them, grauntyng us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and
in the world to come, life everlasting. Amen.

The Collectes Epistles and Gospelles to be used at the celebracyon of the
Lords supper and holy Communion, through the year.
The first Sundaye of Aduente.
The Collecte.
Almighty god, give us grace that we may cast away the works of darkness, and
put upon us the armor of light, now in the time of this mortal life (in the
which thy son Jesus Christ came to visit us in great humility:) that in
the last day, when he shall come again in his glorious majesty to judge both
the quick and the dead, we may rise to the life immortal through him: who
lives and reygneth with thee and the holy ghost, now and ever. Amen.

The Epistle.
Romans xiii
OWe nothing to any man but this, that ye love one another. For he that loves
another, fulfylleth the law. For these commandments: Tou shalt not
commytte adulterye: Thou shalt not kill: Thou shalt not steal: Thou shall
bear no false witness: Thou shalt not lust: and so forth (if there be any
other commandment) it is all comprehended in this saying: namely, love thy
neighbor as thy self. Love hurts not his neighbor: therefore is love the
fulfilling of the law. This also, we know the season how that it is time that
we should now awake out of sleep, for now is our salvation nerer then when we
believed. The night is passed, the day is come nie: let us therefore cast
away the deeds of darkness; and let us put on the armor of light. Let us
walk honestly, as it were in the day light, not in eating and drinkyng,
neither in chaumbouring and wantonness, neither in strife and envying, but put
ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill
the lusts of it.

The Gospel.
Mat. xxi
ANd when they drew nigh to Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage unto Mount
Oliuete, then sent Jesus two of his disciples, saying unto them: go into ye
town that lies over against you, and anon you shall find an Ass bound, and
a colte with her: looce the^ and bring them unto me. And if any man say ought
unto you, say ye the Lord has need of them, and straight way he will let
them go. All this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
the Prophet, saying: Tell ye the daughter of Syon: behold, thy king comes unto
thee meke, sitting upon an Ass and a colte, the foale of the Ass used to the
yoke. The disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them, and brought the Ass
and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and set him thereon. And many of
the people spread their garments in the way. Other cut down branches from
the trees, and strawed them in the way. Moreover, the people that went before,
and they that came after cried, saying: Hosanna to the son of David: Blessed
is he that comes in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest. And when he
was come to Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying: who is this? And the
people said: this is Jesus the Prophet of Nazareth, a city of Galile. And
Jesus went into the temple of god, and cast out all them that sold and bought
in the temple, and ouerthrewe the tables of the money chaungers, and the seats
of them that sold doves, and said unto them: It is written: My house shall be
called the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves.

The second Sunday in Aduent.
The Collecte.
BLessed Lord, which have caused al holy scriptures, to be written for our
learning: grant us that we may in such wise hear them, read, mark,
learn, and inwardlye dygeste them, that by pacyence and coumforte of thy holy
word, we may embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting
life, which thou have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.
Romans xv.
Whatsoever things are written before time, they are written for our learning,
that we through patience and coumfort of the scriptures, might have hope. The
God of patience and consolacyon, grant you to be like minded one toward
another, after the ensaumple of Christ Jesus: that ye al agreing together, may
with one mouth praise God the father of our lord Jesus Christ: wherefore receive
ye one another, as Christ received us to the praise of God. And this I say:
that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to
confirm the promyses made unto the fathers: and that the Gentiles might praise
God for his mercy, as it is written: For this cause I will praise thee among the
Gentiles and sing unto thy name. And again he says: rejoice ye Gentiles with
his people. And again: praise the lord al ye Gentiles, and laud him al ye
nations, together. And again, Esaias says: there shall be the root of Iesse, and
he that shall rise to reign over the Gentyles, in him shall the Gentiles
trust, The God of hope, fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye
may be rich in hope, through the power of the holy ghost.

The Gospel.
Luke. xxi.
THere shall be signs in the sun and in the Moon, and in the stars: and in
the earth the people shall be at their wits end, through despair. The sea and
ye water shall roar, and men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for
lokyng after those things which shall come on the earth. For the powers of
heaven shall move. And then shall they see the son of man come in a cloud,
with power and great glory. When these things begin to come to pass, then
look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. And he
showed them a similitude: behold the figtree, and al other trees: when they
shoot forth their buddes, ye see and know of your own selves that summer is
then nigh at hand. So likewise ye also (when ye see these things come to pass)
be sure that the kingdom of God is nigh. Verily I say unto you: this generation
shall not pass, till all be fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall pass, but my
words shall not pass.

The third Sunday in Aduent.
The Collect.
LOrd, we beseech thee give ear to our prayers, and by thy gracious
visitacion, lighten the darkness of our heart, by our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.
i. Cor. iiii
LEt a man this wise esteem us, even as the ministers of Christ, and stewardes
of the secrets of god. Furthermore, it is required of ye stewardes, that a man
be found faithful: with me it is but a very small thing that I should be
judged of you, either of man's judgment: no, I judge not mine own self, for
I know naught by my self, yet am I not thereby justified. It is the Lord that
judges me. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the lord come, which
will lighte^ things that are hid in darkness, and open the counsayles of the
hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God.

The Gospel.
Math. xi.
WHen John being in prieson heard the works of Christ, he sent two of his
disciples, and said unto him: Art thou he that shall come, or do we look for
an other? Jesus answered, and said unto them. Go and show John again what ye
have heard and seen. The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the
Lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor
receive the glad tydinges of the gospel: and happy is he that is not offended
by me. And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the people concerning
John: What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A read that is shaken with
the wind? or what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raymente?
behold, they that wear soft clothing, are in kings houses. But what went ye
out for to see: a Prophet? verelye I say unto you, and more then a Prophet.
For this is he of whom it is written: Behold, I send my messenger before thy
face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

The fourth Sunday in Aduent.
The Collect.
LOrd raise up (we pray thee) thy power, and come among us, and with great
might succoure us: that whereas (through our sins and wickedness) we be
sorelet and hindered, thy bountiful grace and mercy (through the satisfaccion of
thy son our Lord) may spedely deliver us: to who^ with thee and the holy
ghost, be honor and glory world without end.

The Epistle.
Phili. iiii
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. Let pour softnes be
known to all men: the lord is even at hand. Be careful for nothing, but in
all prayer and supplicacion let your peticions be manifest unto god, with
giving of thanks. And the peace of God (which passes all understanding) keep
your hearts and minds: through Christ Jesus.

The Gospel.
John. i.
THis is the record of John, when the Jews sent Priests and Levites from
Jerusalem, to ask him: what art thou? And he confessed and denied not, and
said plainly: I am not Christ. And they asked him: what then, art thou
Helias? and he says: I am not. Art thou the Prophet? and he answered, no.
Then said they unto him: what art thou that we may give an answer unto the^
that sent us? what say thou of thy self? he said: I am the voice of a
crier in the wilderness: make straight the way of the lord, as said the prophet
Esaias. And they which were sent, were of the Phariseis: and they asked him, and
said unto him: Why baptisest thou then, if thou be not Christ, nor Helias,
nether that Prophet? John answered them, saying: I baptize with water, but
there stands one among you, whom ye know not: he it is, which though he came
after me, was before me, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to vnlooce. These
things were done at Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John did Baptize.

Christmas day.
The Collecte.
Almighty God, which have given us thy only begotten son to take our nature
upon him, and this day to be borne of a pure virgin: Grant that we being
regenerate and made thy children by adopcion and grace, may daily be renewed by
thy holy spirit, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ: who lives and
reygneth with. etc. Amen.

The Epistle.
Hebre. i.
GOd in times past, diversely and many ways spoke unto the fathers by
Prophets: but in these last days he has spoken to us by his own son,
who^ he has made heir of al things, by whom also he made the world. Which
(son) being the bryghtnes of his glory, and the very image of his substance,
ruling al things with the word of his power, has by his own person purged
our sins, and sits on the right hand of the majesty on high: being so
much more excellent then ye Angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a
more excellent name then they. For unto which of the Angels said he at any
time? Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. And again. I will be his
father, and he shall be my son. And again, when he brings in the first
begotten son into the world, he says: and let all the Angels of God worship
him. And unto the Angels he says: He makes his Angels spirits, and his
ministers a flame of fire. But unto the son he says: thy seat (O god)
shall be for ever and ever. The scepter of thy kingdom is right scepter. Thou
have loved righteousness and hated iniquity: wherefore God, even thy God, has
anointed thee with oil of gladness above thy fellows. And thou Lord in the
beginning have laid the foundacyon of the earth: and the heavens are the works
of thy hands. They shall peryshe, but thou endurest: But they all shall wax
old as does a garmente, and as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they
shall be changed. But thou art even the same, and thy years shall not fail.

The Gospel.
John. i.
IN the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and God was the
word. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by it, and
without it was made nothing that was made. In it was life, and the life was the
light of men, and the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not. There was sent from God, a man whose name was John.
The Same came as a witness, to bear witness of the light, that all men
through him might believe. He was not that light, but was sent to bear
witness of the light. That light was the true light which lyghteth every
man that comes into the world. He was in the world, and the world was made
by him, and the world knew him not. He came among his own, and his own
received him not. But as many as received him, to the^ gave he power to be made
sons of God: even them that believed on his name, which were borne, not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor yet of the will of man, but of God.
And the same word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we saw the glory of it,
as the glory of the only begotten son of the father, full of grace and truth.

Saint Stephens day.
The Collecte.
Grant us O Lord, to learn to love our enemies by the example of thy martyr
Saint Stephen who prayed for his persecutours to thee: which lyuest. etc.

Then shall follow a Collecte of the Nativity, which shall be said continually
unto Neweyeares day.

The Epistle.
Acts. vii
ANd Stephen being full of the holy ghost, looked up steadfastly with his eyes
into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of
God, and said: behold, I seethe heavens open, and the son of man standing on
the right hand of God. Then they gave a shoute with a loud voice, and stopped
their ears, and ran upon him all at once, and cast him out of the city, and
stoned him. And the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet,
whose name was Saul. And they stoned Stephen, calling on and saying: Lord
Jesus, receive my spirit. And he kneled down and cried with a loud voice:
Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had thus spoken, he fell
a sleep.

The Gospel.
Matthew xxiii.
Behold, I send unto you Prophets, and wise men, and Scribes, and some of
them ye shall kill and crucifye, and some of them shall ye scourge in your
Sinagogues, and persecute them from city to city, that upon you may come all
the ryghteous blood which has been shed upon the earth, from the blood of
ryghteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom ye
show between the temple and the aultare. Verily I say unto you, all these
things shall come upon this generacyon. O Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets and stonest them which are sent unto thee: how often would I have
gathered thy children together, even as the hen gathers her chickens under
her wings, and ye would not? Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. For
I say unto you: ye shall not see me henceforth, til that ye say: Blessed is he
ye comes in the name of the lord.

Saint John Evangelists day.
The Collecte.
MErciful lord, we beseech thee to cast thy bright beams of light upon thy
Church: that it being lightened by the doctrine of thy blessed Apostle and
Euangeliste John, may attain to thy everlasting gifts. Through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle.
i. John. i.
THat which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have
seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of
the word of life: And the life appeared, and we have seen, and bear witness,
and show unto you that eternal life which was with the father, and appeared
unto us. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye
also may have fellowship with us, and that our fellowship may be with the
father and his son Jesus Chiste. And this we write unto you, that ye may
rejoice, and that your joy may be full. And this is the tidinges which we
have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no
darkness at al. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we
lie, and do not the truth. But and if we walk in light, even as he is in
light, then have we fellowship with him, and the blood of Jesus Christ his
son, cleanses us from al sin. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us. If we knowledge our sines, he is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us fom al unrighteousness. If
we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

The Gospel.
John. xxi
Jesus said unto Peter: follow thou me. Peter turned about, and saw the disciple
whom Jesus loved following (which also leaned on his breast at supper, and
said: lord, which is he that betrayeth thee?) when Peter therefore saw him, he
said to Jesus: Lord, what shall he here do? Jesus said unto him: if I will have
him to tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me. The^ went this
saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die. Yet Jesus
said not to him, he shall not die: but if I will that he tarry till I come,
what is that to thee? The same disciple is he which testifies of these
things, and wrote these things: and we know that his testimony is true.
There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if they should
be written every one, I suppose the world could not contain the books that
should be written.

Thinnocentes day.
The Collecte.
ALmighty God, whose praise this day the young Innocents thy witnesses have
confessed and showed forth, not in speaking, but in dying: mortify and kill all
vices in us, that in our conversation, our life may express thy faith,
which with our tongues we due confess: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Apo. xiiii.
I Looked, and lo, a lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred
and.xliiii. thousand having his name and his fathers name written in their
foreheades. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the sound of many waters, and
as the voice of a great thu^der. And I heard the voice of harpers harpyng with
their harpes. And they song as it were a new song before ye seat, and before
the.iiii. beasts and the elders, and no man could learn the song, but the
hundred fourtye and.iiii. thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. These
are they which were not defiled with women, for they are virgins. These follow
the lamb whersouer he goes. These were redeemed from men, being the first
fruits unto God, and to the lamb, and in their mouths was found no gyle:
for they are without spot before the throne of God.

The Gospel.
Math. ii.
THe Angel of ye lord appeared to Joseph in a sleep, saying: arise and take the
child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there til I bring thee
word. For it will come to pass, ye Herod shall seek the child to destroy
him. So when he awoke, he took the child and his mother by night, and departed
into Egypt, and was there unto ye death of Herod, that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying: out of Egypt have I
called my son. Then Herod when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men,
he was exceading wroth, and sent forth men of war, and slew all the
children that were in Bethleem, and in all the coasts (as many as were two
years old or under) according to ye time which he had diligently known out
of the wisemen. Then was fulylled ye which was spoken by ye Prophet Jeremy,
whereas he said: In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentacyon, weping, and great
mourning. Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because
they were not.

The Sunday after Christmas day.
The Collecte.
Almightye God which have given us. etc.

As upon Christmas day.

The Epistle.
Gala. iiii.
ANd I say, that the heir (as long as he is a child) differs not from a
servant, though he be Lord of all, but is under tutours and governors,
until the time that the father has appointed. Even so we also, when we were
children, were in bondage under the ordeinaunces of the world: But when the
time was full come, God sent his son made of a woman, and made bond unto the
law, to redeem them which were bond unto the law: that we through eleccion
might receive the inherytaunce that belongs unto the natural sons.
Because ye are sons, God has sent the spirit of his son into our
hearts, which cries, Abba father. Wherefore now, thou art not a servant,
but a son: If thou be a son, thou art also an heir of God through Christ.

The Gospel.
Math. i
THis is the book of the generation of Jesus Christ the son of David the
son of Abraham: Abraham begat Isaac: Isaac begat Jacob: Jacob beegat Judas
and his brethren: Judas begat Phares and Zaram of Thamar: Phares begat Esrom:
Esrom begat Aram: Aram begat Aminadab: Aminadab begat Naasson: Naasson begat
Salmon: Salmon begat Boos of Rahab: Boos begat Obed of Ruth: Obed begat Iesse:
Iesse begat David the king: David the king begat Solomon, of her that was the
wife of Vrie: Solomon begat Roboam: Roboam begat Abia: Abia begat Asa: Asa
begat Iosaphat: Iosaphat begat Ioram: Ioram begat Osias: Osais begat Ioatham:
Ioatham begat Achas: Achas begat Ezechias: Ezechias begat Manasses: Manasses
begat Amon: Amo^ begat Josias: Josias begat Iechonias and his brethren, about
the time that they were carried away to Babylon. And after they were brought to
Babylon, Iechonias begat Salathiel: Salathiel begat zorobabel: zorobabel begat
Abiud: Abiud begat Eliachim: Eliachim begat Azor: Azor begat Sadoc: Sadoc begat
Achin: Achin begat Eliud: Eliud begat Eleasar: Eleasar begat Matthan: Matthan
begat Jacob: Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was borne Jesus,
even he that is called Christ. And so all the generacions from Abraham to
David, are.xiiii. generacio^s. And from David unto the captivity of Babylon,
are.xiiii. generacions. And from the captivity of Babilo^ unto Christ,
are.xiiii. generacio^s.

The birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When his mother Mary was married to
Joseph (before they came to dwell together) she was found with child by the
holy ghost. Then Joseph her husband (because he was a ryghteous man, and would
not put her to shame (was minded privily to depart from her. But while he
thus thought: behold, the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in sleep,
saying: Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Marye thy
wife: for that which is conceived in her, comes of the holy ghost. She shall
bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus: for he shall save his
people from their sins.

All this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by
the Prophet, saying: Behold, a maid shall be with child, and shasll bring
forth a son, and they shall call his name Emanuell: which if a man
interpret, is as much to say, as God with us. And Joseph, as soon as he a woke
out of sleep, did as the Angel of the Lord had bidden him: and he took his
wife unto him, and knew her not til she had brought forth her first begotten
son, and called his name Jesus.

The Cyrcumcision of Christ.
The Collect.
Almighty God, which made thy blessed son to be circumcised and obedient
to the law for man: grant us the circumcision of the spirit, that our
hearts and all our members being mortifyed from all worldly and carnal
lusts, may in all things obey thy blessed will: through the same thy son Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Romans iiii
BLessed is that man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. Came this
blessedness then upon the vncyrcumcision, or upon the cyrcumcision also? for we
say that faith was rekoned to Abraham for righteousness. How was it then
rekoned? when he was in the cyrcumcision, or when he was in the vncircumcisio^?
not in time of cyrcumcision, but when he was yet vncyrcumcised. And he received
the sign of cyrcumcision, as a seal of the righteousness of faith, which he
had yet being vncyrcumcised, that he should be the father of al them that
believe, though they be not cyrcumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to
them also, and that he might be the father of cyrcumcision, not unto them
only which came of the cyrcumcised, but unto the^ also that walk in the
steps of the faith that was in our father Abraham before the time of
cyrcumcision. For the promise (that he should be heir of the world) happened
not to Abraham or to his sede through the law, but through the righteousness
of faith. For if they which are of the law be heirs, then is faith but vayn,
and the promise of none effect.

The Gospel.
Luke. ii.
ANd it fortuned, as soon as the Angels were gone away from the shepeheardes into
heaven, they said one to another: let us go now even unto Bethleem, and see
this thing that we hear say is happened, which the Lord has showed unto
us. And they came with have, and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe, laid in
a maunger. And when they had seen it, they published abroad the saying that
was told them of that child. And all they that heard it, wondered at those
things which were told them of the shepeheardes. But Mary kept all those
sayings, and pondred them in her heart. And the shepeheardes returned,
praysyng and laudyng God for all the things that they had heard and seen,
even as it was told unto them. And when the eight day was come that the
child should be circumcised, his name was called Jesus, which was named of
the Angel before he was conceived in the womb.

If there be a Sundaye between the Epiphanye and the Circumcision, then shall be
used the same Collecte, Epistle and Gospel, at the communion, which was used
upon the day of Circumcision.

The Epiphanie.
The Collecte.
O God, which by the leadyng of a star did manyfeste thy only begotten
son to the Gentyles: Mercifullye grant, that we which know thee now by
faith, may after this life have the fruicion of thy glorious Godhead, through
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Ephe. iii.
FOr this cause I Paul am a prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Heathen, if ye
have heard of the ministracion of the grace of God, which is given me to you
ward. For by reuelacion showed he the misterye unto me, as I wrote before in
few words, whereby when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the
mystery of Christ: which mystery in times paste was not opened unto the
sons of men, as it is now declared unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by
the spirit, that the Gentiles should be inheritours also, and of the same
body, and partakers of his promise of Christ, by the means of the gospel,
whereof I am made a minister, according to the gift of the grace of God,
which is given unto me after the woorkyng of his power. Unto me the least of
all saynctes is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentyles,
the unsearchable riches of Christ, and to make all men see what the
fellowship of the mystery is, which from the beginning of the world, has
been hid in God, which made all things through Jesus Christ: to the intent,
that now unto the rulers and powers in heavenly things, might be known by
the congregacyon, the manifold wisdom of God, according to the eternal
purpose which he wroughte in Christ Jesus our Lord: by who^ we have boldenes
and entrance, with the confidence which is by the faith of him.

The Gospel.
Mat. ii.
WHen Jesus was borne in Bethleem a city of Jury, in the time of Herod the
king: Behold, there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem, saying: where
is he yt is borne king of the Jews? For we have seen his star in the East,
and are come to wurshippe him. When Herod the king had heard these things, he
was troubled and all the city of Jerusalem with him. And when he had gathered
all the chief priests and Scribes of the people together, he demanded of
them where Chirste should be borne. And they said unto him: at Bethleem in
Jury. For thus it is written by the Prophet. And thou Bethleem in the land of
Jury, art not the least among the Princes of Judah: for out of thee there
shall come unto me, the captain that shall govern my people Israel. Then
Herod (when he had privily called the wise men) he enquired of them
dylygently what time the star appeared: and he bad them go to Bethleem, and
said: go your way thither, and search diligently for the child. And when
ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come and wurshyp him
also. When they had heard the king, they departed: and lo, the star which
they saw in the East, went before them till it came and stood over the
place wherein the child was. When they saw the star, they were exceadyng
glad, and went into the house, and found the child with Marye his mother,
and fell down flat, and wurshipped him, and opened their treasures, and
offered unto him gifts: Gold, Frankyncense, and Mirre. And after they were
warned of God in sleep (that they should not go again to Herod) they returned
into their own country another way.

The first Sunday after the Epiphanie.
The Collecte.
Lord we beseech thee mercifully to receive the prayers of thy people which
call upon thee: and grant that they may both perceive and know what things
they ought to do, and also have grace and power, faithfully to fulfill the
same, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Romans xii.
I Beseech you therefore brethren by the mercyfulnesse of God, that ye make your
bodies a quick sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto god which is your
reasonable serving of god, and fashion not your selves like unto this world:
but be ye changed in your shape by the renewing of your mind, ye ye may prove
what thing that good and acceptable and perfect will of God is. For I say
(through the grace that unto me given is) to every man among you, that no man
stand high in his own conceit, more then it becomes him to esteem of
himself: but so judge of himself, that he be gentle and sobre, according as
God has dealte to every man the measure of faith: for as we have many members
in one body, and all members have not one office, s o we being many, are one
body in Christ, and every man among our selves one another members.

The Gospel.
Luke. ii.
THe father and mother of Jesus went to Jerusalem after the custom of the
feast day. And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned home, the
child Jesus abode still in Jerusalem, and his father and mother knew not of
it: but they supposyng him to have been in the cumpanye, came a days iourneye
and sought him among their kynsfolke and acquayntaunce. And when they found
him not, they went back again to Jerusalem, and sought him. And it fortuned,
that after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of
the doctors, hearing the^, and posing them. And all that heard him, were
astonished at his understanding and aunsweres. And when they saw him, they
meruayled, and his mother said unto him: son, why have thou thus dealt with
us? Behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorowyng. And he said unto them:
how happened that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must go about my fathers
business? And they understood not yt saying, which he spoke unto them. And he
went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was obedyente unto them: but
his mother kept all these sayings together in her heart. And Jesus prospered
in wisdom and age, and in favor with God and men.

The second Sunday after the Epiphanie.
The Collecte.
Almighty and everlasting god, which do govern al things in heaven and
earth: mercifully hear the supplicacions of thy people, and grant us thy
peace all the days of our life.

The Epistle.
Romans xii.
SEeing that we have diverse gifts, according to the grace yt is given unto
us: if a man have the gift of prophecy, let him have it, that it be agreeing
to the faith. Let him that has an office, wait on his office. Let him that
teaches, take heed to his doctrine. Let him that exhorts, give attendaunce
to his exhortacyon. If any man give, let him do it with synglenesse. Let him
that rules, do it with diligence. If any manne show mercy, let him do it
with cherefulnesse. Let love be without dissimulacion. Hate that which is
evil, and cleave to that which is good. Be kind one to another with brotherly
love. In giving honor, go one before another. Be not slothful in the business
which you have in hand. Be fervent in spirit. Apply your selves to the time.
Rejoice in hope. Be paciente in tribulacion. Continue in prayer. Distribute
unto the necessity of the saints. Be ready to harbor. Bless them which
persecute you, bless I say, and curse not. Be merye with them that are merye:
weep with them that weep: be of like affeccio^ one toward another. Be not hye
minded, but make your selves equal to them of the lower sort.

The Gospel.
John. ii.
ANd the third day was there a marriage in Cana, a city of Galile, and the
mother of Jesus was there. And Jesus was called (and his Disciples) unto the
marriage. and when the wine failed, the mother of Jesus said unto him: they
have no wine. Jesus said unto her: woman, what have I to do with thee? Mine
hour is not yet come. His mother said unto the ministers: whatsoever he says
unto you, do it. And there were standing there.vi. waterpottes of stone, after
the manner of purifying of the Jews, conteynyng two or three fyrkyns a piece.
Jesus said unto them: fill the waterpottes with water. And they filled them up
to the brymme. And he said unto them: draw out now, and bear unto the
gouernoure of the feast: And they bare it. When the ruler of the feast had
tasted the water turned into wine, and knew not whence it was (but the
ministers which drew the water, knew) he called the bridegroom, and said
unto him: every man at the beginning does set forth good wine, and when men
be drunk, then that which is worse: but thou have kept the good wine until
now. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galile, and showed his
glory, and his disciples believed on him.

The third Sunday after thepiphanie.
The Collect.
Almighty and everlasting god, mercifully look upon our infirmities: and in
all our dangers and necessities, stretche forth thy right hand to help and
defend us, through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Romans xii.
BE not wise in your own opinions. Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide
aforehand things honest, not only before God, but also in the sight of all
men. If it be possible (as much as is in you) live peaceably with all men.
Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath. For
it is written: vengeance is mine, I will reward, says the lord. Therefore if
thine enemy hunger, feed him: if he thyrst, give him drink. For in so doing,
thou shall heap coals of fire on his head. Be not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with goodness.

The Gospel.
mat. viii.
WHen he was come down from the mountayn, much people followed him. And behold,
there came a Leper, and worshipped him, saying: Master, if thou will thou can
make me clean. And Jesus put forth his hand and touched him, saying: I will, be
thou clean: and immediately his leprosy was cleansed. And Jesus said unto him:
tell no man, but go and show thy self to the Priest, and offer the gift (yt
Moses commanded to be offered) for a witness unto the^. And when Jesus was
entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a Centurion, and besoughte him,
saying: Master, my servant lies at home, sick of the paulsey, and is
grievously payned. And Jesus said: when I come unto him, I will heal him. The
Centurion answered, and said: Sir, I am not worthy yt thou should come
under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed. For
I also am a man subject to the authority of an other, and have soldiers under
me: and I say to this man, go, and he goes: and to another man, come, and he
comes: and to my servant, do this, and he does it. When Jesus heard these
words, he merueiled, and said to them that followed him: verily I say unto
you, I have not found so great faith in Israel. I say unto you, yt many shall
come from the East and Weste, and shall rest with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in
the kingdom of heaven: but the children of the Kingdom shabe cast out into
utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashyng of teeth. And Jesus said
unto the Centurion: Go thy way, and as thou beleuest, so be it unto thee:
and his servant was healed in the self same hour.

The fourth Sunday after Christmas.
The Collecte.
GOd which know us to be set in the midst of so many and great
dangers, that for man's fraylnesse we cannot always stand uprightly: Grant
to us the health of body and soul, that all those things which we suffer for
sin, by thy help we may well pass and overcome: through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
To. xiii.
LEt every soul submit himself unto the authority of the higher powers:
for there is no power but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God:
whosoever therefore resists power, resists the ordinance of god: But they
that resist, shall receive to themselves damnacyon. For rulers are not
fearful to them that do good, but to them that do evil. Will thou be
without fear of the power? do well then, and so shalt thou be praised of
the same: for he is the minister of God, for thy wealth. But and if thou do
that which is evil, then fear, for he bears not the sweorde for naught: for
he is the minister of God, to take vengeance on them that do evil. Wherefore
ye must needs obey, not only for fear of vengeance, but also because of
conscience, and even for this cause pay ye tribute: For they are Gods
ministers serving for that purpose. Give to every man therefore his duetye:
tribute, to whom tribute belongs: custom, to whom custom is due: fear, to
whom fear belongs: honor, to who^ honor pertayneth.

The Gospel.
Mat. viii
ANd when he entered into a ship, his disciples followed him. And behold,
there arose a great tempeste in the sea, insomuche as the ship was covered
with waves, but he was aslepe. And his disciples came to him, and awoke him,
saying: Master save us, we peryshe. And he said unto them: why are ye
fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the wyndes and the
sea, and there followed a great calm. But the men meruayled, saying: what
manner of man is this, that both wyndes and sea obey him? And when he was come
to the other side, into the country of the Gergesites, there met with him two
possessed of devils, which came out of the graves, and were out of measure
fierce, so that no man might go by that way. And behold, they cried out,
saying: O Jesus thou son of God, what have we to do with thee: Art thou come
hither to tormente us before the time? And there was a good way of from them,
a heerde of Swyne fedyng. So the devils besought him, saying: If thou cast us
out, suffer us to go into the heerd of Swyne. And he said unto them: go
your ways. Then went they out, and departed into the heerd of Swyne. And
behold, the whole heerd of Swyne was carried headlong into the sea, and
peryshed in the waters. Then they that kept them fled, and went their ways
into the city, and told every thing, and what had happened unto the possessed
of the devils. And behold, the whole city came out to mete Jesus: and when
they saw him, they besought him that he would depart out of their coasts.

The fifth Sundaye after the Epiphanie.
The Collecte.
Lord, we beseech thee to keep thy Church and householde continually in thy
true relygion: that they which do lean only upon hope of thy heavenly
grace, may evermore be defended by thy mighty power. Through Christ our
Lord.

The Epistle.
Collo. iii.
PVt upon you as the elect of God, tender mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind,
meekness, long suffryng, forbearyng one another, and forgeuing one another, if
any man have a quarrel against another: as Christ forgave you, even so do
ye. Above all these things, put on love, which is the bond of perfectnes. And
the peace of God rule your hearts, to the which peace year called in one
body: And see that ye be thankful. Let the word of Christ dwell in you
plenteously with all wisdom: Teach and exhort your own selves in Psalms
and Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the
Lord. And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, geuyng thanks to God the father by him.

The Gospel.
Mat. xiii.
THe kingdom of heaven is like unto a man which sowed good seed in his
field: but while men slepte, his enemy came, and sowed tares among the
wheat, and went his way. But when the blade was sprung up, and had brought
forth fruit, then appeared the tares also. So the servants of the householder
came, and said unto him: Sir, did not thou sow good seed in thy field?
from whence then has it tares? He said unto them: the enuyous man has
done this. The servants said unto him: will thou then that we go and wede
them up? But he said: nay, least while ye gather up the tares, ye pluck up
also ye wheat with them: let both grow together until the harvest, and in
the time of harvest, I will say to the reapers: gather ye first the tares,
and bind them together in sheaues to be burnt, but gather the wheat into my
barn.

The sixth Sunday (if there be so many) shall have the same Collect, Episstle and
Gospel, that was upon the fifth Sundaye.

The Sunday called Septuagesima.
The Collecte.
O Lord, we beseech thee favorably to hear the prayers of thy people, that we
which are iustli punished for our offenses, may be mercifullye delivered by
thy goodness, for the glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ our savior: who
lives and reygneth world without end.

The Epistle.
i. Cor. ix.
Perceive ye not, how that they which run in a course, run all, but one
receives the reward? So run that ye may obtain: Every man that proves
masteries abstaineth from all things. And they do it to obtain a crown that
shall peryshe, but we to obtain an everlasting crown. I therefore so run,
not as at an uncertain thing. So fight I, not as one that beats the air:
but I tame my body, and bring it into subieccion, lest by any means it come
to pass, that when I have preached to other, I my self should be a castawaye.

The Gospel.
Mat. xx.
THe kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which
went out early in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyarde. And when
the agremente was made with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent them into
his vineyarde. And he went out about the third hour, and saw other
standing idle in the market place, and said unto them: go ye also into the
vineyarde, and whatsoever is right, I will give you. And they went their
way. Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise.
And about the.xi. hour he went out, and found other standing idle, and said
unto them: Why stand ye here all the day idle? They said unto him: because
no man has hired us. He says unto them: go ye also into the vineyarde, and
whatsoever is right, that shall ye receive. So when even was come, the Lord
of the vineyarde said unto his steward: call the laborers and give them
their hyre, beginning at the last until the first. And when they did come
that came about the eleventh hour, they received every manne a penye: But
when the first came also, they supposed that they should have received more,
and they likewise received every man a penny. And when they had received it,
they murmured against the good manne of the house, saying: these last have
wroughte but one hour, and thou haste made them equal with us, which have
borne the burden and heat of the day. But he answered unto one of them, and
said: Friend, I do thee no wrong: did thou not agree with me for a penny?
Take that thine is, and go thy way: I will give unto this last, even as unto
thee. Is it not lawful for me to do as me lusts with mine own goods. Is
thine eye evil because I am good? So the last shall be first, and the first
shall be last. For many be called but few be chosen.

The Sunday called Sexagesima.
The Collecte.
Lord God, which see that we put not our trust in any thing that we do:
mercyfullye grant, that by thy power we may be defended against all
adversity, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
ii. Cor. xi.
YE suffer fools gladly, seeing your selves are wise. For ye suffer, if a man
bring you into bondage: if a man devour: if a man take: if a man exalt him
self: if a man smite you on the face. I speak as concerning rebuke, as though
we had been weak in this behalf. Howbeit, wherinsoeuer any man dare be bold
(I speak foolyshlye) I dare be bold also. They are Hebrews, even so am I.
They are Israelites, even so am I. They are the seed of Abraham, even so am I.
They are the ministers of Christ (I speak like a fool) I am more. In labors
more aboundaunte: In stripes above measure: In pryeson more plenteouslye: In
death often: Of the Jews five times received I.xl. stripes save one: Thrice was
I beaten with rods: I was once stoned: I suffered thrice shipwrake: Night and
day have I been in the deep sea. In iorneying often: in parels of waters: in
parels of robbers: in ieopardies of mine own nacyon: in ieoparadies among the
Heathen: in parels in the city: in parels in wilderness: in parels in the
sea: in parels among false brethren: in labor and travail: in watchynges
often: in hungre and thirst: in fastinges often: in cold and nakedness: beside
the things which outwardly happen unto me, I am combred daily, and do care
for all congregacions. Who is weak, and I am not weak: who is offended, and I
burn not: If I must needs boaste, I will boaste of the things that concern
mine infirmities. The God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is
blessed for evermore, knows that I lie not.

The Gospel.
Luke viii
WHen much people were gathered together, and were come to him out of all
cities, he spoke by a similitude. The sower went out to sow his seed: and
as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and it was trode^ down, and the fowls
of the air devoured it up. And some fell on stones, and as soon as it was
sprung up, it withered away, because it lacked moistenes. And some fell among
thorns, and the thorns sprang up with it and choked it. And some fell on good
ground, and sprang up and bare fruit an hundredth fold. And as he said these
things, he cried: he that has ears to hear, let him hear. And his
disciples asked him, sayi^g: what manner of similitude is this? And he said:
unto you it is given to know the secrets of the kingdom of God, but to other
by parables: that when they see, they should not see, and when they hear, they
should not vnberstande. The parable is this. The sede is the word of God: those
that are beside the way, are they that hear: then comes the devil and takes
away the word out of their hearts, lest they should believe and be saved.
They on the stones are they, which when they hear, receive the word with
joy, and these have no roots, which for a while believe, and in time of
temptacyon go away. And that which fell among thorns are they, which when
they have heard, go forth and are choked with cares and riches, and voluptuous
living, and bring forth no fruit. That which fell in the good ground are
they, which with a pure and good heart, hear the word and keep it, and bring
forth fruit through patience.

The Sunday called Quinquagesima.
The Collecte.
O Lord, which do teach us that al our doings without charity are nothing
worth: send thy holy ghost, and power in our hearts that most excellent gift
of charity, the very bond of peace and al virtues, without the which whosoever
lives, is counted dead before thee: Grant this for thy only son Jesus
Christ's sake.

The Epistle.
i. Cor. xiii
Though I speak with tongues of men and of Angels, and have no love, I am
even as foundyng brass, or as a tinkling Cimball. And though I could
prophecye, and understand al secrets, and all knowledge: yea, if I have all
faith, so that I could move mountains out of their places, and yet have no
love, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and
though I gave my body even that I burned, and yet have no love, it profits
we nothing. Love suffers long, and is courteous, love enuieth not, love does
not frowardly, swells not, deals not dishonestly, seeks not her own, is
not provoked to anger, thinks none evil, reioyseth not in iniquity. But
reioyseth in the truth, suffers all things, believes all things, hops all
things, hops all things endures all things. Though that prophesying
fail, either tongues cease, or knowledge vanyshe away, yet love falls never
away. For our knowledge is imperfect, and our prophesying is imperfect: But
when that which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall be
done away. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a
child, I ymagined as a child. But as soon as I was a man, I put away a
childishness. Now we see in a glass, even in a dark speaking: but then
shall we see face to face. Now I know imperfectly: but then shall I know even
as I am known. Now abides faith, hope, and love, even these three: but the
chief of these is love.

The Gospel.
Luke xviii
Jesus took unto him the.xii. and said unto them: behold, we go up to
Jerusalem, and all shall be fulfilled that are written by the Prophets of the
son of man. For he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles, and shall be
mocked, and despitefully entreated, and spitted on. And when they have scourged
him, they will put him to death, and the third day he shall rise again. And
they understood none of these things. And this saying was hyd from them, so
that they perceived not the things which were spoken. And it came to pass,
that as he was come nyghe to Hieritho, a certain blind manne satte by the hye
way side, beggyng. And when he heard the people pass by, he asked what it
mente. And they said unto him, that Jesus of Nazareth passed by. And be cried,
saying: Jesus thou son of David, have mercy on me. And they which went
before, rebuked him, that he should bold his peace. But he cried so much the
more: thou son of David have mercy on me. And Jesus stood still, and
commanded him to be brought unto him. And when he was come nere, he asked
him, saying: what will thou that I do unto thee? and he said: Lord, that I
might receive my syghte. And Jesus said unto him: receive thy syghte, thy
faith has saved thee. And immediately he received his sight, and followed him
praysyng God. And all the people when then saw it gave praise unto God.

The first day of Lent.
The Collecte.
ALmighty and everlasting God, which hate nothing that thou have made, and
do forgive the sins of al them that be penitente: Create and make in us
new and contrite hearts, that we worthelye lamentyng our sins, and
knowledging our wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy,
perfect remission and forgiveness, through Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.
Joel. ii.
TVrne you unto me with all your hearts, with fasting, weping and mourning:
rent your hearts and not your clothes. Turn you unto the Lord your God,
for he is gracious and merciful, long suffering and of great compasson, and
ready to pardon wickedness. Then (no doubt) he also shall turn and forgive: and
after his chastening, he shall let your increase remain for meat and drink
offeringes unto the lord your god. Blow out with the trompet in Sion, proclaim
a fasting, call the congregation, and gather the people together: warn the
congregacyon, gather the elders, bring the children and suckelynges together.
Let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet.
Let Priests serve the Lord between the Porche and the alter, weping and
saying: be favorable, O Lord, be favorable unto thy people: let not thine
heritage be brought to such confusion, lest the Heathen be Lords thereof.
Wherefore should they say among the Heathen: where is now their God.

The Gospel.
Math. vi.
WHen ye fast, be not sad as the Hipocrites are: for they diffigure their
faces that it may appear unto men how that they fast. Verily I say unto you,
they have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, annoint thine head, and
wash thy face, that it appear not unto men how thou fastest, but unto thy
father which is in secret: and thy father which sees in secret, shall reward
thee openly. Lay not up for your selves treasure upon earth, where the rust and
moth both corrutp, and where thieves break through and steal. But lay up for
you treasures in heaven, where neither ruste nor moth does corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through nor steal. For where your treasure is, there
will your hearts be also.

The first Sunday in Lent.
The Collect.
O Lord, which for our sake did fast fortye days and forty nights: Give us
grace to use such abstinence, that our flesh being subdued to the spirit, we
may ever obey thy Godly mocions, in righteousness and true holiness, to thy
honor and glory: which live and reygnest. etc.

The Epistle.
ii Cor. vi.
WE as helpers exhort you, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain. For
he says: I have heard thee in a time accepted. and in the dai of salvation
have I succored thee. Behold, now is that accepted time: behold, now is
that day of salvation. Let us give none occasion of evil, that in our office
be found no fault, but in all things let us behave our selves as ye
ministers of God: In much patience, in affliccions, in necessities, in
anguishes, in stripes, in prisonmentes, in stryfes, in labors, in watchinges,
in fastinges, in pureness, in knowledge, in long sufferyng, in kyndnes, in the
holy ghost, in love unfeigned, in the word of truth, in the power of God: by
the armoure of ryghteousnes of the right hand and of the left: by honor and
dishonor: by evil report and good report: as deceyuers, and yet true: as
unknown, and yet known: as dying, and behold we live: as chastened, and not
killed: as sorowing, and yet always merry: as poor, and yet make mani rich: as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things.

The Gospel.
Mat. iiii
THen was Jesus led away of the spirit unto wilderness, to be tempted of the
devil. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was at the
last an hungered. And when the tempter came to him, he said: if thou be the
son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he answered and
said: it is written, man shall not live by bread only, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of god. Then the devil takes him up into the
holy city, and sets him on a pinnacle of the temple, and says unto him: if
thou be the son of God, cast thy self down headlong. For it is written: he
shall give his Aungelles charge over thee, and with their hands they shall
hold thee by, lest at any time thou dashe thy foot against a stone. And
Jesus said unto him: it is written again: Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God. Again the devil takes him up into an exceading high mountain, and
showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and says
unto him: all these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.
Then says Jesus unto him: Avoid Satan, for it is written: Thou shall
worship the Lord thy god, and him only shall thou serve. Then the devil leaves
him: and behold, the Angels came and ministered unto him.

The second Sunday in Lent
The Collecte.
Almighty god, which do see that we have no power of our selves to help
our selves: keep thou us both outwardly in our bodies, and inwardly in our
souls, that we may be defended from al adversities which may happen to the
body, and from al evil thoughts, which may assault and hurt the soul:
hrough Jesus Christ. etc.

The Epistle.
i. these. iii
WE beeseche you brethren, and exhort you by the lord Jesus, that ye increase
more and more, eue^ as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk, and to
please God. For ye know what commandments we gave you by our Lord Jesus
Christ. For this is the will of God, even your holiness: that ye should absteyne
from fornicacion, and that every one of you should know how to keep his
vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lust of concupisence, as do the
Heathen which know not God: that no man oppress and defraude his brother in
bargayninq, because that the Lord is the auenger of all such things, as we
told you before, and testified. For god has not called us unto uncleanness, but
unto holiness. He therefore that despises, despises not man, but God which
has sent his holy spirit among you.

The Gospel.
Math. xv.
Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tire and Sido^: and
behold, a woman of Canaa^ (which came out of the same coasts) cried unto him,
saying: have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David. My daughter is
piteously vexed with a devil. But he answered her nothing at all. And his
disciples came and besougt him, saying: send her away, for she cries after
us. But he answered, and said: I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. Then came the and worshipped him, saying: Lord, help me. He
answered and said: it is not mete to take the childrens bread, and cast it to
dogs. She answered, and said: truth lord, for the dogs eat of the
crummes which fall from their masters table. Then Jesus answered, and said
unto her: O Woman great is thy faith, be it unto thee, eue^ as thou will. And
her daughter was made whole, even the same time.

The third Sunday in Lent.
The Collect.
We beseech thee almighty god, look upon the heartye desires of thy humble
servants: and stretche forth the right hand of thy majesty, to be our
defense against al our enemies: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Ephesi. v
BE you the folowers of God as dear children, and walk in love even as Christ
loved us, and gave himself for us an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet savor
to God. As for fornicacion, and al uncleanness, or covetousness let it not be
once named among you, as it becomes Saints: or filthiness, or foolyshe
talking, or jesting, which are not comely, but rather giving of thanks. For
this ye know, that no whoremonger, either unclean person, or covetous person
(which is a worshypper of images) has any inheritance in the kingdom of
Christ and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words. For because of
such things, comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Be
not ye therefore companions of them. Ye mere sumtimes darkness, but now are ye
light in the Lord: walk as children of light, for the fruit of the spirit
consists in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth. Accept that which is
pleasing unto the Lord, and have no fellowship with the vufruitful works of
darkness, but rather rebuke them. For it is a shame even to name those things,
which are done of them in secret: but all things when they are brought forth
by the light, are manifest. For whatsoever is manifest, the same is light,
wherefore he says: a wake thou that slepest, and stand up from death, and
Christ give thee light.

The Gospel.
Luke. xi.
Jesus was casting of a Devil, that was dumme. And when he had cast out the
devil, the dumme spoke, and the people wondered. But some of them said: he
casts out devils through Beelzebub the chief of the devils. And other
tempted him, and required of him sign from heaven. But he knowing their
thoughts, sasyd unto them: Every kingdom divided against it self, is
desolate, and one house does fall upon another. If Satan also be divided
against himself, how shall his kingdom endure? Because ye say I cast out
devils through Beelzebub: If I by the help of Beelzebub cast out devils, by
whose help do your children cast them out? Therefore shall they be your
judges. But if I with the finger of God cast out devils, no doubt the kingdom
of God is come upon you. When a strong man armed watches his house, the
things yt he possesses are in peace. But when a stronger then he comes upon
him, and ouercometh him, he takes from him al his harness (wherein he trusted)
and deuideth his goods. He that is not with me is against me. And he that
gathers not with me, scatereth abroad. When the unclean spirit is gone out
of a man, he walks through dry places, seking rest. And when he finds
none, he says: I will return again into my house whence I came out. And when
he comes, he finds it swepte and garnished. Then goes he and takes to him
seven other spirits worse then himself, and they enter in and dwell there. And
the end of that man is worse the^ the beginning. And it fortuned ye as he
spoke these things, a certain woman of the company lift up her voice, and
said unto him: happy is the womb that bare thee, and the pappes which gave
thee suck. But he said: yea, happy are they that hear the word of God and
keep it.

The fourth Sunday in Lent.
The Collecte.
Grant we beseech thee almighty god, that we which for our evil deeds are
worthily punisshed, by the comfort of thy grace may mercifully be relieved:
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.
Gala. iiii
TEll me (ye that desire to be under the law) do ye not hear of the law?
for it is written that Abraham had two sons: the one by a bondmayde, the
other by a free woman. Yea, and he which was borne of the bondwoman, was borne
after the flesh: but he which was borne of the freewoman, was borne by
promise: which things are spoken by an allegory. For these are two Testamentes,
ye one from the mount Sina which gendreth unto bondage, which is Agar: For
mount Sina is Agar in Arabia, and bordreth upon the city, which is now called
Jerusalem, and is in bondage with her children. But Jerusalem, which is above,
is fre, which is the mother of us al. For it is written: Rejoice thou barren
that bear no children: break forth and cry, thou that trauaylest not. For
the desolate has many more children then she which has an husband. Brethren,
we are after Isaac the children of promise. But as then he that was borne
after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the spirit: Even so is
it now. Nevertheless, what says the scripture? put away the bondwoman
and her son. For the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the
son of the free woman. So then brethren, we are not children of the bond
woman but of the free woman.

The Gospel.
John. vi
Jesus departed over the sea of Galile, which is the sea of Ciberias, and a
great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles which he did on
them that were diseased. And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat
with his disciples. And Easter, a feast of the Jews, was nie. When Jesus then
lift up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he said unto
Philip: whence shall we bye bread that these may eat? This he said to prove
him, for he himself knew what he would do. Philip answered him: two hundredth
peniworth of bread, are not sufficient for the^ that every man may take a
little. One of his disciples (Andrewe, Simon Peter's brother) says unto him.
There is a ladde which has five barley loaves, and two fisshes: but what are
they among so many? And Jesus said: make the people sit down. There was much
grass in the place: so the men sat down, in number about five thousand.
And Jesus took the bread, and when he had given thanks, he gave to the
disciples, and the disciples to them that were set down, and likewise of the
fisshes as much as they would. When they had eaten enough, he said unto his
disciples: gather up the broken meat which remains, that nothing be lost.
And they gathered it together and filled.xii. baskets with the broken meat of
the five barley loaves: which broken meat remained unto them that had eaten.
Then those men (when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did) said: this is of
a truth the same Prophet that should come into the world.

The fifth Sunday in Lent.
The Collecte.
WE beseech thee almighty God, mercifully to look upon thy people, that by
thy great goodness they may be governed and preserved evermore both in boby and
soul: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Hebre. ix.
Christ being an hye Priest of good things to come, came by a greater and a
more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this
building, neither by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood he
entered in once into the holy place, and found eternal redemption. For if the
blood of Oxen and of Goats, and the ashes of a young kowe, when it was
sprinkled, purifieth the unclean as touching the purifying of the flesh: how
much more shall the blood of Christ (which through the eternal spirit, offered
him self without spotte to God) purge your conscience from dead works, for
to serve the living god: And for this cause he is the mediatoure of the new
Testament, that through death, which chaunsed for the redempcyon of those
transgressions that were under the first Testamente, they which are called,
might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.

The Gospel.
Job. viii.
WHich of you can rebuke me of sin? If I say the truth, why do ye not
believe me? He that is of God, hears gods words: Ye therefore hear the^
not, because ye are not of god. Then answered the Jews, and said unto him:
say we not well that thou art a Samaritane, and have the devil? Jesus
answered. I have not the devil: but I honor my father, and ye have dishonored
me. I seek not mine own praise: there is one that seeks and judges. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall never see death. Then
said the Jews unto him, now know we that thou have the devil. Abraham is
dead, and the Prophets, and thou say: if a man keep my saying he shall
never taste of death. Art thou greater then our father Abraham which is dead?
And the Prophets are dead: whom make thou thy self? Jesus answered. If I
honor my self, mine honor is nothing: it is my father that honors me,
which you say is your God, and yet ye have not known him, but I know him:
and if I say I know him not, I shall be a lier like unto you. But I know him and
keep his saying. Your father Abraham was glad to see my day: and he saw it and
reioysed. Then said the Jews unto him. Thou art not yet fifty year old, and
haste thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them: Verily verily I say unto you:
ere Abraham was borne, I am. Then took they up stones to cast at him: but Jesus
hid himself, and went out of the temple.

The Sunday next before Easter.
The Collecte.
ALmighty and everlasting God, which of thy tender love toward man, have
sent our savior Jesus Christ to take upon him our flesh, and to suffer
death upon the cross, that all mankind should follow the example of his
great humility: mercifully grant, that we both follow the example of his
patience, and be made partakers of his resurreccion: through the same Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Philip. ii
LEt the same mind be in you, that was also in Christ Jesus: which when he was
in the shape of God thought it no robbery to be equal with God: nevertheless,
he made him self of no reputacion, taking on him the shape of a servant, and
became like unto man, and was found in his apparel, as a man. He humbled
himself, and became obedient to the death, even the death of the cross.
Wherefore God has also exalted him on high, and given him a name which is
above all names: that in the name of Jesus, every knee should bow, both of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under ye earth: and that
all tongues should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, unto the praise of
God the father.

The Gospel.
Mat. xxvi
ANd it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he said
unto his disciples, ye know that after two days shall be Easter, and the son
of man shall be delivered over to be crucified. Then assembled together the
chief Priests, and the Scribes, and the elders of the people, unto the palace
of he high Priest (which was called Caiphas) and held a counsel that they might
take Jesus by subteltie, and kill him. But they said: not on the holy day,
lest there be an vproare among the people. When Jesus was in Bethanie in the
house of Simon the Leper, there came unto him a woman having an Alabaster box
of precious ointme^t, and powered it on his head, as he satte at the boarde. But
when his disciples saw it, they had indignacion, saying: whereto serves this
waste? This ointment migtht have been well sold, and given to the poor. When
Jesus understood that, he said unto them: why trouble ye the woman; for she
has wrought a good work upon me. For ye have the poor always with you, but
me ye shall not have always. And in that she has cast this oyntmente on my
body, she did it to bury me. Verily I say unto you: wheresoever this Gospel
shall be preached in all the world, there shall also this be told that she
has done for a memorial of her. Then one of the twelve (which was called
Judas Iscarioth) went unto the chief Priests, and said unto them: what will
ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you? And they appointed unto him.xxx.
pieces of silver. And from that time forth, he sought oportunitye to betraye
him. The first day of sweet bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying to
him: where will thou that we prepare for thee, to eat the Passover? And he
said: Go into the city to such a man, and say unto him: the Master says,
my time is at hand, I will keep my Easter by thee with my disciples. And the
disciples did as Jesus had appointed them, and they made ready the Passover.
When the even was come, he satte down with the.xii. And as they did eat, he
said: Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betraye me. And they were
excedyng sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him: Lord is it I?
He answered and said: he that dippeth his hand with me in the disshe, the same
shall betraye me. The son of man truly goes, as it is written of him: but
woe unto that man by whom the son of man is betrayed. It had been good for
that man, if he had not been borne. Then Judas, which betrayed him, answered,
and said: Master, is it I? He said unto him: thou have said. And when they
were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it and
gave it to the disciples, and said: Take, eat, this is my body. And he took
the cup, and thanked, and gave it them, saying: Drink ye all of this: For this
is my blood (which is of the new Testameant) that is shed for many, for the
remission of sins. But I say unto you, I will not drink hencefurth of this
fruit of the vine tree, until the day when I shall drink it new with you in my
fathers kingdom. And when they had said grace, they went out unto mount
Oliuete. Then said Jesus unto them: all ye shall be offended because of me this
night. For it is written: I will smite the shepehearde, and the sheep of the
flock shall be scatterd abroad: but after I am riesen again, I will go before
you into Galile. Peter answered, and said unto him: though al men be offended
because of thee, yet will I not be offended. Jesus said unto him: verily I say
unto thee, that in this same night, before the Cock krowe, thou shalt deny
me thryse. Peter said unto him: yea, though I should dye with thee, yet will I
not deny thee: likewise also said all the disciples. Then came Jesus with them
unto a farm place, (which is called Gethsemane) and said unto the disciples.
Sytte ye here, while I go and pray yonder. And he took with him Peter, and
the two sons of zebede, and began to wax sorrowful and heavy. Then said
Jesus unto them. My soul is heavy even unto the death. Tarry ye here and
watch with me. And he went a little farther, and fell flat on his face, and
prayed, saying: O my father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me:
neuerthlesse, not as I will, but as thou will. And he came unto the disciples,
and found them aslepe, and said unto Peter: what, could ye not watch with me
one hour? watch and pray that ye enter not into temptacyon: the spirit is
wyllyng, but the flesh is weak. He went away once again and prayed,
saying: O my father, if this cup may not pass away from me except I drink
of it, thy will be fulfilled: and he came and found them aslepe again, for
their eyes were heavy. And he left them, and went again and prayed the third
time, saying the same words. Then comes he to his disciples, and said unto
them: sleep on now and take your rest. Behold, the hour is at hand, and the
son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. Rise, let us be going:
behold, he is at hand that does betraye me. While he yet spoke: lo, Judas
one of the noumbre of the.xii. came, and with him a great multitude with
sweordes and staves, sent from the chyefe Priests and Elders of the people.
But he that beetrayed him, gave them a token, saying: whomesocuer I kiss, the
same is he, hold him fast. And forthwith he came to Jesus, and said: Hayle
Master, and kyssed him. And Jesus said unto him: friend, wherefore art thou
come? Then came they and laid hands on Jesus, and took him. And behold, one
of them that were with Jesus, stretched out his hand and drew his sweorde, and
stroke a servant of the hye Priests and smote of his ear. Then said Jesus
unto him: put up thy sweord into the sheath, for all they that take the sweord
shall perish with the sweord. Think thou that I cannot now pray to my
father, and he shall give me even now, more then.xii. legions of Angels? But
how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled? For thus must it be. In thatsame
hour said Jesus to the multitude: ye be come out as it were to a thief with
sweordes and staves, for to take me. I sat daily with you teaching in the
temple, and ye took me not. But all this is done that the scriptures of the
Prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him and fled.
And they took Jesus and led him to Cayphas the hye Priest, where the Scribes
and the Elders were assembled. But Peter followed him afar of unto the hye
Priests palace, and went in, and satte with the servants to see the end.
The chief Priests and Elders, and all the counsel, sought false witness
against Jesus (for to put him to death) but found none: yea, when many false
witnesses came, yet found they none. At the last came.ii. false witnesses,
and said: This fellow said, I am hable to destroy the temple of God, and to
build it again in three days. And the chief Priest; arose, and said unto
him: aunswerest thou nothing: Why do these bear wytnes against thee? but
Jesus held his peace. And the chief Priest answered, and said unto him. I
charge thee by the living God, that thou tell us, whether thou be Christ the
son of God. Jesus said unto him: thou have said. Nevertheless I say unto you,
hereafter shall ye see the son of man sytting on the right hand of power,
and coming in the clouds of the sky. Then the hie Priest rent his clothes,
saying: he has spoken blasphemye, what need we of any more witnesses? Behold,
now ye have heard his blasphemy, what think ye? They answered, and said: he
is worthy to dye. Then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him with fistes.
And other smote him on the face with the palm of their hands, saying: tell us
thou Christ, who is he that smote thee? Peter sat without in the court, and a
damsel came to him, saying: thou also waste with Jesus of Galile: but he
denied before them all, saying: I wot not what thou say. When he was gone
out into the porche, another wenche saw him, and said unto them that were
there: This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth. And again he denied with an
oath, saying: I do not know the man. After a while came unto him they that
stood by, and said unto Peter: surely thou art even one of them, for thy
speech bewraieth the. Then began he to curse and to swear, that he knew not
the man. And immediately ye Cock krew. And Peter remembered the word of Jesus,
which said unto him: before the cock krowe, thou shall deny me thrice: and he
went out and wept bitterly. When the morning was come, all the chief
Priests and Elders of the people held a counsel against Jesus, to put him
to death, and brought him bound, and delivered him unto Poncyus Pilate the
deputy. The^ Judas (which had betrayed him) seeing that he was condemned,
repented himself, and brought again the.xxx. plates of silver to the chief
priests and Elders, sayng: I have sinned betraying the innocente blood. And
they said: what is that to us? Se thou to that. And he cast down the silver
plates in the temple, and departed, and went and hanged himself. And ye chief
Priests took the silver plates, and said: It is not lawful for to put them
into the treasure, because it is the price of blood. And they took counsel,
and bought with them a potters field to bury strangers in. Wherefore the
field is called Haceldema, that is, the field of blood, until this day. Then
was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying: and they
took.xxx. silver plates, the price of him that was valued, whom they boughte
of the children of Israel, and gave them for the potters field, as the Lord
appointed me. Jesus stood before the deputy, and the deputy asked him,
saying: Art thou the king of the Jews? Jesus said unto him: thou say. And
when he was accused of the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing.
The^ said pilate unto him: hear thou not how many witnesses they lai against
thee? and he answered him to never a word: insomuch that the deputy merueiled
greatly. At that feast, the deputy was wont to deliver unto the people a
prisoner whom they would desire. He had then a notable prisoner called
Barrabas. Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said: whether will
ye that I give looce unto you, Barrabas, or Jesus which is called Christ and
For he knew that for envy they had delivered him. When he was set down to give
judgment, his wife sent unto him, saying: have thou nothing to do with that
just man. For I have suffered this day many things in my sleep, because of
him. But the chief priests and elders persuaded the people that they should
ask Barrabas, and destroy Jesus. The deputy answered, and said unto them:
whether of the twain will ye that I let looce unto you? They said, Barrabas.
Pilate said unto the^: what shall I do the^ with Jesus, which is called
Christ? They al said unto him: let him be crucified. The deputy said: what
evil has he done? but they cried more saying, let him be crucified. When
Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but ye more business was made: he
took water, and washed his hands before the people, saying: I am innocent of
the blood of this just person, see ye. Then answered all the people, and said:
his blood be on us and on our children. The^ let he Barrabas loce unto them and
scourged Jesus, and delivered him to be crucified. Then the soldiers of the
deputy took Jesus into the common hall, and gathered unto him all the company,
and they stripped him, and put on him a purple robe, and platted a crown of
thorns, and put it upon his head, and a read in his right hand, and vowed the
knee before him, and mocked him, saying: hayle king of the Jews: and when they
had spit upon him, they took the read and smote him on the head. And after that
they had mocked him, they took the robe of him again, and put his own raiment
on him, and led him a way to crucifye him. And as they came out, they found a
man of Cirene (named Simo^) him they compelled to bear his cross. And they
came unto the place which is called Golgotha, ye is to say (a place of dead
men's sculles) and gave him vinegre myngled with gall to drink: and when he had
tasted thereof, he would not drink. When they had crucified him, they parted
his garments and did cast lottes, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken
by the Prophet. They parted my garments among the^, and upon my besture did
they cast lottes. And they sat and watched him there, and set up over his head
the cause of his death written. This is Jesus the king of the Jews. Then were
there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand, and another on the
left. They that passed by, reuyled him, wagging their heads, and saying: thou
that destroyedst ye temple of god, and did build it in three days, save thy
self. If thou be the son of god come down from the cross. Likewise also the
hye Priests mocking him with the Scribes and Elders, said: he saved other,
himself he cannot save. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come
down from the cross, and we will believe him. He trusted in GOD, let him
deliver him now, if he will have him: for he said, I am the son of God. The
thieves also which were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth. From the
sixth hour was there darkness over all the land until the ninth hour. And
about the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying: Ely, Ely,
lamasabathany: that is to say, my god my god, why have thou forsaken me? Some
of them that stood there, when they heard ye, said: This man calls for
Helyas. And streyghte way one of them ran and took a sponge, and when he had
filled it full of vinegar, he put it on a read, and gave him to drink. Other
said: let be, let us see whether Helyas will come and deliver him. Jesus when
he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost. And behold, the
veil of the temple did rent in.ii. parts, from the top to the bottom, and
the earth did quake, and the stones rent, and graves did open, and many bodies
of Saints which slept, arose and went out of the graves after his
resurrection, and came into the holy city, and appeared unto many. When the
Ce^turion, and they that were with him watching Jesus, saw the earthquake, and
those things which happened, they feared greatly, saying: Truly this was the
son of god. And many weomen were there (beholding him afar of) which
followed Jesus from Galile, ministering unto him: Among which was Mary Magdalene,
and Mary the mother of James and Ioses, and the mother of zebedes children.

Monday before Easter.
The Epistle.
Isa. lxiii
WHat is he this that cummeth from Edom, with red colored clothes of Bosra
(which is so costly cloth) and cummeth in so myghtely with all his strength? I
am he that teaches righteousness, and am of power to help. Wherefore then is
thy clothyng read, and thy raiment like his that treads in the wine press?
I have trodden the press my self alone, and of all people there is not one
with me. Thus will I tread down mine enemies in my wrath, and set my feet
upon them in mine indignacion: And their blood shall bespryng my clothes, and
so will I stayne all my raiment. For the day of vengeance is assigned in my
heart, and the year when my people shall be delivered is come. I looked about
me, and there was no man to show me any help. I merueiled that no man held
me up. Then I held me by mine own arm, and my feruentnes sustained me. And
thus will I tread down the people in my wrath, and bathe them in my
displeasure, and upon the earth will I lay their strength, I will declare the
goodness of the Lord, yea and the praise of the Lord for all that he has given
us, for the great good that he has done for Israel, which he has given
them of his own favor, and according to the multitude of his loving kindness.
For he said: these no doubt are my people, and no shrinking children, and so he
was their savior. In their troubles he was also troubled with them, and the
Aungel that went forth from his presence, delivered them. Of very love and
kindness that he had unto them, he redeemed them. He has borne them and carried
them up, ever sense the world began. But after they provoked him to wrath, and
vexed his holy mind, he was their enemy, and fought against them himself. Yet
rememberd Israel the old time of Moses and his people, saying: where is he
that brought them from the water of the sea, with them that feed his sheep?
where is he that has given his holy spirit among them? he led them by the
right hand of Moses with his glorious arm, dividing the water before them
(whereby he gat himself an everlasting name:) he led them in the deep, as an
horse is led in the plain, that they should not stumble as a tame beast goes
in the field, and the breath given of God, gives him rest. Thus (O god)
haste thou led thy people, to make thy self a glorious name withal. Look
down then from heaven, and behold the dwelling place of thy sa^ctuary, and thy
glory. How is it that thy gelousy, thy strength, the multitude of thy mercyes,
and thy loving kindness, will not be entreated of us? yet art thou our father.
For Abraham knows us not, neither is Israel acquaynted with us. But thou lord
art our father and redemer, and thy name is everlasting, O lord, wherefore have
thou led us out of thy way? wherefore have thou hardened our hearts that we
fear thee not? Be at one with us again for thy servants sake, and for the
generation of thine heritage. Thy people have had but a little of thy Sanctuary
in possession: for our enemies have trode^ down the holy place. And we were
thine from the beginning, when thou wast not their Lord, for they have not
called upon thy name.

The Gospel.
mar. xiiii
AFter two days was Easter, and the days of sweet bread. And the hie priests
and the Scribes sought how they might take him by craft, and put him to death.
But they said: not in the feast day lest any business arise among the people.
And when he was in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, even as he sat at
meat, there came a woman having an Albaster box of ointment, called Narde,
that was pure and costly, and she brake the box and powered it upon his head.
And there were some that were not content within themselves, and said: what
neded this waste of oyntmente? for it might have been sold for more then three
hundredth pence, and have been given unto the poor. And they grudged against
her. And Jesus said: let her alone, why trouble ye her. She has done a good
work on me: for ye have poor with you always, and whenever ye will ye may
do them good: but me have ye not always. She has done that she could, she
came aforehande to annoynte my body to the burying. Verily I say unto you,
wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, this also
that she has done, shall be rehearsed in remembrance of her. And Judas
Iscarioth one of the twelve, went a way unto the hie Priests to betraye him
unto them. When they heard that, they were glad, and promised that they would
give him money. And he sought how he might conveniently betray him. And the
first day of sweet bread (when they offered the Passover) his disciples said
unto him: where with thou that we go and prepare that thou may eat ye
Passover? And he sent forth two of his disciples, and said unto them: go ye
unto the city, and there shall mete you a man bearyng a pitcher of water,
follow him. And whithersoeuer he goes in, say ye unto the good man of the
house, the master says, where is ye geast chau^ber, where I shall eat ye
Passover with my disciples? And he will show you a great parlor paued and
prepared, there make ready for us. And his disciples went forth, and came into
the city, and found as he had said unto the^: and they made ready the
Passover. And when it was now euentide, he came with the twelve. And as they
sat at board and did eat, Jesus said: vereley I say unto you, one of you
(that eats with me) shall betraye me. And they began to be sorry, and to
say to him one by one: is it I? and an other said: is it I? he answered and
said unto them: it is one of the.xii. even he that dippeth with me in the
platter. The son of man truly goes as it is written of him, but woe to that
man by whom the son of man is betrayed: good were it for that manne, if he
had never been borne. And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and gave to them, and said: Take, eat, this is my
body. And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he took it to them,
and they al drank of it. And he said unto them: This is my blood of the new
testament, which is shed for many. Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more
of the fruit of the vine, until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom
of God. And when they had said grace, they went out to the mount Oliuete. And
Jesus says unto them: all ye shall be offended becausse of me this night, For
it is written: I will smite the shepeheard, and the sheep shall be scattered: but
after that I am risen again, I will go into Galile before you. Peter said
unto him: and though all men be offended, yet will not I. And Jesus says
unto him: verily I say unto thee, that this day, eue^ in this night, before ye
Cock krow twice thou shalt deny me three times, But he spoke more
vehementelye: no, if I should dye with thee, I will not deny thee: Likewise
also said they all. And they came into a place which was named Gethsemane, and
he said to his disciples: sytte ye here while I go aside and pray. And he
takes with him, Peter and James, and John, And began to wax abashed and to
be in an agony, and said unto them: My soul is heavy even unto the death: tarry
ye here and watch. And he went forth a little, and fell down flat on the
ground and prayed, that if it were possible, the hour might pass from him. And
he said: Abba father, all things are possible unto thee, take away this cup
from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but that thou wylt be done. And he came and
found them slepyng, and says to Peter: Simon, slepest thou? Could not
thou watch one hour? watch ye and pray lest ye enter into temptacyon: the
spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weak. And again he went aside and
prayed, and spoke the same words. And he returned and found the^ a sleep
again, for their and eyes were heavy, neither wist they what to answer him.
And he came the third time and said unto them: sleep hencefurth and take
your ease, it is enough. The hour is come: behold, the son of man is
betrayed into the hands of sinners: Rise up, let us go. Lo, he that
betrayeth me is at hand. And immedyathly while he yet spoke, comes Judas
(which was one of the twelve) and with him a great noumber of people with
sweordes and staves, from the hie priests, and Scribes, and Elders. And he
that betrayed him, had given them a general token, saying: whosoever I do
kiss, the same is he: take and lead him away warely. And as soon as he was
come, he goes straight way to him, and says unto him: Master, Master, and
kyssed him: and they laid their hands on him, and took him. And one of them
that stood by, drew out a sweorde, and smote a servant of the hye
Priests, and cut of his ear. And Jesus answered and said unto them: ye be
come out as unto a thief with sweordes and staves, for to take me. I was daily
with you in the temple teaching, and ye took me not: but these things come to
pass that the Scripture should be fulfilled. And they all forsook him, and
ran away. And there followed him a certain young man clothed in linen upon the
bare: and the young men caught him, and he left his linen garment, and fled
from them naked. And they led Jesus away to the high priest of all, and with
him came all the hye priests, and the Elders, and the Scribes. And Peter
followed him a great way of (even till he was come into the palace of the hie
Priest) and he sat with the servants, and warmed himself at the fire. And
the hye priests and all the counsel sought for witness against Jesus to put him
to death, and found none: for many bare false witness against him, but their
witnesses agreed not together. And there arose certain and brought false
witness against him, saying: we heard him say, I will destroy this temple
that is made with hands, and within three days, I will build another made
without hands. But yet their witnesses agreed not together. And the hye
Priest stood up among them, and asked Jesus, saying: aunswerest thou nothing?
How is it that these bear wytnes against thee? But he held his peace, and
answered nothing. Again the hye Priest asked him, and said unto him: Art
thou Christ the son of the blessed? And Jesus said: I am. And ye shall see
the son of man sittyng on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds
of heaven. Then the hye Priest rent his clothes, and said: what need we any
further of witnesses? ye have heard blasphemy, what think ye? And they all
condemned him to be woorthye of death. And some began to spyt at him, and
to cover his face, and to beat him with fistes, and to say unto him: Areade.
And the servants buffeted him on the face. And as Peter was beneathe in the
Palace, there came one of the wenches of the hiest priest: and when she saw
Peter warmyng himself, she looked on him, and said: wast not thou also with
Jesus of Nazareth? And he denied, saying: I know him not, nether wot I what
thou say. And he went out into the porche, and the Cock krewe. And a
damosel (when she saw him) began again to say to the^ that stood by: this is
one of the^. And he denied it again. And anon after, they that stood by, said
again unto Peter: surely thou art one of the^, for thou art of Galile, and thy
speech agrees thereto. But he began to curse and to swear, saying: I know not
this man of whom ye speak. And again the cock krewe, and Peter remembered the
word that Jesus had said unto him: before the cock krow twice, thou shalt
deny me three times. And he began to weep.

Tuesday before Easter.
The Epistle.
Esai. 1.
THe Lord god has opened mine ear, therefore can I not say nay, neither
withdraw my self: but I offer my back unto the smiters, and my chekes unto
the nippers. I turn not my face from shame and spittyng, and the lord God
shall help me: Therefore shall I not be confounded. I have hardened my face like
a flyute stone, for I am sure that I shall not come to confusion. He is at hand
that justifies me, who will then go to law with me? Let us stand one
against another: if there be any that will reason with me, let him come here
forth to me. Behold, the lord God stands by me, what is he then that can
condemn me? lo, they shall be like as an old cloth, the moth shall eat them up.
Therefore, whosoever fears the lord among you, let him hear the voice of his
servant. Whosoever walks in darkness, and no light shines upon him, let him put
his trust in the name of the lord, and hold him up by his God: but take heed,
ye all kyendle a fire of the wrath of God, and stiere up the coals: walk on
in the glisteryng of your own fire, and in the coals that ye have kyendled.
This comes unto you from my hand, namely that ye shall sleep in sorrow.

The Gospel.
Mat. xv.
ANd anon in the dawnyng, the hye Priests held a counsel with the Elders and
the Scribes, and the whole congregacyon, and bound Jesus, and led him away,
and delivered him to Pylate. And Pilate asked him: art thou the King of the
Jews? and he answered, and said to him: thou say it. And the hye priests
accused him of many things. So pilate asked him again, saying: aunswerest
thou nothing? Behold how many things they lay to thy charge. Jesus
answered yet nothing, so that Pilate merueyled. At that feast Pylate did
deliver unto them a pryesoner, whomsoever they would desire. And there was one
that was named Barrabas, which lay bound with them that made insurreccyon:
he had committed murder. And the people called unto him, and began to desire
him that he would do according as he had ever done unto them. Pilate
answered them, saying: will ye that I let looce unto you the King of the
Jews? for he knew that the hye Priests had delivered him of envy. But the
hye priests moved the people that he should rather deliver Barrabas unto
them. Pilate answered again, and said unto them: what will ye ye I then do
unto him, who^ ye call the king of the Jews? And they cried again, crucify
him. Pilate said unto them: what evil has he done? And they cried the more
fervently, crucify him. And so Pilate willing to content the people, let looce
Barrabas unto them, and delivered up Jesus (when he had scourged him) for to
be crucyfyed. And the souldyours led him away into the common halle, and
called together the whole multitude, and they clothed him with purple, and they
platted a crown of thorns, and crowned him withal, and began to salute him:
Hayle king of the Jews. And they smote him on the head with a reed, and did
spytte upon him, and bowed their knees and worshypped him. And when they had
mocked him, they took the purple of him, and put his own clothes on him, and
led him out to crucyfye him. And they compelled one that passed by, called
Simon of Syrene (the father of Alexander and Rufus) which came out of ye field,
to bear his cross. And they brought him to a place named Golgotha (which if
a man interpret) is the place of dead men's sculles: and they gave him to
drink, wine mingled with mirrhe, but he received it not. And when they had
crucified him, they parted his garments, casting lottes upon the^ what every
man should take. And it was about the third hour, and they crucified him. And
the title of his cause was written. The King of the Jews. And they crucified
with him two thieves, the one on his right hand, and the other on his left. And
the scripture was fulfilled, which says: he was counted among the wicked. And
they that went by, rayled on him, wagging their heads, and saying: A wretch,
thou that destroyest the temple, and buldest it again in three days, save thy
self and come down from the cross. Likewise also mocked him the hye Priests
among themselves with the Scribes, and said: he saved other men, himself he
cannot save. Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that
we may see and believe. And they that were crucyfyed with him, checked him also.
And when the sixth hour was come, darkness arose over all the earth, until
the ninth hour. And at the ninthe hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice,
saying: Eloy, Eloy, lamazabathany? which is (if one interpret it) my God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? And some of them that stood by, when they
heard that, said: behold, he calls for Helyas. And one ran and filled a
sponge full of vinegre, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink,
saying: let him alone, let us see whether Helias will come and take him down.
But Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost. And veil of the
temple rent in two pieces from the top to the bottom. And when the Centurion
(which stood before him) saw that he so cried, and gave up the ghost, he said:
truly this man was the son of God. There were also weomen a good way of,
beholding him: among whom was Mari Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the
little, and of Ioses, and Mary Salome (which also when he was in Galile, had
followed him and ministered unto him) and many other weomen, which came up with
him to Jerusalem. And now when the even was come (because it was the day of
preparyng that goes before the Sabbath) Joseph of the city of Aramathya a
noble counsayloure, which also looked for the kingdom of God, came and went in
boldelye unto Pylate, and begged of him the body of Jesus. And Pilate meruayled
that he was already dead, and called unto him the Centurion, and asked of him
whether he had been any while dead. And when he knew the truth of the
Centurion, he gave the body to Joseph, and he bought a lynnen cloth, and took
him down, and wrapped him in the linen cloth, and laid him in a sepulcher
that was hewn out of a rock, and rolled a stone before the door of the
sepulcher. And Mary Magdalene, and Mary Ioses beheld where he was laid.

Wednesday before Easter.
The Epistle.
Hebre. ix.
WHereas is a testament, there must also (of necessity) be the death of him
that makes the testament. For the testament takes authority when men are
dead: for it is yet of no value, as long as he that makes the testament is
alive: for which cause also, neither the first testament was ordained without
blood. For when Moses had declared all the commandment to all the people,
accordying to the law, he took the blood of calves and of Goats, with water
and purple wolle, and ysope, and sprinkled both the book and all the people,
saying: this is the blood of the testament, which God has appointed unto
you. Moreover, he sprinkled the tabernacle with blood also, and all the
ministryng vessels. And almost al things are by the law purged with blood, and
without shedding of blood is no remission. It is need then, that the
similitudes of heavenly things be purifyed with such things: but that the
heavenly things themselves, be purifyed with better sacrifices the^ are
those. For Christ is not entered into the holy places that are made with
hands (which are similitudes of true things) but is entered into very heaven,
for to appear now in the sight of God for us: not to offer himself often, as
the hye Priest enters into the holy place every year with strange blood: for
then must he have often suffered sense the world began. But now in ye end of
the world has he appeared once, to put sin to flight by the offering up of
himself. And as it is appointed unto al me^ ye they shall once die, and the^
comes the judgment: Even so Christ was once offered to take away the sins
of many, and unto them that look for him, shall he appear again without sin,
unto salvation.

The Gospel.
Luke xxii
THe feast of sweet bread drew nigh, which is called Easter, and the hie
Priests and Scribes sought how they might kill him, for they feared the
people. Then entered Satan into Judas, whose syrname was Iscarioth (which was of
the number of the.xii.) and he went his way and commoned with the hie Priests
and officers, how he might betray him unto the^. And they were glad, and
promised to give him money. And he consented, and sought opportunity to betray
him unto them when the people were away. Then came the day of sweet bread when
of necessity the passover must be offered. And he sent Peter and John, saying:
Go and prepare us the passover, that we may eat. They said unto him: where
will thou that we prepare? And he said unto them: behold, when ye enter into
the city, there shall a man mete you bearing a pitcher of water: him follow into
the same house that he enters in, and ye shall say unto the good man of the
house: the master says unto thee, where is the geaft chaumber where I shall
eat the Passover with my disciples? And he shall show you a great parlour
paued, there make ready. And they went and found as he had said unto them, and
they made ready the passover. And when the hour was come, he sat down, and
the.xii. Apostles with him. And he said unto them: I have inwardly desired to
eat this passover with youu, before ye I suffer. For I say unto you:
he^cefurth will I not eat of it any more, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom
of god. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and said: Take this, and divide
it among you. For I say unto you: I will not drink of the fruit of this vine,
until the kingdom of God come. And he took bread, and when he had given
thanks, he brake it, and gave unto them, saying: This is my body which is
given for you: This do in the remembrance of me. Likewise also when he had
supped, he took the cup, saying: This cup is the new testamente in my
blood, which is shed for you. Yet behold, the hand of him that betrayeth
me, is with me on the table. And truly the son of man goes as it is
appointed, but woe unto that manne, by whom he is betrayed. And they began to
inquire among themselves, which of them it was that should do it. And there
was a strife among them, which of them should seem to be the greatest. And he
said unto them: the kings of nations reygne over them, and they that have
auctorytie upon them, are called gracyous: but ye shall not so be. But he that
is greatest among you, shall be as the younger, and he that is chyefe shall be
as he that does minyster. For whether is greater he yt sits at meat, or
he that serves? Is it not he that sits at meat? But I am among you, as he
that ministers. Ye are they which have bydden with me in my temptacyons. And
I appoynte unto you a kingdom, as my father has appointed to me, that ye may
eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on seats iudgyng the
twelve trybes of Israel. And the Lord said: Simon, Simon, behold, Satan
has desired to syfte you, as it were wheat: But I have prayed for thee, that
thy faith fail not. And when thou art converted, strength thy brethren. And
he said unto him: LORD, I am ready to go with thee into prieso^, and to
death. And he said: I tell thee Peter, the cock shall not crow this day,
till thou have denied me thryse that thou know me. And he said unto them:
when I sent you without wallet, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing?
And they said, no. The^ said he unto the^: but now he that has a wallet, let
him take it up, and likewise his scrip. And he that has no sweorde, let him
sell his coat and bye one. For I say unto you, that yet the same which is
written, must be performed in me: even among the wicked was he reputed: For
those things which are written of me have an end. And they said: Lord,
behold, here are two sweordes: and he said unto them: it is enoughe. And he
came out, and went (as he was wont) to mount Oliuete. And the disciples
followed him. And when he came to the place, he said unto them: pray, lest ye
fall into temptacion. And he gat himself from the^ about a stones cast, and
kneled down and prayed, saying: Father, if thou will, remove this cup from
me: Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be fulfilled. And there appeared an
Au^gel unto him from heaven, comfortyng him. And he was in an agonye, and
prayed the longer, and his sweat was like drops of blood, trickling down to
the ground. And when be arose from prayer, and was come to his disciples, he
found them sleping for heaviness, and he said unto them: why sleep ye? Rise and
pray, lest ye fall into temptacyon. While he yet spoke, behold, there came a
company, and he that was called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them,
and preaced nigh to Jesus, to kiss him. But Jesus said unto him: Judas,
betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss? When they which were about him
saw what would follow, they said unto him: Lord, shall we smite with the
sweord? And one of them smote a servant of the hie priests, and stroke of
his right ear? Jesus answered and said: suffer ye thus far forth. And when
he touched his ear, he healed him. Then Jesus said unto the hye pryestes, and
rulers of the temple, and the elders, which were come to him: Ye be come out
as unto a thief, with sweordes and staves. When I was daily with in the Temple,
ye stretched forth no hands against me: but this is even your very hour,
and the power of darkness. Then took they him and led him, and brought him to
the hie priests house. But Peter followed afar of. And when they had kindled
a fire in the mids of the palace, and were set down together, Peter also
satte down among them. But when one of the wenches beheld him, as he sat by
fire (and looked upon him) she said: this same fellow was also with him. And he
denied him, saying: woman, I know him not. And after a little while, another
saw him, and said: thou art also of them. And Peter said: man I am not. And
about the space of an hour after, another affyrmed, saying: verily this
fellow was with him also, for he is of Galile. And Peter said: man, I wot not
what thou say. And immediately while he yet spoke, the Cock krewe. And the
lord turned back and looked upon Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the
Lord, how he had said unto him: before the Cock krowe, thou shall deny me
thrice: and Peter went out and wept bitterly. And the men that took Jesus,
mocked him, and smote him: and when they had blindfolded him, they stroke him
on the face, and asked him, saying: Areade, who is he ye smote thee? And many
other things despitefully said they against him. And as soon as it was day,
the Elders of the people, and the hie Priests and Scribes, came together, and
led him, into their counsel, saying: Art thou very Christ? tell us. And he said
unto them: If I tell you, ye will not believe me: and if I ask you, you will not
answer, nor let me go: hereafter shall the son of man sit on the right
hand of the power of God. Then said they all: Art thou then the son of God?
he said: Ye say that I am. And they said: what need we of any further
witness? For we our selves have heard of his own mouth.

Thursday before Easter.
The Epistle.
i. Cor. xl.
THis I warn you of, and commend not, ye ye come not together after a better
manner, but after a worse. For first of all, when ye come together in the
congregation, I hear that there is discencyon among you, and I partlye beeleue
it. For there must be sects among you, that they which are perfect among
you, may be known. When ye come together therefore into one place, the Lords
supper cannot be eaten, for every manne begins before to eat his own
supper. And one is hungrye, and another is dronken. Have ye not houses to eat
and drink in? despise ye the congregacyon of God, and shame them that have
not? what shall I say unto you? shall I praise you? In this I praise you not.
That which I delivered unto you, I received of the lord. For the lord Jesus,
the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given
thanks, he brake it, and said. Take ye and eat, this is my body which is
broken for you. This do ye in the remembrance of me. After the same manner
also, he took the cup when supper was done, saying: this cup is the new
Testament in my blood. This do, as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me.
For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall show
the Lords death til he come. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat of this bread, and
drink of this cup of the lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood
of the lord. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of the bread
and drink of the cup. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnacion, because he makes no difference of the Lords
body. For this cause many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep. For
if we had judged our selves, we should not have been judged. But when we are
judged of the Lord, we are chastened, that we should not be damned with the
world. Wherefore my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another. If any man hungre, let him eat at home, that ye come not together
unto condemnacyon. Other things will I set order when I come.

The Gospel.
Luke xxiii
THe whole multitude of them arose, and lead him unto Pilate. And they began to
accuse him, saying: we found this fellow perverting the people, and forbidding
to pay tribute to Caesar, saying yt he is Christ a king. And Pylate apposed him,
saying: art thou the king of the Jews? he answered him, and said: thou
say it. Then said Pilate to the hie priests and to the people: I find no
fault in this man. And they were ye more fierce, saying: he moves the people,
teaching throughoute al Jury, and began at Galile even to this place. When
Pilate heard mention of Galile, he asked whether the man were of Galile. And
as soon as he knew yt he belonged unto Herodes iurisdiccion, he sent him to
Herod, which was also at Jerusalem at that time. And when Herod saw Jesus,
he was excedyng glad, for he was desirous to see him of a long season, because
he had heard many things of him, and he trusted to have seen some miracles
done by him. Then he questioned with him many words. But he answered him
nothing. The hie Priests and Scribes stood forth and accused him strayghtly.
And Herod with the men of war, despised him. And when he had mocked him, he
arrayed him in white clothing, and sent him again to Pilate. And the same day
Pilate and Herod were made friends together. For before they were at
variaunce. And Pilate called together the hie priests, and the rulers and the
people, and said unto the^: ye have brought this man unto me, as one that
peruerteth ye people: and behold, I examine him before you, and find no fault
in this man of those things whereof ye accuse him, no nor yet Herod. For I
sent you unto him, and lo, nothing worthy of death is done unto him: I will
therefore chasten him, and let him loce. For of necessity he must have let one
loce to them at ye feast. And all the people cried at once, saying: away with
him, and deliver us Barrabas, which for a certain insurrecion made in the
city, and for a murder, was cast into prieson. Pilate spoke again unto them,
willing to let Jesus looce. But they cried, saying: Crucify him, Crucify
him. He said unto them the third time: what evil has he done? I find no
cause of death in him: I will therefore chasten him and let him go. And they
cried with loud voices, requiring that he might be Crucified. And the voices
of them, and of the hye pryestes prevailed. And Pilate gave sentence that it
should be as they required, and he let looce unto them, him that (for
insurreccion and murder) was cast into prieson, whom they had desired: and he
delivered to them Jesus, to do with him what they would. And as they led him
away, they caught one Simon of Cyrene coming out of the field: and on him
laid they the cross, yt he might bear it after Jesus. And there followed him
a great company of people, and of women, which bewailed and lamented him. But
Jesus turned back unto the^, and said: ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for
me, but weep for your selves and for your children. For behold, the days will
come, in the which they shall say: Happy are the baren, and the wombes that
never bare, and the pappes which never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say
to the mountains, fall on us: and to the hills, cover us. For if they do this
in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry? And there were two evil
doers led with him to be slain. And after that they were come to the place
(which is called Caluarie) there they crucified him and the evil dooers: one on
the right hand, and the other on the left. Then said Jesus: father forgive
the^, for they wot not what they do. And they parted his raiment, and cast
lottes. And the people stood and beheld. And the rulers mocked him with the^,
saying: he saved other men, let him save himself if he be very Christ the
chosen of God. The soldiers also mocked him, and came and offered him vinegar,
and said: if thou be the king of Jews, save thy self. And a superscripcion
was written over him, with letters of Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew: This is the
king of the Jews. And one of the evil doers, which were hanged, rayled on
him, saying: If thou be Christ, save thy self and us. But the other answered
and rebuked him, saying: fear thou not god, seeing thou art in the same
damnacyon? we are righteously punyshed, for we receue according to our deeds:
but this man has done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus: Lord, remember
me when thou come into thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him: verily I say
unto the, to day shall thou be with me in paradyse. And it was about the sixth
hour: and there was a darkness over all the earth, until the ninth hour,
and the Sun was darkened, and the veil of the Temple did rent, even
through the mids. And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said:
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. And when he thus had said, he
gave up the ghost. When the Centurion saw what had happened, he glorified God,
saying: verily this was a righteous man. And all the people that came together
to se that sight, and saw the things which had happened, smote their breasts and
returned. And al his acquaintance, and the women that followed him from Galile,
stood afar of beholding these things. And behold, there was a man named
Joseph, a counsaylor, and he was a good man and a just: the same had not
consented to the counsel and deed of the^, which was of Aramathia, a city of
the Jews, which same also wayteth for the kingdom of God: he went unto Pilate
and begged the body of Jesus, and took it down, and wrapped it in a linne^
cloth, and laid it in a sepulcher that was hewn in stone, wherein never man
before had been laid. And that day was the preparing of the Sabbath, and ye
Sabbath drew on. The women that followed after, which had come with him from
Galile, beheld the sepulcher, and how his body was laid. And they returned,
and prepared sweet Odours and ointmentes, but rested on the Sabbath day,
according to the commmaundement.

On good Fridaye.
The Collectes.
Almighty god, we beseech thee graciously to behold this thy famely, for the
which our Lord Jesus Christ was contented to be betrayed, and given up into
the hands of wicked men, and to suffer death upon the cross: who lives and
reygneth. etc.

Almighty and everlasting god, by whose spirit the whole body of the Church
is governed and sanctified: receive our supplicacio^s and prayers, which we
offer before thee for all estates of men in thy holy congregation, that every
membre of the same in his vocacio^ and ministry, may truly and godly serve
thee: through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Merciful God, who haste made all men, and hate nothing that thou have made,
nor would the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and
live: have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretykes, and take from
them all ignorance, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word. And so
fetch them home blessed Lord, to thy flock, that they may be saved among the
remnaunte of the true Israelites, and be made one fold, under one shepehearde
Jesus Christ our Lord: who lives and reygneth. etc.

The Epistle.
Hebre. x.
THe law (which has but a shadow of good things to come, and not the very
fashion of things them selves) can never with those sacrifices which they
offer year by year continuallye, make the comers thereunto perfect. For would
not then those sacrifices have ceased to have been offered, because that the
offerers once purged should have had no more conscience of sins?
Nevertheless, in those sacrifices is there mention made of sins every year.
For the blood of Oxen and Goats can not take away sins. Wherefore, when he
comes into the world, he says: Sacrifice and offering thou would not have,
but a body have thou ordained me. Burnt offeringes also for sin have thou not
allowed. Then said I: lo, I am here. In the beginning of the book it is
written of me, that I should do thy will, O God. Above, when he says:
Sacrifice and offering, and burnt sacrifices, and sin offeringes thou
wouldeste not have, neither haste thou allowed them (which yet are offered by
the law) then said he: lo, I am here to do thy will, O God: he takes away
the first to establishe the latter: by the which will, we are made holy, even
by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. And every Priest is
ready daily, ministering and offering often times one manner of oblacyon, which
can never take away sins. But this man, after he has offered one sacrifice
for sins, is set down for ever on the right hand of God, and from
henceforth tarieth till his foes be made his footestole. For with one offering
has he made perfect for ever, them that are sanctified. The holy ghost
himself also bears us record, even when he told before: This is the
Testament that I will make unto the^. After those days (says the Lord) I
will put my laws in their hearts, and in their minds will I write them, and
their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. And where remission of
these things is, there is no more offering for sins. Seeing therefore
brethren, that by the means of the blood of Jesus, we have liberty to enter
into the holy place, by the new and living way, which he has prepared for us
through the veil (that is to say, by his flesh.) And seeing also that we have
an hye priest which is ruler over the house of God, let us draw nigh with a
true heart in a sure faith, sprynkled in our hearts from an evil conscience,
and washed in our bodies with pure water: let us keep the profession of our
hope, without wavering (for he is faithful that promised) and let us considre
one another, to the intent that we may provoke unto love and to good works,
not forsaking the fellowship that we have among our selves, as the manner of some
is: but let us exhort one another, and that so much the more, because ye see
that the day draws nigh.

The Gospel.
Ioh. xviii
WHen Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his disciples over the
broke Cedron, where was a garden, into the which he the^ entered with his
disciples. Judas which also beetrayed him, knew the place: for Jesus oftimes
resorted thither with his Disciples. Judas then after he had received a bond of
men (and ministers of the hye Priests and Phariseis) came thither with
lanternes, and firebrandes and weapons. And Jesus knowing al things that
should come on him, went forth and said unto them: whom seek ye? They answered
him: Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus said unto them: I am he. Judas also which
betrayed him, stood with the^. As Soon then as he had said unto them, I am he,
they went backward, and fell to the ground. Then asked he them again: who^
seek ye? They said, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus answered: I have told you that
I am he. If ye seek me, therefore let these go their way, that the saying might
be fulfilled which he spoke. Of them which thou gave me, have I not lost
one. The^ Simon Peter having a sweord, drew it, and smote the hye Priests
servant, and cut of his right ear. The servants name was Malchus. Therefore
says Jesus unto Peter, put up thy sweord into the sheath: shall I not drink of
the cup which my father has given me? Then the company and the captain,
and the ministers of the Jews, took Jesus, and bound him, and led him away
to Annas first, for he was father in law to Cayphas, which was the hye Priest
the same year. Cayphas was he that gave counsel to the Jews, that it was
expedient that one man should dye for the people. And Simon Peter followed
Jesus, and so did another Dysciple: that Disciple was known to the hye Priest,
and went in with Jesus unto the palace of the hye Priest. But Peter stood at
the door without. Then went out that other Disciple (which was known to
the hye Priest) and spoke to the Damsel that kept the door, and brought in
Peter. Then said the Damosel that kept the door unto Peter. Art not thou also
one of this ma^s disciples? he said: I am not. The servants and ministers
stood there, which had made a fire of coals: for it was cold, and they warmed
themselves. Peter also stood among them and warmed himself. The hye Priest
then asked Jesus of his Disciples, and of his doctrine. Jesus answered him: I
spoke openly in the world: I ever taught in the Sinagogue, and in the Temple
whither all the Jews have resoted, and in secret have I said nothing. Why
ask thou me? Ask them which heard me, what I said unto the^. Behold they
can tell what I said. When he had thus spoken, one of them ministers which
stood by, smote Jesus on the face, saying: Aunswerest thou the hye Priest so?
Jesus answered him: If I have evil spoken, bear witness of the evil: But if
I have well spoken, why smytest thou me? And Annas sent him bound unto Cayphas
the hye Priest. Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. Then said they unto him.
Art not thou also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said: I am not. One
of the servants of the hie Priests, (his cousin, whose ear Peter smote of)
said unto him: did not I see thee in the garden with him? Peter therefore
denied again, and immediately the Cock krewe. Then led they Jesus from
Cayphas, into the hall of judgment. It was in the morning, and they themselves
went not into the judgment hall, lest they should be defiled, but that they
might eat the Passover. Pilate then went out to them, and said: what
accusacion bring you against this man? They answered, and said unto him. If
he were not an evil doer, we would not have delivered him unto thee. Then
said Pilate unto them: take ye him and judge him after your own law. The
Jews therefore said unto him: It is not lawefull for us to put any man to
death, that the words of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke,
signifying what death he should dye. Then Pilate entered into the judgment
hall again, and called Jesus, and said unto him. Art thou the king of the
Jews? Jesus answered: say thou that of thy self, or did other tell it
thee of me? Pilate answered: Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and hye priests
have delivered thee unto me: what have thou done? Jesus answered: my kingdom
is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, then would my
ministers surely fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but
now is my kingdom not from hence. Pilate therefore said unto him: Art thou a
King then? Jesus answered: thou say that I am a king. For this cause was I
borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness
unto the truth. And all that are of the truth, hear my voice. Pilate said
unto him: what thing is truth? And when he had said this, he went out again
unto the Jews, and says unto them: I find in him no cause at all. Ye have a
custom that I should deliver you one looce at Easter: will ye that I looce
unto you the king of the Jews? Then cried they al again, saying: Not him, but
Barrabas, the same Barrabas was a murderer. Then Pilate took Jesus therefore,
and scourged him. And the soudiours wound a crown of thorns, and put it on
his head. And they did on him a purple garment, and came unto him, and said:
Hayl king of the Jews, and they smote him on the face. Pilate went forth
again, and said unto them: behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may
know that I find no fault in him. The^ came Jesus forth wearyng a crown of
thorn, and a robe of purple. And he says unto them: behold the man. When the
Priests therefore and the ministers saw him, they cried, Crucifye him,
Crucifye him. Pylate says unto them: take ye him and Crucifye him, for I
find no cause in him. The Jews answered him: we have a law, and by our
law he ought to dye, because he made himself the son of GOD. When Pylate
heard that saying, he was the more afraid, and went again into the judgment
hall, and said unto Jesus: whence art thou? But Jesus gave him none answer.
Then said Pylate unto him. Speak thou not unto me? know thou not that I
have power to crucifye thee, and have power to looce thee? Jesus au^swered:
Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from
above: Therefore he that delivered me unto thee, has the more sin. And from
thenceforth sought Pilate means to looce him: but the Jews cried, saying: if
thou let him go, thou art not Ceasars friend: for whosoever makes himself a
king, is against Ceasar. When Pilate heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth,
and sat down to give sentence in a place yt is called the pauement, but in the
Hebrew tongue, Gabbatha. It was the preparyng day of Easter, about the sixth
hour. And he says unto the Jews: behold your king. They cried, saying: away
with him, away with him, crucifye him. Pylate says unto them: shall I crucifye
your king? The hye Priests answered: we have no king but Ceasar. Then
delivered he him to them to be crucified. And they took Jesus and led him
away, and he bare his cross, and went forth into a place which is called
the place of dead men's sculles: but in Hebrew Golgotha: where they crucified
him, and two other with him, on either side one, and Jesus in the myddest. And
Pylate wrote a title and put it upon the cross. The writing was, Jesus of
Nazareth king of the Jews. This title readde many of the Jews: for the place
where Jesus was crucyfyed, was here to the city. And it was written in Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin. Then said the hye priests of the Jews to Pilate: write not
king of the Jews, but that he said: I am king of the Jews. Pilate answered:
what I have written that I have written. Then the soldiers, when they had
crucified Jesus, took his garments, and made four parts, to every soudier a
part, and also his coat. The coat was without seame, wroughte upon
throughoute. They said therefore among themselves: lte us not divide it, but
cast lottes for it who shall have it, that ye scripture might be fulfilled,
saying: They have parted my raymente among them, and for my coat did they cast
lottes. And the soldiers did such things in deed. There stood by the cross
of Jesus, his mother, and his mothers sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and
Marye Magdalene. When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple, whom he
loved, standing, he says unto his mother: woman, behold thy son. Then said
he to the disciple: behold thy mother. And from that hour the disciple took
her for his own.

After these things, Jesus knowing that all things were now performed, that
the scripture might be fulfilled, he says: I thyrste. So there stood a
vessel by full of vynegre: therefore they filled a sponge with vinegre, and
wound it about with Isope, and put it to his mouth. As Soon as Jesus then
received of the vynegre, he said: It is fynished, and bowed his head, and gave
up the ghost. The Jews therefore, because it was the preparyng of the
Sabbothe, that the bodies should not remain upon the Cross on the Sabbath
day (for that Sabbath day, was an hye day) besoughte Pilate that their
legs might be broken, and that they might be taken down. Then came the
soldiers and brake the legs of the first, and of the other which was
crucified with him. But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead
already, they brake not his legs: but one of the soldiers with a spear
thruste him into the side, and forthwith there came out blood and water. And he
that saw it bare record, and his record is true. And he knows that he says
true, that ye might believe also. For these things were done that the scripture
should be fulfilled: ye shall not break a bone of him.

And again another scripture says: they shall look upon him whom they have
pearsed. After this, Joseph of Aramathia (which was a disciple of Jesus, but
secretly for fear of the Jews) besought Pilate that he might take down the
body of Jesus. And Pilate gave him license. He came therefore and took the body
of Jesus. And there came also Nichodemus (which at the beginning came to Jesus
by night) and brought of Myrre and Aloes mingled together, about an hundredth
pound weight. Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen
clothes with the Odours, as the manner of the Jews is to burye. And in the
place where he was crucified, there was a garden, and in the garden a new
Sepulcher wherein was never man laid: There laid they Jesus therefore because
of the preparing of the Sabbothe of the Jews, for the Sepulcher was nigh at
hand.

Easter Even.
The Epistle.
i. Pete. iii
IT is better (if the will of God be so) that ye suffer for well doing then for
evil doing. Forasmuch as Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for
the unjust, to bring us to God: and was killed as perteyning to the flesh,
but was quickened in the spirits. In which spirit he also went and preached
to the spirits that were in prieson, which sometime had been disobediente,
when the long sufferyng of God was once looked for, in the days of Noe, while
the Arc was a preparyng: wherein a few, that is to say, eyghte souls were
saved by the water, like as Baptism also now saves us: not the puttyng a
way of the fylthe of the flesh, but in that a good conscience consents to
GOD by the resurreccyon of Jesus Christ, which is on the right hand of God, and
is gone into heaven: Angels, powers, and might, subdued unto him.

The Gospel.
Matthew xxvii.
WHen the even was come, there came a rich man of Aramathia, named Joseph,
which also was Jesus disciple. He went unto Pilate and begged the body of
Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered. And when Joseph had
taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and laid it in his new
toumbe, which he had hewn out, even in the rock, and rolled a great stone to
ye door of the Sepulcher, and departed. And there was mary Magdalene and the
other Mary, sitting over against the Sepulcher. The next day that follows the
day of preparing, the high Priests and Phariseis came togather unto Pylate,
saying: Sir, we remember yt this deceiuer said while he was yet alive: After
three days I will rise again. Command therefore that the Sepulcher be made
sure until the third day, lest his disciples come and steal him away, and say
unto the people, he is rise^ from the dead: and the last error shall be worse
then the first. Pilate said unto them: ye have a watch, go your way, make
it as sure as ye can. So they went and made the Sepulcher sure with the
watchemen and sealed the stone.

Easter day.
At morning prayer, instead of the Psalm. O come let us. etc. These Anthemes
shall be song or said.

Christ rising again from the dead, now dies not. Death from henceforth
has no power upon him. For in that he dyed, he dyed but once to put a way
sin: but in that he lives, he lives unto god. And so likewise, count your
selves dead unto sin, but living unto God, in Christ Jesus our Lord.

CHrist is risen again the first fruits of the^ that sleep: for seeing that
by man came death, by man also comes the resurreccion of the dead. For as by
Adam all men do dye, so by Christ, al men shall be restored to life.

The Collecte.
Almighty god, which through thy only begotten son Jesus Christ, haste
overcome death, and opened unto us the gate of everlasting life: we humbly
beseech thee, that as by thy special grace preventing us, thou do put in our
minds good desires: so by thy continual help, we may bring the same to good
effect, through Jesus Christ our lord: who lives and reigns. etc.

The Epistle.
Collo. iii.
IF ye be risen again with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits on ye right hand of God. Set your affeccion on heavenly
things, and not on earthly things. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with
Christ in god. Whenever Christ (which is our life) shall show him self, then
shall ye also appear with him in glory. Mortify therefore your earthy members,
fornicacion, uncleanness, unnatural lust, evil concupiscence, and covetousness,
which is worshippyng of Idols: for which things sake, the wrath of god uses
to come on the children of unbelief, among whom ye walked sometime when ye
lived in them.

The Gospel.
John. xx.
THe first day of ye Sabbothes came Mary Magdalen early (when it was yet dark)
unto the Sepulcher, and saw the stone taken away from the grave. Then she
ran and came to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and
says unto the^: they have taken away the Lord out of the grave, and we cannot
tell where they have laid him. Peter therefore went forth, and that other
disciple, and came unto the Sepulcher. They ran both together, and that other
disciple did outrunne Peter, and came first to the Sepulcher. And when he had
stouped down, he saw the linen clothes lying, yet went he not in. Then came
Simon Peter following him, and went into the Sepulcher, and saw the linen
clothes lie, and the napkin that was about his head, not lying with the linne^
clothes, but wrapped together in a place by it self. Then went in also that
other disciple which came first to the Sepulcher, and he saw and believed. For
as yet they knew not the Scripture that he should rise again from death. Then
the disciples went away again to their own home.

Monday in Easter weke.
The Collecte.
Almighty god, which through thy only begotten son Jesus Christ, have
overcome death, and opened unto us the gate of everlasting life: we humbly
beseech thee, that as by thy special grace preventing us, thou do put in
our minds good desires: so by thy continual help, we may bring the same to
good effect, through Jesus Christ our lord: who lives and reigns. etc.

The Epistle.
Acts. x.
PEter opened his mouth,and said: of a truth I perceive that there is no
respect of persons with God: but in all people, he yt fears him and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. Ye know the preaching that god sent unto
the children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ which is Lord over all
things: which preaching was publyshed throughout al Iewry (and began in
Galile, after the Baptism which John preached) how God anointed Jesus of
Nazareth with the holy ghost, and with power. Which Jesus went about doing
good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil, for God was with him.
And we are witnesses of all things which he did in the land of the Jews, and
at Jerusalem, whom they slew and hanged on tree. Him God raised up the third
day and showed him openly, not to all the people, but to us witnesses (chosen
before of god for the same intent) which did eat and drink with him after
he arose from death. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to
testify that it is he which was ordained of god to be the judge of the quick
and the dead. To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name,
whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins.

The Gospel.
Lu. xxiiii.
Behold, two of the disciples went that same day to a town called Emaus,
which was from Jerusalem about.lx. furlonges: and they talked together of all
the things that had happened. And it chanced while they commoned together and
reasoned, Jesus himself drew nere, and went with the^. But their eyes were
holden that they should not know him. And he said unto them: what manner of
communicacions are these that ye have one to another as ye walk, and are sad?
And the one of them (whose name was Cleophas) answered and said unto him: art
thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and haste not known the things which
have chanced there in these days? he said unto them: what things? And they
said unto him: of Jesus of Nazareth, which was a Prophet, mighty in deed and
word before God and all the people: and how the hie Priests and our rulers
delivered him to be condemned to death, and have crucified him. But we trusted
that it had been he, which should have redeemed Israel. And as touching al these
things, to day is even the third day that they were done. Yea and certain
weomen also of our company made us astonished, which came earlye unto the
Sepulcher, and found not his body: and came, saying that they had seen a
vision of Aungeles, which said that he was alive. And certain of them which
were with us, went to the Sepulcher, and found it even to as the weomen had
said, but him they saw not. And he said unto them: O fools and slow of
heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken. Ought not Christ to have
suffered these things, and to enter into his glory? And he began at Moses and
all the Prophets, and enterpreted unto them in all scriptures which were
written of him. And they drew nigh unto the town which they went unto. And he
made as though he would have gone further. And they constrained him, saying:
Abide with us, for it draws toward night, and the day is far passed: And
he went in to tarry with them. And it came to pass as he sat at meat with
them, he took bread and blessed it, and brake, and gave to the^. And their iyes
were opened, and they knew him, and he vanished out of their sight. And they
said between themselves: did not our hearts burn within us while he talked
with us by ye way, and opened to us the scriptures? And they rose up ye same
hour and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and
them that were with them, saying: the Lord is risen in deed, and has appeared
to Simon. And they told what things were done in the way, and how they knew
him in breakyng of bread.

Tuesday in Easter weke.
The Collecte.
ALmighty father, which have given thy only son to die for our sins, and
to rise again for our iustificacion: Grant us so to put away the leaven of
malice and wyckednes, that we may always serve thee in pureness of living and
truth: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Acts. xiii
YE men and brethren, Children of the generation of Abraham, and whosoever
among you fears god: to you is this word of salvation sent. For the
inhabiters of Jerusalem and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet
the voices of the Prophets, which are read every Sabbath day, they have
fulfilled them in condemning him. And when they found no cause of death in
him, yet desired they Pilate to kill him. And when they had fulfilled all that
were written of him, they took him down from the tree, and put him in a
Sepulcher. But God raised him again from death the third day, and he was
seen many days of them which went with him from Galile to Jerusalem, which
are witnesses unto the people. And we declare unto you, how that the promise)
which was made unto the fathers) god has fulfilled unto their children, (eue^
unto us) in that he raised up Jesus again. Even as it is written in the second
Psalm: thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. As concerning that
he raised him up from death, now no more to return to corruption, he said on
this wise. The holy promises made to David, will I give faithfully unto you.
Wherefore he says also in an other place: Thou shall not suffer thine holy to
see corrupcion. For David (after that he had in his time fulfilled the will of
god) fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corrupcion. But he
whom God raised again, saw no corrupcion. Be it known unto you therefore (ye
men and brethren) that through this man is preached unto you forgeuenes of
sins, and that by him all that believe are justified from al things, from
which ye could not be justified by the law Moses, Beware therefore, lest that
fall on you which is spoken of in the prophets: behold ye despisers, and
wonder, and perish ye: for I do a work in your days, which ye shall not
believe though a man declare it unto you.

The Gospel.
Lu. xxiiii
Jesus stood in the mids of his disciples, and said unto them: peace be
unto you: It is I, fear not. But they were abashed and afraid, and supposed
that they had seen a spirit. And he said unto them: why are ye troubled, and
why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that
it is even I my self. Handle me and see, for a spirit has no flesh and
bones, as ye see me have. And when he had thus spoken, he showed them his
hands and his feet. And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he
said unto them: Have ye here any meat? And they offered him a piece of a
broiled fish, and of an Honey comb. And he took it, and did eat before
them. And he said unto them: these are the words which I spoke unto you, while
I was yet with you: That all must needs be fulfilled, which were written of
me in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the Psalms. Then opened
he their wits, that they might understand the Scriptures, and said unto
them. Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise
again from death the third day, and that repentance and remission of sins,
should be preached in his name among al nations, and must begin at Jerusalem.
And ye are witnesses of these things.

The first Sundaye after Easter.
The Collecte.
Almighty God. etc.

As at the Communion on Easter day.

The Epistle.
i. John. v.
ALL that is borne of god ouercometh the world. And this is the victory that
ouercometh the world, eue^ our faith. Who is he that ouercometh the world, but
he that believes that Jesus is the son of God? This Jesus Christ is he that
came by water and blood, not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is
the spirit that bears witness, because the spirit is truth. For there are
three which bear record in heaven: the father, the word, and the holy ghost:
and these three are one. And there are three which bear record in earth: the
spirit, and water, and blood: and these three are one. If we receive the
witness of men, the witness of God is greater. For this is the witness of
god that is greater, which he testified of his son. He that believes on the
son of god, has the witness in himself. He that believes not god, has
made him a liar, because he believes not the record that God gave of his
son. And this is the record, how that God has given unto us eternal life,
and this life is in his son. He that has the son, has life: and he that
has not the son of God, has not life.

The Gospel.
Ion. xx.
The Same day at night, which was the first day of the Sabbothes, when the
doors were shut (where the disciples were assembled together for fear of ye
Jews) came Jesus and stood in the mids, and said unto them: Peace be unto
you. And when he had so said, he showed unto the^ his hands and his side. Then
were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord. Then said Jesus to them again.
Peace be unto you. As my father sent me, even so send I you also. And when he
had said these words, he breathed on them, and said unto them: receive ye
the holy ghost. Whosoeuers sins ye remitte, they are remitted unto them. And
whosoeuers sins ye retain, they are retained.

The second Sunday after Easter.
The Collecte.
Almighty God, which have given thy holy son to be unto us, both a sacrifice
for sin, and also an example of godly life: Give us the grace that we may
always most thankfully receive that his inestimable benefyte, and also daily
endeavor our selves to follow the blessed steps of his most holy life.

The Epistle.
i. Pete. ii
THis is thank worthy, if a man for conscience toward God, endure grief, and
suffer wrong undeserved. For what praise is it, if when ye be buffeted for
your faults, ye take it patiently? But and if when ye do well, ye suffer
wrong and take it patiently, the^ is there thank with God. For hereunto verily
were ye called. For Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an ensau^ple that
ye should follow his steps, which did no sin, neither was there guyle found
in his mouth: which when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered,
he threatened not: but committed the vengeance to him that judges rightously,
which his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being
delivered from sin, should live unto righteousness. By whose stripes ye
were healed. For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now turned unto the
shepeheard, and bishop of your souls.

The Gospel.
John. x.
CHrist said unto his disciples: I am the good shepeheard: a good shepeheard
gives his life for the sheep. An hired servant, and he which is not the
shepeheard (nether the sheep are his own) sees ye wolf coming, and leaves
the sheep and flees, and ye wolf catches and skattereth the sheep. The hired
servant flees because he is an hired servant, and cares not for ye sheep. I
am the good shepeheard, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. As my father
knows me, eue^ so know I also my father. And I give my life for the sheep:
and other sheep I have which are not of this fold: Them also must I bring, and
they shall hear my voice, and there shall be ohe fold and one shepeheard.

The third Sunday after Easter.
The Collect.
Almighty god, which show to al men that be in error the light of thy
truth, to ye intent that they may return into the way of righteousness.
Grant unto all the^ that be admitted into the fellowship of Christ's religion,
that they may exchew those things ye be contrary to their profession, and
follow all such things as be agreeable to the same: through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

The Epistle.
i. Pete. ii
DErely beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgremes, abstain from
fleshly lusts which fight against the soul: and see that ye have honest
conversation among the gentiles, that whereas they backbite you as evil doers,
they may see your good works, and praise god in the day of visitacion.
Submytte your selves therefore to every man for the lords sake, whether it be
unto the king as unto the chief head: either unto rulers as unto them ye are
sent of him for the punishment of evil doers, but for the laud of the^ that
do well. For so is ye will of god, that with well doing, ye may stop the
mouths of foolish and ignorant men: as free, and not as having the liberty
for a cloak of maliciousnes, but even as ye servants of God. Honor all men,
love brotherly fellowship, fear God, honor the king.

The Gospel.
John. xvi
Jesus said to his disciples: After a while ye shall not see me, and again
after a while ye shall see me: for I go to ye father. The^ said some of his
disciples between themselves: what is this that he says unto us? after a
while ye shall not see me, and again after a while ye shall see me, and that I
go to the father? They said therefore: what is this that he says, after a
while? We cannot tell what he says. Jesus perceived that they would ask him,
and said unto them: ye enquire of this between your selves, because I said:
after a while ye shall not see me, and again after a while ye shall see me.
Verily, verily, I say unto you: ye shall weep and lament, but contrary wise,
the world shall rejoice. Ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned to
joy. A woman when she trauaileth has sorrow, because her hour is come. But
as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the anguishe,
for joy that a man is borne into the world. And ye now therefore have sorrow:
but I will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no
man take from you.

The fourth Sundaye after Easter.
The Collecte.
Almighty god, which do make ye minds of al faithful men to be of one will:
Grant unto thy people, that they may love the thing which thou commaundest,
and desire that which thou do promise: that among the sundry and manifold
chaunges of the world, our hearts may surely there be fixed, whereas true
joys are to be found: Through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
James. i
EVery good gift and every perfect gift, is from above, and comes down from
the father of lights, with who^ is no variablenes, nether shadow of change.
Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be the
first fruit of his creatures. Wherefore (dear brethren) let every man be swifte
to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath. For the wrath of man works not
that which is righteous before God. Wherefore lay aparte all filthiness, and
superfluity of maliciousnes, and receive with mekenes ye word that is graffed
in you, which is hable to save your souls.

The Gospel.
John. xvi.
Jesus said unto his disciples: now I go my way to him that sent me, and
none of you asks me whither I go. But because I have said such things unto
you, your hearts are full of sorrow. Neuerthlesse, I tell you the truth: it
is expedient for you ye I go away. For if I go not away, that comforter
will not come unto you. But if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he
is come, he will rebuke the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of
judgment. Of sin, because they believe not on me. Of rightousnes, because I
go to my father, and ye shall se me no more. Of judgment, because the prince
of this world is judged already. I have yet many things to say unto you, but
ye cannot bear them away now: howbeit when he is come (which is the spirit
of truth) he will lead you into al truth. He shall not speak of himself,
but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will show you things
to come. He shall gloryfy me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show unto
you. All things that the father has, are mine: therefore said I unto you, that
he shall take of mine, and show unto you.

The fifth Sunday after Easter.
The Collect.
LOrd, from whom al good things do come: grant us thy humble servants,
that by thy holy inspiracion we may think those things that be good, and by
thy mercyful guiding may perform the same, through out lord Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.
James. i.
SE that ye be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own
selves. For if any man hear the word, and declares not the same by his
works, he is like unto a man beholding his bodily face in a glass. For as soon
as he has looked on himself, he goes his way, and forgeatteth immediately
what his fashion was. But whosoever looks in ye perfect law of liberty, and
continues therein (if he be not a forgeatful hearer, but a doer of the work)
the same shall be happi in his deed. If any man among you seem to be devout, and
refrayneth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's devotion is in
vain. Pure devotion, and undefiled before God the father is this: to visit the
fatherles and wiedowes in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of
the world.

The Gospel
John. xvi.
Verily, verily, I say unto you: whatsoever ye ask the father in my name, he
will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name. Ask and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full. These things have I spoken unto you by
proverbs. The time will come, when I shall no more speak unto you by
proverbs: but I shall show you plainly from my father. At that day shall ye
ask in my name: And I say not unto you yt I will speak unto my father for you:
For the father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have believed
that I came out from god. I went out from the father, and came into the
world. Again, I leave the world, and go to the father. His disciples said
unto him: Lo, now thou talkest plainly, and speak no proverb. Now are
we sure that thou know all things, and nedest not that any man should ask
thee any question: therefore believe we, yt thou came from god. Jesus au^swered
the^: now ye do believe. Behold, ye hour draws nie, and is already come, yt
ye shall be scatered every man to his own, and shall leave me alone. And yet am
I not alone, for the father is with me. These words have I spoken unto you,
that in me ye might have peace, for in the world shall ye have tribulacion: but
be of good chere, I have overcome the world.

The Ascencion day.
The Collect.
Grant we beseech thee almighty God, that like as we do believe thy only
begotten son our Lord to have ascended into the heavens: so we may also in
heart and mind thither ascend, and with him continually dwell.

The Epistle.
Acts. i.
IN the former treatise (dear Theophilus) we have spoken of all that Jesus
began to do and teach, until the day in which he was taken up, after that he
through the holy ghost, had given commandments unto the Apostles, whom he
had chosen, to whom also he showed himself alive, after his passion (and that
by many tokens) appearing unto them fortye days, and speaking of the kingdom
of God, and gathered them together, and commanded them that they should not
depart from, Jerusalem, but to wait for the to promysse of the father, whereof
(says he) ye have heard of me. For John truly baptized with water, but ye
shall be baptized with the holy ghost, after these few days. When they
therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying: Lord, will thou at
this time restore again the kingdom of Israel? And he said unto them: it is
not for you to know the times or the seasons which the father has put in his
own power. But ye shall receive power, after the holy ghost is come upon you.
And ye shall be witnesses unto me, not only in Jerusalem, but also in all
Iewrye, and in all Samaria, and even unto the worlds end. And when he had
spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up on hye, and a cloud
received him up out of their sight. And while they looked steadfastly up toward
heaven as he went: behold, two men stood by them in white apparel, which
also said: ye men of Galile, why stand ye gasyng up into heaven? This same
Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, even as ye have
seen him go into heaven.

The Gospel.
Mar. xvi.
Jesus appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and cast in their,
teeth their unbelief and hardens of heart, because they believed not them
which had seen that he was risen again from the dead: and he said unto them.
Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to al creatures: he that
belieueth and is baptized shall be saved. But he that believes not shall be
damned: And these tokens shall follow them that believe. In my name they shall
cast out devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall drive away
serpents. And if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them. They
shall lay their hand on the sick, and shall recover. So then when the Lord had
spoken unto them, he was received into heaven, and is on the right hand of God.
And they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with them, and
confirming the word with miracles following.

The Sunday after the Ascencion day.
The Collect.
O God the king of glory, which have exalted thine only son Jesus Christ,
with great triumph unto thy kingdom in heaven: we beseech thee leave us not
coumfortles, but send to us thine holy ghost to comfort us and exalte us unto
the same place whither our savior Christ is gone before: who lives and
reigns. etc

The Epistle.
i. Pe. iiii.
THe end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sobre, and watch unto
prayer. But above all things, have feruente love among your selves: for love
shall cover the multitude of linnes. Be ye herberous one to another without
grudging. As every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one to
another, as good ministers of the manifold graces of god. If any man speak,
let him talk as the words of God. If any man ministre, let him do it as of
the ability which God ministers to him, that God in all things may be
glorified, through Jesus Christ: to whom be praise and dominion for ever and
ever. Amen.

The Gospel.
John. xv.
WHen the comforter is come whom I will send unto you from the father (even the
spirit of truth, which proceeds of the father) he shall testify of me. And
ye shall be are witness also, because ye have been with me from the beeginning.
These things have I said unto you, because ye should not be offended. They
shall excommunicate you: yea the time shall come, that whosoever kills you,
will think that he does god service. And such things will they do unto you,
because they have not known the father, neither yet me. But these things I
have told you, that when the time is come, ye may remember then that I told
you.

Whitsunday
The Collect.
GOd, which as upon this day have taught the hearts of thy faithful people, by
the sending to them the light of holy spirit: Grant us by ye same spirit to
have a right judgment in all things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy
comfort, through the merits of Christ Jesus our savior who lives and reigns
with thee in the unity of the same spirit, one God world without end.

The Epistle.
Acts. ii.
WHen the fifty days were come to an end, they were all with one accord
together in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as it had
been the cummyng of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they
sat. And there appeared unto them, cloven tongues, like as they had been
offyre, and it fate upon each one of them: and they were all filled filled with
the holy ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, even as the same
spirit gave them utterance. The^ were dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews, devout
men, out of every nacyon of them that are under heaven. When this was noysed
about, the multitude came together and were astonished, because that every man
heard them speak with his own language. They wondered all and meruailed, saying
among themselves: behold, are not all these which speak of Galile? And how
hear we every man his own tongue, wherein we were borne: Partians, and Medes,
and Elamites, and the inhabiters of Mesopotamia, and of Iewry, and of
Capadocia, of Pontus and Asia, Phrigia, and Pamphilia, of Egypt, and of the
parties of Libia, which is beside Syrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and
Proselites, Greeks and Arrabians, we have heard them speak in our own tongues
the great works of god.

The Gospel.
Ioh. xiiii.
Jesus said unto his disciplines: If ye love me, keep my commaundmentes, and I
will pray thee father, and he shall give you another coumforter, that he may
abide with you for ever: even the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot
receive, because the world sees him not, neither knows him. But ye know
him: for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you
coumfortles, but will come to you. Yet a little while, and the world sees me no
more: but ye see me. For I live, and ye shall live. That day shall ye know
that I am in my father, and you in me, and I in you. He that has my
commandments, and keeps them, the same is he that loves me. And he that
loves me, shall beeloued of my father, and I will love him, and will show mine
own self unto him. Judas says unto him, (not Judas Iscarioth) Lord, what is
done that thou will show thy self unto us, and not unto the world: Jesus
answered, and said unto them: if a man love me, he will keep my sayings, and
my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and dwell with him. He that
loves me not, keeps not my sayings. And the word which ye hear, is not
mine, but the fathers which sent me. These things have I spoken unto you,
being yet present with you. But the comforter which is the holy ghost, whom
my father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you. Peace I leave
with you: my peace I give unto you. Not as the world gives, give I unto you.
Let not your hearts be grieved, neither fear. Ye have heard how I said unto
you: I go, and come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would verily rejoice,
because I said, I go unto the father, for the father is greater then I. And
now have I showed you before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye might
believe. Hereafter will I not talk many words unto you. For the Prince of this
world comes, and has naught in me. But that the world may know that I
love the father. And as the father gave me commundement, even so do I.

Mondaye in whitson weke.
The Collecte.
God which. etc.

(As upon Whitsundaye.

The Epistle.
Acts. x.
THen Peter opened his mouth, and said: of a truth I perceive that there is no
respect of persons with god: but in all people, he that fearth him, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. Ye know the preaching that GOD sent unto
the children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ which is Lord over
al things: which preaching was publisshed throughout all Iewry (and began in
Galile after the baptism which John preached) how God anointed Jesus of
Nazareth with the holy ghost and with power. Which Jesus went about, dooyng
good, and healyng all that were oppressed of the devil, For God was with him.
And we are witnesses of all things which he did in the land of the Jews,
and at Jerusalem whom they stewe and hanged on a tree: Him God raised by the
third day, and showed him openly, not to all the people, but unto us witnesses
(chosen before of god for the same intent) which did eat and drink with him
after he arose from death. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and
to testify ye it is he, which was ordained of God to be ye judge of quick and
dead. To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. While Peter yet spoke these
words, the holy ghost fell on al the^ which heard ye preaching. And they of the
circumcision which believed, were astonished, as many as came with Peter, because
that on the Gentiles also was shed out the gift of the holy ghost. For they
heard th^e speak with tongues, and magnify God. Then answered Peter: can
any man forbid water that these should not be baptized which have received
the holy ghost as well as we? And he commanded them to be baptized in the
name of the Lord. Then prayed they him to tarry a few days.

The Gospel.
John. iii.
SO god loved the world, that he gave his only be gotten son, that whosoever
belieueth in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent
not his son into the world to condemn the world, but that ye world through
him might be saved. But he that believes on him, is not condemned. But he that
believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of
the only begotten son of God. And this is the condemnacion, that light is
come into the world, and men loved darkness more then light, because their
deeds were evil. For every one that evil does, hates the light, neither
comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that does the
truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be known, how that they are
wrought in God.

The tuesday after whitsondaye.
The Collecte.
God which. etc.

(As upon Whitsondaye.

The Epistle.
Act. viii
WHen ye Apostles which were at Jerusalem, heard say that Samaria had received
the word of god, they sent unto them Peter and John. Which when they were
come down, prayed for them that they might receive the holy ghost. For as yet
he was come on none of them, but they were baptized only in the name of Christ
Jesus. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the holy ghost.

The Gospel.
John. x.
Verily, verily I say unto you, he that enters not in by the door into the
sheep fold, but clymeth up some other way, the same is a these and a
murderer. But he that enters in by ye door, is the shepeheard of the sheep.
To him the porter opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his
own sheep by name, and leads them out. And when he has sent forth his
own sheep, he goes before the^, and the sheep follow him: for they know his
voice. A stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him, for they know
not the voice of strangers. This Proverb spoke Jesus unto the^ but they
understood not what things they were which he spoke unto them.

Then said Jesus unto them again: Verily, verily, I say unto you: I am the
door of the sheep. All (even as many as came before me) are thieves and
murderers, but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door, by me if any enter
in, he shall be safe, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. A these
comes not but for to steal, kill, and destroy. I am come that they may have
life, and that they might have it more aboundauntlye.

Trinity Sundaye.
The Collecte.
Almighty and everlasting God, which haste given unto us thy servants,
grace by the confession of a true faith to acknowledge the glory of the
eternal Trinity, and in the power of ye divine Majesty to worship the
unity: we beseech thee, that through the steadfastness of this faith we may
evermore be defended from al adversity, which live and reignest one god,
world without end. Amen.

The Epistle.
Apoc. iiii
AFter this I looked, and behold, a door was open in heaven, and the first
voice which I heard, was as it were of a trompet talkyng with me, which said:
come up higher, and I will show thee things which must be fulfilled
hereafter. And immediately I was in the spirit. And behold, a seat was set in
heau^e, and one sat on the seat. And he that sat was to look upon, like unto a
Jasper stone, and a Sardine stone. And there was a rainebow about the seat, in
sight like unto an Emerauld. And about the seat were.xxiiii. seats. And upon
the seats.xxiiii. elders sitting, clothed in white raymente, and had on their
heads crowns of gold. And out of the seat proceeded lightninges, and
thunderynges, and voices: and there were seven lamps of fire burning before
the seat, which are the seven spirits of god. And before the seat, there was
a sea of glass like unto Crystal: and in the mids of the seat and round
about the seat, were four beasts full of eyes before and behind. And the
first beast was like a Lion: and the second beast like a Calfe: and the
third beast had a face as a man: and the fourth beast was like a flying Egle.
And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him, and they were
full of eyes within. And they did not rest day neither night, saying: Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God almightye, which was and is, and is to come. And when
those beasts gave glory and honor, and thanks to him that sat on the seat
(which lives for ever and ever) the.xxiiii. elders fell down before him that
sat on the throne, and worshypped him that lives for ever, and cast their
crowns before the throne, saying: thou art worthy, O lord (our god) to
receive glory and honor, and power: for thou have created al things, and for
thy wills sake they are, and were created.

The Gospel
John. iii.
THere was a man of the Phariseis named Nichodemus, a ruler of the Jews. The
same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him: Rabbi, we know that thou art a
teacher come from god: for no man could do such miracles as thou do,
except God were with him. Jesus answered, and said unto him: Verelye,
verily, I say unto thee: except a man be borne from above, he cannot see the
kingdom of God. Nichodemus said unto him: how can a man be borne when he is
older can he enter into his mothers womb and be borne again; Jesus
answered: verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be borne of water,
and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom to God. That which is
borne of the flesh, is flesh: And that which is borne of the spirit, is
spirit. Marvel not thou that I said to thee, ye must be borne from above.
The wynd blows where it lusts, and thou hear the sound thereof, but
thou can not tell whence it comes nor whether he goes: So is every one ye
is borne of the spirit. Nichodemus answered, and said unto him: how can these
things be? Jesus answered, and said unto him: art thou a master in Israel,
and know not these things: Verily, verily, I say unto thee: we speak that
we know, and testifye that we have seen, and ye receive not our witness. If
I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not: how shall ye believe if I
tell you of heavenly things? And no man ascends up to heaven, but he that
came down from heaven, even the son of man which is in heaven. And as
Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the son of man
be lift up: that whosoever believes in him, peryshe not, but have everlasting
life.

The first Sunday after Trinity Sundaye.
The Collecte.
GOd the strength of al the^, that trust in thee, mercyfully accept our
prayers: And because the weakness of our mortal nature can do no good thing
without thee: grant us the help of thy grace, that in keeping of thy
commandments, we may please the both in will and deed: through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

The Epistle.
i. Ioh. iiii.
Dearly beloved, let us love one another: for love comes of god. And eueri
one that loves, is borne of god, and knows god. He that loves not, knows
not God: for god is love. In this appears love of God to us ward, because
that God sent his only begotten son into the world, that we might live
through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his son to be the agremente for our sins. Dearly beloved, if God so
loved us, we ought also one to love another. No man has seen God at any time.
If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is perfect in us.
Nereby know we that we dwell in him and he in us, because he has given us of
his spirit. And we have seen, and do testify that the father sent the son
to be the Savior of the world: whosoever confesses that Jesus is the son of
God, in him dwells God and he in God. And we have known and believed the love
that God has to us. God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in
God, and God in him. Herein is the love perfect in us, that we should trust in
the day of Judgment. For as he is, eue^ so are we in this world. There is no
fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear, for fear has painfulnes.
He that fears, is not perfect in love. We love him, for he loved us first. If
a man say, I love god, and yet hate his brother, he is a liar. For how can he
that loves not his brother whom he has seen, love God whom he has not seen.
And this commandment have we of him: that be which loves God, should love
his brother also.

The Gospel.
Luke. xv.
THere was a certain rich manne, which was clothed in purple and fine white,
and fared deliciouslye every day. And there was a certain beggar, named
Lazarus, which lay at his gate full of sores, desyryng to be refresshed with
the crumines which fell from the rich man's boarde, and no man gave unto him.
The dogs came also and lycked his sores. And it fortuned that the beggar
dyed, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. The rich man also
dyed, and was buried: And being in hell in torments, he lift up his eyes,
and saw Abraham afar of and Lazarus in his bosom, and he cried and said:
Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the
typpe of his finger in water and cole my tongue, for I am tormented in this
flame. But Abraham said: Son, remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst
thy pleasure, and contrariwyse Lazarus received pain. But now he is
coumforted and thou art punyshed. Beyond all this, between us and you there is
a great space set, so that they which would go from hence to you cannot,
neither may come from thence to us. Then he said: I pray thee therefore
father, send him to my fathers house, (for I have five brethren) for to warn
them, left they come also into this place of tormente. Abraham said unto him:
they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear the^. And he said: nay
father Abraham: but if one come unto them from the dead, they will repent. He
said unto him: If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they
believe, though one rose from death again.

The second Sunday after Trinity.
The Collect.
Lord make us to have a perpetual fear and love of thy holy name: for thou
never faylest to help and govern them, whom thou dooest bring up in thy
steadfast love. Grant this. etc.

The Epistle.
i. Ioh. iii.
MErueyle not my brethren, though the world hate you. We know that we are
translated from death unto life, because we love the brethren. He that loves
not his brother, abides in death. Whosoever hates his brother, is a manslear.
And ye know that no manslear has eternal life abiding in him. Herby perceive
we love, because he gave his life for us, and we ought to give our lives for
ye brethren. But whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need,
and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?
My babes, let us not love in word neither in tongue: but in deed and in
verity. Herby we know that we are of the verity, and can quiet our hearts
before him. For if our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and
knows all things. Dearelye beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have
we trust to Godward, and whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep
his commandments, and do those things which are pleasant in his sight. And
this is his commandment, that we believe on the name of his son Jesus
Christ, and love one another as he gave commandment. And he that keeps his
commandments, dwells in him, and he in him: and herby we know that he
abides in us, even by the spirit which he has given us.

The Gospel
Luke xiiii
A Certain man ordained a great supper, and bade many, and sent his servant
at supper time, to say to them that were bydden: come, for all things are
now ready. And they all at once began to make excuse. The first said unto
him. I have bought a farm, and I must needs go and see it, I pray thee have
me excused. And another said: I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I go to
prove the^, I pray thee have me excused. And another said: I have married a
wife, and therefore I cannot come. And the servant returned and brought his
master word again thereof. Then was the good man of the house displeased, and
said to his servant: go out quickly into the streets and quarters of the
city, and bring in hither the poor and feeble, and the halte, and blind. And
the servant said: Lord, it is done as thou haste commanded, and yet there is
room. And the Lord said unto the servant: go out unto the hie ways and
hedges, and compel the^ to come in, that my house may be filled. For I say
unto you, that none of these men which were bidden shall taste of my supper.

The third Sunday after Trinity.
The Collect.
Lord, we beseech thee mercifully to hear us, and unto whom thou haste given
an heartye desire to pray: grant ye by thy mighty aid we may be defended:
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle
i. Petr. v.
SVbmitte your selves every man one to another: knit your selves together in
lowelynes of mind. For god resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble. Submit your selves therefore under the mighty hand of god, that he
may exalt you when the time is come. Cast al your care upon him, for he cares
for you. Be sobre, and, watch, for your aduersarye the devil, as a roaryng
Lion, walks about, sekyng whom he may devour, whom resist steadfast in the
faith: knowing that the same affliccions are appointed unto your brethren, that
are in the world. But the god of all grace, which has called us unto his
eternal glory by Christ, Jesus, shall his own self (after that ye have suffered
a little afflyccion) make you perfect, settle, strength, and stablishe you. To
him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

The Gospel
Luke. xv.
THen resorted unto him, all the Publicans and sinners for to hear him. And the
Phariseis and Scribes murmured, saying: He receives sinners and eats with
them. But he put forth this parable unto them, laying: What man among you
having an hundredth sheep (if he lose one of them) does not of leave ninety
and nine in the wilderness, and goes after that which is lost, until he find
it? And when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders with joy. And
as soon as he comes home, he calls together his lovers and neyghbors, saying
unto them: Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost. I say
unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents,
more then over nintie and nine just persons which need no repentance. Either
what woman having ten grotes (if she loose one) does not light a candle and
swepe the house, and seek diligently till she find it? And when she has found
it, she calls her lovers and her neighbors together, saying: Rejoice with
me, for I have found the grote which I lost. Likewise, I say unto you shall
there be joy in the presence of the Angels of god, over one sinner that
repents.

The fourth Sunday after Trinity.
The Collect.
GOd, the protector of all that trust in thee, without who^ nothing is strong,
nothing is holy: increase and multiply upon us thy mercy, that thou being
our ruler and gyde, we may so pass through things temporal, that we finally
lose not the things eternal: grant this heavenly father, for Jesus Christ's
sake our Lord.

The Epistle
To. viii.
I Suppose that the afflictions of this life, are not worthy of the glory
which shall be showed upon us. For the feruente desire of the creature
abides, lookyng when the sons of God shall appear, because the creature is
subdued to vanity against the will thereof, but for his will which has
subdued the same in hope. For the same creature shall be delivered from the
bondage of corrupcion, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. For we
know that every creature groneth with us also, and trauayleth in pain, eue^
unto this time: not only it, but we also which have the first fruits of the
spirit, mourn in our selves also, and wait for the adopcion (of the children
of God) eue^ the deliverance of our bodies.

The Gospel
Luke. vi.
BE ye merciful as your father also is merciful. Judge not, and ye shall not be
judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned. For give, and ye shall be
forgiven. Give, and it shall be given unto you, good measure, and pressed down,
and shaken together, and runnyng over, shall men give into your bosoms. For
with the same measure that ye mete withal, shall other men mete to you again.
And he put forth a similitude unto them. Can the blind lead the blind? do
they not both fall into the ditche? The disciple is not above his master:
Every man shall be perfect even as his master is. Why see thou a mote in thy
brothers eye, but consydereste not the beam that is in thine own eye? Either
how can thou say to thy brother? Brother, let me pull out the mote that
is in thine eye, when thou seeste not the beam that is in thine own eye?
first thou ypocrite, cast out the beam out of thine own eye, the^ shall thou
see perfectely to pull out the mote that is in thy brothers eye.

The fifth Sunday after Trinity.
The Collect.
Grant Lord, we beseech thee, that the course of this world may be so
peaceably ordered by the governance, that thy congregation may joyfully serve
thee in all godly quietenes: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle
i. Pet. iii
BE you all of one mind, and of one heart, love as brethren, be pietifull, be
courteous, (meke) not renderyng evil for evil, or rebuke for rebuke: but
contrarywyse bless, knowing that ye are thereunto called, even that ye should
be heirs of the blessyng. For he that does long after life, and loves to
see good days: let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that
they speak no gyle. Let him eschew evil and do good: let him seek peace, and
ensue it. For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are
open unto their prayers. Again, the face of the Lord is over the^ that do evil.
Moreover, who is he that will harm you, if ye follow that which is good yea,
happy are ye if any trouble happen unto you for righteousness sake. Be not ye
afraid for any terror of them, neither be ye troubled, but sanctifye the Lord
God in your hearts.

The Gospel
Luke. v.
YE came to pass, that (when the people preaced upon him to hear the word of
God) he stood by the lake of Genazareth, and saw two ships stand by the
lakes side, but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were washyng their
nets. And he entered into one of the ships (which pertained to Simon) and
prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the land. And he sat down,
and taught the people out of the ship. When he had left speaking, he said unto
Simon: launche out into the deep, and let slip your nets to make a draught.
And Simon answered, and said unto him: Master, we have labored al night,
and have taken nothing. Nevertheless, at thy commandment I will looce forth
the nerre. And when they had so done, they enclosed a great multitude of
fysshes. But their net brake, and they beckened to their fellows (which were
in the other ship) that they should come and help them. And they came and
filled both ships, that they souke again. When Simon Peter saw this, he
fell down at Jesus knees, saying: Lord go from me, for I am a sinful man.
For he was astonished and all that were with him, at the draughte of fishes
which they had taken: and so was also James and John the sons of zebede,
which were parteners with Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon: fear not, from
hencefurth thou shalt catch men. And they brought the ships to land, and
forsook all and followed him.

The sixth Sunday after Trinity.
The Collect.
GOd Which have prepared to them that love thee, such good things as pass al
ma^s understanding: Power into our hearts such love toward thee, that we
loving thee in all things, may obtain thy promises, which excede all that we
can desire: through Jesus Christ our lord.

The Epistle
Romans vi.
Know ye not, that all we which are baptized in Jesus Christ, are baptized to
dye with him? We are buried then with him by baptism for to dye: that likewise
as Christ was raised from death by the glory of the father, even so we also
should walk in a new life. For if we be graft in death like unto him, even
so shall we be partakers of the holy resurrection. Knowing this, that your old
man is crucified with him also, that the body of sin might utterly be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not be seruautes unto sin. For he
that is dead, is justified from sin. Wherefore, if we be dead with Christ,
we believe that we shall also live with him, knowing that Christ being raised
from death, dies no more. Death has no more power over him. For as touching
that he dyed, he dyed concerning sin once. And as touching that he lives, he
lives unto God. Likewise considre ye also, that ye are dead as touching sin,
but are alive unto God: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Gospel
Math. v.
Jesus said unto his disciples: except your righteousness exceade the
ryghteousnes of the Scribes and Phariseis, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Ye have heard that it was said unto them of old time. Thou shalt not
kill, whosoever kylleth, shall be in danger of judgment. But I say unto you:
that whosoever is angry with his brother (unadvisedly) shall be in danger of
judgment. And whosoever say unto his brother, Racha: shall be in danger of a
counsel. But whosoever, faith, thou fool: shall be in danger of hell fire.
Therefore, if thou offrest thy gift at the altar, and there remembrest that
thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thine offering before the
altar, and go thy way first and be reconciled to thy brother, and then come
and offer thy gift. Agree with thine aduersarye quickelye, whiles thou art in
the way with him, lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge,
and the judge deliver thee to the minister, and then thou be cast into prieson.
Verily I say unto thee: thou shalt not come out thence, till thou have paid
the uttermost farthing.

The seventh Sunday after Trinity.
The Collecte.
LOrd of al power and might, which art the auctour and geuer of al good
things: graffe in our hearts the love of thy name, increase in us true
religion, nouryshe us with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep us in the
same: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle
Romans vi.
I Speak groslye, because of the infirmity of your flesh. As ye have given
your members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity (from one iniquity to
an other:) even so now give over your me^bres servants unto righteousness, ye
ye may be sanctified. For when ye were servants of sin, ye were void of
righteousness. What fruit had you then in those things, whereof ye are now
ashamed? for the end of those things are death. But now are ye delivered from
sin, and made the servants of God, and have your fruit to be sanctified,
and the end everlasting life. For the reward of sin is death: but eternal
life is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Gospel
mar. viii.
IN those days, when there was a very great company, and had nothing to eat:
Jesus called his disciples unto him, and said unto them: I have compassion on
the people, because they have been now with me three days, and have nothing to
eat: And if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they shall faint
by the way: for diverse of them came from far. And his Disciples answered
him: where should a man have bread here in the wilderness, to satisfye these?
And he asked them: how many loaves have ye: They said, seven. And he
commanded the people to sit down on the ground. And he took the seven
loaves: And when he had given thanks, he brake, and gave to his disciples to
set before them. And they did set them before the people. And they had a
few final fishes. And when he had blessed, he commanded them also to be set
before them. And they did eat, and were suffised. And they took up of the
broken meat that was left, seven baskets full. And they that did eat, were
about four thousand. And he sent them away.

The eight Sundaye after Trinity.
The Collecte.
GOd, whose providence is never deceived: we humblye beseech thee, that thou will put away from us al hurtful things, and give those things, which be
profitable for us: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle
To. viii.
BRethren,we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh. For if
ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye. But if ye through the spirit do
mortyfye the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are lead by the
spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For ye have not received the spirit
of bondage to fear any more, but ye have received the spirit of adopcyon,
whereby ye cry: Abba father. The same spirit certifyeth our spirit, that we
are the sons of God. If we be sons, then are we also heirs: the, heirs I
mean of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, if so be that we suffer with
him, that we may be also glorified together with him.

The Gospel.
Mar. vii.
BEware of false prophets, which come to you in shepes clothing, but inwardly
they are rauenyng wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather
grapes of thorns? Or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree, brings
forth good fruits. But a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruits. A good
tree cannot bring forth had fruits, nether can a bad tree bring forth good
fruits. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is bewen down, and
cast into the fire. Wherefore, by their fruits ye shall know them. Not every
one that faith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but
he that does the will of my father which is in heaven, he shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

The ninth Sundaye after Trinity.
The Collecte.
Grant to us Lord we beseech thee, the spirit to think and do always such
things as be rightful: that we which cannot be without thee, may by thee be
hable to live according to thy will. Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle
i. Corin. x
Brethren, I would not that ye should beignoraunt, how that our fathers were al
under the cloud, and al passed through the sea, and were all baptized under
Moses in ye cloud, and in the sea, and did all eat of one spiritual meat,
and did all drink of one spiritual drink. And they drank of the spiritual
rock that followed them, which rock was Christ. But in many of them had God
no delight. For they were overthrown in the wilderness. These are ensamples to
us, that we should not lust after evil things, as they lusted. And that ye
should not be worshippers of images, as were some of them, according as it is
written. The people satte down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.
Nether let us be defiled with fornicacion, as some of them were defiled with
fornicacyon, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Nether let us
tempt Christ, as some of them tempted, and were destroyed of serpents. Nether
murmr ye, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. All
these things happened unto them for ensamples: But are written to put us in
remembrance, who^ the ends of the world are come upon. Wherefore, let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. There has none other temptacion
taken you, but such as followed the nature of man. But God is faithful, which
shall not suffer you to be tempted above your strength: but shall in the mids
of temptacion, make a way that ye may be hable to bear it.

The Gospel.
Luke. xvi
Jesus said to his disciples. There was a certain rich man, which had a
Steward, and the same was accused unto him, that he had wasted his goods. And
he called him, and said unto him: how is it that I hear this of thee? Give
accou^ptes of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward. The Steward
said within himself: What shall I do? for my master takes away from me the
Stewardshyppe. I cannot dig, and to beg I am ashamed. I wot what to do,
that when I am put out of the Stewardship, they may receive me into their
houses. So when he had called al his masters debtors together, he said unto ye
first: how much owe thou unto my master? And he said: an hundred tons of
oil. And he said unto him: take thy bill and sit down quickly, and write
fifty. The^ said he to another: how much owe thou? And he said: an hundred
quarters of wheat. He said unto him: take thy bill and write four score. And
the Lord commended the unjust Steward, because he had done wiselye. For the
children of this world are in their nation wiser then the children of light.
And I say unto you. Make you fre^des of the unrighteous Mammon, that when ye
shall have need, they may receue you into everlasting habitacions.

The tenth Sunday after Trinity.
The Collect.
Let thy merciful ears, O Lord, be open to the prayers of thy humble
servants: and that they may obtein their peticions, make them to ask such
things as shall please thee: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
i. Cori. xii
COncerning spiritual things (brethren) I would not have you ignoraunte. Ye
know that ye were Gentiles, and went your ways unto dumme images, even as ye
were led. Wherefore I declare unto you, that no man speaking by the spirit of
God, defyeth Jesus. Also no man can say that Jesus is the lord, but by the holy
ghost. There are diversities of gifts, yet but one spirit. And there are
differences of administracions, and yet but one Lord. And there are diverse
manners of operacio^s, and yet but one God, which works all in all. The gift
of the spirit is given to every man, to edifye withal. For to one is given
through the spirit, the utterance of wisdom: To another is given the
vtteraunce of knowledge by the same spirit. To another is given faith by
the same spirit. To another the gift of healing by the same spirit. To another
power to do miracles. To another to prophecy. To another judgeme^t to
discern spirit. To another diverse tongues. To another the interpretacion of
tongues. But these all works the self same spirit, deuyding to every man a
sauerall gift, even as he will.

The Gospel.
Luke. xix
ANd when he was come nere to Jerusalem, he beheld the city, and wept on it,
saying: If thou had known those things which belong unto thy peace, even
in this thy day thou would take heed. But now are they hid from thine
eyes: For the days shall come unto thee, that thy enemies shall cast a bank
about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and make
thee eue^ with the ground, and thy children which are in thee. And they shall
not leave in thee one stone upon an other, because thou know not the time of
thy visitacion. And he went into the Temple, and began to cast out them that
sold therein, and them that boughte, saying unto them. It is written, my house
is the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. And be taught
daily in the Temple.

The eleventh Sundaye after Trinity.
The Collect.
GOd which declarest thy almighty power, most chiefly in showing mercy and
pity: Give unto us abundau^tly thy grace, ye we running to thy promises, may
be made partakers of thy beaue^ly treasure: through Jesus Christ our lord.

The Epistle.
i. Cor. xv.
BRethren, as perteynyng to the gospel which I Preached unto you, which ye
have also accepted, and in the which ye continue, by the which ye are also
saved: I do you to wete after what manner I preached unto you, if ye keep it,
except ye have believed in vain. For first of all I delivered unto you that
which I received, how that Christ dyed for our sins, agreyng to the
scriptures: and that he was buried, and that he arose again the third day
according to the scriptures: And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the
twelve. After that he was seen of more then five hundredth brethren at once, of
which many remain unto this day, and many are fallen aslepe. After that
appeared he to James, then to all the Apostles. And last of all he was seen of
me, as of one that was borne out of due time. For I am the least of the
Apostles, which am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I have
persecuted the congregation of God. But by the grace of God, I am that I am.
And his grace which is in me, was not in vayn. But I labored more abundantly
then they all: yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me. Therefore,
whether it were I or they, so we preached, and so ye have believed.

The Gospel.
Lu. xviii
Christ told this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves, that they
were perfect, and despised other. Two men went up into the Temple to pray, the
one a pharisei, and the other a publicane. The Pharisei stood and prayed thus
with himself. God, I thank thee ye I am not as other men are, extorcioners,
unjust adulterers, or as this publica^. I fast twyse in ye weke. I give tithe
of all that I possess. And the publicane standing afar of, would not lift
up his eyes to heaven, but smote his breast, saying: God be merciful to me a
sinner. I tell you, this man departed home to his house justified more then the
other. For every man that exalts himself, shall be brought low. And he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

The twelfth Sundaye after Trinity.
The Collecte.
Almighty and everlasting God, which art always more ready to hear then we
to pray: And art wont to give more then either we desire or deserve: Power
down upon us the abundance of the mercy, forgeuyng us those things whereof
our conscience is afraid, and geuyng unto us, that, that our prayer dare not
presume to ask: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
ii. Cor. iii
SVche trust have through Christ to Godward, not that we are sufficient of
our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but if we be hable unto any
thing, the same comes of God, which has made us hable to minister the nawe
Testamente, not of the letter, but of the spirit. For the letter kills, but
the spirit gives life: If the ministracion of death through the letters
figured in stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not
behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenance (which glory is
done away:) why shall not the ministracion of the spirit be much more
glorious? for if the ministracion of condemnacyon be glorious, much more
does the ministracion of righteousness excede in glory.

The Gospel.
Mar. vii
Jesus departed from the coasts of Tire and Sydon, and came unto the sea of
Galile through the mids of the Coasts of the.x. cities. And they brought
unto him one that was deaffe, and had an impediment in his speech, and they
prayed him to put his hand upon him. And when he had taken him aside from the
people, he put his fyngers into his ears, and did spyt, and touched his tongue,
and looked up to heaven, and sighed, and said unto him: Ephata, that is to say:
be opened. And straight way his ears were opened, and the stryng of his
tongue was losed, and he spoke plain. And he commanded them that they should
tell no man. But the more he forbad them, so much the more great deal they
published, saying: He has done all things well, he has made both the deaffe
to hear, and the dumme to speak.

The.xiii. Sundaye after Trinity.
The Collecte.
Almighty and merciful god, of whose only gift it cummeth, that thy faithful
people do unto thee true and laudable service: grant we beseech thee, that
we may so tun to thy heavenly promyses, that we fail not finallye to
attain the same: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Gala. iii.
TO Abraham and his sede were the promyses made. He faith, not in his seeds,
many: but in thy sede, as of one, which is Christ. This I say, that the law
which began afterward, beyond.iiii. C. and xxx. years, does not disanull the
Testament that was confirmed before of god unto Christwarde, to make the promise
of none effect. For it ye inheritance come of the law, it comes not now of
promise. But God gave it to Abraham by promise. Wherefore the^ serves the law?
The law was added because of transgression (till the sede came, to whom the
promise was made:) and it was ordained by Angels in ye hand of a mediator. A
mediator is not a mediator of one: But god is one. Is the law the^ against the
promise of god? God forbid. For if there had been a law given which could
have given life, then no doubt righteousness should have come by the law. But
ye scripture concludes all things under sin, that the promise by the faith
of Jesus Christ, should be given to the^ that believe.

The Gospel.
Luke. x.
HAppy are the eyes which see ye things that ye see. For I tell you that many
Prophets and kings have desired to se those things which ye see, and have
not seen the^: and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard
them. And behold, a certain lawyer stood up and tempted him, saying: Master,
what shall I do to enherite eternal life? he said unto him: what is written in
the law? how read thou? and he answered, and said: Love the lord thy god
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength and with all
thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self. And he said unto him: Thou have
au^swered right. This do, and thou shall live. But he willing to iustitie
himself, said unto Ielus. And who is my neighbor? Jesus answered, and said: A
certain man descended from Jerusalem to Hiericho, and fell among thieves, which
robbed him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half
dead. And it chanced ye there came down a certain Priest thatsame way, and
when he sam him, he passed by. And likewise a Leuite, when he went nie to the
place, came and looked on him, and passed by. But a certain Samaritaine as he
iourneied came unto him: and when he saw him, he had compassion on him, and
went to, and bound up his wounds, and powered in oil and wine, and set him on
his own beast, and brought him to a common Inn, and made provision for him.
And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave the^ to the
host, and said unto him: Take cure of him, and whatsoever thou spendest more,
when I come again, I will recompense thee. Which now of these three thynkeste
thou was neighbor unto him that fell among the thieves? And he said unto him:
he that showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus to him: go, and do thou likewise.

The.xiiii. Sunday after Trinity.
The Collect.
Almighty and everlasting god, give unto us ye increase of faith, hope and
charity, and that we may obtain that which thou dooeste promise: make us to
love that which thou do command, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Gala. v.
I Say, walk in the spirit, and fulfill not the lust of the flesh. For the
flesh lusts contrary to the spirit, and ye spirit contrary to ye flesh,
these are contrary one to the other, so ye ye can not do whatsoever ye would.
But and if ye be led of the spirit, then are ye not under the law. The
deeds of the flesh are manifest, which are these: adulterye, fornicacio^,
uncleanness, wantonness, worshipping of images witchecraft, hatred, variaunce,
zele, wrath, strife, sedicio^s, sects, envying, murder, dronkennes, gluttonye,
and such like. Of the which I tell you before, as I have told you in times
past, that they which commit such things, shall not be inheritours of the
kingdom of God. Contrarily, the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace,
long suffering, gentilnes, goodness, faithfullnes, mekenes, temperaunce. Against
such there is no law. They truly that are Christ's, have crucified the
flesh with the affeccions and lusts.

The Gospel.
Luke. xvii
ANd it chanced as Jesus went to Jerusalem, that he passed through Samaria
and Galile. And as he entered into a certain town, there met him ten me^ that
were lepers, which stood afar of and put forth their voices, and said: Jesus
Master have mercy upon us. When he saw them, he said unto them: go show your
selves unto the Priests. And it came to pass, that as they went they were
cleansed. And one of them, when he saw that he was cleansed, turned back again,
and with a loud voice praised God, and fell down on his face at his fete, and
gave him thanks. And the same was a Samaritain. And Jesus answered, and said:
Are there not ten cleansed? but where are those nine? There are not found that
returned again to give God praise, save only this stranger. And be said
unto him: Arise, go thy way, thy faith has made thee whole.

The.xv. Sunday after Trinity.
The Collect.
Keep we beseech thee, O Lord, thy Church with thy perpetual mercy: and
because the frailty of man, without thee, cannot but fall: keep us ever by thy
help, and lead us to al things profitable to our salvation, through Jesus
Christ out Lord, Amen.

The Epistle.
Gala. vi.
YE see how large a letter I have written to you with mine own hand. As many
as desire with outward apperaunce to please carnally, the same constrayne you
to be circumcysed, only lest they should suffer persecucion for the cross of
Christ. For they themselves which are circumcised, keep not the law, but
desire to have you circumcised, ye they might rejoice in your flesh. God
forbid that I should rejoice, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto ye world. For in Christ
Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing at al, nor uncircumcision, but a
new creature. And as many as walk according unto this rule, peace be on the^,
and mercy, and upon Israel that pertains to God. From henceforth, let no man
put me to business: for I bear in my body the marks of the lord Jesus.
Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.

The Gospel.
Mat. vi.
NO man can serve two Masters: for either he shall hate the one, and love the
other, or else lean to the one, and despise ye other: ye cannot serve god and
Mammo^. Therefore I say unto you: be not careful for your life, what ye shall
eat or drink, nor yet for your body, what raymente you shall put on. Is
not the life more worth them meat? and the body more of value then raymente?
Behold the fowls of ye air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
carry into the barnes: and your heavenly father fedeth them. Are ye not much
better then they? Which of you (by taking careful thought) can add one
cubyte unto his stature. And why care ye for raymente? Considre the lilies of
the field, how they grow: They labor not, neither do they spinne. And yet
I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his royalty, was not clothed like one
of these. Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field (which though it
stand to day, is to morrow cast into the furnace:) shall he not much more
do the same for you, O ye of little faith? Therefore take no thought, saying:
what shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed?
after all these things do the Gentiles seek. For your heavenly father knows
that ye have need of all these things. But rather seek ye first the kingdom
of God, and the righteousness thereof, and al these things shall be ministered
unto you. Care not then for the morrow, for to morrow day shall care for it
self: sufficyente unto the day, is the travail thereof.

The.xvi. Sundaye after Trinity.
The Collecte.
LOrd we beseech thee, let thy continual pity cleanse and defend thy
congregation: and because it cannot continue in safety without thy succoure,
preserve it evermore by thy help and goodness: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Ephe. iii.
I Desire that you faint not because of my tribulacions that I suffer for your
sakes, which is your praise. For this cause I bow my knees unto the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which is father of all that called father in heaven
and in earth, that he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory,
that ye may be strengthed with might by his spirit in the inner man, that
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded
in love, might be hable to comprehend with all Saints, what is the bredthe,
length, depthe, and height, and to know the excellent love of the knowledge of
Christ, that ye might be fulfilled with all fullness, which comes of God.
Unto him that is hable to do excedyng aboundauntly above all that we ask or
think, according to the power that works in us, be praise in the
congregation by Christ Jesus, throughout all generacyons from time to time.
Amen.

The Gospel.
Luke. vii
ANd it fortuned, that Jesus went into a city called Naim, and many of his
disciples went with him and much people. When he came nigh to the gate of the
city: behold, there was a dead man carried out, which was the only son of
his mother, and she was widow, and much people of the city was with her. And
when the Lord saw her, had compassion on her, and said unto her: weep not. And
he came nigh and touched the coffen, and they that bare him stood still. And he
said: young man, I say unto thee, arise. And he that was dead sat up, and
beegan to speak. And he delivered him to his mother. And there came a fear on
them all. And they gave the glory unto God, saying: A great Prophet is risen up
among us, and God, has visited his people. And this rumoure of him went
forth throughout all Iewry, and throughout all the regions which lie round
about.

The.xvii. sundaye after Trinity.
The Collecte.
LOrd, we pray thee that thy grace may always prevent and follow us, and make
us continually to be given to all good works: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Ephe. iiii
I (Which am a priesoner of the Lords) exhort you, that ye walk worthy of
the vocacyon wherewith ye are called, with all lowlines and mekenes, with
humblenes of mind, forbearyng one another through love, and be dilligent to
keep the unity of the spirit, through the bond of peace, being one body
and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling. Let there
be but one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, which
is above all, and througbe all, and in you all.

The Gospel.
Luke. xiii
IT chanced that Jesus went into the house of one of the chief Phariseis, to
eat bread on the Sabbath day, and they watched him. And behold, there was a
certain man before him which had the dropsye. And Jesus answered, and spoke
unto the Lawiers and Phariseis, saying: Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath
day? And they held their peace. And he took him and healed him, and let him
go, and answered them, saying: which of you shall have an Ass or an Ox
fallen into a pit, and will not straight way pull him out on the Sabbath day?
And they could not answer him again to these things. He put forth also a
similitude to the geastes, when he marked how they preaced to be in the highest
roumes, and said unto them: when thou art bidden to a wedding of any man, sit
not down in the hiest room, lest a more honorable man then thou be bidde^ of
him, and he (that bad him and thee) come and say to thee: give this man room,
and thou begin with shame to take ye lowest room. But rather when thou art
bidden, go and sit in the lowest room, that when he that bad thee comes, he
may say unto thee: friend, sit up hyer. Then shall thou have worship in the
presence of them that sit at meat with thee. For whosoever exalts himself,
shall be brought low, and he that humbles himself, shall be exalted.

The.xviii. Sundaye after Trinity.
The Collect.
LOrd, we beseech thee grant thy people grace to avoid the infeccions of the
devil, and with pure heart and mind, to follow thee, the only god: through
Jesus Christ our lord.

The Epistle.
i. Corin. i
I Thank my god always on your behalf, for the grace of god which is given
you by Jesus. Christ, that in all things year made rich by him, in all
vtteraunce, and in all knowledge: by the which things the testimonye of Jesus
Christ was confyrmed in you, so that ye are behind in no gift, waytyng for
the appearyng of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall also strength you, to
the end that you may be blameies in the day of the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

The Gospel.
Mat. xxii
WHen the Phariseis had heard that Jesus did put the Saduceis to silence, they
came together: and one of them (which was a doctor of law) asked him a
question, tempting him, and saying: Master, which is the greatest
commandment in the law? Jesus said unto him: Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is
the first and greatest commandment. And the second is like unto it: Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. In these two commandments hang all the
law and the Prophets. While the Phariseis were gathered together, Jesus asked
them, saying: what think ye of Christ? whose son is he? They said unto him:
the son of David. He said unto them: how then does David in spirit call him
Lord, saying: The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand till I
make thine enemies thy fotestole. If David then call him Lord, how is he then
his son? And no man was hable to answer him any thing, neither durst any man
(from that day forth) ask him any more questions.

The.xix. Sundaye after Trinity.
The Collect.
O God, forasmuch as without thee, we are not hable to please thee: Grant
that the working of thy mercy, may in all things direct and rule out hearts:
Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Ephesians. iiii.
THis I say and testify through the Lord, that ye hencefoorthe walk not as
other Gentyles walk, in vanitye of their mind, while they are blinded in
their understanding, being far from a Godly life, by the means of the
ignorance that is in them, and because of the blyndnesse of their hearts,
which being past repentance, have given themselves over unto wantonness, to
work all manner of uncleanness, even with gredines. But ye have not so learned
Christ. If so be that ye have heard of him, and have been taught in him, as
the truth is in Jesus (as concerning ye conversation in times past) to lay from
you the old man, which is corrupt, according to the deceiuable lusts. To be
renewed also in the spirit of your mind, and to put on that new man which
after God is shapen in righteousness and true holiness. Wherefore put a way lying,
and speak every man truth unto his neighbor, forasmuch as we are members one
of another. Be angry and sin not: Let not the sun go down upon your
wrath, neither give place to the backbyter. Let him that stole, steal no more:
but let him rather labor with his hands the thing which is good, that he may
give unto him that needs. Let no filthy communicacion proceed out of your
mouth, but that which is good to edifye withal, as often as need is, that it may
minster grace unto the heaters. And grieve not the holy spirit of God, by
whom ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. Let all bitterness, and
fiercenes, and wrath, and roaryng, and cursed speaking, be put away from you,
with all maliciousnes. Be ye courteous one to another, merciful, forgeuyng one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgeuen you.

The Gospel.
Math. ix.
Jesus entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own city: And
behold, they brought to him a man sick of the paulsey, lying in a bed. And
when Jesus saw the faith of them, he said to the sick of the Paulsey: Son,
be of good there, thy sins be forgeuen thee. And behold, certain of the
Scribes said within themselves this man blasphmeth. And when Jesus saw their
thoughts, he said: wherefore think ye evil in your hearts? Whether is it
easier to say, thy sins be forgeuen thee, or to say, arise and walk? But
that ye may know that the son of man has power to forgive sins in
earth. Then says he to the sick of the Paulsey: Arise, take up thy bed and
go unto thine house. And he arose and departed to his house: But the people
that saw it, meruayled, and glorified God, which has given such power unto
men.

The.xx. Sundaye after Trinity.
The Collecte.
ALmighty and merciful God, of thy bountiful goodness Keep us from all things
that may hurt us: that we being ready both in body and soul, may with fre
hearts accomplish those things that thou would have done: through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Ephe. v
Take heed therefore, how ye walk, circumspectly, not as unwise, but as wise
men, redemyng the time, because the days are evil. Wherefore be ye not
unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is, and be not dronken with
wine, wherein is excess. But be filled with the spirit, speaking unto your
selves in Psalms and Nimnes, and spiritual songs, syngyng and making melody
to the lord in your hearts, giving thanks always for all things unto God
the father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ: submitting your selves one
to another in the fear of God.

The Gospel.
Mat. xxii
Jesus said to his disciples: The kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that
was a King, which made a marriage for his son, and sent furthe his servants
to call them that were bydden to the wedding, and they would not come. Again
he sent forth other servants, saying: Tell them which are bidden: beeholde,
I have prepared my diner, mine Oxen and my fatlynges are killed, and all
things are ready, come unto the manage. But they made light of it, and went
their ways: One to his farm place, another to his marchaundise, and the
remnaunt took his servants, and entreated them shamefully, and flewe them.
But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth, and sent forth his men of
war, and destroyed those murderers, and bre^t up their city. Then said he to
his servants: the marriage in deed is prepared, but they which were bidden,
were not worthy: Go ye therefore out into the hye ways, and as many as ye
find, bid them to the marriage. And the servants went forth into the hye
ways, and gathered together all, as many as they could find, both good and
bad, and ye wedding was furnished with geastes. Then the king came in to see
the geastes: and when he spyed there a man, which had not on a wedding
garmente, he said unto him: friend, how came thou in hither, not having a
wedding garment? And he was even specheles. Then said the king to the
ministers: take and bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness,
there shall be weeping and gnashyng of teeth. For many be called, but few are
chosen.

The.xxi. Sundaye aftter Trinity.
The Collecte.
Grant we beseech thee, merciful Lord, to thy faithful people, pardon and
peace, that they may be cleansed from all their sins, and serve thee with a
quiet mind: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Ephe. vi.
MY brethren, be strong through the Lord, and through the power of his
might: Put on all the armor of God, that ye may stand against all the
assaults of the devil: for we wrestle not against blood and flesh, but
against rule, against power, against worldly rulers, even governors of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual craftines in heavenly things.
Therefore, take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be hable to
resist in the evil day, and stand perfect in all things. Stand therefore,
and your loins gyrd with the truth, having on the brestplate of
righteousness and having shoes on your feet, that ye may be prepared for
the gospel of peace. Above all, take to you the shyelde of faith, wherewith
ye may quench all the fyery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of
salvation, and the sweord of the spirit, which is the word of God. And pray
always with all manner of prayer and supplycacion in the spirit, and watch
thereunto with all instaunce and supplicacion, for all saints and for me, that
vtteraunce may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth freely, to utter the
secrets of my gospel (whereof I am a messenger in bonds) that therein I may
speak freely, as I ought to speak.

The Gospel.
John. iiii
THere was a certain ruler, whose son was sick at Capernau^. A ssone as
the same heard, that Jesus was come out of Iewry into Galile, he went unto him,
and besought him that he would come down and heal his son. For he was even
at the point of death. Then said Jesus unto him: except ye see signs and
wonders, ye will not believe. The ruler said unto him: Sir, come down or ever
that my son dye. Jesus says unto him: Go thy way, thy son lives. The
man beeleued the word that Jesus had spoken unto him: and he went his way. And
as he was going down, the servants met him, and told him saying: thy son
lives. Then enquired be of the^ the hour when he began to amend. And they
said unto him: yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him. So ye
father knew that it was the same hour in the which Jesus said unto him, thy
son lives: and he believed, and all his household. This is again the second
miracle that Jesus did, when he was come out of Iewry into Galile.

The.xxii. Sundaye after Trinity.
The Collecte.
Lord, we beseech thee to keep thy household the church, in continual
godliness, that through thy proteccyon, it may be free from all adversities,
and deuoutlye given to serve thee in good works, to the glory of thy name:
Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Philip. i.
I Thank my God with all remembrance of you always in all my prayers for you,
and pray with gladness, because ye are come into the fellowship of the gospel,
from the firsteday until now. And am surely certified of this, that he which
has begone a good work in you, shall perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ as it becomes me, that I should so judge of you all, because I have
you in my heart: forasmuch as ye are al companions of grace with me, eue^ in my
bonds, and in the defending and establishing of the gospel: for god is my
record how greatly I long after you all, from the very heart root in Jesus
Christ. And this I pray, that your love may increase yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all understanding, that ye may accept the things that are
most excellent, yt ye may be pure and such as offend no man, until the day of
Christ, being filled with the fruit of righteousness, which comes by Jesus
Christ, unto the glory and praise of God.

The Gospel.
Matthew. xviii.
PEter said unto Jesus: Lord, how often shall I forgive my brother if he sin
against me, till seven times? Jesus says unto him: I say not unto the, until
seven times, but seventy times seven times. Therefore is the kingdom of heaven
lykened unto a certain man: that was a king, which would take accoumptes of
his servants. And when he had begone to reckon, one was brought unto him,
which ought him ten thousand tale^tes: but forasmuch as he was not hable to
pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and children, and all
that he had, and payment to be made. The servant fell down, and besought him,
saying: Sir, have patience with me, and I will pay thee al. Then had the lord
piety on that servant, and losed him, and forgave him the debte. So the same
servant went out, and found one of his fellows which ought him an hundred
pence, and he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying: pay that
thou owe. And his fellow fell down and besought him, saying: have patience with
me, and I will pay thee all. And he would not, but went and cast him into
prieso^, til he should pay the debte. So when his fellows saw what was done
they were very sorry, and came and told unto their Lord all that had happened.
Then his Lord called him, and said unto him. O thou ungracious servant, I
forgave thee all that debte when thou desiredst me: should not thou also have
had compassion on thy fellow; even as I had piety on thee? And his lord was
wroth, and delivered him to the Tailers, til he should pay all that was due
unto him. So likewise shall my heavenly father do also unto you, if ye from
your hearts forgive not (every one his brother) their trespasses.

The.xxiii. Sunday after Trinity
The Collecte.
GOd our refuge and strength, which art the author of al godlynes, be ready to
hear the devout prayers of the Church: and grant that those things which
we ask faithfully, we may obtain effectually: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Phil. iii.
BRethren, be folowers together of me, and look on them which walk even so
as ye have us for an ensample. For many walk (of who^ I have told you often,
and now tell you weping) that they are the enemies of ye cross of Christ whose
end is damnacio^ whose belly is their God, and glory to their shame, which are
worldly minded. But our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the
savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall change our vile body, ye he
may make it like unto his glorious body: according to the working, whereby he
is hable also to subdue all things unto himself.

The Gospel.
Mat. xxii
THen the phariseis weut out, and took counsel how they might ta^gle him in
his words. And they sent out unto him their disciples with Herodes servants,
saying: Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of god
truly, nether carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the outward
apearau^nce of men. Tei us therefore, how think thou? Is it lawful that
tribute be given unto Caesar, or not? But Jesus perceiving their wickendnes
said: why te^pt ye me ye ypocrites? Show me the tribute money. And they took
him a penny. And he said unto the^: whose is this image and superscripcion? they
said unto him: Ceasars. Then said he unto them give therefore unto Ceasar, the
things which are Ceasars: and unto god, those things which are gods. When
they heard these words, they merueiled, and left him, and went their way.

The.xxiiii. Sunday after Trinity.
The Collecte.
LOrd, we beseech thee assoile thy people from their offenses: that through thy
bountiful goodness, we may be delivered from the bands of all those sins,
which by our frailty we have committed: Grant this. etc.

The Epistle.
Colossi. i.
WE give thanks to God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, always for you
in our prayers: for we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love
which ye bear to all saints, for the hopes sake which is laid up in store
for you in heaven: of which hope ye heard before by the true word of the
gospel, which is come unto you even as it as, fruitful, and grows as it is
also among you, from the day in the which ye heard of it, and had experience
in the grace of god though ye truth, as ye learned of Epaphra our dear fellow
servant, which is for you a faithful minister of Christ, which also
declared unto us your love which ye have in ye spirit. For this cause we also,
ever sense the day we heard of it, have not ceased to pray for you, and to
desire that ye might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will, in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding, that ye might walk worthi of the Lord,
that in all things ye may please, being fruitful in all good works, and
increasyng in the knowledge of God, strengthed with all might, through his
glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering, with joyefulnes, giving
thanks unto the father, which has made us mete to be partakers of the
inheritance of saints in light.

The Gospel.
Math. ix.
While Jesus spoke unto ye people: behold, there came a certain ruler and
worshipped him, saying: my daughter is even now deceased, but come and lay thy
hand upon her, and she shall live. And Jesus arose and followed him, and so did
his disciples. And behold, a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood
twelve years, came behind him and touched the hemme of his vesture. For she
said within her self: If I may touch but even his vesture only, I shall be
safe. But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said: daughter, be
of good comfort, thy faith has made thee safe. And the woman was made whole
even the same time. And when Jesus came into the rulers house, and saw the
mynstrelles and people making a noise, he said unto them: geat you hence, for
the maid is not dead, but slepeth. And they laughed him to scorn. But when
the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the hand, and said:
damsel arise. And the damosel arose. And this noise was abroad in all that
land.

The.xxv. Sunday after Trinity.
The Collect.
STiere up we beseech thee, O lord, the wills of thy faithful people: that
they plenteously bringing forth the fruit of good works, may of thee be
plenteouslye rewarded: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Ier. xxiii.
Behold, the time comes, says the Lord, that I will raise up the righteous
branch of David, which king shall bear rule, and he shall prosper with
wisdom, and shall set up equity and righteousness again in earth. In his
tune shall Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell without fear. And this is
the name that they shall call him, even the LORD our righteousness: and
therefore behold, the time comes says the Lord, that it shall be no more
sayede, the Lord lives which brought the children of Israel out of the
land of Egipte: But the Lord lives which brought forth and lead the seed
of the house of Israel out of the North land, and from al contreyes where I
have scattered them, and thye shall dwell in their own land again.

The Gospel.
John. vi.
WHen Jesus lift up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he says
unto Philip: whence shall we bye bread that these may eat? This he said to
prove him, for he himself knew what he would do. Philip answered him: two
hundredth penyworth of bread are not sufficient for them, that every man may
take a little. One of his disciples (Andrew, Suno^ Peter's brother) said unto
him. There is a lad here, which has five barley loaves and two fishes: but
what are they among so many? And Jesus said: make ye people sit down: There
was much grass in ye place. So the men sat down, in number about five
thousand. And Jesus took the bread, and when he had given thanks, he gave to
the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set down. And likewise of
the fisshes as much as they would. When they had eaten enough, he says unto
his disciples: Gather up the broken meat which remains, that nothing be
lost. And they gathered it together, and filled twelve baskets with the broken
meat of the five barley loaued, which broken meat remained unto them that
had eaten. Then those men (when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did) said:
this is of a truth the same prophet that should come into the world.

If there be any more Sundaies before Aduente Sunday, to supply the same, shall be
taken the service of some of those Sundaies that were omitted between the
Epiphanie and Septuagesima.

Saint Andrews day.
The Collect.
Almighty god, which did give such grace unto thy holy Apostle Saint
Andrewe, that he redely obeyed the calling of thy son Jesus Christ, and
followed him without delay: Grant unto us al, that we being called by thy
holy word, may forth with give over our selves, obedyently to follow thy holy
commandments: through the same Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Roma. x.
IF thou knowledge with thy mouth that Jesus is the lord, and believe in thy
heart that god raised him up from death: thou shalt be safe. For to believe
with the heart justifies, and to knoweledge with the mouth, makes a man
safe. For the scripture faieth: whosoever belieueth on him, shall not be
confounded. There is no difference between the Jew and the Gentile. For one is
Lord of all, which is rich unto all that call upon him. For whosoever does call
on the name of the Lord, shall be safe. How then shall they call on him, on whom
they have not believed? How shall they believe on him, on whom they have not
heard? How shall they hear without a preacher? And how sall they preach,
without they be sent? As it is written: how beautiful are the fete of them
which bring tidinges of peace, and bring tydinges of good things? But the
have not all obeyed to the gospel. For Esaias says: Lord, who has believed our
sayings? so then faith comes by hearing, and hearing comes by the word of
God. But I ask: have they not heard? no doubt their sound went out into all
lands, and their words into the ends of world. But I demand whether Israel
did know or not? First Moses says: I will provoke you to envy, by them that
are no people, by a foolish nation I will anger you. Esaias after that is bold,
and says: I am found of them that sought me not: I am many feste unto them
that asked not after me. But against Israel he says: All day long have I
stretched forth my hands unto a people that belieueth not, but speaks
against me.

The Gospel.
Mat. iiii.
AS Jesus walked by the Sea of Galile, he saw two brethren: Simon which was
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, castyng a net into the Sea, (for they
were fisshers) and he says unto them: follow me, and I will make you to become
fisshers of men. And they straight way left their nets and followed him. And
when he was gone forth from thence, he saw other two brethen, James the son
of zebede, and John his brother, in the ship with zebede their father mendyng
their nets, and he called them. And they immediately left the ship and their
father, and followed him.

Saint Thomas the Apostle.
The Collecte.
ALmighty everliving god, which for the more confirmacion of the faith, did
suffer thy holy Apostle Thomas to be doubtful in thy sons resurreccion:
grant us so perfectly, and without all doubt to believe in thy son Jesus
Christ, that our faith in thy sight never be reproved: hear us, O lord through
the same Jesus Christ: to whom with thee and the holy ghost be all honor. etc.

The Epistle.
Ephe. ii.
Now are ye not strangers, nor foreyners, but citezens with the saints, and
of the household of God: and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Chrst himself being the head corner stone: in whom what
building soever is coupled together, it grows unto an holy temple of the
Lord: in whom also ye are built together, to be an habitacion of God through
the holy ghost.

The Gospel.
John. xx.
THomas one of the twelve, which is called Didimus, was not with them when
Jesus came. The other disciples therefore said unto him: we have seen the Lord.
But he said unto them: except I see in his hands the prynte of the nails, and
put my finger into the printe of the nails and thruste my hand into his side,
I will not believe. And after eight days, again his disciples were within, and
Thomas with the^. Then came Jesus when the doors were shut, and stood in the
mids and said: Peace be unto you. And after that, he said to Thomas: bring
the finger hither, and see my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust
it into my side, and be not faythlesse but beleuyng. Thomas answered, and
said unto him: my lord and my god. Jesus said unto him: Thomas, because thou
have see^ me, thou have believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet
have beeleued. And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his
disciples, which are not written in this book. These are written that ye might
believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God, and that (in believing) ye might
have life through his name.

The conversion of Saint Paul.
The Collect.
GOd which have taught all the world, through yt preaching of thy blessed
Apostle Saint Paul: Grant we beseech thee, that we which have his wonderful
conuertion in remembrance, may follow and fulfill thy holy doctrine that he
taught: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Acts. ix.
ANd Saul yet breathyng out threatninges and slaughter against the disciples
of the lord: went unto ye hie priest, and desired of him letters to carye to
Damasco to the Sinagoges, yt if he found any of this way (were they men or
women) he might bring them bound to Jerusalem. And when he iourneyed, it
fortuned yt as he was come nigh to Damasco, suddenly there shined round about
him a light from heaven, and he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying to
him: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said: what art thou lord? And
the Lord said: I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. It is hard for thee to kick
against the prick. And he both trembling and astonished, said: Lord, what will thou have me to do? And the Lord said unto him: arise, and go into the
city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do. The men which iourneyed
with him, stood amassed, hearing a voice but seeying no man. And Saul arose
from the earth, and when he opened his eyes, he saw no man: But they lead
him by the hand, and brought him into Damasco. And he was three days
without syghte, and neither did eat nor drink. And there was a certain
Disciple at Damasco, named Ananias: and to him said the Lord in a vision:
Ananias? and he said: behold, I am here Lord. And the lord said unto him:
arise and go into the street (which is called straight) and seek in the house
of Judas, after one called Saul of Tharsus. For behold, he prays, and has
seen in a vision, a man named Ananias, coming in to him and puttyng his hands
on him, that he might receive his sight. Then Ananias answered: Lord, I have
heard by many of this man, how much evil he has done to thy saints at
Jerusalem: and here he has auctority of the hie priests, to bind all that
call on thy name. The Lord said unto him: go thy way, for he is a chosen
vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the
children of Israel. For I will show him how great things he must suffer for
my names sake. And Ananias went his way, and entered into the house, and put his
hands on him, and said: brother Saul, the lord that appeared unto thee in the
way as thou came, has sent me, that thou might receive thy sight, and be
filled with the holy ghost. And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had
been scales, and he received sight, and arose, and was baptized, and received
meat, and was comforted. The^ was Saul a certain days with the Disciples
which were at Damasco. And straight way he preached Chrste in the Sinagogues,
how that he was the son of God. But all that heard him were amassed, and said:
is not this he that spoiled them which called on this name in Jerusalem, and
came hither for that intent, that he might bring them bound unto thehye
Priests? But Saul increased the more in strength and confounded the Jews
which dwelt at Damasco, affirming that this was very Christ.

The Gospel.
Mat. xix.
PEter answered, and said unto Jesus: behold, we have forsaken all and followed
thee: what shall we have therefore? Jesus said unto them: Verily I say unto you,
that when the son of man shall sit in the seat of his Majesty, ye that have
followed me in the regeneracion, shall sit also upon.xii seats, and judge the
twelve tribes of Israel. And every one that forsakes house, or brethren, or
sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names
sake, shall receive an hundredth fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. But
many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be first.

The purificacion of Saint Mary the virgin.
The Colleste.
Almighty and everlasting God, we humblye beeseche thy Majesty, that as thy
only begotten son was this day presented in the Temple, in substance of
our flesh: so grant that we may be presented unto thee with pure and clear
minds: By Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
The same that is appointed for the Sundaye.

The Gospel.
Luke. ii.
WHen the time of their Purificacion (after the law of Moses) was come, they
brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord (as it is written in the
law of the Lord: every man child that first opens the matrix, shall be called
holy to the Lord:) and to offer (as it is said in the law of the Lord) a
pair of turtle Dooues, or two young Pigeons. And behold, there was a man in
Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon. And the same man was just and godly, and
looked for the consolacyon of Israel, and the holy ghost was in him. And an
answer had he received of the holy ghost, that he should not see death, except
he first saw the Lord Christ. And he came by inspiracyon into the temple.

Saint Mathies day.
The Collecte.
ALmightye God, which in the place of the traitor Judas dydst chose thy
faithful servant Mathie to be of the number of thy twelve Apostles: Grant
that thy church being always preserved from false Apostles, may be ordered and
guyded by faithful and true pastors: through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Acts. i.
IN those days Peter stood up in the mids of the disciples, and said: the
number of names that were together, were about an hundred and.xx. Ye men and
brethren, this scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the holy ghost,
through the mouth of David, spoke before of Judas, which was guide to them
that took Jesus. For he was noumbred with us, and had obtained fellowship in
this ministracion. And the same has now possessed a plat of ground, with the
reward of iniquity: and when he was hanged, burst a sunder in the mids, and
al his bowels gushed out. And it was known unto all the inhabiters of
Jerusalem: insomuche that the same field is called in their mother tongue,
Acheldama, that is to say: the bloody field. For it is written in the book of
Psalms: his habitacyon be void, and no man be dwelling therein, and his
bisshoprike let another take. Wherefore, of these men which have companied with
us (all the time that the Lord Jesus had al his conuersacio^ among us,
beginning at the Baptism of John unto that same day, that he was taken up from
us) must one be ordained, to be a witness with us of his resurreccion. And they
appointed two, Joseph which is called Barsabas (whose surname was Iustus) and
Mathias. And when they prayed, they said: Thou Lord which know the hearts
of all men, show whether of these two thou have chosen, that he may take the
room of this ministracio^ and Apostleship, from which Judas by transgression
fell, that he might go to his own place. And they gave forth their lottes, and
the lot fell on Mathias, and he was coumpted with the eleven Apostles.

The Gospel.
Math. xi.
IN that time Jesus answered, and said: I thank thee (O father) Lord of
heaven and earth, because thou haste hyd these things from the wise and
prudente, and have showed them unto babes: verily father, even so was it thy
good pleasure. All things are given unto me of my father, And no man knows
the son, but the father: neither knows any man the father, save the son,
and he to who^soeuer the son will open him. Come unto me al ye that labor and
are laden, and I will ease you. Take my yoke upon you and learn of me, for I am
meke and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls: for my yoke
is easy, and my burden is light.

The annunciacion of the virgin Mary.
The Collecte.
WE beseech thee lord, power thy grace into our hearts, that as we have known
Christ thy sons incarnacyon, by the message of an Angle, so by his cross and
passion, we may be brought unto the glory of his resurreccyon: Through the
same Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Esaias. vii
GOd spoke once again unto Ahaz, saying: require a token of the Lord thy god,
whether it be toward the depthe beneathe, or toward the heyght above. Then
said Ahaz: I will require none, nether will I tempt the Lord. And he said:
hearken to, ye of the house of David: is it not enough for you, that ye be
grievous unto men, but ye must grieve my GOD also? And therefore the Lord shall
give you a token: Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and thou
his mother shall call his name Emanuel. Butter and honey shall he eat, that he
may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good.

The Gospel.
Luke. i.
ANd in the sixth month, the Aungel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of
Galili, named Nazareth, to a virgin spoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of
the house of David, and the virgins name was Mary. And the Aungel went in unto
her, and said: Hail full of grace ye lord is with thee: blessed art thou among
women. When she saw him, she was abashed at his saying, and cast in her mind
what manner of salutacion that should be. And the Aungle said unto her: fear
not Mary, for thou have found grace with God. Behold, thou shalt conceive in
thy womb, and bear a son, and shall call his name Jesus: He shall be great,
and shall be called the son of the highest. And the Lord God shall give unto
him, the seat of his father David, and he shall reygne over the house of Jacob
for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be none end. Then said Mary to the
Aungel: How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the Aungle au^swered,
and said unto her: the holy ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
hiest shall ouershadow thee. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be borne,
shall be called the son of God. And behold thy Cosyn Elizabeth, she has also
conceived a son in her age. And this is the sixthe month, which was called
baren, for with God nothing shall be impossible. And Mary said: behold the
handmayde of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word. And the Aungel
departed from her.

Saint Marks day.
The Collecte.
ALmighty god, which have instructed thy holy church, with the heavenly
doctrine of thy Euangeliste Saint Mark; give us grace so to be established
by thy holy gospel, that we be not like children, carried a way with every
blast of vain doctrine: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Ephe. iiii
Unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. Wherefore he says: when he went upon hie, heled catiuitie captive,
and gave gifts unto men. That he ascended, whatmeaneth it, but that he also
descended first into the lowest parts of the earth? he that descended, is
even the same also that ascended up above all heavens, to fulfill all things.
And the very same made some Apostles, some prophets, some Euangelystes, some
shepeheardes and teachers, to the edifying of the saints, to the work and
administracion, even to the edifying of the body of Christ, till we al come to
the unity of the faith, and knowledge of the sone of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the full perfect age of Christ. That we henceforth should
be no more children, waueryng and carried about which every wind of doctrine, by
the wylines of men, through craftines whereby they lay awayt for us to deceive
us. But let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow in him which
is the head, even Christ: in whom if all the body be coupled and knytte
together, throughout every ioynte, where with one ministers to another
(according to the operacion, as every part has his measure) he increases the
bodi, unto the edifiing of it self through love.

The Gospel.
John. xv
I Am the true vine, and my father is a husbandeman. Every branch that
bears not fruit in me, he will take away. And every branch that bears
fruit, will he pourge, that it may bring forth more fruit. Now are ye
clean through the words which I have spoken unto you. Bide in me, and I in
you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it bide in the
vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the
branches. He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much
fruit. For without me, can ye do nothing. If a man bide not in me, he is
cast forth as a branch, and is withered: And me^ gather them, and cast them
into the fire, and they burn. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you,
ask what ye will, and it shall be done for you. Herein is my father glory fyed,
that ye bear much fruit, and become my disciples. As the father has loved
me, even so also have I loved you. Continue you in my love. If ye keep my
commandments, ye shall bide in my love, even as I have kept my fathers
commandments, and abide in his love. These things have I spoken unto you,
that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full.

Saint Philip and James.
The Collecte.
Almighty God, whom truly to know is everlasting life: grant us perfectly
to know thy Son Jesus Christ, to be the way, the truth and the life, as
thou haste taught Saint Philip, and other the apostles: through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

The Epistle.
James. i.
James the servant of God, and of the lord Jesus Christ, sends greetyng to
the twelve Tribes which are scattered abroad. My brethren, count it for an
excedyng joy, when ye fall into diverse temptacyons. Knowing this, that the
trying of your faith gendreth patience, and let patience have her perfect
work, that ye may be perfect and sound, lackyng nothing. If any of you lack
wisdom, let him ask of him that gives it: even God, which gives to all men
indifferenly, and casts no man in the teeth, and it shall be given him. But let
him ask in faith, and waver not: for he that doubts, is like a wave of the
Sea, which is tossed of ye winds, and carried with violence. Nether let that man
think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. A wavering minded man, is
unstable in all his ways. Let the brother which is of low degree, rejoice
when he is exalted. Again, let him that is rich, rejoice when he is made
low. For even as the flower of the grass, shall he pass away. For as the
sun ryseth with heat, and the grass withers, and his flower falls away,
and the beauty of the fasshion of it perissheth: even so shall the rich man
perish in his ways. Happy is the man that endures temptacion: for when he is
tried, he shall receive the croune of life, which the Lord has promised to
them that love him.

The Gospel.
Ioh. xiiii.
ANd Jesus said unto his disciples: let not your hearts be troubled. Ye
believe in God, believe also in me. In my fathers house are many mansions. If it
were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I
go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you, even unto
my self: that where I am, there may ye be also. And whyther I go, you know,
and the way ye know. Thomas says unto him: Lord, we know not whither thou
go. And how is it possible for us to know the way? Jesus says unto him:
I am the way, and the truth, and the life: No man comes to the father but by
me: if ye had known me, ye had known my father also. And now ye know him,
and have seen him. Philip says unto him: Lord, show us the father, and it
suffiseth us. Jesus says unto him: have I been so long time with you, and yet
have thou not known me? Philip, he that has seen me, has seen my father: and
how say thou then, show us the father? Beleuest not thou that I am in the
father, and the father in me? The words that I speak unto you, I speak not
of my self: But the father that dweelleth in me, is he that does the works.
Beeleue me that I am in the father, and the father in me? Or else beeleue me for
the worcester;kes sake. Verily, verily, I say unto you: he that believes on me, the
works that I do, the same shall he do also: and greater works then these
shall he do, because I go unto my father. And whatsoever ye ask in my name,
that will I do, that the father may be glorified by the son. If ye shall ask
any thing in my name, I will do it.

Saint Barnabe Apostle.
The Collect.
Lord almighty, which haste endued thy holy Apostle Barnabas, with singular
gifts of thy holy ghost: let us not be destytute of thy manyfolde gifts, nor
yet of grace, to use them always to thy honor and glory: Through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

The Epistle.
Acts. xi.
TYdinges of these things came unto the ears of the congregation, which was
in Jerusalem. And they sent forth Barnabas that he should go unto Antioche.
Which when he came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad: and exhorted
them all, that with purpose of heart they would contynually cleave unto the
Lord. For he was a good man, and full of the holy ghost and of faith, and
much people was added unto the Lord. Then departed Barnabas to Tharsus, to
seek Saul. And when he had found him, he brought him unto Antioche. And it
chanced that a whole year they had their conuersacyon with the congregacyon
there, and taught much people: in so much that the disciples of Antioche were
the first that were called christian. In those days came Prophets from the
city of Jerusalem unto Antioche. And there stood up one of them, named Agabus,
and signified by the spirit, that there should be great dearth throughout all
the world, which came to pass in the Emperor Claudius days. Then the
disciples, every man according to his ability, purposed to send succoure
unto the brethren which dwelt in Iewry: which thing they also did, and sent
it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

The Gospel.
John. xv.
THis is my commandment, that ye love together as I have loved you. Greater
love has no man then this: ye a man bestow his life for his friends. Ye are my
friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Hencesforth call I not you
servants, for the servant knows not what his Lord does. But you have I
called friends, for all things that I have heard of my father, have I opened to
you: ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you to go and
bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remayn: that what soever ye
ask of the father in my name, he may give it you.

Saint John Baptiste.
The Collect.
ALmyghtie God, by whose prouydence thy servant John Baptist was wonderfulli
borue, and sent to prepare the way of thy son out savior by preaching of
penance: make us so to fellow his doctrine and holy life, that we may truly
repent, according to his preaching, and after his example constantly speak the
truth, boldly rebuke vice, and patiently suffer for the truths sake: through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Esaye. xi.
BE of good there my people, Dye prophets comfort my people, says your God,
comfort Jerusalem at the heart, and tell her that her travail is at an end,
that her offense is pardoned, ye she has received of the Lords hand,
sufficient correccion for all her sins. A voice cried in wilderness, prepare
the way of the lord in the wyldernes, make straight the path of our God in the
deserte. Let al valleys be exalted, and every mountain and hill be laid low:
whatso is crooked let it be made straight, and let ye rough be made plain
fields. For the glory of the Lord shall appear, and al flesh shall at once see
it: for why the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. The Same voice spoke. Now
cry. And the Prophet au^swered: what shall I cry? that al flesh is grass, and
that all the goodlines thereof is as the flower of the field. The grass is
withered, the flower falls away. Even so is the people as grass, when the
breath of the lord blows upon the^. Nevertheless, whether the grass wither,
or ye the flower fade away, yet the word of our god endures for ever. Go up
unto the hie hill (O sio^) thou that bring good tidinges lift up thy voice
with power. O thou preacher Jerusalem, lift it up without fear, and say unto
ye cities of Judah: Behold your god, behold, the lord god shall come with
power, and bear rule with his arm. Behold, he brings his treasure with
him, and his works go before him. He shall feed his flock like an heardma^.
He shall gather the lambs together with his arm, and carry them in his bosom,
and shall kindly entreat those that bear young.

The Gospel.
Luke. i.
ELizabethes time came ye she suould be delivered, and she brought forth a
son. And her neighbors and her cosins heard how the lord had showed great
mercy upon her, and reioised with her. And it fortuned, that in the eight day
they came to circumcise the child, and called his name zachary, after the name
of his father. And his mother answered and said: not so, but his name shall be
called John. And they said unto her: There is none in thy kynred ye is named
with this name. And they made signs to his father, how he would have him
called. And he asked for writing tables, and wrote, saying: his name is John.
And they meruayled all. And his mouth was opened immediatlye, and his tongue
also, and he spoke and praised god. And fear came on all them that dwelt nigh
unto him. And all these sayings was noised abroad throughout all the hie
country of Iewry, and they ye heard them laid them up in their hearts,
saying: what manner of child shall this be? And the hand of the lord was with
him. And his father zacharias was filled with ye holy ghost, and prophesied,
saying: Praised be the lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people. And has raised up an horn of salvation unto us, in the house of his
servant David. Even as he promised by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which
were sense the world began. That we should be saved from our enemies, and from
the hand of al ye hate us. That he would deal mercifully with our fathers, and
remember his holy covenant. And he would perform ye oath which he swear to
our father Abraham for to forgive us. That we being delivered out of the hands
of our enemies, might serve him without fear all the days of our life, in
such holiness and righteousness, as are acceptable for him. And thou child
shall be called the Prophet of the hiest: for thou shall go before ye face of
the lord to prepare his ways. To give knowledge of salvation unto his people,
for ye remissio^n of sins. Through the tender mercy of our god, whereby the
day spring from an high has visited us. To give light to the^ that sat in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, to guide our fete into the way of peace.
And the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, and was in wyldernes til the
day came, when he should show himself unto the Israelites.

Saint Peter's day.
The Collect.
Almighty god, which by the son Jesus Christ have given to thy Apostle
Saint Peter many excellent gifts, and commaundest him earnestly to feed thy
stock: make we beseech thee, al Bisshops and Pastors diligently to preach
thy holy word, and the people obedientlye to follow the same, that they may
receive the crown of everlasting glory: though Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Acts. xii.
AT the same time Herod the king stretched forth his hands to vex certain
of the congregation. And he killed James the brother of John with the sweord.
And because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded farther and took Peter
also. Then were the days of sweet bread. And when he had caught him, he put
him in prieson also, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to be
kept: entending after Easter to bring him forth to ye people. And Peter was
kept in prieson, but prayer was made without ceasing of ye congregacyon unto
god for him. And when Herod would have brought him out unto the people,
the same night slepte Peter between two soldiers, bound with two chains: and
the kepers before the door, kept the prieson. And behold, the Aungel of the
lord was there present, and a light shined in the habitacion. And he smote
Peter on the side, and styrred him up, saying: arise up quickly. And his
chains fell from his hands. And the Aungel s;aid unto him: gyrd thy self, and
bind on thy sandales. And he so did. And he says unto him: cast thy garment
about thee, and follow me. And he came out and followed him, and wist not that it
was truth which was done by the Aungel, but thought he had seen a vision.
When they were past the first and second watch, they came unto the iron gate,
that leads unto the city, which opened to them by the own accord. And they
went out and passed through one street, and forth with the Angel departed from
him. And when Peter was come to himself, he said: now I know of a surety
that the lord has sent his Angel, and has delivered me out of the hand of
Herod, and from all the waiting of the people of the Jews.

The Gospel.
Mat. xvi.
WHen Jesus came into the coasts of the City which is called Cesarea
Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying: whom do men say that I the son of
man am? They said: Some say that thou art John Baptist, some Helias, some
Ieremias, or one of the prophets. He says unto the^: but who^ say ye that I
am? Simo^ Peter answered, and said: Thou art Christ the son of the living
god. And Jesus au^swered, and said unto him. Happy art thou Simo^ the son of
Jonas: for flesh and blood has not opened that unto thee, but my father
which is in heaven. And I say unto thee, ye thou art Peter: and upon this
rock I will build my co^gregacio^. And the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. And
whatsoever thou bindest in earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever
thou loocest in earth, shall be looced in heaven.

Saint James the Apostle.
The Collect.
Grant, O merciful god, that as thy holy Apostle saint James, leaving his
father and all that he had without delay, was obedyente unto the calling of thy
son Jesus Christ, and followed him: So we, forsaking al worldly and carnal
affeccyons, may be evermore ready to follow thy commandments: through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Acts. xi.
IN those days came Prophets from the city of Jerusalem unto Antioche: And
there stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by ye spirit, that
there should be great dearth throughout all the world, which came to pass in
the Emperor Claudiug days. Then the disciples, every man according to his
ability, purposed to send succor unto ye brethren which dwelt in Iewry:
which thing they also did, and sent it to the elders, by the hands of Barnabas
and Saul. At the same time Herod the king stretched forth his hands to vex
certain of the congregation. And he killed James the brother of John with the
sweord. And because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded farther, and took
Peter also.

The Gospel.
Math. xx.
THen came to him the mother of zebedes children, with her sons, worshipping
him, and desiryng a certain thing of him. And he said unto her: what will
thou? She said unto him: Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on
thy right hand, and ye other on thy left, in thy kingdom. But Jesus answered
and said: ye wot not what ye ask. Are ye hable to drink of the cup that I
shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?
They said unto him: we are. He said unto them: ye shall drink in deed of my
cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with: but to sit on
my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall chance unto
them that it is prepared for of my father. And when the ten heard this, they
disdained at the two brethren. But Jesus called them unto him, and said: ye
know that the princes of the nations have dominion over the^, and they that are
great me^, exercise authority upon the^. It shall not be so among you. But
whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister: and whosoever
will be chief among you, let him be your servant. Even as the son of man
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a
redemption for many.

Saint Bartholomewe.
The Collect.
O Almighty and everlasting god, which have given grace to thy Apostle
Bartholomewe truly to believe, and to preach thy word: grant we beseech thee
unto thy church, both to love that he believed, and to preach that he taught:
through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
Acts. v.
BY the hands of the Apostles, were many signs And wonders showed among the
people. And they were al together with one accord in Salomons porche. And of
other durst no man join himself to them: nevertheless the people magnified
the^. The number of them ye believed in the lord, both of men and women, grew
more and more: insomuch that they brought the sick into ye streets, and laid
them on beds and couches, that at the leastway the shadow of Peter, when he
came by, might shadow some of them. There came also a multitude out of the
cities round about, unto Jerusalem, bringing sick folks, and them which
were vexed with unclean spirits: And they were healed every one.

The Gospel.
Luke. xxii.
ANd there was a strife among them, which of the^ should seem to be the
greatest. And he said unto them: the kings of nations reygne over them, and
they that have authority upon the^, are called gracious lords: But ye shall
not so be. But he that is greatest among you, shall be as the younger, and he that
is chief, shall be as he that does minister. For whether is greater, he that
sits at meat, or he that serves? Is not he that sitteh at meat? But I am
among you, as he that ministers. Ye are they which have bidden with me in my
te^ptacions. And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my father has appointed unto
me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sytte on
seats iudgeing the twelve tribes of Israel.

Saint Mathewe.
The Collect.
Almighty God, which by thy blessed son did call Matthew from the receipt
of custom to be an Apostle and Evangelist: Grant us grace to forsake all
covetous desires, and inordinate love of riches, and to follow thy said son
Jesus Christ: who lives and reigns. etc.

The Epistle.
ii. cor. iiii
SEeing that we have such an office, eue^ as god has had mercy on us, we go
not out of kind, but have cast from us the clokes of unhonesty, and walk not
in craftines, neither handle we the word of God deceiptfullye, but open the
truth, and report our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. If
our gospel be yet hid, it is hid among them that are lost, in whom the God
of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the
light of the gospel of ye glory of Christ (which is the image of God) should
shine unto them. For we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus to be the
Lord, and our selves your servants, for Jesus sake. For it is god that
commands the light to shine out of darkness, which has shined in our
hearts, for to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the
face of Jesus Christ.

The Gospel.
Math. ix.
ANd as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man (named Matthew) sitting at
the receipt of custom, and he said unto him: follow me. And he arose and
followed him. And it came to pass as Jesus sat at meat in his house:
beeholde, many publicanes also and sinners that came, sat down with Jesus and
his disciples. And when the Phariseis saw it, they said unto his disciples: why
eats your master with Publicanes and sinners? But when Jesus heard that, he
said unto them: They ye be strong need not the Phisicio^, but they that are
sick. Go ye rather, and learn what that means: I will have mercy and not
sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.

Saint Michael and all Angels.
The Collect.
Everlasting God, which have ordained and constituted the services of al
Aungles and men in a wonderful order: mercifully grant that they which always
do thee service in heaven, may by thy appoyntme^t succor and defend us in
earth: through Jesus Christ our Lord. etc.

The Epistle.
Apoca. xii
THere was a great battle in heaven: Michael and his Angles fought with the
dragon, and the dragon fought with his Angels, and prevailed not, neither was
their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon, ye old Serpent,
called the devil and Sathanas, was cast out, which deceueth all ye world. And
he was cast into the earth, and his Angels were cast out also with him. And I
heard a loud voice, saying: heaven is now made salvation and strength, and the
kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ. For the accuser of our
brethren is cast down, which accused them before god day and night. And they
overcame him by the blood of the lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and
they loved not their lives unto the death. Therefore rejoice heavens, and ye
that dwell in them. Woe unto the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea: for
the devil is come down unto you, which has great wrath, because he knows
that he has but a short time.

The Gospel.
Mat. xviii
AT the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying: who is the greatest in
ye kingdom of heaven. Jesus called a child unto him, and set him in the midst
of the^, and said: Verily I say unto you, except ye turn and become as
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven, Whosoever therefore
humbles himself as this child, thatsame is the greatest in ye kingdom of
heaven. And whosoever receives such a child in my name, receives me. But
whosoever does offend one of these little ones which beeleue in me, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck and that he were
drowned in ye depth of the sea. Woe unto ye world, because of offenses:
necessary it is ye offenses come: But woe unto ye man by who^ the offense
comes. Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot hinder thee, cut him of, and cast it
from the. It is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather then
thou shoudest (having two hands or two feet) be cast into everlasting fire.
And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee. It is
better for the to enter into life with one eye, rather then (having two eyes)
to be caft into hell fire. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little
ones. For I say unto you: that in heaven their Angels do always behold the
face of my father which is in heaven.

Saint Luke the Evangelist.
The Collect.
Almighty god which calledst Luke the phisicio^, whose praise is in the
gospel, to be a phisicio^ of ye soul: it may please thee by the wholesome
medicines of his holy doctrine, to heal all the diseases of our souls:
through thy son Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
i. tim. iiii.
Watch thou in all things, suffer affliccio^s, do the work thoroughly of an
Evangelist, fulfill thine office unto the uttermost: be sobre. For I am now
ready to be offered, and ye time of my departing is at hand, I have fought a
good fight, I have fulfilled my course, I have kept the faith. From henceforth
there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which ye lord (that is a
righteous judge (shall give me at that day: not to me only, but to all them ye
love his coming. Do thy diligence, that thou may come shortly unto me. For
Demas has forsaken me, and loves this present world, and is departed unto The
ssalonica. Crescens is gone to Galacia, Titus unto Dalmacia, only Lukas is with
me. Take Mark and bring him with thee, for he is profitable unto me for the
ministracion. And Tichicus have I sent to Ephesus. The cloak that I left at
Croada with Carpus, when thou come bring with thee, and the books, but
specially the parchement. Alexander the copersmith did me much evil: the Lord
reward him according to his deeds, of whom be thou ware also: for he has
greatly withstand our words.

The Gospel.
Luke. x.
THe Lord appointed other seventy (and two) also, and sent them two and two
before him into every city and plate, whether he himself would come. Therefore
he said unto the^: ye harvest is great, but ye laborers are few. Pray ye
therefore the Lord of the harvest, to send forth laborers into the harvest.
Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. Bear no
wallet, neither scrip, nor shoes, and salute no man by ye way: into whatsoever
house ye enter, first say: peace be to this house. And if the son of peace be
there, your peace shall rest upon him: if not, it shall return to you again. And
in the same house tarry still, eating and drinking such as they give. For the
labourer is worthy of his reward.

Simon and Jude Apostles.
The Collect.
Almighty God, which have builded thy congregacyon upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head corner stone:
grant us so to be joined together in unity of spirit by their doctrine,
that we may be made an holy temple acceptable to thee: through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

The Epistle.
Iudi. i.
IVdas ye servant of Jesus Christ, the brother of James: to them which are
called and sanctified in god the father, and preserved in Jesus Christ: Mercy
unto you, and peace and love be multiplited. Beloved, when I gave all diligence
to write unto you of the common salvation, it was nedeful for me to write unto
you, to exhort you ye ye should continually labor in the faith, which was
once given unto ye saints. For there are certain ungodly men craftily crept
in, of which it was written before time unto such judgment. They turn the
grace of our god unto wantonness, and deny God (which is the only lord) and our
lord Jesus Christ. My mind is therefore to put you in remembrance, forasmuch
as ye once know this, how that the lord (after that he had delivered ye people
out of Egypt) destroyed the^ which after believed not. The Angels also which
kept not their first state, but left their own habitacion, he has reserved
in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day:
even as Sodom and Gomor, and ye cities about them, which in like manner defiled
themselves with fornicacion and followed strange flesh, are set forth for an
example, and suffer the pain of eternal fire: like wife these being deceived
by dreams, defile the flesh, despise rulers, and speak evil of them that
are in authority.

The Gospel
John. xv.
THis command I you, that ye love together. If the world hate you, ye know it
hated me before it hated you: If ye were of the world, the world would love
his own: howbeit, because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out
of the world, therefore the world hates you. Remember the word that I say
unto you: the servant is not greater then the Lord. If they have persecuted
me, they will also persecute you. If they have kept my saying, they will keep
yours also. But al these things will they do unto you for my names sake,
because they have not known him that sent me. If I had not come and spoken
unto them, they should have had no sin: but now have they nothing to cloak
their sin withal. He that hates me, hates my father also. If I had not
done among the^ the works which none other man did, they should have had no
sin. But now have they both seen and hated, not only me, but also my father.
But this happens, that the saying might be fulfilled ye is written in their
law: They hated me without a cause. But when the comforter is come, whom I will
send unto you from the father, even ye spirit of truth (which proceeds of ye
father) he shall testify of me. And ye shall bear witness also, because ye have
been with me from ye beginning.

All Sainetes.
The Collect.
Almighty God, which have knit together thy elect in one Communion and
fellowship, in ye mistical body of thy son Christ our Lord: grant us grace so
to follow thy holy Saints in all virtues, and godly living, that we may come
to those inspeakeable joys, which thou have prepared for them that unfeignedly
love thee: Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle
Apoc. vii
Behold, I John saw another Angel ascend from the rising of the Sun,
which had ye seal of the living God, and he cried with a loud voice to the
four Angels (to who^ power was given to hurt the earth and the sea) saying:
Hurt not the earth, nether the sea, nether the trees, till we have sealed the
servants of our God in their foreheades. And I heard the number of them which
were sealed: and there were sealed an.C. and.xliiii. thousand, of all the
trybes of the children of Israel. Of the tribe of Judah were sealed.xii.M. Of
the tribe of Ruben were sealed.xii.M. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed.xii.M. Of
the trybe of Aser were sealed.xii.M. Of the trybe of Neptalim were
sealed.xii.M. Of the trybe of Manasses were sealed.xii.M. Of the trybe of
Simeon were sealed.xii.M. Of the trybe of Leui were sealed.xii.M. Of the tribe
of Isachar were sealed.xii.M. Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed.xii.M. Of the
tribe of Joseph were sealed.xii.M. Of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed.xii.M.


After this I beheld: and lo, a great multitude (which no man can number) of
all nations and people, and tongues, stood before the seat, and before ye
lamb, clothed with long white garments, and Palms in their hands, and cried
with a loud voice, saying: salvation be ascribed to him that sits upon the
seat of our God, and unto the lamb. And all the Angels stood in the compass
of the seat, and of the Elders, and the four beasts, and fell before the
seat on their faces, and worshipped God, saying: Amen. Blessyng. and glory?
and wisdom, and thank, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our god for
evermore. Amen.

The Gospel
Math. v.
Jesus seeing the people, went up into ye mountayn: and when he was set, his
disciples came to him: and after that he had opened his mouth, he taught them,
saying: Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are they that mourn, they shall receive coumforte. Blessed are the
meke, for they shall receive the enheritaunce of the earth. Blessed are they
which hunger and thyrste after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. Blessed
are the merciful, for they shall obtayn mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see god. Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall be called
the children of God. Blessed are they which suffer persecucion for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye when
men revile you and persecute you, and shall falsely say al manner of evil
sayings against you for my sake: rejoice and be glad, for great is your
reward in heaven. For so persecuted they the Prophets which mere before you.

The order for the administracion of the Lords Supper or holy Communion.
SO many as entend to be partakers of the holy Communion, shall signify their
names to the Curate ouernight, or else in the morning before the beginning of
morning prayer, or immediately after.

And if any of those be an open and notorious evil liver, so that the
congregation by him is offended, or have done any wrong to his neighbors by
word or deed: The Curate having knowledge thereof, shall ral him and advertise
him, in any wise not to presume to the Lords Table, until he have openly
declared himself to have truly repented and amended his former naughty life,
that the congregation may thereby be satisfied, which before were offended: and
that he have recompensed the parties, whom he has done wrong unto, or at the
least declare himself to be in full purpose so to do, as soon as he
conveniently may.

The Same order shall the Curate use, with those betwixt whom he perceives
malice and hatred to raygne, not suffering them to be partakers of the Lords
Table, until he know them to be reconciled. And if one of the parties so at
variaunce, be content to forgive from the bottom of his heart, all that ye
other has trespassed against him, and to make amends for that he himself has
offended, and the other party will not be persuaded to a godly unity, but
remain still in his frowardnes and malice: The minister in that ease, ought to
admytte the penitente person to the holy Communion, and not him that is
obstinate.

The Table having at the Communion time a fair white lynnen cloth upon it,
shall stand in the body of the Church, or in the chaunsell, where Morning
prayer, and Evening prayer be appointed to be said. And the Pryest standing at
the Northsyde of the Table, shall say the Lords prayer with this Collect
following.

Almighty god, unto whom al hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom
no secrets are hid: cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiracio^ of
thy holy spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy
holy name: through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Priest rehearse distinctly all the.x. commandments: and
people kneling, shall after every Commandment asake Gods mercy for their
transgression of the same after this sort.

Minister. God spoke these words, and said: I am the lord thy god. Thou shall
have none other Gods but me.

People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister. Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness
of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor in the water
under the earth. Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I
the Lord thy God am a gelous God, and vistte the sin of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generacyon of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands in them that love me and keep my commandments.

People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy god in vain: for the
lord will not hold him giltlesse that takes his name in vain.

People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our. etc.

Minister. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Sire days shall thou
labor and do all that thou haste to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath
of the LORD thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy
son and thy daughter, thy manseruaunt, and thy maid servant, thy Catell,
and the stranger that is within thy gates: for in.vi. days the lord made
heaven and earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh
day. Wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our. etc.

Minister. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the
land which the Lord thy god gives thee.

People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our. etc.

Minister. Thou shall do no murder.

People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our. etc.

Minister. Thou shall not commit adultery.

People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our. etc.

Minister. Thou shall not steal.

People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our. etc.

Minister. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister. Thou shalt not couete thy neighbors house. Thou shalt not covet
thy neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his
ass, nor any thing that is his.

People. Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these thy laws in our
hearts we beseech thee.

Then shall follow the Collect of the day, with one of these two Collectes
following for the King: the Priest standing up, and saying.

Priest. Let us pray.

Almighty God, whose kingdom is everlasting, (and power infinite: have mercy
upon the whole congregation, and so rule the heart of thy chosen servant
Edward the sixth, our king and governor, that he (knowing whose minister he
is) may above all things seek thy honor and glory:and that we his subjects
(duly considering whose authority he has) may faithfully serve, honor, and
humbly obey him, in thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed word and
ordinance: Through Jesus Christ our Lord: who with thee, and the holy ghost,
lives and reygneth ever one God, world without end. Amen.

Almighty and everlasting god, we be taught by thy holy word, that the
hearts of kings are in thy rule and governance, and that thou do dispose
and turn them, as it seems best to thy godly wisdom: we humbly beseech thee,
so to dispose and govern the heart of Edward the sixth, thy servant, our
king and governor, that in all his thoughts, words and works, he may ever
seek thy honor and glory, and study to preserve thy people committed to his
charge, in wealth, peace and godliness. Grant this O merciful father, for thy
dear sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Immediately after the Collectes the Priest shall read the Epistle beginning
thus.

The Epistle written in the. (...) Chapter of. (...)

And the Epistle ended, he shall say the Gospel, beginning thus.

The Gospel written in the. (...) Chapter of (...)

And the Epistle and Ghospel being ended, shall be said the Creed.

I Believe in one god, the father almighty maker of heaven and earth, and of al
things visible and invisible: And in one lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten
son of god, begotten of his father before al worlds: God of God, light of
light, very god of very god, begotten, not made, being of one substance with
the father, by whom all things were made: who for us men and for our
salvation, came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the holy ghost, of the
virgin Mary and was made man: and was crucified also for us, under Po^cius
Pilate. He suffered and was buried, and the third day he arose again according
to the scripture: and ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of
the father. And he shall come again with glory, to judge both the quick and
the dead: Whose kingdom shall have none end. And I believe in the holy ghost,
the lord and geuer of life, who proceeds from the father and the son, who
with the father and the son together, is worshipped and glorified, who spoke
by ye Prophets. And I believe one Catholyke and Apostolic church. I
acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of sins. And I look for the
resurreccion of the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen.

After the Creed, if there be no sermon, shall follow one of the homelies
already set forth, or hereafter to be set forth by common auctortie.

After such sermon, homely, or exhortacio^, the Curate shall declare unto the
people whether there be any holy days or fasting days the weke following: and
earnestlye exhort them to remember the poor, saying one or more of these
sentences following, as he thinks most convenient by his discrerion.

Math. v.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your father which is in heaven.

Math. vi.
Lay not up for your selves treasure upon the earth, where the rust and moth
does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. But lay up for your
selves treasures in heaven, where neither ruste nor mothe does corrupt, and
where thieves do not break through and steal.

Mat. vii.
Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them:
for this is the law and the Prophets.

Mat. vii.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven: but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven.

Luke. xix
Zache stood forth, and said unto the Lord: behold lord, the half of my goods
I give to the poor, and if I have done any wrong to any man, I restore four
fold.

i. Cor. ix.
Who goes a warfare at any time of his own cost? who planteth a vineyard, and
eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who fedeth a flock, and eats not of the
milk of ye flock?

i. Cor. ix.
If we have sowe^ unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter, if we
shall reap your worldly things?

i. Cor. ix.
Do ye not know, that they which minister about holy things, live of the
sacrifice? They which wait of the altar, are partakers with the altar. Even
so has the lord also ordained, that they which preach the gospel, should
live of the gospel.

ii. Cor. ix.
He which sows little, shall reap little: and he that sows plenteouslye
shall reap plenteouslye. Let every man do according as he is disposed in his
heart, not grudgeing, or of necessity: for God loves a cherefull geuer.

Gala. vi.
Let him that is taught in the word, ministre unto him that teaches, in all
good things. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he reap.

Gala. vi.
While we have time, let us do good unto all men, and specyallye unto
them, which are of the householde of faith.

i. Tim. vi
Godliness is great riches, if a man be contented with that he has: for we
brought nothing into the world, neither may we carry any thing out.

i. Tim. vi
Charge them which are rich in this world, that they be ready to give, and
glad to distribute: laying up in store for themselves a good foundacyon
against the time to come, that they may attain eternal life.

Heb. vi.
God is not unrighteous, that he will forgeat your works and labor that
proceeds of love: which love ye have showed for his names sake, which have
ministered unto saints, and yet do ministre.

Heb. xiii.
To do good and to distribute, forgeat not: for with such sacrfices God is
pleased.

i Ioh. iii.
Whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts
up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?

Tob. iiii.
Give almose of thy goods, and turn never thy face from any poor man, and
then the face of the Lord shall not be turned away from thee.

Tob. iiii.
Be merciful after thy power. If thou haste much, give plenteouslye: If thou
haste little, do thy diligence gladlye to give of that little: for so gatherest
thou thy self a good reward in the day of necessity.

Prou. xix.
He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord, and look what he
lays out, it shall be paid him again.

Psalm. lxi.
Blessed be the man that provides for the sick and nedy, the Lord shall
deliver him in the time of trouble.

Then shall the church wardens, or some other by them appointed, gather the
devotion of the people, and put the same into the poor men's bore: and upon the
offering days appointed, every man and woman shall pay to the curate the due
and accustomed offringes: after which done, the priest shall say,

Let us pray for the whole state of Christ's Church militante here in earth.

Almighty and everliving God, which by thy holy Apostle, haste taught us to
make prayers and supplicacyons, and to give thanks for all men: we humbly
beseech thee most mercifullye to accept our almose, If there be none almose
given unto ye pore then shall ye words of acceptyng our alms be left out
vnsayde.
and to receive these our prayers which we offer unto words thy divine
majesty: besechyng thee to inspire contynually, the universal church with
the spirit of truth, unity and our concord: and grant that all they that
do confess thy holy name, may agree in the truth of thy holy word, and
live in unity and godly love. We beeseche thee also to save and defend all
chrystian Kings, Princes and governors, and specially thy servant Edward
our King, that under him we may be godly and quietly governed: and grant
unto his whole counsel, and to all that be put in authority under him, that
they may truly and indifferentlye minister justice, to the punyshmente of
wyckednes and vice, and to the maintenance of Gods true religion and virtue.
Give grace (O heavenly father) to all Bisshoppes, Pastors and Curates, that
they may both by their life and doctrine set forth thy true and lyuelye
word, and rightly and duly administer thy holy Sacraments: and to all thy
people give thy heavenly grace, and especially to this congregation here
present, that with meke heart and due reverence, they may hear and receive
thy holy word, truly serving thee in holiness and ryghteousnes all the days
of their life. And we most humbly beseech thee of thy goodness (O Lord) to
comfort and succor all them which in this transitory life be in trouble,
sorrow, need, syckenes, or any other adversity: Grant this O father for
Jesus Christ's sake our only mcdiatour and advocate. Amen.

Then shall follow this exhortacion, at certain times when the Curate shall see
the people negligent to come to the holy Communion.

WE be come together at this time dereli beloved brethren, to feed at the
Lords supper, unto the which in Gods behalf I did you all that be here
present, and beseech you for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, ye ye will not
refuse to come thereto, being so louinglye called and bidden of God himself. Ye
know how grieuouse and unkind a thing it is, when a man has prepared a
rich feast, decked his table with all kind of prouisyon, so that there
lacks nothing but the geastes to sit down, and yet they which be called,
without any cause most vnthankefullye refuse to come. Which of you in such
a case would not be moved? Who moulde not think a great iniurye and wrong
done unto him? Wherefore most dearelye beloved in Christ, take ye good head,
lest ye with drawing your selves from this holy supper, provoke Gods
indygnacyon against you. It is an easy matter for a man to say, I will not
communicate, because I am otherwise let with worldly business: but such
excuses be not so easelye accepted and allowed before God. If any man say, I
am a grieuouse sinner, and therefore am afraid to come: wherefore then do you
not repent and amend? When God calls you, be you not ashamed to say you
will not come? when you should return to God will you excuse youreselfe, and
say that you be not ready? Consydre earnestlye with your selves how little
such feigned excuse shall avail before God. They that refused the feast in
the Gospel, because they had boughte a farm, or would try their yokes of
oxen, or because they were married, were not so excused, but counted unworthy
of the heavenly feast: I for my part am here present, and according unto
mine office, I bydde you in the name of GOD, I call you in Christ's behalf, I
exhort you, as you love your own salvation, that ye will be partakers of
this holy Communyon. And as the son of God did vouchesafe to yield up his
soul by death upon the Cross for your health: even so it is your duetye
to receive the Communyon together in the remembrance of his death, as he
himself commanded. Now if you will in nowyse thus do, considre with your
selves how great iniurye you do unto GOD, and how sore punyshemente
hangs over your heads for the same. And whereas you offend GOD so fore in
refusyng this holy Banquete, I admonyshe, exhort, and beeseche you, that unto
this unkindness ye will not add any more. Which thing ye shall do, if ye
stand by as gasers and lookers on them that do communycate, and be no
partakers of the same your selves. For what thing can this be accoumpted else,
then a further contempt and unkindness unto God? Truly it is a great
unthankfulness to say nay when ye be called: but the fault is much greater
when men stand by, and yet will neither eat nor drink this holy Communyon
with other. I pray you what can this be else, but even to have the misteryes
of Christ in derysyon? It is said unto all: Take ye and eat. Take and drink
ye all of this: do this in remembrance of me. With what face then, or with
what countenance shall ye hear these;e words? What will this be else, but
a neglecting, a des;pys;ing and mockyng of the Tes;tament of Chris;te?
Wherefore, rather then you should s;o do, depart you hence, and give place to
them that be Godly dys;pos;ed. But when you depart, I bees;each you pondre
with your selves from whom you depart: ye depart from the Lords table, ye
depart from your brethren, and from the banquete of most heavenly food.
These things if ye earnestlye considre, ye shall by Gods grace return a
better mind: for the obteining whereof we shall make our humble peticions, while
me shall receive the holy communion.

And some time shall be said this also at the discrecyon of the Curate.

Dearly beloved, forasmuch as our duty is to render to almyghtye God our
heavenly father most hearty thanks, for that he has given his son our
savior Jesus Christ, not only to dye for us, but also to be our
spiritual food and sustenaunce, as it is declared unto us, as well by Gods
word, as by the holy sacraments of his blessed body and blood, the which
being so coumfortable a thing to them which receue it worthelye, and so
dangerous to them that will presume to receive it vnwoorthelye: My duetye is
to exhort you to consydre the bignitie of the holy misterye, and the great
peril of the vnmorthye receiuyng thereof, and so to search and examyne your
own consciences, as you should come holy and clean to a most godly and
heavenly feast: so that in no wise you come, but in the marriage garmente,
required of God in holy scripture: and so come and be received, as woorthye
partakers of such a heavenly table. The way and means thereto is: First to
examine your lives and conversation by the rule of Gods commandments, and
wherein soever ye shall perceive your selves to have offended, either by will,
word, or deed, there bewail your own sinfullines, confess your selves to
almighty god with full purpose of amendment of life. And if ye shall perceive
your offenses to be such, as be not only against God, but also against
your neighbors: then ye shall reconcile your selves unto them, ready to make
restitucion and satisfaccion according to the uttermost of your powers, for all
injuries and wrongs done by you to any other: and like wise being ready to
forgive other that have offended you, as you would have forgeuenes of your
offenses at gods hand: for otherwise the receiving of the holy Communion,
does noting else but increase your damnacion. And because it is requisite that
no man should come to the holy Communion, but with a full trust in Gods mercy,
and with a quiet conscience: therefore if there be any of you which by the
means aforesaid, cannot quiet his own conscience, but requires further
comfort or counsel: then let him come to me, or some other discrete and learned
minister of gods word, and open his grief, that he may receive such gostly
counsayl, advise, and comfort, as his conscience may be relieved: and that by
the ministry of Gods word he may receive comfort and the benefit of
absolucion to the quieting of his conscience, and avoiding of al Scruple and
doubtfulnes.

Then shall the priest say this exhortacion.

DErely beloved in the Lord: ye that mind to come to the holy Communion of
the body and blood of our savior Christ, must consider what S. Paul writes
to the Corinthians: how he exhorts al persons diligently to try and examyne
themselves, before they presume to eat of that bread, and drink of that
cup, for as the benefit is great if with a truly penitente heart and lively
faith, we receive that holy Sacrament (for then we spirituallye eat the
flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, then we dwell in Christ, and
Christ, in us, ^e be one with Christ, and Christ, with us:) so is the
danger great, if we receive the same unworthily. For then we be guilty of the
body and blood of Christ our Savior. We eat and drink our own damnacion,
not considering the lords body. We kyndle Gods wrath against us, we provoke
him to plage us with diverse diseases and sondrye kinds of death. Therefore,
if any of you be a blasphemer of God, an hinderer or slaunderer of his to
word, an adulterer, or be in malice or envy, or in any other grievous crime,
bewail your sins, and come not to this holy Table, lest after the taking of
that holy Sacrament, the Devil enter into you, as he entered into Judas, and
fill you full of al iniquities, and bring you to destruction both of body and
soul: Judge therefore your selves (brethren) that ye be not judged of the
Lord. Repent you truly for your sins past, have a liuelye and steadfast
faith in Christ our Savior. Amend your lives, and be in perfect charity with
all men, so shall ye be mete partakers of those holy mysteries. And above all
things, ye must give most humble and hearty thanks to God the father, the
son, and the holy ghost, for the redemption of the world, by the death and
passion of our Savior Christ both God and man: who did humble himself, even
to the death upon the Cross for us miserable sinners, which lay in darkness
and shadow of death, that he might make us the children of God, and exalte us
to everlasting life. And to the end that we should always remember the exceeding
great love of our Master and only Savior Jesus Christ, thus dying for us, and
the innumerable benefits (which by his precious bloudshedding) he has
obtained to us, he has instituted and ordained holy mysteries as pledges of
his love, and continual remembrance of his death, so our great and endless
comfort. To him therefore with the father and the holy ghost, let us give (as
we are most bounden) continual thanks: submittyng our slues wholye to his
holy will and pleasure, and studying to setue him in true holiness and
ryghteousnes all the days of our life. Amen.

Then shall the priest say to them that come to receive the holy Communion.

YOu that do truly and earnestly repent you of your sins, and be in love
and charity with your neighbors, and entend to lead a new life, following
the commandments of God, and walking from hencefurh in his holy mayes: Draw
nere, and take this holy Sacrament to your comfort, make your humble
coufession to almighty God before this congregation here gathered together in
his holy name, mekely kneling upon your knees.

Then shall this general confession be made, in the name of all those that are
minded to receive the holy Communion, either by one of them, or else by one of
the Minissters, or by the Priest him self, all kneling humbly upon their
knees.

Almighty god, father of our lord Jesus Christ, maker of al things, judge of
al men, we knowledge and bewail our manifold sins and wickedness, which we
from time to time most grievously have committed, by thought, word, and deed,
against thy deuyne Majesty: prouokyng most justly thy wrath and indignacion
against us: we do earnestly repent, and be heartelry sorry for these our
misdoynges: the remembrance of them is grievous unto us the burthe of them is
intolerable: have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us most merciful father,
for thy son our Lord Jesus Chriestes sake: forgive us all that is past, and
grant that we may ever hereafter, serve and please thee, in newness of life,
to the honor and glory of thy name: Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Priest or the Bishop being present, stand up, and turning
himself to the people, says thus.

Almighty God our heavenly father, who of his great mercy, has promised
forgeuenes of sins to al them, which with hearty repentance and true faith
turn unto him: have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you from all your
sinnnes, confirm and strength you in all goodness, and bring you to everlasting
life: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the priest also say.

Hear what comfortable words our savior Christ says, to all that truly
turn to him.

Come unto me all that travail and be heavy laden, and I shall refreshe you. So
God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, to thend that all that believe in him, should not peryshe, but have life everlasting.

Hear also what Saint Paul says.

This is a true saying, a worthy of al men to be received, that Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners.

Hear also what Saint John says.

If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ
righteous, and he the propiciacyon for our sins.

After the which, the priest shall proceed, saying.

Lift up your hearts.

Answer. We lift them up unto the Lord.

Priest. Let us give thanks unto our Lord God.

Answer. It is mete and right so to do.

Priest. It is very mete, right, and our bounden duty, that we should at
al times, and in all places, give thanks unto thee, O Lord holy father,
almighty everlasting god.

Here shall follow the proper Preface according to the time, if there be any
specially appointed: or else immediately shall follow. Therefore with Angels etc.

Propre Prefaces.

Upon Christmas day, and seven days after.

BEcause thou did give Jesus Christ, thine only son, to be borne, as
this day for us, who by the operacion of the holy ghost, was made very man,
of the substance of the, Vyrgyn Marye his mother, and that without spot of
sin, to make us clean from all sin. Therefore. etc.

Upon Easter day, and seven days after.

But chieflye are we bound to praise thee, for the glorious resurreccion of
thy son Jesus Christ our Lord: for he is the very Paschal la^be, which was
offered for us, and has taken away the sin of the world, who by his death
has destroyed death, and by his risyng to life again, has restored to us
everlasting life. Therefore. etc.

Upon the Ascencion day, and seven days after.

Through thy most dear beloved son, Jesus Christ our Lord: who after his
most glorious resurrection, manifestly appeared to al his apostles, and in
their sight ascended up into heaven, to prepare a place for us, that where he
is, thither might we also ascend, and reign with him in glory. Therefore with.
etc.

Upon whitsonday and six days after.

THrough Jesus Christ our Lord, according to whose most true promise, the
holy ghost came down this day from heaven, with a sudden great sound, as it
had been a mighty wind, in the likeness of fiery tongues, lightyng upon the
Apostles, to teach them, and to lead them to all truth, geuyng them both
the gift of diverse languages, and also boldenes with fervent zeal, constantly
to preach the Gospel unto all nations, whereby we are brought out of darkness
and error, into the clear light and true knowledge of thee, and of thy son
Jesus Christ. Therefore with. etc.

Upon the feast of Trinity only.

IT is very mete, right, and our bounden duty, that me should at all tunes,
and in all places give thanks to thee, O Lord, almighty and everlasting God,
which art one God, one lord, not one only person, but three persons in one
substance: for that which we believe of the glory of the father, the same we
believe of the son, and of the holy ghost, without any difference or
inequality. Therefore with. etc.

After which Preface shall follow immediately.

Therefore with Angels and Archangelles, and with all the company of heaven,
we laud and magnify thy glorious name, evermore praising thee, and saying:
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts: heaven and earth are full of thy glory,
glory be to thee, O Lord most high.

Then shall the Priest kneeling down at Gods board, say in the name of all
them that shall receive the Communion, this prayer following.

WE do not presume to come to this thy Table (O merciful Lord) trusting in
our own righteousness, but in thy manifold and great mercies: we be not worthy
so much as to gather up the cru^mes under thy table, but thou art the same
Lord, whose property is always to have mercy: grant us therefore (gracious
Lord) so to eat the flesh of thy dear son Jesus Christ, and to drink his
blood, that our sinful bodies may be made clean by his body, and our souls
washed through his most precious blood: and that we may evermore dwell in him
and he in us. Amen.

Then the Priest standing up, shall say as follows.

Almighty God our heavenly father, which of thy tender mercy did give
thine only son Jesus Christ, to suffer death upon the cross for our
redemption, who made there by his one oblacion of himself once offered, a
full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblacion, and satisfaccyon for the
sins of the whole world: and did institute, and in his holy Gospel command
us, to continue a perpetual memory of that his precious death, until his
coming again. Hear us O merciful father we beseech thee: and grant that we
receiving these thy creatures of bread and wine, according to thy son our
Savior Jesus Christ's holy institucion, in remembrance of his death and
passion, may be partakers of his most blessed body and blood: who in the same
night that he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying: Take, eat, this is my body
which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of me. Likewise after supper
he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to the^, saying:
Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the new Testamente, which is
shed for you and for many, for remissyon of sins: do this as often as ye shall
drink it in remembrance of me.

Then shall the Minister first receive the Communion in both kinds himself,
and next deliver it to other Ministers, if any be there present (that they
may help the chief Minister, and after to the people in their hands
kneelyng. And when he delyuereth the bread, he shall say.

Take and eat this in remembrance that Christ dyed for thee, and feed on him
in thy heart by faith, with thanks geuyng.

And the minister that delivers the cup, shall say.

Drink this in remembrance that Christ's blood was shed for thee, and be
thankful.

Then shall the Priest say the Lords prayer, the people repeating after him
every peticyon.

After shall be said as follows.

O Lord and heavenly father, we thy humble servants, entierly desire thy
fatherly goodness, mercyfullye to accept this our Sacrifyce of praise and
thanks geuyng: most besechyng thee to grant that by the merits and death
of thy son Jesus Christ, and through faith in his blood, we and all thy
whole church, may obtain remission of our sins, and al other benefits of
his Passion. And here we offer and prse^t unto thee, O lord, our selves, our
souls and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively Sacrifice unto thee,
humblye besechyng thee, that all we which be partakers of this holy
Communion, may be fulfilled with thy grace and heavenly benediccion. And
although we be unworthy, through our manyfolde sins, to offer unto thee
any sacrifyce: yet we beseech thee to accept this our bounden duty and
service, not weyghing our merits, but pardonyng our offenses, through Jesus
Christ our Lord: by whom and with whom, in the unity of the holy ghost, all
honor and glory be unto thee O father almyghtie, world without end. Amen.

Or this.

Almighty and everliving god, we most heartily thank thee, for that thou do
vouchesafe to feed us, which have duly received these holy mysteries, with
the spiritual food of the most precious body and blood of thy son our
Savior Jesus Christ, and do assure us thereby of thy favor and goodness
toward us, and that we be very members incorporate in thy mistycall body,
which is the blessed company of all faithful people, and be also heirs
through hope, of thy everlasting kingdom, by the merits of the most precious
death and Passion of thy dear son: we now most humblye beseech thee,
heavenly father, so to assiste us with thy grace, that we may continue in that
holy fellowship, and do all such good works as thou have prepared for us to
walk in, through Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom with thee and the holy
ghost, be all honor and glory, world without end. Amen.

Then shall be said or song.

Glory be to GOD on high. And in earth peace, good will toward men. We
praise thee, we bless thee, we woorshyp thee, we gloryfy thee, we give thanks
to thee, for thy great glory. O Lord GOD heavenly king, God the father
almyghtye. O Lord, the only begotten son Iusu Chrysse: O Lord God, Lame of
God, son of the father, that takeste away the sins of the world, have
mercy upon us: Thou that take away the sins of the world, have mercy
upon us. Thou that takeste away the sins of the world: receive our prayer.
Thou that fittest at the right hand of God the father, have mercy upon us:
For thou only art holy: Thou only are the Lord: Thou only (O Christ) with
the holy ghost, art most high, in the glory of God the father Amen.

Then the Priest or the Bishop, if he be present, shall let them depart with
this blessing.

THe peace of God which passes all vndersta^nding, keep your hearts and
minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his son Jesus Christ our
Lord: and the blessing of God almighty, the father, the son, and the holy
ghost, be amongst you, and remain with you always. Amen.

Collectes to be said after the Offertorie, when there is no Communion, every
such day one. And the same may be said also, as often as occasion shall
serve, after the Collectes, either of Morning and Evening prayer, Communion, or
Letany, by the discrecion of the Minister.

ASsist us mercifully, O Lord, in these our supplicacions and prayers, and
dispose the way of thy servants, toward the attaynemente of everlasting
salvation: that among all the chaunges and chances of this mortal life, they
may ever be defended by thy most gracyous and ready help: through Christ
our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty Lord and euerliuyng God, vouchsafe we beeseche thee, to direct,
sanctifye and govern both our hearts and bodies, in the ways of thy laws,
and in the works of thy commandments: that through thy most mighty
proteccyon, both here and ever, we may be preserved in body and soul: through
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Grant we beseech thee almighty god, that the words which we have heard
this day with our outward ears, may through thy grace be so grafted
inwardlye in our hearts, that they may bring for the in us, the fruit of
good living, to the honor and praise of thy name: through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Prevent us O Lord in all our doings, with thy most gracyous favor, and
further us with thy contynuall help, that in all our works begone, continued,
and ended in thee: we may glorifye thy holy name, and finally by thy mercy
obtain everlasting life: through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

ALmightye God, the fountain of all wisdom, which know our necessities
before we ask, and our ignorance in asking: we beseech thee to have
compassyon upon our infirmities, and those things which for our unworthiness
we dare not, and for our blindness we cannot ask, vouchesafe to give us for
the worthynesse of thy son Jesus Christ our Lourde. Amen.

Almighty God, which haste promised to hear the peticyons of them that ask
in thy sons name: we beeseche thee mercifully to enclyne thine ears to us
that have made now our prayers and supplycacyons unto thee: and grant that
those things which we faithfully asked according to the will, may effectually
be obtained, to the relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth of
thy glory: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Upon the holy days, if there be no Communion, shall be said all that is
appointed at the Communion, until the end of the Homelye, concludyng with the
general prayer, for the whole state of Christ's church militant here in earth,
and one or more of these Collectes before rehearsed, as occasion shall serve.

And there shall be no celebracion of the Lords supper, except there be a good
noumbre to commnunicate with the priest, according to his discrecyon.

And if there be not above twentye persons in the Parish of discrecion to
receive Communion: yet there shall be no Communion, except four, or three at the
least, communicate with the priest. And in Cathedral and Collegiate churches,
where be many priests and Deacons, they shall all receive the Communion with
the Minister every Sundaie at the least, except they have a reasonable cause to
the contrary.

And to take away the supersticio^, which any person has, or might have in the
bread and wine, it shall suffyse that the bread be such, as is usual to be
eaten at the Table with other meats, but the best and purest wheat bread,
that conuenienly may be gotten. And if any of the bread or wine remain, the
Curate shall have it to his own use.

Although no order can be so perfectly devised, but it may be of son, either
for their ignorance and infirmity, or else of malice and obstinacy,
misconcostrued, depraved, and interpreted in a wrong part: And yet because
brotherly charity wills, that somuche as conveniently may be, offenses
should be taken away: therefore we willing to do the same. Whereas it is
ordained in the book of common prayer, in the administracion of the lords
Supper, that the communicantes knelyng should receive the holy Communion: which
thing being well mente, for a significacion of the humble and grateful
acknowledgeing of the benefices of Christ given unto the worthy receyuer, and
to avoid the prophanacion and disordre which about the holy Communion might
else ensue. Lest yet the same kneling might be thought or taken otherwise, we
do declare that it is not meant thereby, that any adoracion is done, or ought
to be done, either unto the Sacramental bread or wine there bodily received,
or unto any real and essenciall presence there being of Christ's natural
flesh and blood. For as concerning the Sacramental bread and wine, they
remain still in their very natural substaunces, and therefore may not be
adored, for that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians. And
as concerning the natural body and blood of our fauiour Christ, they are in
heaven and not here: for it is against the truth of Chryestes true natural
body, to be more in places then in one at one time.

The bread and wine for the Communion, shall be provided by the Curate and the
church wardens, at the charges of the Parish, and the Parish shall be
discharged of such sums of money, or other duties, which hitherto they
have paid for the same, by order of their houses every Sundaye.

And note, that every Parishioner shall communicate, at the least three times
in the year: of which, Easter to be one: and shall also receive the
Sacraments, and other rites, according to the order in this Book appointed.
And yearly at Easter, every Parishioner shall reke^ with his Person, Vicar, or
Curate, or his, or their deputy, or deputies, and pay to them or him, all
Ecclesiastical duties, accustomably due, then and at that time to be paid.

The Ministracion of Baptisine to be used in the Church.
IT appears by auncyente writers, that the Sacrament of Baptism in the old
time, was not commonly ministed, but at two times in the year: at Easter, and
Whitsontide. At which times it was openly ministered, in the presence of all
the congregation: which custom (now being grown out of use) although it
cannot for many consideracyons be well restored again, yet it is thought
good to follow the same as nere as conuenientlye may be: wherefore the people
are to be admanisshed, that it is most convenient that baptism should not
be ministered but upon Sundays, and other holy days, when the most noumbre
of people may come together, as well for that the congregation there present
may testify the receiving of them that be newely Baptized into the noumbre of
Christ's Church, as also because in the Baptism of infantes, every man
present may be put in remembrance of his own profession made to God in his
Baptism. For which cause; also, it is expediente that Baptism be ministered
in the English tongue. Nevertheless, (if necessity so require) children may
at all times be Baptized at home.

Public Baptism.
When there are children to be Baptized upon the Sundaye, or holy day, the
Parents shall give knowledge ouernight, or in the Morning, before the beginning
of Morning prayer, to the Curate. And then the godfathers, godmothers, and
people with the children, must be ready at ye Fonie, either immediately after
the last Lesson at Morning prayer, or else immediately after the last Lesson at
Evening prayer, as the Curate by his discrecion shall appoint. And the standing
there, the Priest shall ask whether the children be Baptized or no. If they
answer, no: Then shall the Priest say thus.

Dearly beloved, forasmuch as al me^ be conceived and borne in sin, and that
our Savior Christ says, none can enter into the kingdom of God (except he
be regenerate, and borne a new of water and the holy ghost:) I beseech you to
call upon God the father, through our lord Jesus Christ, ye of his bounteous
mercy, he will grant to these children, that thing which by nature they cannot
have, that they may be Baptized with water and the holy ghost, and received
into Christ's holy church, and be made lively members of the same.

Then the Priest shall say.

Let us pray.

Almighty and everlasting god, which of thy great mercy did save Noe and his
family in ye Arc, from perishing by water: and also did; safelye lead
the children Israel thy people through ye read Sea, figuring thereby thy holy
Baptism, and by the Baptism of thy well-beloved son Jesus Christ, did
sanctify the flood Iorda^ and al other waters, to ye mystical wasshyng away
of sin: We beseech thee for thy infinite mercyes, that thou myit mercifully
look upon these children, sanctify them and wash them with thy holy ghost,
that they being delivered from thy wrath, may be received into the Arc of
Christ's church: and being steadfast in faith, ioyefull through hope, and
rooted in charity, may so pass the waves of this troublesome world, that
finally they may come to the land of everlasting life, there to reign with
thee, world without end, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty and immortal god, the aid of all that need, the helper of all that
flee to thee for succoure, the life of them that believe, and the resurreccion
of the dead: We call upon thee for these infantes, that they coming to thy
holy Baptism, may receive remissto^ of their sines by spiritual regeneracion.
Receive them (O Lord) as thou have promised by thy well-beloved son, saying:
Ask and you shall have, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened
unto you. So give now unto us ye ask. Let us that seek find. Open ye gate unto
us that knock, ye these infantes may enjoy the everlasting benediccio^ of thy
heavenly wasshing, and may come to the eternal kingdom, which thou have
promised by Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Priest say: hear the words of the Gospel written by Saint
Mark in the tenth Chapter.

Mark. x.
AT a certain time they brought children unto Christ that he should touch
them, and his disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus saw
it, he was displeased, and said unto them: suffer little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not, for to such belongs the kingdom of god. Verelye I
say unto you, whosoever does not receive the kingdom of God as a little
child, he shall not enter therein. And when he had taken them up in his arms,
he put his hands upon them and blessed them.

After the Gospel is readde, the Minister shall make this brief exhortacion
upon the words of the Gospel.

Friends, you hear in this Gospel the words of our Savior Christ, that he
commanded the children to be brought unto him: Now he blamed those that
would have kept them from him: Now he exhorted all men to follow their
innocence. You perceive how by his outward gesture and deed, he declared his
good will toward them. For he embraced the^ in his arms, he laid his hands
upon them, and blessed them: doubt not ye therefore, but earnestlye believe,
that he will likewise fauourablye receive these present infantes, that he will
embrace them with the arms of his mercy, that he will give unto them the
blessyng of eternal life, and make the^ partakers of his everlasting kingdom.
Wherefore we being thus persuaded of the good will of our heavenly father
toward these infantes declared by his son Jesus Christ, and nothing
doubting but that he favorably allows this charitable work of ours in
bringing these children to his holy Baptism: let us faithfully and deuoutlye
give thanks unto him, and say.

Almighty and everlasting god, heavenly father, we give thee humble thanks,
that thou haste vouchsafed to call us to the knowledge of thy grace and faith
in thee: increase this knowledge, and confirm this faith in us evermore: Give
thy holy spirit to thse infantes, that they may be borne again, and be made
heirs of everlasting salvation, through our Lord Jesus Christ: who lives and
reigns with thee and ye holy spirit, now and for ever. Amen.

Then the Priest shall speak unto the Godfathers and Godmothers, on this wise.

Well-beloved friends, ye have brought these children here to be Baptized: ye
have prayed that our Lord Jesus Christ would vouchsafe to receive them, to lay
his hands upon the^, to bless the^, to release them of their sins, to give
them the kingdom of heaven, and everlasting life. Ye have heard also that our
lord Jesus Christ has promised in his gospel to grant al these things that
ye have prayed for: which promise he for his part will most surely keep and
perform: Wherefore after this promise made by Christ, these infantes must
also faithfully for their part promise by you that be their suerties, that they
will forsake the devil and al his works, and constantly believe gods holy word,
and obediently keep his commandments.

Then shall the Priest demand of the Godfathers and Godmothers these
questions following.

Do thou forsake the devil and al his works, the vain pomp, and glory of
the world, with all couetouse desires of the same, the carnal desires of the
flesh, so that thou will not follow, nor be led by them?

Answer. I forsake them all.

Minister. Do thou believe in god the father almighty, maker of heaven and
earth? And in Jesus Christ his only begotten son our lord, and that he was
conceived by the holy ghost, borne of the virgin Mary: that he suffered under
Poncyus Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried: that he went down into hell,
and also did rise again the third day: that he ascended into heaven, and
litteth at the right hand of god the father almighty, and from thence shall
come again at ye end of the world, to judge the quick and the dead?

And do thou believe in ye holy ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the
communion of saints, the remiss;ion of sins, the resurrection of the
flesh, and everlasting life after death?

Answer. All this I steadfastly believe.

Minister. Wylt thou be Baptized in this faith?

Answer. That is my desire.

Then shall the Priest say.

O Merciful god, grant that the old Adam in these children may be so buried,
that the new man may be raised up in them. Amen.

Grant that all carnal affecions may dye in them, and that all things
belongyng to the spyryte, may live and grow in them. Amen.

Grant that they may have power and strength to have victory, and to triumph
against the devil, the world and the flesh. Amen.

Grant that whosoever is here dedicated to thee by our office and ministry,
may also be endued with heavenly virtues, and euerlastynglye rewarded through
thy mercy, O blessed lord God, who do live and govern all things world
without end. Amen.

Almighty everliving God, whose most dearelye beloved son Jesus Christ, for
the forgeuenes of our sins, did shead out of his most precious side both
water and blood, and gave commandment to his disciples that they should go
teach all nacyons, and baptize them in the name of the father, the son, and
of the holy ghost: Regard we beseech thee, the supplicacions of thy
congregation, and grant that all thy servants which shall be baptized in
this water, may receive the fulness of thy grace, and ever remain in the
noumbre of thy faithful and elect children, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Then the Priest shall take the child in his hands, and ask the name: and
naming the child, shall dippe it in the water, so it be discretely and warely
done, saying.

N I Baptize thee in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. Amen.

And if the child be weak, it shall suffice to power water upon it, saying
the foresaid words.

N I Baptize thee in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. Amen.

Then the Priest shall make a cross upon the childs forehead, saying.

WE receive this child into the congregation of Christ's stock, and do sign
him with the sign of ye cross, in toke^ that hereafter he shall not be
ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under
his banner against sin, the world, and the devil: and to continue Christ's
faithful souldioure and servant, unto his lives end. Amen.

Then shall the Priest say.

Seeing now derely beloved brethren, that these children be regenerate and
grafted into the body of Christ's congregacyon: let us give thanks unto God
for these benefits, and with one accord make our prayers unto almyghtye God,
that they may lead the rest of their life, according to this beginning.

Then shall be said.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

Then shall the Priest say.

WE yield thee hearty thanks most merciful father, that it has pleased thee
to regenerate this infant with thy holy sprite, to receive him for thy own
child by adopcion, and to incorporate him into thy holy congregation. And
humblye we beseech thee to grant that he being dead unto sin, and living
unto rightousnes, and being buried with Christ in his death, may crucify the
old man, and utterly abolishe the whole body of sin: that as he is made
partaker of the death of thy son, so he may be partaker of his resurreccion.
So that finally with the residue of thy holy congregation he may be inheritour
of thine everlasting kingdom: through Christ our Lord. Amen.

At the last end, the Priest calling the Godfathers and Godmothers together,
shall say this short exhortacyon following.

Forasmuch as these children have promised by you to forsake the Devil and all
his works, to believe in God, and to serve him: you must remember that it is
your parts and duetyes to see that these infantes be taught so soon as
they shall be hable to learn what a solemn vow, promise and profession they
have made by you. And that they may know these things the better, ye shall
call upon them to hear sermons. And chyeftye ye shall provide that they may
learn the Creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten Commandments in the English
tongue, and al other things which a Christian man ought to know and believe,
to his souls health: and that these children, may be vertuoustlye brought up,
to lead a godly and Christen life, remembering alwaie that Baptism does
represente unto us our professyon, which is to follow the example of our
savior Christ, and to be made like unto him: that as he dyed and rose again
for us, so should we which are Baptized, dye from sin, and rise again unto
righteousness, contynuallye mortifying all our evil and corrupt affeccions,
and daily procedyng in all virtue, and godlynes of living.

The Minister shall command that the children be brought to the Bishop to be
confirmed of him, so sone as they can say in their vulgar tongue, the articles
of ye faith, the lords prayer, and the.x. commandments: and be further
instructed in the Cathechisme set forth for that purpose, accordingly as it
is there expressed.

Of them that be Baptized in private houses, in time of necessity.
The Pastors and Curates shall often admonyshe the people, that they defer
not the Baptism of infantes any longer the^ the Sundaye, or other holy day
next after the child be borne, unless upon a great and reasonable cause
declared to the Curate, and by him approved.

And also they shall warn them, that without great cause and necessity, they
Baptize not children at home in their houses.

And when great need shall compel them so to do, that then they minister it
on this fashyon.

First let them that be present call upon God for his grace, and say the
Lords prayer, if the time will suffer, And then one of them shall name the
child, and dippe him in the water, or power water upon him, saying these
words.

N I Baptize thee in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. Amen.

And let them not doubt, but that the child so Baptized, is lawfully and
sufficiently Baptized, and ought not to be Baptized again in the Church. But
yet nevertheless, if the child which is after this sort Baptized, do
afterward live: it is expedyente that he be brought into the Church, to the
entente the Priest may examine and try, whether the child be lawfully baptized
or no. And if those that bring any child to the church do answer that he
is already Baptized, then shall the Priest examine them further.

By whom the child was Baptized.

Who was present when the child was Baptized?

Whether they called upon God for grace and succoure in that necessity?

With what thing, or what matter they did Baptyse the child?

With what words the child was Baptized.

Whether they think the child to be lawefully and perfectly Baptized?

And if the minister shall prove by the aunsweres of such as brought the
child, that all things were done as they ought to be: Then shall not be
Christen the child again, but shall receive him as one of the flock of the
true Christian people, saying thus.

I Certifye you, that in this case ye have done well, and according unto due
order concerning the baptising of this child, which being borne in original
sin, and in the wrath of god, is now by the lauer of regeneracion in
Baptism, received into the noumber of the children of God, and heirs of
everlasting life: for our Lord Jesus Christ does not deny his grace and mercy
unto such infantes, but most lovingly does call them unto him, as the holy
Gospel does witness to our comfort, on this wise.

Mark. x.
AT a certain time they brought children unto Christ that he should touch
them, and his disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus saw
it, he was displeased, and said unto them: suffer little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not, for to such belongs the kingdom of god. Verelye I
say unto you, whosoever does not receive the kingdom of God as a little
child, he shall not enter therein. And when he had taken them up in his arms,
he put his hands upon them and blessed them.

After the Gospel is readde, the Minister shall make this exhortacion upon the
words of the Gospel.

Friends, you hear in this Gospel the words of our Savior Christ, that he
commanded the children to be brought unto him: Now he blamed those that
would have kept them from him: Now he exhorted all men to follow their
innocencye. Ye perceive how by his outward gesture and deed, he declared his
good will toward them. For he embraced the^ in his arms, he laid his hands
upon them, and blessed them: doubt ye not therefore, but earnestlye believe,
that he has likewise fauourablye received this present infant, that he has
embraced him with the arms of his mercy, that he has given unto him the
blessyng of eternal life, and made him partaker of his everlasting kingdom.
Wherefore we being thus persuaded of the good will of our heavenly father
declared by his son Jesus Christ toward this infant: Let us faithfully and
devoutly give thanks unto him, and say the prayer which the Lord himself
taught, and in declaracion of our faith, let us recyte the articles
contained in our Creed.

Here the Minister with the Godfathers and Godmothers shall say.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

Then shall the priest demand the name of the child, which being by the
Godfathers and Godmothers pronounced, the Minister shall say.

Dooest thou in the name of this child forsake the Devil and all his works,
the vain pomp and glory of the world, with all the covetous desires of the
same, the carnal desires of the flesh, and not to follow and be lead by them?

Answer. I forsake them all.

Minister. Do thou in the name of this child profess this faith, to believe
in God the father almightye, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus Christ
his only beegotten son our Lord: and that he was conceived by the holy
ghost, borne of the vyrgyn Marye: that he suffered under: Poncyus Pylate, was
crucified, dead and buried: that he went down into hell, and also did rise
again the third day: that he ascended into heaven, and sits at the right
hand of god the father almighty: and from thence he shall come again at the
end of the world, to judge the quick and the dead?

And do you in his name believe in the holy ghost. The holy Catholyque Church.
The Communion of Saints. The remyssyon of sins. Resurreccyon, and
everlasting life after death?

Answer. All this I steadfastly believe.

Let us pray.

Almighty and everlasting God heavenly father, we give thee humble thanks,
for that thou haste vouchsaued to call us to ye knowledge of thy grace and faith
in thee: increase this knowledge, and co^fyrme this faith in us evermore: Give
thy holy spyrite to this infant, that he being borne again, and being made
heir of everlasting salvation, through our Lord Jesus Christ, may continue
thy servant, and attain thy promise, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ
thy son: who lives and reigns with thee, in the unity of the same holy
spirit euerlastyngly. Amen.

Then shall the Minister make this exhortacion to the Godfathers and Godmothers.

Forasmuch as this child has promised by you to forsake the devil and all
his works, to believe in God, and to serve him: you must remember that it is
your part and duetye to see that this infant be taught so soon as he
shall be hable to learn what a solemn vow, promise, and profession he has
made by you: and that he may know these things the better, ye shall call
upon him to hear sermons: And chiefly ye shall provide that he may learn the
Creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten Commandments in the english tongue, and
all other things which a christian man ought to know and believe, to his
souls health: and that this child may be virtuously brought up to lead a
godly and a christen life: Remembering always that Baptism does represent unto
us our profession, which is to follow the exaumple of our savior Christ,
and be made like unto him: that as he died and rose again for us: so should we
which are baptized, dye from sin, and rise again unto righteousness,
continually mortifying all our evil and corrupt affeccyons, and daily
procedyng in all virtue and Godlynes of living.

And so forth as in Publyque Baptism.

But if they which bring the infantes to the Church, do make an uncertain
answer to the priests questions, and say that they cannot tell what they
thought, did or said in that great fear and trouble of mind, (as oftentimes
it chances) then let the priest baptize him in form above written,
concerning Public baptism, saving that at the dyppyng of the child in the
Font, he shall use this form of words.

If thou be not Baptized already.N. I Baptize thee in the name of the father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen.

Confirmacion, wherein is contained a Cathechisme. for children.
TO the end that Confirmacion may be ministered to the more edifying of such as
shall receive it (according unto.S. Paul's doctrine, who teaches that all
things should be done in the Church to the edificacyon of the same) it is
thought good, that none herafter shall be confirmed, but such as can say in
their mother tongue, the Articles of the faith, the Lords prayer, and the.x.
Commandments: And can also answer to such questyons of this short
Cathechisme, as the Bisshoppe (or such as he shall appoint) shall by his
discretion appose them in. And this order is most convenient to be observed
for diverse consideracions.

First, because that when children come to the years of discretion, and have
learned what their Godfathers and Godmothers promised for the^ in Baptysme,
they may then themselves with their own mouth, and with their own consent,
openly before the Church ratifye and confirm the same: and also promise, that
by the grace of God, they will evermore endeavor themselves faithfully to
observe and keep such things, as they by their own mouth and confession have
assented unto.

Secondly forasmuch as Confirmacion is ministered to them that be Baptized,
that by imposicion of hands and prayer, they may receive strength and defense
against all temptacyons to sin, and the assaults of the world and the Devil:
it is most mete to be minystred when children come to that age, that partly by
the fraylty of their own flesh partly by the assaults of the world and the
Devil, they begin to be in danger to fall into sondrye kinds of sin.

Thirdly, for that it is agreeable with the usage of the Church in times past,
whereby it was ordained that Confirmacion should be ministered to them that were
of perfect age, that they being instructed in Christ's religion, should
openly profess their own faith and promise, to be obedient unto the will of
God.

And that no man shall think that any detriment shall come to children by
deferryng of their Confyrmacion, he shall know for truth, that it is certain
by Gods word, that children being baptized, have all things necessary
for their salvation, and be undoubtedly saved.

A Cathechisme, that is to say, an instruccion to be learned of every child
before he be brought to be Confirmed of the Bishop.
Question. What is your name?

Answer. N. or.M.

Question. Who gave you this name?

Answer. My godfathers and godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a
member of Christ, the child of God, and an inheritour of the kingdom of
heaven.

Question. What did your godfathers and godmothers then for you?

Answer. They did promise and vow three things in my name. First, that I
should forsake the devil and all his works and pompes; the vanities of the
wicked world, and all the synful lusts of the flesh. Secondly, that I
should believe all the articles of the christen faith. And thirdly, yt I should
keep Gods holy will and commandments, and walk in the same all the days of
my life.

Question. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe and to do as
they have promised for thee?

Answer. Yes verily. And by Gods help so I will. And I hertelye thank our
heavenly father, that he has called me to this state of salvation, through
Jesus Christ our savior. And I pray god to give me his grace, that I may
continue in the same unto my lives end.

Question. Rehearse the articles of thy belief.

Answer. I Believe in god the father almighty, maker of heaven and of earth.
And in Jesus Christ his only son our lord. Which was conceived of the holy
ghost, borne of the of virgin Mary. Suffered under Po^ce Pilate, was crucified;
dead and buried, he descended into hell. The third day he rose again from
the dead. He ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of god the
father almighty. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I
believe in the holy ghost. The holy Catholyke Church. The communion of Saints.
The forgeuenes of sins. The resurreccion of the body. And the life
everlasting. Amen.

Question. What do you chiefllye learn in these articles of thy belief?

Answer. First, I learn to believe in god the father, who has made me and all the world.

Secondly, in God the son, who has redeemed me and al mankind.

Thirdly, in god the holy ghost, who sanctifies me and all the elect people of
god.

Question. You said that your godfathers and godmothers did promise for you
that you should keep gods commandments. Tell me how many there be.

Answer. Ten.

Question. Which be they?

Answer. The Same which God spoke in the.xx. Chapter of Exodus, saying: I am
the Lord thy god which have brought thee out of the land of Egipte, out of
the house of bondage. i. Thou shall have none other Gods but me. ii. Thou
shalt not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing
that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor in the water under the
earth. Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord
thy god am a gelous god, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands in the^ that love me and keep my commandments. iii.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy god in vain: for the lord will not
hold him giltlesse that takes his name in vain. iiii. Remember thou keep holy
the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor and do all that thou have to
do: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it thou
shalt do no manner of work, thou, and thy son and thy daughter, thy man
servant, and thy maid servant, thy Cattle, and the stranger that is
within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the Sea,
and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day. Wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it. v. Honor thy father and thy mother,
that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy god gives thee.
vi. Thou shall do no murder. vii. Thou shall not commit adultery. viii. Thou
shall not steal. ix. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
x. Thou shalt not coueite thy neighbors house, thou shalt not coueite thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass,
nor any thing yt is his.


Question. What dooeste thou chieflye learn by these commandments?

Answer. I learn two things. My duty toward god, and my duetye toward
my neighbor.

Question. What is thy duty toward God?

Answer. My duty toward God is to believe in him, to fear him, and to
love him with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all
my strength. To worship him. To give him thanks. To put my whole trust in
him. To call upon him. To honor his holy name and his word, and to serve him
truly all the days of my life.

Question. What is thy duty toward thy neighbor?

Answer. My duty toward my neighbor is, to love him as my self. And to
do to al men as I would they should do unto me. To love, honor and succoure
my father and mother. To honor and obey the king and his ministers. To
submit my self to al my governors, teachers, spiritual Pastors and
Masters. To order my self lowly and reuere^tly to all my betters. To hurt no
body by word nor deed. To be true and just in all my dealyng. To bear no
malice nor hatred in my heart. To keep my hands from picking and stealing, and
my tongue from evil speaking, lying and slaundering. To keep my body in
temperaunce, soberness, and chastity. Not to covet nor desire other men's
goods. But learn and labor truly to geat mine own living, and to do my
duty in that state of life, unto which it shall please God to call me.

Question. My good child know this, that thou art not hable to do these
things of thy self, nor to walk in ye commandments of God, and to serve
him, without his special grace, which thou must learn at al times to call
for by diligent prayer. Let me hear therefore if thou can sat the Lords
prayer.

Answer. Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom
come. Thy will be done will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this
day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us. And lead us not in to temptacion. But deliver us from
evil. Amen.

Question. What desire thou of God in this prayer.

Answer. I desire my Lord God our heavenly father, who is the geuer of all
goodness, to send his grace unto me and to all people, that we may worship
him, serve him, and obey him as we ought to do. And I pray unto God, that he
will send us all things that be nedeful both for our souls and bodies. And
that he will be merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins: and that it will
please him to save and defend us in all dangers gostly and bodily. And that he
will keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our gostly enemy, and from
everlasting death. And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore I say. Amen. So be it.

So sone as the children can say in their mother tongue, the Articles of the
faith, the Lords prayer, the.x. commandments: and also can answer to
such questions of this short Cathechisme, as the Bishop (or such as he shall
appoynte) shall by his discrecion appose them in: then shall they be brought to
the Bisshoppe by one that shall be his Godfather, or Godmother, that every child
may have a witness of his confirmacion. And the Bisshoppe shall confyrme them
on this wise.

Confirmacion.
Our help is in the name of the Lord.

Answer. Which has made both heaven and earth.

Minister. Blessed is the name of the Lord.

Answer. Hencefurth world without end.

Minister. Lord hear our prayer.

Answer. And let our cry come to thee.

Let us pray.

Almighty and euerliuyng God, who have vouchsafed to regenerate these thy
servants by water and the holy ghost, and have given unto them forgeuenes of
al their sins: strengthen them we beseech thee (O lord) with the holy ghost
the comforter, and daily increase in them thy manifold gifts of grace, the
spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and gostely
strength, the spirit of knowledge and true godliness: and fulfill them (O
Lord) with the spirit of thy holy fear. Amen.

Then the Bishop shall lay his hand upon every child severally, saying.

Defend, O Lord this child with thy heavenly grace, that he may continue
thine for ever, and daily increase in thy holy spirit more and more, until he
come unto thy everlasting kingdom. Amen.

Then shall the Bisshoppe say.

ALmighti everliving god, which make us both to will and to do those things
that be good and acceptable unto thy Majesty: we make our humble supplicacions
unto thee for these children, upon whom (after the exaumple of thy holy
Apostles) we have laid our hands, to certify them (by this sign) of thy
favor and gracious goodness toward them: let thy fatherly hand we beseech
thee, ever be over them: let thy holy spirit ever be with them, and so lead
them in the knowledge and obedience of thy word, that in the end they may
obtain the everlasting life through out Lord Jesus Christ: who with thee and
the holy ghost lives and reigns one God, world without end. Amen.

Then the Bisshoppe shall bless the children, thus saying.

The blessing of god almighty, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, be
upon you and remain with you for ever. Amen.

The Curate of every Paryshe, or some other at his appointment, shall diligently
upon Sundays and holy days, half an hour before Euensong, openly in the
church instruct and examine so many children of his paryshe sent unto him, as
the time will serve, and as he shall think convenient in some part of this
Cathechisme.

And al fathers, mothers, Masters and Dames, shall cause their children,
servants, and prentises (which have not learned their Cathechisme) to come
to the Church at the time appointed, and obediently to hear, and be ordered
by the Curate, until such time as they have learned all that is here appointed
for them to learn. And whenever the Bisshoppe shall give knowledge for
children to be brought before him to any convenient place, for their
confirmacion: The^ shall the Curate of every paryshe either bring or send in
writting, ye names of al those children of his paryshe, which can say the
Articles of their faith, the Lords prayer, and the.x. commandments: and
also how many of them can answer to the other questions contained in this
Cathechisme.

And there shall none be admitted to the holy Communion, until such time as he
can say the Cathechisme, and be confirmed.

The form of Solemnizacion of Matrimony.
First the bannes must be asked three several Sundays or holy days in the
time of service, the people being present after the accustomed manner.

And if the persons that would be married dwell in diverse Parishes, the
bannes must be asked in both parishes: and the Curate of the one Parish shall
not solemnize Matrimony betwixt them, without a certificate of the bannes
being thryse asked from the Curate of the other Parish. At the day appointed
for Solemnizacion of Matrimony, the persons to be married shall come into the
body of the Church with their friends and neighbors. And there the Priest
shall thus say.

Dearly beloved friends, we are gathered together here in the syghte of God,
and in the face of his congregation, to join together this man and this woman
in holy matrimony, which is an honorable estate instituted of God in
paradise, in the time of man's innocence: signifying unto us ye mystical
union, ye is betwixt Christ and his church: which holy estate Christ adourned
and beautified with his presence and first miracle that he wroughte in Cana of
Galile, and is commended of Saint Paul to be honorable among al men, and
therefore is not to be enterprised, not taken in hand unadvisedly, lightly, or
wantonly, to satisfye men's carnal lusts and appetites, like brute beasts
that have no understanding: but reverently, discretely, advisedly, sobrely, and
in the fear of god: Duly considering the causes for which Matrimony was
ordained. One was the procreacion of children, to be brought up in the fear
and nurtour of the Lord, and praise of God. Secondlye, it was ordained for a
remedy against sin, and to avoid fornicacion, that such persons as have not
the gift of continency, might marrye, and keep themselves undefiled members of
Christ's body. Thirdly, for ye mutual society, help and comfort, that ye
one ought to have of the other, both in prosperity and adversity: into the
which holy estate these two persons present come to be joined. Therefore, if
any man can show any just cause, why they may not lawfully be joined together:
let him now speak, or else hereafter for ever hold his peace.

And also speaking to the persons that shall be married, he shall say.

I require and charge you (as you will answer at the dreadful day of
judgment, when the secrets of al hearts shall be disclosed) that if either of
you do know any impedimente why ye may not be lawfullye joined together in
Matrimony, that ye confess it. For be ye well assured, that so many as be
coupled together otherwise then Gods word does allow, are not joined
together by God, neither is their Matrimony lawful.

At which day of marriage, if any man do allege and declare any impediment
why they may not be coupled together in matrimony, by Gods law, or the
laws of this Realm: and will be bound and sufficient sureties with him, to
the parties, or else put in a caucion to the full value of such charges as the
persons to be married does sustain to prove his allegacion: then the
Solemnizacion must be deferred unto such time as the truth be tried. If no
impediment be alleged, then shall the Curate say unto the man.

N, Will thou have this woman to thy wedded wife, to live together after Gods
ordinance in the holy estate of Matrimony? Will thou love her, coumforte her,
honor and keep her, in sickness and in health? And forsakyng al other, keep
thee only to her, so long as you both shall live?

The man shall answer.

I will. Then shall the priest say to the woman.

N, Will thou have this man to thy wedded housbande, to live together after
Gods ordinance in the holy estate of Matrimony? Will thou obey him and
serve him, love, honor and keep him, in sickness and in health, and forsaking
all other, keep thee only unto him, so long as you both shall live?

The woman shall answer.

I will. Then shall the Minister say.

Who gives this woman to be married unto this man?

And the Minister receiving ye woman at her father or friends hands, shall
cause the man to take the woman by the right hand, and so either to give their
troth to other. The man first saying.

I N. take thee N. to my wedded wife, to have and to hold from this day
forewarde, for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness, and in
health, to love and to cherish, til death us depart, according to gods holy
ordinance: And thereto I plight thee my troth.

Then shall they loose their hands, and the woman taking again the man by the
right hand, shall say.

I N. take thee N. to my wedded husband, to have and to hold from this day
foreward, for better, for worse, for rycher, for poorer, in sickness, and in
health, to love, cherishe, and to obey, till death us depart, according to
gods holy ordinance: And thereto I give thee my troth.

Then shall they again loose their hands, and the man shall give unto the woman
a ring, laying the same upon the book with the accustomed duty to the Priest
and Clerk. And the Priest taking the ring, shall deliver it unto the man, to
put it upon the fourth finger of the woman's left hand. And the man taught by
the Priest, shall say.

With this ring I thee wed: with my body I thee worship: and with all my worldly
goods I thee endow. In the name of the father, and of the son, and of the
holy ghost. Amen.

Then the man leaving the ryng upon the fourth finger of the woman's left hand,
the Minister shall say.

Let us pray.

O Eternal god, creator and preserver of al mankind, geuer of all spiritual
grace, the auctour of everlasting life: Send thy blessing upon these thy
servants, this man and this woman, who^ we bless in thy name, that as Isaac
and Rebecca lived faithfully together, so these persons may surely perform
and keep the vow and covenant betwixt them made: whereof this ring given and
received, is a toke^ and pledge, and may ever remain in perfect love and peace
together, and live according unto thy laws: through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Then shall the Priest join their right hands together and say.

Those whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

Then shall the Minister speak unto the people.

Forasmuch as N. and N. have consented together in holy wedlock, and have
witnessed the same before god and this company, and thereto have given and
pledged their troth either to other, and have declared the same by giving and
receiving of a ring, and by joining of hands: I pronounce that they be man and
wife together. In the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost.
Amen.

And the Minister shall add this blessing.

God the father, god the son, god the holy ghost, bless, preserve, and keep
you: the Lord mercifully with his favor look upon you, and so fill you with all
spiritual benediccyon and grace, that you may so live together in this life,
that in the world to come, you may have life everlasting. Amen.

Then the Minister or Clerks, going to the Lords table, shall say or sing
this psalm following.

Beati omnes. ps. cxxviii.
BLessed are al they that fear the lord: and walk in this ways.

For thou shall eat the labor of thy hands: O well is thee, and happy shall
thou be.

Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine: upon the walls of thy house.

Thy children like the Olive branches: round about thy table.

Lo, thus shall the man be blessed: that fears the Lord.

The Lord from out of Sion, shall bless thee: that thou shall see Jerusalem
in prosperity, all thy life long.

Yea, that thou shall see thy childrens children: and peace upon Israel.

Glory be to the father. etc. As it was in the. etc.

Or else this psalm following.

Deus misereatur. psalm lxvii.
GOd be merciful unto us and bless us: and show us the light of his
countenance, and be merciful unto us.

That thy way may be known upon the earth: thy saving health among all nations.

Let the people praise thee (O God:) yea let all the people praise thee.

O let the nations rejoice and be glad: for thou shall judge the stock
righteouslye, and govern the nations upon the earth.

Let the people praise thee (O god:) let all the people praise thee.

Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and god, eue^our God, shall give
us his blessyng.

God shall bless us, and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Glory be to the father. etc. As it was in the. etc.

The Psalm ended, and the man and the woman knelyng before the Lords table:
the Priest standing at the table, and turning his face toward them, shall say.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Answer. Christ have merry upon us.

Minister. Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven.etc.

And lead us not into temptacion.

Answer. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Minister. O Lord save thy servant, and thy handmayde.

Answer. Which put their trust in thee.

Minister. O Lord send them help from thy holy place.

Answer. And evermore defend them.

Minister. Be unto them a tower of strength.

Answer. From the face of their enemy.

Minister. O Lord hear our prayer.

Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.

The Minister.

O God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, bless these thy servants, and
so we the sede of eternal life in their minds, that whatsoever in thy holy
word they shall profitably learn, they may in deed fulfill the same. Look O
Lord mercifully upon the^ from heaven, and bless them. And as thou did
send thy blessing upon Abraham and Sara to their great comfort: so vouchsafe
to send thy blessing upon these thy servants, that they obeying thy will, and
always being in safety under thy proteccion, may abide thy love unto their
lives end: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

This prayer next following shall be omitted, where the women is paste child
birth.

O Merciful lord and heavenly father, by whose gracious gift mankind is
increased: we beseech thee assyste with thy blessyng these two persons, that
they may both be fruiteful in procreacion of children, and also live together
so long in godly love and honesty that they may see their childrens children,
unto the third and fourth generacyon, unto thy praise and honor: through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, which by thy mighty power have made all things of naught, which
also after other things set in order, did appointe that out of man (created
after thine own image and similitude) woman should take her beginning: and
knitting the^ together, dydst teach that it should never be lawful to put a
sunder those, whom thou by matrimony had made one: O God which have
consecrated the state of matrimony to such an excellent mystery, that in it
is signified and represented the spiritual marriage and unity betwixt Christ
and his church: Look mercyfully upon these thy servants, that both this man
may love his wife, according to thy word (as Christ did love his spouse the
church, who gave him self for it, loving and cherysshyng it even as his own
flesh.) And also ye this woman may be loving and amiable to her husband as
Rachel, wife as Rebecca, faithful and obedient as Sara, and in all quietness,
sobriety and peace, be a follower of holy and godly matrones: O Lord bless
them both, and grant them to inherit thy everlasting kingdom: through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Priest say.

Almighty God, which at the beginning did create our first parents Adam and
Eve, and did sanctify and join them together in marriage: power upon you the
riches of his grace, sanctify and bless you, that ye may please him both in
body and soul, and live together in holy love, unto your lives end. Amen.

Then shall begin the Communion, and after the Gospel shall be said a sermon,
wherein ordinarely (so often as there is any marriage) thoffice of a man and wife
shall be declared, according to holy scripture: or if there be no sermon, the
Minister shall read this that follows.

Al ye which be married, or which entende to take the holy estate of matrimony
upon you: hear what holy scripture does say, as touching the duty of
husbands toward their wives, and wives toward their husbands. Saint Paul in
his Epistle to the Ephesians ye fifth Chapter) does give this commandment
to all married men.

Ye husbands love your wives, even as Christ loved the church, and has given
himself for it, to sanctify it, pourging it in the fountain of water,
through thy word, that he might make it unto himself, a glorious
congregation, not having spotte or wrinkel, or any such thing, but that it
should be holy and blameles. So men are bound to love their own wives as their
own bodies. He that loves his own wife, loves himfelse. For never did any man
hate his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the lord does
the congregation: for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones.

For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall be joined unto
his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This mystery is great, but I
speak of Christ and of ye congregation. Nevertheless, let every one of you so
love his own wife, even as himself.

Likewise the same saint Paul (writing to the Colossians) speaks thus to al
men that be married. Colo. iiii
Ye men love your wives, and be not bitter unto them.

Hear also what Saint Peter the Apostle of Christ, which was himself a
married man (says unto al me^ that are married.) i. pete. iii
Ye husbands, dwell with your wives according to knowledge: Giving honor unto
the wife as unto the weaker vessel, and as heirs together of the grace of
life, so that your prayers be not hyndered.

Hertherto ye have heard the duty of the husband toward the wife.

Now likewise ye wives, hear and learn your duty toward your husbands,
even as it is plainly set forth in holy scripture.

Saint Paul (in the forenamed Epistle to the Ephesians) teaches you thus.
Ephesi. v
Ye women, submit your selves unto your own husbands as unto the lord: for
ye husband is the wives head eue^ as Christ is the head of the Church. And he
is also the savior of the whole body. Therefore as the church or
congregation is subject unto Christ: so likewise let the wives also be in
subieccio^ unto their own husbands in all things. And again he says: Let
the wife reverence her husband. And (in his Epistle to ye Collossians) Sayncte
Paul gives you this short Lesson. Colos. iii
Ye wives submit your selves unto your own husbands, as it is convenient in
the Lord.

Saint Peter also does instruct you very godly, thus saying: i. pete. iii.
Let wives be subject to their own husbands, so that if any obey not the
word, they may be won without the word, by the conversation of the wives,
while they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear, wbose apparel
let it not be outward, with broided here and trimming about with gold,
either in putting on of gorgeous apparel: but let the hid man which is in the
heart, be without al corrupcyon, so that the spirit be mild and quiet which
is a precious thing in the sight of god. For after this manner (in the old
time) did the holy women which trusted in god apparel themselves, being subject
to their own husbands: as Sara obeyed Ibraham calling him Lord, whose
daughters ye are made, doing well, and being not dismaide with any fear.

The new married persons (the same day of their marriage) must receive the holy
Communion.

The order for the visitacion of the sick.
The Priest entering into the sick persons house, shall say.

Peace be in this house, and to all that dwell in it.

When he comes into the sick man's presence, he shall say knelyng down.

Remember not lord our iniquities, nor the iniquities of our forefathers. Spare
us good Lord, spare thy people, whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious
blood, and be not angry with us for ever.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven.etc.

And lead us not into temptacion.

Answer. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Minister. O Lord save thy servant.

Answer. Which puts his trust in thee.

Minister. Send him help from thy holy place.

Answer. And evermore mightily defend him.

Minister. Let the enemy have none advantage of him.

Answer. Nor the wicked approach to hurt him.

Minister. Be unto him O Lord, a strong tower.

Answer. From the face of his enemy.

Minister. Lord hear our prayers.

Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.

The Minister.

O Lord look down from heaven, behold, visit and releue this thy servant:
Look upon him with the eyes of thy mercy, give him comfort and sure confydence
in thee: Defend him from the danger of the enemy, and keep him in perpetual
peace and safetye: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Hear us almighty and most merciful god and savior. Extend thy accustomed
goodness to this thy servant which is grieved with sickness: Visit him, O
Lord, as thou did visit Peter's wives mother, and the Captains servant.
So visit and restore unto this sick person his former health (if it be thy
will) or else give him grace so to take thy visitacion, that after this painful
life ended, he may dwell with thee in life everlasting. Amen.

Then shall the Minister exhort the sick person after this form or other
like.

DErely beloved, know this: that almighty God is the Lord of life and death,
and over all things to them perteining, as youth, strength, health, age,
weakness, and sickness. Wherefore, whatsoever your sickness is, know you
certainly, that it is gods visitacyon. And for what cause soever this syckenes
is sent unto you, whether it be to try your patience for the example of
other, and that your faith may be found in the day of the Lord laudable,
glorious, and honorable, to the increase of glory, and endless felicity: Or
else it be sent unto you to correct and amend in you, whatsoever does offend
the eyes of our heavenly father: know you certainly, that if you truly repent
you of your sins, and bear your sickness patiently, trustyng in Gods
mercy for his dear son Jesus Christ's sake, and render unto him humble
thanks for his fatherly visitacio^, submitting your self wholly to his will:
it shall turn to your profit, and help you foreward in the right way that
leads unto everlasting life.

If the person visited be very sick, then the Curate may end his exhortacion
in this place.

Take therefore in good worth the chastement of the Lord: For whom the Lord
loves, be chastises. Yea (as Saint Paul says) he scourges every son
which he receives: if you endure chastisement, he offers himself unto you,
as unto his own children. What son is he that the father chastises not? If
ye be not under correccion (whereof al true children are partakers) then are ye
bastardes and not children. Therefore, seeing that when our carnal fathers do
correct us, we reverently obey the^: shall we not now much rather be obedient
to our spiritual father, and so live? And they for a few days do chastise
us after their own pleasure, but he does chastise us for our profit, to the
intent he may make us partakers of his holiness. These words, good brother, are
Gods words, and written in holy scripture for our comfort and instruccion that
we should patiently and with thankesgeuing, bear our heavenly fathers
correccio^, whansoeuer by any manner of adversity it shall please his gracious
goodness to visit us. And there should be no greater comfort to Christian
persons, then to be made like unto Christ by suffering patiently adversities,
troubles, and sickenesses. For he himself went not up to joy, but first he
suffered pain: he entered not into his glory, before he was crucified. So
truly our way to eternal joy, is to suffer here with Christ, and our
door to enter into eternal life, is gladly to dye with Christ, that we may
rise again from death, and dwell with him in everlasting life. Now therefore
taking your sickness which is thus profitable for you, patiently: I exhort you
in the name of God, to remember the profession which you made unto God in your
Baptism. And forasmuch as after this life, there is accoumpt to be given unto
the righteous judge, of who^ all must be judged without respect of persons:
I require you to examine your self, and your state, both toward God and man:
so that accusing and condemning your self for your own faults, you may find
mercy at our heavenly fathers hand for Christ's sake, and not be accused and
condemned in that fearful judgment. Therefore I shall shortly rehearse the
articles of our faith, that ye may know whether you do believe as a christian
man should or no.

Here the Minister shall rehearse the Articles of the faith, saying thus.

Do thou believe in God the father almighty?

And so forth as it is in Baptism.

Then shall the Minister examine whether he be in charity with all the world:
Exhorting him to forgive from the bottom of his heart, all persons that have
offended him: and if he have offended other, to ask them forgiveness: And
where he has done injury or wrong to any man, that he make ame^des to the
uttermost of his power. And if he have not before disposed his goods, let him
than make his will. But men must be often admonyshed, that they set an order for
their temporal goods and lands wha^ they be in health. And also declare his
debtes what he owes, and what is owyng unto him, for dischargeing of his
conscience, and quietness of his executours.

These words before rehearsed, may be said before the Minister begin his
prayer, as he shall see cause.

The Minister may not forgeat, nor omit to move the sick person, (and that
most earnestly) to liberality toward the poor.

Here shall the sick person make a special confession, if he feel his
conscience troubled with any weighty matter. After which confession, the
Priest shall absolve him after this sort.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power to his church to absolve all
sinners, which truly repent and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive
thee thine offenses: and by his authority committed to me, I absolve thee from
all thy sins, in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. Amen.

And then the Priest shall say the Collect following.

Let us pray.

O Most merciful God, which according to the multitude of thy mercies, do
so put away the sins of those which truly repent, that thou remembrest
them no more: open thy eye of mercy upon this thy servant, who most earnestly
desires pardon and forgeuenes. Renew in him most loving father, whatsoever
has been decayed by the fraud and malice of the devil, or by his own
carnal will and frailnes: preserve and continue this sick membre in the
unity of thy church: considre his co^trycion, accept his tears, assuage his
pain, as shall be seen to thee most expedient for him. And forasmuch as he
puts his full trust only in thy mercy, Impute not unto him his former
sins, but take him unto thy favor: through the merits of thy most dearly
beloved son Jesus Christ. Amen.

Then the Minister shall say this Psalm.

In te domine speraui. psalm lxxi.
IN thee O Lord have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion: but
rydde me, and deliver me into thy ryghteousnes, inclyne thine ear unto me, and
save me.

Be thou my strong hold (whereunto I may always resort:) thou have promised
to help me, for thou art my house of defense and my castle.

Deliver me (O my God) out of the hand of the ungodly: out of the hand of the
unrighteous and cruel man.

For thou (O Lord God) art the thing that I long for: thou art my hope even
from my youth.

Through thee have I been holden up ever sense I was borne: thou art he that
took me out of my mothers womb, my praise shall always be of thee.

I am become as it were a monstre unto many: but my sure trust is in thee.

Oh let my mouth be filled with thy praise: (that I may sing of thy glory)
and honor all the day long.

Cast me not away in the time of age: forsake me not when my strength fails
me.

For mine enemies speak against me, and they that lay wait for my soul,
take their counsayll together, saying: GOD has forsaken him, persecute him,
and take him, for there is none to deliver him.

Go not far from, O God: my GOD, haste thee to help me.

Let them be confounded and perish, that are against my soul: let them be
covered with shame and dishonor, that seek to do me evil.

As for me, I will pacienly abide always: and will praise thee more and more.

My mouth shall daily speak of thy righteousness and salvation: for I know no
end thereof.

I will go forth in the strength of the Lord god: and will make mencyon of thy
righteousness only.

Thou (O God) have taught me from my youth up until now: therefore I will tell
of thy wondrous works.

Forsake me not (O God in mine old age, when I am graye headed: until I have
showed thy strength unto this generacyon, and thy power to al them that are yet
for to come.

Thy ryghteousnes (O god) is very high, and great things are they that thou
have done: O god who is like unto thee?

O what great troubles and adversities have thou showed me? and yet did
thou turn and refreshe me, yea and broughtest me from the deep of the earth
again.

Thou haste brought me to great honor: and comforted me on every syed.

Therefore will I praise thee and thy faythfulnesse (O God) playing upon an
instrument of music: unto thee will I sing upon the harp, O thou holy one of
Israel.

My lips will be feign, when I sing unto thee: and so will my soul whom
thou have delivered.

My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long: for they are
confounded and brought unto shame, that seek to do me evil.

Glory be to the father, and to the son: and to the. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

Adding this.

O Savior of the world, save us, which by thy cross and precious blood have
redeemed us, help us we beseech thee O God.

Then shall the Minister say.

THe almighty Lord, which is a most strong tower to all them that put their
trust in him, to whom all things in heaven, in earth, and under earth, do
bow and obey: be now and evermore thy defense, and make thee know and feel,
that there is no other name under heaven given to man, in whom, and through
whom, thou may receive health and salvation, but only the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Communion of the Sick.
Forasmuch as all mortal men be subject to many sudden perilles, diseases,
and sickenesses, and ever uncertain what time they shall depart out of this
life: Therefore, to the intent they may be always in a readiness to dye
whensoever it shall please almightye God to call them, the Curates shall
diligenly from time to time, but specially in the plague time, exhort their
parishioners, to the often receyuyng in the Church of the holy Communion of the
body and blood of our savior Christ. Which (if they do) they shall have no
cause in their sudden visitacio^ to be unquieted for lack of the same: but if
the sick person be not hable to come to the Church, and yet is desirous to
receive the Communion in his house, then he must give knowlegde ouernight, or
else early in the morning to the Curate, signifying also how many be appointed
to Communicate with him. And having a convenient place in the sick man's house,
where the Curate may reverently minister, and a good number to receive the
Communion with the sick person, with all things necessary for ye same, he
shall there minister the holy Communion.

The Collect.

Almighty everliving God, maker of mankind, which do correct those whom
thou do love, and chastisest every one whom thou do rcceyue: we beseech
to have mercy upon this thy servant visited with thy hand, and to grant that
he may take his sickness patiently, and recover his bodily health (if it be thy
gracious will) and whenever his soul shall depart from the body, it may
be without spot presented unto thee: through Jesus Christ our lord Ame^.

The Epistle.

Hebr. xii.
MI son despise not the correccion of the Lord, neither faint when thou art
rebuked of him: For who^ the Lord loves, him he corrects, yea and he
scourges every son, whom be receives.

The Gospel.

John. v.
Verily verily I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes on him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come unto damnacion, but he
passes from death unto life.

At the time of the distribucion of the holy Sacrament, the Priest shall first
receive the Communion himself, and after minister unto them that be appointed
to Communicate with the sick.

But if any man, either by reason of extremity of syckenes, or for lack of
warnyng in due time to the Curate, or for lack of company to receive with
him, or by any other just impedimente, do not receive the Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood: then the Curate shall instruct him, that if he do
truly repent him of his sins, and stedfastlye beeleue that Jesus Christ has
suffered death upon the cross for him, and shed his blood for his redemption,
earnestlye remembryng the benefytes he has thereby, and geuyng him hearty
thanks therefore, he does eat and drink the body and blood of our Savior
Christ, profitablye to his souls health, although he do not receive the
Sacrament with his mouth.

When the sick person is visited, and receives the holy Communion all at one
time, then the Priest for more expedycion shall cut of the form of the
visitacion at the Psalm. In thee O Lord have I put my trust, and go
streyghte to the Communion.

In the time of plague, Swette, or such other like contagyous times of
sickenesses or diseases, when none of the paryshe or neighbors can be gotten
to Communnicate with the sick in their houses, for fear of the infeccion:
upon special request of the diseased, the minister may alonly Communicate with
him.

The order for the Burial of the dead.
The Priest metyng the corpse at the Church style, shall say: Or else the
Priests and clerks shall sing, and so go either unto the Church, or toward
the grave.

John. xi.
I Am the resurreccyon and the life (says the Lord) he ye believes in me, yea
though he were dead, yet shall live. And whosoever lives and believes in me:
shall not dye for ever.

Job. xix.
I Know that my redemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the earth in the
last day, and shall be covered again with my skin, and shall see god in my
flesh: yea, and I my self shall behold him, not with other, but with the same
eyes.

i. Tim. vi
WE brought nothing into this world, neither may we carry any thing out of
this world. The Lord gives, and the lord takes away. Job. i.
Even as it has pleased the lord, so comes things to pass: blessed be the
name of the Lord.

When they come at the grave, whiles the corpse is made ready to be laid into
the earth, the Priest shall say, or the Priest and clerks shall sing.

Job. ix.
MAn that is borne of a woman has but a short time to live, and is full of
misery: he comes up and is cut down like a flower, he flies as it were a
shadow, and never continues in one stay. In the mids of life we be in
death: of whom may we seek for succor but of thee, O Lord, which for our
sins justly art displeased: yet O lord god most holy, O lord most mighty,
O holy and most merciful savior, deliver us not into the bitter pains of
eternal death. Thou know Lord the secrets of our hearts, shut not up
thy merciful eyes to our prayers: But spare us lord most holy, O god most
mighty, O holy and merciful savior, thou most worthy judge eternal, suffer
us not at our last hour for any pains of death, to fall from thee.

Then while the earth shall be cast upon the body by some standing by, the Priest
shall say.

FOrasmuch as it has pleased almighty god of his great mercy to take unto
himself the soul of our dear brother here departed: we therefore commit his
body to the ground, earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust, in sure and
certain hope of resurreccion to eternal life, through our Lord Jesus Christ:
who shall change our vile bodi, that it may be like to his glorious body,
according to the mighty working whereby he is hable to subdue all things to
himself.

Then shall be said or song.

I Heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me: write from hence for the, blessed
are the dead which dye in the Lord. Even so says the spirit, that they
rest from their labors.

Then shall follow this lesson, taken out the.xv. Chapter, to the Corinthians,
the first Epistle.

CHrist is risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of the^ that
sleep. For by a man came death, and by a man came the resurrection of the dead.
For as by Adam all dye: even so by Christ shall all be made alive, but every
man in his own order. The first is Christ, then they that are Christ's at
his coming. Then comes the end, when he has delivered up the kingdom to god
the father, when he has put down al rule and al authority and power. For he
must reign till he has put all his enemies under his fete. The last enemy
that shall be destroyed is death. For he has put al things under his fete. But
when he says, all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is
excepted, which did put all things under him. When all things are subdued
unto him, then shall the son also himself be subject unto him that put
all things under him, that god may be al in all: else what do they which are
Baptized over the dead, if the dead rise not at al? Why are they then Baptized
over them? yea, and why stand we always then in ieopardye? by our reioysyng
which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. That I have fought with
beasts at Ephesus after ye manner of me^, what auantageth it me, if ye dead
rise not again? Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. Be not ye
deceived, evil words corrupt good manners. Awake truly out of sleep, and sin
not. For some have not the knowledge of god. I speak this to your shame. But
some man will say: how arise the dead? With what bodi shall they come? thou
fool, that which thou sowest, is not quickened except it die. And what sowest
thou? thou sowest not ye body ye shall be, but bare corn, as of wheat or some
other: but god gives it a body at his pleasure, to every sede his own body. Al
flesh is not one manner of flesh: but there is one manner of flesh of me^, and
other manner of flesh of beasts, and other of fishes, another of birds. There
are also celestial bodies, and there are bodies terrestrial. But the glory of
the celestial is one, and the glory of ye terrestrial is another. There is one
manner glory of ye sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of
the stars. For one star differs from another in glory: so is the
resurreccion of the dead. It is sown in corrupcion, it rises again in
incorrupcion. It is sown in dishonor, it rises again in honor. It is sown
in weakness, it rises again in power. It is sown a natural body, it rises
again a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual
body, as it is also written: the first man Adam was made a living soul, and ye
last Adam was made a quickening spirte. How beit, that is not first which is
spiritual, but ye which is natural, and then that which is spiritual. The
first man is of the earth, earthy: The second man is ye lord from heaven,
heauely. As is the earthy, such are they that be earthy. And as is the
heavenly, such are they ye are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the
earthy, so shall we bear the Image of the heavenly. This say I brethren, that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of god, neither does corrupcion
inherit vncorrupcion. Behold, I show you a mystery. We shall not all sleep:
but we shall al be changed, and that in a momente, in the twinkeling of an eye
by the last trumpe. For ye trumpe shall blow, and the dead shall rise
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on
incorrupcion, and this mortal must put on immortality. When this corruptible
has put on incorrupcio^, and this mortal has put on immortality: the^ shall be
brought to pass the saying that is written. Death is swalowed up in victory:
Death, where is thy sting? Hell where is thy victory. The sting of Death is
sin: and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be unto god, which
has given us victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore my dear
brethren, be ye steadfast and immovable, always rich in the work of the
Lord, forasmuch as ye know, now that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

The Lesson ended, the Priest shall say.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

And lead us not into temptacion.

Answer. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The Priest.

Almighty god, with whom do live the spirits of them that depart hence in
the Lord, and in whom the souls of them that be elected, after they be
delivered from the burden of the flesh, be in joy and felicity: We give
thee hearty thanks, for that it has pleased thee to deliver this N. our
brother out of ye miseries of this synneful world: beseching thee, that it may
please thee of thy gracious goodness, shortly to acco^plishe ye number of thine
elect, and to have thy kingdom, that we with this our brother, and al other
departed in the true faith of thy holy name, may have our perfect consummacion
and bliss, both in body and soul, in thy eternal and everlasting glory. Amen.

The Collecte.

O Merciful god, ye father of our lord Jesus Christ, who is the resurreccion
and the life, in whom whosoever believes, shall live though he die. And
whosoever lives and believes in him, shall not die eternally: who also taught
us (by his holy Apostle Paul) not to be sorye as men without hope, for them
that sleep in him: We mekely beseech thee (O father) to raise us from the death
of sin, unto the life of righteousness: that when we shall depart this life,
we may rest in him, as our hope is this our brother does: and that at the
general resurreccion in the last day, we may be found acceptable in thy sight,
and receive that blessing which thy well-beloved son shall then pronounce to
all that love and fear thee, saying. Come ye blessed children of my father,
receive the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. Grant
this we beseech thee O merciful father, through Jesus Christ our mediator and
redemer. Amen.

The thanks giving of weomen after child birth, commonly called the Churching
of women.
The woman shall come into the church, and there shall knele down in some
convenient place, nigh unto the place where the Table stands: and the Priest
standing by her, shall say these words, or such like as the case shall
require.

FOrasmuch as it has pleased almighty god of his goodness to give you safe
deliverance, and has preserved you in the great danger of childbirth, ye
shall therefore give hearty thanks unto God and pray.

Then shall the Priest say this Psalm.

I Have lyfted up mine eyes unto the hills: from whence comes my help.

My help comes even from the Lord: which has made heaven and earth.

He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: and he that keeps thee will not
sleep.

Behold, he that keeps Israel, shall neither flumber nor sleep.

The lord himself is thy keeper: the lord is thy defense upon thy right hand.

So that the Sun shall not burn thee by day: neither the Moon by night.

The Lord shall preserve thee from al evil: yea it is even he that shall keep
thy soul.

The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in: from this time forth
for evermore.

Glory be to the father, and to the son.etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now. etc.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

And lead us not into temptacion.

Answer. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Priest. O Lord, save this woman thy servant.

Answer. Which puts her trust in thee.

Priest. Be thou to her a strong tower.

Answer. From the face of her enemy.

Priest. Lord hear our prayer.

Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.

Priest.

Let us pray.

O Almighty god, which have delivered this woman thy servant from the great
pain and peril of child birth: Grant we beseech thee (most merciful father)
that she through thy help, may both faithfully live and walk in her
vocacion, according to thy will in this life present: And also may be partaker
of everlasting glory in ye life to come, through Jesus Christ our lord. Ame^

The woman that comes to give her thanks, must offer accustomed offeringes:
and if there be a Communion, it is convenient that she receive the holy
Communion.

A Comminacion against sinners, with certain prayers to be used diverse times
in the year.
After Morning prayer, the people being called together by the rynging of a
bell, and assembled in the Church, the English Letany shall be said, after the
accustomed manner: which ended, the Priest shall go into the pulpitte, and
say thus.

BRethren, in the primative Church there was a godly discipline, that at the
beginning of Lent, such persons as were notorious sinners, were put to open
penance, and punished in this world, that their souls might be saved in the
day of the Lord. And that others admonished by their exaumple, might be more
afraid to offend. In the stead whereof, until the said discipline may be
restored again (which thing is much to be wisshed:) it is thought good, that
at this time (in your presence) should be read the general sentences of God
cursyng against impenitent sinners: gathered out of the.xxvii. Chapter of
Deuteronomie, and other places of scripture. And that ye should answer to
every sentence. Amen. To thinte^t that you, being admonished of the great
indignacion of god against sinners, may the rather be called to earnest and
true repentance, and may walk more warely in these dangerous days, fleing
from such vices, for the which ye affirm with your own mouths, the curse of
God to be due.

Cursed is the man that makes any carved or molten image, an abhominacion to
the Lord, the work of the hands of the crafts man, and puts it in a
secret place to worship it.

And the people shall answer and say.

Amen. Ministre. Cursed is he that curses his father and mother.

Answer. Amen.

Minister. Cursed is he that remoueth away the mark of his neighbors land.

Answer. Amen.

Minister. Cursed is he that makes the blind to go out of his way.

Answer. Amen.

Minister. Cursed is he that lets in judgment, the right of the stranger,
of them that be fatherles, and of wiedowes.

Answer. Amen.

Minister. Cursed is he that smites his neighbor secretly.

Answer. Amen.

Minister. Cursed is he that lies with his neighbors wife.

Answer. Amen.

Minister. Cursed is he that takes reward to slay the soul of innocent blood.

Answer. Amen.

Minister. Cursed is he that puts his trust in man, and takes manne for his
defense: and in his heart goes from the Lord.

Answer. Amen.

Ministre. Cursed are the unmerciful, the fornicatours and adulterers, and the
covetous persons, the woorshippers of images, slaunderers, drunkardes, and
extorcioners.

Answer. Amen.

The Minister.

NOw, seeing that all they be accursed (as the Prophet David bears witness)
psa. cxviii
which do err and go a stray from the commandments of god: let us
remembryng the dreadful judgment hangyng over our heads, and being always
at hand) return unto our Lord God, with all contricion and meekness of
heart, bewayling and lamentyng our sinful life, knowledgeing and confessing our
offenses, and seking to bring forth worthy fruits of penance. Math. iii
For now is the Axe put unto the root of the trees, so that every tree which
brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. Hebre. x.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living god: Psalm. x
he shall power down rayn upon the sinners, snares, fire and brimstone, storm
and tempest, this shall be their portion to drink. Esa. xxvi
For lo, the lord is comen out of his place to visyte the wickedness of such
as dwell upon the earth. Mala. iii
But who may abide ye day of his coming? who shall be able to endure when he
appears? His fan is in his hand, and he will pourge his floor, and gather
his wheat into the barn: Math. iii
but he will burn the chafe with unquenchable fire. The day of the lord
comes as a these upon the night, and when men shall say peace, and all
things are safe: i. Tess. v.
then shall sodeynlye destruction come upon them, as sorrow comes upon a woman
trauayling with child, Roma. ii
and they shall not escape: then shall appear the wrath of God in the day of
ve^geaunce, which obstinate sinners, through the stubbernes of their heart,
have heaped unto themself, which despised the goodness, patience, and long
sufferaunce of God, Prouer. i
when he called them continually to repentance. Then shall they call upon me,
says the lord, but I will not hear: they shall seek me early but they shall
not find me, and that because they hated knowledge, and received not the fear
of the Lord, but abhorred my counsel, and despised my correccyon: then shall
it be to late to knock, when the door shall be shut, and to late to cry for
mercy, when it is the time of justice. O terrible voice of most just
judgment, which shall be pronounced upon them, when it shall be said unto them:
go ye cursed into the fire everlasting, which is prepared for the devil and
his Angels: Mat. xxv
therefore brethren take we head betime, while the day of salvation lasts:
ii. Cor. vi.
for the night comes when none can work: Ioh. ix.
but let us while we have the light, believe in the light, and walk as the
children of the light, that we be not cast into the utter darkness where is
weping and gnashyng of teeth. Mat. xxv
Let us not abuse ye goodness of God, which calls us mercyfully to
amendmente, and of his endless piety promises us forgiveness of that which
is past, if (with a whole mind and true heart) we return unto him: for though
our sins be red as scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow: Esai. i.
Ezechiel. xxviii.
and though they be like purple, yet shall they be as white as wolle. Turn
you clean (says the Lord) from all your wickedness, and your sin shall not
be your destruction. Cast away from you al your ungodliness that ye have done,
make you new hearts and a new spirit: wherefore will ye dye, O ye house of
Israel? Seeing that I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies (says
the lord god.) i. John. ii
Turn you then and you shall live. Although we have sinned, yet have we an
advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous: Esai. liii.
and he it is that obteyneth grace for our sins, for he was wounded for our
offenses, and smitten for our wyckednes. Let us therefore return unto him, who
is the merciful receiver of al true penitent sinners, assuryng our self, that
he is ready to receue us, and most willing to pardon us, if we come to him
with faytfull repentance: If we will submyt our selves unto him, and from
hencefurth walk in his ways. If we will take his easy yoke and light burden
upon us, to follow him in lowlines, patience, and charity, Math. xi.
and be ordered by the governance of his holy spirit, seking always his
glory, and scruyng him duelye in our vocacion, with thanks geuyng. This if we
do, Christ will deliver us from the curse of the law, and from the extreme
malediccion which shall light upon them that shall be set on the left hand:
Mat. xxv.
and he will set us on his right hand, and give us the blessed benediccyon
of his father, commanding us to take possession of his glorious kingdom, unto
the which he vouchsafe to bring us all, for his infinite mercy. Amen.

Then shall they al knele upon their knees: and the Priests and Clerks knelyng
(where they are accustomed to say the Letany,) shall say this Psalm.

Miserere mei deus. Psalm. li
Have mercy upon me (O God) after thy great goodness: according to the
multitude of thy mercyes, do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly fro my wickedness: and cleanse me from me sin.

For I knowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou
might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.

Behold, I was shapen in wickedness: and in sin has my mother conceived me.

But lo, thou requirest truth in inward parties: and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

Thou shalt purge me with Isope, and I shall be clean: thou shall wash me, and
I shall be whyter then Snow.

Thou shalt make me hear of joy and gladness: that the bones which thou
have broken may rejoice.

Turn thy face from my sins: and put out al my misdedes.

Make me a clean heart (O God:) and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy spirit from me.

O give me the comfort of thy help again: and stablishe me with thy free
spirit.

Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked: and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

Deliver me from bloudguiltinesse (O God) thou that art the God of my health:
and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

Thou shalt open my lips (O Lord:) my mouth shall show thy praise.

For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou delitest
not in burnt offerynges.

The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and a contrite heart (O
God) shall thou nor despise.

O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of rightousnes, with the burnt
offerings and oblacions; then shall they offer young bullockes upon thine altar.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and. etc.

As it was in the beginning, and is now.etc. Amen.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven.etc.

And lead us not into temptacyon.

Answer. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Minister. O Lord save thy servants.

Answer. Which put their trust in thee.

Minister. Send unto them help from above.

Answer. And evermore mightily defend them.

Minister. Help us O God our savior.

Answer. And for the glory of thy names sake deliver us, be merciful unto us
sinners, for thy names sake.

Minister. O Lord hear our prayers.

Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.

Let us pray.

O Lord, we beseech thee mercifully hear our prayers, and spare all those
which confess their sins to thee: that they (whose consciences by sin are
accused) by thy merciful pardon may be absolved: Through Christ our Lord
Amen.

O Most mighty god and merciful father, which have compassion of al men, and
hate nothing that thou have made: which would not the death of a sinner,
but that he should rather turn from sin, and be saved: mercyfully forgive us
our trespasses, receive and comfort us, which be grieved and weryed which the
burden of our sin. Thy property is to have mercy, to thee only it
apperteineth to forgive sins: spare us therefore good lord, spare thy people
whom thou haste redeemed. Enter not into judgment with thy servants, which
be vile earth, and miserable sinners: but so turn thy ire from us, which
mekely knowledge our vileness, and truly repent us of our faults: so make haste
to help us in this world, that we may ever live with thee, in the world to
come: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the people say this that follows, after the Minister.

TVrne thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we be turned: be favorable (O
lord) be favorable to thy people, which turn to thee in weping, fasting and
praying: for thou art a merciful God, full of compassion, long sufferyng, and
of a great piety. Thou sparest when we deserve punishment, and in thy wrath
think upon mercy. Spare thy people good Lord, spare them, and let not
thy heritage be brought to confusion: hear us (O lord) for thy mercy is
great, and after the multitude of thy mercyes look upon us.

Here ends the book of common prayer.
The psalter or Psalms of David, after the tra^slacion of the great Bible,
poynted as it shall be said or song in Churches.

decorative border containing printer's device of Edward Whitchurch

The Psalms of David.
Beatus vir qui non abiit. psalm. i.
Morni^g prayer.
BLessed is that man that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly: nor
stand in the way of sinners, and has not sit in the seat of the scornful.

But his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law will he exercise
himself day and night.

And he shall be like a tree planted by the water side: that will bring forth
his fruit in due season.

His leaf also shall not wyther: and look whatsoever he does, it shall
prosper.

As for the ungodly, it is not so with them: but they are like the chafe which
the wind scatters away (from the face of the earth.)

Therefore the ungodly shall not be hable to stand in the judgment: neither
the sinners in the congregacyon of the ryghteous.

But the lord knows the way of the righteous: and the way of the ungodly
shall peryshe.

Quare fremuerunt gentes. psalm. ii.
WHy do the Heathen so furiously rage together: and why do the people ymagine
a vain thing?

The kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel together:
against the Lord, and against his anointed.

Let us break their bands a sunder: and cast away their cords from us.

He that dwells in heaven shall laugh them to scorn: the lord shall have them
in derision.

Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath: and vex them in his sore
displeasure.

Yet have I set my king: upon my holy hill of Syon.

I will preach the law, whereof the lord has said unto me: thou art my son,
this day have I begotten thee.

Desire of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine enheritaunce: and
the uttermost part of the earth for thy possession.

Thou shall bruise them with a rod of iron: and break them in pieces like a
potters bessell.

Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be learned ye that are judges of the earth.

Serve the Lord in fear: and rejoice (unto him) with reverence.

Kiss the son left he be angry, and so ye perish from the (right) way: if
his wrath be kiendled (yea but a little) blessed are all they that put their
trust in him.

Domine quid multiplicati. psalm. iii.
LOrd how are they increased that trouble me? many are they that rise aganst me.

Many one there be that say of my soul: there is no help for him in (his) God.

But thou O Lord art my defendour: thou art my worship, and the lifter up of my
head.

I did call upon the Lord with my voice: and he heard me out of his holy hill.

I laid me down and slepte: and rose up again, for the Lord sustained me.

I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people: that have set themselves
against me round about.

Up Lord and help me, O my God: for thou smytest all mine enemies upon the
cheke bone, thou haste broken the teeth of the ungodly.

Salvation belongs unto the Lord: and thy blessing is upon the people.

Cum inuocarem. psalm. iiii.
Hear me when I call, O God of my righteousness: thou haste set me at
liberty when I was in trouble, have mercy upon me, and hearken unto my prayer.

O ye sons of men, how long will ye blaspheme mine honor: and have such
pleasure in vanity, and seek after leasyng?

Know this also, that the Lord has chosen to himself the man that is
godly: when I call upon the Lord, he will hear me.

Stand in awe, and sin not: comen with your own heart, and in your
chamber, and be still.

Offer the sacrifice of righteousness: and put your trust in the Lord.

There be many that will say: who will show us any good.

LORD lift thou up: the light of thy countenance upon us.

Thou haste put gladness in my heart: sense the time that their corn and
wine (and oil) increased.

I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest: for it is thou Lord only,
that make me dwell in safety.

Verba mea auribus. Psalm. v.
POnder my words, O LORD: consider my meditacyon.

O harken thou unto the voice of my calling, my king and my God: for unto thee
will I make my prayer.

My voice shalt thou hear betimes O Lord: earlye in the morning will I
direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

For thou art the God that has no pleasure in wickedness: neither shall any
evil dwell with thee.

Such as be foolyshe, shall not stand in thy syghte: for thou hate all
them that work vanity.

Thou shalt destroy them that speak leasyng: the Lord will abhor both
the bloudthirstye and deceytfull man.

But as for me, I will come into thy house, even upon the multitude of thy
mercy: and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple.

Lead me, O lord, in thy righteousness, because of mine enemies: make thy way
plain before my face.

For there is no faithfulness in his mouth: their inward parts are very
wickedness.

Their throat is an open sepulcher: they flatter with their tongue.

Destroy thou them, O God, let them peryshe through their own ymaginacyons:
cast them out in the multitude of their ungodliness, for they have rebelled
against thee.

And let all them that put their trust in thee rejoice: they shall ever be
geuyng of thanks, because thou defendest the^: they that love thy name shall be
ioyefull in thee.

For thou Lord will give thy blessyng unto the ryghteous: and with thy
favorable kyndnesse will thou defend him, as with a shield.

Domine ne in furore. Psalm. vi.
Evening prayer
O Lord, rebuke me not in thine indignacion: neither chasten me in thy
displeasure.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord: for I am weak, O Lord heal me, for my bones are
vexed.

My soul is also sore troubled: but Lord how long will thou punish me?

Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul: oh save me for thy mercies sake.

For in death no man remembers thee: and who will give thee thanks in the
pit?

I am wearye of my gronyng, every night wash I my bed: and water my couche
with my tears.

My beauty is gone for very trouble: and worn away because of all my
enemies.

Away fro me all yet that work vanity: for the Lord has heard the voice
of my weeping.

The Lord has heard my peticyon: the Lord will receive my prayer.

All mine enemies shall be confounded and sore vexed: they shall be turned
back, and put to shame suddenly.

Domine deus meus. psalm. vii.
O Lord my God, in thee have I put my trust: save me from all them that
persecute me, and deliver me.

Left he devour my soul like a Lion, and tear it in pieces: while there is
none to help.

Oh Lord my God, if I have done any such thing: or if there be any wickedness
in my hands.

If I have rewarded evil unto him that dealte frendlye with me: yea, I have
delivered him, that without any cause, is mine enemy.

Then let mine enemy persecute my soul, and take me: yea, let him tread my
life down upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the duste.

Stand up O Lord in thy wrath, and lift up thy self: because of the
indignacions of mine enemies, arise up for me in the judgment that thou have
commanded.

And so shall the congregation of the people come about thee: for their sakes
therefore, lift up thy self again.

The Lord shall judge the people, give sentence with me, O Lord: according to
my righteousness, and according to the innocence that is in me.

Oh let the wickedness of the ungodly come to an end: but guide thou the
just.

For the righteous god: tries the very hearts and reins.

My help comes of God: which preserves them that are true of heart.

God is a righteous judge (strong and paciente:) and God is provoked every day.

If a man will not turn, he will wheat his sweorde: he has bent his bow, and
made it ready.

He has prepared for him the instruments of death: he ordeyneth his arrows
against the persecutours.

Behold, he trauayleth with mischief: he has conceived sorrow, and brought
forth ungodliness.

He has graven and dug up a pytte: and is fallen him self into the
destruction that he made for other.

For his travail shall come upon his own head: and his wickedness shall fall
upon his own pate.

I will give thanks unto the Lord according to his righteousness: and will
praise the name of the Lord the most highest.

Domine dominus noster. Psalm. viii.
O Lord our governor, how excellent is thy name in all the world? thou that
haste set thy glory above the heavens.

Out of the mouth of very babes and suckelynges haste thou ordained strength
because of thine enemies: that thou might: still the enemy and the auenger.

For I will consydre thy heavens, even the work of thy fyngers: the Moon and
the sterres which thou have ordained.

What is man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou
vysitest him?

Thou made him lower then the Angels: to crown him with glory and worship.

Thou make him to have dominion of the works of thy hands: and thou have
put all things in subieccyon under his feet.

All sheep and oxen: yea, and the beasts of the field.

The fowls of the air, and the fish of the sea: and whatsoever walks
through the paths of the seas.

O Lord our governor: how excellent is thy name in all the world.

Confitebor tibi. Psalm. ix.
Morning prayer
I Will give thanks unto thee, O LORD, with my whole heart: I will speak of
all thy marvelous works.

I will be glad, and rejoice in thee: yea, my songs will I make of thy name,
O thou most highest.

While mine enemies are drieuen back: they shall fall, and peryshe at thy
presence.

For thou haste mainteyned my right and my cause: thou art set in the throne
that iudgest right.

Thou haste rebuked the Heathen, and destroyed the ungodly: thou haste put out
their name for ever and ever.

O thou enemy, destruccions are come to a perpetual end: even as the cities
which thou haste destroyed, their memorial is perished with them.

But the Lord shall endure for ever: he has also prepared his seat for
judgment.

For he shall judge the world in righteousness: and minister true judgment
unto the people.

The Lord also will be a defense for the oppressed; even a refuge in due time
of trouble.

And they that know thy name, will put their trust in thee: for thou Lord
haste never failed them that seek thee.

O praise the Lord, which dwells in Sion: show the people of his doings.

For when he makes inquisicion for blood, he remembers them: and forgeatteth
not the complaynt of the poor.

Have mercy upon me (O Lord:) consydre the trouble which I suffer of them
that hate me, thou that lyftest me up from the gates of death.

That I may show all thy praises within the ports of the daughter of Syon: I
will rejoice in thy salvation.

The Heathen are sunken down in the pytte that they made: in the same net
which they hid privily, is their own foot taken.

The Lord is known to execute judgment: the ungodly is trapped in the work
of his own hands.

The wicked shall be turned unto hell: and all the people that forgeat God.

For the poor shall not be always forgotten: the pacyent abiding of the meke,
shall not perish for ever.

Up Lord and let not man have the upper hand: let the Heathen be judged in thy
syghte.

Put them in fear (O Lord:) that the Heathen may know them selves to be
but men.

Vt quid domine. psalm. x.
WHy stand thou so far of (O Lord:) and hydest thy face in the needful
time of trouble?

The ungodly for his own lust does persecute the poor: let them be taken in
the craftye wilines that they have ymagined.

For the ungodly has made boaste of his own hearts desire: and speaks
good of the couetouse (whom God abhors.)

The ungodly is so proud, that he cares not for God: neither is God in all
his thoughts.

His ways are always greuouse, thy judgments are far above out of his
syghte: and therefore defyeth he all his enemies.

For he has said in his heart: tushe, I shall never be cast down, there shall
no harm happen unto me.

His mouth is full of cursyng, and disceyte and fraud: under his tongue is
ungodliness and vanity.

He sits lurkyng in the theuishe corners of the streets: and privily in his
lurkyng dens does he murder the innocent, his eyes are set against the
poor.

For he lies waiting secretelye: even as a Lion lurketh he in his den, that
he may rauishe the poor.

He does rauishe the poor: when he geatteth him into his net.

He falls down and humbles him self: that the congregcyon of the poor
may fall into the hand of his captains.

He has said in his heart: tushe, God has forgotten, he hydeth away his
face, and he will never see it.

Arise (O Lord God) and lift up thine hand: forgeat not the poor.

Wherefore should the wicked blaspheme God? while he does say in his heart,
tushe, thou God carest not for it.

Surely thou haste seen it: for thou beholdeste ungodliness, and wrong.

That thou may take the matter into thy hand: the poor commits himself
unto thee, for thou art the helper of the friendless.

Break thou the power of the ungodly and malicyous: take away his
ungodliness, and thou shall find none.

The Lord is king for ever and ever: and the Heathen are perished out of the
land.

Lord, thou haste heard the desire of the poor: thou preparest their heart,
and thine ear harkened thereto.

To help the fatherless and poor unto their right: that the manne of the
earth be no more exalted against them.

In domino confido. psalm. xi.
IN the Lord put I my trust: how say ye then to my soul, that she
should fly as bird unto the hill.

For lo, the ungodly bend their bow: and make ready their arrows within
the quyuer, that they may prieuelye shoot at them, which are true of heart.

For the foundacions will be cast down: and what has the righteous done?

The Lord is in his holy Temple: the Lords seat is in heaven.

His eyes consydre the poor: and his eye liddes tries the children of men.

The LORD aloweth the ryghteous: but the ungodly and him that delights in
wickedness, does his soul abhor.

Upon the ungodly he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, storm and
tempeste: this shall be their porcyon to drink.

For the righteous Lord loves righteousness: his countenance will behold the
thing that is just.

Saluum me fac domine. Psalm. xii.
Evening prayer.
Help (me) Lord, for there is not on godly manne left: for the faithful are
minished from among the children of men.

They talk of vanity, every one with his neighbor: they do but flatter
with their lips, and dissemble in their double heart.

The Lord shall root out all disceytfull lips: and the tongue that speaks
proud things.

Which have said: with our tongue will we prevail, we are they that ought
to speak, who is Lord over us?

Now for the coumforteles troubles sake of the nedye: and because of the deep
sighing of the poor.

I will up (says the Lord:) and will help every one from him that swells
against him, and will set them at rest.

The words of the Lord are pure words: even as the silver, which from earth
is tried and purifyed seven times in the fire.

Thou shalt keep them (O Lord:) thou shalt preserve him from this generacyon
for ever.

The ungodly walk on every side, when they are exalted: the children of men
are put to rebuke.

Vsquequo domine. Psalm. xiii.
How long wylt thou forgeat me O Lord, for ever: how long will thou hyde thy
face from me?

How long shall I seek counsel in my soul, and be so vexed in my heart:
how long shall mine enemies triumph over me?

Consydre and hear me, Lord my God: lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in
death.

Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him: for if I be cast
down, they that trouble me will rejoice at it.

But my trust is in thy mercy: and my heart is ioyeful in thy salvation.

I will sing of the Lord, because he has delte so lovingly with me: (yea, I
will praise the name of the Lord the most hygheste.)

Dixit incipiens. psalm. xiiii.
THe fool has said in his heart: there is no God.

They are corrupt, and become abominable in their doings: there is not one
that does good (no not one.)

The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men: to see if there were
any that would understand, and seek after God.

But they are al gone out of the way, they are altogether become abominable:
there is none that does good, no not one.

Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they have deceived: the
person of aspes is under their lips.

Their mouth is full of cursyng and bitterness: their feet are swyfte to
shed blood.

Destruction and unhappiness is in their ways: and the way of peace have they
not known, there is no fear of god before their eyes.

Have they no knowledge that they are all such workers of mischief? eating up
my people as it were bread.

And call not upon the Lord: there were they brought in great fear (even where
no fear was) for God is in the generation of the righteous.

As for you, ye have made a mock at the counsel of the poor: because he
puts his trust in the Lord.

Who shall give salvation unto Israel out of Sion? when the Lord turns the
captivity of his people, then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

Domine quis habitabit. psalm. xv.
Morning prayer.
Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle: who shall rest upon thy holy hill?

Even he that leads an incorrupt life: and does the thing which is right,
and speaks the truth from his heart.

He that has used no deceste in his tongue: nor done evil to his neighbors,
and has not slaundered his neighbors.

He that sets not by himself, but is lowlye in his own eyes: and makes
much of them that fear the Lord.

He that swears unto his neigbboure and dysapoynteth him not: though it were
to his own hinderaunce.

He that has not given his money upon usury: nor taken reward against the
innocent.

Whosoever does these things shall never fall.

Conserua me domine. psalm. xvi.
Preserve me, O god: for in thee have I put my trust. O my soul, thou have
said unto the Lord: thou art my god, my goods are nothing unto thee.

At my delight are upon the Saints that are in the earth: and upon such as
excel in virtue.

But they that run after another God: shall have great trouble.

Their drink offeringes of blood will not I offer: neither make mention of
their names within my lyppes.

The lord himself is the portion of mine enheritaunce and of my cup: thou
shall maintain my lot.

The lot is fallen unto me in a fair ground: yea, I have a goodly heritage.

I will thank the Lord for giving me warning: my reins also chasten me in the
night season.

I have set god always before me: for he is on my right hand, therefore I shall
not fall.

Wherefore my heart was glad, and my glory reioysed: my flesh also shall rest
in hope.

For why? thou shalt not leave my soul in hell: neither shall thou suffer thy
holy one to see corrupcion.

Thou shall show me the path of life: in thy presence is the fulness of joy,
and at thy right hand there is pleasure for, evermore.

Exaudi domine iusticiam. psalm. xvii.
HEeare the right, O lord, consider my complaint: and hearken unto my prayer
that goes not out of fained lyppes.

Let my sentence come forth from thy presence: and let thine eyes look upon the
thing that is equal.

Thou have proved and visited mine heart in the night season, thou have tried
me, and shall find no wickedness in me: for I am utterly purposed that my mouth
shall not offend.

Because of men's works that are done against the words of thy lyppes: I
have kept me from the ways of the destroyer.

O hold thou up my goynges in thy paths: that my fotesteppes slyp not.

I have called upon thee, O god, for thou shalt hear me: incline thine ear
to me, and hearken unto my words.

Show thy marvelous loving kindness, thou that art the savior of them that
trust in thee: from such as resist thy right hand.

keep me as the apple of an eye: hide me under the shadow of thy wings.

From the ungodly that trouble me: mine enemies compass me round about, to
take away my soul.

They are enclosed in their own fat: and their mouth speaks proud things.

They lie waiting in out may on every side: turning their eyes down to the
ground.

Like as a lion that is gredy of his pray: and as it were a Lions whelpe
lurkyng in secret places.

Up Lord, disapoint him and cast him down: deliver my soul from the ungodly,
which is a sweorde of thine.

From the men of thy hand, O Lord, from the men I say, and from the evil
world: which have their portion in this life, whose bellyes thou fyllest with
thy hid treasure.

They have children at their desire: and leave the rest of their substance
for their babes.

But as for me, I will behold thy presence in righteousness: and when I awake
up after thy lykenes, I shall be satisfied with it.

Diligain te domine. psalm. xviii.
Evening prayer.
I Will love thee, O Lord, my strength, the Lord is my stony rock and my
defense, my savior, my God, and my might, in whom I will trust: my buckeler,
the horn also of my salvation, and my refuge.

I will call upon the Lord which is worthy to be praised: so shall I be safe fro
mine enemies.

The sorrows of death compassed me: and the ouerflowinges of ungodliness made me
afraid.

The pains of hell came about me: the snares of death ouertoke me.

In my trouble will I call upon the Lord: and complain unto my God.

So shall he hear my voice out of his (holy) temple: and my complaint shall
come before him, it shall enter even into his ears.

The earth trembled and quaked: the very foundacyons also of the hills shoke
and were removed, because he was wroth.

There went a smoke out of his presence: a consuming fire out of his mouth, so
that coals were kindled at it.

He bowed the heavens also and came down: and it was dark under his feet.

He road upon the Cherubins and did fly: he came flying upon the wings of
the wind.

He made darkness his secret place: his pauilion round about him; with dark
water and thick clouds to cover him.

At the brightness of his presence, his clouds removed: hayle stones, and
coals of fire.

The Lord also thundered out of heaven: and the highest gave his thunder,
hayle stones and coals of fire.

He sent out his arowes and scattred them: he cast forth lygh: enynges, and
destroyed them.

The springes of waters were seen: and the foundacyons of the round world
were dyscouered at thy chydyng, O Lord, at the blastyng of the breath of thy
displeasure.

He shall send down from the high to fetch me: and shall take me out of many
waters.

He shall deliver me from my strongest enemy, and from them which hate me: for
they are to mighty for me.

They prevented me in the day of my trouble: but the lord was my vpholder.

He brought me forth also into a place of liberty: he brought me forth, even
because he had a favor unto me.

The Lord shall reward me after my righteous dealyng: according to ye clennes
of my hands, shall he recompense me.

Because I have kept the ways of the Lord: and have not forsaken my god as
the wicked does.

For I have an eye unto all his laws: and will not cast out his
commandments from me.

I was also incorrupt before him: and eschewed mine own wickedness.

Therefore shall the Lord reward me after my righteous dealyng: and according
unto the clennesse of my hands in his eye syghte.

With the holy thou shall be holy: and with a perfect man thou shall be perfect.

With the clean, thou shall be clean: and with ye froward thou shall learn
frowardnes.

For thou shalt save the people that are in adversity, and shall bring down
the high lokes of the proud.

Thou also shall light my Candle: the lord my god shall make my darkness to be
light.

For in thee I shall discomforte an host of men: and with the help of my god,
I shall leap over the wall.

The way of god is an vnderfiled way, the word of the lord also is tried in the
fire: he is the defender of al them that put their trust in him.

For who is god but the Lord? or who has any strength, except our God.

It is God that gyrdeth me with strength of war: and makes my way perfect.

He makes my fete like hearts fete: and sets me up on high

He teaches my hands to fight: and mine arms shall break even a bow of
stele.

Thou have given me the defense of thy salvation: thy right hand also shall
hold me up, thy loving correccion shall make me great.

Thou shall make room enough under me for to go: that my footsteps shall
not slide.

I will follow upon mine enemies and overtake them: neither will I turn again,
till I have destroyed them.

I will smite them, that they shall not be hable to stand: but fall under my
feet.

Thou have girded me with strength unto the battle: thou shall throw down
mine enemies under me.

Thou have made mine enemies also to turn their backs upon me: and I shall
destroy them that hate me.

They shall cry, but there shall be none to help them: yea, even unto the
Lord shall they cry, but he shall not hear the^.

I will beat them as small as the dust before the wind: I will cast them out,
as the claye in the streets.

Thou shall deliver me from the striuinges of the people: and thou shall make
me the head of the heathen.

A people whom I have not known: shall serve me.

As Soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me: but the strange children
shall dissemble with me.

The strange children shall fail: and be afraid out of their prisons.

The Lord lives: and blessed be my strong helper, and praised be the God of
my salvation.

Even the god which sees that I be avenged: and subdueth the people unto me.

It is he that delivers me from my (cruel) enemies, and sets me up above
mine adversaries: thou shall rydde me from the wicked man.

For this cause I will give thanks unto thee O lord, among the Gentiles: and
sing praises unto thy name.

Great prosperity gives he unto his king: and shows loving kindness unto
David his anointed, and unto his sede for evermore.

Celi enarrant gloriam dei. psalm. xix.
Morni^g prayer.
THe heavens declare the glory of God: and the fyrmament shows his handy
work.

One day tells another: and one night certifyeth another.

There is neither speech nor language: but their voices are heard among them.

Their sound is gone out into all lands: and their words into the ends of
the world.

In them has he set a tabernacle for the sun: which comes forth as a
brydegrome out of his chaumbre, and reioyseth as a Giant to run his course.

It goes forth from the uttermost part of the heaven, and runs about unto
the end of it again: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.

The law of the Lord is an undefiled law, converting the soul: the
testimony of the lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple.

The statutes of the lord are right, and rejoice the heart: the commandment
of the lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes.

The fear of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever: the judgments of the
lord are true, and righteous altogether.

More to be desired are they then gold, yea then much fine gold: sweter also
then honey and the honey comb.

Moreover, by them is thy servant taught: and in keeping of them there is great
reward.

Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret faults.

Keep the servant also from presumpteous sins, lest they geat the dominion
over me: so shall I be undefiled, and innocent from the great offense.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditacion of my heart: be (always)
acceptable in thy sight.

O lord: my strength and my redemer.

Exaudiat te dominus. psalm. xx.
THe Lord hear thee in the day of trouble: the name of the God of Jacob defend
thee.

Send thee help from the sanctuary: and strength thee out of Syon.

Remember all thy offerynges: and accept thy burnt sacrifice.

Grant thee thy hearts desire: and fulfill al thy mind.

We will rejoice in thy salvation, and tryumphe in the name of the Lord our
God: the Lord perform al thy peticions.

Now know I that the lord helps his anointed, and will hear him from his
holy heaven. Even with the wholesome strength of his right hand.

Some put their trust in charets, and some in horses: but we will remember the
name of the Lord our God.

They are brought down and fallen: but we are riesen, and stand upright.

Save Lord, and hear us, O king of heaven: when we call (upon thee.)

Domine in virtute tua. psalm. xxi.
THe King shall rejoice in thy strength O Lord: exceading glad shall he be of
thy salvation.

Thou have given him his hearts desire: and have not denied him the request of
his lips.

For thou shall prevent him with the blessings of goodness: and shall set a
crown of pure gold upon his head.

He asked life of the, and thou gave him a long life: even for ever and ever.

His honor is great in thy salvation: glory and great worship shall thou lay
upon him.

For thou shall give him everlasting felicity: and make him glad with the joy
of thy countenance.

And why? because the king puts his trust in the lord: and in the mercy of
the most highest, he shall not miscary.

All thine enemies shall feel thy hand: thy right hand shall find out them
that hate thee.

Thou shall make them like a fyerye oven in time of thy wrath: the lord shall
destroy them in his displeasure, and the fire shall consume them.

Their fruit shall thou root out of the earth: and their sede from among the
children of men.

For they intended mischief against thee: and imagyned such a devise, as they
are not hable to perform.

Therefore shall thou put them to flight: and ye stringes of thy bow shalt
thou make ready against the face of them.

Be thou exalted Lord, in thy own strength: so will we sing and praise thy power.

Deus deus meus. psalm. xxii.
Eueni^g prayer.
MY God, my god (look upon me:) why have thou forsaken me, and art so far
from my health, and from the words of my complaynt?

O my god, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not: and in the night
season also I take no rest.

And thou continuest holy: O thou worship of Israel.

Our fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee: and thou did deliver them.

They called upon thee, and were helped: they put their trust in thee, and
were not confounded.

But as for me, I am a worm and no man: a very scorn of men, and the outcast
of the people.

All they that see me, laughe me to scorn: they shote out their lyppes, and
shake the head, saying.

He trusted in god that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, if he will
have him.

But thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb: thou waste my hope when
I hanged yet upon my mothers breasts.

I have been left unto thee ever sense I was borne: thou art my god even from
my mothers womb.

O go not from me, for trouble is hard at hand: and there is none to help me.

Many oxen are come about me: fat bulls of Basan close me in on every side.

They gape upon me with their mouths: as it were a raumpyng and roaryng lion.

I am powered out like water, and all my bones are out of iointe: my heart also
in the mids of my body, is even like melting ware.

My strength is dried up like a potsherde and my tongue cleueth to my gummes:
and thou shalt bring me into the dust of death.

For (many) dogs are come about me: and the counsel of the wicked lays
siege against me.

They pierced my hands and my fete: I may tell all my bones, they stand
staryng and lokyng upon me.

They part my garments among them: and cast lottes upon my vesture.

But be not thou far from me O Lord: thou art my succor, have thee to help
me.

Deliver my soul from thy swoeorde: my dearling from the power of the dog.

Save me from the Lions mouth: thou have heard me also from among the horns of
the Unicorns.

I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the mids of the congregation
will I praise thee.

O praise the lord ye that fear him: magnifye him al ye of the sede of Jacob,
and fear him all ye sede of Israel.

For he has not despised nor abhorred the low estate of the poor: he has
not hyd his fare from him, but when he called unto him, he heard him.

My praise is of thee in the great congregation: my vows will I perform in
the sight of them that fear him.

The poor shall eat and be satisfied: they that seek after the lord shall
praise him, your heart shall live for ever.

All the ends of the world shall remember themselves, and be turned unto the
lord: and all the kinredes of the nacyons shall worship before him.

For the kingdom is the Lords: and he is the gouernoure among the people.

All such as be fat upon earth: have eaten and worshipped.

Al they that go down into the dust, shall knele before him: and no man has
quickened his own soul.

My sede shall serve him: they shall be counted unto the lord for a generation.

They shall come, and the heavens shall declare his righteousness: unto a people
that shall be borne whom the lord has made.

Dominus regit me. psalm. xxiii.
THe Lord is my shepehearde: therefore can I lack nothing.

He shall feed me in a grene pasture: and lead me forth beside the waters of
comfort.

He shall convert my soul: and bring me forth in ye paths of righteousness for
his names sake.

Yea, though I walk through the valey of the shadow of death: I will fear no
evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort me.

Thou shall prepare a table before me, against them that trouble me: thou have
anointed my head with Oil, and my cup shall be full.

But (thy) loving kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and
I will dwell in the house of ye lord for ever.

Domini est terra. psalm. xxiiii.
Morni^g prayer.
THe earth is the lords, and all that therein is: the compass of the world,
and they that dwell therein.

For he has founded it upon the Seas: and prepared it upon the sloudes.

Who shall ascend into the hill of the lord? or who shall rise up in his holy
place?

Even he that has clean hands, and a pure heart: and that has not lift up
his mind unto vanity, nor sworn to deceive his neighbor.

He shall receive the blessyng from the lord: and ryghteousnes from the God of
his salvation.

This is the generation of the^ that seek him: even of them that seek thy face
O Jacob.

Lift up your heads, O ye gates: and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and
the king of glory shall come in.

Who is the king of glory? it is the lord strong and mighty, even the Lord,
mighty in battayl.

Lift up your heads (O ye gates:) and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors,
and the king of glory shall come in.

Who is the king of glory? even the Lord of hosts, he is the king of glory.

Ad te domine. psalm. xxv.
INto thee (O Lord) will I lift up my soul, my God, I have put my trust in
thee: O let me not be confounded, neither let mine enemies triumph over me.

For all they that hope in thee shall not be ashamed: but such as transgress
without a cause, shall be put to confusyon.

Show me thy ways, O lord: and teach me thy paths.

Lead me forth in thy truth, and learn me, for thou art the god of my
salvation: in thee has been my hope all the day long.

Call to remembrance (O Lord) thy tender mercyes: and thy loving kindness, which
has been ever of old.

Oh remember not the sins and offenses of my youth: but according to thy
mercy think thou upon me (O Lord) for thy goodness.

Gracious and righteous is the lord: therefore will he teach sinners in the way.

Them that be meke shall he guide in judgment: and such as be gentle, them
shall he learn his way.

All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth: unto such as keep his
covenant and his testimonies.

For thy names sake, O Lord: be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

What man is he that fears the lord? him shall he teach in the way that he
shall chose.

His soul shall dwell at ease: and his seed shall enherite the land.

The secrets of the Lord are among them that fear him: and he will show them
his covenant.

Mine iyes are ever lokyng unto the lord: for he shall pluck my fete out of the
net.

Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate and in misery.

The sorrows of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my troubles.

Look upon mine adversity and misery: and forgive me all my sin.

Considre mine enemies how many they are: and they bear a tyrannous hate
against me.

O keep my soul and deliver me: let me not be confounded for I have put my
trust in thee.

Let perfectnes and righteous dealing wait upon me: for my hope has been in
thee.

Deliver Israel, O God: out of al his troubles.

Iudica me domine. Psalm. xxvi.
BE thou my judge (O lord) for I have walked innoce^tly: my trust has been
also in the lord, therefore shall I not fall.

Examine me, O Lord: and prove me: try out my reins and my heart.

For thy loving kindness is ever before mine eyes: and I will walk in thy
truth.

I have not dwelt with vain persons: neither will I have fellowship with the
deceitful.

I have hated the congregation of the wicked: and will not sit among the
ungodly.

I will wash my hands in innocence, O Lord: and so will I go to thine altar.

That I may show the voice of thankesgeuing: and tell of al thy wondrous
works.

Lord, I have loved the habitacion of thy house: and the place where thine
honor dwells.

O shut not up my soul with the sinners: nor my life with the blood thyrstie.

In whose hands is wickedness: and their right hands are full of gifts;

But as for me, I will walk innocentlye: O deliver me, and be merciful unto
me.

My foot stands right: I will praise the Lord in the congregacions.

Dominus illuminacio. psalm. xxvii.
Evening prayer.
THe lord is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? the lord is
the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid.

When the wicked (even mine enemies and my foes) came upon me to eat up my
flesh: they stombled and fell.

Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be
afraid: and though there rose up war against me, yet will I put my trust in
him.

One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require: even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair
bewty of the lord, and to visit his temple.

For in the time of trouble he shall hyde me in his Tabernacle: yea in the
secret place of his dwelling shall he hide me, and set me up upon a rock of
stone.

And now shall he lift up my head: above mine enemies round about me.

Therefore will I offer in his dwelling an oblacyon with great gladness: I will
sing and speak praises unto the lord.

Hearken unto my voice, O lord, when I cry unto thee: have mercy upon me, and
hear me.

My heart has talked of thee, seek ye my face: thy face lord will I seek.

O hyde not thou thy face fro me: nor cast thy servant away in dyspleasure.

Thou have been my succor: leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
salvation.

When my father and my mother forsake me: the lord takes me up.

Teach me thy way, O lord: and lead me the right way, because of mine enemies.

Deliver me not over into the will of mine adversaries: for there are false
witnesses risen up against me, and such as speak wrong.

I should utterly have faynted: but that I beeleue verily to see the goodness of
the lord, in the land of the living.

O tarry thou the lords laisure: be strong and he shall comfort thine heart, and
put thou thy trust in the Lord.

Ad te domine clamabo. psalm. xxviii.
Unto thee will I cry, O lord my strength: think no scorn of me, lest if
thou make thee as though thou hear not, I become like them that go down
into the pytte.

Hear the voice of my humble peticions when I cyre unto thee: when I hold up
my hands toward the mercy seat of thy holy Temple.

O pluck me not away (neither destroy me) with the ungodly and wicked doers:
which speak frendlye to their neighbors, but imagine mischief in their
hearts.

Reward them according to their deeds: and according to the wickedness of their
own inuencions.

Recompense them after the work of their hands: pay them that they have
deserved.

For they regard not in their mind the works of the lord, nor the operacio^
of his hands: therefore shall he break them down, and not build them up.

Praised be the lord: for he has heard the voice of my humble peticions.

The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart has trusted in him: and I
am helped, therefore my heart daunceth for joy, and in my song will I praise
him.

The lord is their strength: and he is the wholesome defense of his anointed.

O save thy people, and give thy blessyng unto thine enheritaunce: feed them
and set them up for ever.

Afferte domino. psalm. xxix.
BRing unto the Lord, O ye mighty (bring young Rams unto the Lord:)
ascribe unto the Lord worship and strength.

Give the lord the honor due unto his name: worship the lord with holy worship.

It is the Lord that commands the waters: it is the glorious God that
makes the thunder.

It is the Lord that rules the sea, the voice of the lord is mighty in
operacion: the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice.

The voice of the Lord breaks the Cedre trees: yea, the lord breaks the
Cedres of Libanus

He made them also to skip like a calfe: Libanus also and Syrion like a young
unicorn.

The voice of the Lord deuydeth the flames of fire: the voice of the lord
shakes the wilderness, yea the lord shakes the wyldernes of Cades.

The voice of the lord makes the Hindes to bring forth young, and discovers
the thick busshes: in his Temple does every man speak of his honor.

The lord sits above the water flood: and the lord remains a king forever.

The lord shall give strength unto his people: the lord shall give his people the
blessyng of peace.

Exaltabo te domine. psalm. xxx.
Morni^g prayer.
I Will magnify thee, O Lord, for thou have set me up: and not made my foes to
triumph over me.

O lord my god, I cried unto thee: and thou haste healed me.

Thou Lord have brought my soul out of hell: thou have kept my life from them
that go down to the pyt.

Sing praises unto the lord (O ye Saints of his:) and give thanks unto him,
for a remembrance of his holiness.

For his wrath endures but ye twinkling of an eye, and in his pleasure is
life: heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be removed: thou lord of thy
goodness had made my hill so strong.

Thou did turn thy face (fro me:) and I was troubled. Then cried I unto thee
O lord: and gat me unto my lord right humbly.

What profit is there in my blood: when I go down to to the pyt?

Shall the dust give thanks unto thee: or shall it declare thy truth?

Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord be thou my helper.

Thou have turned my heaviness to joy: thou have put of my sackecloth, and
gyrded me with gladness.

Therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without ceasing: O my God, I
will give thanks unto the for ever.

In te domine speraui. psalm. xxxi.
IN thee O lord have I put my trust: let me never be put to confusion, deliver
me in thy righteousness.

Bow down thine ear to me: make have to deliver me.

And be thou my strong rock, and house of defense: that thou may save me.

For thou art my strong rock and my castle: be thou also my gyde, and lead me
for thy names sake.

Draw me out of the net, that they have laid prieuely for me: for thou art
my strength.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit: for thou have redeemed me O Lord, thou
God of truth.

I have hated them that hold of supersticious vanities: and my trust has been
in the Lord.

I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou have considered my trouble,
and have known my soul in adversity.

Thou have not shut me up into the hand of the enemy: but have set my fete in
a large rowme.

Have mercy upon me, O lord, for I am in trouble: and mine iye is consumed for
very heaviness, eue^ my soul and my body.

For my life is waxen old with heaviness: and my years with mourning.

My strength fails me because of mine iniquity: and my bones are corrupt.

I became a reprofe among al mine enemies, but specially among my neighbors:
and they of mine acquaintance were afraid of me, and they that did see me
without, conveyed themselves from me.

I am clean forgotten, as a dead man out of mind: I am become like a broken
vessel.

For I have heard the blasphemy of the multitude: and fear is on every side,
while they conspire together against me, and take their counsel to take away
my life.

But my hope has been in thee, O Lord: I have said thou art my God.

My time is in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine enemies: and from
them that persecute me.

Show thy servant the light of thy countenance: and save me for thy mercies
sake.

Let me not be confounded, O lord, for I have called upon thee: let the
ungodly be put to confusion, and be put to silence in the grave.

Let the lying lips be put to silence: which cruellye, disdaynfully, and
dispitefully, speak against the ryghteous.

O how plentiful is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee: and that thou have prepared for the^ that put their trust in thee, even
before ye sons of me^.

Thou shall hide them prieuely by thine own presence, from the provoking of al
men: thou shall keep them secretly in thy tabernacle from the strife of tongues.

Thanks be to the lord: for he has showed me marvelous great kindness in a
strong city.

And when I made have, I said: I am cast out of the sight of thine iyes.

Nevertheless, thou hardest the voice of my prayer: when I cried unto thee.

O love the lord, al ye his Saints: for the lord preserves them that are
faithful, and plenteously rewards the proud doer.

Be strong, and he shall stablishe your heart: all ye that put your trust in
the Lord.

Beati quorum. Psalm. xxxii.
Eueni^g prayer.
Blessed is he, whose unrighteousness is forgeuen: and whose sin is covered.

Blessed is the man, unto whom the lord imputes no sin: and in whose
spirit there is no gyle.

For while I held my tongue, my bones consumed away, through my daily
complaining.

For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night: and my moisture is like the
drouth in the Summer.

I will knowledge my sin unto thee: and mine unrighteousness have I not hyd.

I said, I will confess my sins unto the lord: and so thou forgauest the
wyckednes of my sin.

For this shall every one that is godly, make his prayer unto thee: in a time
when thou may be found, but in the great water fluddes they shall not come
nighe him.

Thou art a place to hyde me in, thou shalt preserve me from trouble: thou
shalt compass me round about with songs of delyueraunce.

I will inform thee, and teach thee in the way wherein thou shall go: and I
will guide thee with mine eye.

Be ye not like horse and mule, which have no vnderstaning: whose mouths must
be holden with bitte and bridle, lest they fall upon thee.

Great plagues remain for the ungodly: but whosoever puts his trust in ye lord,
mercy embraces him on every side.

Be glad, O ye righteous and rejoice in the Lord: and be joyful all ye that
are true of heart.

Exultate iusti in domino. Psalm. xxxiii.
Rejoice in the lord, O ye righteous: for it becomes well the just to be
thankful.

Praise the lord with harp: sing Psalms unto him with the lute and
instrument of ten strings.

Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing praises iustlye (unto him) with a good
courage.

For the word of the Lord is true: and al his works are faithful.

He loves righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the goodness of
the lord.

By the word of the Lord were the heavens made: and all the hosts of them by
the breath of his mouth.

He gathers the waters of the sea together as it were upon an heap: and
lays up the deep as in a treasure house.

Let all the earth fear the lord: stand in awe of him al ye that dwell in the
world.

For he spoke, and it was done: he commanded, and it stood fast.

The lord brings the counsel of the heathen to naught: and makes the
devises of the people to be of none effect (and casts out the counsels of
princes.)

The counsayll of the Lord shall endure for ever: and the thoughts of his
heart from generation to generation.

Blessed are the people whose god is the Lord Jehovah: and blessed are the
folk that have chosen him to be their inheritance.

The lord looked down from heaven, and beheld all the children of men: from
the habitacion of his dwelling, he co^sidereth all them that dwell in the earth.

He fashioned all the hearts of them: and understands all their works.

There is no king that can be saved by the multitude of an host: neither is any
mighty man delivered by much strength.

A horse is coumpted but a vain thing to save a man: neither shall he deliver
any man by his great strength.

Behold, the iye of the lord is upon them that fear him: and upon them that
put their trust in his mercy.

To deliver their souls from death: and to feed them in time of dearth.

Our soul has patiently tarried for the lord: for he is our help, and our
shield.

For our heart shall rejoice in him: because we have hoped in his holy name.

Let thy merciful kyndnesse (O lord) be upon us: like as we have put our
trust in thee.

Benedicam dominum. Psalm. xxxiiii.
I Will always give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall ever be in my mouth.

My soul shall make her bost in ye lord: ye humble shall hear thereof and be
glad.

O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnifye his name together.

I sought the Lord, and he heard me: yea, he delivered me out of all my fear.

They had an eye unto him, and were lightened: and their faces were not ashamed.

Lo, the poor cries, and the Lord hears him: yea and saves him out of all
his troubles.

The Aungel of the Lord tarieth round about them that fear him: and
delivers them.

O taste and see how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts
in him.

O fear the Lord, ye that be his saints: for they that fear him, lack
nothing.

The lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they which s;eke the Lord,
s;hall want no manner of thing that is good.

Come ye children, and hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

What man is he that lusts to live, and would feign see good days? keep thy
tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guyle.

Eschew evil and do good: seek peace and ensue it.

The eyes of the Lord, are over the righteous: and his ears are open unto
their prayers.

The countenance of the Lord is against them that do evil: to root out the
remembrance of them from of the earth.

The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them: and delivers them out of all
their troubles.

The lord is nygh unto them that are of a contrite heart: and will save such
as be of an humble spirit.

Great are the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord delivers him out of
all.

He keeps all his bones: so that not one of them is broken.

But misfortune shall stay the ungodly: and they that hate the righteous,
shall be desolate.

The Lord delivers the souls of his servants: and all they that put their
trust in him, shall not be destitute.

Iudica domine nocentes. Psalm. xxxv.
Morni^g prayer.
Plead thou my cause O Lord, with them that strive with me: and fight thou
against them that fight against me.

Lay hand upon the shield and buckeler: and stand up to help me.

Bring forth the spear: and stop the way against them that persecute me:
say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my soul: let them be
turned back, and brought to confusion, that ymagine mischief for me.

Let them be as the dust before the wind: and the aungel of the Lord
scattering them.

Let their way be dark and slippery: and let the Angel of the Lord
persecute them.

For they have prieuely laid their net to destroy me without a cause: yea,
even without a cause have they made a pytte for my soul.

Let a sudden destruction come upon him unawares, and his net that he has
laid privily catch himself: that he may fall into his own mischief.

And my soul be joyful in the Lord: it shall rejoice in his salvation.

And my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which deliuerest the
poor from him ye is to strong for him? yea, the pore and him ye is in misery,
from him ye spoyleth him.

False witness did rise up: they laid to my charge things that I know not.

They rewarded me evil for good: to the great discoumforte of my soul.

Nevertheless, when they were sick I put on sackeclothe, and humbled my soul
with fasting: and my prayer shall turn into mine own bosom.

I behaved my self, as though it had been my friend, or my brother: I went
heuely, as one ye mourns for his mother.

But in mine adversity they reioysed and gathered them together: yea, the
very abiectes came together against me unawares, making mowes at me and
ceased not.

With the flatterers were busy mockers: which gnashed upon me with their teeth.

Lord, how long, will thou look upon this? O deliver my soul from the
calamities which they bring on me, and my darlyng from the lions.

So will I give thee thanks in the great congregation: I will praise thee
among much people.

O let not them that are mine enemies triumph over me ungodly: neither let
them wink with their eyes that hate me without a cause.

And why? their commoning is not for peace: but they ymagine deceytfull words
against the^ ye are quiet in ye land.

They gaped on me with their mouths and said; fie on thee, fie on thee, we
saw it with our eyes.

This thou haste seen, O lord: hold not thy tongue then, go not far fro
me, O Lord.

Awake and stand up to judge my quarrel: Avenge thou my cause, my God and my
lord.

Judge me, O lord my God, according to thy ryghteousnes: and let them not
triumph over me.

Let them not say in their hearts, there there, so would we have it: neither
let them say, we have devoured him.

Let them be put to confusion and shame together, that rejoice at my trouble:
let them be clothed with rebuke and dishonor that boast themselves against me.

Let them be glad and rejoice that favor my ryghteous dealyng: yea let them
say always, blessed be the lord which has pleasure in the prosperity of his
servant.

And as for my tongue, it shall be talkyng of thy ryghteousnes, and of thy praise
all the day long.

Dixit iniustus Psalm. xxxvi.
My heart shows me the wickedness of the ungodly: that there is no fear of
God before his eyes.

For he flatreth himself in his own sight until his abominable sin be
found out.

The words of his mouth are unrighteous and full of deceypt: he has left of to
behave himself wisely, and to do good.

He ymagineth mischief upon his bed, and has set himself in no good way:
neither does he abhor any thing that is evil.

Thy mercy O Lord, reaches unto the heaven: and thy faythfulnes unto the
clouds.

Thy righteousness stands like the strong mountains: thy judgments are like
the great deep.

Thou lord shall save both man and beast, how excellent is thy mercy O God?
and the children of men, shall put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

They shall be satisfied with the plenteousnes of thy house: and thou shall give
them drink of thy pleasures, as out of the river.

For with thee is the well of life: and in thy light shall we see light.

O continue forth thy loving kyndnes unto them ye know thee: and thy
righteousness unto them that are true of heart.

O let not the foot of pride come against me: and let not the hand of the
ungodly cast me down.

There are they fallen (all) that work wickedness: they are cast down, and
shall not be hable to stand.

Noli emulari. Psalm. xxxvii.
Evening prayer.
FRet not the self because of the ungodly neither be thou enuyous against
the evil doers.

For they shall sone be cut down like the grass: and be withered even as
the grene herb.

Put thou thy trust in the Lord, and be doing good: dwell in the land, and
verily thou shall be fed.

Delyghte thou in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy hearts desire.

Commit thy way unto the Lord, and put thy trust in him: and he shall bring
it to pass.

He shall make thy ryghteousnes as clear as the light: and thy just dealyng
as the noone day.

Hold thee still in the lord, and abide patiently upon him: but grieve not thy
self at him, whose way does prospere against the man that does after evil
counsayles.

Leave of from wrath, and let go displeasure: fret not thy self, else shall
thou be moved to do evil.

Wicked doers shall be roted out: and they that patiently abide the lord, those
shall inherit the land.

Yet a little while, and the ungodly shall be clean gone: thou shall look after
his place, and he shall be away.

But the meke spirited shall possess the earth: and shall be refreshed in the
multitude of peace.

The vugodly seeks counsel against the just: and gnassheth upon him with his
teeth.

The lord shall laugh him to scorn: for he has seen, that his day is
coming.

The ungodly have drawn out the sweord, and have bended their bow: to cast
down the poor and nedy, and to slay such as be of a right conversation.

Their sweorde shall go through their own heart: and their bow shall be broken.

A small thing that the righteous has: is better then great riches of the
ungodly.

For the arms of the ungodly shall be broken: and the lord vpholdeth the
righteous.

The lord knows the days of the godly: and their enheritaunce shall endure
for ever.

They shall not be confounded in the perilous time: and in the days of dearth
they shall have enough.

As for the ungodly, they shall perish, and the enemies of the lord shall
consume as the fat of lambs: yea, even as the smoke shall they consume away.

The ungodly boroweth and pays not again: but the righteous is merciful, and
liberal.

Such as be blessed of god, shall possess the land: and they that be cursed of
him shall be rooted out.

The Lord orders a good man's going: and makes his way acceptable to
himself.

Though he fall, he shall not be cast away: for the Lord vpholdeth him with his
hand.

I have been young, and now am old: and yet saw I never the righteous forsaken,
nor his sede begging their bread.

The righteous is ever merciful, and lends: and his sede is blessed.

Fly from evil, and do the thing that is good: and dwell for evermore.

For the lord loves the thing that is right: he forsakes not his that be
godly, but they are preserved for ever.

(The righteous shall be punished:) as for the sede of ye ungodly, it shall be
roted out.

The righteous shall enherite the land: and dwell therein for ever.

The mouth of the ryghteous is excercysed in wisdom: and his tongue wylbe
talkyng of judgment.

The law of his god is in his heart: and his goinges shall not slide.

The ungodly sees the ryghteous, and seeks occasion to slaye him.

The lord will not leave him in his hand: nor condemn him when he is judged.

Hope thou in the lord, and keep his way, and he shall promote thee: that thou
shall possess the land, when the ungodly shall perish, thou shall see it.

I my self have seen the ungodly in great power: and flourishing like a grene
baye tree.

And I went by, and lo, he was gone: I sought him, but (his place) could no
where be found.

Keep innocence, and take heed unto the thing that is right for that shall bring
a man peace at the last.

As for the transgressors, they shall peryshe together: and the end of the
ungodly is, they shall be roted out at the last.

But the saluaryon of the ryghteous comes of the Lord: which is also their
strength in the time of trouble.

And the Lord shall stand by them, and save them: he shall deliver them from
the ungodly, and shall save them because they put their trust in him.

Domine ne in furore. psalm. xxxviii
Morni^g prayer.
But me not to rebuke (O Lord) in thine anger: neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure.

For thine arowes stick fast in me: and thy hand presses me sore.

There is no health in any flesh, because of thy dispeasure: neither is there
any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin.

For my wickednesses are gone over my head: and are like a sore burden, to
heavy for me to bear.

My wou^des stink and are corrupt: through my foolishnes.

I am brought into so great trouble and miserye: that I go mourning all the
day long.

For my loins are filled with a fore disease: and there is no whole part in my
body.

I am feeble and sore smitten: I have roared for the very disquietnes of my
heart.

Lord, thou know all my desire: and my groaning is not hid from thee.

My heart pants, my strength has failed me: and the light of mine eyes is
gone from me.

My lovers and my neighbors did stand loking upon my trouble: and my kinsmen
stood afar of.

They also that sought after my life, laid snares for me: and they that went
about to do me evil, talked of wickedness, and ymagined deceit all the day long.

As for me, I was like a deaf man and heard not: and as one that is domme,
which does not open his mouth.

I became even as a man that hears not: and in whose mouth are no reprofes.

For in thee, O Lord, have I put my trust: thou shalt answer for me, O Lord
my God.

I have required, that they (even mine enemies) should not tryumphe over me:
for when my foot slipped, they reioysed greatly against me.

And I truly am set in the plage: and my heaviness is ever in my sight.

For I will confess my wickedness: and be sorye for my sin.

But mine enemies live, and are mighty: and they that hate me wrongfully, are
many in number.

They also that reward evil for good, are against me: because I follow the
thing that good is.

Forsake me not (O Lord my God:) be not thou far fro me.

Haste thee to help me: O Lord (God) my salvation.

Dixi cuftodiam vias. psalm. xxxix.
I Said, I will take heed to my ways: that I offend not in my tongue.

I will keep my mouth (as it were with a bridle:) while the ungodly is in my
sight.

I held my tongue and spoke nothing: I kept silence, yea even from good
words, but it was pain and grief to me.

My heart was hot within me, and while I was thus musyng: the fire kiendled,
and (at the last) I spoke with my tongue.

Lord, let me know mine end, and the number of my days: that I may be
certifyed how long I have to live.

Behold, thou have made my days as it were a spanne long: and mine age is
even as nothing in respect of thee, and verily every man living is altogether
vanity.

For man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vayn: he
heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.

And now lord, what is my hope? truly my hope is even in thee.

Deliver me from all mine offenses: and make me not a rebuke unto the foolish.

I became domme, and opened not my mouth: for it was thy doing.

Take thy plague away from me: I am even consumed by the means of thy heavy
hand.

When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, thou make his beauty to
consume away, like as it were a mothe fretting a garmente: every man
therefore is but vanity.

Hear my prayer, O Lord, and with thine ears considre my calling: hold not
thy peace at my tears.

For I am a stranger with thee, and a soiourner: as all my fathers were.

Oh spare me a little, that I may recover my strengeth: before I go hence and
be no more seen.

Expectans expectaui. Psalm. xl.
I Waited patiently for the lord: and be inclined unto me, and heard my
calling.

He brought me also out of the horrible pit, out of the mire and claye: and
set my fete upon the rock, and ordered my goinges.

And he has put a new song in my mouth: eue^ a thanks giving unto our God.

Many shall see it and fear: and shall put their trust in the Lord.

Blessed is the man that has set his hope in the Lord: and turned not unto
the proud, and to such as go about with lies.

O Lord my God, great are thy woonderous works, which thou have done: like as
be also thy thoughts which are to usward, and yet there is no man that
orders them unto thee.

If I would declare them and speak of the^: they should be more then I am hable
to express.

Sacrifice and meateofferyng thou would not have: but mine ears have thou
opened.

Burnte offeringes, and sacrifice for sin, have thou not required: then said
I, lo I come.

In the volume of the Book it is written of me, that I should fulfill thy
will, O my God: I am content to do it, yea thy law is within my heart.

I have declared the ryghteousnes in the great congregation: lo, I will not
refrayue my lips, O Lord, and that thou know.

I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart: my talking has been of thy
truth and of thy salvation.

I have not kept back thy loving mercy and truth: from the great
congregation.

Withdraw not thou thy mercy fro me O Lord: let thy loving kindness and thy
truth always preserve me.

For innumerable troubles are come about me, my sins have taken such hold
upon me, that I am not hable to look up: yea, they are more in number then the
heeres of my head, and my heart has failed me.

O Lord, let it be thy pleasure to deliver me: make have (O Lord) to help me.

Let them be ashamed and confounded together, that seek after my soul to
destroy it: let them be drieuen backward and put to rebuke that wish me evil.

Let them be desolate and rewarded with shame that say unto me: fie upon thee,
fie upon thee.

Let all those that seek thee, be joyful and glad in thee: and let such as love
thy salvation say always, the lord be praised.

As for me, I am poor and nedye: but the Lord cares for me.

Thou art my helper and redemer: make no long tarying (O my God.)

Beatus qui intelligit. Psalm. xli.
Evening prayer.
Blessed is he that considers the poor (and nedye:) the Lord shall deliver
him in the time of trouble.

The Lord preserve him and keep him alive, that he may be blessed upon earth:
and deliver not thou him into the will of his enemies.

The Lord coumfort him, when he lies sick upon his bed: make thou all his
bed in his sickness.

I said, Lord be merciful unto me: heal my soul, for I have sinned against
thee.

Mine enemies speak evil of me: when shall he dye, and his name perish?

And if he come to see me, he speaks vanity: and his heart conceyueth
falsehode within him self, and when he comes forth, he tells it.

All mine enemies whisper together against me: even against me do they
imagine this evil.

Let the sentence of giltynes proceed against him: and now that he lies, let
him rise up no more.

Yea, eue^ mine own familiar fre^d who^ I trusted: (which did also eat of my
bread,) has laid great wait for me.

But be thou merciful unto me, O Lord: raise thou me up again, and I shall
reward them.

By this I know that thou fauourest me: that mine enemy does not triumph
against me.

And when I am in health, thou vpholdest me: and shall set me before thy face
for ever.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel: world without end. Amen.

Quemadmodum. Psalm. xlii.
Like as the heart desires the water brokes: so lo^geth my soul after thee, O
God.

My soul is a thyrst for god, yea eue^ for the living god: when shall I come
to appear before ye presence of god?

My tears have been my meat day and night: while they daily say unto me,
where is now thy God?

Now when I think thereupon, I power out my heart by my self: for I went
with the multitude, and brought them forth into the house of God.

In the voice of praise and thankesgeuyng: among such as keep holy day.

Why art thou so full of heaviness, O my soul: and why art thou so unquiet
within me.

Put thy trust in God: for I will yet give him thanks, for the help of his
countenance.

My God, my soul is vexed within me: therefore will I remember thee, concerning
the land of Iordane, and the little hill of Hermon.

One deep calls another, because of the noise of thy water pipes: all thy
waves and storms are gone over me.

The Lord has granted his loving kyndnes: on the day time and in the night
season did I sing of him, and made my prayer unto the God of my life.

I will say unto the God of my strength, why haste thou forgotten me? why go
I thus heauelye, while the enemy oppresses me?

My bones are smitten a sunder as with a sweord: while mine enemies (that
trouble me) cast me in the teeth.

Namely while they say daily unto me: where is now thy God?

Why art thou so vexed (O my soul:) and why art thou so disquyeted within me?

O put thy trust in God: for I will yet thank him, which is the help of
my countenance, and my God.

Iudica me deus. Psalm. xliii
Give sentence with me (O God) and defend my cause against the ungodly people:
O deliver me from the deceytfull and wicked man.

For thou art the God of my strength, why have thou put me from thee? and why
go I so heauely, while the enemy oppresses me?

Oh send out thy light and thy truth that they may lead me: and bring me unto
thy holy hill, and to thy dwelling.

And that I may go unto the alter of God, even unto the God of my joy and
gladness: and upon the harp will I give thanks unto thee (O God) my God.

Why art thou so heavy (O my soul?) and why art thou so disquieted within me?

O put thy trust in God: for I will yet give him thanks, which is the help of
my countenance, and my God.

Deus auribus nostris. Psalm. xliiii.
Morni^g prayer.
WE have heard with our ears (O god) our fathers have told us: what ye have
done in their time of old.

How thou have driven out the heathen with thy hand, and planted them in: how
thou have destroyed the nations, and cast them out.

For they gat not the land in possession through their own sweorde: neither
was it their own arm that helped them.

But thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance:
because thou had a favor unto them.

Thou art my kings (O God:) send help unto Jacob.

Through thee will we overthrow our enemies: and in thy name will we tread
them under that rise up against us.

For I will not trust in my bow: it is not my sweorde that help me.

But it is thou that sauest us from our enemy: and put them to confusyon
that hate us.

We make our boaste of God all day long: and will praise thy name for ever.

But now thou art far of, and put us to confusyon: and go not forth
with our armies.

Thou make us to turn our backs upon our enemies: so that they which
hate us, spoil our goods.

Thou let us be eaten up like sheep: and haste scattered us among the
Heathen.

Thou sellest thy people for naught: and take no money for them.

Thou make us to be rebuked of our neighbors: to be laughed to scorn and
had in derisio^, of them that are round about us.

Thou make us to be a by word among the Heathen: and that the people shake
their heads at us.

By confusion is daily before me: and the shame of my face has covered me.

For the boyce of the slaunderer and blasphemer: for the enemy and auenger.

And though all this be come upon us, yet do we not forgeat thee: nor behave
our selves frowardly in thy covenant.

Our heart is not turned back: nether our steps gone out of thy way.

No not when thou have smitten us into the place of dragons: and covered us
with the shadow of death.

If we have forgotten the name of our god, and holde^ up our hands to any
strange God: shall not God search it out? for he knows the very secrets of
the heart.

For thy sake also are we killed all the day long: and are counted as sheep
appointed to be slain.

Up Lord, why slepest thou: awake, and be not absent from us for ever.

Wherefore hydest thou thy face? and forgettest our myserie and trouble.

For our soul is brought low unto the duste: our bellye cleueth unto the
ground.

Arise and help us: and deliver us for thy mercy sake.

Eructauit cor meum. Psalm. xlv.
MY heart is endytyng of a good matter: I speak of the things which I have
made unto the king.

My tongue is the pen: of a ready writer.

Thou art fayrer then the children of men: full of grace are thy lyppes,
because God has blessed thee for ever.

Gyrde thee with thy sweorde upon thy thyghe (O thou most mighty:) according
to thy worship and renown.

Good luck have thou with thine honor: ride on because of the word of
truth, of mekenes and righteousness, and thy right hand shall teach thee
terrible things.

Thy arrows are very sharp, and the people shall be subdued unto thee: even in
the midst among the Kings enemies.

Thy seat (O God) endures for ever: the scepter of thy Kingdom is a right
scepter.

Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity: wherefore God (even thy God)
has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

All thy garments smell of Myrre, Aloes, and Cassia: out of the yuerye
palaces whereby they have made thee glad.

Kings daughters were among thy honorable women: upon thy right hand did stand
the Queen in a vesture of gold (wrought about with diverse colors.)

Harken (O daughter) and consydre, enclyne thine ear: forgeat also thine own
people, and thy fathers house.

So shall the king have pleasure in thy beauty: for he is thy Lord (God) and
worship thou him.

And the daughter of Tire shall be there with gift: like as the rich also
among the people shall make their supplycacion before thee.

The Kings daughter is al glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold.

She shall be brought unto the king in raiment of nedle work: the vyrgins that
be her fellows, shall bear her company, and shall be brought unto thee.

With joy and gladness shall they be brought: and shall enter into the Kings
palace.

In stead of thy fathers thou shall have children: whom thou may make
Princes in all lands.

I will remember thy name from one generacyon unto another: therefore shall the
people give thanks unto thee, world without end.

Deus noster refugium. Psalm. xlvi.
GOd is our hope and strength: a very present help in trouble.

Therefore will not we fear, though ye earth be moved: and though the hills be
carried into the midst of the sea.

Though the waters thereof rage and swell: and though the mountains shake at
the tempest of the same.

The rivers of the fludde thereof shall make glad the city of God: the holy
place of the tabernacle of the most highest.

God is in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed: God shall
help her, and that right early.

The Heathen make much a do, and the kingdoms are moved: but God has
showed his voice, and the earth shall melte away.

The Lord of hosts is with us: the god of Jacob is our refuge.

O come hither, and behold the works of the Lord: what destruction he has
brought upon the earth.

He makes wars to cease in all the world: he breaks the bow, and knappeth
the spear in sunder, and burns the chariotes in the fire.

Be still then and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the Heathen, and
I will be exalted in the earth.

The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our defense.

Omnes gentes plaudite. Psalm. xlvii.
Evening prayer.
Clap your hands together (all ye people:) O sing unto God with the voice of
melodye.

For the Lord is hye and to be feared: he is the great king upon all the
earth.

He shall subdue the people under us: and the nations under our feet.

He shall chose out an heritage for us: even the worship of Jacob whom he loved.

God is gone up with a merry noise: and the Lord with the sound of the trompe.

O sing praises, sing praises unto our God: O sing praises, sing praises unto
our King.

For God is the King of all the earth: sing ye praises with understanding.

God reygneth over the Heathen: God sytteth upon his holy seat.

The Princes of the people are joined unto the people of the God of Abraham:
for God (which is very hye exalted) does defend the earth as it were with a
shield.

Magnus dominus. Psalm. xlviii.
GReat is the Lord, and highely to be praised: in the city of our God, even
upon his holy hill.

The hill of Sion is a fair place, and the joy of the whole earth: upon the
Northsyde lies the city of the great King, God is well known in her palaces,
as a sure refuge.

For lo, the kings of the earth: are gathered and gone by together.

They marueyled to see such things: they were astonished, and suddenly cast
down.

Fear came there upon the^ and sorrow: as upon a woman in her travail.

Thou shall break the ships of the sea: through the East wind.

Like as we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the lord of hosts, in
the city of our god; god vpholdeth the same for ever.

We wait for thy loving kindness, O god: in the mids of thy temple.

O god, according unto thy name, so is thy praise unto the worlds end: thy
right hand is full of righteousness.

Let the mount Sion rejoice, and the daughters of Judah be glad: because of thy
judgments.

Walk about Sion, and go round about her: and tell the towers thereof.

Mark well her bulwarks, set up her houses: that ye may tell them that come
after.

For this God is our God for ever and ever: he shall be our guide unto death.

Audite he gentes. psalm. xlix.
O Hear ye this, al ye people: po^der it with your ears, all ye that dwell in
the world.

High and low, rich and poor: one with another.

My mouth shall speak of wisdom: and my heart shall muse of understanding.

I will incline mine ear to the parable: and show my dark speech upon the
harp.

Wherefore should I fear in the days of wickedness? and when the wickedness
of my heles compasses me round about.

There be some that put their trust in their goods: and boast themselves in
the multitude of their richesse.

But no man may deliver his brother: nor make agreement unto god for him.

For it cost more to redeem their souls: so that he must let that alone for
ever.

Yea, though he live long: and see not the grave.

For he sees that wisemen also die, and perish together: as well as the
ignorant and foolish, and leave their riches for other.

And yet they think that their houses shall continue for ever: and that their
dwelling places shall endure from one generation to another, and call the lands
after their own names.

Nevertheless, man will not abide in honor: seeing he may be compared unto the
beasts that perish, this is the way of them.

This is their foolishnes: and their posterity praise their saying.

They lie in the hell like sheep, death gnaweth upon them, and the righteous
shall have dominacio^ of them in the morning: their beauty shall consume in the
sepulcher out of their dwelling.

But god shall deliver my soul from the place of hell: for he shall receive me.

Be not thou afraid though one be made rich: or if the glory of his house be
increased.

For he shall carry nothing away with him when he dies: neither shall his pomp
follow him.

For while he lived, he counted himself an happy man: and so long as thou
do well unto thy self, men will speak good of thee.

He shall follow the generacions of his fathers: and shall never see light.

Man being in honor, has no understanding: but is compared unto the beasts;
that peryshe.

Deus deorum dominus. psalm. l.
Morni^g prayer.
THe lord, even the most mighty god: has spoken and called the world from the
rising up of the sun unto the going down thereof.

Out of Sion has god appeared: in perfect beauty.

Our god shall come, and shall not keep silence: there shall go before him a
consuming fire, and a mighty tempest that be styred up round about him.

He shall call the heaven from above: and the earth, that he may judge his
people.

Gather my saints together unto me: those that have made a covenant with me,
with sacrifice.

And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge himself.

Hear, O my people, and I will speak: I my self will testify against thee, O
Israel, for I am God, even thy God.

I will not reprove thee, because of thy sacrifices, or for thy burnt
offeringes: because they were not always before me.

I will take no bullock out of thy house: nor he goats out of thy foldes.

For all the beasts of the forest are mine: and so are the rattelles upon a
thousand hills.

I know all the fowls upon the mountains: and the wild beasts of the
field are in my sight.

If I be hungry I will not tell thee; for the whole world is mine, and all
that therein is.

Think thou that I will eat bulls flesh: and drink the blood of goats.

Offer unto god thanks giving: and pay thy vows unto the most hiest.

And call upon me in the time of trouble: so will I hear thee, and thou shall
praise me.

But unto the ungodly fayd God: why do thou preach my laws, and take my
covenant in thy mouth?

Whereas thou hate to be reformed: and have cast my words behind thee.

When thou saw a thief, thou consentedst unto him: and have been partaker
with the aduouterers.

Thou have let thy mouth speak wickedness: and with thy tongue thou have set
forth disceite.

Thou sattest and spakest against thy brother: yea, and have slaundered thine
own mothers son.

These things haste thou done, and I held my tongue: and thou thoughtest
(wickedly) that I am even such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee and
set before thee, the things that thou have done.

O considre this, ye that forgeat god: lest I pluck you away, and there be
none to deliver you.

Whosoever offers me thanks and praise, he honoreth me: and to him that orders
his conversation right, will I show the salvation of God.

Miserere mei deus. psalm. li.
Have mercy upon me (O god) after thy great goodness: according unto the
multitude of thy mercyes, do away mine offenses.

Wash me througlye fro my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin.

For I knowledge my faults: and my sine is ever before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou
might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.

Behold, I was shapen in wickedness: and in sin has my mother conceived me.

But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

Thou shall pourge me with I soap, and I shall be clean: thou shall wash me,
and I shall be whiter then snow.

Thou shalt make me hear joy and gladness: that the bones which thou have
broken, may rejoice.

Turn thy face from my sins:and put out all my misdedes.

Make me a clean heart (O God:) and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy spirit from me.

O give me the comfort of thy help again: and stablyshe me with thy free
spirit.

Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked: and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

Deliver me from blood giltines, O god, thou that art the god of my health: and
my tongue shall sing of thy ryghteousnes.

Thou shall open my lyppes, O lord: my mouth shall show thy praise.

For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou delightest
not in burnte offerynges.

The sacrfice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O
God, shall thou not despise.

O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of rightousnes, with the burnte
offerynges and oblacyons: then shall they offer young bullockes upon thine alter.

Quid gloriaris in malicia. Psalm. lii.
WHy boastest thou thy self, thou tyrante: that thou canste do mischief.

Whereas the goodness of god: endures yet daily.

Thy tongue ymagineth wickedness: and with lies thou cuttest like a shar;pe
rasor.

Thou have loved ungraciousness more then goodness: and to talk of lies more
then righteousness.

Thou have loved to speak all words that may do hurt: O thou false tongue.

Therefore shall God destroy thee for ever: he shall take thee and pluck thee
out of thy dwelling, and root thee out of the land of the living.

The righteous also shall see this, and fear: and shall laugh him to scorn.

Lo, this is the man that took not God for his strength: but trusted unto the
multitude of his riches, and strengthed himself in his wickedness.

As for me, I am like a grene Olyue tree in the house of god: my trust is in
the tender mercy of god, for ever and ever.

I will always give thanks unto thee, for that thou have done: and I will hope
in thy name, for thy saynctes like it well.

Dixit insipiens. Psalm. liii.
Evening prayer.
The foolyshe body has said in his heart: there is no God.

Corrupt are they, and become abominable in their wickedness: there is none
that does good.

God looked down from heaven upon the children of men: to see if there were any
that would understand seek after God.

But they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become abominable:
there is also none that does good, no not one.

Are not they without understanding that work wickedness: eating up my people
as if they would eat bread they have not called upon god.

They were afraid, where no fear was: for God has broken the bones of him
that besieged thee, thou have put the^ to confusion because God has despised
them.

Oh that the salvation were given unto Israel out of Sion: Oh that the Lord
would deliver his people out of captivity.

The^ should Jacob rejoice, and Israel should be right glad.

Deus in nomine tuo. Psalm. liiii.
Save me (O god) for thy names sake: and aue^ge me in thy strength.

Hear my prayer (O God:) and harken unto the words of my mouth.

For strangers are riesen up against me: and tyrauntes (which have not god
before their eyes) seek after my soul.

Behold, God is my helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul.

He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: destroy thou them in thy truth.

An offering of a free heart will I give thee, and praise thy name (O Lord:)
because it is so comfortable.

For he has delivered me out of al my trouble: and mine eye has seen his
desire upon mine enemies.

Exaudi deus. Psalm. lv.
Hear my prayer (O God:) and hyde not thy self fro^my peticion.

Take heed unto me, and hear me: how I mourn in my prayer, and am vexed.

The enemy cries so, and the ungodly comes on so fast: for they are minded
to do me some mischief, so maliciouslye are they set against me.

My heart is disquieted within me: and the fear of death is fallen upon me.

Fearefulnes and tremblyng are come upon me: and horrible dread has
overwhelmed me.

And I said, O that I had wings like a dove: for then would I sly a way, and
be at rest.

Lo, then would I geat me a way far of: and remain in the wilderness.

I would make have to escape: because of the stormy wind and tempest.

Destroy their tongues (O Lord) and divide them: for I have spied
unrighteousness and strife in the city.

Day and night go they about within the walls thereof: mischief also and
sorrow are in the midst of it.

Wickedness is therein: deceit and guile go not out of their streets.

For it is not an open enemy that has done me this dishonor: for then I
could have borne it.

Neither was it mine aduersarye, that did magnify himself against me: for
then (paraduenture) I would have hid my self from him.

But it was even thou my companion: my guide, and my own familier friend.

We took sweet counsel together: and walked in the house of god as friends.

Let death come hastily upon the^ and let them go down quick into hell: for
wickedness is in their dwellinges, and among them.

As for me, I will call upon god: and the Lord shall save me.

In the euenyng and morning, and at noone day will I pray (and that
instantlye:) and he shall hear my voice.

It is he that has delivered my soul in peace: from the battle that was
against me, for there were many with me.

Yea, even God that endures for ever shall hear me, and bring the^ down: for
they will not turn nor fear god.

He laid his hands upon such as be at peace with him; and he brake his
covenant.

The words of his mouth were softer the^ butter, having war in his heart:
his words were smother the^ oil, and yet be they very swords.

O cast thy burden upon the lord, and he shall norish thee: and not suffer the
righteous to fall for ever.

And as for them: thou (O God) shall bring them into the pit of destruction.

The bloudthyrstie and deceitefull men shall not live out half their days:
nevertheless, my trust shall be in thee (O lord.)

Miserere mei deus quoniam. Psalm. lvi.
Morni^g prayer.
Be merciful unto me (O god) for man goes about to devour me: he is daily
fightyng and troubling me.

Mine enemies are daily in hand to swalowe me up: for they be mani ye fight
against me, O thou most highest.

Nevertheless, though I am sometime afraid: yet I put my trust in thee.

I will praise god, because of his word: I have put my trust in god, and will
not fear what flesh can do unto me.

They daily mistake my words: all that they imagine is to do me evil.

They hold all together, and keep them selves close: and mark my steps when
they lay wait for my soul.

Shall they escape for their wickedness? thou (O god) in thy displeasure shall
call them down.

Thou tellest my flittinges: put my tears into thy bottel, are not these
things noted in thy book?

Whenever I call upon thee, then shall mine enemies be put to flight: this I
know, for God is on my side.

In gods words will I rejoice: in the lords word will I comfort me.

Yea, in God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do unto
me.

Unto thee (O God) will I pay my vows: unto thee will I give thanks.

For thou haste delivered my soul from death, and my feet from falling: that
I may walk before god in the light of the living.

Miserere mei deus. psalm. lvii.
BE merciful unto me (O god) be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts in
thee: and under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge, until this tirannye
be ouerpast.

I will call unto the most high God: even to the God that shall perform the
cause which I have in hand.

He shall send from heaven: and save me from the reprofe of him that would eat
me up.

God shall send forth his mercy and truth: my soul is among Lions.

And I lie even among thee children of men (that are set on fire:) whose teeth
are spears and arowes, and their tongue a sharp sweorde.

Set up thy self (O god) above the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth.

They have laid a net for my feet, and pressed down my soul: they have
dug a pyt before me, and are fallen into the mids of it them selves.

My heart is fixed (O God) my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise.

Awake up my glory, awake lute and harp: I my self will awake right early.

I will give thanks unto thee (O Lord) among the people: and I will sing unto
thee among the nations.

For the greatness of thy mercy reaches unto the heavens: and thy truth
unto the clouds.

Set up thy self (O God) above the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth.

Si vere vtique iusticiam. Psalm. lviii.
ARe your minds set upon righteousness, O ye congregation: and do ye judge
the thing that is right, O ye sons of men?

Yea, ye imagine mischief in your heart upon the earth: and your hands
deal with wickedness.

The ungodly are froward, eue^ from their mothers womb: as soon as they be
borne, they go astray and speak lies.

They are as venomous as the poison of a serpente: even like the deaf Adder
that stops her ears.

Which refuses to hear the voice of the charmer: charm he never so wisely.

Break their teethe (O God) in their mouths, smite the chawe bones of the
Lions (O Lord:) let them fall away like water that runs a pace, and when
they shote their arrows, let them be rooted out.

Let them consume away like a snayle, and be like the untimely fruit of a
woman: and let them not see the sun.

Or ever our pottes be made whote with thorns:so let indignacion vex him,
even as a thing that is raw.

The righteous shall rejoice when he sees ye vengeance: he shall wash his
fotesteppes in the blood of the ungodly.

So that a man shall say, verily there is a reward for the righteous: doutles;
there is a God that judges in the earth.

Eripe me de inimicis. Psalm. lix.
Eueni^g prayer.
Deliver me from mine enemies (O God:) defend me from them that rise up
against me.

O deliver me from the wicked doers: and save me from the bloudthyrstie men.

For lo, they lie waytyng for my soul: the mighty men are gathered together
against me, without any offense or fault of me (O Lord.)

They run and prepare themselves without my fault: arise thou therefore to
help me, and behold.

Stand up (O lord God of hosts) thou God of Israel, to visit all the hethen:
and be not merciful unto them that offend of malicious wickedness.

They go too and fro in the euenyng they grinne like a dog: and run about
through the city.

Behold, they speak with their mouth: and sweordes are in their lips:for
who does hear.

But thou (O Lord) shall have them in derision; and thou shall laugh all
Heathen to skorne.

My strength will I ascribe unto thee: for thou art the god of my refuge.

God shows me his goodness plenteously: and God shall let me see my desire
upon mine enemies.

Slay them not, lest my people forgeat it: but scatter them abroad among thy
people, and put them down (O Lord) our defense.

For the sin of their mouth, and for the words of their lips they shall be
taken in their pride: and why?their preaching is of cursyng and lies.

Consume them in thy wrath, consume them that they may perish: and know that
it is God which rules in Jacob, and unto the ends of the world.

And in the evening they will return: grenne like a dog, and will go about
the city.

They will run here and there for meat: and grudge if they be not satisfied.

As for me, I will sing of thy power, and will praise thy mercy betimes in the
morning: for thou have been my defense and refuge in the day of my trouble.

Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing: for thou (O God) art my refuge and my
merciful God.

Deus repulistinos. psalm. lx.
O God, thou that haste cast us out and scattered us abroad: thou haste also
been displeased, O turn thee unto us again.

Thou have moved the land and divided it: heal the sores thereof, for it
shakes.

Thou have showed thy people heavy things: thou haste given us a drink of
deadly wine.

Thou have given a token for such as fear thee: that they may tryumphe because
of the truth.

Therefore were thy beloved delivered: help me with thy right hand and hear me.

God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice and deuyde Sichem: and mete
out the valley of Sucoth.

Gilead is mine, and Manasses is mine: Ephraim also is the strength of my head,
Judah is my law geuer.

Moab is my wash pot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Philistia be thou
glad of me.

Who will lead me into the strong city: who will bring me into Edom?

Have thou not cast us out (O god?) wilt not thou (O god) go our with our
hosts.

O be thou our help in trouble: for vain is the help of man.

Through God me shall do great acts: for it is he that shall tread down
our enemies.

Exaudi deus depreca. psalm. lxi.
Hear my crying (O god:) give ear unto my prayer.

From the ends of the earth will I call unto thee: when my heart is in
heaviness.

Oh set me up upon the rock that is hyer then I: for thou haste been my hope,
and a strong tower for me against the enemy.

I will dwell in thy tabernacle for ever: and my trust shall be under the coueryng
of thy wings.

For thou, O Lord, haste heard my desires: and have given an heritage unto
those that fear thy name.

Thou shalt grant the king a long life: that his years may endure through out
all generacions.

He shall dwell before God for ever: O prepare thy loving mercy and
feythfulnes, that they may preserve him.

So will I always sing praise unto thy name: that I may daily perform my
vows.

Nonne deo subiecta. psalm. lxii.
Morni^g prayer.
MY soul truly wayteth still upon God: for of him comes my salvation.

He verily is my strength and my salvation: he is my defense so that I shall
not greatly fall.

How long will ye ymagyne myschyefe against every manne? ye shall be slain
all the sort of you, yea as a tottering wall shall ye be, and like a broken
hedge.

Their devise is only how to put him out whom god will exalte: their delight
is in lies, they give good words with their mouth, but curse with their heart.

Nevertheless, my soul wait thou still upon God: for my hope is in him.

He truly is my strength, and my salvation: he is my defense so that I shall
not fall.

In god is my health and my glory: the rock of my might, and in god is my
trust.

O put your trust in him always (ye people:) power out your hearts before him,
for god is our hope.

As for the children of men, they are but vain: the children of men are
disceitful upon the waightes, they are altogether lighter then vanity it self.

O trust not in wrong and robery, give not your selves unto vanity: if riches
increase, set not your heart upon them.

God spoke once and twice: I have also heard the same, that power belongs
unto god.

And that thou lord art merciful: for thou rewardest every man according to his
work.

Deus deus meus. psalm. lxiii.
O God thou art my god: early will I seek thee.

My soul thyrsteth for thee: my flashe also longs after thee, in a barren
and dry land where no water is.

Thus have I looked for thee in holiness: that I might behold thy power and
glory.

For thy loving kindness is better then the life it self: my lyppes shall
praise thee.

As long as I live, will I magnify thee on this manner: and lift up my hands
in thy name.

My soul shall be satisfied, even as it were with mary and fatness: wen my
mouth prayseth thee with joyful lyppes.

Have I not remembered thee in my bed: and thought upon thee, when I was wakyng?

Because thou have been my helper: therefore under the shadow of thy wings
will I rejoice.

My soul hangs upon thee: thy right hand has vpholden me.

These also that seek the hurt of my soul: they shall go under the earth.

Let them fall upon the edge of the sweord: that they may be a portion for
foxes.

But the king shall rejoice in god, al they also that swear by him shall be
commended; for the mouth of them that speak lies, shall be stopped.

Eaudi deus orationem meam. psalm. lxiiii.
Hear my voice, O God, in my prayer;preserve my life from fear of the enemy.

Hide me from ye gathering together of the froward: and from the insurreccion
of wicked doers.

Which have whet their tongue like a sweord: and shote out their arowes, even
bitter words.

That they may privily shote at him which is perfect: sodeinly do they him
and fear not.

They courage themselves in mischief: and common among themselves how they may
lay snares, and say that no man shall see them.

They imagine wickedness, and practice it: that they keep secret among
themselves, every man in the deep of his heart.

But god shall sodeinly shote at them with swift arrow: that they shall be wounded.

Yea their own tongues shall make them fall: insomuche that whosoever sees them,
shall laugh them to scorn.

And all men that see it, shall say, this has God done: for they shall
perceive that it is his work.

The righteous shall rejoice in the lord, and put his trust in him: and all
they that are true of heart shall be glad.

Tedecet himnus. psalm. lxv.
Evening prayer.
THou, O god, art praised in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be performed,
in Jerusalem.

Thou that hear the prayer: unto thee shall al flesh come.

My misdedes prevail against me: Oh he thou merciful unto our sins.

Blessed is the man whom thou chosest and receauest unto thee: he shall dwell
in thy court, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house, even of thy
holy temple.

Thou shall show us wonderful things in thy righteousness (O god) of our
salvation: thou that art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them
that remain in the broad sea.

Which in his stength sets fast the mountains: and is gyrded about with
power.

Which stilleth the ragyng of the sea, and the noise of his waves: and the
madness of his people.

They also that dwell in the uttermost parts (of the earth) shall be afraid at
thy tokens: thou that make ye outgoinges of the morning and evening to praise
thee.

Thou visitest the earth, and blessest it: thou make it very plenteous.

The river of God is full of water: thou preparest their corn, for so thou
prouidest for the earth.

Thou watrest her forowes, thou sendest rain into the little valleys thereof:
thou make it soft with the drops of rain, and blessest the increase of it.

Thou crownest the year with thy goodness: and thy clouds drop fatnes.

They shall drop upon the dwellinges of ye wilderness: and the little hills shall
rejoice on every side.

The foldes shall be full of sheep: the valleys also shall stand so thick with
corn, that they shall laugh and sing.

Iubilate deo. psalm. lxvi.
O Be ioyefull in god, all ye lands: sing praises unto ye honer of his name,
make his praise to be glorious.

Say unto god, O how wonderful art thou in thy works: through the greatness
of thy power shall thine enemies be found liars unto thee.

For all the world shall Worship thee sing of thee, and praise thy name.

O come hither and behold the works of God: how wonderful he is in his
doing, toward the children of men.

He turned the sea into dry land: so that they went through the water on
foot, there did we rejoice thereof.

He rules with his power for ever: his eyes behold the people, and such as
will not believe, shall not be able to exalte themselves.

O praise our God (ye people:) and make the voice of his praise to be heard.

Which holds our soul in life: and suffers not our fete to slyp.

For thou (O god) have proved us: thou also have tried us, like as silver is
tried.

Thou broughtest us into the snare: and laid trouble upon our loins.

Thou sufferedst men to ride over our heads: we went through fire and water,
and thou broughtest us out into a welthy place.

I will go into thy house with burnt offerynges: and will pay thee my vows
which I promised with my lips, and spoke with my mouth, when I was in trouble.

I will offer unto thee, fat burnte sacrifices, with the insence of rams: I
will offer bullockes and goats.

O come hither, and harken al ye that fear god: and I will tell you what he
has done for my soul.

I called unto him with my mouth: and gave him praises with my tongue.

If I incline unto wickedness with my heart: the lord will not hear me.

But god has heard me: and considered the voice of my prayer.

Praised be god which has not cast out my prayer: nor turned his mercy fro me.

Deus miscreatur nostri. Psalm. lxvii.
GOd be merciful unto us, and bless us: and show us the light of his
countenance, and be merciful unto us.

That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among al nations.

Let the people praise thee O God: yea let all the people praise thee.

O let the nations rejoice and be glad: for thou shall judge the folk
righteously, and govern the nations upon earth.

Let the people praise thee, O god: let all the people praise thee.

Then shall the earth bring furthher increase: and God, even our own god shall
give us his blessing.

God shall bless us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Exurgat deus. Psalm. lxviii.
Morni^g prayer.
LEt God arise, and let his enemies be scatered: let them also that hate him
fly before him.

Like as the smoke vanishes, so shall thou drive them away: and like as wax
melts at the fire, so let the ungodly peryshe at the presence of god.

But let the righteous be glad, and rejoice before God: let them also be merry
and joyful.

O sing unto god, and sing praises unto his name: magnify him that rides upon
the heavens, as it were upon an horse, praise him in his name, yea and rejoice
before him.

He is a father of the fatherles, and defends the cause of widows: even god
in his holy habitacion.

He is the god that makes men to be of one mind in an house, and brings the
priesoners out of captivity: but lets the runneagates continue in scarcenes.

O god, when thou wentest forth before the people: when thou wentest through
the wilderness.

The earth shoke, and the heavens dropped at the presence of Ood: even as Sinay
also was moved at the presence of god, which is the god of Israel.

Thou, O god, sendest a gracious rain upon thine enheritaunce: and refreshedst
it when it was weary.

Thy congregacions shall dwell therein: for thou (O God) have of thy goodness
prepared for the poor.

The Lord gave the word: great was the company of the preachers.

Kings with their armies did fly, and were discomfited: and they of the
household divided the spoil.

Though ye have lain among the pottes: yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove,
that is covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold.

When the almighty scattered kings for their sake: then were they as white as
snow in Salmon.

As the hill of Basan, so is gods hill: even an high hill as the hill of Basan.

Why hop ye so, ye high hills, this is gods hill, in the which it pleases him
to dwell? yea, the Lord will abide in it for ever.

The charettes of god are.xx.M. even thousands of Angels: and the Lord is
among them, as in the holy place of Sinay.

Thou art gone up on high, thou have led captivity captive, and received
gifts for men: yea, eue^ for thine enemies, that the Lord God might dwell
among them.

Praised be the lord daily: even the god which helps us, and powered his
benefits upon us.

He is our god, even the god of whom comes salvation: god is the lord by whom
we escape death.

God shall wound the head of his enemies: and the heary scalpe of such a one as
goes on still in his wyckednes.

The Lord has said, I will bring my people again as I did from Basan: mine own
will I bring again, as I did some time from the deep of the sea.

That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemiesand that the tongue
of thy dogs may be read through the same.

It is well seen, O god, how thou go: how thou, my god and king, go in the
sanctuary.

The fingers go before, the minstrels follow after: in the midst are the
damsels playing with the timbrelles.

Give thanks, O Israel, unto god the lord in the congregacions: from the
ground of the heart.

There is little Benjamin their ruler: and the princes of Judah their counsel,
the princes of zabulon, and the princes of Nephtali.

Thy God has sent forth strength for thee: stablishe the thing O God, that
thou have wrought in us.

For thy temples sake at Jerusalem: so shall kings bring presents unto thee.

When the company of the spear men, and multitude of the mighty are
scattered abroad among the beasts of the people (so that they humbly bring
pieces of silver:) and when he has scattered the people that delight in war.

Then shall the Princes come out of Egypt: the Morians land shall sone stretche
out her hands unto God.

Sing unto God, O ye kingdoms of the earth: O sing praises unto the Lord.

Which sits in the heavens over all from the beginning: lo, he does send out
his voice, yea and that a mighty voice.

Ascribe ye the power to God over Israel: his worship and strength is in the
clouds.

O God, wonderful art thou in thy holy places: even the God of Israel, he will
give strength and power unto his people, blessed be God.

Saluum me fac deus. Psalm. lxix
Evening prayer.
Save me, O God: for the waters are come in, even unto my soul.

I stick fast in the deep mire where no ground is: I am come into deep waters,
so that the floudes run over me.

I am weary of crying, my throat is dry: my sight fails me, for waiting so
long upon my god.

They that hate me without a cause are more then the heeres of my head: they
that are mine enemies, and would destroy me gyltles are mighty.

I paid them the things that I never took: God thou know my simplenes,
and my faults are not hid from thee.

Let not them that trust in thee, O lord God of hosts, be ashamed for my
cause: let not those that seek thee be confounded through me, O Lord God of
Israel.

And why? for thy sake have I suffered reprofe: shame has covered my face.

I am become a stranger unto my brethren: even an aleant unto my mothers
children.

For the zeal of thine house has even. eaten me: and the rebukes of them that
rebuked thee are fallen upon me.

I wept and chastned my self with fasting: and that was turned to my reprofe.

I put on a sackecloth also: and they iested upon me.

They that sytte in the gate speak against me: and the drunkardes make songs
upon me.

But Lord I make my prayer unto thee: in an acceptable time.

Hear me O God, in the multitude of thy mercy: even in the truth of thy
salvation.

Take me out of the mire that I sink not: Oh let me be delivered from them
that hate me, and out of the deep waters.

Let not the water flood drown me, neither let the deep swalow me up: and let
not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

Hear me, O lord, for thy loving kindness is comfortable: turn the unto me,
according to ye multitude of thy mercies.

And hyde not thy face from thy servant: for I am in trouble, Oh have thee
and hear me.

Draw nigh unto my soul and save it: Oh deliver me because of mine enemies.

Thou have known my reprofe, my shame, and my dishonor: mine adversaries are
all in thy sight.

Thy rebuke has broken my heart, I am full of heaviness: I looked for some to
have piety on me, but there was no man, neither found I any to comfort me.

They gave me gall to eat: and when I was thyrstie, they gave me vinegre to
drink.

Let their table be made a snare to take themselves withal: and let the
things (that should have been for their wealth) be unto them an occasion of
falling.

Let their eyes be blinded that they see not: and ever bow thou down their
backs.

Power out thine indignacyon upon them: and let thy wrathful displeasure
take hold of them.

Let their habitacion be void: and no man to dwell in their tents.

For they persecute him whom thou have smitten: and they talk how they may
vex them whom thou have wounded.

Let them fall from one wickedness to another: and not come into thy
righteousness.

Let them be wiped out of the book of the living: and not to be written among
the righteous.

As for me, when I am poor and in heaviness: thy help (O God) shall lift me
up.

I will praise the name of god with a song: and magnifye it with thanks giving.

This also shall please the Lord: better then a bullock, that has horns and
hoofes.

The humble shall considre this, and be glad: seek ye after god, and your soul
shall live.

For the lord hears the poor: and despises not his prisoners.

Let heaven and earth praise him: the sea, and all that moves therein.

For god will save Sio^, and build the cities of Judah: that men may dwell there,
and have it in possession.

The posterity also of his servants shall enherite it: and they that love
his name shall dwell therein.

Deus in adiutorium. psalm. lxx.
Have the, O god, to deliver me: make have to help me O Lord.

Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul: let them be
turned backward, and put to confusyon that wyshe me evil:

Let them (for their reward) be sone brought to shame: that cry over me,
there there.

But let al those that seek thee, be joyful and glad in thee: and let all such
as dilighte in thy salvation say always, the lord be praised.

As for me, I am poor and in misery: haste thee unto me (O god.)

Thou art my helper and my redemer: O Lord make no long tarying.

In te domine speraui. psalm. lxxi.
Morni^g prayer.
IN thee, O lord, have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusyon: but
rid me and deliver me in thy righteousness enclyne thine ear unto me and save
me.

Be thou my strong hold (whereunto I may always resort:) thou have promised to
help me, for thou art my house of defense and my castle.

Deliver me, O my god, out of the hand of the ungodly: out of the hand of the
unrighteous and cruel man.

For thou, O lord god, art the thing that I long for: thou art my hope even
from my youth.

Through thee have I been holden up ever sense I was borne: thou art he that
took me out of my mothers womb, my praise shall be always of thee.

I am become as it were a monstre unto many: but my sure trust is in thee.

Oh let my mouth be filled with thy praise: (that I may sing of thy glory) and
honor all the day long.

Cast me not away in the time of age: forsake me not when my strength fails
me.

For mine enemies speak against me, and they that lay wait for my soul,
take their counsayll together, saying: God has forsaken him, persecute him and
take him, for there is none to deliver him.

Go not far fro me, O god: my god, haste thee to help me.

Let them be confounded and perish, that are against my soul: let them be
covered with shame and dishonor, that seek to do me evil.

As for me, I will patiently abide always: and will praise thee more and more.

My mouth shall daily speak of thy righteousness and salvation: for I know no
end thereof.

I will go forth in the strength of the Lord god: and will make mention of thy
ryghteousnes only.

Thou (O god) haste taught me from my youth up until now: therefore will I
tell of thy wondrous works.

Forsake me not (O God) in mine old age, when I am graye headed: until I have
showed thy strength unto this generacyo^, and thy power to al the^ that are yet
for to come.

Thy righteousness (O god) is very high, and great things are they that thou
haste done: O god who is like unto thee?

O what great troubles and adversities have thou showed me? and yet dyddeste
thou turn and refreshe me, yea and broughtest me from the deep of the earth
again.

Thou have brought me to great honor: and comforted me on every side.

Therefore will I praise thee and thy faythfulnes (O god) playing upon an
instrument of music: unto thee will I sing upon the harp, O thou holy one of
Israel.

My lyppes will be feign, when I sing unto thee: and so will my soul whom thou
have delivered.

My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long: for they are
confounded and brought unto shame, that seek to do me evil.

Deus iudicium. psalm. lxxii.
Give the king thy judgments (O god:) and thy righteousness unto the kings
son.

Then shall be judge the people according unto right: and defend the poor.

The mountains also shall bring peace: and the little hills, righteousness
unto the people.

He shall keep the simple folk by their right: defend the children of the
poor, and punish the wrong doer.

They shall fear thee as long as the Sun and Moan endures: from one
generation to another.

He shall come down like the rain into a fleece of wolle: even as the drops
that water the earth.

In his time shall the righteous florishe: yea, and abundance of peace, so
long as the Moon endures.

His dominion shall be also from the one sea to the other: and from the stoud
unto the worlds end.

They that dwell in the wilderness shall knele before him: his enemies shall
lick the dust.

The kings of Tharsis and of the Isles shall give presents: the kings of
Araby and Saba shall bring gifts.

All kings shall fall down before him: al nations shall do him service.

For he shall deliver the poor when he cries: the nedy also, and him that
has no helper.

He shall be favorable unto the simple and nedy: and shall preserve the souls of
the poor.

He shall deliver their souls from falshed and wrong: and dear shall their
blood be in his syghte.

He shall live, and unto him shall be given of the gold of Arabia: prayer
shall be made ever unto him, and daily shall he be praised.

There shall be an heap of corn in the earth, hye upon the hills: his fruit
shall shake like Libanus, and shall be grene in the city, like grass upon the
earth.

His name shall endure for ever, his name shall remain under the sun among
the posterities: which shall be blessed through him, and all the heathen shall
praise him.

Blessed be the lord god, even the god of Israel: which only does wondrous
things.

And blessed be the name of his majesty for ever: and all the earth shall be
filled with his majesty. Amen. Amen.

Quam bonus Israel. psalm. lxxiii.
Evening prayer.
TRuly God is loving unto Israel: even unto such as are of a clean heart.

Nevertheless, my feet were almost gone: my treadynges bad welnigh slipped.

And why? I was grieved at the wicked: I do also see the ungodly in such
prosperity.

For they are in no peril of death: but are lusty and strong.

They come in no misfortune like other folk: nether are they plaged like other
men.

And this is the cause that they be so holden with pride: and overwhelmed with
cruelty.

Their eyes swel for fatnes: and they do even what they lust.

They corrupt other, and speak of wicked blasphemye: their talkyng is against
the most highest.

For they stretche forth their mouth unto the heaven: and their tongue goes
through the world.

Therefore fall the people unto them: and there out suck they no small
advantage.

Tushe (say they) how should God perceive, ^is there knowledge in the most
highest?

Lo, these are the ungodly, these prospere in the world and these have riches
in possession: and I said, then have I cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my
hands in innocencye.

All the day long have I been punished: and chastened every morning.

Yea, and I had almost said even as they: but lo, then should I have
condemned the generation of thy children.

Then thought I to understand this: but it was to hard for me.

Until I went into the Sanctuary of God: then understood I the end of these
men.

Namely, how thou do set them in slippery places: and castest them down,
and destroyest them.

O how suddenly do they consume: perish, and come to a fearful end.

Yea, even like as a dream when one awaketh: so shalt thou make their image
to vanishe out of the city.

Thus my heart was grieved: and it went even through my reins.

So foolysh was I and ignorant: eue^ as it were a beast before thee.

Nevertheless, I am always by thee: for thou have holden me by my right hand.

Thou shalt gide me with thy counsel: and afterward receive me with glory.

Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth, that I desire in
comparyson of thee.

My flesh and my heart fails: but god is the strenthe of my heart, and my
porcyon for ever.

For lo, they that forsake thee shall peryshe: thou have destroyed al them that
commit fornycacyon against thee.

But it is good for me to hold me fast by god, to put my trust in the lord god:
and to speak of all thy works, in the gates of the daughters of Syon.

Vt quid deus repulisti. psalm. lxxiiii.
O God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long? why in thy wrath so hoate
against the Sheep of thy pasture.

O Think upon thy congregation: whom thou have purchased and redeemed of old.

Think upon the tribe of thine enheritaunce: and mount Syon wherein thou have
dwelt.

Lift up thy (...) that thou may utterly destroy every enemy: which has
done evil in thy Sanctuary.

Thine adversaries roar in the mids of thy congregacions: and set up their
banners for tokens.

He that hewed timber before out of the thick trees: was known to bring it to
an excellent work.

But now the break down all the carved work thereof: with axes and hammers.

They have set fire upon thy holy places: and have defiled the dwelling place
of thy name, even unto the ground.

Yea, they said in their hearts, let us make havoc of them altogether: thus
have they brent up all the houses of god in the land

We see not our tokens, there is not one Prophet more: no not one is there
among us that understands any more.

O god, how long shall the adversary do this dishonor? how long shall the enemy
blaspheme thy name, for ever?

Why withdrawest thou thy hand? why pluckest thou not thy right hand out of
thy bosom, to consume the enemy?

For God is my king of old: the help that is done upon earth, he does it
himself.

Thou dyddest deuyde the Sea, through thy power: thou brakest the heads of
the dragons in the waters.

Thou smotest the heads of Leuiathan in pieces: and gave him to be meat for
the people in the wilderness.

Thou broughtest out fountaynes and waters out of the hard Rocks: thou
driuedst up mighty waters.

The day is thine, and the night is thine: thou have prepared the light and the
sun.

Thou have set all the borders of the earth: thou have made somer and winter.

Remember this, O lord, how the enemy has rebuked: and how the foolish people
has blasphemed thy name.

O deliver not the soul of the Turtle Dove, unto the multitude of the enemies:
and forgeat not the congregacyon of the poor for ever.

Look upon the covenant: for all the earth is full of darkness, and cruel
habitacions.

O let not the simple go away ashamed: but let the poor and nedy give praise
unto thy name.

Arise O god, maintain thine own cause: remember how the foolysh man
blasphemeth thee daily.

Forgeat not the voice of thine enemies: the presumpcion of them that hate
thee, increases ever more and more.

Confirebimur tibi. psalm. lxxv.
Morni^g prayer.
INto thee (O god) do we give thanks: unto thee do we give thanks.

Thy name also is nyghe: and that do thy wondrous works declare.

When I receive the congregation: I shall judge according unto right.

The earth is weak, and all the inhabitours thereof: I bear up the pillars of
it.

I said unto the fools, deal not so madly: and to the ungodly, set not up
your horn.

Set not up your horn on high: and speak not with a stiff neck.

For promocion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor yet from
the South.

And why? god is ye judge: he puts down one, and sets up another.

For in the hand of the lord there is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full
mixte, and he powers out of the same.

As for the dregs thereof: all the ungodly of the earth shall drink them, and
suck them out.

But I will talk of the god of Jacob: and praise him for ever.

All the horns of the ungodly also will I break: and the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted.

Notus in Judea. Psalm. lxxvi.
IN Iewry is god known: his name is great in Israel.

At Salem is his tabernacle: and his dwelling in Sion.

There brake he the arowes of the bow: the shield, the sweord, and the
battle.

Thou art of more honor and might: then the hills of the robbers.

The proud are robbed, they have slepte their stepe: and all the men (whose
hands were mighty) have found nothing.

At thy rebuke (O god of Jacob) both the charret and horse is fallen.

Thou, even thou art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight, when thou
art angry?

Thou did cause thy judgment to be heard from heaven: the earth trembled and
was still.

When god arose to indgemente: and to help all the meke upon earth.

The fearcenes of man shall turn to thy praise: and the fearcenes of other
shall thou restrain.

Promise unto the lord your god, and keep it al ye that be round about hun:
bring presents unto hun that ought to be feared.

He shall restrain the spirit of Princes: and is wonderful among the kings
of the earth.

Voce mea ad dominum. Psalm. lxxvii.
I Will cry unto God with my voice: even unto God will I cry with my voice,
and he shall hearke^ unto me.

In the time of my trouble I sought the lord: my sore ran and ceased not, in
the night season my soul refused comfort.

When I am in heaviness, I will think upon god: when my heart is vexed and will
complain.

Thou hold mine eyes wakyng: I am so feeble that I cannot speak.

I have considered the days of old: and the years that are past.

I call to remembrance my song, and in the night I common with mine own heart,
and search out my spirits.

Will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he be no more entreated?

Is his mercy clean gone for ever? and is his promise come utterly to an
end for evermore?

Has God forgotten to be gracious? and will he shut up his loving kindness in
displeasure?

And I said, it is mine own infirmity: but I will remember the years of the
right hand of the most highest.

I will remember the works of the Lord: and call to mind thy wonders of old
time.

I will think also of al thy works: and my talking shall be of thy doings.

Thy way, O God, is holy: who is so great a god as our God?

Thou art the God that does woonders: and have declared thy power among people.

Thou have myghtelye delivered thy people: even the sons of Jacob and Joseph.

The waters saw thee, O God: the waters saw thee and were afraid, the depthes
also were troubled.

The clouds powered out water, ye air thundered: and thine arowes went abroad.

The voice of the thunder was heard round about: the lightninges shone upon
the ground, the earth was moved and shoke withal.

Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in the great waters: and thy foot
steps are not known.

Thou leddest thy people like sheep: by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

Attendite popule. psalm. lxxviii.
Eueni^g prayer.
Hear my law, O my people: incline your ears unto the words of my mouth.

I will open my mouth in a parable: I will declare hard sentences of old.

Which we have heard and known: and such as our fathers told us.

That we should not hide the^ from the children of the generacions to come: but
to show the honor of the lord, his mighty and wonderful works that he has
done.

He made a covenant with Jacob, and gave Israel a law: which he commanded our
forefathers to teach their children.

That their posterity might know it: and the children which were yet unborn.

To the intent that when they came up: they might show their children the same.

That they might put their trust in God: and not to forgeat the workers of god,
but to keep his commandments.

And not to be as their forefathers, a faithles and stubburne generation: a
generation that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit cleaves not
steadfastly unto God.

Like as the children of Ephraim: which being harnessed and carrying bows,
turned themselves back in the day of battle.

They kept not the couenante of God: and would not walk in his law.

But forgot what he had done: and the wonderful works that he had showed for
them.

Marvelous things did he in the sight of our fathers in the land of Egypt:
even in the field of zoan.

He divided the sea, and let them go through: he made the waters to stand on
a heap.

In the day time also he led them with a cloud: and all the night through
with a light of fire.

He claue the hard rocks in the wilderness: and gave them drink thereof, as it
had been out of the great depth.

He brought waters out of the stony rock: so that it gushed out like the
ryuers.

Yet for all this, they sinned more against him: and provoked the most highest
in the wilderness.

They tempted God in their hearts: and required meat for their lust.

They spoke against God also, saying: shall god prepare a table in the
wilderness?

He smote the stony rock in deed, that the water gushed out, and the streams
flowed withal: but can he give bread also, or provide flesh for his people?

When the Lord heard this, he was wroth: so the fire was kindled in Jacob, and
there came up heavy displeasure against Israel.

Because they believed not in God: and put not their trust in his help.

So he commanded the clouds above: and opened the doors of heaven.

He rayned down Manna also upon them for to eat: and gave them fode from
heaven.

So man did eat Angels fode: for he sent them meat enoughe.

He caused the East wind to blow under the heaven: and through his power he
brought in the Southweste wind.

He rayned flesh upon them as thick as dust: and fethered fowls like as the
sand of the sea.

He let it fall among their tents: even round about their habitacion.

So they did eat, and were well filled: for he gave them their own desire,
they were not disappoynted of their lust.

But while the meat was yet in their mouths, the heavy wrath of god came
upon them: and slew the welthiest of the^, yea, and smote down the chosen men
that were in Israel.

But for all this, they sinned yet more: and believed not his wondrous works.

Therefore their days did he consume in vanity: and their years in trouble.

When he slew them, they sought him: and turned them early, and enquired
after God.

And they remembered that God was their strength: and that the high god was
their redemer.

Nevertheless, they did but flatter him with their mouths: and dissembled with
him in their tongues.

For their heart was not whole with him: neither continued they steadfast in his
covenant.

But he was so merciful: that he forgave their misdedes, and destroyed them
not.

Yea, many a time turned he his wrath away: and would not suffer his whole
displeasure to arise.

For he considered that they were but flesh: and that they were even a wind
that passes away, and comes not again.

Many a time did they provoke him in the wilderness: and grieved him in the
desert.

They turned back, and tempted god: and moved the holy one in Israel.

They thought not of his hand: and of the day when he delivered them from the
hand of the enemy.

How he had wrought his miracles in Egipte: and his wonders in the field of
Zoan.

He turned their waters into blood: so that they might not drink of the
ryuers.

He sent lice among them and devoured them up: and frogs to destroy them.

He gave their fruits unto the caterpiller: and their labor unto the
grasshopper.

He destroyed their vines with hail stones: and their mulbery trees with the
frost.

He smote their cattle also with hail stones: and their flocks with hot
thunderboltes.

He cast upon them the furiousnes of his wrath: anger, displeasure, and
trouble, and sent evil Angels among them.

He made a way to his indignacion, and spared not their soul from death: but
gave their life over to the Pestilence.

And smote all the first borne in Egypt: the most principal and mightiest in
the dwellynges of Ham.

But as for his own people, he led the^ forth like sheep: and carried them in
the wilderness like a flock.

He brought them out safely, that they should not fear: and overwhelmed their
enemies with the sea.

And brought them in the borders of his sanctuarye: even in his mountain,
which he purchased with his right hand.

He cast out the heathen also before them: caused their land to be divided
among them for an heritage, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their
tents.

So they tempted and displeased the most high god: and kept not his testimonies.

But turned their backs and fell away like their forefathers: startyng aside
like a broken bow.

For they grieved him with their hill altars: and provoked him to displeasure
with their images.

When God heard this, he was wroth: and took sore dyspleasure at Israel.

So that he forsook the tabernacle in Silo: even the tente that he had pitched
among them.

He delivered their power into captivity: and their beauty into the enemies
hand.

He gave his people over also into the sweord: and was wroth with his
inheritance.

The fire confumed the young men: and their maidens were given to marriage.

Their Priests were slain with the sweord: and there were no widows to make
lamentacion.

So the Lord awaked as one out of stepe: and like a Giaunt refreshed with wine.

He smote his enemies in the hindre parts: and put them to a perpetual shame.

He refused the tabernacle of Joseph: and chose not the tribe of Ephraim.

But chose the tribe of Judah: even the hill of Sion, which he loved.

And there he builded his temple on hie: and laid the foundation of it like the
ground which he has made continually.

He chose David also his servant: and took him away from the sheep foldes.

As he was following the ewes great with young ones, he took him: that he might
feed Jacob his people, and Israel his enheritaunce.

So he fed them with a faithful and true heart: and ruled them prudently with
all his power.

Deus venerunt. psalm. lxxix.
Morni^g prayer.
O God, the Heathen are come into thy enheritaunce: thy holy temple have they
defiled, and made Jerusalem an heap of stones.

The dead bodies of thy servants have they given, to be meat unto fowls of
the air: and the flesh of thy saints, unto the beasts of the land.

Their blood have they shed like water on every side of Jerusalem: and there
was no man to bury them.

We are become an open shame to our enemies: a very scorn and derision unto
them that are round about us.

Lord how long will thou be angry: shall thy gelousy burn like fire for ever?

Power out thine indignacion upon the Heathen that have not known thee: and
upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.

For they have devoured Jacob: and laid wast his dwelling place.

O remember not our old sins, but have mercy upon us, and that soon: for
we are come to great misery.

Help us, O god of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: O deliver us, and
be merciful unto our sins for thy name sake.

Wherefore do the Heaten say: where is now their God?

O let the vengeance of thy servants blood that is shed: be openly showed
upon the heathen in our sight.

O let the sorrowful syghyng of the prisoners come before thee: according to
the greatenes of thy power, preserve thou those that are appointed to dye.

And as for ye blasphemy (wherewith our neighbors have blasphemed thee:)
reward thou them O Lord, seven fold into their bosom.

So we that be thy people, and sheep of of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks
for ever: and will always be showing forth thy praise, from generacyon to
generacyon.

Qui regis Israel. Psalm. lxxx.
Hear O thou shepeherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep: show
thy self also, thou that sit upon the, Cherubins.

Before Ephraim, Ben Iamin, and Manasses: stire up thy strength, and come and
help us.

Turn us again, O God: show the light of thy countenance, and we shall be
whole.

O Lord god of hosts: how long will thou be angry with thy people that prays?

Thou fedest them with the bread of tears: and geuest the^ plenteousnes of
tears to drink.

Thou haste made us a very strife unto our neighbors: and our enemies laugh us
to scorn.

Turn us again, thou God of hosts: show the light of thy countenance, and
we shall be whole.

Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt: thou have cast out the Heathen, and
planted it.

Thou made rowme for it: and when it had taken root, it filled the land.

The hills were covered with the shadow of it: and the boughs thereof were
like the goodly Cedre trees.

She stretched out her branches unto the sea: and her boughs unto the river.

Why have thou then broken down her hedge? that all they which go by, pluck
of her grapes.

The wild bore out of the wood does root it up: and the wild beasts of the
field devour it.

Turn thee again thou God of hosts, look down from heaven: behold and
viset this vine.

And the place of the vineyard that thy right hand has planted: and the
branch that thou made so strong for thy self.

It is brent with fire, and cut down: and they shall perish at the rebuke of
thy countenance.

Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand: and upon the son of man whom
thou made so strong for thine own self.

And so will not we go back from thee: Oh let us live, and we shall call upon
thy name.

Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts: show the light of thy countenance, and
we shall be whole.

Exultate deo. Psalm. lxxxi.
Sing we merely unto god our strength: make a cherefull noise unto the god of
Jacob.

Take the Psalm, bring hither the tabret: the merry harp with the lute.

Blow up the trompet in the new moon: even to the time appointed, and upon our
solemn feast day.

For this was made a statute for Israel: and a law of the God of Jacob.

This he ordained in Joseph for a testimonye: when he came out of ye land of
Egypt, and had heard a strange language.

I eased his shoulder from the burden: and his hands were delivered from
(making) the pottes.

Thou calledst upon me in troubles, and I delivered thee: and heard thee, what
time the storm fell upon thee.

I proved thee also: at the waters of strife.

Hear, O my people: and I will assure thee O Israel, if thou will hearken unto
me.

There shall no strange god be in thee: neither shall thou worship any other
god.

I am the lord thy god, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy
mouth wide and I shall fill it.

But my people would not hear my boyce: and Israel would not obey me.

So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust: and let them follow their own
imaginacions.

O that my people would have herkened unto me: for if Israel had walked in my
ways.

I should sone have put down their enemies; and turned my hand against their
adversaries.

The haters of the lord should have been found liars: but their time should
have endured for ever.

He should have fed them also with the fynest wheat flower: and with honey out
of the stony rock should I have satisfied thee.

Deus stetit in Sinagoga. Psalm. lxxxii.
Eueni^g prayer.
GOd stands in the congregacyon of Princes: he is judge among gods.

How long will ye give wrong judgment: and accept the persons of the ungodly?

Defend the poor and fatherles: see that such as be in need and necessity
have right.

Deliver the outcast and poor: save them from the hand of the ungodly.

They will not be learned, nor understand, but walk on still in darkness: all
the foundacyons of the earth be out of course.

I have said: ye are Gods, and ye al are children of the most highest.

But ye shall dye like men: and fall like one of the princes.

Arise, O god, and judge thou the earth: for thou shall take all heathen to
thine enheritaunce.

Deus quissimilis. psalm. lxxxiii.
HOld not thy tongue, O god: keep not still silence, refrain not thy self O god.

For lo, thine enemies make a murmuring: and they that hate thee have lift up
their head.

They have imagined craftily against thy people: and taken counsel against
thy secret ones.

They have said, come and let us root them out, that they be no more a people:
and that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.

For they have cast their heads together with one consent: and are confederate
against thee.

The tabernacles of the Edomites and the Ismaelites: the Moabites, and
Hagarenes.

Geball and Ammon, and Amelech; the Philistines, with them that dwell at Tire.

Assure also is joined unto them: and has helped the children of Loath.

But do thou to them as unto the Madianites: unto Sisera, and unto Iabin at
the broke of Kison.

Which perished at Endor: and became as the dong of the earth.

Make them and their Princes like Oreb and zeb: yea make al their Princes like
as zeba and Salmana.

Which say: let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession.

O my god, make them like unto a whele: and as the stubble before the wind.

Like as the fire that burns up the wood: and as the flame that consumes the
mountains.

Persecute them even so with thy tempest: and make them afraid with thy storm.

Make their faces ashamed, O Lord: that they may seek thy name.

Let them be confounded and vexed ever more and more: let them be put to shame
and perish.

And they shall know, that thou (whose name is Jehovah) art only the most
highest over all the earth.

Quam dilecta tabernacula. Psalm. lxxxiiii.
O How amiable are thy dwellynges: thou Lord of hosts.

My soul has a desire and longing to enter into the courts of the Lord: my
heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God.

Yea, the sparowe has found her an house, and the swallowe a nest, where she
may lay her young: even thy aulters O Lord of hosts, my king and my God.

Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be always praising thee.

Blessed is that man, whose strength is in thee: in whose heart are thy ways.

Which going through the veil of miserye, use it for a well: and the pooles
are filled with water.

They will go from strength to strength: and unto the God of Gods appears
every one of them in Syon.

O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: hearken O God of Jacob.

Behold, O God our defender: and look upon the face of thine anointed.

For one day in thy courts: is better then a thousand.

I had rather be a door keeper in the house of my god: then to dwell in the
tents of ungodliness.

For the lord god is a light and defense: the Lord will give grace and
worship, and no good thing shall he withhold from them that live a godly life.

O Lord God of hosts: blessed is the man that puts his trust in thee.

Benedixisti domine. psalm. lxxxv.
LOrd thou art become gracious unto thy land: thou have turned a way the
captivity of Jacob.

Thou have forgeuen the offense of thy people: and covered all their sins.

Thou have taken a way all thy displeasure: and turned thy self from thy
wrathful indignacion.

Turn us then, O God our savior: and let thine anger cease from us.

Will thou be displeased at us for ever? and will thou stretch out thy wrath
from one generation to an other?

Will thou not turn again and quicken us? that thy people may rejoice in thee.

Show us thy mercy, O Lord: and grant us thy salvation.

I will hearken what the lord god will say concerning me: for he shall speak
peace unto his people and to his saints, that they turn not again.

For his salvation is nigh them that fear him: that glory may dwell in our land.

Mercy and truth are met together: righteousness and peace have kissed each
other.

Truth shall flourish out of the earth: and righteousness has looked down from
heaven.

Yea, the lord shall show loving kindness: and our land shall give her increase.

Righteousness shall go before him: and he shall direct his going in the way.

Inclina domine aurem. psalm. lxxxvi.
Morni^g prayer.
BOw down thine ear, O Lord, and hear me: for I am poor and in misery.

Preserve thou my soul, for I am holy: my god save thy servant, that puts
his trust in thee.

Be merciful unto me, O lord: for I will call daily upon thee.

Comfort the soul of thy servant: for unto thee (O lord) do I lift up my
soul.

For thou lord art good and gracious: and of great mercy unto al them that call
upon thee.

Give ear Lord unto my prayer: and ponder the voice of mine humble desires.

In the time of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou hear me.

Among the gods there is none like unto thee (O Lord:) there is not one that
can do as thou do.

All nations whom thou have made, shall come and worship thee, O Lord: and shall
glorifye thy name.

For thou art great, and do wondrous things: thou art God alone.

Teach me thy way (O Lord) and I will walk in thy truth: O knit my heart
unto thee, yt it may fear thy name.

I will thank thee, O lord my God, with all my heart: and will praise thy name
for evermore.

For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou have delivered my soul from the
nethermost hell.

O God, the proud are riesen against me: and the congregation of naughty men
have sought after my soul, and have not set thee before their eyes.

But thou (O Lord God) artful of compassion and mercy: long suffering,
plenteous in goodness and truth.

O turn thee then unto me, and have mercy upon me: give thy strength unto thy
servant, and help the son of thine handmayd.

Show some good token upon me for good, that they which hate me may see it,
and be ashamed: because thou Lord have helped me, and comforted me.

Fundamenta eius. Psalm. lxxxvii.
HEr foundacions are upon the holy hills: the Lord loved the gates of Syon,
more then all the dwellinges of Jacob.

Very excellent things are spoken of thee: thou city of God.

I will think upon Rahab and Babylon: with them that know me.

Behold ye the Philistines also: and they of Tire with the Morians, lo there
was he borne.

And of Syon it shall be reported, that he was borne in her: and the most high
shall stablishe her.

The Lord shall rehearse it when he writes up the people: that he was borne
there.

The syngers also and Trumpetters shall he rehearse: all my fresh springes
shall be in thee.

Domine deus salutis. psalm. lxxxviii.
O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee: O let
my prayer enter into thy presence, incline thine ear unto my calling.

For my soul is full of trouble: and my life draws nigh unto hell.

I am counted as one of them that go down unto the pyt: and I have been even
as a man that has no strength.

Free among the dead, like unto them that be wounded and lie in the grave,
which be out of remembrance: and are cut away from thy hand.

Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in a place of darkness: and in the diepe.

Thine indignacion lies hard upon me: and thou have vexed me with all thy
storms.

Thou have put a way mine acquayntaunce far fro me: and made me to be
abhorred of them.

I am so fast in prieson: that I can not geat forth.

My sight fails for very trouble: Lord I have called daily upon thee, I have
stretched out my hands unto the.

Do thou show wonders among the dead? or shall the dead rise up again and
praise thee?

Shall thy loving kindness be showed in the grave? or thy faythfulnes in
destruction?

Shall thy wondrous works be known in the dark? and thy rightousnes in the
land, where al things are forgotten?

Unto thee have I cried, O Lord: and early shall my prayer come before thee.

Lord, why abhorrest thou my soul: and hydest thy face fro me?

I am in misery, and like unto him that is at the point to dye: (even from my
youth up) thy terrors have I suffered, with a troubled mind.

Thy wrathful displeasure goes over me: and the fear of thee has undone me.

They came round about me daily like water: and compassed me together on every
side.

My lovers and friends have thou put a way fro me: and hid mine acquaintance
out of my sight.

Misericordias domini. psalm. lxxxix.
Evening prayer.
MY s;ong shall be always of the loving kindness of the Lord: with my mouth will
I ever be showing thy truth: from one generation to another.

For I have said, mercy shall be set up for ever: thy truth shall thou stablishe
in the heavens.

I have made a covenant with my chosen: I have sworn unto David my servant.

Thy seed will I stablishe for ever: and set up thy throne from one generation
to another.

O Lord, the very heavens shall praise thy wondrous works: and thy truth in
the congregation of the saints.

For who is he among the clouds: that shall be compared unto the Lord.

And what is he among the Gods: that shall be like unto the Lord?

God is very greatly to be feared in the counsel of the Saints: and to be
had in reverence of all them that are about him.

O Lord God of hosts: who is like unto thee? thy truth (most mighty Lord) is
on every side.

Thou rulest the rageing of the sea: thou stillest the waves thereof, when they
arise.

Thou haste subdued Egipte, and destroyed it: thou haste scatered thine enemies
abroad with thy mighty arm.

The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: thou have laid the foundation
of the round world, and all that therein is.

Thou haste made the North and the South: Tabor and Hermon, shall rejoice in
thy name.

Thou have a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand.

Righteousness and equity is the habitacion of thy seat: mercy and truth
shall go before thy face.

Blessed is the people (O Lord) that can rejoice in thee: they shall walk in
the light of thy countenance.

Their delight shall be daily in thy name: and in thy ryghteousnes shall they make
their boaste.

For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy loving kindness thou
shall lift up our horns.

For the lord is our defense: the holy one of Israel is our King.

Thou spakest sometime in visions unto thy Saints, and saydste: I have laid
help upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen out of the people.

I have found David my servant: with my holy oil have I anointed him.

My hand shall hold him fast: and my arm shall strengthen him.

The enemy shall not be hable to do him violence: the son of wickedness
shall not hurt him.

I shall smite down his foes before his face: and plage them that hate him.

My truth also and my mercy shall be with him: and in my name shall his horn
be exalted.

I will set his dominion also in the sea: and his right hand in the floudes.

He shall call me: thou art my father, my God, and my strong salvation.

And I will make him my first borne: higher then the Kings of the earth.

My mercy will I keep for him for evermore: and my covenant shall stand fast
with him.

His seed also will I make to endure for ever: and his throne as the days of
heaven.

But if his children forsake my law: and walk not in my judgments.

If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments: I will visit
their offenses with the rod, and their sin with scourges.

Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him: nor suffer
my truth to fail.

My couenante will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips: I have sworn once by my holiness, that I will not fail David.

His sede shall endure for ever: and his seat is like as the sun before me.

He shall stand fast for evermore as the moon: and as the faithful witness in
heaven.

But thou have abhorred and forsaken thine anointed: and art displeased at him.

Thou have broken the covenant of thy servant: and cast his croune to the
ground.

Thou have overthrown al his hedges: and broken down his strong holds.

Al they that go by, spoil him: and he is become a rebuke to his neighbors.

Thou haste set up the right hand of his enemies: and made all his
adversaries to rejoice.

Thou have taken away the edge of his sweord: and geuest him not victory the
battle.

Thou have put out his glory: and cast his throne down to the ground.

The days of his youth have thou shortened: and covered him with dishonor.

Lord, how long will thou hide thy self, for ever? and shall thy wrath burn
like fire?

O remember how short my time is: wherefore have thou made all men, for naught?

What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? and shall he deliver his
own soul from the hand of hell?

Lord, where are thy old loving kindness: which thou swarest unto David in
thy truth?

Remember (Lord) the rebuke that thy servants have: and how I do bear in
my bosom ye rebukes of many people.

Wherewith thine enemies have blasphemed thee: and slaundered the fotesteppes
of thine anointed, praised be the Lord for evermore. Amen.

Domine refugium. psalm. xc.
Morni^g prayer.
Lord thou have been our refuge: from one generacyon to another.

Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world
were made, thou art god fro everlasting, and world without end.

Thou turnest man to destruction: again thou say, come again ye children
of men.

For a thousand years in thy sight, are but as yesterday: seeing that is past
as a watch in the night.

As Soon as thou scaterest them, they are even as a sleep: and fade away
suddenly like the grass.

In the morning it is grene and grows up: but in the euenyng it is cut down
(dried up) and withered.

For we consume away in thy displeasure: and are afraid at thy wrathful
indignacyon.

Thou haste set our misdedes before thee: and our secret sins in the light
of thy countenance.

For when thou art angry, al our days are gone: we bring our years to an
end, as it were a tale that is told.

The days of our age are therescore years and ten, and though me^ be so
strong that they come to fourscore years: yet is their strength the^ but
labor and sorrow, so sone passes it away, and we are gone.

But who regards the power of thy wrath: for eue^ thereafter as man fears,
so is thy displeasure.

O teach us to noumbre our days: that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

Turn thee again (O lord) at the last: and be gracious unto thy servants.

O satisfye us with thy mercy, and that sone: so shall we rejoice and be glad
all the days of our life.

Comfort us again, now after the time that thou haste plagued us: and for the
years wherein we have suffered adversity.

Show thy servants thy mark: and their children thy glory.

And the glorious majesty of the Lord our God be upon us: prosper thou the
work of our hands upon us, O prosper thou our handy work.

Qui habitat. Psalm. xci.
Whosoever dwells under the defense of the most high: shall abide under the
shadow of the almighty.

I will say unto the lord: thou art my hope and my strong hold, my God, in
him will I trust.

For he shall deliver thee from the snare of thy hunter: and from the noisome
pestilence.

He shall defend thee under his wings, and thou shalt be safe under his
feathers: his faithfulness and truth shall be thy shield and buckeler.

Thou shall not be afraid for any terror by night: nor for the arrowe that
flies by day.

For the pestilence that walks in the darkness: nor for the sickness that
destroys in the noone day.

A thousand shall fall beside thee: and ten thousand at thy right hand, but
it shall not come nigh thee.

Yea, with thine eyes shalt thou beeholde: and see the reward of the ungodly.

For thou lord art my hope: thou have set thine house of defense very hye.

There shall no evil happen unto thee: neither shall any plague come nie thy
dwelling.

For he shall give his Angels charge over thee: to keep thee in all thy ways.

They shall bear thee in their hands: that thou hurt not thy foot against the
stone.

Thou shalt go upon the Lion and adder: the young Lion and the dragon shall
thou tread under thy feet.

Because he has set his love upon me, therefore shall I deliver him: I shall
set him up, because he has known my name.

He shall call upon me, and I will hear him: yea, I am with him in trouble, I
will deliver him, and bring him to honor.

With long life will I satisfye him: and show him my salvation.

Bonum est confitere. Psalm. xcii.
IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the lord: and to sing praises unto
thy name, O most high.

To tell of thy loving kindness early in the morning: and of thy truth in the
night season.

Upon an instrument of ten stringes, and upon the lute: upon a loud
instrument, and upon the harp.

For thou Lord have made me glad through thy works: and I will rejoice in
giving praise, for the operacions of thy hands.

O lord, how glorious are thy works: and thy thoughts are very deep.

An unwise man does not well consider this: and a fool does not understand
it.

When the ungodly are grene as the grass, and when all the works of
wickedness do storyshe: then shall they be destroyed for ever, but thou lord
art ye most high for evermore.

For lo, thine enemies, O Lord, lo thine enemies shall perish: and all the
workers of wickedness shall be destroyed.

But my horn shall be exalted, like the horn of an unicorn: for I am anointed
with fresh oil.

Mine eye also shall see his lust of mine enemies: and mine ear shall hear
his desire of the wicked yt rise up against me.

The righteous shall florishe like a Palm tree: and shall spread abroad like
a Cedre in Libanus.

Such as be planted in the house of the lord: shall flourish in the courts
(of the house of our God.)

They shall also bring forth more fruit in their age: and shall be fat and well
lykyng.

That they may show how true the Lord my strength is: and that there is none
unrighteousness in him.

Dominus regnauit. Psalm. xciii.
Evening prayer.
THe Lord is king, has put on glorious apparel: the lord has put on his
apparel, and girded him self with strength.

He has made the round world so sure: that it cannot be moved.

Ever sense the world began has thy seat been prepared: thou art from
everlasting.

The floudes are risen (O Lord) the floudes have lift up their noyce: the
floudes lift up their waves.

The waves of the sea are mighty, and rage horribly: but yet the Lord that
dwells on hie is mightier.

Thy testimonies O Lord are very sure: holiness becomes thine house for ever.

Deus vltionum. Psalm. xciiii.
O Lord god to whom vengeance belongs: thou god to whom vengeance
belongs, show thy self.

Arise thou judge of the world: and reward the proud after their deserving.

Lord how long shall the ungodly: how long shall the ungodly triumph.

How long shall wicked doers speak so disdaynefully: and make such proud
boastyng.

They smite down thy people, O Lord: and trouble thine heritage.

They murder the widdowe, and the stranger: and put the fatherles to death.

And yet they say, tushe, the Lord shall not see: neither shall the god of Jacob
regard it.

Take heed, ye unwise among the people: O ye fools, when will ye understand?

He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? or he that made the eye, shall he
not see?

Or he that nurtereth the Heathen: it is he that teaches man knowledge, shall
he not punish?

The Lord knows the thoughts of man: that they are but vain.

Blessed is the man, whom thou chastenest (O lord:) and teach in thy law.

That thou may give him pacyence in time of adversity: until the pyt be
dug up for the ungodly.

For the Lord will not fail his people: neither will he forsake his enheritaunce.

Until righteousness turn again unto judgment: all such as be true of heart
shall follow it.

Who will rise up with me against the wicked? or who will take my part against
the evil doers?

If the Lord had not helped me: it had not failed, but my soul had been put
to silence.

But when I said, my foot has slipped: thy mercy (O lord) helped me up.

In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart: thy comfortes have
refreshed my soul.

Will thou have any thing to do with the stole of wickedness: which ymagineth
mischief as a law?

They gather them together against the soul of the righteous: and condemn the
innocent blood.

But the lord is my refuge: and my god is ye strength of my confydence.

He shall recompense them their wickedness, and destroy them in their own
malice: yea, Lord our God shall destroy them.

Venite exultemus. psalm. xcv.
Morni^g Prayer.
O Come, let us sing unto ye lord: let us heartily rejoice in the strength of
our salvation.

Let us come before his presence with thanks giving: and show our selves glad
in him with Psalms.

For the Lord is a great God: and a great king above all Gods.

In his hand are all the corners of the earth: and ye strength of the hills is
his also.

The sea is his and he made it: and his hands prepared the dry land.

O come, let us worship and fall down: and knele before the Lord our maker.

For he is (the Lord) our god: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands.

To day if ye will hear his voice, harde^ not your hearts: as in the
prouocacion, and as in the day of temptacion in the wilderness.

When your fathers tempted me: proved me and saw my works.

Fortye years lang was I grieved with that generation, and said: it is a people
that door err in their hearts, for they have not known my ways.

Unto whom I swear in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest.

Cantate domino canticum. psalm. xcvi.
O Sing unto the lord a new song: sing unto the lord, all the whole earth.

Sing unto the Lord, and praise his name: be telling of his salvation from day
to day.

Declare his honor unto the Heathen: and his wonders unto all people.

For the lord is great, and cannot worthily be praised: he is more to be feared
then all gods.

As for all the gods of the Heathen, they be but Idols: but it is the Lord that
made the heavens.

Glory and worship are before him: power and honor are in his Sanctuary.

Ascrybe unto the Lord (O ye kynredes of the people:) ascribe unto the Lord
worship and power.

Ascribe unto the Lord the honor due unto his name: bring presents, and
come into his courts.

O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness: let the whole earth stand
in awe of him.

Tell it out among the heathen that the Lord is king: and that it is he which
has made the round world so fast that it cannot be moved, and how that he
shall judge the people righteously.

Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; let the sea make a
noise, and all that therein is.

Let the field be joyful, and all that is in it: then shall all the trees of the
wood rejoice before the Lord.

For he comes, for he comes to judge the earth: and with righteousness to
judge the world, and the people with his truth.

Domimus regnauit. Psalm. xcvii.
THe Lord is king: the earth may be glad thereof, yea the multitude of the Isles
may be glad thereof.

Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and judgment are the
habitacion of his seat.

There shall go a fire before him: and bunre up his enemies on every side.

His lyghtenynges gave shine unto the world: the earth saw it and was afraid.

The hills melted like wax at the presence of the lord: at the presence of
the Lord of the whole earth.

The heavens have declared his righteousness: and all the people have seen his
glory.

Confounded be all they that worship carved images, and that delight in vain
gods: worship him al ye gods.

Syon heard of it, and reioised: and the daughters of Judah were glad, because
of thy judgment O Lord.

For thou lord art hier then all that are in the earth: thou art exalted far
above all gods.

O ye that love the Lord, se that ye hate the thing which is evil: the Lord
preserves the souls of his saynctes, he shall deliver them from the hand of
the ungodly.

There is sprung up a light for the righteous: and a ioyefull gladness for such
as be true hearted.

Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous: and give thanks for a remembrance of his
holiness.

Cantate domino. Psalm. xcviii.
Evening prayer.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song: for he has done marvelous things.

With his own right hand, and with his holy arm: has he gotten himself the
victory.

The Lord declared his salvation: his righteousness has he openly showed in
the sight of the Heathen.

He has remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: and all the ends of the world have seen the salvation of our god.

Show pour selves ioyefull unto the Lord al ye lands: sing, rejoice, and
give thanks.

Psrayse the Lord upon the harp: sing to the harp with a Psalm of
thankesgeuing.

With trumpettes also and shawmes: O show your selves ioyefull before the Lord
the King.

Let the Sea make a noise, and all that therein is: the round world, and
they that dwell therein.

Let the fluddes clappe their hands, and let the hills be joyful together
before the Lord: for he is come to judge the earth.

With rightousnes shall he judge the world: and the people with equity.

Dominus regnauit. psalm. xcix.
THe Lord is king, be the people never so vnpaciente: he sytteth between the
Cherubins, be the earth never so unquiet.

The Lord is great in Sion: and hye above all people.

They shall give thanks unto thy name: which is great, wonderful, and holy.

The Kings power loves judgment, thou haste prepared equity: thou have
executed judgment and righteousness in Jacob.

O magnifye the Lord our God: and fall down before his footestole, for he is
holy.

Moses and Aaron among his Priests, and Samuel among such as call upon his
name: these called upon the Lord, and he heard them.

He spoke unto them out of the cloudye pyller: for they kept his testimonies,
and the law that he gave them.

Thou heardest them (O Lord our God:) thou forgauest them, O God, and
punishedst their own inuencions.

O magnifye the Lord our God: and worship him upon his holy hill, for the
Lord our God is holy.

Iubilate deo. psalm. c.
O Be ioyefull in the lord (all ye lands:) serve the Lord with gladness,
and come before his presence with a song.

Be ye sure that the Lord he is God: it is he that has made us, and not we
our selves, we are his people and the sheep of his pasture.

O go your way into his gates with thankesgeuyng, and into his courts with
praise: be thankful unto him, and speak good of his name.

For the lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures
from generation to generation.

Misericordiam and. psalm. ci.
MY song shall be of mercy and judgment: unto thee (O lord) will I sing.

O let me have understanding: in the way of godlynes.

When will thou come unto me: I will walk in my house with a perfect heart.

I will take no wicked thing in hand: I hate the sins of unfaithfulness, there
shall no such cleave unto me.

A froward heart sall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person.

Whosoever prieuely slaundreth his neighbor: him will I destroy.

Whosoever has also a proud look and hye stomach: I will not suffer him.

Mine eyes look upon such as be faithful in the land: that they may dwell
with me.

Whosoever leads a godly life: he shall be my servant.

There shall no disceytful person dwell in my house: he that tells lies, shall
not tarry in my sight.

I shall soon destroy all the ungodly that are in the land: that I may root
out all wicked dooers from the city of the Lord.

Domine exaudi oracionem meam. psalm. cii.
Morni^g prayer.
Hear my prayer, O Lord: and let my crying come in unto thee.

Hyde not thy face fro me in the time of my trouble: enclyne thine ears unto
me when I call, O hear me, and that right soon.

For my days are consumed away like smoke: and my bones are brent up, as it
were a fyrebrand.

My heart is smitten down, and withered like grase: so that I forgeat to eat
my bread.

For the voice of my groaning; my bones will scante cleave to my flesh.

I am become like a Pellicane of the wilderness: and like an Owl that is in the
deser te.

I have watched, and am even as it were a sparowe: that sits alone upon the
house top.

Mine enemies revile me all the day long: and they that are mad upon me, are
sworn together against me.

For I have eaten ashes as it mere bread: and mingled my drink with weping.

And that because of thine indignacion and wrath: for thou have taken me up,
and cast me down.

My days are gone like a shadow: and I am withered like grass.

But thou (O lord) shall endure for ever: and thy remembrance throughout all
generacions.

Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Syon: for it is time that thou have
mercy upon her, yea the time is come.

And why? thy servants think upon her siones: and it pietieth them to see
her in the dust.

The Heathen shall fear thy name, O Lord: and all the Kings of the earth thy
Majesty.

When the Lord shall build up Syon: and when his glory shall appear.

When he turns him unto the prayer of the poor destytute: and despyseth not
their desire.

This shall be written for those that come after: and the people which shall be
borne, shall praise the Lord.

For he has looked down from his sanctuary: out of the heaven did the lord
bebold the earth.

That he might hear the mourninges of such as be in captivity: and deliver
the children appointed unto death.

That they may declare the name of the Lord in Syon: and his woorship at
Jerusalem.

When the people are gathered together: and the kyngedomes also to serve the
Lord.

He brought down my strength in my journey: and shortened my days.

But I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of mine age: as for thy
years, they endure througeout all generacions.

Thou Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundacions of the earth: and the
heavens are the work of thy hands.

They shall perish, but thou shalt endure: they all shall wax old as does
a garment.

And as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: but thou
art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

The children of the servants shall continue: and their seed shall stand
fast in thy sight.

Benedic anima mea. psalm. ciii.
Praise the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, praise his holy name.

Praise the Lord, O my soul: and forgeat not al his benefits.

Which forgeueth all thy sin: and heals all thine infirmities.

Which saves thy life from destruccyon: and crouneth thee with mercy and
loving kindness.

Which satisfied thy mouth with good thyges: making thee young and lusty as an
Eagle.

The Lord executes rygteousnes and judgment: for all them that are
oppressed with wrong.

He showed his ways unto Moses: his works unto the children of Israel.

The lord is full of compassion and mercy: long suffryng, and of great goodness.

He will not always be chyding: neither kepet he his anger for ever.

He has not dealt with us after our sins: nor rewarded us according to our
wickednesses.

For look how hie the heaven is in comparion of the earth: so great is his
mercy also toward them that fear him.

Look how wide also the East is from the West: so far has he set our snnes
from us.

Yea like as a father pitieth his own children: even so is the Lord merciful
unto them that fear him.

For he knows whereof we be made: he remembers that we are but duste.

The days of man are but as grass: for he florisheth as a flower of the
field.

For as soon as the wind goes over it, it is gone: and the place thereof
shall know it no more.

But the merciful goodness of the Lord endures for ever, and ever, upon them
that fear him: and his righteousness upon chylders children.

Even upon such as keep his covenant: and think upon his commandments to
do them.

The Lord has prepared his seat in heaven: and his kingdom rules over all.

O praise the Lord ye Angels of his, ye that excel in strength: ye that
fulfill his commandment, and hearken unto the voice of his words.

O praise the Lord all ye his hosts: ye servants of his, that do his
pleasure.

O speak good of the Lord all ye works of his, in all places of his dominion:
praise thou the Lord, O my soul.

Benedic anima mea. psalm. ciiii.
Evening prayer.
PRaise the Lord, O my soul, O Lord my God: thou art become exceeding glorious,
thou art clothed with majesty and honor.

Thou deckest thy self with light, as it were with a garment: and spredest
out the heavens like a curtain.

Which lays the beams of his chambers in the waters: and makes the clouds
his charet, and walks upon the wings of the wind.

He makes his Aungelles spirits: and his ministers a flaming fire.

He laid the foundacions of the earth: that it never should move at any time.

Thou coueredst it with the deep like as with a garment: the waters stand in
the hills.

At thy rebuke they stye: at the voice of thy thunder they are afraid.

They go up as hye as the hills, and down in the valleys benethe: even unto
the place which thou have appointed for them.

Thou have set them their bonds which they shall not pass: neither turn
again to cover the earth.

He sends the sprynges into the ryuers, which run among the hills.

Al beasts of the field drink thereof: and the wild Asses quench their
thirst.

Beside them shall the fowls of the air have their habitacyon: and sing among
the branches.

He waters the hills from above: the earth is filled with the fruit of thy
works.

He brings forth grass for the cattle: and green herb for the service of
men.

That he may bring fode out of the earth, and wine that makes glad the heart
of man: and oil to make him a cherefull countenance, and bread to strength
man's heart.

The trees of the Lord also are full of sap: even the Ceders of Libanus
which he has planted.

Wherein the birds make their nestes: and the fur trees are a dwelling for
the Storke.

The hye hills are a refuge for the wild goats: and so are the stony rocks
for the Conies.

He appointed the Moon for certain seasons: and the Sun knows his going
down.

Thou make darkness that it may be night: wherein all the beasts of the
forest do move.

The Lions roaryng after their pray: do seek their meat at God.

The Sun arises, and they geat them away together: and lay them down in
their dens.

Man goes forth to his work and to his labor: until the euenyng.

O Lord, how manifold are thy works? in wysdom have thou made them all, the
earth is full of thy riches.

So is the great and wide sea also: wherein are things crepyng innumerable,
both small and great beasts.

There go the ships, and there is that Leuiathan: who^ thou have made to
take his pastyme therein.

These wait all upon thee: that thou may give them meat in due season.

When thou geuest it them, they gather it: and when thou openest thy hand, they
are filled with good.

When thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: when thou take away their
breath they dye, and are turned again to their duste.

When thou let thy breath go forth, they shall be made: and thou shall renew
the face of the earth.

The glorious majesty of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall
rejoice in his works.

The earth shall tremble at the look of him: if he do but touch the hills,
they shall smoke.

I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will praise my God while I
have my being.

And so shall my words please him: my joy shall be in the Lord.

As for sinners, they shall be consumed out of the earth, and the ungodly shall
come to an end: praise thou the lord, O my soul praise the Lord.

Confitemini domino. psalm. cv.
Morni^g prayer.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, and call upon his name: tell the people what
things he has done.

O let your songs be of him, and praise him: and let your talkyng be of all
his wondrous works.

Rejoice in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.

Seek the Lord and his strength: seek his face evermore.

Remember the meruaylous works that he has done: his wonders, and the
judgments of his mouth.

O ye seed of Abraham his servant: ye children of Jacob his chosen.

He is the Lord our God: his judgments are in all the world.

He has been always mindful of his covenant and promise: that he made to a
thousand generacyons.

Even the couenaunte that he made with Abraham: and the oath that he swore unto
Isaac.

And appointed the same unto Jacob for a law: and to Israel for an everlasting
Testament.

Saying, unto thee will I give the land of Canaan: the lot of your enheritaunce.

When there was yet but a few of them: and they strangers in the land.

What time as they went from one nacyon to another: from one kingdom to
another people.

He suffered no man to do them wrong: but reproved even kings for their sakes.

Touch not mine anointed: and do my Prophets no harm.

Moreover, he called for a dearth upon the land: and destroyed all the
provision of bread.

But he had sent a man before them: even Joseph which was sold to be a bond
servant.

Whose feet they hurt in the stocks: the iron entered into his soul.

Until the time came that his cause was known: the word of the Lord tried
him.

The king sent, and delivered him: the Prince of the people let him go free.

He made him Lord also of his house: and ruler of all his substance.

That he might enfourme his Princes after his will: and teach his Senators
wisdom.

Israel also came into Egypt: and Jacob was a stranger in the land of Ham.

And he increased his people excedyngly: and made them stronger then their
enemies.

Whose heart turned so that they hated his people: and dealt untruly with his
servants.

Then sent he Moses his servant: and Aaron, whom he had chosen.

And these showed his tokens among them: and wonders in the land of Ham.

He sent darkness, and it was dark: and they were not obedyent unto his word.

He turned their waters into blood: and slew their fish.

Their land brought forth frogs: yea, eue^ in their kings chambres.

He spoke the word, and there came all manner of flies: and lyce in all their
quarters.

He gave them hayle stones for rain: and slambes of fire in their land.

He smote their vines also, and fig trees: and destroyed the trees, that were
in their coasts.

He spoke the word, and the greshoppers came, and Caterpillars innumerable:
and did eat up all the grass in their land, and devoured the fruit of their
ground.

He smote all the first borne in their land: even the chief of all their
strength.

He brought them forth also with silver and gold: there was not one feeble
person among their tribes.

Egypt was glad at their departing: for they were afraid of them.

He spread out a cloud to be a coueryng: and fire to give light in the night
season.

At their desire, he brought quayles: and he filled them with the bread of
heaven.

He opened the rock of stone, and the waters flowed out: so that ryuers ran in
the dry places.

For why? he remembers his holy promise: and Abraham his servant.

And he brought forth his people with joy: and his chosen with gladness.

And gave them the lands of the Heathen: and they took the labors of the
people in possession.

That they might keep his statutes: and observe his laws.

Confitemini domino. psalm. cvi.
Evening prayer.
O Give thanks unto the lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

Who can express the noble acts of the lord: or show forth all his praise?

B1essed are they that always keep judgment: and do righteousness.

Remember O lord, according to thy favor, that thou bear unto thy people:
O visit me with thy salvation.

That I may see the felicity of thy chosen: and rejoice in the gladness of thy
people, and give thanks with thine enheritaunce.

We have sinned with our fathers: we have done amysse, and dealt wickedly.

Our fathers regarded not thy wonders in Egypt, neither kept they thy great
goodness in remembrance: but were disobedient at the sea, even at the red sea.

Nevertheless, he helped them for his names sake: that he might make his power
to be known.

He rebuked the red sea, and it was dried up: so he led them through the deep,
as through a wilderness.

And he saved them from the adversaries hand: and delivered them from the hand
of the enemy.

As for those that troubled them, the waters overwhelmed them: there was not
one of them left.

Then believed they his words:and sang praise unto him.

But within a while they forgatte his works: and would not abide his counsel.

But lust came upon them in the wilderness: and they tempted god in the deserte.

And he gave them their desire: and sent leanesse wythall into their soul.

They angered Moses also in the tents: and Aaron the saint of the Lord.

So the earth opened and swalowed up Dathan: and covered the congregation of
Abiram.

And the fire was kiendled in their company: the flame brent up the ungodly.

They made a calfe in Horeb: and worshipped the molten image.

Thus they turned their glory into the similitude of a calf: that eats hay.

And they forgot god their Savior: which had done so great things in Egypt.

Wondrous works in the land of Ham: and fearful things by the red sea.

So he said, he would have destroyed them, had not Moses his chose^ stand
before him in the gappe: to turn away his wrathful indignacion, lest he
should destroy them.

Yea, they thought scorn of that pleasant land: and gave no credence unto his
word.

But murmured in their tents: and harkened not unto the voice of the Lord.

Then lift he up his hand against them: to overthrow them in the wilderness.

To cast out their sede among the nations: and to scatter: them in the lands.

They joined themselves unto Baal Peor: and eat the offerynges of the dead.

Thus they provoked him unto anger with their own inuencions: and the plague
was great among them.

Then stood up Phinees, and prayed: and so the plague ceased.

And that was coumpted unto him forrighteousnes: among all posterities for
evermore.

They angered him also at the waters of strife: so that he punished Moses for
their sakes.

Because they provoked his spirit so: that he spoke unadvisedly with his
lyppes.

Neither destroyed they the Heathen: as the Lord commanded them.

But were mingled among the Heathen: and learned their works.

Insomuch that they worshipped their ydols, which turned to their own decay:
yea, they offered their sons, and daughters unto deuilles.

And shed innocente blood, even the blood of their sons and of their
daughters: whom they offered unto the ydols of Canaan, and the land was
defiled with blood.

Thus were they stained with their own works: and went a whoring with their
own inuencions.

Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people: insomuch that
he abhorred his own enheritaunce.

And he gave them over into the hand of the Heathen: and they that hated them,
were Lords over them.

Their enemies oppressed them: and had them in subieccyon.

Many a time did he deliver the^: but they rebelled against him with their own
inuencions, and were brought down in their wickedness.

Nevertheless, when he saw their aduerstie: he heard their complaynte.

He thought upon his covenant, and pitied them, according unto ye multitude
of his mercies: yea, he made all those that had led them away captive to pity
them.

Deliver us O lord our god, and gather us from among the Heathen: that we may
give thanks to thy holy name, and make our boast of thy praise.

Blessed be the Lord god of Israel, from everlasting and world without end:
and let all people say. Amen.

Confitemini domino. Psalm. cvii.
Morni^g prayer.
O Give thanks unto the lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

Let them give thanks: whom the Lord has redeemed, and delivered from the
hand of the enemy.

And gathered them out of the lands: from the East, and from the west, from
the North, and from the South.

They went astraye in the wilderness out of the way: and found no city to dwell
in.

Hungry, and thirsty: their soul faynted in them.

So they cried unto the lord in their trouble: and he delivered them from their
distress.

He led them forth by the right way: that they might go to the city where
they dwelt.

O that men would therefore praise the lord, for his goodness: and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men.

For he satisfied the empty soul: and fills the hungrye soul with gladness.

Such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: being fast bound in
miserye and iron.

Because they rebelled against the words of the lord: and lightly regarded the
counsel of the most high.

He also brought down their heart through heaviness: they fell down, and there
was none to help them up.

So when they cried unto the lord in their trouble: he delivered them out of
their distress.

For he brought them out of darkness: and out of the shadow of death:and brake
their bonds in sundre.

O that men would therefore praise the lord for his goodness: and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men.

For he has broken the gates of brass: and smytten the bars of iron in
sundre.

Foolysh men are plaged for their offense: and because of their wickedness.

Their soul abhorred al manner of meat: and they were even hard at deaths
door.

So, when they cried unto the lord in their trouble: he delivered them out of
their distress.

He sent his word and healed them: and they were saved from their destruction.

O that me^ would therefore praise the lord for his goodness: and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men.

That they would offer unto him the sacrifice of thanks giving: and tell out
his works with gladness.

They that go down to the sea ships: and occupy their busynes in great
waters.

These men see the works of the lord: and his wonders in the deep.

For at his word the stormy wind aryseth: which lifts up the waves thereof.

They are carried up to heaven, and down again to the deep: their soul
melts away because of the trouble.

They rele to and fro, and stacker like a dronken man: and are at their wits
end.

So when they cry unto lord in their trouble: he delivers them out of their
distress.

For he makes the storm to cease: so that the waves thereof are still.

Then are they glad, because they be at rest: and so he brings them unto the
haven where they would be.

O that men would therefore praise the lord for his goodness: and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men.

They that would exalte him also in the congregacyon of the people: and praise
him in the seat of the elders.

Which turns the fluddes into a wilderness: and dries up the water sprynges.

A fruitful land makes he barren: for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein.

Again, he makes the wyldernes a standing water: and water sprynges of a dry
ground.

And there he sets the hungry: that they may build them a city to dwell in.

That they may sow their land: and plant vineyardes to yield them fruits of
increase.

He blesses them so that they multiply excedingly: and suffers not their
cattle to decrease.

And again, when they are minished and brought low: through oppression,
through plage or trouble.

Though he suffer them to be evil entreated through Tirantes: and let the^
wander out of the way in the wilderness.

Yet helps he the poor out of miserye: and makes him housholdes like a
flock of sheep.

The righteous will consider this, and rejoice: and the mouth of al wickedness
shall be stopped.

Whosoever is wise, will ponder these things: and they shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord.

Paratum cormeum. psalm. cviii.
Eueni^g prayer.
O God, my heart is ready (my heart is ready:) I will sing and give praise,
with the best member that I have.

Awake thou lute and harp: I my self will awake right early.

I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the people: I will sing praises
unto thee, among the nations.

For thy mercy is greater then the heavens: and thy truth reaches unto the
clouds.

Set up thy self O god, above the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth.

That thy beloved may be delivered: let thy right hand save them, and hear
thou me.

God has spoken in his holiness: I will rejoice therefore, and denide Sichem, and
mete out the valey of Sucoth.

Gilead is mine, and Manasses is mine: Ephraim also is the strength of mine
head.

Judah is my law geuer, Mcab is my washepot: over Edom will I cast out my shoe,
upon the Philistines will I tryumphe.

Who will lead me into the strong city? and who will bring me into Edom?

Have not thou forsaken us O god? and wilt not thou god, go forth with our
hosts?

O help us against the enemy: for vain is the help of man.

Through god we shall do great Acts: and it is he that shall tread down our
enemies

Deus laudem. psalm. cix.
HOld not thy tongue (O god) of my praise: for the mouth of the ungodly, yea and
the mouth of the deceitful is opened upon me.

And they have spoken against me with false tongues: they compassed me about
also with words of hatred, and fought against me without a cause.

For the love that I had unto them: lo they take now the contrary part, but I
give my self unto prayer.

Thus have they rewarded me evil for good: and hatred for my good will.

Set thou an ungodly man to be ruler over him: and let Satan stand at his
right hand.

When sentence is given upon him, let him be condemned: and let his prayer be
turned into sin.

Let his days be few: and let an other take his office.

Let his children be fatherles: and his wife a wiedowe.

Let his children be vagabondes, and beg their bread: let them seek it also
out of desolate places.

Let the extorcioner consume all that he has: and let the strangers spoil
his labor.

Let there be no man to piety him: nor to have compassion upon his fatherless
children.

Let his posterity be destroyed: and in the next generation, let his name be
clean put out.

Let the wickedness of his fathers, be had in remembrance in the sight of the
Lord: and let not the sin of his mother be done away.

Let them always be before the lord: that he may root but the memorial of
them from of the earth.

And that because his mind was not to do good: but persecuted the poor
helpeles man, that he might slay him that was vexed at the heart.

His delight was in cursing, and it shall happen unto him: he loved not
blessyng, therefore shall it be far from him.

He clothed himself with curssing like as with a raiment: and it shall come
into his bowelles like water, and like oil into his bones.

Let it be unto him as a cloak that he has upon him: and as the gyrdel that he
is always girded withal.

Let it thus happen from the Lord unto mine enemies: and to those that speak
evil against my soul.

But deal thou with me (O lord god) according unto thy name: for sweet is my
mercy.

O deliver me, for I am helples and poor: and my heart is wounded within me.

I go hence like the shadow that departs: and am driven away as the
Grasshopper.

My knees are weak through fasting: my flesh is dried up for want of fatnes.

I became also a rebuke unto them: they that looked upon me, shaked their heads.

Help me, (O Lord my God:) Oh save me according to thy mercy.

And they shall know how that this is thy hand: and that thou Lord have done
it.

Though they curse, yet bless thou: and let them be confounded that rise up
against me, but let thy servant rejoice.

Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame: and let them cover themselves with
their own confusyon, as with a cloak.

As for me, I will give great thanks unto the lord with my mouth: and praise
him among the multitude.

For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor: to save his soul from
unrighteous judges.

Dixit dominus domino meo. Psalm. cx.
Morni^g prayer.
THe lord said unto my lord: sit thou on my right hand until I make thine
enemies thy fotestole.

The lord shall send the rod of thy power out of Sion: be thou ruler even in the
midst among thine enemies.

In the day of thy power shall the people offer the free will offeringes with an
holy worship: the dew of thy birth is of the womb of the morning.

The lord swear and will not repent: thou art a Priest for ever, after the order
of Melchisedech.

The lord upon the right hand: shall wound even kings, in the day of his
wrath.

He shall be judge among the heathen: be shall fill the places with dead
bodies, and smite in sunder the heads over diverse couutreies.

He shall drink in the broke of the way: therefore shall he lift up his head.

Confitebor tibi domine. psalm. cxi.
I Will give thanks unto ye lord, with my whole heart: secretly among the
faithful, and in the congregation.

The works of the lord are great: sougt out of all them that have pleasure
therein.

His work is worthy to be praised and had in honor: and his righteousness,
endures for ever.

The merciful and gracious lord has so done his merueylous works: that they
ought to be had in remembrance.

He has given meat unto them that fear him: he shall ever be myndfull of his
covenant.

He has showed his people the power of his works: that he may give them the
heritage of the heathen.

The works of his hands are verity and judgment: al his commandments are
true.

They stand fast for ever and ever: and are done in truth and equity.

He sent redemption unto his people: he has commanded his covenant for ever,
holy and reverent is his name.

The fear of the lord is the beginning of wisdom: a good understanding have
al they that do thereafter, the praise of it endures for ever.

Beatus vir. psalm. cxii.
BLessed is the man that fears the lord: he has great delight in his
commandments.

His sede shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the faithful shall be
blessed.

Riches and plenteousnes shall be in his house: and his rightteousnes endures
for ever.

Unto the godly there aryseth up light in the darkness: he is merciful, loving
and ryghteous.

A good man is merciful and lends: and will guide his words with discrecion.

For he shall never be moved: and the righteous shall be had in an everlasting
remembrance.

He will not be afraid for any evil tidinges: for his heart stands fast, and
believes in the Lord.

His heart is stablished and will not shrink: until he see his desire upon his
enemies.

He has dispersed abroad, and given to the poor: and his righteousness
remains for ever, his horn shall be exalted with honor.

The ungodly shall see it, and it shall grieve him: he shall gnashe with his
teeth, and consume away, the desire of the ungodly shall peryshe.

Laudate pueri. psalm. cxiii.
PRaise the lord (ye servants:) O praise the name of the lord.

Blessed be the name of the Lord: from this time forth for evermore.

The lords name is praised: from the rising up of the Sun, unto the going
down of the same.

The lord is high above al heathen: and his glory above the heavens.

Who is like unto the lord our god, that has his dwelling so high? and yet
humbles himself, to behold the things that are in heaven and earth.

He takes up the simple out of the dust: and lifts the pore out of the myer.

That he may set him with the princes: even with the princes of his people.

He makes the barren woman to keep house: and to be a joyful mother of
children.

In exitu Israel. Psalm. cxiiii.
Eueni^g prayer.
WHen Israel came out of Egipte: and the house of Jacob from among the
strange people.

Judah was his sanctuarye: and Israel his domynyon.

the sea saw that, and fled: Jordan was driven back.

The mountains skipped like Rams: and ye little hills like young sheep.

What ayleth thee, O thou sea, that thou steddest? and thou Jordan that thou
wart driven back?

Ye mountains, that ye skipped like Rams? and ye little hills like young
sheep?

Tremble thou earth at the presence of the lord: at the presence of the god of
Jacob.

which turned the hard rock into a standing water: and the flinte stone into
a springing well.

Non nobis domine. Psalm. cxv.
NOt unto us (O Lord) not unto us, but unto thy name give the praise: for thy
loving mercy, and for thy truethes sake.

Wherefore shall the heathen say: where is now their God?

as for our god he is in heaven: he has done whatsoever pleased him.

Their Idols are silver and gold: even the work of men's hands.

They have mouth and speak not: eyes have they and see not.

They have ears, and hear not: noses have they and smell not.

They have hands and handell not: fete have they and walk not, neither speak
they through their throat.

They that make them are like unto them: and so are all such as put their trust
in them.

But thou house of Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is their succor and
defense.

Ye house of Aaron, put your trust in the lord: he is their helper and
defender.

Ye that fear the Lord, trust ye in the Lord: he is their helper and
defender.

The Lord has been myndfull of us, and he shall bless us: even he shall
bless the house of Israel, he shall bless the house of Aaron.

He shall bless them that fear the Lord: both small and great.

The Lord shall increase you more and more: you and your children.

Ye are the blessed of the Lord: which made heaven and earth.

All the whole heavens are the Lords: the earth has he given to the children
of men.

The dead praise not thee (O Lord:) neither al they that go down into the
silence.

But we will praise the Lord: from this time forth for evermore.

Dilexi quoniam. Psalm. cxvi.
Morni^g prayer.
I Am well pleased: that the Lord has heard the voice of my prayer.

That the has enclyned his care unto me: therefore will I call upon him, as
long as I live.

The snares of death compassed me round about: and the pains of hell gate
hold upon me.

I shall find trouble and heaviness, and I shall call upon the name of the
lord: (O lord) I beseech thee deliver my soul.

Gracyous is the lord and righteous: yea out god is merciful.

The lord preserves the simple: I was in misery, and he helped me.

Turn again then unto thy rest O my soul: for the lord has rewarded thee.

And why? thou have delivered my soul from death: mine eyes from tears, and
my fete from falling.

I will walk before the lord: in the land of the living.

I believed, and therefore will I speak: but I was sore troubled, I said in my
have, all men are liars.

What reward shall I give unto the Lord: for all the benefytes that he has
done unto me?

I will receive the cup of salvation: and call upon the name of the lord.

I will pay my vows now in the presence of all his people: right dear in the
sight of the Lord, is the death of his saynctes.

Behold (O lord) how that I am thy servant: I am thy servant, and the son
of thy handmayd, thou have broken my bones in sunder.

I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thankesgeuing: and will call upon the name
of the Lord.

I will pay my vows unto the Lord, in the sight of al his people: in the
courts of the Lords house, even in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem, Praise
the Lord.

Laudate dominum. psalm. cxvii.
O Praise the Lord all ye heathen: praise him all ye nations.

For his merciful kindness is ever more and more toward us: and the truth of
the Lord endures for ever, Praise the Lord.

Consitemini domino. psalm. cxviii.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: because his mercy endurerth
for ever.

Let Israel now confess that he is gracyous: and that his merry endures for
ever.

Let the house of Aaron now confess: that his mercy endures for ever.

Yea, let them now that fear the Lord confess: that his mercy endures for
ever.

I called upon the Lord in trouble: and the lord heard me at large.

The lord is on my side:I will not fear what man does unto me.

The lord takes my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see my
desire upon mine enemies.

It is better to trust in the lord: then to put any confidence in man.

It is better to trust in the lord: then to put any confidence in Princes.

All nations compassed me round about: but in the name of the lord will I
destroy them.

They kept me in on every side, they kept me in (I say) on every side: but in
the name of the lord I will destroy them.

They came about me like Bees: and are extinct, even as the fire among the
thorns, for in the name of the lord I will destroy them.

Thou have thrust sore at me, that I might fall: but the lord was my help.

The lord is my strength and my song: and is become my salvation.

The voice of joy and health is in the dwellynges of the ryghteous: the right
hand of the lord brings mighty things to pass.

The right hand of the lord has the pre-eminence: the right hand of the lord
brings mighty things to pass.

I will not die, but live: and declare the works of the lord.

The lord has chastned and corrected me: but he has not given me over unto
death.

Open me the gates of righteousness: that I may go into them, and give thanks
unto the lord.

This is the gate of the lord: the righteous shall enter into it.

I will thank thee, for thou have heard me: and art become my salvation.

The Same stone which the builders refused: is become the head stone in the
corner.

This is the lords doing: and it is marvelous in our eyes.

This was the day which the lord has made:we will rejoice and be glad in it.

Help (me) now O lord: O lord, send us now prosperity.

B1essed be he that comes in the name of the lord: we have wisshed you good
luck, ye that be of the house of the lord.

God is the lord, which has showed us light: bind the sacrifice with
coardes, yea even unto the horns of ye altar.

Thou art my god, and I will thank thee: thou art my God, and I will praise
thee.

O give thanks unto the lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

Beati immaculati. psalm. cxix.
Eueni^g prayer.
BLessed are those that be vndefyied in the way: and walk in the law of the
Lord.

Blessed are they that keep his testimonies:and seek him wih their whole heart.

for they which do no wickedness: walk in his ways.

Thou have charged: that we shall diligently keep thy commandments.

O that my ways were made so direct: that I might keep thy statutes.

So shall I not be confounded:while I have respect unto all the commandments.

I will thank thee with an unfeigned heart: when I shall have learned the
judgments of thy ryghteousnes.

I will keep thy Ceremonies: O forsake me not utterly.

In quo corrigit.
Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? even by ruling himself after thy
word.

With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not go wrong out of thy
commandments.

Thy words have I hyd within mine heart: that I should not sin against thee.

Blessed art thou, O Lord: O teach me thy statutes.

With my lips have I been telling: of all the judgments of thy mouth.

I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies: as in all manner of
riches.

I will talk of thy commandments: and have respect unto thy ways.

My delight shall be in thy statutes: and I will not forgeat thy word.

Retribue seruo.
I Do well unto thy servant: that I may live and keep thy word.

Open thou mine eyes: that I may see the wondrous things of thy law.

I am a stranger upon earth: O hyde not thy commandments.

My soul breaks out for the very seruent desire: that he has always unto thy
judgments.

Thou have rebuked the proud: and cursed are they that do err from thy
commandments.

O turn fro me shame and rebuke: for I have kept thy testimonies.

Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant is occupied in
thy statutes.

For thy testimonies are my delight: and my counselors.

Adhesit pauimento.
MY soul cleaves to the dust: O quicken thou me according to thy word.

I have knowledged my ways: and thou heardest me: O teach me thy statutes.

Make me to understand the way of thy commandments: and so shall I talk of
thy wondrous works.

My soul melts away for very heaviness: comfort thou me according to thy
word.

Take fro me the way of lying: and cause thou me to make much of thy law.

I have chosen the way of truth: and thy judgments have I laid before me.

I have sticken unto thy testimonies: O Lord confound me not.

I will run the way of thy commandments: when thou have set my heart at
liberty.

Legem pone.
Morni^g prayer.
Teach me O Lord, the way of thy statutes: and I shall keep it unto the end.

Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law: yea, I shall keep it with my
whole heart.

Make me to go in the path of thy commandments: for theirin is my desire.

Incline my heart unto thy testimonies: and not to covetousness.

O turn away mine iyes, lest they behold vanity: and quicken thou me in thy
way.

O stablish thy word in thy servant: that I may fear thee.

Take away the rebuke that I am afraid of: for thy judgments are good.

Behold, my delyghte is in thy commandments: O quicken me in thy
righteousness.

Et veniat super me.
LEt thy loving mercy come also unto me, O lord: eue^ thy salvation according
unto thy word.

So shall I make answer unto my blasphemers: for my trust is in thy word.

O take not the word of thy truth utterly out of my mouth: for my hope is in
thy judgments.

So shall I always keep thy law: yea, for ever and ever.

And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy commandments.

I will speak of thy testimonies also, even before kings: and will not be
ashamed.

And my delight shall be in thy commandments: which I have loved.

My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments which I have loved: and
my study shall be in thy statutes.

Memor esto verbi tui.
O Think upon thy servant, as concerning thy word: wherein thou have caused me
to put my trust.

The Same is my coumforte in my trouble: for thy word has quickened me.

The proud have had me exceadynglye in derision: yet have I not shrinked from
thy law.

For I remember thine everlasting judgments, O lord: and rececyued comfort.

I am horriblye afraid: for the ungodly that forsake thy law.

Thy statutes have been my songs: in the house of my pilgrimage.

I have thought on thy name O Lord, in the night season: and have kept thy
law.

This I had: because I kept thy commandments.

Portio mea domine.
THou art my portion O lord: I have promised to keep thy law.

I made mine humble peticion in thy presence with my whole heart: O be merciful
unto me, according unto thy word.

I called mine own ways to remembrance: and turn my fete into thy
testimonies.

I made have: and prolonged not the time to keep thy commandments.

The congregation of the ungodly have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy
law.

At midnight I will rise, to give thanks unto thee: because of thy righteous
judgments.

I am a companion of all them that fear thee: and keep thy commandments.

The earth, O Lord is full of thy mercy: O teach me thy statutes.

Bonitatem fecisti.
O Lord, thou have dealt graciously with thy servant: according unto thy
word.

O learn me true understanding and knowledge: for I have believed thy
commandments.

Before I was troubled I went wrong: but now have I kept thy word.

Thou art good and gracious: O teach me thy statutes.

The proud have imagined a lie against me: but I will keep thy
commandments with my whole heart.

Their heart is fat as brawne: but my delyghte has been in thy law.

It is good for me that I have been in trouble: that I may learn thy statutes.

The law of thy mouth is dearer unto me: then thousands of gold and silver.

Manus tue fecerunt me.
Evening prayer.
THy hands have made me and fashioned me: O give me understanding, that I may
learn thy commandments.

They that fear thee will be glad when they see me: because I have put my
trust in thy word.

I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right: and that thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled.

O let thy merciful kyndnes be my comfort: according to thy word unto thy
servant.

O let thy loving mercies come unto me that I may live: for thy law is my
delight.

Let the proud be confounded, for they go wickedlye about to destroy me: but
I will be occupied in thy commandments.

Let such as fear thee, and have known thy testimonies: be turned unto me.

Oh let my heart be sound in thy statutes: that I be not ashamed.

Defecit anima mea.
MY soul has longed for thy salvation: and I have a good hope, because of thy
word.

Mine iyes long sore for thy word: saying, O when will thou comfort me?

For I am become like a bottel in the smoke: yet do I not forgeat thy statutes.

How many are the days of thy servant: when wylt thou be avenged of them that
persecute me?

The proud have dug pittes for me: which are not after thy law.

Al thy commandments are true: they persecute me falsely, O be thou my help.

They had almost made an end of me upon earth: but I forsook not thy
commandments.

O quicke^ me after thy loving kindness: and so shall I keep the testimonies of
thy mouth.

Ineternum domine.
O Lord, thy word: endures for ever in heaven.

Thy truth also remains from one generation to another: thou have laid the
foundation of the earth, and it abides.

They continue this day, according to thine ordinance: for all things serve
thee.

If my delight had not been in thy law: I should have perished in my trouble.

I will never forgeat thy commandments: for with the^ thou have quickened me.

I am thine, Oh save me: for I have sought thy commandments.

The ungodly laid wait for me to destroy me: but I will considre thy
testimonies.

I see that all things come to an end: but thy commandment is exceadyng
broad.

Quomodo dilexi.
LOrd, what love have I unto thy law? all the day long is my study in it.

Thou, through thy commandments have made me wiser then mine enemies: for
they are ever with me.

I have more understanding then my teachers: for thy testimonies are my study.

I am wiser then the aged, because I keep thy commandments.

I have refrayned my fete from every evil way: that I may keep thy word.

I have not shronke from thy judgments: for thou teach me.

O how sweet are thy words unto my throat? yea, sweter then honey unto my mouth.

Through thy commandments I geat understanding: therefore I hate all wicked
ways.

Lucerna pedibus meis.
Morni^g prayer.
THy word is a lantern unto my feet: and a light unto my paths.

I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed: to keep thy righteous judgments.

I am troubled above measure: quicken me, O Lord, according unto thy word.

Let the frewil offeringes of my mouth please thee, O lord: and teach me thy
judgments.

My soul is always in my hand: yet do not I forgeat thy law.

The ungodly have laid a snare for me: but yet I swarued not from thy
commandments.

Thy testimonies have I claymed as mine heritage for ever: and why? they are
the very joy of my heart.

I have applied my heart to fulfill thy statutes always: eue^ unto the end.

Iniquos odio habui.
I Hate them that imagine evil things: but thy law do I love.

Thou art my defense and shield: and my trust is in thy word.

Away from me ye wicked: I will keep the commandments of my God.

O stablishe me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be
disappoynted of my hope.

Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: yea, my delight shall be ever in thy
statutes.

Thou have trodden down all them that depart from thy statutes: for they
imagine but deceit.

Thou put away all the ungodly of the earth like dross: therefore I love thy
testimonies.

My flesh trembles for fear of thee: and I am afraid of thy judgments.

Feci iudicium.
I Deal with the thing that is lawful and right: O give me not over unto
mine oppressors.

Make thou thy servant to delyght in that which is good: that the proud do
me no wrong.

Mine iyes are wasted away with loking for thy health: and for the word of thy
righteousness.

O deal with thy servant according unto thy loving mercy: and teach me thy
statutes.

I am thy servant: O grant me understanding, that I may know thy
testimonies.

It is time for thee Lord to lay to thine hand: for they have destroyed thy
law.

For I love thy commandments: above gold and precious stone.

Therefore hold I straighte all thy commandments: and all false ways I
utterly abhor.

Mirabilia.
THy testimonies are wonderful: therefore does my soul keep them.

When thy word goes forth: it gives light and understanding, even unto the
simple.

I opened my mouth, and drew in my breath: for my delyght was in thy
commandments.

O look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me: as thou use to do unto
those that love thy name.

Order my steps in thy word: and so shall no wickedness have dominion over me.

O deliver me from the wrongful dealinges of men: and so shall I keep thy
commandments.

Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant: and teach me thy
statutes.

Mine iyes gushe out with water: because men keep not thy law.

Iustus es domine.
RIghteous are thou, O Lord: and true is thy judgment.

The testimonies that thou have commanded: are exceading righteous and true.

My zeal has even consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy words.

Thy word is tried to the uttermost: and thy servant loves it.

I am small, and of no reputacion: yet do not I forgeat thy commandments.

Thy rightousnes is an everlasting rightousnes: and thy law is the truth.

Trouble and heaviness have taken hold upon me: yet is my delight in thy
commandments.

The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: O grant me
understanding, and I shall live.

Clamaui in toto cord meo.
Evening prayer.
I Call with my whole heart: hear me O Lord, I will keep thy statutes.

Yea, even upon thee do I call: help me, and I shall keep thy testimonies.

Early in ye morning do I cry unto thee: for in thy word is my trust.

Mine iyes prevent the night watches: that I might be occupied in thy words.

Hear my voice (O lord) according unto thy loving kindness: quicken me
according as thou art wont.

They draw nyghe that of malice persecute me: and are far from thy law.

Be thou nigh at hand, O Lord: for all thy commandments are true.

As concerning thy testimonies, I have known long se^ce: that thou have
grounded them for ever.

Vide humilitatem.
O Consider mine adversity, and deliver me: for I do not forgeat thy law.

Avenge thou my cause, and deliver me: quicken me, according unto thy word.

Health is far from the ungodly: for they regard not thy statutes.

Great is thy mercy, O lord: quicken me as thou art wont.

Many there are that trouble me, and persecute me: yet do not I swerve from
thy testimonies.

It greueth me when I see the transgressors: because they keep not thy law.

Considre O Lord, how I love thy commandments: O quicken me according to thy
loving kindness.

Thy word is true from everlasting: all the judgments of thy righteousness
endure for evermore.

Principes persecuti sunt.
Princes have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart stands in awe of
thy words.

I am as glad of thy word: as one that fyndeth great spoils.

As for lies, I hate and abhor the^: but thy law do I love.

Seven times a day do I praise thee: because of thy righteous judgments.

Great is the peace that they have which love thy law: and they are not
offended at it.

Lord, I have looked for thy saving health: and done after thy commandments.

My soul has kept thy testimonies: and loved them exceadingly.

I have kept thy commandments and testimonies: for all my ways are before
thee.

Appropinquet deprecatio.
LEt my complaint come before thee, O Lord: give me understanding, according
unto thy word.

O let my supplicacyon come before thee: deliver me according to thy word.

My lyppes shall speak of thy praise: when thou haste taught me thy statutes.

Yea, my tongue shall sing of thy word: for all thy commandments are
righteous.

Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy commandments.

I have longed for thy saving health O Lord: and in thy law is my delyght.

O let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: and thy judgments shall help
me.

I have gone astraye like a sheep that is lost: Oh seek thy servant, for I do
not forgeat thy commandments.

Ad dominum cum tribularer. psalm. cxx.
Morni^g prayer.
WHen I was in trouble, I called upon the lord: and he healed me.

Deliver my soul (O lord) from lying lyppes: and from a deceiptfull tongue.

What reward shall be given or done unto thee, thou false tongue? even mighty
and sharp arrows, with hot burning coals.

Woe is me, that I am constreined to dwell with Mesech: and to have mine
habytacyon among the tents of Cedar.

My soul has long dwelt among them: that be enemies unto peace.

I labor for peace, but when I speak unto them thereof: they make them ready
to battle.

Leuaui oculos meos. psalm. cxxi.
I Will lift up mine eyes unto the hills: from whence comes my help.

My help comes even from the lord: which has made heaven and earth.

He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: and he that keeps thee, will not
sleep.

Behold, he that keeps Israel: shall neither slomber nor sleep.

The lord himself is thy keeper: the lord is thy defense upon thy right hand.

So that the sun shall not burn thee by day: neither the Moon by night.

The Lord shall preserve thee from al evil: yea, it is even he that shall keep
thy soul.

The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in: from this time forth
for evermore.

Letatussum. psalm. cxxii.
I Was glad when they said unto me: we will go into the house of the Lord.

Our fete shall stand in thy gates: O Jerusalem.

Jerusalem is builded as a city: that is at unity in it self.

For thither the tribes go up, eue^ the tribes of the lord: to testify unto
Israel, to give thanks unto ye name of ye lord.

For there is the seat of judgment: even the seat of the house of David.

O pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee.

Peace be within thy walls: and plenteousnes within thy palaces.

For my brethren and companions sakes: I will wish thee prosperity.

Yea, because of the house of the lord our God: I will seek to do thee good.

Ad te leuaui oculos meos. psalm. cxxiii.
Unto thee lift I up mine iyes: O thou that dwell in the heavens.

Behold, even as the iyes of servants look unto the hands of their masters,
and as the iyes of a maiden, unto the hand of her maistres: even so our iyes
wait upon the lord our God, until he have mercy upon us.

Have mercy upon us, O lord, have mercy upon us: for we are utterly despised.

Our soul is filled with the scorneful reprofe of the welthy: and with the
despitefulnes of the proud.

Nisi quia dominus. psalm. cxxiiii.
IF the Lord himself had not been on our side (now may Israel say:) If the
Lord himself had not been on our side, when men rose up against us.

They had swallowed us up quick: when they were so wrathfully displeased at us.

Yea, the waters had drowned us: and the stream had gone over our soul.

The diepe waters of the proud: had gone even over our soul.

But praised be the Lord, which has not given us over for a pray unto their
teeth.

Our soul is escaped, even as a bird out of the snare of the fouler: the
snare is broken, and we are delivered.

Our help stands in the name of the Lord: which has made heaven and earth.

Qui confidunt in domino. psalm. cxxv.
THey that put their trust in the Lord, shall be even as the Mount Syon: which
may not be removed, but stands fast for ever.

The hills stand about Jerusalem: even so stands the Lord round about his
people, from this time forth for evermore.

For the rod of the ungodly comes not into the lot of the righteous: lest ye
righteous put their hand unto wickedness.

Do well, O Lord: unto those that be good and true of heart.

As for such as turn back unto their own wickedness: the Lord shall lead the^
forth with the evil doers, but peace shall be upon Israel.

In conuertendo. psalm. cxxvi.
Evening prayer.
WHen the lord turned again the captivity of Syon: then were we like unto them
that dream.

Then was out mouth filled with laughter:and our tongue with joy.

Then said they among the Heathen: the lord has dooen great things for them.

Yea the lord has dooen great things for us already: whereof we rejoice.

Turn our captivity, O lord: as the rivers in the south.

They that sow in tears: shall reap in joy.

He that now goes on his way weping, and bears forth good sede: shall
doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaues with him.

Nisi dominus edifica. psalm. cxxvii.
EXcept the Lord build the house: their labor is but lost that build it.

Except the Lord keep the city: the watch man waketh but in vain.

It is but lost labor that ye have to rise up early, and so late take rest:
and eat the bread of carefulnes, for so he gives his beloved sleep.

Lo, children, and the fruit of thy woombe: are an heritage and gift, that
comes of the Lord.

Like as the arrows in the hand of the Giant: even so are the young children.

Happy is the man that has his quyuer full of them: they shall not be ashamed
when they speak with their enemies in the gate.

Beati omnes. psalm. cxxviii.
BLessed are al they that fear the Lord: and walk in his ways.

For thou shall eat the labors of thine hands: O well is thee, and happy
shall thou be.

Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine: upon the walls of thine house.

Thy children like the Olive branches: round about thy table.

Lo, thus shall the man be blessed: that fears the Lord.

The Lord from out of Syon, shall so bless thee: that thou shall see
Jerusalem in prosperity all thy life long.

Yea, that thou shalt see thy childres children: and peace upon Israel.

Sepe expugnauerunt. psalm. cxxix.
Many a time have they fought against me, fro my youth up: (may Israel now
say.)

Yea, many a time have they vexed me fro my youth up: but they have not
prevailed against me.

The plowers plowed upon my back: and made long forowes.

But the ritghteous Lord: has hewn the snares of the ungodly in pieces.

Let them be confounded and turned backward: as many as have evil will at
Syon.

Let them be even as the grass growyng upon the house tops: which withers
a fore it be plucked up.

Whereof the mower fills not his hand: neither he that binds up the
sheaues, his bosom.

So that they which go by, say not so much as the lord prosper you: we wyshe
you good luck, in the name of the Lord.

Deprofundis clamaui. psalm. cxxx.
OVt of the deep have I called unto thee, O lord: lord hear my voice.

Oh let thine ears consider well: the voice of my complaynt.

If thou lord will be extreme to mark what is done amiss: O lord, who may
abide it?

For there is mercy with thee: therefore shall thou be feared.

I look for the lord, my soul does wait for him: in his word is my trust.

My soul flies unto ye lord, before the morning watch: (I say before the
morning watch.)

O Israel trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy: and with him is
plenteous redemption.

And he shall redeem Israel: from at his sins.

Domine non est exaltatum. psalm. cxxxi.
LOrd, I am not hye minded: I have no proud lokes.

I do not exercise my self in great matters: which are to hye for me.

But I refrayn my soul, and keep it low, like as a child that is wayned from
his mother: yea my soul is even as a wayned child.

O Israel trust in the lord: from this time forth for evermore.

Memento domine David. psalm. cxxxii.
Morni^g prayer.
Lord remember David: and all his trouble.

How he swear unto the lord: and vowed a vow unto the almighty God of Jacob.

I will not come within the tabernacle of my house: nor climb up into my bed.

I will not suffer my eyes to sleep, nor my eye liddes to slumbre: neythter the
temples of my head to take any rest.

Until I find out a place for the temple of the Lord: an habitacion for the
mighty God of Jacob.

Lo, we heard of the same at Ephrata: and found it in the wood.

We will go into his Tabernacle: and fall low on our knees before his
fotestoole.

Arise O lord, into thy restyng place: thou, and the Arc of thy strength.

Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness: and let thy saints sing with
ioyfulnes.

For the servant David's sake: turn not away the presence of thine anointed.

The Lord has made a faithful oath unto David: and he shall not shrink from
it.

Of the fruit of thy body: shall I set upon thy seat.

If thy children will keep my couenaunte and my testymonies, that I shall
learn them: their children also shall sit upon thy seat for evermore.

For the Lord has chosen Syon to be an habitacion for himself: he has
longed for her.

This shall be my rest for ever: here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein.

I will bless her vitailes with increase: and will satisfye her poor with
bread.

I will deck her Priests with health: and her saynctes shall rejoice, and
sing.

There shall I make the horn of David to flourish: I have ordained a lantern
for mine anointed.

As for his enemies, I shall clothe them with shame: but upon himself shall
his crown florishe.

Ecce quam bonum. psalm. cxxxiii.
Behold, how good and joyful a thing it is: brethren to dwell together in
unity.

It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down unto the
heard: even unto Aarons bearde, and went down to the skyrtes of his clothyng.

Like as the dew of Hermon: which fell upon the hill of Syon.

For there the Lord promised his blessyng: and life for evermore.

Ecce nunc benedicite dominum. Psalm. cxxxiiii.
Behold (now) praise the Lord: all ye the servants of the Lord.

Ye that by night stand in the house of the Lord: (even in the courts of the
house of our God.)

Lift up your hands in the sanctuary: and praise the lord.

The lord that made heaven and earth: give thee blessyng out of Syon.

Laudate dominum. psalm. cxxxv.
O Praise the Lord, laud ye the name of the Lord: praise it, O ye servants
of the Lord.

Ye that stand in the house of the lord: in the courts of the house of our God.

O praise the lord, for the lord is gracious: O sing praises unto his name,
for it is lovely.

For why, the lord has chosen Jacob unto himself: and Israel for his own
possession.

For I know that the Lord is great: and that our Lord is above all Gods.

Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth: and in the
Sea, and to all deep places.

He brings forth the clouds from the ends of ye world: and sends forth
lightninges with the rain, bryngyng the wyndes out of his treasures.

He smote the first borne of Egypt: both of man and of beast.

He has sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O thou land of
Egipte: upon Pharao, and all his servants.

He smote diverse nations: and slew mighty kings.

Sehon, king of the Amorites, and Og the king of Basa^: and all the kingdoms
of Canaan.

And gave their land to be an heritage: even an heritage unto Israel his
people.

Thy name O lord, endures for ever: so does thy memorial O Lord, from one
generation to another.

For the Lord will avenge his people: and be gracious unto his servants.

As for the images of the heathen, they are but silver and gold: the work of
men's hands.

They have mouths and speak not: iyes have they, but they see not.

They have ears, and yet they hear not: neither is there any breath in their
mouths.

They that make them, are like unto them: and so are all they that put their
trust in them.

Praise the lord ye house of Israel: praise the lord ye house of Aaron.

Praise the Lord ye house of Leui: ye that fear the lord, praise the Lord.

Praised be the Lord out of Sion: which dwell that Jerusalem.

Confitemini domino. Psalm. cxxxvi.
Evening prayer.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures
forever.

O give thanks unto the God of all gods: for his mercy endures for ever.

O thank the Lord of all Lords: for his mercy endures for ever.

Which only does great wonders: for his mercy endures for ever.

Which by his excellent wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy endures for
ever.

Which laid out the earth above the waters: for his mercy endures for ever.

Which has made great lights: for his mercy endures for ever.

The Sun to rule the day: for his mercy endures for ever.

The Moon and the stars to govern the night: for his mercy endures for ever.

Which smote Egypt with their first borne: for his mercy endures for ever.

And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endures for ever.

With a mighty hand and stretched out arm: for his mercy endures for ever.

Which divided the red Sea in two parts: for his mercy endures for ever.

And made Israel to go through the mids of it: for his mercy endures for
ever.

But as for Pharao and his hoaste he ouerthrewe them in the red sea: for his
mercy endures for ever.

Which led his people through the wilderness: for his mercy endures for ever.

Which smote great kings: for his merci endures for ever.

Yea, and slew myghtie kings: for his mercy endures for ever.

Sehon king of the Ammorites: for his mercy endures for ever.

And Og the king of Basan: for his mercy endures for ever.

And gave away their land for an heritage: for his mercy endures for ever.

Even for an heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endures for
ever.

Which remembered us when we were in trouble: for his mercy endures for ever.

And has delivered us from our enemies: for his mercy endures for ever.

Which gives food to all flesh: for his mercy endures for ever.

O give thanks unto the god of heaven: for his mercy endures for ever.

O give thanks to the Lord of Lords: for his mercy endures for ever.

Super flumina. psalm. cxxxvii.
BY the waters of Babylon we satte down and wept: when we remembered (thee O)
Syon.

As for our harpes, we hanged them up: upon the trees that are therein.

For they that led us away captive, required of us then a long and melody in
our heaviness: sing us one of the so^ges of Syon.

How shall me sing the Lords song: in a strange land?

If I forgeat thee, O Jerusalem: let my right hand forgeat her connyng.

If I do not remember thee, let me tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth:
yea if I prefer not Jerusalem in my mirth.

Remember the children of Edom O Lord: in the day of Jerusalem, how they
said, down with it, down with it, even to the ground.

O daughter of Babylon, wasted with miserye: yea, happy shall he be, that
rewards thee as thou haft served us.

Blessed that he be, that takes thy children: and throws them against the
stones.

Confitebor tibi domine. psalm. cxxxviii.
I Will give thanks unto thee, O lord, with my whole heart: even before the
gods will I sing praise unto thee.

I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name, because of thy
loving kindness and truth: for thou have magnified thy name, and thy word above
all things.

When I called upon thee, thou heardest me: and enduedst my soul with much
strength.

All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord: for they have heard
the words of thy mouth.

Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord: that great is the glory of the
Lord.

For though the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly: as for the
proud, he beholds them afar of.

Though I walk in the middeste of trouble, yet shalt thou refreshe me: thou
shall stretche forth thine hand upon the furiousnes of mine enemies, and thy
right hand shall save me.

The Lord shall make good his loving kindenes toward me: yea, thy mercy, O
lord, endures for ever, despise not the^ the works of thine own hands.

Domine probasti me. Psalm. cxxxix.
Morni^g prayer.
O Lord, thou have searched me out and known me: thou know my down
sittyng, and mine vprysing, thou understand my thoughts long before.

Thou art about my path, and about my bed: and spiest out all my ways.

For lo, there is not a word in my tongue: but thou, O lord, know it
altogether.

Thou have fashioned me behind and before: and laid thine hand upon me.

Such knowledge is to wonderful and excellent for me: I cannot attain unto it.

Whether that I go then from thy spirit? Or whether shall I go then from thy
presence?

If I climb up into heaven, thou art there: if I go down to hell, thou art
there also.

If I take the wings of the morning: and remain in the uttermost parts of
the sea.

Even there also shall thy hand lead me: and thy right hand shall hold me.

If I say peradventure the darkness shall cover me: the^ shall my night be
turned to day.

Yea, the darkness is no darkness with thee: but the night is as: clear as the
day, the darkness and light (to thee) are both alike.

For my reins are thine: thou have covered me in my mothers womb.

I will give thanks unto thee, for I am fearefullye and wonderouslye made:
marvelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well.

My bones are not hid from thee: though I be made secretly, and fashioned
beneath in the earth.

Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being imperfect: and in thy book were
al my members written.

Which day by day were fashioned: when as yet there was none of them.

How dear are thy counsels unto me, O gods? how great is the sum of them?

If I tell them, they are more in number then the sand: when I wake up, I am
present with thee.

Will thou not sley the wicked, O god? depart from me ye blood thyrsty men.

For they speak unrighteously against thee: and thine enemies take thy name in
vain.

Do not I hate them, O lord, that hate thee? and am not I grieved with those
that rise up against thee?

Yea, I hate them right sore: even as though they were mine enemies.

Try me, O god, and seek the ground of mine heart: prove me, and examyne my
thoughts.

Look well if there be any way of wickedness in me: and lead me in the way
everlasting.

Eripe me domine. psalm. cxl.
Deliver me O lord, from the evil men: and preserve me from the wicked men.

Which imagine mischief in their hearts: and stire up strife all the day long.

They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent: adders poison is under their
lyppes.

Keep me O lord from the hands of the ungodly: preserve me from the wicked
men, which are purposed to overthrow my goynges.

The proud have laid a snare for me, and spread a net abroad with cords: yea,
and set trappes in my way.

I said unto the lord, thou art my god: hear the voice of my prayers, O Lord.

O lord god, thou strength of my health: thou have covered my head in the day
of battle.

Let not the ungodly have his desire O Lord: let not his mischeuous
imaginacion prospere, lest they be to proud.

Let the mischief of their own lips fall upon the head of them: that compass
me about.

Let hot burning coals fall upon them: let them be cast into the fire, and
into the pit, that they never rise up again.

A man full of words shall not prospere upon the earth: evil shall hunt the
wicked person to overthrow him.

Sure I am that the lord will avenge the poor: and maintayn the cause of the
helpeles.

The righteous also shall give thanks unto thy name: and the just shall
continue in thy sight.

Domine clamaui. psalm. cxli.
LOrd, I call upon thee, have thee unto me: and consider my voice, when I cry
unto thee.

Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as ye incence: and let the lifting up
of my hands, be an evening sacrifice.

Set a watch O Lord, before my mouth: and keep the door of my lyppes.

O let not mine heart be inclined to any evil thing: let me not be occupied in
ungodly works, with ye men that work wyckednes, lest I eat of such things
as please them.

Let the righteous rather smite me fre^dly: and reprove me.

But let not their precious balmes break mine head:yea, I will pray yet against
their wickedness.

Let their judges be overthrown in stony places:that they may hear my words,
for they are sweet.

Our bones lie scatered before the pit: like as when one breaks and heweth
wood upon the earth.

But mine eyes look unto thee, O Lord God: in thee is my trust, O cast not out
my soul.

Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me: and from the trappes of
the wicked doers.

Let the ungodly fall into their own nets together: and let me ever escape
them.

Voce mea ad dominum. psalm. cxlii.
Eueni^g prayer.
I Cried unto the lord with my voice: yea, even unto the Lord did I make my
supplycacion.

I powered out my complayntes before him: and showed him of my trouble.

When my spirit was in heaviness, thou knew my path: in the way wherein I
walk, have they privily laid a snare for me.

I looked also upon my right hand: and see, there is no man that would know me.

I had no place to fly unto: and no man cared for my soul.

I cried unto thee, O lord, and said: thou art my hope and my porcyon, in the
land of the living.

Consider my comylaynt: for I am brought very low.

O deliver me from my persecutours: for they are to strong for me.

Bring my soul out of prison, that I may give thanks unto thy name: which
thing if thou will grant me, the^ shall the ryghteous resort unto my company.

Domine exaudi. psalm. cxliii.
Hear my prayer O Lord, and considre my desire: harken unto me for thy truth
and righteousness sake.

And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

For the enemy has persecuted my soul, he has smytten my life down to the
ground: he has laid me in the darkness, as the men that have been long dead.

Therefore is my spirit vexed within me: and my heart within me is desolate.

Yet I do remember the time paste, I muse upon all thy works: yea, I exercise
my self in the works of thy hands.

I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul gaspeth unto thee, as a thyrsty
land.

Hear me, O lord, and that soon, for my spirit waxes faynte: hyde not thy
face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down to the pit.

O let me hear thy loving kyndnes betymes in the morning, for in thee is my
trust: show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul
unto thee.

Deliver me, O lord, from mine enemies: for I fly unto thee, to hyde me.

Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee: for thou art my god, let thy
loving spirit lead me forth unto the land of ryghteousnes.

Quicke^ me, O lord, for thy names sake: and for thy righteousness sake, bring
my soul out of trouble.

And of thy goodness slay mine enemies: and destroy all the^ that vex my soul,
for I am thy servant.

Benedictus dominus. psalm. cxliiii.
Morni^g prayer.
BLessed be the Lord my strength: which teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight.

My hope, and my fortres, my castle and delyuerer, my defender in whom I
trust: which subdueth my people that is under me.

Lord what is man that thou have such respect unto him? or the son of man,
that thou so regardest him?

Man is like a thing of naught: his time passes away like a shadow.

Bow thy heavens, O lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and they
shall smoke.

Cast forth the lightning, and tear them: shote out thine arrows, and consume
them.

Send down thine hand from above: deliver me and take me out of the great
waters, from the hand of strange children.

Whose mouth talks of vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of
wyckednes.

I will sing a new song unto thee, O god: and sing praises unto thee upon a ten
stringed lute.

Thou that geuest victory unto kings: and have delivered David thy servant,
from the peril of the sweord.

Save me and deliver me from the hand of struange children: whose mouth talks
of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity.

That our sons may grow up as the young plants: and that our daughters may
be as the pullished corners of the temple.

That our garners may be full and plenteous with all manner of store: that our
sheep may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets.

That our oxen may be strong to labor, that there be no decay: no leading
into captivity, and no complaining in our streets.

Happy are the people that be in such a case: yea, blessed are the people which
have the lord for their God.

Exaltabo te deus. psalm. cxlv.
I Will magnify thee, O god my king: and I will praise thy name for ever and
ever.

Every day will I give thanks unto the: and praise thy name for ever and ever.

Great is the lord, and marvelous, worthy to be praised: there is no end of
his greatness.

One generacyon shall praise thy work unto another: and declare thy power.

As for me, I will be talking of thy worship: thy glory, thy praise, and
wondrous works.

So that men shall speak of the might of thy marvelous acts: and I will also
tell of thy greatness.

The memorial of thine aboundaunt kindness, shall be showed: and men shall sing of
thy ryghteousnes.

The lord is gracious and merciful: long suffering, and of great goodness.

The lord is loving unto every man: and his mercy is over all his works.

All thy works praise thee, O lord: and thy saints give thanks unto thee.

They show the glory of thy kingdom:and talk of thy power.

That thy power, thy glory, and mightines of thy kingdom might be known unto
men.

Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom: and thy dominion endures thorowout
all ages.

The Lord vpholdeth all such as fall: and lyfteth up all those that be down.

The eyes of al wait upon thee, O Lord: and thou geuest them their meat in
due season.

Thou openest thine hand: and fillest all things living with plenteousnes.

The lord is righteous in all his ways: and holy in all his works.

The lord is nie unto al them that call upon him: yea, al such as call upon him
faythtfully.

He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their
cry, and will help them.

The lord preserves al them that love him: but scatereth abroad all the
ungodly.

My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh give thanks
unto his holy name, for ever and ever.

Lauda anima mea. psalm. cxlvi.
PRaise ye lord, O my soul: while I live will I praise the lord, yea as long as
I have any being, I will sing praises unto my god.

O put not your trust in Princes: nor in any child of man: for there is no
help in them.

For when the breath of man goes forth: he shall turn again to his earth, and
then all his thoughts peryshe.

Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help: and whole hope is in
the Lord his god.

Which made heaven and earth, the Sea, and all that therein is: which keeps his
promise for ever.

Which helps them to right that suffer wrong: which fedeth the houngry.

The lord loses men out of prieson: the lord gives sight to the blind.

The lord helps them that are fallen: the Lord cares for the ryghteous.

The lord cares for the strangers, he defends the fatherless and widdowe:
as for the way of the ungodly, he turns it vpsyde down.

The lord thy god, O Sion, shall be king for evermore: and thorowout all
generacions.

Laudate dominum. psalm. cxlvii.
Eueni^g prayer.
O Praise the lord, for it is a good thing to sing praises unto our God: yea a
joyful and pleasant thing is it to be thankful.

The lord does build up Jerusalem: and gather together the outcastes of Israel.

He heals those that are broken in heart: and gives medecin to heal their
sickness.

He tells the number of the stars: and calls them al by their names.

Great is our lord, and great is his power: yea, his wisdom is infinite.

The lord sets up the meke: and brings the ungodly down to the ground.

O sing unto the lord with thankesgeuing: sing praise upon the harp unto our
god.

Which covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth:
and makes the grass to grow upon the mountains, (and herb for the use of
men.)

Which gives fodder unto the cattle: and fedeth the young ravens that call
upon him.

He has not pleasure in the strength of an horse: neither delights he in any
man's legs.

But the lords delight is in them that fear him: and put their trust in his
mercy.

Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: praise thy God, O Syon.

For he has made fast the bars of thy gates: and has blessed thy children
within thee.

He makes peace in thy borders: and fills the with flower and wheat.

He sends forth his commandment upon earth: and his word runs very
swiftly.

He gives snow like wolle: and scatters the hoare frost like ashes.

He casts forth his yse like morselles: who is hable to abide his frost?

He sends out his word, and melts them: he blows with his wind, and the
waters slow.

He shows his word unto Jacob: his statutes and ordinances unto Israel.

He has not dealte so with any nation: neither have the Heathen knowledge of
his laws.

Laudate dominum de celis. psalm. cxlviii.
O Praise the lord of heaven: praise him in the height.

Praise him al ye Angels of his: praise him al his host.

Praise him sun and Moan: praise him al ye stars and light.

Praise him al ye heavens: and ye waters that be above the heavens.

Let them praise the name of the Lord, for (he spoke the word, and they were
made) he commanded, and they were created.

He has made them fast for ever and ever: he has given them a law, which
shall not be broken.

Praise the Lord upon earth: ye dragons, and all diepes.

Fire and hail, snow and vapors: wind and storm, fulfilling his word.

Mountains and al hills: fruitful trees and al Cedres.

Beasts and all cattle: worms and fethered fowls.

Kings of the earth and all people: princes and al judges of the world.

Young men and maidens, old men and children, praise the name of the Lord:
for his name only is excellent, and his praise above heaven and earth.

He shall exalte the horn of his people, al his saints shall praise him: even
the children of Israel, even the people that serves him.

Cantate domino. psalm. cxlix.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song: let the congregation of saints praise him.

Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: and let the children of Syon be
ioyefull in their King.

Let them praise his name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him with
tabret and harp.

For the Lord has pleasure in his people: and helps the meke hearted.

Let the saints be ioyefull with glory: let them rejoice in their beds.

Let the praises of God be in their mouth: and a two edged sweorde in their
hands.

To be avenged of the Heathen: and to rebuke the people.

To bind their kings in chains: and their nobles with linkes of iron.

That they may be avenged of them, as it is written: such honor have all his
saints.

Laudate dominum. psalm. cl.
O Praise God in his holiness: praise him in the firmament of his power.

Praise him in his noble acts: praise him according to his excellent
greatness.

Praise him in the sound of the trumpet: praise him upon the lute and harp.

Praise him in the cimbals and daunces: praise him upon the stringes and pype.

Praise him upon the well tuned cimbals: praise him upon the loud cimbals.

Let every thing that has breath: praise the Lord.

The end of this Book.
Certain godly prayers, to be used for sondrye purposes
A general confession of sins to be said every morning.
O Almightye God our heavenly father, I confess and knowledge that I am a
miserable and a wretched sinner, and have manyfolde ways most grievously
transgressed thy most godli commandments, through wicked thoughts, ungodly
lusts, sinful words and deeds, and in my whole life. In sin am I borne
and conceued, and there is no goodness in me, inasmuch as if thou should
enter into thy narrow judgment with me, iudgeyng me according unto the same, I
were never able to suffer or abide it, but must needs perish, and be damned
for ever. So little help, coumforte or succor, is there either in me, or in
any other creature. Only this is my coumfort (O heavenly father) that thou
did not spare thy only dear beloved son, but did give him up unto the
most bitter, and most vile and slanderous death of the cross for me, that he
might so pay the ransom for my sins, satisfy thy judgment, still and
pacify thy wrath, reconcile me again unto thee, and purchase me thy grace and
favor, and everlasting life. Wherefore, through the merit of his most bitter
death and passion, and through his innocent bloudsheding, I beseech thee, O
heavenly father, that thou will vouchsafe to be gracious and merciful unto me,
to forgive, and to pardon me all my sins, to lighten my heart with thy holy
spirit, to renew, confirm and strengthen me with a right and a perfect faith,
and to inflame me in love toward thee and my neighbor, that I may
hencefoorthe with a willing and a glad heart, walk as it becomes me, in
thy most godly commandments, and so gloryfye and praise thee euerlastyngly.
And also that I may with a free concyence and quiet heart in all manner of
temptacyons, afflyccyons, or necessyties, and even in the very pangues of
death, cry boldelye and merelye unto thee, and say: I beeleue in God the
father almyghtye, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus Christ. etc. But O
lord God heavenly father, to comfort my self in affliccion and temptacyon with
these articles of the christen faith, it is not in my power. For faith is thy
gift, and forasmuch as thou will be prayed unto, and called upon for it, I
come unto thee, to pray and beseech thee, both for that, and for all my other
necessities, even as thy dear beloved son our Savior Christ Jesus has
him self taught us. And from the very botome of my heart, I cry and say: O
our father which art in heaven. etc.

Prayers to be said in the morning.
O Merciful Lord God heavenly father, I render most high lauds, praise, and
thanks unto thee, that thou have preserved me both this night, and all the
time and days of my life hitherto under thy proteccion, and have suffered me to
live until this present hour. And I beseech thee heartily, thou will
vouchesafe to receive me this day, and the residue of my whole life from
hencefoorthe into thy tuicion, rulyng and gouernyng me with thy holy spirit,
that all manner of darkness of misbeliefe, infidelity, and of carnal lusts
and affeccions, may be utterly chased and driven out of my heart, and that I
may be justified and saved both body and soul through a right and a perfect
faith, and so walk in the light of thy most godly truth to thy glory and
praise, and to the profit and furtheraunce of my neighbor, through Jesus
Christ our Lord and savior. Amen.

ALl possible thanks that we are hable, we render unto thee, O Lord Jesus
Christ: for that thou have willed this night past to be prosperous unto us,
and we beseech thee likewise to prosper all this same day unto us, for thy
glory, and for the health of our soul: and that thou which art the true
light, not knowing any going down, and which art the sun eternal, giving
life, food and gladness unto all things: vouchsafe to shine into our minds,
that we may not any where stumble to fall into any sin, but may through thy
good guiding and conductyng, come to the life everlasting. Amen.

O Lord Jesus Christ, which art the true sun of the world, evermore arysyng
and never going down, which by thy most wholesome appearing and fight do
bring forth, preserve, nourish and refreshe all things, as well that are in
heaven, as also that are on earth: we beseech thee mercifully and favorably to
shine into our hearts, that the night and darkness of sins, and the mistes
of errors on every side drieue^ away, thou brightly shining within our hertes,
we may al our life space go without any stumbling or offense, and may decently
and semely walk (as in the day time) being pure and clean from the works of
darkness, and abounding in all good works which god bath prepared for us to
walk in: which with father and with the holy ghost, lyuest and reygnest for
ever and ever.Amen.

O God and lord Jesus Christ, thou know, yea and have also taught us how
great the infirmity and weakness of man is, and how certain a thing it is,
that it can nothing do without thy godly help. If man trust to himself, it
cannot be avoided, but that he must headlong run and fall, into a thousand
vndoynges and mischiefs: O our father, have thou piety and compassion upon
the weakness of us thy children, be thou pressed and ready to help us, always
showing thy mercy upon us, and prospering whatsoever we godly go about: so
that thou giving us light, we may see what things are truly good in deed,
thou encouragyng us, we may have an earnest desire to the same, and thou being
our gyde, we may come where to obtain them: for we having nothing but
mistrust in our selves, do yield and commytte our selves full and whole unto
the alone, which workest all things in all creatures to thy honor and glory.
So be it.

A prayer against temptacion
O Lord Jesus Christ, the only stay and fence of our mortal state, our
only hope, our only salvation, our glory, and our triumph, who in the
flesh (which thou had for our only cause taken upon thee) did suffer
thy self to be tempted of Satan, and who only and alone of all men did
utterly overcome and vanquishe sin, death, the world, the devil, and all the
kingdom of hell: and whatsoever thou have to ouercomed, for our behofe it is
that thou have ouercomed it: neither has it been thy will to have any of thy
servants keep battle or fight with any of the foresaid euis, but of purpose
to reward us with a crown of the more glory for it: and to thintente that thou
myghtest likewise overthrow Satan in thy members, as thou had before done in
thine own person, give thou (we beseech thee) unto us thy souldyers (O Lion
most victorious of the trybe of Judah) strength against the roaring Lion, which
continually wandreth to and fro, sekyng whom he may devour. Thou being that
same serpent, the true geuer of health and life that were nailed on high upon a
tree, give unto us thy little sely ones, wilines against the deceitful a
waiting of the most subtyle serpente. Thou being a lamb as white as snow, the
vanquisher of Satan's tyranny, give unto us thy little sheep the strength and
virtue of thy spirit, that being in our own selves weak and feeble, and in
thee strong valiant, we may withstand and overcome all assaults of the
devil, so that our gostly enemy may not glory on us, but being conquerers
through thee, we may give thanks to thy mercy, which never leaves them
destitute that put their trust in thee: who lyuest and reygnest God for ever
without end. Amen.

A prayer for obteyning of wisdom Sapien. ix.
O God of our fathers, and Lord of mercy, thou that have made all things with
thy word, and ordained man through thy wisdom that he should have dominacion
over the creature which thou haste made, that he should order the world
according to equity and righteousness, and execute judgment with a true heart:
give me wisdom which is ever about thy seat, and put me not out from among thy
children: for I thy servant and son of thy handmayde, am a feeble person, of
a short time, and to young to the understanding of thy judgment and laws:
yea though a man be never to perfect among the children of men, yet if thy
wisdom be not with him, he shall be nothing worth. Oh send thy wisdom out
of thy holy heavens, and from the throne of thy majesty, that she may be
with me, and labor with me, that I may know what is acceptable in thy sight,
for she knows and understands all things, and she shall conducte me right
soberlye in my works, and preserve me in her power. So shall my works be
acceptable. Amen.

A Prayer against worldly carefulnes.
O Most dear and tender father, our defender and nourisher, endue us with thy
grace, that we may cast of the great blindness of our minds and carefulnes of
worldly things, and may put our whole study and care in keeping of thy holy
law. And that we may labor and travail for our necessities in this life,
like the birds of the air and the lilies of the field, without care. For
thou have promised to be careful for us, and have commanded that upon thee
we should cast all our care, which live and reignest, world without end. Amen.

A prayer necessary for all persons.
O Merciful God, I a wretched bed sinner reknowledge my self bound to keep
thy holy commandments, but yet unable to perform them, and to be accepted
for just, without the righteousness of Jesus Christ thy only son, who has
perfectly fulfilled thy law, to justify al men that believe and trust in him.
Therefore grant me grace I beseech thee, to be occupied in dooynge of good
works, which thou commaundeste in holy Scripture, all the days of my life
to thy glory, and yet to trust only in thy mercy, and in Christ's merits
to be pourged from my sins, and not in my good works, be they never so many.
Give grace to love thy holy word fervently, to search the Scritptures
diligently, to read them humblye, to understand them truly, to live after
them effectually. Order my life to, O Lord, that it be always acceptable unto
thee. Give me grace not to rejoice in any thing that displeases thee, but
evermore to delight in those things that please thee, be they never so
contrary to my desires. Teach me so to pray, that my peticions may be
graciously heard of thee. Keep me vpryghte among diversity of opinions and
judgments in the world, that I never swerve from thy truth, taught in holy
scripture. In prosperity, O Lord save me that I wax not proud. In
adversity, help me that I neither despair nor blaspheme thy holy name, but
taking it patiently, to give thee thanks, and trust to be delivered after thy
pleasure. When I happen to fall into sin through frayltie, I beseech thee to
work true repentance in my heart, that I may be sorye without desperacion,
trust in thy mercy without pres;umpcion, that I may amend my life and become
truly religious without hypocrisy, lowlye in heart without faynyng,
faithful and trusty without deceitpte, merye without lightness, sad
without mistrust, sober without slouthfulnes, content with mine own, without
covetousness. To tell my neighbor his faults charitably without dissimulacion.
To instruct my household in thy laws truly. To obey our King and all
governors under him unfeignedly. To receive all laws and common ordinances
(which disagreeth not from thy holy word) obediently. To pay every man that
which I owe unto him truly. To backebyte no man, nor slander my neighbor
secretlye, and to abhor all vice, loving all goodness earnestlye. O Lord
grant me thus to do, for the glory of thy holy name. Amen.

A prayer necessary to be said at all times.
O Bountiful Jesus, O sweet savior, O Christ the son of God, have piety upon
me, mercifully hear me, and despise not my prayers. Thou have created me of
nothing, thou have redeemed me from the bondage of sin, death, and hell,
neither with gold nor silver, but with thy most precious body once offered
upon the cross, and thine own blud shed once for all for my rau^some: therefore
cast me not away, who^ thou by thy great wisdom have made: despise me not whom
thou have redeemed with such a precious treasure. Nor let my wickedness destroy
that, which thy goodness has builded. Now whiles I live, O Jesus have mercy on
me, for if I dye out of thy favor, it will be to late afterward to call for thy
mercy: whiles I have time to repent, look upon me with thy merciful eyes, as
thou did vouchsafe to look upon Peter thine Apostle, that I may bewail my
sinful life, and obtein thy favor, and dye therein. I reknowoledge, that if
thou should deal with me according to very justice, I have deserved
everlasting death. Therefore I appeal to thy high throne of mercy, trusting
to obteyn Gods favor, not for my merits, but for thy merits, O Jesus, who
have given thy self an acceptable sacrifice to thy father to appease his
wrath, and to bring all sinners, (truly repenting and amending their evil
life) into his favor again. Accept me, O lord, among the number of them that
shall be saved, forgive me my sins, give me grace to lead a godly and innocent
life, grant me thy heavenly wisdom, inspire my heart with faith, hope, and
charity: give me grace to be humble in prosperity, pacie^t in adversity,
obedient to my rulers, faithful unto the^ that trust me, dealing truly with all
men, to live chastely in wedlock, abhor adulterye, fornicacion, and al
uncleanness, to do good after my power unto al me^, to hurt no man, ye thy name
may be glorified in me, during this present life, and that I afterward may
obtein everlasting life through thy merci, and ye merits of thy passion.ame^.

Certain prayers, taken out of the service daily used in the Queen's house.
Mondai
ALmighty god the father of mercy, and god of al comfort, the which only
forgeuest sin, forgive unto us our sins good Lord, forgive unto us our
sins, that by the multitude of thy mercies, they may be covered and not
imputed unto us, and by the operacion of the holy ghost, we may have power
and strength herafter to resist sin: by our savior and Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen.

Tuesday
O Lord God, which despysest not a contrite heart, and forgeattest ye sins
and wickedness of a sinner, in what hour soever he does mourn and lament his
old manner of living: Grant unto us O lord, true contricion of heart, that we
may vehemently despise our synneful life past, and wholely be converted unto
thee, by our Savior and Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Wednesdaye.
O Merciful father, by whole power and strength we may overcome our enemies
both bodily and gostly: grant unto us O Lord, that according to our promise
made in baptism, we may overcome the chief enemies of our soul, that is, the
desires of the world, the pleasures of the flesh, and the suggestions of ye
wicked spirit, and so after lead our lives in holiness and righteousness, ye we
may serve thee in spirit and in truth, and that by our savior and lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Thursdaye.
O Almighty and everlasting god, which not only geuest every good and
perfect gift, but also encreasest those gifts ye thou have given: we most
humbly beseech thee merciful God, to encreafse in us the gift of faith, that
we may truly believe in thee, and in thy promises made unto us, and that
neither by our negligence, nor infirmity of the flesh, nor by greuousnes of
temptacion, nether by the subtle crafts and assaults of the devil, we be
drieuen from faith in the blood of our savior and Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Friday.
Grant unto us O merciful God, we most heartily beseech thee, knowledge and
true understanding of thy word, that all ignorance expelled, we may know what
thy will and pleasure is in all things, and how to do our duties, and truly
to walk in our vocacion, and that also we may express in our living those
things that we do know: that we be not only knowers of thy word good Lord,
but also be workers of the same: by our savior and Lord Jesus Christ Amen.

Saterdaye.
O Alimightie god, which have prepared everlasting life to all those that be
thy faithful servants: grant unto us lord, sure hope of the life
everlasting, that we being in this miserable world, may have some taste and
felyng of it in our hearts: and that not by our deserving, but by the merits
and deserving of our savior and lord Jesus Christ. Ame^

O Merciful god, our only aid, succor and strength at al times, grant unto
us, O lord, ye in the time of prosperity, we be not proud, and so forgeat
thee, but that with our whole power and strength we way clean unto thee: and
in the time of adversity, that we fall not to infidelity, and desperacion, but
that always with a constant faith we may call for help unto the: grant this O
lord for our advocate sake, and savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Sunday
O Almighty and mercyful lord, which geuest unto thy elect people the holy
ghost, as a sure pledge of thy heavenly kingdom: Grant unto us O Lord, this
holy spirit, that he may bear witness with our spirit that we be thy
children, and heirs of thy kingdom, and that by the operacion of this spirit
we way kyl all carnal lusts, unlawful pleasures, concupiscence, evil
affeccions contrary unto thy will: by our Savior and Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

A prayer for trust in God.
THe beginning of the fall of man, was trust in himself. The beginning of the
restoring of man, was distruste in him self, and trust in god. O most gracious
and most wise guide our savior Christ, which do lead them the right way to
immortal blessedness, which truly and unfeignedly trusting in thee, commit
them self to thee: Grant us, that like as we be blind and feeble in deed,
so we may take and repute our selves, that we presume not of our selves to
see to our selves, but so far to see, that always we may have thee before
our eyes, to follow thee being our guide, to be ready at thy call most
obediently, and to commit our selves wholly unto thee: that thou which only
know the way, may lead us the same way unto our heavenly desires. To
thee with the father and the holy ghost be glory for ever. Amen.

A prayer for the concord of Christ's Church.
ARise lord, let thine enemies be scattered, thy haters put to flight, the
righteous and Christ's disciples make pleasant and merry, let the^ sing praises
and pleasant songs unto thee, let them blow abroad thy magnificence, let
them most highly auaunce thy majesty, let thy glory grow, let the kingdom of
Christ from heaven among the chosen be enlarged: be thou the father of the
fatherles, the judge of the widows, and the protector of the^, namely whom
the world forsakes, whose conscyences be troubled, whom the world pursues
for Christ's sake, which be nedy and wrapped full of mysery. In thy house O
Lord, let us dwell in peace and concord, give us all one heart, one mind, one
true interpretacion upon thy word. Pluck of the bands as well from the
consciences as from the bodies of ye miserable captives, and of the^ also which
as yet be hedged in within ye listes of death, and unadvisedly strive against
grace. How dry (Lord) is the flock of thine heritage: I pray thee power down
largely the showers of thy graces, let a more plenteous fruitefulnes chance,
let thy people be strengthened with thy spirit: Grant us lord thy word
aboundauntly, so that there may be many preachers of thy Gospel, which may
within them selves holily conspire and agree. Let the Church the spouse of
Christ, deal large spoils of the conquered Satan. All that beeleue in thee,
by Christ (O Lord GOD of health) moughte lift thee up with praises, might
renoume thee and extol thee. We be entered into the voyage of salvation.
Conducte us luckelye unto the port, that being delivered by thee from the very
death, we may escape and come to the very life. Fynyshe the thing that thou
have begone in us, make us to increase from faith to faith, leave us not to
our own will and choice, for it is slippery and ready to fall. To the
thunderboltes of thy word put violence, that we may give the glory to thee
alonely. Give to thy people courage and power, to withstand sin, and to obey
thy word in all things, O Lord God most glorious and excellent over all.

A Prayer against the enemies of Christ's truth.
Deliver me O lord, from the ungodly and stiff necked persons, for thou see
how in their hearts they ymagine mischief, and have great pleasure to pick
quarelles, their tongues be more sharp than any adders sting, and under their
lyppes lurketh poison of adders. But O merciful Lord, let me not fall into their
hands, that they handle not me after their own lusts. Thou only art my
God, thou must hear my pieteous plaint: Lord that rulest all together, that
art the strength and power of my defense, be thou as a sallet on my head,
whenever the ungodly shall assault me: neyter suffer thou not the wicked
thus to prosper in their matters. Suffer not their crooked and malicious
stomachs to increase, and spitefullye reuyle thee. Look upon thy poor
wretches cause, and rid me out of these daily greuaunces, then shall I with
a right up heart and pleasant countenance, extol and magnify thy holy
name. Amen.

A Prayer for patience in trouble.
Now haste thou O Lord, humbled and plucked me down? I dare now uneaths
make my prayers unto thee, for thou art angry with me, but not without my
deserving. Certainly I have sinned Lord, I confess it, I will not deny it.
But Oh my god, pardon my trespasses, release my dettes, render now thy grace
again unto me, stop my wounds, for I am al to plaged and beaten: yet lord,
this notwithstanding, I abide patiently, and give mine atte^daunce on thee,
continually waiting for relief at thy hand, and that not without skyll, for I
have received a token of thy favor and grace toward me, I mean thy word
of promise concerning Christ, who for me was offered on the cross for a
ransom, a sacrifice, and price for my sins: wherefore according to that thy
promise, defend me Lord by thy right hand, and give a gracious ear to my
requests, for all man's stays are but vain. Beat down therefore mine
enemies thine own self with thy power, which art mine only ayder and
protector O Lord god almightye. Amen.

A Prayer to be said at night going to bed.
O Merciful Lord God heavenly father, whether we sleep or wake, live or die,
we are always thine. Wherefore I beseech thee heartely, that thou will
vouchsafe to take care and charge of me, and not to suffer me to perish in the
works of darkness, but to kindle the light of thy countenance in my
heart, that thy godly knowledge may daily increase in me, through a right and
pure faith, and that I may always be found to walk and live after thy will
and pleasure, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer to be said at the hour of death.
O Lord Jesus, which art the only health of all men living, and the
everlasting life of them which dye in faith: I wretched sinner give and
submit my self wholly unto thy most blessed will. And I being sure that the
thing cannot perish which is committed unto thy mercy, willingly now I leave
this frail and wicked flesh, in hope of the resurrection, which in better
wise shall restore it to me again. I beseech thee most merciful lord Jesus
Christ, that thou will by thy grace, make strong my soul against al
te^ptacions, and that thou will cover and defend me with the buckler of thy
mercy against all the assaults of the devil. I see and knowledge that there
is in my self no help of salvation, but all my confidence, hope and trust, is
in thy most merciful goodness. I have no merits nor good works which I may
allege before thee: Of sins and evil works (alas) I see a great heap, but
through thy mercy I trust to be in the number of the^, to whom thou will not
impute their sins, but take and accept me for righteous and just, and to be
the inheritour of everlasting life. Thou merciful Lord werte borne for my
sake, thou did suffer both hunger and thirste for my sake, thou did preach
and teach, thou did pray and fast for my sake, thou did all good works
and deeds for my sake, thou sufferedst most grievous pains and torments for
my sake. And finally, thou gave thy most precious body to die, and thy blood
to be shed on the cross for my sake. Now most merciful savior, let all
these things profit me, which thou freely haste given me, that have given
thy self for me. Let thy blood cle^se and wash away the spots and foulness
of my sins. Let thy righteousness hyde and cover my unrighteousness. Let the
merits of thy passion and blood, be the satisfaccion for my sins. Give me
lord thy grace, that my faith and salvation in thy blood waver not in me, but
ever be firm and constant, that the hope of thy mercy and life everlasting,
never decaie in me, that charity wax not cold in me: finallye, that the
weakness of my flesh be not overcome with the fear of death. Grant me
merciful savior, that when death has shut up the eyes of my body, yet that
the eyes of my soul may still behold and look upon thee: that when death has
taken away the use of my tongue and speech, yet that my heart may cry and say
unto thee, (In manus tuas domine, commendo spiritum meum,) that is to say: O
lord, into thy hands I give and committte my soul. (Dommine Jesus accipe
spiritum meum.) Lord Jesus receive my soul unto thee. Amen.

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the Sun, over against
the Conduyte, by Edward Whytchurche.


