DIVES AND LAZARUS: Or rather, DIVELLISH DIVES:

Delivered in a Sermon at Paul's Cross, by R. I. Preacher of the word.

Very necessary for these times, and purposely published for the great comfort
of those that taste the bitterness of affliction.

MATTHEW. 5. 3. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven.

The fourth Edition.



LONDON, Printed by W. I. for Robert Bird, and are to be sold at his shop in
Cheap Side at the sign of the Bible. 1623.

DIVES and LAZARUS: or rather, Devilish Dives.
Luke 16. verse 19. There was a certain rich man clothed in purple and fine
silk: and fared well and delicatly every day.

20 Also there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which lay at his gates full
of sores.

21 And desired to be refreshed with the crumbs that fell from this rich man's
table; yea, and the dogs came and licked his sores.

22 And it was so, that the beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died and was buried.

23 And being in bell torments, he lift up his eyes, and saw Abraham a far
off, and Lazarus in his bosom, etc.

THese words (right Honorable, right Worshipful, and Beloved) have relation
unto the precedent verses in this Chapter, wherein our Savior Christ, from the
13 verse to the seventeenth, reproves the covetousness of the Pharisees, by
showing unto them, that no man can serve two Masters, that is, God and Riches.
All these things heard the Pharisees, which were covetous, and they mocked him:
whereupon he aptly and fitly takes occasion to relate this Parable of the Rich
man and Lazarus.

Hearken, and I shall speak of a great rich man, that flourished here on
earth, in all pomp and abundance, that shined in Courtly Purple Robes, that
was clothed in Bystus and fine Silk, that fared deliciously, that was lodged
softly, that lived pleasantly. But understand what became of this Rich man: his
years being expired, and his days numbered, and his time determined, he was
invited to the fatal banquet of blacks ugly Death, that makes all men subject
to the rigor of his Law: his body was honorably buried, in respect of his
much wealth. But what became of his soul? that was carried from his body to
dwell with the devils; from his Purple robes to burning flames; from his soft
Silk and white Byssus, to cruel pains in black Abyssus; from his Palace
here on earth, to the Palace of Pluto in hell; from Paradise, to a dungeon;
from pleasures to pains, from joys to torments, and that by hellish means
and damned spirits, into the infernal Lake of bottomless Barathrum, where is
woe, woe, and alas, where is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, Matthew,
Chap. 25. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the people that forget
GOD, Psalm 9.

Hearken also of a certain poor Beggar, clothed in tagges, with miserics
pined, pained with griefs grieved with sores, sorely tormented, unmercifully
contemned, lying at this Rich man's gate, desiring to be refreshed but with the
crumbs that fell from this Rich man's table: but dogs had more pity then this
Rich man on this distressed creature; for they came to visit him, they came to
comfort him, they came and liked his sores.

Well, his time being also determined, he went the way of all flesh, and death
was the finisher of all his miseries and griefs. Vita assumpsit mortem, vt
mors vitam acciperet, He died once, to live ever. And what became of his soul?
It was carried from his body to his Maker; from a house of clay, to a house
not made with hands; from a wilderness to a Paradise; from an earthly prison,
to a heavenly Palace; from the Rich man's gate, to the City of the great GOD;
from pains to pleasures, from miseries to joys; from Adams corruption, to
Abraham's bosom. It was carried by Angels into the Quires of Angels, to have
his being and moving in the euer-mouing heavens with God himself, Vbi vita,
and victus, and copia, and gloria, and salus, and pax, and aeternitas, and bona
omnia. Where is life, and food, and abundance, and glory, and health, and
peace, and eternity, and all good things, all above all that can be either
wishes or desired, And this is the subject that I am to speak of in your
presence. Sed quia primum, what shall I say first; let it please you to
consider the argument of this Scripture, which is twofold.

First, our Savior Christ hereby advises all rich men to be merciful to
their poor brethren in this life, lest they find no mercy in the life to come.

Secondly, he does comfort all poor men, that although they are afflicted in
this life with great miseries and calamities, yet they shall be comforted in
the life to come, and rest in Abraham's bosom.

The parts of this Scripture, are four.
1 The life of the Rich man, in these words, There was a certain Rich man
clothed in purple and fine silk, and fared deliciously every day.

2 The life of the Beggar, in these words, Also there was a certain beggar
named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate full of sores, etc.

3 The death of the Beggar, in these words, And it was so, the beggar died, and
was carried, etc.

4 The death of the Rich man, The Rich man also dyed, and was buried.

In the first part, I note these three circumstances. 1 What this Rich man was,
and whether there was any such man, or no.

2 What his apparel was, not mean or ordinary, but Purple and fine silk.

3 That his diet was not base, nor homely, but delicious; and not once, or
twice, but every day.

In the life of the Beggar, I find four circumstances.

1 Where he lived; in no Palace or house, but at the Rich man's gate.

2 How he lived; neither in health nor wealth, but miserably full of sores.

3 That he desired in his life, not Lordships, or houses, or land, or gold, or
silver, but crumbs to save his life.

4 Who showed the Beggar kindness in his life; not the Rich man, but the Rich
man's dogs. The dogs came also and licked his sores.

In the death of the Beggar, I note three circumstances.

1 What became of his body being dead, no mention hereof is made in holy
Scriptures? it may be buried with little or no respect, because he was a poor
man; or else cast into some ditch, by reason of his sores.

2 What became of his soul? It went not to Purgatory, (for there is no such
place) but it was carried into Abraham's bosom.

3 By whom? by Angels: It was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom.

In the death of the Rich man, I note these two circumstances.

1 What became of his body being dead? It was honorably buried, because of his
great substance.

2 What became of his soul? It went to hell: He being in hell torments, hit up
his eyes, and saw Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his bosom.

Of these in order.
And first, in the life of the Rich man, we noted what this Rich man was;
whether there was indeed any such man or no: wherefore here may a question
arise, Whether this be a Parable or History? the Writers hereon do not agree.

Marloret says, Quanquam quibusdam haec simplex Parabola esse videtur, tamen
quia hic Lazari nomen exprimitur, rem gestam narrare probabilius est: Some are
of that mind, that this is a Parable; yet because (said he) Christ expresses
here the name of Lazarus, it argues that he spoke of a thing that was so done
indeed.

Likewise says Franciscus Lambertus, Credondum magis esse Historia^ and
exemplum verum quam Parabolum: It must be believed, that this is rather a
History, and a true example, then a Parable.

But Theophilactus is of contrary opinion, Parabola veraest, and hac non
Historia, This is a Parable, and no History.

Erasmus also says, that it is but a Parable, whereby all rich men may learn
to be merciful to their poor brethren, that they may speak for them in the
day of vengeance and wrath.

Srella also says, Erat quidam homo, non quidam vir; he speaks of the Species
not of the indiuidum, as one particular man; therefore it is a Parable.

Many Writers there are also, that rather aiming at the arguments and
observations herein, have not set down their judgments, whether it be a
Parable or History: therefore it might seem wiscdome in me to suspend my my
judgment also herein, especially since Marloret says, Parum refert vtrum sit
Parabola an Historia modo summam doctrinam teneant lectores: It greatly
skilleth not whether it be a Parable or History, so that we duly consider the
doctrine herein.

But because it is requisite that I also show mine opinion, I will return the
verdict according to my evidence; and therefore in naked truth I find and hold
that it is a Parable: and my reasons are these two; First, because our Savior
in the beginning of this Chapter does relate a Parable of a Rich man that had a
Steward, etc. Therefore he continues in this Chapter to open his mouth in
Parables, according to the Prophet, I will open my mouth in parables, and show
dark sentences of old time. Secondly, because the Rich man cried out of hell
unto Abraham, and Abraham answered the Rich man; which must needs be understood
Parabolically: for the damned in hell cannot see nor hear the Saints that are
in heaven, neither by reason of the distance of place, and also because of the
maine spheres and orbs that are twixt heaven and hell; neither shall they see
or know what is done there. And again, Abraham's throat is yet dry, and
cleaves to the roof of his mouth; therefore he cannot speak so loud as to be
heard out of heaven into hell. Therefore it is but a Parable.

But here we see, first, that the wicked are so little respected with God, that
he will not vauchsafe so much as to name them. I will not (says David,
speaking in the person of God) make mention of their names within my lips. And
again, such as be foolish shall not tarry in my sight; for thou hate all
them which work vanity. And have not our sins also deserved that we should
not be remembered also of God, and that he should utterly forget us, that is,
take away his love and fanour from us? Yes verily; for what pride, envy, and
impiety is there practiced here among us? pride against God, envy against
men, and impiety against our own souls and consciences; having touched even
the very tropicke of all wickedness: so that our sins force God to forsake
us, and not to remember us. Plutarch in the life of Theseus, reports of one
Phea a woman that robbed all the passengers that passed by her palace, called
Crommyonia, where she dwelled; which History may not unfitly be applied to our
sins; for they like Phea rob us of grace, of favor, of blessings, of good
name, and of Gods love too. Solum peccatum homicida, It is sin only that
cutteth our throats. It was the sin of Egypt, that plagued Egypt, and it was
the sins of this City, that plagued this City: although now the Lord has
spared it a good season, yet let us not presume of his long sufferance: for if
punishments argue sins, and sins plagues, have we not cause to fear great
miseries to ensue. I conclude this point therefore with the Prophet, Esa. 5. Woe
be unto them that draw on wickedness with cords of vanity, and sin, as it
were, with a cart-rope. I heard a voice, saying, Woe, woe, woe unto the
inhabitants of the earth. Whereupon one notes that there is, Triplex vae,
Primum vae propter culpam, secundum propter tribulationem mundanam, tertium
propter aeternam poenam: There are three kinds of woes, the first woe is for
sin and offenses: the second, for worldly tribulation and misery: the third,
for the everlasting pain. All of these woes did the Rich man feel: two of them
were begun here on earth, and the third was finished being in hell torments.

Secondly, let us consider what his apparel was, Purple and fine white, as
sour will have: but we read, kai endidysketo porphyron kai bysson, which word
bysson, although some take it for fine Flax, yet let it here be understood of
silk.

There was very great difference betwixt the apparel of John the Baptist and
this man, John's raiment was Camels hair, with a leatherne girdle about his
loins, which did argue repentance and mortification in him; but this Rich man's
apparel was Purple and fine Silk, whose outward apparel did argue the pride of
his heart: the outward habit for the most part resemble the inward habit and
condition of the mind. Pride, as says one, is grounded in the heart of man; a
vice most loathsome to God, hateful to man, and hurtful to the soul.

But let us consider the three circumstances in the life of this rich man, to
wit, what his diet was; Deliciously every day: and here we see what the
children of this would delight in, namely in fullness of meat; Qui neglecto
superorum culta, Baccho indulgent, venerique ministrant: who neglecting the
service of God, have given themselves to serve Bacchus and Venus. Hence one
notes, Gula delectationem, non necessitatem quaerit: A gluttonous person
eats more for pleasure then necessity: so did this Rich man; so did our
first parents; it was not through need or necessity that they (...) eat of the
forbidden tree, but through wan^onnesse, pleasures and idleness. Such is the
strength of gluttony, that it is called, Bla^dus Demon, dulce venenum, suaue
peccatum, quamqui habet, seipsum non habet; quam qui habet peccatum non habet,
sed ipse totus est peccatum: Gluttony is a flattering Devil, and pleasant
sin, and a sweet poison; which who so uses, has not the use of himself;
which who so has, has no sin, for he is all sin it self. Besides, it
has an especial effect, for it does, as Gregory says, generate lust.

Therefore it is well noted, that it is, Amisso temporis, naufragium
castitatis, ruina corporis: The loss of time, the shipwreck of honesty, and
the ruin of the body. To be short, it was gluttony that caused our first
Parents to transgress: it was gluttony that caused Lot to commit incest: it
was gluttony that made Esau to sell his birthright: it was gluttony and
drunkenness that caused Nabals death: it was gluttony that lost Balthasars
kingdom.

Be not then desirous of dainty meats, says Solomon: for he that loves
banqueting shall be poor; and he that delights in wine shall not be rich.

Also, hence I cannot but commend the tempera^e diet of our well fed Monks: O
Monachi, vestri stomachi sunt amphora Barchi. Monks bellies are Bacchuses
barrels: like unto their countreyman Alpities a Roman, famous for his
gluttony. The righteous eat, and are satisfied; but the belly of the ungodly
has never enough. Prou. 13. There are therefore two kinds of eating; Moderate,
as that of John the Baptist, and that of Elias, David, and Daniel: Immoderate,
as this of the Rich man which fared delicately.

And so let us a while leave the Rich man, and consider the second, that which
is the life of the Beggar.

There was also a certain Beggar named Lazarus, etc.

Poor Lazarus? what, lying at a gate, and full of sores too? Would not this
Rich man afford thee some out-house to lie in, to shroud thee from storms and
tempests? no. Would not his servants pity thee? no. Would not his children
speak for thee? no. Would not his wife entreat her husband for thee? no. Have
thou ever done them any wrong? no. But Lazarus, it may be thou art stout; and
often times Beggars will be chusers: thou perhaps would have some great
alms, or some Coppiehold, or some Farm of this Rich man? no: or thou would
have some delicate meat, or many dishes? no: or thou would sit at the table
with his sons or servants; no, no. What is it then that thou do desire?
nothing but crumbs to refresh my soul; nothing but crumbs to save my life;
nothing but crumbs, crumbs that fall from the Rich man's table: I know that he
fares plentifully, and that he may well spare them.

What shall I say of the hardness of this cruel Rich man's heart? Let me speak
for Lazarus unto this rich man, yet I shall but a sinam tondere, get nothing of
this hard fellow: I have a message unto thee, O thou Rich man, from the great
God of heaven, and he does desire thee, that thou respect the Beggar that
lies at the gate, pained with sores, pined with grief, and even starued
through hunger; and I beseech thee in Gods stead, that thou have pity on this
Beggar, as God shall have pity, mercy and compassion on thee; and look what
thou layest cut, it shall be paid thee again. But he auswered: I warrant
you, he is some runnagate idle Rogue; and so long as he can be maintained by
such easy means, he will never take any other Trade upon him. Nay, but good
sir, let it please you only to behold this poor creature; which suppose it
were granted, and he coming to the gate where this wretched object lay,
seeing him berayed with sores, betottered in rags, and the dogs licking him,
stopping his nose, with a squeamish face, and disdainful look, began to say
unto him: I see thou art some lewd fellow, that such miseries happen unto thee,
and such plagues come upon thee, it is not for thy goodness or righteousness,
that these afflictions light on thee. But he replied O good Master, some
comfort, good Master, some relief, good Master, some crumbs to save my life, I
shall die else and starve at your gate; good Master, I beseech you for Gods
sake, I beseech you for Christ's sake, take some pity, some compassion, some
mercy on me. But he with an angry look disdaining Lazarus, said, Away, hence
you idle Rogue, not a penny, not a morsel, not a crumme of bread; and so
stopping his nose from the sent, and his ears from the cry of Lazarus,
returned into his Palace. And this poor man's throat being dry with crying,
his heart fainting for want of comfort, his tongue cleaving to the roof of his
month, being worn out with fastings and miseries, starued at the Rich man's
gate. Now must I speak for dead Lazarus against this Rich man; Nam sibi
tacuissent, nonne lapides clamabant? If I should hold my peace, the very stones
would cry, O thou painted sepulcher, and son of no woman, thou rich Miser, and
more then cruel wretch, Lazarus is dead, he is dead at thy gate, and his blood
shall be upon thee; thou shewedst no mercy unto him, no mercy shall be showed to
thee; thou stopst thy ears unto his cry, thou shall cry and not be heard. It
is inhumane wickedness to have no compassion on distressed Lazarus; but most
of all to let him starve at thy gate for want of food. what did he desire of
thee, but only crumbs to save his life? Is it a small thing, I pray thee, that
thou having abundance of delicate meat, should see him starve for bread;
that thou flourishing in Purple and Silk, should see Lazarus lie in rags;
that thou seeing even thy dogs have pity on him, thou would have no pity
upon him thy self: what eyes had thou that would not see his sores? what
ears had thou, that would not hear his cry? what hands had thou, that
should not be stretched out to give? what heart had thou, that would not melt
in thy body? what soul had thou, that would not pity this silly soul,
this wretched body, poor Lazarus? If the stones could speak, they would cry,
Fie upon thee; if thy dogs could speak, they would condemn thee of
unmercifulness; if dead Lazarus were here, his sores would bleed afresh before
thy face, and cry in thy ears, that thou art guilty, guilty of his blood,
and that thy sin is more then can be pardoned. Why should I not tell thee the
portion that is prepared for thee; this shall be thy portion to drink: Let thy
days be few, and let another take thine office: let thy children be
fatherless, and thy wife a widow: let thy children be vagabonds and beg their
bread, let them seek it also out of desolate places: let the extortioner
consume all that thou have, and let the stranger spoil thy labor: let there
be no man to pity them, nor to have compassion on thy fatherless children:
let thy memorial be clean forgotten, and in the next generation let thy name
be clean put out: let him be an accursed example to all the world: let him be
cursed in the City, and cursed in the field: let him be cursed when he goes
out, and when he comes in: let him be cursed when he lies down, and when he
rises up: let all creatures, and the Creator himself forsake him, Angels
reject him, heavens frown at him, earth open thy mouth, hell receive him,
spirits tear him, devils torment him, let no mercy be showed unto him that
showed no mercy: thus shall the miseries of Lazarus be revenged by the just
plagues that shall justly fall upon the rich man's head.

But here let us first observe, the little or no whit of mercy that the
children of this world show to the godly in this life, how basely they use
them, and unmercifully respect them. They gaped on me with their mouths, as it
had bin a roaring lion: they stood staring upon me, saying, Fie upon thee, fie
upon thee, we saw it with our eyes. So did this Rich man stare upon poor
Lazarus, crying, fie upon thee loathsome forsaken abject. Therefore here we
see, that there was in him, Triplex peccatum, nefas in Deum, malitia in
proximum, scelus in seipsu^: Impiety toward God, cruelty toward Lazarus, and
vengeance against himself: and the little mercy that bloody minded Herod
showed to the innocents, sufficiently proves this place: whereupon Saint
Gregory thus applies, Quare horrendum etc. Why should that horrible decree,
that cruel edict proceed out from Herod, that the young innocents should be
slain? Why should none but Herod, that Sycophant, that blood-sucker, be
appointed to act this cruel, this woeful, this more then unnatural Tragedy?
What harms had they done him? What ill thought against him was imagined by
them? What occasion of murder was offered by them? What injury or wrong was
pretended toward him, that the City of Rhama should for no cause be filled
with Butchers that should murder the innocents, and destroy newborn babes?
In Rhama there was a voice heard, Lamentation, weeping and great mourning. Who
can with tongue declare the miseries and calamities in that town, that there
should be such a lamentation, such a weeping consent of children, of mothers,
of fathers, of kindred, miserably crying out to the merciless murderers to
save their lives? Who can deplore the many and sundry faces, manners, innocent
smiling looks of these pretty babes on their fatal executioners? that the
poor infant, so soon as it was borne, and cleaued to the breast, should
receive a deadly wound thorough his bowels: and the woeful mother offering the
child a dug, was constrained to seek her infants blood in the dust: yea, and
oftentimes the cruel slave for haste, with a sword carelessly murdered Mother
and infants together. We cannot without tears rightly consider these things.
Neither was this capital sentence of Herod only against infants that were but
one year old, but if any had lived to the age of two years, that they also
should be slain.

Here is painted out most plainly the manner and savage dealing of the wicked
world toward the children of God, how unmercifully they do use them, like as
Cain used Ab^l, and as Achab dealt with Naboth, or as the Rich man dealt with
Lazarus. But here let the ungodly merciless learn, that they that show no
mercy to poor Lazarus in this world, shall find but little in that to come.
And let Lazarus learn also, since his miseries are so great and so many in
this life, to look for a better in that life, where there is no such cruel
dealings. Let us then with Stella loath this world: for Impossible est in hoc
^undo esse and non timere, and non dolor, and non laborare, and non
p^riclitare: We cannot possibly live in this world without fear, danger,
dread, sorrow, pain, miseries, and such like, as Lazarus felt.

Secondly, in the life of Lazarus I noted how he lived, to wit, miserably and
full of sores; and yet this Rich man would not pity him. Christ could not of
his mercy but cure the Leper, when he saw him full of sores and leprosy, and
Elisha could not but of humanity teach Naaman the Assyrian to wash himself in
Jordan, that he might be whole: but this Rich man would not help the poor
Beggar, neither by his counsel, purse, table or crumbs, but let him alone to
pining miseries at his gate.

Hence we note in the person of Lazarus, the great miseries and afflictions
that the Church of God does endure in this world.

Great are the troubles of the righteous, says David, not small or few, but
great and many, Psalm. 34. And again, He will thoroughly purge his floor, not
slightly or to halues, but thoroughly, Matthew. 3. And he will search Jerusalem
with candle light, lest he should ouerslip any wickedness therein. So that as
Saint Bernard says, In sordibus generamur, in tenebris conseruemur, in
doloribus paterimur: We are begotten in uncleanness, we are nourished in
darkness and brought into this world with bitternesie. ^riplices enim sunt
dolores, scilicet, cordis, mundi, and inferni: There are thee kinds of
sorrows, the sorrow of the heart, the sorrows of the world, and the pains of
hell. Primi sunt ex natura, secundi ex necessitate, tertij pro aequitate: We
sorrow in heart by nature, we sorrow in this world of necessity, the third
shall happen to the Rich man in hell of equity, when he shall confess
himself to be justly plagued.

And further to prove this place, we have many examples in the Scripture, but
that wellknowne one of Job may not be omitted, whose miseries were more then
many, and intolerable; as first, he being a just man, and one that feared God,
to be thus plagued; for when one messenger was relating tragical news to him,
there came another on the neck of him, like the waves of the Sea, while he was
yet speaking, and there came another, while the other was yet speaking; and
while he was yet speaking, there came another; and yet this good man had not so
much as an hours respit to breathe, or to receive comfort and consolation by
any means; his goods were lost, his body plagued, his servants slain, his
sons were dead, and no creature left alive to comfort him, but only a
froward wife to grieve and vex his heart, Miseria est copia tribulationis, and
inopia consolationis, quan^^ multifarie quis patitur, and e nemine reuelatur:
Misery is then a sea of tribulation, and scarce a drop of consolation, when a
man is oppressed many ways, and relieved by no means.

For further proof hereof, add hereunto the miseries and afflictions of that
blessed Saint the Virgin Mary the mother of Christ: for so soon as her
eye-pleasing Babe was borne, her troubles with his were enlarged: first, she
was constrained through Herod, cruelty to fly from Bethelem into the land of
Egypt; to the land of Israel from thence; from the land of Israel to the parts
of Galile; from thence to the city of Nazareth: thus the holy Mother, with her
more then holy Son, was compelled to fly for fear of their lives, and to
seek their diet and lodging where they could find it. The Foxes have holes,
and the birds of the Air have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to
rest his head, Math. 8. From the hour of his birth, until he was twelve
years old, she never slept but in fear of her life and her Sons too, being
both hated by the red Dragon, and persecuted by Herod and the world. He came
among his own, and his own received him not. But when her Son came to
thirty years of age, O I cannot express nor speak her griefs! for grief,
when as she saw him betrayed and, given into the hands of wicked men; when as
she saw him haled and pulled before Councels; when as she saw him test from
pillar to post; when as she saw him sent from Anoas to Caiphas, from Caiphas to
Pontius Pilat, to be unjustly condemned; when as she heard the fatal sentence
of judgment proceed from Pilat and the Jews, Crucifige; when as she saw her
Son stripped of his coat, and beat with rods; when as she saw his head crowned
with sharp thorns, that pure red blood trickled down on his sacred face; when
as she saw him led to execution, when as she saw him hoist upon the Cross to
suffer death before her face. O how she wept and wroong her hands, when as she
saw his hands spread aborad, and nailed to the Cross. O how she bedewed her
pleasant lovely cheeks with bitter brinish tears, when as she saw his side
pierced with a spear, that blood and water issued out, as out of a rock. O
she cried out, O ye that pass by, O ye that stand by the Cross, have ye no
respect of my Son? When as she saw him bow his head, O how she beat her
breast. When as he gave up the Ghost, O how her heart melted within her. Who
can with unworthy words declare the miseries of this worthy Saint?

The Adamant stone is dissolved in blood; and let either the miseries of Mary,
or the blood of Jesus Christ mollify our stony hearts, and cause our eyes to
run over with streams of tears.

O that my head were a Well of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that
I might weep for the miseries that the Saints of God and Martyrs of Jesus
Christ have suffered in this life! But what counsel shall I give in miseries?
truly to learn patience, which is defined thus, Patientia est obedire Deo in
tollerandis aduersis, sed ita tamen vt non Deo irascamur, nec aliquid contra
mandata faciamus: Patience is a virtue that teaches us to obey God in our
miseries, but so that we be not angry with him, nor rashly charge God, nor do
any thing against the will of God, but patiently to endure what his pleasure is
to inflict upon us. I do conclude this point with the Psalmographer: The
patient abiding of the Lord shall not perish for ever. Psalm. 61.

Thirdly, in the life of the Beggar we noted what he desired in his life,
crumbs; desiring to be refreshed with the crumbs that fell from the Rich man's
table. Out of which words I do observe, that the godly do desire no great
matters in this life; they thirst not after honor and promotion, but if they
have wherewith to serve their present necessities, therewith to be content.
Habens victu^ and vestnu^, says our Savior Christ, Having food and apparel,
be therewith content. But the rich man, he must fare delicately, and so fat
himself for the slaughter. Gulosus habet cor in ventre, lasciuus in lubidius,
cupidus in luero: The Gluttons heart is on his belly, the Wantons heart is on
his lust, and the Covetous man's heart is on his chest. But here since Lazarus
does request but crummes, let us yield to his request, and let us learn to be
merciful. Misericordia est dolor de alterius concepta miseria, and ad
succurrendum propensa: Mercy is a kind of grief that comes by thinking on
other men's miseries, and willing to show comfort; hence the word is derived:
Misericordia, quasi miserum cor dans: Mercy, because it procures sorrow of
heart to think on miseries. Or, Misericordia, quasi mittens seorsum rigorem
cordis: Mercy, because it strikes an extreme cold unto the heart: or, as
some will have it, Misericordia, quasi mira suauitate rigans corda: Mercy,
because it powers a wonderful sweetness on the heart of him that conceiueth
comfort by some man's mercy. O how pleasant would this mercy have been! O how
sweet would crumbs have been unto the heart and soul of Lazarus, if he could
have had them! But there is Triplex misericordia, propria, paterna, fraterna;
prima ad seipsum, secunda patris ad filium, tertia ad proximum: Mercy is
threefold, there is a proper mercy, a fatherly mercy, and a brotherly mercy:
the first belongs unto our selves, the second is from the father unto the
son, and the third is from each to other: concerning the first, David says,
So long as thou do good unto thy self, men will speak well of thee. Of the
second, we read the father seeing his son a far off, run on him, and
kissed him, Luke 15 Of the third, we read of the mercy of the Samaritan, which
he showed unto him that fell among the thieves. Then have mercy on Lazarus
which is in distress; let us not like the Leuite pass by Lazarus that lies
wounded, and more then half dead; have mercy, I say, on Lazarus which is a
member of Christ; have mercy on Lazarus, and God shall have mercy on thee.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. And so let us consider
the fourth part in the life of the Beggar: who showed this Beggar mercy? not
the Rich man, but his dogs.

The dogs came and licked his sores. The Rich man's dogs by licking Lazarus,
taught their Master to have mercy on him, but he would not; therefore he had
worse then a doggish nature and cruel heart. But here first we note Gods
providence toward his children, he will have them comforted and fed, though by
dumb and only sensible creatures; so the dogs here came and licked Lazarus
sores. So Elias was fed by Ravens to save his life, 1. King. chap. 17. verse 4.
And thou shall drink of the river: and I have commanded the Ravens to feed
thee there.

This, I say, is done by Gods providence: therefore what tender care and
careful respect God has over his children, here we see.

The mercy of God is threefold, Prima speciosa, secunda spaciosa, tertia
p^^tiosa: the first is beautiful to behold, the second is spacious, the third
is precious to the sold. By the first, Lazarus and us all are created: by the
second, Lazarus and all us his believing children are redeemed: by the third,
Lazarus and all of us are carried into Abraham's bosom in the kingdom of
heaven.

Secondly, in that dogs came and licked Lazarus sores. when the Rich man
himself forsook him, we observe, that sensible dumb creatures of the earth
are (in their kinds) better then many men. Therefore it is that God
complains by the mouth of his Prophet, The ox knows his owner, and the
Ass his masters crib, but my people will not know me, said the Lord. So the
dogs here knew Lazarus to be pained, but the Rich man would not vouchsafe to
know him: therefore his own dogs condemned him of mercileue cruelty.

It is worth the noting ye which Pliny reports of dogs, Fidelissimi homini
ante omnia sunt canes and equos: Dogs and Horses are most loyal and loving
unto men, above all other creatures. Again, Quod impetus eorum and seuitia
mittigatur ab homine concidentur humi: That their savageness and cruelty is
mitigated when one does fall on the ground: but Lazarus humbled himself on the
ground, and lay in the dust, yet this Rich man had no pity on him, he relieved
him not. Soli nomina sua canes: Dogs only of all other sensible creatures
know their names. I would all Christians would remember their names, and what
belongs thereto: how when they were incorporated into the Church, they vowed
to forsake the Diuill, the world, and the flesh. Again, Soli vocem domesticam
agnoscunt canes: Dogs know the voices of them that are in the house; if one
come at midnight and chastise them, they will cease to bark, they will know
the householders voice, and they of the household. I would men would learn to
know Christ their householder, and the voices of the Prophets and Preachers of
his household. Again, Scrutantur vestigia canes: They search the foot-paths of
their Masters. We will not follow the paths of righteousness, nor tread in the
footsteps of our master Christ, although he has said, Learn of me; and
although the Apostle does earnestly exhort us, Be ye followers of God, as dear
children. Persequitur inimicum canis: A dog chaseth his enemy; but our enemy
the Devil chaseth us. See that medicinable virtue that is in a dogs tongue,
for it heals, and was comfortable to Lazarus. Man's tongue cutteth and
kills. Thy tongue, says David, cutteth like a sharp razor: and the tongue
that tells lies, slays the soul. But now let us consider the third part,
which is the death of the Beggar.

It was so that the Beggar dyed. Here is the adage fulfilled. Mors optima
rapit, deterima reliquit. Now must I speak of tragical matters, of Funerals
and Obsequies, of dissolution and death, which is called by many metaphors in
the holy Scriptures, as sometimes, Transtius ex hoc munde ad Patrem, A passage
or going out of this world to the Father. Sometimes Dissolutio: so Paul calls
it, Cupio dissolui, and esse cum Christo: I desire to be loosed, and to be with
Christ. Sometimes Lucrum, Gain, as in the Philippians, Death is to me
advantage. Sometime Somnus, a sleep; so Abraham and David slept with their
Fathers. Sometimes Seminario, a sowing: It is sown a natural body, it rises
again a spiritual body: and it is thus defined, Mors est separatio animae a
corpore, requies a laboribus, and misereri huius seculi: Death is a separation
of the soul from the body, a rest and quietness from all labors, pains and
miseries of this wicked world. But there are three kinds of Death, to wit,
Corporal, Spiritual and Eternal.

The Corporal death is a natural separation of the soul from the body, etc.

The Spiritual death is twofold: there is Mors spirituales piorum and
impiorum, There is a spiritual Death of the godly and of the wicked: the
spiritual Death of the godly, Mors peccati and mundi dicitur, It is to die
only unto sin and to the world: the spiritual death of the ungodly, Est
mors fide^ and anim^. Is the death of faith and righteousness of the soul,
which death the ungodly taste of, although they be yet living.

The Eternal Death is, Sempiterna infoelicitas and miseria, quae secundum mora
(...): An everlasting unhappiness and misery, when the sold is separated from
God and the company of all Saints, which is called the second death.

Moritur ergo homo Temporaliter, moritur Spiritualiter and vtiliter, moritur
spiritualiter and dansnabiliter.

Man may therefore taste of three Deaths: First, Corporal: Secondly,
Spiritual and profitable: Thirdly, Spiritual and damnable.

Primam Christus suscepit: Secundam docuit: Tertiam, damnauit.

The first, is a temporal Death, that Christ himself did suffer;

Non quia noluit, sed quia voluit, mortuus est Christus:

Not because he wanted power to withstand Death, but because he would die
willingly, and offer a sacrifice for the whole world that do believe in him.

The second, that is, the Spiritual profitable Death, to die unto sin and
the world, he taught by his own example, Ye are dead with Christ, etc.

The third, that is the Spiritual everlasting Death, he shall give unto the
reprobate in the day of judgment: Go ye cursed into hell fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels.

But in the death of the Beggar, first we noted what became of his soul, It
was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom. Whereby we learn, the immortality
of the soul. Pithagoras was the first among the Grecians, that held the soul
was immortal. The Philosophers also, and Heathen Poets do prove the
immortality of the soul.

Cedit enim retro, de terra quod fuit ante
In terra; sed quod missum and ex aetheris oris,
Id rursum caeli fulgentia templa, receptunt.
That part of man that was made of earth, went to earth; and that part as came
from heaven, went to heaven again. But leaving these, we prove by Scripture
the immortality of the soul: Man was made a living soul. Therefore the soul
is immortal. And here in the Text, Lazarus being dead, his soul was carried
into Abraham's bosom.

Here therefore is the damnable opinion of the Atheists overthrown: for if
they deny God, they must also deny that they have souls; and so consequently
that they are not men. But Saint John teaches them, that all things were made
by the Word of God, and without it nothing was made: therefore if they are
made, they are made by the Word of God, and of a reasonable soul, which does
acknowledge and believe in his Creator. Anima est primum principium vitae, per
se subsistens, incorporea, ac incorruptibile: The soul is the first beginning
of life, subsisting of it self, incorporeall, and incorruptible. Saint Austin,
Anima est spiritus and substantia incorporea, corporis su vita sensihilis,
inuisibilis, rationales, immortales: The soul of man is a spiritual or
incoporeall substance, sensible, invisible, reasonable, immortal: for as he
also says, Solus homo habet animale rationalem: Only man has an immortal
soul. Lazarus soul was carried into Abraham's bosom, which is a quiet Haven,
which the faithful have gotten by the troublesome Navigations of this life,
that is the Kingdom of heaven. There is Duplex Regnum, Gratiae and Gloriae,
There is two kingdoms, one of Grace, the other of Glory.

Here therefore we note, that the souls of the Elect, being separated from
their bodies, are presently in joys, and are carried into Abraham's bosom; so
called, because it belongs only to the faithful. Well then, Lazarus soul
went to heaven; and Christ said to the These on the Cross, This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise. Not to morrow, or next year, but this day.
Therefore the souls of the Elect being separated from their bodies, are in joy
and rest. As also on the other side, the soul of the Rich man and ^he damned,
after they be separated from their bodies, are in hell torments.

And thus much concerning the place whither Lazarus soul was carried bring
dead, namely into Abraham's bosom.

Lastly, we noted by whom, by Angels: It was carried by Angels into Abraham's
bosom. An Angel does signify a Messenger, according to the Etimologio of the
world; and this name is proper to them in respect of their offices: but they
are defined otherwise, namely to be ministering spirits, created to the glory
of God, and benefit of his Church; and there are nine orders of Angels, as the
Divines do write, and as we gather out of Scripture.

1 The first, are they that we call Seraphins, Qui semper Dei amore ard^unt,
who always burn with the love of God; they glister and shine in brightness,
and their office is, Bon^tatem Dei considerare, to meditate on the goodness of
God.

2 The second, are Cherubius, Qui principaliter (...) radio, who principally do
give a reflex of the brightness of God; and they do virtutes Dei considerare,
consider the (...) and quality of God.

3 The third order are Throni, a regal seat, and their office is Assis^^^ Dei
Throno, to stand about the Throne of God.

4 The fourth are Dominationes, Dominions, and they do inst^uere in spirituali
bello, instruct and direct men in the spiritual combat that is betwixt the
flesh and the spirit.

5 The fifth are Principatus, Principalities; and they do Principes regere and
homines docere, guide Princes, and teach every one to reverence men in their
place and calling.

6 The sixth, are Potestates, Powers; and they do Potestatem daemonum coercere,
restrain the power of di^els.

7 The seventh, are Virtutes, Virtues, and they do Miracula operare, work
miracles.

8 The eight, are Archangels, Qui summa nunciant who declare wonderful things.

8 The last order are Angels, Sed hominibus magis propinqui more near to men
in office, and they do Homines a Diuinam cognitionem duo^re, teach men the
knowledge of heavenly things. Behold, I will send mine Angel which shall go
before thee, and keep thee in the way, Exodus 25. He will give his Angel charg
over thee, that thou dash not thy foot against a stone, Psalm. 90. Angels do
instruct the ignorant. So the Angel did teach Joseph to fly into Egypt from
Herod's cruelty. Angels do attend the souls of the faithful, being separated
from their bodies, and carry them into everlasting joys and rest, as is
manifest in this place.

We see therefore the tender care and love of God, which has three
properties, sweetness, wisdom and strength. He loved us sweetly, in that he
took on him our flesh: he loved us by his wisdom, in that he prevented the
blame that should light on us: he loved us by his strength, when as he endured
the bitter pangs of death for our sakes. Therefore he shall be called Amicus
dulcis, conjolarius prudens, adiutor fortis: A sweet friend, a wise
Counselor, and a strong helper. And so let us consider the fourth and last
part, which is the death of the Rich man.

The Rich man also dyed, etc. Here we may see, that Death is the way of all
flesh. Death shakes Cydar and shrub. Death calls away the Rich man from his
pleasures, and Lazarus from his pains; and all must obey when Death calls.
It is not the majesty of Prince, nor holiness of Priest, strength of body,
feature of face, wisdom, beauty, riches, honor, nor any such secular regard
can plead against Death, or privilege a man from the grave. Statutum est,
omnibus semel mori: The decree is out, all must die once; all must taste of
this distasteful cup of death. Let us then know that the pale horse, and he
that sits there on, whose name is Death, comes running on toward us. All
that is within us, and without us are remembrances of Death. The Sun rising in
the East, and shining into the West, shows our rising and falling, our
coming in and going out of this world. All cry unto us, we must away, we must
hence, as Christ said, My kingdom is not of this world. Death is a separation
of the soul from the body; the husband separated from the wife of his youth;
the father separated from his children whom he dearly loved, the children from
their parents; the master from his servant, and the servant from his master:
thus parents and friends, and all must part.

The first circumstance of the Rich man, is to know what became of his body? It
was honorably buried. But here we see, that honorable burial does not profit
the damned soul. Lates are sown as well as Wheat all times; the one grows
up for the fire, the other for the barn. Gather the tares in bundles, and
burn them, but gather the wheat into my barn, Math. 13. 30. But let us
lastly consider what became of his soul?

And being in hell torments, etc. But because none can so well relate miseries,
and none can describe the torments of hell so well as he that has felt the
same, let the Rich man himself speak, and let us hear him what he says; He
being in hell torments, he thus begins, O wretch that I am, why did I suffer
Lazarus to starve at my gate? for which I am shut in the gates of hell: why did
I not give Lazarus a crum of bread? for which I cannot have here now one drop
of water to cool my tongue. Why did I show Lazarus no mercy on earth? for
which no mercy is showed to me in hell. What shall I do? for I am tormented in
this flame. I will cry unto Abraham, Abraham have mercy on me, and send
Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; I
am tormented here Abraham, I am torn in pieces here Abraham, I am plagued and
continually pained here Abraham; here my purple raiment is flames of fire, my
light is darkness, my day is night, my companions are devils; O how they hale
me, O how they pull me, O how they vex and torment me! Here my feet are
scorched, my hands are feared, my heart is wounded, my eyes are blinded, my
ears are delled, my senses confounded, my tongue is hot, it is very hot, send
Lazarus therefore Abraham with a drop of water to comfort me; one drop good
Abraham, one drop of water.

But Abraham answered him, Thou damned wretch, once thou did disdain
Lazarus, once thou did refuse Lazarus, once thou did scorn Lazarus, now
Lazarus shall disdain, refuse and scorn thee; once thou stopst thine ears
from the cry of Lazarus, now he stops his ear s from thy cry; once thou
turnedst away thy face from Lazarus, now he turns away his face from thee;
once thou deniedst crumbs to Lazarus, now he denies water to thee: not a
spoonful, not a drop of water.

Oh Abraham, but now if I had my goods, I would give Lazarus all for a drop of
water, now if I had a million of gold, I would give it all for a drop of water;
now if I had a world of wealth, I would give it all to Lazarus: therefore good
Abraham on drop. But he answered, No, not a drop.

Not a drop? then cursed be the day wherein I was borne, and cursed be the
night wherein I was conceived; cursed be my father that begot me, and cursed be
my mother that bare me; cursed be the Palace that kept me, cursed be the purple
robes that clothed me, cursed be the delicate meat that fed me, let me be
most accursed of all creatures both in heaven and earth. And so leave we him
cursing, who indeed was most accursed: and learn, that the souls of the
damned being separated from their bodies, are in hell torments.

Hell is describod by many metaphors: as, horrible darkness; a land as black
as darkness it self; also, unquenchable fire: Ibi erit fletus, and stridor
dentium, fletus quidem ob ignem qui non extinguitur, stridor dentium ob vermen
qui nunquam moritur: There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. weeping for
the fire that never shall be quenched, gnashing of teeth for the worm that
never dies. Also it is called Infernus, a dungeon, a bottomless pit. Infernus
lacus est sine mensura, profundus est sine fundo, plenus ardore incomparabile,
plenus dolor intollerablis: Hell is a Lake that cannot be measured, so deep
that it is without bottom, full of intolerable heat, full of in comparable
pain. Also Gehennam, a velley nigh unto Jerusalem, wherein was a Chapel, in
the which the idolatrous Jews did sacrifice their children unto a brazen Image
called Molech, which being made hot, enclosed them in the belly thereof; and
lest their cry should move any to pity them, they made a horible noise with
drums and other instruments: whereupon the place is called Tophet. Thus will
the Lord speak with his enemies in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure.

But some may demand, where this place of Hell is? If I should take upon me to
declare that, it would appear unto me, Annibalem Phornio, as the adage is, and
I were mad, out of my element. I had rather with safety hereby teach, that
there is a Hell to punish the merciless Rich man, and the damned: he being in
hell torments; therefore there is a hell and torments both.

Therefore to conclude all in one word, and to apply all that has been spoken
to this present time and place, let us all in our vocations learn to have
mercy on Lazarus, that is, on our poor brethren, that we may find mercy, and
that mercy may rejoice in judgment. And you that are Magistrates of this
City, think upon Lazarus that lies in your streets, that pineth at your
gates, that starueth in your Prisons for want of crumbs; hearken how they cry,
Bread, bread, a loaf of bread for Jesus sake. Who would not hear them? Who
would not pity them? who would not comfort them? Also see that you choose good
and merciful Officers in your Spittles and Hospitals, that may feed Lazarus,
and not fill their own purses and bellies as this Rich man did. And you that
sit in the seat of Judgment, and are gods here on earth, let the matter be
judged rightly between the Rich man and poor Lazarus; let Equity be in your
right hand, and Justice in your left; consider that Lazarus is poor, and that
he is not able to wage Law against the Rich man, yet defend him and let him
have right. Defend the fatherless and the widow. See that such as be in need
and necessity have their right, then shall the righteous God of heaven bless
you, and bless the Land for your sake: then shall we be with Lazarus in the
blessed place of rest, which the only Lord Jesus grant us, for his mercies
sake, Amem, Lord Jesus, Amen.

FINIS.

