A BLOODY Tragedy, OR Romish Mask. Acted by five Jesuits, and sixteen young
German Maids. Presented in a Church (within the Dukedom of Bauaria) at the
high Altar, in the City of Miniken in Germany, in March. 1607.

Translated out of the High Dutch, and Printed at Noremberg by John
Lankenberger.

LONDON, Printed for E. E. and are to be sold at the little shop at the
Exchange. 1607.

TO THE Reader.
THe Circle of the year is closed up with Christmas: to celebrate which time
only, (w^h more magnificence and solemnity;) It is a custom in the Courts of
Kings, to make preparation for Maskes, Plays, and Reuolts. But the Jesuits,
(who are the only Reuellers in the Court of Rome) disdaining to be tied to
order, time, or ceremony, have taken upon them to play the Lords of
Misse-rule, in the very midst of this year 1607. as if it had bin their year
of Iubile. At Lions in France, did they in person Act a Play: at Min^ken in
G^many, did they set forth a Mask. The Play was full of State; the Mask full
of Sratagemes: In the Play, a new God-amightie had a part; in the Mask, the
old Devil was a Torch-bearer. The Play was stuffed with blasphemy, irreligion,
and scandal: the Mask was apparrelled with suites of Lust, profanation,
blood and Treason. Thunder claps from heaven struck the Players, yet the
Jesuits called them Plaudities. A common Hangman desrobed the Masquers, and
discovered them to be devils, yet the Jesuits say they are Saints. Since
then God himself brands this Iesuited flock with letters of infamy, to show
it is none of his: and sincs (as being given over) they set marks on their
own forebeads, to make them odious and ridiculous to the world: who would
not detest their pride? who does not (even at hand) see their dovvnefall? The
scarlet-colored beast of Rome, has had many of her heads struck off: she
has walked upon a number offeete, which gave her strength to tread upon the
necks of Kings, but a number of those feet are fallen lame, many have been
cut off, and those upon which she now stands, are but vveake: for your
Francistan, Dominicans, Benedictines, Mendicants, Jacobines, and many a rabbie
more of the Romish Army, were (nor long since) the very sinevves to the legs
of that Papal Monster, and the ribs to her body: but now, like leaves shaken
by the breath of Autumn, hang they quiuering and have but little hold, else lie
they scattered on the earth, the tree from which they drop tottering every day
more and more, and ready with her fall to bruise them for ever. The Jesuits
only are the Pillars, against which she leanes: if they shrink, she shrinkes
for ever. And that their great and sudden swelling up in the, Roman Sea,
shall be but as bubbles in a River? who does not see it? who does not laugh at
it: France did of late drive them out of her dominions, yet like the Horse of
Troy, were they pulled in again: and she fears already they will prove as
fatal: Italia knovves them to be Machiauels Germany to be monsters: Spain to
be devils: Portugal knovves the^ to be bloudily ambitious (witness Sebastian,
upon whom, they would have strangly wrought.) Ireland knovves them to be
seditious: Scotland knovves them to be treacherous, and England knovves them to
be Iesuiets. All countries you see have taken their pictures yet because al
countries have not seen them, in all their true colors: I present to the
whole world this one Protraiture more, which you may behold a far off,
because it is penciled down in blood.

Vale
A MASK OF FIVE Jesuits.
THe Nest of Jesuits, (like a bed of Serpents, that when their eggs are
hatched, are full of nothing but poison) is now opened to the eyes of the
world, and their venomous tallants have drawn bl^d (almost) of all the
Kingdoms in Christendom. Their feathers, which at the first coming forth
were thin, (as not able to cover their backs) weak and sickely (as not ^f
force to make them fly) are now spread into large, mighty, and dreadful
wings; so that they dare presume to keep flight with the Falcon, and to perch
side by side with the princely Eagle: the beating of their pinneons in the air
is so lofty and so lewd, that it affcighteth all Nations, who know not of what
breeding they are.

But God (who with a spurn of his foot, can at his pleasure break the necks
of proud and ambitious climbers) has a little (of late) shaken them, the wings
of their insolence has he plucked, (and will in time turn them out naked,
and discover their vileness. This Iniesuated Fratry, think themselves worthy
to be companions with Kings, they look to be Lords over Cities, to control
States with the bending of their brows, to be as Gods Porters upon earth,
carrying in their hands the keys of heaven, and to let in none but whom they
shall like. But listen unto me (O you people of the German Empire, and all
the Nations upon earth beside) listen unto me, and I will in few words give
you the pedigree of these Jesuitical Aspirers that comparing the baseness of
their birth with their present bearing themselves, and their brauings, because
they serve in chief place under the Roman Empire, you may take heed how you
let such dangerous enemies into your gates, or lay such snakes in your warm
bosoms.

Understand therefore, that Ignatius Layola, a Spaniard, (borne in Biscay) was
the father and first founder of them. This Layolo being befiedged (among
others) by the French, happened in an assault to be wounded in the thigh with a
Gunne, and so grievously to be hurt in the other, that at length he was taken
prisoner. But being not worth the keeping, (for he had neither any command
among the Spaniards, he was of no birth that might challenge a ransom,
neither had he any friends that were able or willing to lay down money to
redeem him) he was in the end therefore set free for nothing. Being then (as
he was) lame and unfit for the wars, he thought himself a man not fit for
the world; and thereupon making away all the goods and wealth which he had, he
betook himself to the Church of our Lady in Mount Serrat, resolving there to
mortify the flesh, and to dedicate the remainder of his days to the service
of devotion.

Whilst thus he continued, it is said, that he had a vision (forsooth) of a
strange light, which descended from heaven and shonevpon him; wrapped with which
apparition, he vowed to make a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and to kiss the
Sepulcher of Christ. He did so, and then returned into Spain, where he gave
himself (being but young) to his book, knowing that the authority of
learning would carry him out in the enterprise, which in his mind he had to
himself purposed. From Spain he came into France, and studied ten years in
Paris: in which space, he got companions and fellows, who travailed with him
back again into his own Country: from whence, he went to Rome, and obtained
the Popes Bull for him and his fellows, (or rather disciples) to go on
pilgrimage to Jerusalem. But the Turks and Venetians, being at that time in
wars together, they went no further then Venice, and were there made
Shorne-priests, (being then but seven in number) by the Popes Legate, who lay
Resident in Venice. Afterward, Pope Paulus the third confirmed their order,
preuided their number should never exceed threescore. Yet afterward, his
Holiness upon better consideration decreed, that their number should not be
stinted, nor that their Order (which he called the Society of Jesus) should
be tied to any certain place of abiding. Thus was a poor lame Soldier the
root of this Tree, which now spreades into so manybranches: and because they
were ashamed to be called Ignatians, or Layolons, after their fathers name,
(he being so poor) they took upon them a more haughty title, and would
needs be called The society of Jesus, that is to say, Jesuits.

When they lay thus in the cradle of their rearing, they vowed a perpetual and
willing poverty, to fight as Soldiers under the Banner of the Cross, to be
chaste, to exercise works of charity, and only to labor about the winning
of souls for heaven. These were at first their laws, to these were they
sworn. But the winds have shifted their places since, and now this Society
of Jesus, utterly renounce the society of Jesus; they row up and down now no
more in the shallow and narrow streams of poverty, but hoist up lusty and
lofty sails in the Seas of Avarice and Ambition. Now birds of their own
feather, do abhor their singing: for the Secular Seminaries (who drink of
the same cup, and the same draught, which she who sits upon the Purple
Beast, and poures out to them both, and who march in the same rank with the
Jesuits) have (and do every day more and more) in books publicly printed,
utterly condemn them. They say the Jesuits are bloody, and stirrers up
sedition in Christian Kingdoms, that they are liars, that they are proud,
that they delight in rich apparel, that they are wherried up and down in
Coaches, that they have trains of followers at their heels, as if they were
great Earls, or men of blood, that they are Epicures, and make their belly
their god, that they are lascivious, and love women, having Gentlewomen for
their chamber-maides, and young wenches for their bedfellowes, that they are
now the only statesmen in the world, and deal in no other affairs but the
titles of Princes, the genealogies of Kings, the lives of succession, the
bestowing of Scepters where they please, that they are thieves, murderers,
Machiauells, and the only couseners of the whole world.

Thus (O you subjects of the Dukedom of Bauaria) have I showed unto you the
pictures of these Jesuits as they went at the first, and and have pulled off
the Vizards under which they have gone masked a long time since, and have now
their faces discovered and made bare by some of their own fellows.

Sithence then that with their own fingers they lay spots of ink upon one
another cheeks, it shall be no shame for me, (nor let it be held as a
malicious act of my pen) neither can it strain their Society with more
dishonor then already sticks upon them for other crimes) if Idraw forth to
the life and to the truth, the monstrous and ugly shapes of those impieties,
which of late they have begotten: and these they are.

In the City of Miniken, these Jesuitical Maskers, used to walk up and down
the streets daily: such granitie was in their loekes, such holiness hung upon
their lips, and such authority waited on their presence: that in all places
where they came, heads stood bare before them, knees were bowed unto them, and
the upper hand was given them; their order required no less, the show which
they made of Religion deserved as much. These obseruances which all men bestowed
upon the^, made the^ swell into pride, and to desire more to be observed: so
that they who were the marks for all eyes, began in the end to cast their eyes
upon the City with more curiousnes, and to mark others. By which means, the
flames of a burning Lust, caught hold of five of these wanton gazers. They
willing lie embraced the heat of it, and added what fuel flesh and blood
could make to nourish the fire: in so much, that the eye which yesterday was
enamoured of one beauteous face, to day dotes upon a second, and the next day
is almost blind which immodesty, stareing on a third. By which means, five
Jesuits became five lascivious Lovers: and no fewer the^ Sixteen Virgins must
sacrifice their chaste bodies, to satisfy their lust. How to skale these
Maiden-forts, many Stratagems were invented: to court the young Damsels was
hard, but to conquer them, seemed more hard, and almost impossible. To sommon
them to a wanton parley, stood not with the dignity of the Jesuitical
profession, to be Suitors in the way of marriage, was against the orders of
their society, and to court so many openly, had bin to their everlasting
scandal. Some new, some seacret and some strange nets, must therefore be
spread to take these Doves. In the end by degrees (some at one time, some at
another) were they caught in the snares that were laid for them: for under
pretense either of confesion, or to receive instructions in some points of
their religion, were these Maidens drawn privily first to the Chambers of
their Lecherous Confessors: and after (by the sweetness of their alluring
tongues) to be visitants of this New Family of Love.

Which forelocke of occation, one of the principal of these holy Fathers one
day taking hold of, when he had in his company, one of the fairest of the
Sixteen: whom they had marked out for spoil and dishonor: thus (the door
being fast locked) did his lust attempt to assail her.

Sweetest Maiden, wonder not that my hand trembles, feeling thus the soft
touch of yours, nor think it strange, if either I blush or look pale, whilst
I embrace your delicate and tender body: let neither my looks affright you
(beautiful Virgin) which I fear are wild, (as are my thoughts) nor this
forcible holding (but not rough laying hands upon you) put your heart in doubt
that you are beset with danger. Assure your self (pretty soul) that the
Infant in the mothers bosom is not more safe, then you are in my chamber: for
I must tell you (and you must believe I speak truth, because my words flow
from the zeal and ardor of true affection) I love you most entirely; at your
eyes did I long ago kindle a fire. which I have strove to smother, but the
more ashes I throw upon it to cover the same, the more vehemently does it
break forth to consume me: unless the same eye that has wounded send forth
pity. It is your beauty (most delicate creature) that begets these wounds:
nor am I ashamed that one of my order and coat, and soldier to those colors
of the Church, under which I serve, should thus revolt from the discipline to
which he is sworn: for Kings forsake their dignity, and forget themselves to
win what I seek: the love of a woman blinds the eyes of devotion, bridleth
the head of authority, beats down ceremony, makes a fool of wisdom, and
a madman of son. Pardon me therefore if I submit my self, to a pour so
universal, and be contented to yield unto my affections, since they fight
not to triumph over you, but to be your flanes. If you fears to commit the
sin, I can absolve you; if you fear your parents anger, I have strength (by
virtue of my Order) to defend you from thom; if you fear the scandal of the
world, I can pluck out the stings of envy, that they shall not hurt you, and
stop up the mouth of slander, that she shall not dare to name you.

With these and such other forces of speech did this holy devil set upon her,
that at the length, what by violent detaining her day and night in his chamber,
and what by the temptation of gifts, and hopes of promotion, she yielded, and
became a slave to his lust: being a sister so long to the Society, that in the
end she proved great with child of a young Jesuit. During all which time,
she could never odtaine of her Lover, to see or send to her parents, or to go
forth into the City, but was locked up by him like a close prisoner.

And as this tyrannous inuader assulted her chastity on the one side, and made
spoil of it; so did the other four by several parlees, onsets, stratagems,
and treasons, both set upon the other maidens, and overcome them. Fifteen
fellows had she more (in a short time) that like lambs lay in the dens of
the Lion. The vailes of modesty were torn from before their faces; and they
were glad to be strumpets to those, that (by profession) were bound to be their
fathers. They are now no more maidens, but holy-mens hariots; no more are they
free, but bond women to villains. That love, or rather that lust which enticed
them to sell away their liberty, does now make their liberty more servile
then Turkish slavery: for their chambers were unto them like so many prisons.
They had the nightly embracements of their Lovers, and in the day, the horrors
of an afflicted conscience. All of them were great with child, and more great
with calamity.

Whereupon these unfortunate wretches (that were neither maids, wines, nor
widows, but were robbed of all honors due unto women) seeing to what base
seruitute they were made subjects, and into what strange misery they had
fallen by their own weakness, when so ever any of them could spy fit
opportunity, She wooed her Lover as hard (now that he had made shipwreck of
her body) to detain her no longer in that imprisonment, as before he had
wooed her to yield her body to his pleasure.

She entreated, if she might not be suffered to behold^ ^he face of her
parents any more, nor to breathe that air in which she was borne, that then
he would commit her to the hands of any hard hearted men, who (so they might
not kill her) should be enjoined to set her upon any foreign shore, were it
never so far from her own native Country. To these prayers did she often
add tears, and with the tears did mingle kisses and embracements, the better
to win her liberty; but neither the one nor the other prevailing, all of
them (though they seldom came together) had secret intents in their bosoms,
to work the means of their particular deliueries. Which being perceived by
their five Iaylers, (whose jealous eyes were always fixed upon them) they
laid their heads together, how to ease their shoulders of that burden, which
they had laid so heavy upon themselves. They could have been contented to be
rid of their guests, but all the danger would have been when they had been
rid of them. To send them to the City, had been to call so many executioners
to cut them in pieces (for their Rapes) as were people in the City. To deliver
them back to their parents, was to deliver the inselues to Lions that had
been robbed of their young ones. To convey them into any other Country, was
assured danger, and no policy; for so might their infamy sly round about the
world. No path therefore had they that led unto safety but one, and that was
the way that Murder uses to walk in. A Tragedy must conclude all; they five
were actors enough to begin it and end it. They five should write but five
acts, every man his act, though the Epilogue of all should be their damnations.

This Tragedy was plotted in the day time, and was to be presented in the
night: darkness was appointed to hang the Stage all in black of her own
making; lust to speak the Prologue, murder to hold the book, and to prompt
them; the devils to be the Chorus, Jesuits the Tragedians, Innocents to be
slain, God vowed to be the revenger, and the Angels of heaven (who were
sworn to publish it) the spectators.

This Blacke-worke being thus put to weaueing in their brains, they party
casting a thousand ways how with most conuenience to finish it. And as these
bloody Priests were preparing to set forth their unhallowed sacrifice on the
one side: so on the other, the Parents of these Sixteen unhappy Children, did
nothing but spend their days in searching, and their nights in passionate
lamentations, for the loss of their fair daughtters.

The City could tell no news of them; the whole Dukedom knew nothing of
their misfortune: the whole Empire of Ge^ie, afforded no comfort to these who
sought for them. Yea oftentimes did these Five Hell Hounds h^e the complaints
of the Fathers and Mothers, and beheld the tears of brethren and kinsfolk (as
they walked by their doors,) yet made they but a mockery of all their
sorrows: their hearts being hardened the more to keep them still as their
Prisoners, by how much the more grievous they saw their absence was taken.

In the mean time, and in the very Interim between the plotting of their
intended Tragedy, and the Acting of it; behold what a Watch man heaven had
picked out to stand Centinell in the night of such horred mischief: a poor
and silly man was ordained to confound these great Polliticians in their own
inventions.

It happened that a Post (who used to ride with letters up and down the
Country) being weary with travailing, came into the Church (of which these
five Jesuits had with others, the rule and authority) with purpose of
devotion. But his devotion belike, being not so great as his weariness, he
fell into so sound a sleep, that the doors of the Church were locked upon
him, no man suspecting that any creature had been left within it. The nap he
took was so long, that he waked not all the night following, till toward one
or two of the clock the next morning: at which hour, rubbing his eyes to
look what time of day it was, but s^ing no light; at length he began to
remember in what Inn he had taken up so cold a lodging; and knowing it to be a
Church, he presently fell into a fear by reason of the place: his mind ran
upon nothing but graves; which way soever he turned his head, he imagined he
spied men and women sitting in winding sheets, with the knots of the sheets
nodding too and fro on their heads, as if they shook with cold as well as
himself did: the least noise he heard made him believe it was the voice of a
ghost: if a mouse did but stir in the next pew, he trembled as if he had
seen a spirit; he often felt the bench upon which he sat, and thought verily
it had been a coffin, and did as often feel himself round about his body,
being no otherwise persuaded, but that he was a dead man, and had no clothes
on, but such as men have that are buried. But to be sure it was not so, he
would speak to himself softly, and knowing that he was certainly alive, he
lift up his hands to heaven, which he could not see by reason of darknesss,
and prayed coldly, (for the night was not warm) that God would (if it were his
will) turn him out of his doors, he cared not how soon. Sitting in this
perplexity, and conching down low, but not daring to lift up his head, yet
sweating with the very self same fear, which presently made him shiuer as
much again. Behold he heard the locks of a door fly back, at which noise
his very teeth chattered in his head with the terror. Anon he might hear the
shufling of feet, and the lamentable sound of a voice, struggling to utter
somewhat, but he could not perfectly tell what, by reason as he imagined, it
was often stopped by some violence, whilst it labored to speak.

The poor Post being not willing to die, he knew not how, (for he looked
still to be knocked on the head as he sat) peered up by little and little with
his eyes, and spied round about the Church the glimpse of a candle: the light
put him into comfort, but the noise that followed it, went more cold to his
heart, then the panges of death it self.

They that were thus entered into the Church so early, (for it was now about
three of the clock in the morning) were the five bloody Tragedians: the Scaene
was now on foot. The Mask which the Jesuits intended for this nights
Reuells, was now newly come in. The principal of them (of whom in the
beginning of this discourse we spoke first) being the chiefs Torch-bearer, for
he led the way, and carried a light before all the rest. Those that were to
dance their last heavy measures hand in hand with death, were the firteene
young Damsells great with child, who were thus led in one by one, (for more
state to the murder.) This first, (whose name was Elizabeth) being she whose
courting I told you of before. Her did three of the Jesuits (like three
Furies) hale in; two by drawing her violently by ye arms, two behind her,
driving her as forcibly forward, with one of their hands ever and anon (as she
offered to cry-out) stopping her mouth, whilst the fifth Fiend held a candle
before the Devil, and lighted the other Four: who continued in this barbarous
halling of the poor wretch, till they had draged her up to the High Alter.

The Post ventured to see all this, and could have sighed to see it: but that
he feared the wind of his breath, would betray him. Now stood the miserable
condemned Prisoner on the Scaffold, where she was to suffer: her executioners
stood round about her there was no hope of a pardon, there was no help to save
her from the Block. The Lecherous Villain, that had deslowred her; was the
first that bid her kneel down: She with a trembling voice, and a piteous
look, asking why, and desiring to know in what she had offended him, to be
thus torue in pieces, and to be haled like a sheep to a slaugter-house. Her
Rauisher bid her be patient, to use few words, not to dally with her foul,
but to settle her thoughts to meet death like a Christian: and demanded of
her, if she could be content to dye. I am (quoth she) content to dye; but I
befeech you my Lords, play not you the cruel hangmen, nor lay my blood upon
your reuer end heads. If God say this is my last hour, his message is welcome:
but be not you the Murderers of an Innocent Maiden. Oh I have lost the honor
of that name amongst you, which was as ^eare to me as life it self. Let me not
l^e my life amongst you, least you (...) too many sins upon your souls. I
swear unto you my Lords, if you will give me life, (it is a wretched gift
which I b^gge at your hands, for it is a misery for me to live) but if you
will grant me life, I will renounce my C^y, forsake my Parents, fly from my
kindred and acquaintance: or if I ^te with any so unhappy as to know me, I will
deny my own name, or if I cannot do that, yet will I never publishe yours, nor
what you have done unto me. And you (most Holy Sir) that have pulled the
fruits of my Chastity; look upon me with an eye of pity: I conjure you by
the Religion which you profess, by your S^ietie, by the love which at the
first you ^are me, and by the Babe in my Womb, of which you are the Father:
spare me (Oh spare me!) if not for my own sake, (for happily I have wr^nged
you, or (...) not now gracious in your ^ight) yet for the Infants sake within
me, who even strugleth at this instant in my body, to get away, a^ having
knowledge (I think) what is coming toward it: save that which is part of
your self, that never offended you.

Not a word which she spoke, but came forth with such abundance of tears,
that even the Marble in which thee kneeled, sweat drops of water: because it
bare up men that were harder then that on which they trod.

In this manner did she pleads for life: in this manner did she complain.

But they that had made a Covenant with Hell (which they could not now break,)
remembered what state of danger they stood in, if she and the rest lived: and
therefore one of them casting a Cord a bout her neck, to pull her body down
to the ground: the rest held her, whilst he that had before the use of her
fair body, was now the destroyer of it; and with a great Iron Bullet, beat
out her brains.

This first Scaene of Death being Acted, the rest of the big bellied Damosells,
were in the same manner fetched forth of their Chambers, which had been their
Iayles, and were led to the Church, to be married to Death. Their
lamentations were a like, because their wrongs were a like: but all pity and
pyetie being hid in the darkness of so foul a night, and cruelty usurping
their hearts, of purpose to give grace to so hort^ a Tragedy, and to make it
more full: in the end, the last of the ^rt^e closed up the Jesuits Play.
Whilst in stead of an Epilogue, their bodies which as they were murdered, were
thrown behind the Alter, and were in one grave behind the Alter buried.

By this time the Sun (who cannot abide to be present at murders) arose, and
looked red with anger, that his pale sister (the Queen of the night) should
suffer such damned impieties to be done in her dominion: cheering therefore the
miserable Post, with his golden beams, which he sent into the Church to
revive him, that was more than half dead with the sight which he had seen. At
the length, when the Murderers were fled to their nests, like Owls at the
approaching of day, his light both called up the morning, and called out the
poor fellow out of the polluted Temple, (who with his hair half an end)
went home and related to his Host the circumstance of all things, in which he
had been the only sad speetator.

The Host upon this relation, took the Post along with him to the Citizens
house, who had lost his Daughter (whose name was Elizabeth:) the Father (albeit
his child, whom he loved dearly, had been for a long time missing) being
informed of the bloody Night-worke of the Jesuits, would hardly believe,
that men so reverenced for their Religion, could descend into such baseness
and godless acts.

To the Magistrate therefore was the Post carried, before whom he constantly
^ing in his former discourse, was notwithstanding committed to prison, because
a matter of such moment was not to be published for truth, from the report of
so mean a person, when it concerned the lives and repulation of men so great
as the Jesuits.

The fellow being thus committed, the Magistrates went discreetely to work,
and at last, ^iring to the Church, which had been stained with the blood of
Innocents, and made a Shambles: upon some farther presumptu^ probabilities,
the ground behind the Altar was broken up, and the murdered bodies found, as
the Post had discovered.

Thereupon the Jesuits were sent for to the B^e-house, and after many
inquities, and (...), the Post like^se ^ua voce ^ing to their faces, and
accusing the; the fact was openly con^: for which they were by order of the
laws of the Country, adi^ed to die: the (...) their (...) and death being the.

All the five Jesuits being placed in a Wagon, and drawn through the City,
had their flesh at nine several times pinched with hot burning pincers from
them; and in three several parts of their bodies, great pieces sliced away
with knives; then were their arme^ and legs broken on the Wheel, and (...)
were they left languishing till they expired: the Post being rewarded (for his
watching all night) out of the common purse of the City.

FINIS

