The deceased Maiden-Louer.
Being a pleasant new Court-Song to an excellent new tune.
Or to be sung to the tune of Bonny Nell


AS I went forth one Summers day,
To view the Meddowes fresh and gay
A pleasant Bower I espide,
Standing hard by a River side:
And int a Maiden I heard cry,
Alas there is none ere loved like I.
I couched close to hear her moan,
With many a sigh and heavy groan,
And wished that I had been the wight
That might have bred her hearts delight
But these were all the words that she
Did still repeat, none loves like me.
Then round the Meddowes did she walk
Catching each Flower by the stalk,
Such as within the Meddowes grew,
As Dead-mans-thumb and Hare-bel blew
And as she plucked them, still cried she
Alas there is none ere loved like me.
A Bed therein she made to lie,
Of fine green things that grew fast by,
Of Poplers and of Willow leaves,
Of Sicamore and flaggy sheaues:
And as she plucked them still cried she,
Alas there is none ere loud like me.
The little Larke-foot, sheed not pass,
Nor yet the flouers of Three leaud grass
With Milkmaids Hunny-suckles phrase
The Crows-foot, nor the yellow Crayse,
And as she plucked them still cride she,
Alas there is none ere lou^d like me.
The pretty Daisie which does show
Her love to phoebus bred her woe,
Who joys to see his cheerful face,
And mournes when he is not in place.
Alack, alack, alack, quoth she
There Is none that ever loves like me.
The flowers of the sweetest scent,
She bound them round with knotted Bent
And as she laid them still in bands,
She wept she waild, and wrung her hands
Alas, alas, alas, quoth she.
There Is none that ever loved like me.
False man (quoth she) forgive thee heaven
As I do wish my sins forgiven:
In blessed El^zium I shall sleep,
when thou with peiurd soul shall weep:
Who when they lived did like to thee,
That loved there loves as thou do me.
When she had filled her apron full
Of such sweet flowers as she could cull,
The green Leaves serud her for her Bed
The Flowers pillowes for her head.
then down she lay, nere more did speak
alas with love her heart did break.
FINIS.
Printed by the Assigns of Thomas Symcocke.

The Faithless Lover.
To the same Tune.


When I had seen this Virgins end,
I sorrowed as became a friend,
And wept to see that such a maid,
Should be by faithless love betrayed,
But woe (I fear) will come to thee,
That was not true in love as she.
The Birds did cease their harmony,
The harmless Lambs did seem to cry:
The Flowers they did hang their head,
The Flower of Maidens being dead,
Whose life by death is now set free.
And none did love more dear then she.
The Bubling Brooks did seem to moan
And Echo from the vales did groan:
Dianaes Nimphs did ring her knill,
And to their Queen the same did tell:
Who vowed by her chastity
That none should take revenge but she.
When as I saw her corpse were cold,
I to her lover went and told,
What chance unto this Maid befell,
Who said, Im glad she sped so well,
Do You think that I so fond would be
To love no Maid but only she:
I was not made for her alone,
I take delight to hear them moan:
When one is gone I will have more.
That man is rich that has most store:
I bondage hate I must live free,
And not be tide to such as she.
O Sir remember then (quoth I)
The power of heavens all seeing eye,
Who does remember vows for got,
Though you deny you know it not:
Call you to mind this maiden free,
the which was wro^gd by none but thee
Quoth he I have a love more fair
Besides she is her Fathers heir:
A honny Less does please my mind,
That unto me is wondrous kind:
Her will I love and none but she,
Who welcome still shall be to me.
False minded man that so would prove
Disloyal to thy dearest Love:
Who at her death for thee did pray,
And wished thee many happy day.
I would my Love would but love me,
Even half so well as she lou^d thee.
Fair Maidens will example take,
Young men will curse thee for her sake:
They Will stop their ears unto our plaints,
And call us devils seeming Saints:
They Will say to day that we are kind,
To morrow in another mind.
FINIS.
Printed by the Assigns of Thomas Symcocke.


