LVCANS FIRST BOOK TRANSLATED LINE FOR LINE, BY CHR. MARLOVV.

serpent cross

AT LONDON, Printed by P. Short, and are to be sold by Walter Burre at the
Sign of the Flower de Luce in Paul's Churchyard, 1600.

TO HIS KIND, AND TRVE FRIEND: EDWARD BLVNT.
BLount:
I purpose to be blu^t with you, and out of my dullness to encounter you with a
Dedication in the memory of that pure Elementall wit Chr. Marlow; whose ghoast
or Genius is to be seen walk the Churchyard in (at the least) three or four
sheets. Me thinks you should presently look wild now, and grow humorously
frantique upon the taste of it. Well, least you should, let me tell you. This
spirit was sometime a familiar of your own, Lucans first book translated;
which (in regard of your old right in it) J have raised in the circle of your
Patronage. But stay now Edward (if J mistake not) you are to accommodate your
self with some few instructions, touching the property of a Patron, that you
are not yet possessed of; and to study them for your better grace as our Gallants
do fashions. First you must be proud and think you have merit enough in you,
though you are never so empty; then when I bring you the book take physic,
and keep state, assign me a time by your man to come again, and before the
day be sure to have changed your lodging; in the mean time sleep little, and
sweat with the invention of some pitiful dry jest or two which you may happen
to utter, with some little (or not at al) marking of your friends when you have
found a place for them to come in at: or if by chance something has dropped from
you worth the taking up weary all that come to you with the often repetition of
it; Censure scornefully enough, and somewhat like a trauailer; commend nothing
least you discredit your (that which you would seem to have) judgment. These
things if you can mould your self to them Ned I make no question but they will
not become you. One special virtue in our Patrons of these days J have
promised my self you shall fit excellently, which is to give nothing; Yes, thy
love J will challenge as my peculiar Object both in this, and (J hope) many
more succeeding offices: Farewell, J affect not the world should measure my
thoughts to thee by a scale of this Nature: Leave to think good of me when J
fall from thee.

Thine in all rites of perfect friendship, THOM. THORPE.

THE FIRST BOOK OF LVCAN TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH.
WARS worse then civil on Thessalian playnes,
And outrage strangling law and people strong,
We sing, whose conquering swords their own breasts lau^cht
Armies alied, the kingdoms league vprooted
The Affrighted worlds force: bent on public spoil,
Trumpets, and drums like deadly threatening other,
Eagles alike displaide, darts answering darts.
Romans, what madness, what huge lust of war
Has made Barbarians drunk with latin blood?
Now Babylon, (proud through our spoil) should stoop
While slaughtred Crassus ghost walks unrevenged.
Will ye wadge war, for which you shall not triumph?
Ay me, O what a world of land and sea,
Might they have won whom civil broiles have slain,
As far as Titan springs where night dims heaven,
I to the Torrid Zone where midday burns,
And where stiff vvinter whom no spring resolves,
Fetters the Euxin sea, with chains of ye:
Scythia and vvilde Armenia had bin yoakt,
And they of Nilus mouth (if there live any.)
Room if thou take delight in impious war,
First conquer all the earth, then turn thy force
Against thy self: as yet thou wants not foes,
That now the walls of houses half reaer'd totter,
That rampires fallen down, huge heaps of stone
Lie in our towns, that houses are abandoned,
And few live that behold their ancient seats;
Jtaly many years has lain vntil'd,
And choakt with thorns, that greedy earth wa^ts hinds
Fierce Pirhus, neither thou nor Hanniball
Art cause, no foreign foe could so afflict us,
These plagues arise from wreake of civil power.
But if for Nero (then unborn) the fates
Would find no other means, (and gods not slightly
Purchase immortal thrones; nor Joue ioide heaven
Until the cruel Giants war was done.)
We plain not heavens, but gladly bear these evils
For Neros sake: Pharsalia groan with slaughter;
And Carthage souls be glutted with our bloods;
At Munda let the dreadful battles join;
Add Caesar; to these ills Perusian famine;
The Mutin toils; the fleet at Leuca suncke;
And cruel field, nere burning Aetna fought:
Yet Room is much bound to these civil arms,
Which made thee Emperor, thee (seeing thou being old
Must shine a star) shall heaven (whom thou love,)
Receive with shouts; where thou will reign as King,
Or mount the suns flame bearing chariot,
And with bright restles fire compass the earth,
Undaunted though her former guide be changed,
Nature, and every power shall give thee place,
What God it please thee be, or where to sway:
But neither choose the north t'erect thy seat;
Nor yet the adverse reking southern pole,
Whence thou should view thy Room with squinting beams
If any one part of vast heaven thou swayest
The burdened axes with thy force will bend;
The midst is best; that place is pure, and bright,
Their Caesar may thou shine and no cloud dim thee;
Then men from warshal bide in league, and ease,
Peace through the world from Janus Phane shall fly,
And boult the brazen gates with bars of Iron.
Thou Caesar at this instant art my God,
Thee if I invoke, I shall not need
To crave Appolles aid, or Bacchus help;
Thy power inspires the Muze that sings this war.
The causes first, I purpose to unfold
Of these garboiles, whence springs along discourse,
And what made madding people shake off peace.
The fates are envious, high seats quickly perish,
Under great burdens falls are ever grievous;
Room was so great it could not bear it self:
So when this worlds compounded union breaks,
Time ends and to old Chaos all things turn;
Confused stars shall meet, celestial fire
Fleet on the floods, the earth shoulder the sea,
Affording it no shore, and Phoebe's waine,
Chase Phoebus and enraged affect his place,
And strive to shine by day, and full of strife
Disolue the engines of the broken world.
All great things crush themselves, such end the gods,
Allot the height of honor, men so strong.
By land, and sea, no foreign force could ruin:
O Room thy self art cause of all these evils,
Thy self thus shiuered out to three men's shares,
Dire league of partners in a kingdom last not.
O faintly joined friends with ambition blind,
Why join you force to share the world betwixt you?
While the earth, the sea, and air, the earth sustaines;
While Titan strives against the worlds swift course;
Or Cynthia nights Queen waights upon the day;
Shall never faith be found in fellow kings.
Dominion cannot suffer partnership;
This need no foreign proof, nor far fet story:
Rooms infant walls were steept in brothers blood;
Nor then was land, or sea, to breed such hate,
A town with one poor church set them at odds.
Caesar's, and Pompeys iarring love soon ended,
It Was peace against their wills, betwixt them both
Stepped Crassus in, even as the slender Jsthmos,
Betwixt the Aegean and the Ionian sea,
Keeps each from other, but being worn away
They both burst out, and each encounter other:
So when as Crassus wretched death who stayed them,
Had filled Assirian Carras walls with blood,
His loss made way for Roman outrages.
Parthians y'afflict us more then ye suppose,
Being conquered, we are plaugde with civil war,
Swords share our Empire, fortune that made Room
Govern the earth, the sea, the world it self
Would not admit two Lords: for Julia
Snatched hence by cruel fates with ominous howles,
Bare down to hell her son the pledge of peace,
And all bands of that death presaging aliance.
Iulia, had heaven given thee longer life
Thou had restrainde thy headstrong husbands rage,
Yea and thy father to, and swords thrown down.
Made all shake hands as once the Sabines did;
Thy death broake amity and trainde to war,
These Captains emulous of each others glory.
Thou feard'st (great Pompey that late deeds would dim)
Old triumphs, and that Caesar's conquering France,
Would dash the wreath thou wearst for Pirates wrack
Thee wars use stirde, and thoughts that always scorned
A second place; Pompey could bide no equal,
Nor Caesar no superior, which of both
Had iustest cause unlawful it is to judge:
Each side had great partakers; Caesar's cause,
The gods abetted; Cato likt the other;
Both differed much, Pompey was struck in years,
And by long rest forgot to manage arms,
And being popular sought by liberal gifts,
To gain the light unstable commons love,
And ioyed to hear his Theaters applause;
He lived secure boasting his former deeds,
And thought his name sufficient to uphold him,
Like to a tall oak in a fruitful field,
Bearing old spoils and conquerors monuments,
Who though his root be weak, and his own weight
Keep him within the ground, his arms al bare,
His body (not his boughs) send forth a shade;
Though every blast it nod, and seem to fall,
When all the woods about stand bolt vp-right,
Yet he alone is held in reverence.
Caesar's renown for war was less, he restles,
Shaming to strive but where he did subdue,
When ire, or hope prouokt, heady, and bold,
At al times charging home, and making hauock;
Urging his fortune, trusting in the gods
Destroying what withstood his proud desires,
And glad when blood, and ruin made him way:
So thunder which the wind tears from the clouds,
With crack of riuen air and hideous sound,
Filling the world, leapes out and throws forth fire,
Affrights poor fearful men, and blasts their eyes
With ouerthwarting flames, and raging shoots
Along the air and not resisting it
Falls, and returns, and shiuers where it lights.
Such humors stirde them up; but this wars seed,
Was even the same that wrack's all great dominions.
When fortune made us lords of all, wealth flowed,
And then we grew licencious and rude,
The soldiers pray, and rapine brought in riot,
Men took delight in Jewels, houses, plate,
And scorned old sparing diet, and ware robes
Too light for women; Poverty (who hatched
Rooms greatest wits) was loathed, and all the world
Ransanckt for gold, which breeds the world decay;
And then large limits had their butting lands,
The ground which Curious and Camillus tilled,
Was stretched unto the fields of hinds unknown;
Again, this people could not brook calm peace,
Them freedom without war might not suffice,
Quarrels were rife, greedy desire still poor
Did vild deeds, then it was worth the price of blood,
And deemed renown to spoil their native town,
Force mastered right, the strongest governed all,
Hence came it that th'edicts were ouerrul'd,
That laws were broake, Tribunes with Consuls strove,
Sale made of offices, and peoples voices,
Bought by themselves and sold, and every year
Frauds and corruption in the field of Mars;
Hence interest and devouring usury sprang,
Faiths breach, and hence came war to most men welcome.
Now Caesar ouerpast the snowy Alps,
His mind was troubled, and he aimed at war,
And coming to the foord of Rubicon,
At night in dreadful vision fearful Room,
Mourning appeared, whose hoary hayres were torn,
And on her Turret, bearing head dispersed,
And arms all naked, who with broken sighs,
And staring, thus bespoke, what mean thou Caesar?
Whether goes my standarde? Romans if ye be,
And bear true hearts, stay hear: this spectacle
Stroke Caesar's heart with fear, his hair stood up,
And faintnes numm'd his steps there on the brincke:
He thus cride out: Thou thunderer that guardst
Rooms mighty walls built on Tarpeian rock,
Ye gods of Phrigia and Iulus line,
Quirinus rites and Latian Joue advanced,
On Alba hill, o Vestall flames, o Room,
My thoughts sole gods, aid mine enterprise,
I hate thee not, to thee my conquests stoop,
Caesar is thine, so please it thee, thy soldier;
He, he afflicts Room that made me Rooms foe.
This said, he laying aside all lets of war,
Approcht the swelling stream with drum and ensign,
Like to a Lion of scortcht desert Affricke,
Who seeing hunters pauseth till fell wrath
And kingly rage increase, then having whiskt
His tail athwart his back, and crest heau'd up,
With jaws wide open ghastly roaring out;
(Albeit the Moors light Iauelin or his spear
Sticks in his side) yet runs upon the hunter.
In summer time the purple Rubicon,
Which issues from a small spring is but shallow,
And creepes along the vales dividing just
The bounds of Jtaly, from Cisalpin France;
But now the winters wrath and watery moon,
Being three days old inforst the flood to swell,
And frozen Alps thawed with resolving winds.
The thunder hou'd horse in a crooked line,
To escape the violence of the stream first waded,
Which being broke the foot had easy passage.
As soon as Caesar got unto the bank
And bounds of Italy; here, here (says he)
An end of peace; here end polluted laws;
Hence leagues, and covenants; Fortune thee I follow,
War and the destinies shall try my cause.
This said, the restles general through the dark.
(Swifter then bullets thrown from Spanish slinges,
Ordarts which Parthians backward shoot (marched on
And then (when Lucifer did shine alone,
And some dim stars) he Arriminum entered:
Day rose and viewde these tumultes of the war;
Whether the gods, or blustering south were cause
I know not, but the cloudy air did frown;
The soldiers having won the market place,
There spread the colors, with confused noise
Of tru^pets clange, shril cornets, whistling fifes;
The people started; young men left their beds;
And snatched arms near their household gods hung up
Such as peace yields; wormeaten leatherne targets,
Through which the wood peer'd, headles darts, old swords
With ugly teeth of black rust foully scarr'd:
But seeing white Eagles, and Rooms flags well known,
And lofty Caesar in the thickest throng,
They shook for fear, and cold benumbed their lims,
And muttering much, thus to themselves complained.
O walls unfortunate too near to France,
Predestinate to ruin; all lands else
Have stable peace, here wars rage first begins,
We bide the first brunt, safer might we dwell,
Under the frosty bear, or parching East,
VVagons or tents, then in this frontire town,
We first sustained the vproares of the Gauls,
And furious Cymbrians and of Carthage moors,
As often as Room was sacked, here began the spoil:
Thus sighing whispered they, and none durst speak
And show their fear, or grief: but as the fields
When birds are silent thorough winters rage;
Or sea far from the land, so all were whist.
Now light had quite dissolved the mysty might,
And Caesar's mind unsettled musing stood;
But gods and fortune pricked him to this war,
Infringing all excuse of modest shame,
And laboring to approve his quarrel good.
The angry Senate urging Grachus deeds,
From doubtful Room wrongly expelled the Tribunes,
That crossed them; both which now approacht the camp,
And with them Curio; sometime Tribune too,
One that was feed for Caesar, and whose tongue
Could tune the people to the Nobles mind:
Caesar (said he) while eloquence prevailed,
And I might plead, and draw the Commons minds
To favor thee, against the Senats will.
Five years I lengthned thy command in France;
But law being put to silence by the wars;
We from our houses driven, most willingly
Suffered exile: let thy sword bring us home.
Now while their part is weak, and fears, march hence
Where men are ready, lingering ever hurts:
^n ten years wonst thou France; Room may be won
With far less toil, and yet the honors more;
Few battles fought with prosperous success
May bring her down, and with her all the world;
Nor shall thou triumph when thou comst to Room;
Nor capital be adorned with sacred bays:
Envy denies all, with thy blood must thou
Abie thy conquest past: the son decrees
To expel the father; share the world thou can not;
^nioy it all thou may: thus Curio spoke,
And therewith Caesar prone ennough to war,
Was so incenst as are Eleius steedes
With clamors: who though locked and chaind in stalls,
Souse down the walls, and make a passage forth:
Straight summoned he his several companies
Unto the standard: his grave look appeasd
The wrestling tumult, and right hand made silence:
And thus he spoke; you that with me have borne
A thousand brunts, and tried me full ten years,
See how they quit our bloodshed in the North;
Our friends death; and our wounds; our wintering
Under the Alps; Room rages now in arms
As if the Carthage Hannibal were near;
Cornets of horse are mustered for the field;
Woods turned to ships; both land and sea against us:
Had foreign wars ill thriu'd; or wrathful France
Pursued us hither, how were we bestead
When coming conqueror Room afflicts me thus?
Let come their leaders whom long peace has quail'd;
Raw soldiers lately pressed; and troops of gowns;
Brabbling Marcellus; Cato whom fools reverence;
Must Pompeis followers with strangers aid,
(Whom from his youth he bribde) needs make him king?
And shall he triumph long before his time,
And having once got head still shall he reign?
What should I talk of men's corn reapt by force,
And by him kept of purpose for a dearth,
Who sees not war sit by the quiuering Judge;
And sentence given in rings of naked swords,
And laws assailde, and armed men in the Senate;
It Was his troop hemmed in Milo being accusde;
And now least age might waine his state, he casts
For civil war, wherein through use he is known
To exceed his master, that arch-traitor Sylla.
A brood of barbarous Tygars having lapt
The blood of many a heard, whilst with their dams
They kennel'd in Hircania evermore
Will rage and pray: so Pompey thou having lickt
Warm goare from Syllas sword art yet athirst,
Jaws, flesh, with blood continue murderous.
Speak, when shall this thy long usurped power end?
What end of mischief? Sylla teaching thee,
At last learn wretch to leave thy monarchy;
What, now Scicillian Pirates are suppressed,
And Jaded, king of Pontus poisoned slain,
Must Pompey as his last foe plume on me,
Because at his command I wound not up
My conquering Eagles? say I merit naught,
Yet for long service done, reward these men,
And so they triumph, be it with whom ye will.
Whether now shall these old bloudles souls repair?
What seats for their deserts? what store of ground
For seruitors to till? what Colonies
To rest their bones? say Pompey, are these worse
Then Pirates of Sycillia? they had houses:
Spead, spread these flags that ten years space have conquered,
Lets use our tried force, they that now thwart right
In wars will yield to wrong: the gods are with us,
Neither spoil, nor kingdom seek we by these arms,
But Room at thraldoms feet to rid from tyrants.
This spoke none answered but a murmuring buz
Th'vnstable people made: their household gods
And love to Room (though slaughter steeld their hearts
And minds were prone) restrained them; but wars love
And Caesar's awe dashed all: then Lalius
The chief Centurion crowned with Oaken leaves,
For saving of a Roman Citizen,
Steptforth, and cryde, chief leader of Rooms force,
So be I may be bold to speak a truth:
We grieve at this thy patience and delay,
What doubtst thou us? even now when youthful blood
Pricks forth our lively bodies, and strong arms
Can mainly throw the dart; will thou endure
These purple grooms? that Senates tyranny?
Is conquest got by civil war so heinous?
Well, lead us then to Syrtes desert shore;
Or Scythia; or hot Libiaes thirsty sands.
This hand that all behind us might be quail'd,
Has with thee past the swelling Ocean;
And swept the foming breast of Articks Rhene,
Love ouer-rules my will, I must obey thee,
Caesar, he whom I hear thy trumpets charge
I hold no Roman; by these ten blessed ensigns
And all thy several triumphs, should thou bid me
Intombe my sword within my brothers bowels;
Or fathers throat; or women's groaning womb;
This hand (albeit unwilling) should perform it;
Or rob the gods; or sacred temples fire:
These troops should soon pull down the church of Joue,
If to incampe on Thuscan Tybers streams;
I Will bouldly quarter out the fields of Rome;
What walls thou will be leaueld with the ground,
These hands shall thrust the ram, and make them fly,
Albeit the City thou would have so ra'st
Be Room it self. Here every band applauded,
And with their hands held up, all jointly cryde
They'ill follow where he please, the showts re^t heaven,
As when against pine bearing Ossa's rocks,
Beats Thracian Boreas; or when trees bowde down,
And rustling swing up as the wind fets breath.
When Caesar saw his army proane to war,
And fates so bent, least sloth and long delay
Might cross him, he withdrew his troops from France,
And in all quarters musters men for Room.
They by Lemannus nooke forsook their tents;
They whom the Lingones foild with painted spears,
Under the rocks by crooked Vogesus;
And many came from shallow Jsara,
Who running long, falls in a greater flood,
And ere he sees the sea loses his name;
The yellow Ruthens left their garrisons;
Mild Atax glad it bears not Roman bloats;
And frontier Varus that the camp is far,
Sent aid; so did Alcides port, whose seas
Eat hollow rocks, and where the north-west wind;
Nor Zephir rules not, but the north alone,
Turmoiles the coast, and entrance forbids;
And others came from that uncertain shore,
Which is nor sea, nor land, but often times both,
And changes as the Ocean ebbes and flows:
Whether the sea roul'd always from that point,
Whence the wind blows still forced to and fro;
Or that the wandering maine follow the moon?
Or flaming Titan (feeding on the deep,
Pulls them aloft, and makes the surge kiss heaven,
Philosophers look you, for unto me
Thou cause what ere thou be whom God assigns,
This great effect, art hid. They came that dwell
By Nemes fields, and banks of Satirus,
Where Tarbels winding shoares embrace the sea,
The Santons that rejoice in Caesar's love,
Those of Bituriges and light Axon pikes;
And they of Rhene, and Leuca cunning darters,
And Sequana that well could manage steeds;
The Belgians apt to govern British cars;
The Auerni, too which bouldly feign themselves;
The Romans brethren, sprung of Ilian race;
The stubborn Neruians staind with Cottas blood;
And vangions who like those of Sarmata,
Were open slops: and fierce Batauians,
Whom trumpets clang incites, and those that dwell
By Cyngas stream, and where swift Rhodanus
Drives Araris to sea; They near the hills,
Under whose hoary rocks Gebenna hangs;
And Treuier; thou being glad that wars are past thee;
And you late shorn Ligurians, who were wont
In large spread heir to exceed the rest of France;
And where to Hesus, and fell Mercury (Joue)
They offer humane flesh, and where it seems
Bloody like Dian, whom the Scythians serve;
And you French Bardi, whose immortal pens
Renown the valiant souls slain in your wars,
Sit safe at home and chaunt sweet Poesy,
And Druides you now in peace renew
Your barbarous customs, and sinister rites,
In vnfeld woods, and sacred groves you dwell,
And only gods and heavenly powers you know,
Or only know you nothing. For you hold
That souls pass not to silent Erebus
Or Plutoes bloodles kingdom, but else where
Resume a body: so (if truth you sing)
Death brings long life. Doubtless these northren men
Whom death the greatest of all fears affright not,
Are blessed by such sweet error, this makes them
Run on the swords point and desire to die,
And shame to spare life which being lost is won;
You likewise that repulst the Caicke foe,
March toward Room; and you fierce men of Rhene
Leaving your country open to the spoil.
These being come, their huge power made him bold
To manage greater deeds; the bordering towns
He garrisoned; and Jtaly he filled with soldiers.
Vain fame increast true fear, and did invade
The peoples minds, and laid before their eyes
Slaughter to come, and swiftly bringing news
Of present war, made many lies and tales,
One swears his troops of daring horsemen fought
Upon Meuanias plain, where Bulls are grazed;
Other that Caesar's barbarous bands were spread
Along Nar flood that into Tiber falls,
And that his own ten ensigns, and the rest
Marched not entirely, and yet hide the ground,
And that he is much changed, looking wild and big,
And far more barbarous then the French (his vassals)
And that he lags behind with them of purpose;
Borne twixt the Alps and Rhene, which he has brought
From out their Northren parts, and that Room
He looking on by these men should be sacked.
Thus in his fright did each man strengthen Fame,
And without ground, feared, what themselves had faind:
Nor were the Commons only struck to heart
With this vain terror; but the Court, the Senate;
The fathers selves leapt from their seats; and flying
Left hateful war decreed to both the Consuls.
Then with their fear, and danger al distract,
Their sway of fleight carries the heady rout
That in chained troops break forth at every port;
You would have thought their houses had bin fierd
Or dropping-ripe, ready to fall with Ruin,
So rusht the inconsiderate multitude
Thorough the City hurried headlong on,
As if, the only hope (that did remain
To their afflictions) were t'abandon Room.
Look how when stormy Auster from the breach
Of Libian Syrtes, roules a monstrous wave,
Which makes the maine sail fall with hideous sound;
The Pilot from the helm leapes in the sea;
And Mariners, albeit the keele be sound
Ship wrack themselves: even so the City left,
All rise in arms; nor could the bedridden parents
Keep back their sons, or women's tears their husbands;
They stayed not either to pray or sacrifice,
Their household gods restrain the^ not, none lingered,
As loath to leave Room whom they held so dear,
Th'irreuocable people fly in troops.
O gods that easy grant men great estates,
But hardly grace to keep them: Room that flows
With Citizens and Captains, and would hold
The world (were it together) is by cowards
Left as a pray now Caesar does approach:
When Romans are besieged by foreign foes,
With slender trench they escape night stratagems,
And sudden rampire raisde of turfe snatched up
Would make them sleep securely in their tents.
Thou Room at name of war runst from thy self,
And wilt not trust thy City walls one night:
Well might these fear, when Pompey feared and fled,
Now evermore least some one hope might ease
The Commons iangling minds, apparent signs arose,
Strange sights appeared, the angry threatening gods
Filled both the earth and seas with prodegies;
Great store of strange and unknown stars were seen
Wandering about the North, and rings of fire
Fly in the air, and dreadful bearded stars,
And Commets that presage the fall of kingdoms.
The flattering sky gliter'd in often flames,
And sundry fiery meteors blazed in heaven:
Now spearlike, long; now like a spreading torch:
Lightning in silence, stole forth without clouds,
And from the northren climat snatching fire
Blasted the Capitol: The lesser stars
Which wont to run their course through empty night
At noone day mustered; Phoebe having filled
Her meeting horns to match her brothers light,
Struck with the earths sudden shadow waxed pale,
Titan himself throand in the midst of heaven,
His burning chariot plunged in sable clouds,
And whelmed the world in darkness, making men
Despair of day; as did Thiestes town;
(Mycenae) Phoebus flying through the East:
Fierce Mulciber vnbarred; Aetna's gate,
Which flamed not on high; but headlong pitched
Her burning head on bending Hespery.
Cole-blacke Charibdis whirled a sea of blood;
Fierce Mastiues hold; the vestall fires went out,
The flame in Alba consecrate to Joue,
Parted in twain; and with a double point
Rose like the Theban brothers funeral fire;
The earth went off her hinges; And the Alps
Shook the old snow from off their trembling laps.
The Ocean swelled, as high as Spanish Calpe;
Or Atlas head, their saints and household gods
Sweat tears to show the travails of their city.
Crowns fell from holy statues, ominous birds
Defiled the day, and wild beasts were seen,
Leaving the woods lodge in the streets of Rome.
Cattle were seen that muttered humane speech:
Prodigious birthes with more and ugly iointes
Then nature gives, whose sight appauls the mother,
And dismal Prhphesies were spread abroad:
And they whom fierce Bellonaes fury moves,
To wound their arms, sing vengeance, Sibils priests,
Curling their bloody locks, howl dreadful things,
Souls quiet and appeased sight from their graves,
Clashing of arms was heard, in vntrod woods,
Shrill voices schright, and ghoasts encounter men,
Those that inhabited the suburb fields
Fled, foul Erinnis stalkt about the walls,
Shaking her snakie hair and crooked pine
With flaming top, much like that hellish fiend;
Which made the stern Lycurgus wound his thigh,
Or fierce Agaue mad; or like Megaera
That scared Alcides, when by Junoes task
He had before looked Pluto in the face,
Trumpets were heard to sound; and with what noise
An armed battle ioines, such and more strange
Black night brought forth in secret: Sylla's ghost
Was seen to walk, singing sad Oracles,
And Marius head above cold Tau'ron peering
(His grave broke open) did affright the Boores.
To these ostents (as their old custom was)
They call the Etrurian Augures, amonst whom
The grauest, Aruns, dwelt in forsaken or Lunae
Leucae
Well skild in Pyromancy; one that knew
The hearts of beasts, and flight of wandering fowls;
First he commands such monsters Nature hatched
Against her kind (the barren Mules loathed issue)
To be cut forth and cast in dismal fires:
Then, that the trembling Citizens should walk
About the City; then the sacred priests
That with divine lustration purged the walls,
And went the round, in, and without the town.
Next, an inferior troop, in tuckt up vestures;
After the Gabine manner: then the Nuns
And their vaild Matron, who alone might view
Mineruas statue; then, they that keep, and read
Sybillas secret works, and washed their saint
In Almo's flood: Next learned Augures follow;
Apolloes southsayers, and Joues feasting priests;
The skipping Salij with shields like wedges;
And Flamins last, with networke woollen vailes.
While these thus in and out had circled Room,
Look what the lightning blasted, Aruns takes
And it inters with murmurs dolorous,
And calls the place Bidentall, on the Altar
He lays a ne're-yoakt Bull, and powers down wine,
Then crams salt leuin on his crooked knife;
The beast long struggled, as being like to prove
An awkward sacrifice, but by the horns
The quick priest pulled him on his knees and slew him:
No vain sprung out but from the yawning gash,
In steed of red blood wallowed venomous gore,
These direful signs made Aruns stand amazed,
And searching farther for the gods displeasure,
The very cullor scard him; a dead blackness
Ran through the blood, that turned it all to gelly,
And stained the bowels with dark loathsome spots,
The liver swelled with filth: and every vain
Did threaten horror from the host of Caesar;
A small thin skin contained the vital parts,
The heart stird not, and from the gaping liver
Squis'd matter through the call; the intralls pearde,
And which (aie me) ever pretends ill,
At that bunch where the liver is, appeared
A knob of flesh, whereof one half did look
Dead, and discoulour'd; the other lean and thin.
By these he seeing what myschiefes must ensue,
Cride out, O gods! I tremble to unfold
What you intend, great Joue is now displeased,
And in the breast of this slain Bull are crept,
The Infernal powers. My fear transcends my words
Yet more will happen (...) I can unfold,
Turn all to good, be Augury vain, and Tages
Th'arts master falce. Thus in ambiguous terms,
Inuoluing all, did Aruns darkly sing.
But Figulus more seen in heavenly mysteries,
Whose like Aegiptian Memphis never had
For skill in stars, and tune-full planeting
In this sort spoke. The worlds swift course is lawless
And casual; all the stars at random radge:
Or if Fate rule them, Rome thy Citizens
Are near some plague? what mischief shall ensue?
Shall towns be swallowed? shall the thickened air,
Become intemperate? shall the earth be barraine?
Shall water be conieal'd and turned to ice?
O Gods what death prepare ye? with what plague
Mean ye to radge? the death of many men
Meets in one period. If cold noisome Saturn
Were now exalted, and with blew beams shinde,
Then Gaynimede would renew Deucalions flood,
And in the fleeting sea the earth be drencht.
O Phoebus should thou with thy rays now sing
The fell Nemean beast, the earth would be fired,
And heaven tormented with thy chafing heat,
But thy fires hurt not; Mars, it is thou enflam'st
The threatening Scorpion with the burning tail
And fier'st his cleyes. Why art thou thus enraged?
Kind Jupiter has low declined himself;
Venus is faint; swift Hermes retrograde;
Mars only rules the heaven: ^^y do the Planets
Alter their course; and vainly dim their virtue?
Sword-girt Orions side glisters too bright.
Wars radge draws near; and to the swords strong hand,
Let all Laws yield, sin bear the name of virtue,
Many a year these firious broiles let last,
Why should we wish the gods should ever end them?
War only gives us peace, o Rome continue
The course of mischief, and stretch out the date
Of slaughter; only civil broiles make peace.
These sad presages were enough to scarre
The quiuering Romans, but worse things affright them,
As Maenus full of wine on Pindus raues,
So runs a Matron through the amazed streets,
Disclosing Phoebus fury in this sort:
Pean whither am I halde? where shall I fall?
Thus borne aloft I see Pangeus hill,
With hoarie top, and under Hemus mount
Philippi plains; Phoebus what radge is this?
Why grapples Rome, and makes war, having no foes?
Whither turn I now? thou lead'st me toward the east,
Where Nile augmenteth the Pelusian sea:
This headless trunk that lies on Nylus sand
I know, now throughout the air I fly,
To doubtful Sirtes and dry Affricke, where
A fury leads the Emathian bands, from thence
To the pine bearing hills, hence to the mounts
Pirene, and so back to Rome again.
Se impious war defiles the Senate house,
New factions rise; now through the world again:
I go; o Phoebus show me Neptunes shore,
And other Regions, I have seen Philippi:
This said being tired with fury she sunk down.
FINIS.

