A short form of Thanksgiving to GOD, for staying the contagious sickness of
the Plague: To be used in Common Prayer, on Sundays, Wednesdayes, and Fridayes.

Set forth by Authority.

Jmprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO 1604.

elaborate decorative border containing the royal Anglo-Irish blazon or coat of
arms, personifications of Fidelity and Humility, and the attributes of the
Gospel writers: St Matthew's angel, St John's eagle, St Mark's lion, and St
Luke's bull FIDES

HVMILITAS



royal Anglo-Irish blazon or coat of arms

Read the ordinary Service till you come to the Psalms. And in stead of those
which are appointed of course, read some of these: Viz. 34. 95. 103. 116. 107.
118. 145. 146. 147.
After the second Lesson, read this Psalm following.
Psalm. 85.
LOrd, thou art become gracious unto thy Land, thou have turned away the
afflictions of thy servants.

Thou have taken away all thy displeasure, and turned thy self from thy
wrathful indignation.

Psalm. 94.
For if thou Lord had not helped us, it had not failed, but our souls had
been put to silence.

But when we said our feet have slipped, thy mercy, O Lord, helped us up.



Psalm. 62.63
Our souls waited still upon the Lord, our souls hanged upon his help, our
hope was always in him.



Psalm. 50.
For the Lord said: Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee,
and thou shall praise me.

Psalm. 40.69
So when we were poor, needy, sickly, and in heaviness, the Lord cared for
us: he was our help and our Savior according to his word.

Psalm. 27.
In our adversity and distress he has lift up our heads, and saved us from
utter destruction.

Psalm. 33.91
He has delivered our souls from death, he has fed us in the time of
dearth, he has saved us from the noisome Pestilence.

Psalm. 27.
Therefore will we offer in his holy Temple, the oblation of Thanksgiving with
great gladness: we will sing and speak praises unto the Lord our Savior.

Psalm. 106.
We will give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures
for ever.

Psalm. 86.103.
The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, long suffering, plenteous in
goodness and pity.

Psalm. 57.108.
His mercy is greater then the heavens, and his gracious goodness reaches unto
the clouds.

Psalm. 103.
Like as a father pitieth his own children: even so is the Lord merciful unto
them that fear him.

Psalm. 71.
Therefore will we praise thee and thy mercies, O God, unto thee will we sing,
O thou Holy one of Israel.

Psalm. 98.
We will sing a New song unto thee, O God, we will praise the Lord with
Psalms of Thanksgiving.

Psalm. 47.
O sing praises, sing praises unto our God: O sing praises, sing praises unto
our King.

For God is the King of the earth, sing praises with understanding.

Psalm. 145.
We will magnify thee, O God our King, we will praise thy Name for ever and
ever.

Every day will we give thanks unto thee, and praise thy Name for ever and
ever.



Psalm. 21.72
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for ever: and blessed be the Name of his
Majesty world without end. AMEN. AMEN.

In stead of the other Prayers used in the time of the Sickness, Read some of
these following.
We will magnify thee, O God our King, and we will praise thy name for ever
and ever: because in the midst of thine anger, thinking upon mercy, thou have
delivered our souls from death, and preserved us from that noisome pestilence,
which not long since, raged in this City, sweeping away the rich with the
poor, the aged with the young, leaving whole houses desolate, and filling all
places with dead bodies: So that in man's judgment there was no hope remaining,
but that this year would have thereby proved yet more dreadful and infectious
then the former. But because thou will have it known, that thou only woundest
and can heal again, that thou killest and reuiuest, bring even to hell
and back again: thou have vouchsafed, contrary to all humane expectation
(such is thy power and goodness) to command thine Angel to stay his hand,
and spare this City, and have turned thine anger and the fierceness thereof
upon many other Cities and Towns within this Realm. We therefore at this time
offer up unto thee a double sacrifice, at once, of hearty Thanksgiving for
this our strange deliverance, and of humble and earnest Prayers, for those
doleful places, thus grievously afflicted: beseeching thee for thy Son Jesus
Christ his sake, to be gracious unto them also, that both they and we in joint
affection, may acknowledge thy justice in thy punishments, and record thine
infinite mercies in sparing us miserable sinners, through Jesus Christ thy
Son, and our Savior, to whom, etc.

O Most gracious God, seeing it has pleased thee in the multitude of those
sorrows which we had in our hearts, by reason of that grievous contagion which
thou lately did send amongst us (besides the fear and expectation of the
like, or a more violent infection this present year) to send thy comfortes
for the refreshing of our souls, and to remove that fearful pestilence from
us, not for any desert of ours, who are most wretched sinners; nor by any
means of man's devise, but only of thine own favor, and for thy mercies
sake: we yield unto thy divine Majesty all thanks and praise, for this thine
especial goodness; trusting that we shall take warning, by this last dreadful
judgment, for ever provoking thee to such a wrathful indignation again. And
having felt the weight of thy heavy hand upon our selves, tenderly
compassionating the woeful case of those Cities and Towns in this Realm,
which are now stricken with the same; we most humbly beseech thee, most
merciful Father, to extend the like mercy to them, that thou have done to us.
Good Lord spare them, and hear their prayers, now crying unto thee in the
vexation of their spirits, and the anguish of their souls, and us for them,
that so this whole land may joyfully praise thy Name, and say; Lord thou art
become gracious unto thy land, thou have turned away all thy displeasure.
Grant this O Lord, for thine only Sons sake, Jesus Christ our Lord and
only Savior, Amen.

Almighty and eternal God, which strikest and healest, bring down to
death and quicknest again, who in thy just judgment for our sins did
lately sore plague us in our chief City and round about, with great
sickness and mortality: yet remembering thy mercy have turned thy self most
graciously unto us, and comforted us again, by ceasing the plague therein, even
then when as by all likelihoode both of the time and place, and concourse of
people, and our little amendment of life, we could not but justly fear and
expect the continuance and increasing of the same: we most humbly acknowledge
with all due thankfulness from the bottom of our hearts, this thine
exceeding gracious goodness and undeserved mercy, evermore praising thy great
and glorious name, for so wonderful grace and clemency toward us most vile
and wretched sinners so freely and mercifully extended: most humbly beseeching
thee of thy fatherly goodness, not only to continue this gracious course of
thy loving favor, in mitigating and lessening more and more this noisome
Pestilence, till it be clean removed from us: But also to power thy heavenly
Grace into our hearts, that we never forgetting how grievously and justly we
have been chastened for our sins, and yet in Mercy not consumed, but raised
up again and comforted, may learn thereby, both to fear thy dreadful
judgments against sin, and so by true Repentance to turn unto thee from our
wicked ways, least a worse Plague fall upon us; And also to put our whole
trust in thy Mercy, and approach with confidence unto thy Throne of Grace, for
help and succor in all our troubles and adversities, Evermore thanking and
praising thy glorious Majesty for this thy most merciful and marvelous
deliverance, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.

O God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the God of all Mercy and Comfort,
which art Lord of life and death, and rulest all things in heaven and earth by
the word of thy Power: Look down mercifully from thy Holy place, upon the
people of this Land yet grievously afflicted in many places, with great
sickness and mortality. And as by thy great Mercy, the Plague which lately
raged in our chief City, threatening utter consumption and desolation to the
same, is now slaked and assuaged to our great comfort, for which we praise and
magnify thy glorious Name: So likewise we most humbly beseech thee, in the
tender bowels of thy endless Compassion, to be gracious and merciful to the
other parts of this land, now fearfully affrighted and afflicted with this
grievous Plague and pestilence. Send them good Lord, speedy help and succor
from thy Holy habitation; And as thou did sometimes turn away thy fierce
wrath from the Ninevites, being justly threatened out against them, and even
hanging over their heads, by giving them Repentance through thy Grace: So now
visit the hearts of thy people in this Land with thine heavenly Grace, and
holy Spirit, that they may speedily and soundly return unto thee from all
their wicked ways, in true Repentance, and a living Faith in Jesus Christ:
That so we may be delivered from this heavy wrath and Plague, which our
sins have pulled down and scattered amongst us; And learn by thy fearful
Judgments to walk hereafter before thee, in continual reverence and
obedience, And for thy gracious mercy to give thee Everlasting praise and
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Almighty God, which art the Resurrection of the dead, and the Life of them
which live, who in thy displeasure cariest us down in a moment to the gates of
death, and in thy mercy recallest our Souls back to dwell in the land of the
living: We give thee humble thanks, that it has pleased thee to restore us
when we were almost past hope, to strengthen us in the extremity of our
weakness, to deliver us thy people of this City from the Contagion, when in
the eye of man's reason it was most likely to have increased. This we
acknowledge to be thy doing, O Lord, and it is wonderful in our eyes, which
have seen these thy great mercies surpassing the strength of our hope: and we
beseech thee to continue thy gracious goodness toward us still, whereby all
the world may see and know, that thou art our merciful Father, and wonderful
Deliverer, to the glory of thy holy Name, and to the comfort of us thy
children, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Heavenly Father, which art the Fountain of Life, and the GOD of our health,
in whom alone we live, and move, and have our being: we beseech thee, that
as thou have been gracious unto this City, and the parts about it, in
remoouing from hence that fearful Plague, which for our sins thou had
most justly sent among us: So it would please thee to hear these our
intercessions for our brethren, which in other places of this Realm do yet
groan under thy punishing hand. O Lord, be gracious also unto them, and command
thine Angel to sheath his Sword, that a remnant may be saved. So shall we all
jointly magnify thy Mercies, and compass about thine Altars with songs of
deliverance, to our unspeakable comfort, and to thy everlasting Glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


