Campaspe, Played before the Queens Majesty on newyeares day at night, by
her Majesty's Children, and the Children of Paul's. (*)

Imprinted at London for Thomas Cadman, 1584.

The Prologue at the Court.
We are ashamed that our bird which fluttered by twilight seeming a swan,
should be proved a Batte set against the sun. But as Jupiter placed Silenus
Ass among the stars, and Alcebiades covered his pictures being Owls and
Apes, with a courtaine embroidered with Lions and Eagles, so are we enforced
upon a rough discource to draw on a smooth excuse resembling Lapidaries, who
think to hide the crake in a stone by setting it deep in gold. The Gods
supped once with poor Baucis, the Persian kings sometimes shaued sticks, our
hope is, your heighnesse will at this time lend an ear to an idle pastime.
Appion raising Homere from hell, demanded only who was his father, and we
calling Alexander from his grave, seek only who was his love. Whatsoever we
present, we wish it may be thought the daunsing of Agrippa his shadows: who,
in the moment they were seen, were of any shape one would conceive: or
Lynces, who having a quick sight to discern, have a short memory to forget.
With us it is like to fare, as with these torches, which giving light to
others, consume themselves, and we showing delight to others, shame our selves.

The Prologue at the Black friars.
THey that fear the stinging of waspes make fannes of peacockes tails, whose
spots are like eyes. And Lepidus, which could not sleep for the chatting of
birds, set up a beast, whose head was like a dragon: and we which stand in
awe of report, are compelled to set before our owl Pallas shield thinking
by her virtue to cover the others deformity. It was a sign of famine to
Aegypte, when Nilus flowed less then twelve Cubits, or more then eighteen:
and it may threaten despair unto us, if we be less curious then you look
for, or more combersome. But as Theseus being promised to be brought to an
Eagles neast, and travailing all the day, found but a wrenne in a hedge, yet
said, this is a bird: so we hope if the shower of our swelling mountain seem
to bring forth some Eliphant, perform but a mouse, you will gently say, this
is a beast. Basil softly touched, yields a sweet sent but chafed in the
hand, a rank savor. We fear even so that our labors slylye glaunced on,
will breed some content, but examined to the proof, small commendation. The
haste in performing shall be our excuse. There went two nights to the
begetting of Hercules. Feathers appear not on the Phoenix under seven
months, and the mulbery is twelve in budding, but our travails are like the
Hares, who at one time brings forth, nourishes, and engenders again, or
like the brood of Trochilus, whose eggs in the same moment that they are
laid, become birds. But howsoever we finish our work, we crave pardon, if we
offend in matter, and patience if we transgress in manners. We have mixed
mirth with counsel, and discipline with delight, thinking it not amiss, in
the same garden to sow pothearbes, that we set flowers. But we hope, as Hearts
that cast their horns, Snakes their skins, Eagles their bills, become more
fresh for any other labor: so our charge being shaken of, we shall be fit for
greater matters. But least like the Mindyans, we make our gates greater then
our town, and that our play runs out at the preface, we here conclude:
wishing that although there be in your precise judgments an universal
mislike, yet we may enjoy by your woonted courtisies a general silence

Actus primus. Schaena prima.
Clytus, Permenio, Timoclea, Campaspe, Alexander, Hephestion. Clyt. PArmenio I
cannot tell whether I should more commend in Alexanders victories, courage, or
courtesy, in the one being a resolution without fear in the other a liberality
above custom: Thebes is raised, the people not racked, towers thrown down,
bodies not thrust aside, a conquest without conflict, and a cruel war in a
mild peace.


Parmenio. Clytus, it becomes the son of Phillip to be none other then
Alexander is: therefore seeing in the father a full perfection, who could have
doubted in the son an excellency. For as the moon can borrow nothing else of
the sun but light, so of a sire, in whom nothing but virtue was, what could
the child receive but singular? it is for Turkies to stain each other, not
for Diamondes, in the one to be made a difference in goodness, in the other no
comparision.


Clytus You mistake me Parmenio, if whilst I commend Alexander, you imagine I
call Phillip into question, unless happily you conjecture (which none of
judgment will conceive) that because I like the fruit, therefore I heave at the
tree, or coveting to kiss the child, I therefore go about to poison the teat.


Parme. I but Clytus, I perceive you are borne in the East, and never laugh but
at the sun rising, which argues though a duty where you ought, yet no
great devotion where you might.


Clytus We will make no controversy of that which there ought to be no
question, only this shall be the opinion of us both, that none was worthy to be
the father of Alexander but Phillip, nor any meet to be the son of Phillip
but Alexander.


Parme. Soft Clytus, behold the spoils and prisoners, a pleasant sight to us,
because profit is joined with honor, not much paineful to them, because their
captivity is eased by mercy.


Timo. Fortune, thou did never yet deceive virtue, because virtue never yet
did trust fortune. Sword and fire will never get spoil, where wisdom and
fortitude bears sway. O Thebes, thy walls were raised by the sweetness of
the harp, but raced by the shrilnes of the trumpet. Alexander had never come
so near the walls. had Epaminondas walked about the walls, and yet might the
Thebanes have been merry in there streets, if he had been to watch their to
wers. But destiny is seldom foreseen, never prevented. We are here now
captives, whose necks are yoaked by force, but whose hearts can not yield by
death. Come Campaspe and the rest, let us not be ashamed to cast our eyes one
him, on whom we feared not to cast our darts.


Parme. Madame, you need not doubt, it is Alexander, that is, the conqueror.


Timo. Alex. has overcome, not conquered.


Parme. To bring al under his subjection is to co^quer.


Timo. He cannot subdue that which is divine.


Parme Thebes was not.


Timo. Virtue is.


Clytus. Alexander as he tendreth virtue, so he Will you, he drinks not
blood, but thirsts after honor, he is greedy of victory, but never satified
with mercy. In fight terrible, as becomes a captain, in conqueste mild, as
beseems a king. In all things, then which nothing can be greater, he is
Alexander.


Camp. Then if it be such a thing to be Alexander, I hope it shall be no
miserable things to be a virgin. For if he save our honors, it is more the^ to
restore our goods. And rather do I wish he preserve our fame, then our lives,
which if he do, we will confess there can be no greater thing then to be
Alexander.


Alex. Clitus, are these prisoners? of whence these spoils?


Cly. Like your majesty, they are prisoners, and of Thebes.


Alex. Of what calling or reputation?


Cly. I know not, but they seem to be Ladies of honor.


Alex. I will know. Madam, of whence you are I know: but who I cannot tell.


Timo. Alexander, I am the sister of Theagenes, who fought a battle with thy
father before the City of Chyronie, where he died, I say which no^e ca^
gainsay, valia^tly.


Alex. Lady, there seem in your words sparks of your brothers deeds, but
woorser fortune in your life then his death: but fear not, for you shall live
without violence, enemies, or necessity, but what are you fair Lady, another
sister to Theagines?


Camp. No sister to Theagines, but an humble handmaid to Alexander, borne of a
mean parentage, but to extreme fortune.


Alex. Well Ladies, for so your virtues show you, whatsoever your birthes be,
you shall be honorably entreated. Athens shall be your Thebes, and you shall not
be as abiectes of war, but as subjects to Alexander Permenio, conducte these
honorable Ladies into the City: charge the soldiers not so much as in words
to offer them any offense, and let all wants be supplied, so far forth as
shall be necessary for such persons and my prisoners.

Exeunt Parme. and captiui.
Hephestion, it rests now that we have as great care to govern in peace, as
conquer in war: that whilst arms cease, arts may flourish, and joining
letters with lances, we endeavor to be as good Philosophers as soldiers,
knowing it no less praise to be wise, the^ commendable to be vailiant.

Heph. Your Majesty therein shows that you have as great desire to rule as to
subdue, and needs must that common wealth be fortunate, whose captain is a
Philosopher, and whose Philosopher is a Captain.


Exeunt. Actus primus, Schaena secunda.
Manes, Granichus, Psyllus. Manes. I serve in steed of a master, a mouse,
whose house is a tub, whose dinner is a crust, and whose board is a bed.


Psyllus. Then art thou in a state of life, which Philosophers commend. A
crumme for thy supper, an hand for thy cup, and thy clothes for thy sheets. I
or Natura paucis contenta.


Grani. Manes, it is pity so proper a man should be cast away upon a
Philosopher: but that Diogenes that dog should have Manes, that dogbolt, it
greeneth nature and spiteth art, the one having found thee so dissolute,
absolute I would say, in body, the other so single singular in mind.


Manes Are you merry, it is a sign by the trip of your tongue, and the toys of
your head, that you have done that to day, which I have not done these three
days.


Psyllus. What is that?


Manes. Dined.


Grani. I think Diogenes keeps but cold cheer.


Manes I would it were so, but he keeps neither hot nor cold.


Grani. What then, luck warm? That made Manes run from his master last day.


Psyllus. Manes had reason: for his name foretold as much.


Manes. My name? how so sir boy?


Psyllus You know that it is called Mons, a mouendo, because it stands still.


Manes Good.


Psyllus And thou art named Manes, a manendo, because thou runst away.


Manes Passing reasons, I did not run away, but retire.


Psyllus To a prison, because thou would have leisure to contemplate.


Manes. I will prove that my body was immortal: because it was in prison.


Grani. As how?


Manes. Did your masters never teach you that the soul is immortal?


Grani. Yes.


Manes. And the body is the prison of the soul.


Gran. True.


Manes. Why then, thus to make my body immortal, I put it to prison.


Grani. Oh bad.


Psyllus. Excellent ill.


Manes. You may see how dull a fasting wit is: therefore Psyllus let us go to
supper with Granichus: Plato is the best fellow of al Philosophers. Give me him
that reads in the morning in the school, and at noone in the kitchen.


Psyl. And me.


Grani. Ah sirs, my master is a king in his parlour for the body, and a God in
his study for the soul. Among all his men he commedeth one that is an
excellent Musition, then stand I by, and clap another on the shoulder, and say,
this is a passing good Cook.


Manes. It is well done Granichus, for give me pleasure that goes in at the
mouth, not the ear, I had rather fill my guts, then my brains.


Psyllus. I serve Apelles, who feeds me as Diogenes does Manes, for at
dinner the one preaches abstinence, the other commends counterfeiting: when
I would eat meat, he paintes a spit, and when I thirst, O says he, is not this
a fair pot, and points to a table, which co^teines the banquet of the Gods,
where are many dishes to feed the eye, but not to fill the gut.


Grani. What do thou then?


Psyllus This does he then bring in many examples that some have lived by
savors, and proves that much easier it is to fat by colors: and tells of
birds that have been fatted by painted grapes in winter: and how many have so
fed their eyes with their mistress picture, that they never desired to take
food, being glutted with the delight in their favors. Then does he show me
cou^terfeits, such as have surfeited with their filthy and loathsome vomits, and
with the riotous Bacchanalles of the God Bacchus, and his disorderly crew,
which are painted al to the life in his shop. To conclude, I fare hardly, though
I go richly, which makes me when I should begin to shadow a Ladies face, to
draw a Lambs head, and sometime to set to the body of a maid a shoulder of
mutton: for semper animus meus est in patinis.


Manes Thou art a God to me: for could I see but a Cooks shop painted, I would
make mine eyes fat as butter. For I have naught but sentences to fill my maw,
as plures occidit crapula quam gladius, musa ieiunantibus amica: repletion
kills delicately: and an old saw of abstinence, Socrates, The belly is the
heads grieve. Thus with sayings not with meat he makes a gally mafrey.


Grani. But how do thou then live?


Manes With fine jests, sweet air, and the dogs alms.


Grani. Well for this time I will stanch thy gut, and among pots and platters
thou shall see what it is to serve Plato.


Psyllus. For joy of Granichus lets sing.


Manes. My voice is as clear in the evening as in the morning.


Grani. Another commodity of emptines.


song. Actus primus, Schaena tertia,
Melipus, Plato, Aristotle, Crisippus, Crates, Cleanthes. Anaxarchus,
Alexander, Hephestion, Parmenio, Clytus, Diogenes. Melip, I had never such a
do to warn scholars to come before a king. First, I came to Crisippus a tall
lean old mad man, willing him presently to appear before Alexander, he stood
staring on my face, neither moving his eyes nor his body, I urging him to give
some answer, he took up a book, sat down, and said nothing: Melissa his
maid told me it was his manner, and that oftentimes she was fain to thrust
meat into his mouth: for that he would rather starve the^ cease study. Well
thought I, seeing bookish men are so blockish, and so great clerks such simple
courtiers, I will neither be partaker of their commons nor their comme^dations.
From thence I came to Plato and to Aristotle, and to diverse other, none
refusing to come, saving an old obscure fellow, who sitting in a tub turned
toward the sun, read Greek to a young boy, him when I willed to appear
before Alexander, he answered, if Alexander would feign see me, let him come to
me, if learn of me, let him come to me, whasoeuer it be, let him come to
me. why, said I, he is a king, he answered, why I am a Philosopher, why, but he
is Alexander: I but I am Diogenes. I was half angry to see one so crooked in
his shape, to be so crabbed in his sayings. So going my way, I said thou shall
repent it, if thou co^mest not to Alexander: nay smiling answered he: Alexander
may repent it, if he come not to Diogenes, virtue must be sought, not offered:
and so turning himself to his cel, he grunted I know not what, like a pig under
a tub. But I must be gone, the Philosophers are coming. Exit.


Plato. It is a difficult controversy, Aristotle, and rather to be wondered at,
then believed, how natural causes should work supernatural effects.


Arist. I do not so much stand upon the apparition is seen in the Moon,
neither the Demonium of Socrates, as that I cannot by natural reason give any
reason of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, which makes me in the depth of my
studies to cry out, O ens entium, miserere mei.


Plato. Cleanthes and you attribute so much to nature by searching for things
which are not to be found, that whilst you study a cause of your own, you
omit the occasion it self. There is no man so savage in whom rests not
this divine particle, that there is an omnipotent, eternal and divine mouer,
which may be called God.


Cleant. I am of this mind, that that first mouer, which you term God, is
the instrument of all the mouings, which we attribute to nature. The earth
which is mass, swimmeth on the sea, seasons divided in themselves, fruits
growing in themselves, the majesty of the sky, the whole firmament of the
world, and whatsoever else appears miraculous, what man almost of mean
capacity but can prove it natural.


Anaxar. These causes shall be debated at our Philosophers feast, in which
controversy I will take part with Aristotle, that there is Natura naturans,
and yet not God.


Craterus. And I with Plato, that there is Deus optimus maximus, and not nature.


Arist. Here comes Alexander.


Alex. I see Hephestion, that these Philosophers are here attending for us.


Heph. They were not Philosophers, if they knew not their duties.


Alex. But I much marvel Diogenes should be so dogged.


Heph. I do not think but his excuse will be better then Melippus message.


Alex. I will go see him Hephestion, because I long to see him that would
command Alexander to come, to whom all the world is like to come. Aristotle and
the rest sithence my coming from Thebes to Athens, from a place of conquest to
a palace of quiet, I have resolved with my self in my court to have as many
Philisophers, as I had in my camp soldiers. My court shall be a schole, wherein I
will have used as great doctrine in peace, as I did in war discipline.


Arist. We are al here ready to be commanded, and glad we are that we are
commanded: for that nothing better becomes kings the^ literature, which
makes them come as near to the Gods in wisdom, as they do in dignity.


Alex. It is so Aristotle: but yet there is among you, yea and of your bringing
up, that sought to destroy Alexander: Calistenes, Aristotle, whose treasons
against his prince shall not be borne out with the reasons of his Philosophy.


Arist. If ever mischief entered into the heart of Calistenes, let Calistenes
suffer for it, but that Aristotle ever imagined any such thing of Calistenes,
Aristotle does deny.


Alex. Well Aristotle, kindred may blind thee, and affection me, but in kings
causes I will not stand to scholars arguments. This meeting shall be for a
commandment, that you all frequent my court instruct the young with rules
confirm the old with reasons: let your lives be answerable to your
learnings, least my proceedings by contrary to my promises.


Hephest. You said you would ask every one of them a question, which yester
night none of us could answer.


Alex. I will Plato, of all beasts, which is the subtillest?


Plato. That which man hitherto never knew.


Alex. Aristotle, how should a man be thought a God?


Arist. In doing a thing impossible for a man.


Alex. Crisippus, which was first, the day or the night?


Crisp. The day by a day.


Alex. Indeed strange questions must have straung answers. Cleanthes, what
say you, is life or death the stronger?


Clean. Life, that suffers so many troubles.


Alex. Crates, how long should a man live?


Crates. Till he think it better to die then live.


Alex. Anaxarchus, whether does the sea or the earth bring forth most creatures?


Anax. The earth, for the sea is but a part of the earth.


Alex. Hephestion, me thinks they have answered all well, and in such
questions I mean often to try them.


Heph. It is better to have in your court a wise man then in your ground a
golden mine. Therefore would I leave war, to study wisdom, were I Alexander.


Alex. So would I, were I Hephestion. But come, let us go and give release, as
I promised, to our Theba^ thralles.


Exeunt. Plato. Thou art fortunate Aristotle, that Alexander is thy scholar.


Arist. And you happy that he is your sovereign.


Crisip. I could like the man well, if he could be contented to be but a man.


Ari. He seeks to draw near to the Gods in knowledge, not to be a God.


Plato Let us question a little with Diogenes, why he went not with us to
Alexander. Diogenes, thou did forget thy duty, that thou wentst not with us
to the king.


Diog. And you your profession, that you went to the king.


Plato. Thou take as great pride to be peevish, as others do glory to be
virtuous.


Diog. And thou as great honor being a Philosopher to be thought courtlike, as
others shame that be courtiers, to be accounted Philosophers.


Arist. These austere manners set a side, it is well known that thou did
counterfeate monye.


Diog. And thou thy manners, in that thou didste not counterfeite money.


Arist. Thou have reason to co^temn the court, being both in body and mind
too crooked for a courtier.


Diog. As good be crooked, and endeavor to make my self straight from the
court, as to be straight and learn to be crooked at the court.


Crates Thou think it a grace to be opposite against Alexander.


Diog. And thou to be iump with Alexander.


Anax. Let us go: for in contemning him, we shall better please him, than in
wondering at him.


Arist. Plato, what do thou think of Diogenes.


Plato. To be Socrates furious, let us go.


Exeunt Philosophi. Actus secundus, Schaena prima.
Diogenes. Psyllus, Manes, Granichus. Psyllus Behold Manes where thy master
is, seeking either for bones for his dinner, or pinnes for his sleeves. I will
go salute him.


Manes Do so: but mum, not a word you saw Manes.


Gran. Then stay thou behind, I will go with Psyllus.


Psyllus All hail Diogenes to your proper person.


Diog. All hate to thy peevish conditions.


Grani. O Dog.


Psyllus What do thou seek for here?


Diog. For a man and a beast.


Grani. That is easy without thy light to be found, be not all these men?


Diog. Called men.


Grani. What beast is it thou look for?


Diog. The beast my man Manes.


Psyllus He is a beast indeed that will serve thee.


Diog. So is he that begat thee.


Grani. What would thou do, if thou should find Manes?


Diog. Give him leave to do as he has done before.


Grani. What Is that.


Diog. To run away.


Psyllus Why, have thou no need of Manes?


Diog. It were a shame for Diogenes to have need of Manes, and for Manes to
have no need of Diogenes.


Grani. But put the case he were gone, would thou entertain any of us two?


Diog. Upon condition.


Psyllus What?


Diog. That you should tell me wherefore any of you both were good.


Grani. Why, I am a scholar, and well seen in Philosophy.


Psyllus And I a prentice, and well seen in painting.


Diog. Well then Granichus, be thou a painter to amend thine ill face, and
thou Psyllus a Philosopher, to correct thine evil manners. But who is that,
Manes?


Manes I care not who I were, so I were not Manes.


Gran. You are taken tardie.


Psyllus Let us slip aside Granichus, to see the salutation between Manes and
his master.


Diog. Manes, thou know the last day I threw away my dish, to drink in my
hand, because it was superfluous, now I am determined to put away my man, and
serve my self: Quia non egeo tui vel te.


Manes. Master, you know a while a go I ran away, so do I mean to do
again, quia scio tibi non esse argentum.


Diog. I know I have no money, neither will I have ever a man, for I was
resolved long sithence to put away both my slaves, money and Manes.


Manes So was I determined to shake of both my dogs, hunger and Diogenes.


Psyllus O sweet consent beetweene a crowde and a Jews harp.


Grani. Come, let us reconcile them.


Psyllus It shall not need: for this is their use, now do they dine one upon
another.


Exit Diogenes. Grani. How now Manes, art thou gone from thy master.


Manes Noe, I did but now bind my self to him.


Psyllus Why, you were at mortal iars.


Manes In faith no, we brake a bitter jest one upon another.


Grani. Why, thou art as dogged as he.


Psyllus My father knew them both little whelps.


Manes Well, I will hie me after my master.


Grani. Why, is it supper time with Diogenes?


Manes I, with him at al times when he has meat.


Psyllus Why then, every man to his home, and let us steal out again anon.


Grani Where shall we meet.


Psyllus Why, at Ala vendibili suspensa haedera non est opus.


Manes O Psyllus, habeo te loco parentis, thou blessest me.


Exeunt. Actus secundus, Schaena secunda,
Alexander, Hephestion, Page, Diogenes, Apelles. Alex. Stand aside sir boy,
till you be called. Hephestion, how do ye like the sweet face of Campaspe.


Heph. I cannot but commend the stout courage of Timoclea.


Alex. Without doubt Campaspe had some great man to her father.


Heph. You know Timoclea had Theagines to her brother,


Alex. Timoclea still in thy mouth, art thou not in love?


Heph. Not I.


Alex. Not with Timoclea you mean, wherein you resemble the Lapwing, who
cries most, where her neast is not. And so you lead me from espying your love
with Campaspe, you cry Timoclea.


Heph. Could I as well subdue kingdoms, as I can my thoughts, or were I as
far from ambition, as I am from love, all the world would account me as valiant
in arms, as I know my self moderate in affection.


Alex. Is love a vice?


Heph. It is no virtue.


Alex. Well, now shall thou see what small difference I make between Alexander
and Hephestion. And since thou haste been always partaker of my triumphs,
thou shall be partaker of my torments. I love Hephestion, I love I love
Campaspe, a thing far Unfit for a Macedonian, for a king, for Alexander. Why
hangest thou down thy head Hephestion? blushing to hear that which I am not
ashamed to tell.


Hephest. Might my words crave pardon, and my counsel credit, I would both
discharge the duty of a subject, for so I am, and the office of a friend, for
so I will.


Alex. Speak Hephestion for what soever is spoken, Hephestion speaks to
Alexander.


Heph. I can not tell, Alexander, whether the report be more shameful to be
heard or the cause sorrowful to be believed? What? is the son of Phillip,
king of Macedon become the subject of Campaspe the captive of Thebes? Is that
mind, whose greatness the world could not contain, drawn within the compass
of an idle alluring eye? Will you handle the spindle with Hercules, when you
should shake the spear with Achilles? Is the warlike sound of drum, and
trumpe turned to the soft noise of lire, and lute, the neighing of barbed
steeds, whose loudnes filled the air with terror, and whose breathes dimmed
the sun with smoke, converted to dilicate tunes and amorous glaunces? O
Alexander, that soft and yielding mind should not be in him, whose hard and
unconquered heart has made so many yield. But you love, ah grief, but whom?
Campaspe, ah shame, a maid forsooth unknown, unnoble, and who can tell
whether immodest? whose eyes are framed by nature to inamour, and whose heart
was made by nature to inchaunt. I, but she is bewtiful, yea but not therefore
chaste: I, but she is comely in all parts of the body: yea, but she may be crooked
in some part of the mind: I, but she is wise, yea, but she is a woman? Bewty is
like the black berry which seems red, when it is not ripe, resembling
precious stoe^s that are polished with honny, which the smother they look, the
sooner they break. It is thought wonderful among the sea men, that Mugil of
all fishes, the swiftest, is found in the belly of the Bret of all the slowest:
And shall it not seem monstrous to wisemen, that the heart of the greatest
conqueror of the world, should be found in the hands of the weakest creature
of nature? of a woman? of a captive? Hermyns have fair skins, but foul
livers, Sepulchers fresh colors, but rotten bones, women fair faces, but
false hearts. Remember Alexander thou have a camp to govern, not a chamber,
fall not from the armor of Mars to the arms of Venus, from the fiery assaults
of war, to the maide^ly skirmishes of love, from displaying the Eagle in thine
ensign, to set down the sparow. I sighe Alexander that where fortune could
not conquer, folly should overcome. But behold all the perfection that may be in
Campaspe, a hair curling by nature not art: sweet alluring eyes, a fair
face made in dispite of Venus, and a stately port in disdain of Juno, a wit
apt to conceive, and quick to answer a skin as soft as silk, and as smooth as
iet, a long white hand, a fine little foot, to conclude, all parts answerable
to the best part, what of this? Though she have heavenly gifts, virtue and
beauty, is she not of earthly metal flesh and blood? You Alexander that would
be a God, show your self in this worse then a man, so soon to be both
ouerseene and overtaken in a woman, whose false tears know their true times,
whose smooth words wound deeper then sharp swords. There is no surfeit so
dangerous, as that of honney, nor any poison so deadly, as that of love, in
the one physic cannot prevail, nor in the other counsel.


Alex. My case were light Hephestion, and not worthy to be called love, if
reason were a remedy, or sentences could salve, that sense cannot conceive.
Little do you know, and therefore slightly do you regard the dead embers in a
private person, or live coals in a great prince, whose passions and thoughts do
as far exceed others in extremity, as their callings do in Majesty. An
Eclipse in the Sun is more then the falling of a star, none can conceive
the torments of a king, unless he be a king whose desires are not inferior to
their dignities. And then judge Hephestion if the agonies of love be dangerous
in a subject, whether they be not more then deadly unto Alexander, whose deep
and not to be conceived sighs, cleave the heart in shiuers: whose wounded
thoughts can neither be expressed nor endured. Cease then Hephestion, with
arguments to seek to refel that, which with their deity the Gods cannot
resist, and let this suffice to answer thee that it is a king that loves and
Alexander, whose affections are not to be measured by reason, being immortal,
nor I fear me to be borne being intolerable.


Hephe. I must needs yield, when neither reason nor counsel can be heard.


Alex. Yield Hephestion, for Alexander does love, and therefore must obtain.


Heph. Suppose she loves not you, affection comes not by appointmente or
birth, and then as good hated as enforced.


Alex. I am a king, and will command.


Hephe. You may to yield to lust by force, but to consent to love by fear
you cannot.


Alex. Why, what is that, which Alexander may not conquer as he list?


Hephe. Why, that which you say the Gods cannot resist, Love.


Alex. I am a conqueror, she a captive, I as fortunate, as she fair: my
greatness may answer her wants, and the gifts of my mind, the modesty of
hers: Is it not likely then that she should love? Is it not reasonable?


Heph. You say that in love there is no reason, and therefore there can be no
likelihood.


Alex. No more Hephestion, in this case I will use mine own counsel, and in
all other thine advice, thou may be a good soldier, but never good lover. Call
my Page. Sirrah, go presently to Apelles, and will him to come to me without
either delay or excuse.


Page I go.


Alex. In the mean season to recreate my spirits, being so near, we will go
see Diogenes, and see where his tub is. Diogenes?


Diog. Who calls?


Alex. Alexander. How happened it that you would not come out of your tub to
my palace?


Diog. Because it was as far from my tub to your palace, as from your palace
to my tub.


Alex. Why the^ do thou ow no reverence to kings:


Diog. No.


Alex. Why so?


Diog. Because they be no Gods.


Alex. They be Gods of the earth.


Diog. Yea, Gods of earth.


Alex. Plato is not of thy mind.


Diog. I am glad of it.


Alex. Why?


Diog. Because I would have none of Diogenes mind but Diogenes.


Alex. If Alexander have any thing that may pleasure Diogenes, let me know, and
take it.


Diog. Then take not from me, that you cannot give me, the light of the world.


Alex. What do thou want?


Diog. Nothing that you have.


Alex. I have the world at command.


Diog. And I in contempt.


Alex. Thou shall live no longer than I will.


Diog. But I will die whether you will or no.


Alex. How should one learn to be content?


Diog. Vnlearn to covet.


Alex. Hephestion, were I not Alexander, I would wish to be Diogenes.


Heph. He is dogged, but discrete, I cannot tell how sharp with a kind of
sweetenes, full of wit, yet too too wayward.


Alex. Diogenes, when I come this way again, I will both see thee, and confer
with thee.


Diog. Do.


Alex. But here comes Apelles, how now Apelles, is Venus face yet finished


Apel. Not yet: Bewty is not so soon shadowed whose perfection comes not
within the compass either of cunning or of color.


Alex. Well let it rest imperfect, and come you with me, where I will show you
that finished by nature, that you have been trifling about by art.


Actus tertius, Schaena prima,
Apelles, Campaspe. Apel. Lady, I doubt whether there be any color so fresh,
that may shadow a countenance so fair.


Camp. Sir, I had thought you had been commanded to paint with your hand, not
to gloss with your tongue, but as I have heard, it is the hardest thing in
painting to set down a hard favor, which makes you to despair of my face, and
then shall you have as great thanks to spare your labor, as to discredit your
art.


Apel. Mistress, you neither differ from you self, nor your sex: for knowing
your own perfection, you seem to dispraise that which men most commend,
drawing the^ by that mean into an admiration, where feeding them selves they
fall into an ecstasy, your modesty being the cause of the one, and of the
other, your affections.


Camp. I am too young to understand your speech, though old enough to
withstand your devise: you have bin so long used to colors, you ca^ do nothing
but color.


Apel. Indeed the colors I see, I fear will alter the color I have: but come
madam, will you draw near, for Alexander will be here anon. Psyllus, stay you
here at the window, if any enquire for me, answer, Non lubet esse domi.


Exeunt. Actus tertius, Schaena secunda.
Psyllus, Manes. Psyllus It is always my masters fashion, when any fair
Gentlewoman is to be drawn within, to make me to stay without. But if he
should paint Jupiter like a Bull, like a Swan, like an Eagle, then must Psyllus
with one hand grind colors, and with the other hold the candle. But let him
alone, the better he shadows her face, the more will he burn his own heart.
And now if a man cold meet with Manes, who I dare say, looks as lean, as if
Diogenes dropped out of his nose.


Manes And here comes Manes, who has as much meat in his maw, as thou have
honesty in thy head.


Psyllus Then I hope thou art very hungry.


Manes They that know thee, know that.


Psyllus But do thou not remember that we have certain licour to confer
withal.


Manes I, but I have business, I must go cry a thing.


Psyllus Why, what have thou lost?


Manes That which I never had my dinner.


Psyllus Foul lubber will thou cry for thy dinner?


Manes I mean, I must cry, not as one would say cry, but cry, that is make a
noise.


Psyllus Why fool, that is al one, for if thou cry, thou must needs make a
noise.


Manes Boy thou art deceived. Cry has diverse significations, and may be
alluded to many things, knave but one, and can be applied but to thee.


Psyllus Profound Manes.


Manes We Cynickes are mad fellows, didste thou not find I did quip thee?


Psyllus No verily, why, what is a quip.


Manes We great girders call it a short saying of a sharp wit, with a bitter
sense in a sweet word.


Psyllus How can thou thus divine, divide, define, dispute, and all on the
sudden?


Manes Wit will have his swing, I am bewitched, inspird, inflamed, infected.


Psyllus Well, then will not I tempt thy gybing spirit.


Manes Do not Psyllus, for thy dull head will be but a grindstone for my quick
wit, which if thou whet with ouerwhartes, peristi, actum est de te. I have
drawn blood at ones brains with a bitter bob.


Psyllus Let me cross my self: for I die, if I cross thee.


Manes Let me do my business, I my self am afraid, least my wit should wax
warm, and then must it needs consume some hard head with fine and pretty jests.
I am some times in such a vain, that for want of some dull pate to work on, I
begin to gird my self.


Psyllus The Gods shield me from such a fine fellow, whose words melt wits
like wax.


Manes Well then, let us to the matter. In faith my master means to morrow
to fly.


Psyllus It is a jest.


Manes Is it a jest to fly: should thou fly so soon, thou should
repent it in earnest.


Psyllus Well, I will be the crier.


Manes and Psyl. one after an other. O is, o is, o is, Al manner of men, women
or children, that will come to morrow into the market place, between the hours
of nine and ten, shall see Diogenes the Cynick fly.


Psyllus I do not think he will fly.


Manes Tush, say fly.


Psyllus Fly.


Manes Now let us go: for I will not see him again til midnight, I have a
back way into his tub.


Psyllus Which way call thou the backwaye, when every way is open.


Manes I mean to come in at his back.


Psyllus Well, let us go away, that we may return speedily.

Exeunt.
Actus tertius, Schaena tertia.
Apelles, Campaspe. Apel. I shall never draw your eyes well, because they
blind mine.


Camp. Why the^, paint me without eyes, for I am blind.


Apel. Were you ever shadowed before of any?


Camp. No. And would you could so now shadow me, that I might not be perceived
of any?


Apel. It were pity, but that so absolute a face should furnish Venus temple
amongst these pictures.


Camp. What are these pictures?


Apel. This is Laeda, whom love deceived in likeness of a swan.


Camp. A fair woman, but a foul deceit.


Apel. This is Alcmena, Unto who^ Jupiter came in shape of Amphitrio^ her
husband, and begat Hercules.


Camp. A famous son, but an infamous fact.


Apel. He might do it, because he was a God.


Camp. Nay, therefore it was evil done, because he was a God.


Apel. This is Danae, into whose prison Jupiter drisled a golden shewre, and
obtained his desire?


Camp. What Gold can make one yield to desire?


Apel. This is Europa, whom Jupiter ravished: this Antiopa.


Camp. Were all the Gods like this Jupiter?


Apel. There were many Gods in this like Jupiter.


Camp. I think in those days love was well ratified among men on earth, when
lust was so full authorized by the Gods in heaven.


Apel. Nay, you may imagine there were women passing amiable, when there were
Gods exceeding amorous.


Camp. Were women never so fair, me^ would be false.


Apel. Were women never so false, men would be fond.


Camp. What counterfeit is this Appelles?


Apel. This is Venus, the Goddess of love.


Camp. What, be there also loving Goddesses?


Apel. This is she that has power to command the very affections of the
heart.


Camp. How is she hired: by prayer, by sacrifice, or bribs?


Apel. By prayer, sacrifice and bribes.


Camp. What prayer?


Apel. Vows irreuocable.


Camp. What sacrifice?


Apel. Hearts ever sighing never dissembling.


Camp. What bribes.


Apel. Roses and kisses: but were you never in love?


Camp. No, nor love in me.


Apel. Then have you iniuried many.


Camp. How so?


Apel. Because you have been loved of many.


Camp. Flattered parchance of some.


Apel. It is not possible that a face so fair, and a wit so sharp, both
without comparison, should not be apt to love.


Camp. If you begin to tip your tongue with cunning, I pray you dip your pensil
in colors, and fall to that you must do, not that you would do.


Actus tertius, Schaena quarta.
Clytus, Parmenio, Alexander, Hephestion, Crisus, Diogenes, Apelles, Campaspe.
Clytus Parmenio, I cannot tell how it comes to pass, that in Alexander now a
days there grows an vnpatie^t kind of life, in the morning he is
melancholy, at noone solomne, at all times either more sower or severe, then he
was accustomed.


Parme. In kings causes I rather love to doubt then conjecture, and think it
better to be ignorant then inquisitiue: they have long ears and stretched
arms, in whose heads suspicion is a proof, and to be accused is to be
condemned.


Clytus Yet between us there can be no danger to find out the cause: for
that there is no malice to withstand it. It may be an unquenchable thirste of
conquering makes him unquiet: it is not unlikely his long ease has altered his
humor: that he should be in love, it is not impossible.


Parme. In love Clytus? no, no, it is as far from his thought, as treason in
ours, he whose ever waking eye, whose never tried heart, whose body patient of
labor, whose mind insatiable of victory, has always bin noted, cannot so
soon be melted into the weak conceits of love. Aristotle told him there were
many worlds, and that he has not conquered one that gapeth for all, galleth
Alexander. But here he comes.


Alex. Parmenio, and Clitus, I would have you both ready to go into Persia about
an embassage no less profitable to me, then to your selves honorable.


Clytus We are ready at all commaundes, wishing nothing else, but continually to
be commanded.


Alex. Well, then withdraw your selves, till I have further considered of this
matter.

Exeunt Clytus and Parmenio.
Now we will see how Apelles goes forward: I doubt me that nature has ouercom
art, and her countenance his cunning.

Hephest. You love, and therefore think any thing.


Alex But not so far in love with Campaspe, as with Bucephalus, if occasion
serve either of co^flicte or of conquest.


Hephest. Ocasion cannot want, if will do not. Behold all Persia swelling in
the pride of their own power. the Scithians careless what courage or fortune
can do: the Aegiptians dreaming in the southsayings of their Auguries, and
gaping over the smoke of their beasts intralles. All these Alexander, are to
be subdued, if that world be not slipped out of your head, which you have
sworn to conquer with that hand.


Alex I confess the labors fit for Alexander, and yet recreation necessary
among so many assaults, bloudye wounds, intolerable troubles: give me leave a
little, if not to sit, yet to breath. And doubt not but Alexander can, when he
will, throw affections as far from him, as he can cowardice. But behold
Diogenes talking with one at his tub.


Crysus One penny Diogenes, I am a Cynick.


Diog. He made thee a beggar, that first gave thee any thing.


Crysus Why, if thou will give nothing, no body will give thee.


Diog. I want nothing, till the springs dry, and the earth perish.


Crysus I gather for the Gods.


Diog. And I care not for those gods, which want money.


Crysus Thou art a right Cynicke, that will give nothing.


Diog. Thou art not, that will beg any thing.


Crysus Alexander, king Alexander, give a poor Cynick a groat.


Alex. It is not for a king to give a groat.


Crysus Then give me a talent.


Alex. It is not for a beggar to ask a talent, A way. Apelles?


Apel. Here.


Alex. Now Gentlewomanne, does not your beauty put the painter to his trump?


Camp. Yes my Lord, seeing so disordered a countenance he fears he shall
shadow a deformed counterfeit.


Alex. Would he could color the life with the feature. And me thinks Apelles,
were you as cunning as report says you are, you may paint flowers as well with
sweet smells, as fresh colors observing in your mixture such things as should
draw near to their savors.


Apel. Your majesty must know, it is no less hard to paint savors the^
virtues, colors can neither speak nor think.


Alex. Where do you first begin, when you draw any picture?


Apel. The proposition of the face in just compass, as I can.


Alex. I would begin with the eye, as a light to all the rest.


Apel. If you will paint, as you are a king, your Majesty, may begin where
you please, but as you would be a painter, you must begin with the face.


Alex. Aurelius would in one hour color four faces.


Apel. I marvel in half an hour he did not four.


Alex. Why, is it so easy?


Apel. No but he does it so homely.


Alex. When will you finish Campaspe?


Apel. Never finishe: for always in absolute beauty there is somewhat above
art.


Alex. Why should not I by labor be as cunning as Apelles?


Apel. God shield you should have cause to be so cunning as Apelles.


Alex, Me thinks 4. colors are sufficient to shadow any countenance, and so
it was in the time of Phyaias.


Apel. The^ had me^ fewer fancies, and women not so many favors. For now, if
the hair of her eye brows be black, yet must the hair of her head be
yellowe: the attire of her head must be different from the habit of her body,
else must the picture seem like the blason of ancient armorie, not like the
sweet delight of new found amiablenes. For as in garden knottes diversity of
odours make a more sweet savor, or as in music diverse strings cause a more
delicate consent, so in painting, the more colors, the better counterfeit,
observing black for a ground, and the rest for grace.


Alex. Lend me thy pensil Apelles, I will paint, and thou shall judge.


Apel. Here.


Alex. The coal breaks.


Apel. You lean too hard.


Alex. Now it blackes not.


Apel. You lean too soft.


Alex. This is awry.


Apel. Your eye goes not with your hand.


Alex. Now it is worse.


Apel. Your hand goes not with your mind.


Alex. Nay, if al be too hard or soft, so many rules and regardes, that ones
hand, ones eye, ones mind must all draw together, I had rather be setting of a
battle, then blotting of a bourd. But how have I done here?


Apel. Like a king.


Alex. I think so: but nothing more unlike a Painter. Well Apelles, Campaspe is
finished as I wish, dismiss her, bring presently her counterfeit after me.


Apel. I will.


Alex. Now Hephestion, does not this matter cotton as I would, Campaspe looks
pleasauntlye, liberty will increase her bewty, and my love shall advance her
honor.


Heph. I will not contrary your majesty, for time must we are out that love
has wrought, and reason weane what appetite noursed.


Alex. How stately she passes bye, yet how so berly, a sweet consent in her
countenance with a chaste disdain, desire mingled with coyness, and I cannot
tell how to term it, a cursed yielding modesty.


Heph. Let her pass.


Alex. So she shall for the fairest on the earth.

Exeunt.
Actus tertius, Schaena quinta.
Psyllus, Manes, Apelles. Psyllus. I shall be hanged for tarying so long.


Manes I pray God my master be not flowne before I come.


Psyl. Away Manes, my master does come.


Apel. Where have you bin all this while?


Psyl. No where but here.


Apel. Who was here since my coming?


Psyl. No body.


Apel. Ungracious wag, I perceive you have been a loytering: was Alexander no
body?


Psyl. He was a king, I meant no mean body.


Apel. I will cogell your body for it, and then will I say it was no body,
because it was no honest body. Away in.

Exit Psyllus.
Unfortunate Apelles, and therefore unfortunate, because Apelles. Have thou by
drawing her bewty brought to pass, that thou can scarce draw thine own
breath. And by so much the more have thou increased thy care, by how much the
more thou have showed thy cunning: was it not sufficient to behold the fire and
warm thee, but with Satyrus thou must kiss the fire and burn thee? O
Campaspe, Campaspe, art must yield to nature, reason to appetite, wisdom to
affection Could Pigmalion entreat by prayer to have his Iuory turned into
flesh? and cannot Apelles obtain by plaints to have the picture of his love
changed to life? Is painting so far inferior to caruing? or do thou
Venus, more delight to be hewed with Chizels, then shadowed with colors? what
Pigmalyon, or what Pyrgoteles, or what Lysppus is he, that ever made thy face
so fair or spread thy fame so far as I? unless, Venus, in this thou enuiest
mine art, that in coloring my sweet Campaspe, I have left no place by
cunning to make thee so amiable. But alas, she is the paramour to a prince.
Alexander the monarch of the earth has both her body and affection. For what
is it that kings cannot obtain by prayers, threats and promises? Will not she
think it better to sit under a cloth of estate like a queen, then in a poor
shop like a huswife? and esteem it sweeter to be the concubine of the Lord of
the world, then spouse to a painter in Athe^s? Yes, yes Apelles, thou may
swim against the stream with the Crab, and feed against the wind with the
dear, and pecke against the steel with the Cockatrice: stars are to be
looked at, not reched at, princes to be yielded unto, not contended with:
Campaspe to be honored, not obtained to be painted not possessed of thee. O
fair face, O unhappy hand, and why did thou draw it so fair a face? O
bewtifull countenance, the express image of Venus, but sowhat fresher: the
only pattern of that eternity, which Jupiter dreaming of aslepe, could not
conceive again waki^g Blush Venus, for I am ashamed to end thee. Now must I
paint things impossible for mine art, but agreeable with my affections: deep
and hollow sighs, sad and melancholye thoughts, wounds and slaughters of
conceits, a life posting to death, a death galloping from life, a wavering
constancy, an unsettled resolution, and what not, Apelles? And what but
Apelles? But as they that are shaken with a fever are to be warmed with
clothes, not groans, and as he that melts in a consumption is to be recured
by Colices, not conceits: so the feeding ca^ker of my care, the never dying
worm of my heart is to be killed by counsel, not cries by applying of remedies,
not by replying of reasons. And since in cases desperate there must be used
medicines that are extreme, I will hazard that little life that is left, to
restore the greater part that is lost, and this shall be my first practice: for
wit must work, where authority is not. As Soon as Alexander has viewed this
portraiture, I will by devise give it a blemish, that by that means she may
come again to my shop, and then as good it were to utter my love, and die with
denial, as conceal it, and live in despair.

The Song. Actus quartus, Schaena prima.
Solinus, Psyllus, Granichus, Manes, Diogenes, Populus. Soli. This is the
place, the day, the time, that Diogenes has appointed to fly.


Psyl. I will not loose the flight of so fair a foul as Diogenes is, though
my master cogel my no body, as he threatened.


Grani. What Psyllus, will the beast wag his wings to day?


Psyl. We shall hear: for here comes Manes. Manes will it be?


Manes Be, he were best be as cunning as a Be, or else shortly he will not be
at all.


Grani. How is he furnished to fly, has he feathers?


Manes Thou art an ass, Capons, Geese and Owls, have feathers. He has found
Dedalus old waxen wings, and has been peecing them this month, he is so
broad in the shoulders. O you shall see him cut the air even like a Tortoys.


Soli. Me thinks so wise a man should not be so mad, his body must needs be
to heavy.


Manes Why, he has eaten nothing this seuennight but cork and feathers.


Psyllus Tutch him Manes


Manes He is so light, that he can scarce keep him from flying at midnight.

Populus intrat.
Manes. See they begin to flock, and behold my master bustles himself to
fly.


Diog. Ye wicked and beewtiched Atheneans, whose bodies make the earth to
groan, and whose breathes infect the air with stench. Come ye to see Diogenes
fly? Diogenes comes to see you sink? ye call me dog: so I am, for I long to
gnaw the boanes in your skins. Ye term me an hater of men: no, I am a
hater of your manners. Your lives dissolute, not fearing death, will prove your
deaths desperate, not hoping for life: what do you else in Athens but sleep in
the day, and surfeite in the night: back Gods in the morning with pride, in the
evening belly Gods with gluttony. You flatter kings, and call them Gods:
speak truth of your selves, and confess you are devils. From the Be you
have taken not the honney, but the wax to make your religion, framing it to the
time, not to the truth. Your filthy lust you color under a courtly color of
love, injuries abroad under the title of policies at home, and secret malice
creeps under the name of public justice. You have caused Alexander to dry up
springs and plant Vines, to sow roket and weed endiffe, to sheare sheep, and
shrine foxes. Al conscience is sealed at Athens. Swearing comes of a hot
metal: lying of a quick wit: flattery of a flowing tongue, indecent talk of a
merry disposition. Al things are lawful at Athens. Either you think there are
no Gods, or I must think ye are no men. You build as though you should live for
ever, and surfeit as though you should die to morrow.

None teaches true Philosophy but Aristotle, because he was the kings
schoolemaister. O times, O men, O coruption in manners. Remember that green
grass must turn to dry hay. When you sleep, you are not sure to wake, and
when you rise, not certain to lie down, Look you never so hie, your heads
must lie level with your feet. Thus have I flowne over your disordered lives,
and if you will not amend your manners, I will study to fly further from you,
that I may be nearer to honesty.


Soli. Thou rauest Diogenes, for thy life is different from thy words. Did not
I see thee come out of a brothel house? was it not a shame?


Diog. It was no shame to go out, but a shame to go in.


Grani. It were a good deed Manes, to beat thy master.


Manes You were as good eat my master.


One of the people. Have thou made us all fools, and will thou not fly?


Diog. I tell thee unless thou be honest, I will fly.


People Dog, dog, take a boane.


Diog. Thy father need fear no dogs, but dogs thy father.


People We will tell Alexander, that thou reprouest him behind his back.


Diog. And I will tell him, that you flatter him before his face.


People We will cause all the boys in the street to hiss at thee.


Diog. Indeed I think the Athenians have their children ready for any vice,
because they be Athenians.


Manes Why master, mean you not to fly?


Diog. No Manes, not without wings.


Manes Every body will account you a liar.


Diog. No, I warrant you: for I will always say the Athenians are mischievous.


Psyllus I care not, it was sport ynogh for me to see these old huddles hit
home.


Gran. Nor I.


Psyllus Come, let us go, and hereafter when I mean to rail upon any body
openly, it shall be given out, I will fly,


Exeunt. Actus quartus, Schaena secunda.
Campaspe, Apelles. Campaspe sola. Campaspe, It is hard to judge whether thy
choice be more unwise, or the chance unfortunate. Do thou prefer, but
stay, utter not that in words, which makes thine ears to glow with
thoughts. Tush better thy tongue wagge, then thy heart break. Has a painter
crept further into thy mind then a Prince? Apelles the^ Alexander? Fond wench,
the baseness of thy mind bewraies the meannesse of thy birth. But alas,
affection is a fire which kindles as well in the bramble as in the oak, and
catches hold where it first lights, not where it may best burn. Larkes that
mount aloof in the air, build their neastes below in the earth, and women that
cast their eyes upon kings, may place their hearts upon vassals. A needle will
become thy fingers better then a Lute, and a distaffe is fitter for thy hand
then a Scepter. Ants live safely, til they have gotten wings, and Juniper is
not blown up, till it has gotten an hie top. The mean estate is without
care, as long as it continues without pride. But here comes Apelles, in whom
I would there were the like affection.


Apel. Gentlewoman, the misfortune I had with your picture, will put you to some
pains, to sit again to be painted.


Camp. It is small pains for me to sit still, but infinite for you to draw still.


Apel. No Madame, to painte Venus was a pleasure, but to shadow the sweet
face of Campaspe it is a heaven.


Camp. If your tongue were made of the same flesh that your heart is, your
words would be as your thoughts are, but such a common thing it is amongst
you to comme^d, that oftentimes for fashion sake you call the^ beautiful, whom
you know black.


Apel. What might men do to be believed?


Camp. Whet their tongues on their hearts.


Apel. So they do, and speak as they think.


Camp. I would they did.


Apel. I would they did not.


Camp. Why, would you have them dissemble?


Apel. Not in love, but their love. But will you give me leave to ask you a
question without offense.


Camp. So that you will answer me an other without excuse.


Apel. Whom do you love best in the world.


Camp. He that made me last in the world.


Apel. That was a God.


Camp. I had thought it had been a man. But whom do you honor most Apelles.


Apel. The thing that is lykest you Campaspe.


Camp. My picture?


Apel. I dare not venture upon your person. But come, let us go in: for
Alexander will think it long till we return.


Exeunt. Actus quartus, Schaena tertia,
Clytus, Permenio. Clytus. We hear nothing of our Embassage, a color belike
to bleare our eyes, or ticle our ears, or inflame our hearts. But what does
Alexander in the mean season, but use for Tantara, Sol. Fa. La. for his hard
couch, down beds, for his handful of water, his standinge Cup of wine?


Parme. Clytus, I mislike this new delicacie and pleasing peace: for what else
do we se now then a kind of softnes in every man's mind, Bees do make their
hiues in soldiers helmets, our steedes furnished with foot clothes of gold, in
steed of saddles of steel. More time to be required to scour the rust of
our weapons, the^ there was woo^t to be in subdewing the countries of our
enemies. Sithence Alexander fell from his hard armor to his soft robes
behold the face of his court, youths that were wont to carry devises of
victory in their shieldes, engraue now posies of love in their ringes. They
that were accustomed on trotting horses to charge the enemy with a lance, now
in easy coches ride up and down, to court Ladies: in steed of sword and
target to hazard their lives, use pen and paper to paint their loves. Yea, such
a fear and faintnes is grown in court, that they wish rather to hear the
blowing of a horn to hunt, the^ the sound of a trumpet to fight? O Phillip,
were thou alive to see this alteration, thy men turned to women, thy soldiers
to lovers, gloves worn in velvet, caps in steed of plumes in graven helmets,
thou would either die among them for sorrow, or confound them for anger.


Clitus, Cease Permenio, least in speaking what becomes thee not, thou feel
what likes thee not: truth is never without a scratcht face, whose tongue
although it cannot be cut out, yet must it be tied up.


Parme. It grieueth me not a little for Hephestion, who thirsts for honor,
not ease: but such is his fortune and neerenesse in friendship to Alexander,
that he must lay a pillowe under his head, when he would put a targette in his
hand.

But let us draw in, to see how well it becomes them to tread the measurs in a
dance, that were wont to set the order for a march.


Exeunt. Actus quartus, Schaena quarta.
Apelles, Campaspe. Apel. I have now Campaspe, almost made an end.


Camp. You told me Apelles, you would never end.


Apel. Never end my love: for it shall be eternal.


Camp. That is, neither to have beginning nor ending.


Apel. You are disposed to mistake, I hope you do not mistrust.


Camp. What will you say, if Alexander perceive your love?


Apel. I will say it is no treason to love.


Camp. But how if he will not suffer thee to see my person?


Apel. Then will I gase continually on thy picture.


Camp. That will not feed thy heart.


Apel. Yet shall it fill mine eye: besides the sweet thoughts, the sure
hopes, thy protested faith, will cause me to embrace thy shadow continually in
mine arms, of the which by strong imagination I will make a substance.


Camp. Well, I must be gone: but this assure your self, that I had rather be in
thy shop grinding colors, then in Alexanders court, following higher fortunes.


Campaspe alone. Foolish wensh, what have thou done? that alas which cannot be
undone, and therefore I fear me undone. But content is such a lif, I care not
for abundance. O Apelles, thy love comes from the heart, but Alexanders from
the mouth. The love of Kings is like the blowinge of winds, which whistle
sometimes gentlye among the leaves, and straight ways turn the trees up by
the roots: or fire which warmeth a far off, and burns near hand, or the
sea, which makes men hoyse their seals in a flattering calm, and to cut
their mastes in a rough storm. They place affection by times, by policy, by
appointment, if they frown, who dares call them unconstant? if bewray secrets,
who will term them untrue? if fall to other loves, who trembles not, if he
call them unfaithful. In kings there can be no love, but to Queens: for as
near must they meet in majesty, as they do in affection. It is requisite to
stand aloof from kings love, Jove, and lightening.

Exit. Actus quartus, Schena quinta.
Apelles. Page. Apel. Now Apelles, gather thy wits together: Campaspe is no
less wise then fair, thy self must be no less cunning then faithful. It
is no small matter to be rival with Alexander.


Page. Apelles, you must come away quicklye with the picture, the king thinks
that now you have painted it, you play with it.


Apel. If I would play with pictures, I have enough at home.


Page. None parhaps you like so well.


Apel. It may be I have painted none so well.


Page. I have known many fairer faces.


Apel. And I many better boys.


Exeunt. Actus quintus, Schaena prima.
Diogenes, Syluius, Perim, Milo, Trico, Manes. Sylui. I have brought my sons
Diogenes, to be taught of thee.


Diog. What can thy sons do?


Silui. You shall see their qualities. Dance sirrah.

Then Perim daunceth. How like you this? does he well?


Diog. The better, the worser.


Silui. The Music very good.


Diog. The Musitions very badde, who only study to have their stringes in
tune, never framing their manners to order.


Silui. Now shall you see the other. Tumble sirrah.

Milo tumbleth. How like you this? why do you laugh?


Diog. To see a wagge, that was born to break his neck by distinie, to practice
it by art.


Milo. This dog will bite me I will not be with him.


Diog. Fear not boy, dogs eat no thistles.


Perim. I marvel what dog thou art, if thou be a dog.


Diog. When I am hungry, a mastyue, and when my belly is full a spaniell.


Sylui. Do thou believe that there are any gods, that thou art so dogged?


Diog. I must needs believe there are gods; for I think thee an enemy to them.


Silui. Why so?


Diog. Because thou have taught one of thy sons to rule his legs, and not
to follow learning, the other to bend his body every way, and his mind no way.


Perim. Thou do nothing but snarle, and bark like a dog.


Diog. It is the next way to drive away a thief.


Sylui. Now shall you hear the third, who signs like a Nightingall.


Diog. I care not: for I have heard a Nightingall sing her self.


Syl. Sing sirrah.


Trico sings. Syl. Lo Diogenes, I am sure thou can not do so much.


Diog. But there is never a Thrush but can.


Sylui. What have thou taught Manes thy man:


Diog. To be as unlike as may be thy sons.


Manes He has taught me to fast, lie hard, and run away.


Sylui. How say thou Perim, will thou be with him?


Perim. I, so he will teach me first to run away.


Diog. Thou need not be taught, thy legs are so nimble.


Sylui. How say thou Milo, Will thou be with him?


Diog. Nay, hold your peace, he shall not.


Sylui. Why?


Diog. There is not room enough for him and me both to tumble in one tub.


Sylui. Well Diogenes, I perceive my sons brook not thy manners.


Diog. I thought no less, when they knew my virtues.


Sylui. Farewell Diogenes, thou neededst not have scraped roots, if thou
would have followed Alexander.


Diog. Nor thou have followed Alexander, if thou had scraped roots.


Exeunt. Actus quintus, Schaena secunda.
Apelles alone. I fear me Apelles, that thine eyes have blabbed that, which
thy tongue durst not. What little regard had thou, whilst Alexander viewed
the conterfeite of Campaspe? thou stoodest gazing on her countenance. If he
epsy or but suspect, thou must needs twice perish with his hate, and thine
own love. Thy pale looks when he blushed, thy sad countenance, when he
smiled, thy sighs, when he questioned, may breed in him a ielosie, perchance
a frenzye. O love, I never before knew what thou were and now haste thou made
me that I know not what my self am? Only this I know, that I must endure
intolerable passions, for unknown pleasures. Dispute not the cause wretch,
but yield to it: for better it is to melt with desire, then wrestle with love.
Cast thy self on thy careful bed, be content to live unknown, and die
vnfounde. O Campaspe, I have painted thee in my heart, painted? nay, contrary
to mine art, imprinted, and that in such deep Characters, that nothing can
raze it out, unless it rub thy heart out.

Exit. Actus quintus, Schaena tertia.
Milectus, Phrigius, Lays, Diogenes. Mil. It shall go hard, but this peace shall
bring us some pleasure.


Phry. Down with arms, and up with legs, this is a world for the nonce.


Layis Sweet youths, if you knew what it were to save your sweet blood, you
would not so foolishly go about to spend it. What delight can there be in
gasshing, to make foul scarres in fair faces, and crooked maimes in straight
legs? as though men being borne goodly by nature, would of purpose become
deformed by folly, and all forsooth for a new found term, called valiant, a
word which breeds more quarrels than the sense can commendation.


Mil. It is true Layis, a featherbed has no fellow, good drink makes good
blood, and shall pelting words spill it?


Phry. I mean to enjoy the world, and to draw out my life at the wiredrawers,
not to curtall it off at the cutlers.


Layis You may talk of war, speak big, conquer worlds with great words:
but stay at home, where in steed of Alarums you shall have daunces, for hot
battles with fierce men, gentle skirmishes with fair women. These pewter
coats can never sit so well as Satin dublets. Believe me, you cannot
conceive the pleasure of peace, unless you despise the rudenes of war.


Mil. It is so. But see Diogenes prying over his tub: Diogenes what say thou
to such a morsel?


Diog. I say, I would spit it out of my mouth, because it should not poison my
stomach.


Phry. Thou speak as thou art, it is no meat for dogs.


Diog. I am a dog, and Philosophy rates me from carrion.


Layis Uncivil wretch, whose manners are answerable to thy calling, the time
was thou would have had my company, had it not been, as thou saydst too
dear.


Diog. I remember there was a thing, that I repented me of, and now thou haste
told it: indeed it was too dear of nothing, and thou dear to no body.


Layis Down villain, or I will have thy head broken.


Mile. Will you couch?


Phry. Auant curre. Come sweet Lays, let us go to some place, and possess
peace. But first let us sing, there is more pleasure in tuning of a voice, than
in a volly of shot.


Milec. Now let us make haste, least Alexander find us here.

Exeunt.
Actus quintus, Schaena quarta.
Alexander, Hephestion, Page, Diogenes, Apelles, Campaspe. Alex. Me thinks
Hephestion you are more melancholy than you were accustomed, but I perceive it
is all for Alexander. You can neither brook this peace, nor my pleasure, be of
good cheer, though I wink, I sleep not.


Hephest. Melancholy I am not, nor well content: for I know not how there is
such a rust crept into my bones with this long ease, that I fear I shall not
scowre it out with infinite labors.


Alex. Yes, yes, if all the travails of conquering the world will set either
thy body or mine in tune, we will undertake them. But what think you of
Apelles? Did ye ever see any so perplexed? He neither answered directly to any
question, nor looked steadfastly upon any thing. I hold my life the painter is
in love.


Heph. It may be: for commonly we see it incident in artificers to be enamoured
of their own works, as Archidamus of his wodden dove, Pygmalion of his yuorie
Image, Arachne of his wodde^ swan, especially painters, who playing with their
own concesses, now coveting to draw a glauncing eye, then a roling, now a
wincking, still mending it, never ending it, till they be caught with it, and
then poor souls they kiss the colors with their lips, with which before
they were loath to tainte their fingers.


Alex. I will find it out. Page, go speedely for Apelles, will him to come
hither, and when you see us earnestly in talk, suddenly cry out, Apelles shop
is on fire.


Page It shall be done.


Alex. Forget not your lesson.


Heph. I marvel what your devise shall be.


Alex. The event shall prove.


Heph. I pity the poor painter, if he be in love.


Alex. Pity him not, I pray thee, that severe gravity set aside, what do you
think of love?


Heph. As the Macedonians do of their herb Beet, which looking yellow in the
ground, and black in the hand, think it better seen than touched.


Alex. But what do you imagine it to be?


Heph. A word by supersticio^ thought a God, by use turned to an humor, by
self-will made a flattering madness.


Alex. You are too hard hearted to think so of love. Let us go to Diogenes.
Diogenes, thou may think it somewhat, that Alexander comes to thee again so
soon.


Diog. If you come to learn, you could not come soon enough, if to laugh, you
be come too soon.


Heph. It would better become thee to be more courteous, and frame thy self to
please.


Dio. And you better to be less, if you durst displease.


Ale. What do thou think of the time we have here?


Diog. That we have little and lose much.


Alex. If one be sick what would thou have him do?


Dio. Be sure that he make not his physician his heir.


Alex. If thou might have thy will, how much ground would content thee?


Diog. As much as you in the end must be contented withal.


Alex. What, a world?


Diog. No, the length of my body.


Alex. Hephestion, shall I be a little pleasant with him?


He. You may: but he will be very perverse with you.


Alex. It skills not, I cannot be angry with him. Diogenes, I pray thee what
do thou think of love?


Diog. A little worser than I can of hate.


Alex. And why?


Diog. Because it is better to hate the things, which make to love, than to
love the things, which give occasion of hate.


Alex. Why, be not women the best creatures in the world?


Diog. Next men and Bees.


Alex. What do thou dislike chiefly in a woman?


Diog. One thing.


Alex. What?


Diog. That she is a woman.


Alex. In mine opinion thou were never born of a woman, that thou think so
hardly of women. But now comes Apelles, who I am sure is as far from thy
thoughts, as thou art from his cunning. Diogenes, I will have thy cabin removed
nerer to my court, because I will be a philosopher.


Diog. And when you have done so, I pray you remove your court further from my
cabin, because I will not be a courtier.


Alex. But here comes Apelles. Apelles, what piece of work have you now in
hand?


Apel. None in hand if it like your majesty: but I am devising a platform in
my head.


Alex. I think your hand put it in your head. Is it nothing about Venus?


Apel. No, but some thing above Venus.


Page Apelles, Apelles, look about you, your shop is on fire.


Apel. Ay me, if the picture of Campaspe be burnt, I am undone.


Ale. Stay Apelles, no haste, it is your heart is on fire, not your shop, and if
Came. hang there, I would she were burnt. But have you the picture of Campaspe?
Belike you love her well, that you care not though al be lost, so she be safe.


Apel. Not love her: but your majesty knows that painter^ in their last works
are said to excel themselves, and in this I have so much pleased my self,
that the shadow as much delights me being an artificer, as the substance
does others that are amorous.


Alex. You lay your colors grossly, though I could not paint in your shop, I
ca^ spy into your excuse. Be not ashamed Apelles, it is a gentleman's sport to
be in love. Call hither Campaspe. Me thinks I might have bin made privy to
your affection, though my counsel had not been necessary, yet my countenance
might have bin thought requisite. But Apelles forsooth loves under hand, yea
and under Alexanders nose, and: but I say no more.


Apel. Apelles loves not so: but he lives to do as Alexander will.


Alex. Campas here is news. Apel. is in love with you.


Camp. It pleases your Majesty to say so.


Alex. Hephestion, I will try her too. Campaspe, for the good qualities I know
in Apelles, and the virtue I see in you, I am determined you shall enjoy one
another. How say you Campaspe, would you say I?


Came. Your handmaid must obey, if you command.


Alex. Think you not Hephestion that she would feign be commanded?


Hep. I am no thought catcher, but I guess unhappily.


Alex. I will not enforce marriage, where I cannot compel love.


Came. But your majesty may move a question, where you be willing to have a
match.


Alex. Believe me Hephestion, these parties are agreed, they would have me both
priest and witness. Apelles. take Campaspe, why move ye not? Campaspe, take
Apelles will it not be? If you be ashamed one of the other, by my consent you
shall never come together. But dissemble not Campaspe, do you love Apelles?


Camp. Pardon my Lord, I love Apelles.


Alex. Apelles, it were a shame for you, being loved so openly of so fair a
virgin, to say the contrary. Do you love Campaspe?


Apel. Only Campaspe.


Alex. Two loving worms Hephestion, I perceive Alexander cannot subdue the
affections of men, though co^quer their countries. Love falls like a dew
as well upon the low grass, as upon the high Caedar. Sparks have their heat,
Antes their gall, Flies their spleen. Well, enjoy one another, I give her thee
fra^ckly Apelles. Thou shall see that Alexander makes but a toy of love, and
leads affection in fetters, using fa^cie as a fool to make him sport, or a
minsttell to make him merry. It is not the amorous glaunce of an eye can settle
an idle thought in the heart, no no, it is childrens game, a life for
seamesters and scholars, the one pricking in cloutes have nothing else to
think on, the other picking fancies out of books, have little else to
marvel at. Go Apelles, take with you your Campaspe, Alexander is cloyed with
looking on that, which thou wondrest at.


Apel. Thanks to your majesty on bended knee, you have honored Apelles.


Camp. Thanks withbowed heart, you have blessed Campaspe.

Exeunt.
Alex. Page go warn Clytus and Parmenio and the other Lords to be in a
readiness, let the trumpet sound, strike up the drum, and I will presently
into Persia. How now Hephestion, is Alexander able to resist love as he list?


Heph. The conquering of Thebes was not so honorable as the subduing of these
thoughts.


Alex. It were a shame Alexander should desire to command the world, if he
could not command himself. But come let us go, I will try whether I can
better bear my hand with my heart, than I could with mine eye. And good
Hephestion, when all the world is won, and every country is thine and mine,
either find me out another to subdue, or of my word I will fall in love.

Exeunt.
The Epilogue at the Black Friars.
Where the Rainbow touches the tree, no Caterpillars will hang on the
leaves: where the Gloworm creeps in the night, no Addar will go in the day. We
hope in the ears where our travails be lodged, no carping shall harbor in
those tongues. Our exercises must be as your judgment is, resembling water,
which is always of the same color into what it runs. In the Troyan horse
lay couched soldiers with children, and in heaps of many words we fear
diverse unfit, among some allowable. But as Demosthenes with often breathing up
the hill amend his stammering, so we hope with sundry labors against the
hair, to correct our studies. If the tree be blasted that blossoms, the fault
is in the wind, and not in the root, and if our pastimes be misliked, that
have been allowed, you must impute it to the malice of others, and not our
endeavor. And so we rest in good case if you rest well content.

The Epilogue at the Court.
WE cannot tell whether we are fallen among Diomedes birds or his horses, the
one received some men with sweet notes, the other bitte al men with sharp
teeth. But as Homers Gods conveyed them into clouds, whom they would have kept
from curses, and as Venus, least Advnis should be pricked with the stings of
Adders, covered his face with the wings of Swans: so we hope, being shielded
with your highness countenance, we shall, though hear the neighing, yet not
feel the kicking of those iades, and receive, though no praise (which we
cannot deserve) yet a pardon, which in all humility we desire. As yet we
cannot tell what we should term our labors, iron or bullyon, only it
belongs to your majesty to make the^ fit either for the forge or the mynt,
current by the stamp, or counterfeit by the anuill. For as nothing is to be
called white, unless it had bin named white by the first creature, so can
there be nothing thought good in the opinion of others, unless it be
christened good by the judgment of your self. For our selves again, we are
like these torches wax, of which being in your highness hands, you may make
Doves or Vultures, Roses or Nettles, Laurel for a garland, or Elder for a
disgrace.

FINIS.

