THE FORM AND MANNER OF MAKING and Consecrating BISHOPS, PRIESTS and DEACONS.



Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty, and by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. Anno, 1633.

THE PREFACE.
IT is evident unto all men, diligently reading holy Scripture, and ancient
Authors, that from the Apostles time, there has been these orders of
Ministers in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, which offices were
evermore had in such reverent estimation, that no man by his own private
authority, might presume to execute any of them, except he were first called,
tried, examined and known to have such qualities, as were requisite for the
same, and also by public prayer, with imposition of hands, approved and
admitted thereunto. And therefore, to the intent these orders should be
continued, and reverently used and esteemed in this Church of England, it is
requisite that no man (not being at this present, Bishop, Priest, nor Deacon)
shall execute any of them, except he be called, tried, examined, and admitted,
according to the form hereafter following. And none shall be admitted a
Deacon, except he be twenty one years of age at the least. And every man
which is to be admitted a Priest, shall be full four and twenty years old.
And every man which is to be consecrated a Bishop, shall be fully thirty years
of age. And the Bishop knowing, either by himself, or by sufficient testimony,
any person to be a man of virtuous conversation, and without crime, and after
examination and trial, finding him learned in the Latin tongue, and
sufficiently instructed in holy Scripture, may upon a Sunday or Holy day, in
the face of the Church, admit him a Deacon, in such manner and form as
hereafter follows.

The Form and manner of Ordering of DEACONS.
FIrst, when the day appointed by the Bishop is come, there shall be an
exhortation, declaring the duty and office of such as come to be admitted
Ministers, how necessary such orders are in the Church of Christ, and also how
the people ought to esteem them in their vocation.

After the exhortation ended, the Archdeacon or his Deputy, shall present such
as shall come to the Bishop to be admitted, saying these words.

Reverend Father in God, I present unto you these persons present, to be
admitted Deacons.

The Bishop. TAke heed that the persons whom ye present unto us, be apt and
meet, for their learning and godly conversation, to exercise their ministry
duly, to the honor of God, and edifying of his Church.


The Archdeacon shall answer. I Have enquired of them, and also examined them,
and think them so to be.


And the Bishop shall say unto the people. BRethren, if there be any of you,
who knows any impediment or notable crime, in any of these persons presented
to be ordered Deacons, for the which he ought not to be admitted to the same,
let him come forth in the Name of God, and show what the crime or impediment is.


And if any great crime or impediment be objected, the Bishop shall surcease
from ordering that person, until such time as the party accused shall try
himself clear of that crime.

Then the Bishop commending such as shall be found meet to be ordered, to the
prayers of the Congregation, with the Clearkes and people present, shall say or
sing the Letany, as follows, with the prayers.

The Ordering of Deacons.
The Letany and Suffrages.
O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: Spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all blindness of heart, from pride, vain glory, and hypocrisy, from
envy, hatred and malice, and all uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh and the devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence, and famine, from battle
and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy,
from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and Commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation, by thy holy Nativity and
Circumcision, by thy Baptism, Fasting, and temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony and bloody sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious
Death and Burial, by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and by the
coming of the holy Ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of Judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us (O Lord God) and that it may please
thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy Servant Charles, our most
gracious King and Governor.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear and love, and
that he may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and
glory.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory
over all his enemies.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and preserve our gracious Queen Mary,
Prince Charles, the Lady Mary, the Lady Elizabeth the Kings only sister, and
her issue.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors and Ministers of
the Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy Word, and that both by
their preaching and living, they may set it forth, and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Counsel, and all the
Nobility, with grace, wisdom and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute Justice, and to maintain truth.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all Nations, unity, peace, and concord.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth
the fruits of the Spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have
erred, and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat
down Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help and comfort, all that be in danger,
necessity, and tribulation.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show thy
pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and
widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors and slanderers,
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences, and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy word.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world.

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ search for the sick, poor, and impotent people of the Parish, to
intimate their estates, names and places where they dwell unto the Curate, that
by his exhortation they may be relieved by the Parish, or other convenient
alms: will you do this gladly and willingly?

Answer. I will so do by the help of God.


The Bishop. Will you apply all your diligence to frame and fashion your own
lives, and the lives of your family, according to the doctrine of Christ, and
to make both your selves and them, as much as in you lies, wholesome examples
of the flock of Christ?


Answer. I will so do, the Lord being my helper.


The Bishop. Will you reuerendly obey your Ordinary and other chief Ministers
of the Church, and them to whom the government and charge is committed over
you, following with a glad mind and will, their godly admonitions?


Answer. I will endeavor my self, the Lord being my helper.


Then the Bishop laying his hands severally upon the head of every of them,
shall say,

Take thou authority to execute the office of a Deacon in the Church of God
committed unto thee: In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
Amen.

Then shall the Bishop deliver to eueryone of them the new Testament, saying,

Take thou authority to read the Gospel in the Church of God, and to preach
the same, if thou be thereto ordinarily commanded.

Then one of them appointed by the Bishop, shall read the Gospel of that day.

Then shall the Bishop proceed to the Communion, and all that are ordered shall
tarry and receive the holy Communion the same day with the Bishop.

The Communion ended, after the last Collect, and immediately before the
Benediction, shall be said this Collect following.

Almighty God giver of all good things, which of thy great goodness have
vouchsafed to accept and take these thy servants unto the offices of Deacons in
thy Church: make them we beseech thee (O Lord) to be modest, humble, and
constant in their ministration, to have a ready will to observe all spiritual
discipline, that they having always the testimony of a good conscience, and
continuing ever stable and strong in thy Son Christ, may so well use
themselves in this inferior office, that they may be found worthy to be
called unto the higher ministeries in thy Church, through the same thy Son
our Savior Christ, to whom be glory and honor world without end. Amen.

And here it must be showed unto the Deacon, that he must continue in that
office of a Deacon, the space of a whole year at the least (except for
reasonable causes it be otherwise seen to his Ordinary) to the intent he may
be perfect, and well expert in the things appertaining to the Ecclesiastical
administration, in executing whereof, if he befound faithful and diligent, he
may be admitted by his Diocesan, to the order of Priesthood.

The form of ordering of Priests.
When the exhortation is ended, then shall follow the Communion. And for the
Epistle, shall be read out of the twentieth Chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles, as follows.

FRom Mileto, Paul sent messengers to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the
Congregation: which when they were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know
that from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been
with you at all seasons, serving the Lord with all humbleness of mind, and
with many tears and temptations, which happened unto me by the layings a wait
of the Jews, because I would keep back nothing that was profitable unto you,
but to show you, and teach you openly throughout every house, witnessing both
to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, the repentance that is toward GOD, and
the faith which is toward our Lord Jesus. And now behold, I go bound in the
spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall come on me there, but
that the holy Ghost witnesses in every city, saying that bands and troubles
abide me. But none of these things move me, neither is my life dear unto my
self, that I might fulfill my course with joy, and the ministration of the
word, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the
grace of God. And now behold, I am sure that henceforth ye all (through whom I
have gone preaching the kingdom of God) shall see my face no more. Wherefore I
take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men: For I
have spared no labor, but have showed you all the counsel of God. Take heed
therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, among whom the holy Ghost
has made you overseers, to rule the Congregation of God, which he has
purchased with his blood. For I am sure of this, that after my departing shall
grievous woolues enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Moreover, of your
own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after
them. Therefore awake, and remember that by the space of three years, I ceased
not to warn every one of you might and day with tears.

And now brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is
able to build further, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified. I have desired no man's silver, gold, or vesture: Yea, you know your
selves, that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and unto them that
were with me. I have showed you all things, how that so laboring, ye ought to
receive the weak, and to remember the words of our Lord Jesus, how that he
said, it is more blessed to give, then to receive.

Or else this third Chapter, of the first Epistle to Timothy.

THis is a true saying, If any man desire the office of a Bishop, 1. Tim. 3.
This when Deacons and Priests are made both in one day.
he desires an honest work. A Bishop therefore must be blameless, the
husband of one wife, diligent, sober, discreet, a keeper of hospitality, apt to
teach, not given to overmuch wine, no fighter, not greedy of filthy lucre, but
gentle, abhorring fighting, abhorring covetousness, one that rules well his
own house, one that has children in subjection with all reverence. For if a
man cannot rule his own house, how shall he care for the Congregation of God?
He may not be a young Scholar, lest he swell and fall into the judgment of the
evil speaker. He must also have a good report of them which are without, lest
he fall into rebuke and snare of the evil speaker.

Likewise must the Ministers be honest, not double tongued, not given unto
much wine, neither greedy of filthy lucre, but holding the mystery of the
faith, with a pure conscience: and let them first be proved, and then let them
minister, so that no man be able to reprove them.

Even so must their wives be honest, not evil speakers: but sober, and
faithful in all things. Let the Deacons be the husbands of one wife, and such
as rule their children well, and their own households: For they that minister
well, get themselves a good degree, and great liberty in the faith, which is in
Christ Jesus. These things write I unto thee, trusting to come shortly unto
thee: but if I tarry long, that then thou may have yet knowledge, how thou
ought to behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Congregation of
the living God, the pillar and ground of truth.

And without doubt, great is that mystery of godliness: God was showed in the
flesh, was justified in the Spirit, was seen among the Angels, was preached
unto the Gentiles, was believed on in the world, and received up in glory.

After this shall be read for the Gospel, a piece of the last Chapter of
Matthew, as follows.

Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven
and in earth: Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son. and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you
always, even until the end of the world.

Or else this that follows, out of the tenth Chapter of John.

Verily, verily I say unto you, He that enters not in by the door into the
sheepefold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a
murderer. But he that enters in by the door, is the shepherd of the sheep:
to him the porter opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his
own sheep by name, and leads them out. And when he has sent forth his
own sheep, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him, for they know
his voice. A stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him, for they
know not the voice of strangers. This proverb spoke Jesus unto them, but they
understood not what things they were which he spoke unto them. Then said Jesus
unto them again, Verily, verily I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep:
and all (even as many as came before me) are thieves and murderers, but the
sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall
be safe, and go in and out, and find pasture. A thief comes not but for to
steal, kill, and to destroy. I am come, that they might have life, and that
they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd. A good shepherd
gives his life for the sheep. An hired servant, and he which is not the
shepherd (neither the sheep are his own) sees the wolf coming, and leaves
the sheep, and flees, and the wolf catches and scatters the sheep. The
hired servant flees, because he is an hired servant, and cares not for the
sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. As
my Father knows me, even so know I also my Father. And I give my life for the
sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also must I
bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold, and one
shepherd.

Or else this, of the xx. Chapter of John.

THe same day at night, which was the first day of the Sabboths, when the
doors were shut (where the Disciples were assembled together, for fear of the
Jews) came Jesus, and stood in the midst, and said unto them, Peace be unto
you, and when he had so said, he showed unto them his hands and his side. Then
were the Disciples glad, when they saw the Lord. Then said Jesus unto them
again, Peace be unto you: Is my Father sent me, even so send I you also. And
when he had said those words, he breathed on them, and said unto them, Receive
ye the holy Ghost. Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them:
and whosoeuers sins ye retain, they are retained.

When the Gospelis ended, then shall be said or sung.

COme holy Ghost eternal God, proceeding from above:

Both from the Father, and the Son, the God of peace and love.

Visit our minds, and into us, thy heavenly grace inspire:

That in all truth and godliness, we may have true desire.

Thou art the very Comforter, in all woe and distress:

The heavenly gift of God most high, which no tongue can express.

The fountain and the lively spring, of joy celestial:

The fire so bright, the love so clear, and Unction spiritual.

Thou in thy gifts art manifold, whereby Christ's Church does stand:

In faithful hearts writing thy Law, the finger of Gods hand.

According to thy promise made, thou give speech of grace:

That through thy help, the praise of God, may sound in every place.

O holy Ghost into our wits send down thy heavenly light:

Kindle our hearts with fervent love to serve God day and night.

Strength and stablish all our weakness, so feeble and so frail:

That neither flesh, the world, nor devil, against us do prevail.

Put back our enemy far from us, and grant us to obtain,

Peace in our hearts, with God and man, without grudge or disdain.

And grant, O Lord, that thou being, our leader and our guide:

We may eschew the snares of sin, and from thee never slide.

To us such plenty of thy grace, good Lord, grant we thee pray:

That thou may be our Comforter at the last dreadful day.

Of all strife and dissension, O Lord, dissolve the bands:

And make the knots of peace and love, throughout all Christian lands.

Grant us, O Lord, through thee to know, the Father most of might:

That of his dear beloved Son, we may attain the sight,

And that with perfect faith also we may acknowledge thee:

The Spirit of them both always, one God in persons three.

Laud and praise be to the Father, and to the Son equal:

And to the holy Spirit also, one God coeternall.

And pray we that the only Son, vouchsafe his Spirit to send:

To all that do profess his Name, unto the worlds end. Amen.

And then the Archdeacon shall present unto the Bishop, all them that shall
receive the order of Priesthood that day, the Archdeacon saying,

Reverend Father in God, I present unto you these persons, present, to be
admitted to the order of Priesthood.

Cum interrogatione and responsione, vt in ordine Diaconatus.

And then the Bishop shall say to the people.

GOod people, these be they whom we purpose, God willing, to receive this day
unto the holy office of Priesthood: For after due examination, we find not to
the contrary, but that they be lawfully called to their function and ministry,
and that they be persons meet for the same: but yet if there be any of you,
which knows any impediment, or notable crime of any of them, for the which
he ought not to be received into this holy ministry, now in the Name of God
declare the same.

And if any great crime or impediment be objected.

Vt supra in Ordine Diaconatus, vsque ad finem Letaniae, cum hac Collecta.

ALmighty God, giver of al good things, which by thy holy Spirit have appointed
diverse orders of Ministers in thy Church, mercifully behold these thy servants,
now called to the office of Priesthood, and replenish them so with the truth
of thy doctrine, and innocence of life, that both by word and good example,
they may faithfully serve thee in this office, to the glory of thy Name, and
profit of thy Congregation, through the merits of our Savior Jesus Christ, who
lives and reigns with thee, and the holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

Then the Bishop shall minister unto every one of them the Oath concerning the
Kings Supremacy, as it is set forth in the order of Deacons. And that done, he
shall say unto them which are appointed to receive the said office, as
hereafter follows.

YOu have heard brethren, as well in your private examination, as in the
exhortation, and in the holy Lessons taken out of the Gospel and of the
writings of the Apostles, of what dignity, and of how great importance this
office is (whereunto ye be called.) And now we exhort you in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to have in remembrance into how high a dignity, and to how
chargeable an office ye be called, that is to say, the messengers, the
watchmen, the Pastors and the Stewards of the Lord, to teach, to premonish, to
feed, and provide for the Lords family, to seek for Christ's sheep that be
dispersed abroad, and for his children which be in the midst of this naughty
world, to be saved through Christ for ever. Have always therefore printed in
your remembrance, how great a treasure is committed to your charge: for they be
the sheep of Christ, which he bought with his death, and for whom he shed his
blood. The Church and Congregation whom you must serve, is his spouse and his
body.

And if it shall chance the same Church, or any member thereof, to take any hurt
or hinderance, by reason of your negligence, ye know the greatness of the
fault, and also of the horrible punishment which will ensue. Wherefore,
consider with your selves the end of your ministry, toward the children of
God, toward the spouse and body of Christ, and see that you never cease your
labor, your care, and diligence, until you have done all that lies in you,
according to your bounden duty, to bring all such as are, or shall be committed
to your charge, unto that agreement in faith and knowledge of God, and to that
ripeness and perfectnes of age in Christ, that there be no place left among
you, either of error in Religion, or for viciousness in life.

Then, forasmuch as your office is both of so great excellency, and of so
great difficulty, ye see with how great care and study ye ought to apply your
selves, as well that you may show your selves kind to that Lord who has placed
you in so high a dignity, as also to be ware that neither you your selves
offend, neither be occasion that other offend. Howbeit, ye cannot have a mind
and a will thereto of your selves, for that power and ability is given of God
alone. Therefore ye see how ye ought and have need earnestly to pray for his
holy spirit. And seeing that you cannot by any other means, compass the doing
of so weighty a work pertaining to the salvation of man, but with doctrine and
exhortation, taken out of the holy Scriptures, and with a life agreeable unto
the same: Ye perceive how studious ye ought to be in reading and in learning
the Scriptures, and in framing the manners, both of your selves, and of them
that specially pertain unto you, according to the rule of the same Scriptures:
And for this self same cause, ye see how ye ought to forsake and set aside (as
much as you may) all worldly cares and studies.

We have good hope, that you have well weighed and pondered these things with
your selves, long before this time, and that you have clearly determined, by
Gods grace, to give your selves wholly to this vocation, whereunto it has
pleased God to call you, so that (as much as lies in you) you apply your
selves wholly to this one thing, and draw all your cares and studies this way,
and to this end. And that you will continually pray for the heavenly assistance
of the holy Ghost from God the Father, by the mediation of our only Mediator
and Savior Jesus Christ, that by daily reading and weighing of the Scriptures,
ye may so wax riper and stronger in your ministry: And that ye may so
endeavor your selves from time to time, to sanctify the lives of you and
yours, and to fashion them after the rule and doctrine of Christ: And that ye
may be wholesome and godly examples and patterns, for the rest of the
congregation to follow: and that this present congregation of Christ here
assembled, may also understand your minds and wills in these things: and that
this your promise shall more move you to do your duties, ye shall answer
plainly to these things, which we in the name of the congregation shall demand
of you touching the same.

Do you think in your heart that you be truly called according to the will
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the order of this Church of England, to the
ministry of Priesthood?

Answer. I think it.


The Bishop. Be you persuaded that the holy scriptures contain sufficiently
all doctrine required of necessity for eternal salvation, through faith in
Jesus Christ? And are you determined with the said Scriptures to instruct the
people committed to your charge, and to teach nothing (as required of
necessity to eternal salvation) but that you shall be persuaded may be
concluded, and proved by the Scripture?


Answer. I am so persuaded, and have so determined by Gods grace.


The Bishop. Will you then give your faithful diligence, always so to
minister the doctrine and Sacraments, and the discipline of Christ, as the Lord
has commanded, and as this Realm has received the same, according to the
Commandments of God, so that you may teach the people committed to your cure
and charge, with all diligence to keep and observe the same?


Answer. I will so do, by the help of the Lord.


The Bishop. Will you be ready with all faithful diligence to banish and
drive away all erroneous and strange doctrines, contrary to Gods word, and to
use both public and private monitions and exhortations, as well to the sick,
as to the whole, within your cures, as need shall require, and occasion be
given?


Answer. I will, the Lord being my helper.


The Bishop. Will you be diligent in prayers, and in reading of the holy
Scriptures, and in such studies as help to the knowledge of the same, laying
aside the study of the world and the flesh?


Answer. I will endeavor my self so to do, the Lord being my helper.


The Bishop. Will you be diligent to frame and fashion your own selves, and
your families, according to the doctrine of Christ, and to make both your
selves and them (as much as in you lies) wholesome examples and spectacles to
the flock of Christ?


Answer. I will apply my self, the Lord being my helper.


The Bishop. Will you maintain and set forwards (as much as lies in you)
quietness, peace, and love, among all Christian people, and specially among them
that are, or shall be committed to your charge?


Answer. I will so do, the Lord being my helper.


The Bishop. Will you reverently obey your Ordinary, and other chief
Ministers, unto whom the government and charge is committed over you, following
with a glad mind and will, their godly admonitions, and submitting your selves
to their godly judgments?


Answer. I will so do, the Lord being my helper.


Then shall the Bishop say.

ALmighty God, who has given you this will to do all these things, grant also
unto you strength and power to perform the same, that he may accomplish his
work which he has begun in you, until the time he shall come at the latter
day, to judge the quick and the dead.


After this, the Congregation shall be desired, secretly in their prayers, to
make humble supplications to God for the aforesaid things: for the which
prayers, there shall be a certain space kept in silence.

That done, the Bishop shall pray in this wise.

Let us pray.

ALmighty God, and heavenly Father, which of thine infinite love, and goodness
toward us, have given to us thy only and most dear beloved Son Jesus Christ
to be our redeemer and author of everlasting life, who after he had made
perfect our redemption by his death, and was ascended into heaven, sent abroad
into the world his Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Doctors, and Pastors, by
whose labor and ministry, he gathered together a great flock in all the
parts of the world, to set forth the eternal praise of thy holy Name. For
these so great benefits of thy eternal goodness, and for that thou have
vouchsafed to call these thy servants here present, to the same office and
ministry of salvation of mankind, we render unto thee most hearty thanks,
we worship and praise thee, and we humbly beseech thee, by the same thy Son,
to grant unto us all, which either here, or elsewhere call upon thy Name, that
we may show our selves thankful to thee, for these and all other thy benefits
and that we may daily increase and go forwards, in the knowledge and faith of
thee and thy Son, by the holy Spirit. So that as well by these thy Ministers,
as by them to whom they shall be appointed Ministers, thy holy Name may be
always glorified, and thy blessed kingdom enlarged, through the same thy
Son our Lord Jesus Christ, which lives and reigns with thee, in the unity
of the same holy Spirit, world without end. Amen.


When this prayer is done, the Bishop with the Priests present, shall lay their
hands severally upon the head of every one that receives Orders: The Receivers
humbly kneeling upon their knees, and the Bishop saying.

Receive the holy Ghost: whose sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven:
and whose sins thou do retain, they are retained: and be thou a faithful
dispenser of the word of God, and of his holy Sacraments. In the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen.

The Bishop shall deliver to every one of them the Bible in his hand, saying.

TAke thou authority to preach the word of God, and to minister the holy
Sacraments in this Congregation, where thou shall be so appointed.

When this is done, the Congregation shall sing the Creed, and also they shall
go to the Communion, which all they that receive Orders shall take together,
and remain in the same place where the hands were laid upon them, until such
time as they have received the Communion.

The Communion being done, after the last collect, and immediately before the
Benediction, shall be said this Collect.

MOst merciful Father, we beseech thee, so to send upon these thy servants thy
heavenly blessing, that they may be clad about with all justice, and that thy
word spoken by their mouths, may have such success, that it may never be
spoken in vain. Grant also that we may have grace to hear, and receive the
same as thy most holy word, and the means of our salvation, that in all our
words and deeds, we may seek thy glory, and the increase of thy kingdom,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

And if the Order of Deacons and Priesthood be given both upon one day, then
shall all things at the holy Communion be used, as they are appointed at the
Ordering of Priests: Saving that for the Epistle, the whole third Chapter of
the first to Timothy shall be read, as it is set out before in the order of
Priests. And immediately after the Epistle, the Deacons shall be ordered. And it
shall suffice the Letany to be said once.

The Form of Consecrating of an Archbishop, or Bishop.
At the Communion.
The Epistle.
THis is a true saying, If a man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires an
honest work. A Bishop therefore must be blameless, the husband of one wife,
diligent, sober, discreet, a keeper of hospitality, apt to teach, not given to
overmuch wine, no fighter, not greedy of filthy lucre, but gentle, abhorring
fighting, abhorring covetousness, one that rules well his own house, one that
has children in subjection with all reverence. For if a man cannot rule his
own house, how shall he care for the Congregation of God? He may not be a
young scholar, lest he swell: and fall into the judgment of the evil
speaker. He must also have a good report of them which are without, lest he
fall into rebuke, and the snare of the evil speaker.

The Gospel.
Jesus said to Simon Peter, Simon Iohanna, love thou me, more then these?
He said unto him. Yea, Lord, thou know that I love thee: he said to him,
Feed my Lambs. He said to him again the second time, Simon Iohanna, love
thou me? He said unto him, Yea, Lord, thou know that I love thee: he said
Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

And lead us not into temptation.

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The Versicle.

O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

Answer.

Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers that we
make before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress
us: and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of
the devil or man works against us, be brought to naught, and by the
providence of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants being
hurt by no persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy Names sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord arise, help us and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O Son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ: graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

The Versicle.

O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us.

Answer.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.

WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities,
and for the glory of thy Names sake, turn from us all those evils that we
most righteously have deserved: and grant that in all our troubles we may put
our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in
holiness and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only
Mediator and Advocate Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, which have given us grace at this time with one accord to make
our common supplications unto thee, and do promise that when two or three
be gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their requests: fulfill now,
O Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come life everlasting. Amen

Then shall be said also this that follows.

ALmighty God, which by thy divine providence have appointed diverse orders of
Ministers in the Church, and did inspire thine holy Apostles, to choose unto
this order of Deacons, the first Martyr S. Stephen, with other: mercifully
behold these thy servants, now called to the like office and administration,
replenish them so with the truth of thy doctrine, and innocence of life, that
both by word and good example, they may faithfully serve thee in this office to
the glory of thy Name, and profit of the Congregation, through the merits of
our Savior Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee, and the holy Ghost,
now and for ever. Amen.

Then shall be sung or said the Communion of the day, saving the Epistle shall
be read out of Timothy, as follows.

LIke wise must the Ministers be honest, not double tongued, nor given unto
much wine, neither greedy of filthy lucre, but holding the mystery of the
faith, with a pure conscience: and let them first be proved, and then let them
minister, so that no man be able to reprove them. Even so must their wives be
honest, not evil speakers, but sober, and faithful in all things. Let the
Deacons be the husbands of one wife, and such as rule their children well, and
their own households: For they that minister well, get themselves a good
degree, and a great liberty in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

These things write I unto thee, trusting to come shortly unto thee: but and if
I tarry long, that then thou may yet have knowledge how thou ought to
behave thy self in the house of God, which is the congregation of the living
God, the pillar and ground of truth. And without doubt, great is that mystery
of godliness. God was showed in the flesh, was justified in the spirit, was
seen among the Angels, was preached unto the Gentiles, was believed on in the
world, and received up in glory.

Or else this out of the sixth of the Acts.

THen the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples together, and said, It
is not meet that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables. Wherefore
brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest report, and full of the
holy Ghost and wisdom, to whom we may commit this business: but we will give
our selves continually to prayer, and to the administration of the word. And
that saying pleased the whole multitude. And they chose Stephen, a man full of
faith, and full of the holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and
Timon, and Permenas, and Nicholas, a convert of Antioch. These they set before
the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. And the
word of God increased, and the number of the Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem
greatly, and a great company of the Priests were obedient unto the faith.

And before the Gospel, the Bishop sitting in a chair, shall cause the Oath of
the Kings supremacy, and against the power and authority of all foreign
Potentates, to be ministered unto every of them that are to be ordered.

The Oath of the Kings Soueraignetie.
I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Temporal, and that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate, has or ought to have any jurisdiction, power, superiority,
preeminence, or authority Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual within this Realm,
and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign Jurisdictions,
Powers, Superiorities, and authorities: and do promise that from henceforth, I
shall bear faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and
lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preeminences and Authorities, granted or belonging to the Kings
Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm, so help me God, and the Contents of this Book.

Then shall the Bishop examine every one of them that are to be ordered, in
the presence of the people, after this manner following,

Do you trust that you are inwardly moved by the holy Ghost to take upon you
this office and ministration, to serve God, for the promoting of his glory, and
the edifying of his people?


Answer. I trust so.


The Bishop. Do you think that ye truly be called according to the will of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the due order of this Realm, to the Ministry of
the Church?


Answer. I think so.


The Bishop. Do you unfeignedly believe all the Canonical Scriptures of the
old and new Testament?


Answer. I do believe.


The Bishop. Will you diligently read the same unto the people assembled in
the Church, where you shall be appointed to serve?


Answer. I will.


The Bishop. IT appertains to the office of a Deacon in the Church, where he
shall be appointed, to assist the Priest in divine Service, and specially when
he ministers the holy Communion, and to help him in distribution thereof, and
to read holy Scriptures and Homilies in the Congregation, and to instruct the
youth in the Catechism, to Baptize and to Preach, if he be admitted thereto by
the Bishop. And furthermore, it is his office, where provision is so made, to
search said unto him, Feed my sheep. He said unto him the third time, Simon
Iohanna, love thou me? Peter was sorry, because he said unto him the third
time, Love thou me. And he said unto him, Lord thou know all things, thou
know that I love thee. Jesus said unto him, Feed my sheep.


Or else out of the tenth Chapter of John: as before in the order of Priests.

After the Gospel and Creed ended: first the elected Bishop shall be presented
by two Bishops, unto the Archbishop of that Province, or to some other Bishop
appointed by his commission: the Bishops that present him, saying,

MOst reverend Father in God, we present unto you this godly and well learned
man to be consecrated Bishop.

Then shall the Archbishop demand the Kings mandate, for the consecration, and
cause it to be read, and the Oath touching the knowledge of the Kings
Supremacy, shall be ministered to the persons elected, as it is set out in the
order of Deacons. And then shall be ministered the Oath of due obedience unto
the Archbishop, as follows.

The Oath of due obedience to the Archbishop.
IN the Name of God, Amen. I. N. chosen Bishop of the Church and See of N. do
profess and promise all due reverence and obedience to the Archbishop, and to
the Metropoliticall Church of N. and to their successors: so help me God,
through Jesus Christ.

This Oath shall not be made at the Consecration of an Archbishop.

Then the Archbishop shall move the Congregation present, to pray, saying thus
to them,

BRethren, it is written in the Gospel of S. Luke, that our Savior Christ
continued the whole night in prayer, or ever that he did choose and send forth
his twelve Apostles. It is written also in the Acts of the Apostles, that the
Disciples which were at Antioch did fast and pray, or ever they laid hands
upon, or sent forth Paul and Barnabas. Let us therefore, following the example
of our Savior Christ and his Apostles, first fall to prayer, or that we admit
and send forth this person presented unto us, to the work whereunto we trust
the holy Ghost has called him.

And then shall be said the Letanie, as before in the order of Deacons.

And after this place, That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, etc.
he shall say.

That it may please thee to bless this our brother elected, and to send thy
grace upon him, that he may duly execute the office whereunto he is called,
to the edifying of thy Church, and to the honor, praise, and glory of thy Name.

Answer. We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.


Concluding the Letanie in the end, with this prayer.

ALmighty God, giver of all good things, which by thy holy spirit have
appointed diverse orders of Ministers in thy Church, mercifully behold this thy
servant, now called to the work and ministry of a Bishop, and replenish him
so with the truth of thy doctrine, and innocence of life, that both by word
and deed he may faithfully serve thee in this office, to the glory of thy Name,
and profit of thy congregation, through the merits of our Savior Jesus Christ,
who lives and reigns with thee and the holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

Then the Archbishop sitting in a chair, shall say to him that is to be
consecrated,

BRother, for as much as holy Scripture, and the old Canons commands, that we
should not be hasty in laying on hands, and admitting of any person to the
government of the Congregation of Christ, which he has purchased with no
less price then the effusion of his own blood: before I admit you to this
administration, whereunto you are called, I will examine you in certain
articles, to the end the Congregation present, may have a trial and bear
witness how ye be minded to behave your self in the Church of God.

Are you persuaded that you be truly called to this ministration, according to
the will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the order of this Realm?

Answer. I am so persuaded.


The Archbishop. ARe you persuaded that the holy Scriptures contain
sufficiently all doctrine, required of necessity for eternal salvation,
through the faith in Jesus Christ? And are you determined with the same holy
Scriptures, to instruct the people committed to your charge, and to teach or
maintain nothing as required of necessity to eternal salvation, but that you
shall be persuaded may be concluded and proved by the same?


Answer. I am so persuaded and determined by Gods grace.


The Archbishop. Will you then faithfully exercise your self in the said holy
Scriptures, and call upon God by prayer, for the true understanding of the
same, so as ye may be able by them to teach and exhort with wholesome doctrine,
and to withstand and convince the gainesayers?


Answer. I will so do by the help of God.


The Archbishop. BE you ready with all faithful diligence to banish and drive
away all erroneous and strange doctrine contrary to Gods word, and both
privately and openly to call upon and encourage others to the same?


Answer. I am ready the Lord being my helper.


The Archbishop. Will you deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this world, that you may show your self in
all things an example of good works unto others, that the adversary may be
ashamed, having nothing to lay against you?


Answer. I will so do, the Lord being my helper.


The Archbishop. Will you maintain and set forward (as much as shall lie in
you) quietness, peace, and love among all men: and such as be unquiet,
disobedient, and criminous within your Diocese, correct and punish according
to such authority as ye have by Gods word, and as to you shall be committed
by the ordinance of this Realm?


Answer. I will do so by the help of God.


The Archbishop. Will you show your self gentle, and be merciful for Christ's
sake to poor and needy people, and to all strangers destitute of help?


Answer. I will so show my self by Gods help.


The Archbishop. ALmighty God our heavenly Father, who has given you a good
will to do all these things: grant also unto you strength and power to
perform the same, that he accomplishing in you the good work which he has
begun, ye may be found perfect, and irreprehensible at the latter day,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Then shall be sung or said, Come holy Ghost, etc.

As it is set out in the order of Priests.

That ended, the Archbishop shall say.

Lord hear our prayer.

Answer.

And let our cry come unto thee.

Let us pray.

ALmighty God, and most merciful Father, which of thine infinite goodness
have given thy only and most dear beloved Son Jesus Christ to be our Redeemer
and Author of everlasting life, who after that he had made perfect our
Redemption by his death, and was ascended into heaven, powered down his gifts
abundantly upon men, making some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists,
some Pastors and Doctors, to the edifying and making perfect his
Congregation: grant we beseech thee, to this thy servant such grace, that he
may evermore be ready to spread abroad thy Gospel, and glad tidings of
reconcilement to God, and to use the authority given unto him, not to destroy,
but to save, not to hurt, but to help: so that he, as a wise and faithful
servant, giving to thy family meat in due season, may at the last be received
intoioy, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who with thee, and the holy Ghost,
lives and reigns one God world without end. Amen.

Then the Archbishop and Bishops present, shall lay their hands upon the head
of the elected Bishop, the Archbishop, saying,

TAke the holy Ghost, and remember that thou stir up the grace of God, which
is in thee, by imposition of hands: for God has not given us the spirit of
fear, but of power, and love, and soberness.

Then the Archbishop shall deliver him the Bible, saying,

Give heed unto reading, exhortation, and doctrine. Think upon these things
contained in this book. Be diligent in them, that the increase coming
thereby, may be manifest unto all men. Take heed unto thy self, and unto
teaching, and be diligent in doing them: for by doing this, thou shall save thy
self, and them that hear thee. Be to the flock of Christ a shepherd, not a
wolf: feed them, devour them not: hold up the weak, heal the sick, bind
together the broken, bring again the outcasts, seek the lost, be so
merciful, that ye be not too remiss: so minister discipline, that you forget
not mercy, that when the chief shepherd shall come, ye may receive the
immarcessible crown of glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

Then the Archbishop shall proceed to the Communion, with whom the new
consecrated Bishop, with other shall also communicate. And for the last Collect
immediately before the Benediction, shall be said this Prayer.

MOst merciful Father, we beseech thee, to send down upon this thy servant thy
heavenly blessing, and so endue him with thy holy Spirit, that he preaching thy
word, may not only be earnest to reprove, beseech, and rebuke, with all
patience and doctrine, but also may be, to such as believe, an wholesome
example, in word, in conversation, in love, in faith, in chastity, and purity:
that faithfully fulfilling his course, at the latter day he may receive the
Crown of righteousness, laid up by the Lord the righteous Judge, who lives
and reigns, one God with the Father and the holy Ghost, world without end.
Amen.

Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. Anno, 1633.


