The True Loves Knot Untied. Being the right path, whereby to advise Princely
Virgins how to behave themselves, by the example of the renowned Princess, the
Lady Arabella, and the second Son to the Lord Seymore, late Earl of Hertford.
To the Tune of, Frogs Galliards.


AS I from Ireland did pass,
I saw a Ship at Anchor lay,
Another Ship likewise there was
which from fair England took her way.
The Ship that sailed from fair England
unknown unto our gracious King,
The Lord Chief Justice did command
that they should us to London bring.
I drew more near, and saw more plain
Lady Arabella in distress,
She wrung her hands, and wept amain,
bewailing of her heaviness,
When near fair London Tower she came
whereas her landing place should be,
The King and Queen with all their train
did meet this Lady gallantly.
How now Arabella, then our King
unto this Lady straight did say,
Who has first fy'd you to these things,
that you from England took your way?
None but my self, my gracious Liege,
this ten long years I Have been in love,
With the Lord Seymors second Son,
the Earl of Hertford so we prove.
Though he be not the mightiest man
of goods and Livings in the Land,
Yet I have lands us to maintain,
so much your grace does understand.
My lands and livings are well known
unto your Books of Majesty,
Amounting to twelvescore pound a week,
besides what I do give, quoth she.
In gallant Derbyshire likewise
I ninescore Beads-men maintain there
With hats and gowns, and house-rent free,
and every man five marks the year.
I never raised rent said she
nor yet oppressed the Tenant poor
I never took no Bribes nor fines,
for why, I had enough before.
The second part
to the same Tune


WHom of your Nobles will do so
for to maintain the Commonalty
Such multitudes would never grow,
nor be such store of poverty.
I would I had a Milk-maid been,
or born of some more low degree,
Then I might have loved where I like
and no man could have hindered me.
Or would I were some Yeomans Child,
for to receive my portion now,
According unto my degree,
as other Virgins whom I know.
The highest branch that springs aloft,
needs must beshade the middle tree,
Needs must the shadow of them both,
shadow the third in his degree.
But when the tree is cut and gone,
and from the ground is born away
The lowest tree that there does stand
in time may grow as high as they.
Once when I thought to have been Queen
but yet that still I do deny,
I know your Grace had right to the Crown
before Elizabeth did dye.
You of the eldest Sister came,
I of the second in degree,
The Earl of Hertford of the third,
a man of royal blood quoth she.
And so good night my Sovereign Liege,
since in the Tower I must lie,
I hope your Grace will condescend,
that I may have my liberty.
Lady Arabella said our King
I to your Freedom would consent,
If you would turn and go to Church
there to receive the Sacrament.
And so good night Arabella fair,
our King to her replied again,
I will take Counsel of my Nobility,
that you your Freedom may obtain.
Once more to prison must I go
Lady Arabella then did say,
To leave my Love breeds all my woe
the which will be my lives decay.
Love is a knot none can unknit
fancy a liking of the heart,
He whom I love I cannot forget
though from his presence I must part.
The meanest people enjoy their mates,
but I was born unhappily,
For being crossed by cruel fate,
I want both love and liberty.
But death I hope, will end the strife
farewell, farewell, dear Love, quoth she
Once had I thought to have been thy wife
but now am forced to part from thee.
At this sad meeting she had cause
in heart and mind to grieve full sore,
After that Arabella fair
did never see Lord Seymore more.
FINIS.
London, Printed for F. G. on Snow-hill. Entered according to Order.


