printer's device of Christopher Barker (McKerrow 221): "compartment with the
Queen's arms at top, Fides and Humilitas at sides; the ensigns of the four
evangelists at the corners, and a tiger's head, the crest of Sir F. Walsingham,
below. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE FIDES

HVMILITAS



A form of prayer with thanks giving, to be used of all the Queens
Majesty's loving subjects every year, the 17. of November, being the day of
her Highness entry to her kingdom.

Set forth by authority.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, printer to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

An order for morning prayer to be used, the 17. of November.
1. Tim. 2. verse. 1. I Exhort you therefore, that first of all, prayers,
supplications, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: for
Princes, and for all that are in authority, that we may live a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, for that is good and acceptable
in the sight of God our Savior.


You shall understand, that every thing in this book is placed in order, as
it shall be used, without turning to and fro, saving the three lessons taken
out of the old Testament, of which you may choose any one, as you think best,
for the first lesson at this morning prayer. And in Cathedral Churches, the
minister may use either of the other two for the first lesson at evening prayer.

First the Minister shall with a loud voice, pronounce some one of these three
sentences, as in the book of common prayer. Ezech. 18
AT what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the bottom of
his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord.

Joel. 2.
Rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God,
because he is gentle and merciful, he is pacient, and of much mercy, and such a
one that is sorry for your afflictions.

If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth
in us.

Dearly beloved brethren, the scripture moves us in sundry places, to
acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we
should not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of almighty God our
heavenly father, but confess the^ with an humble, lowly, penitent, and
obedient heart, to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same, by his
infinite goodness and mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to
acknowledge our sins before God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do when we
assemble and meet together, to render thanks for the great benefits that we
have received at his hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his
most holy word, and to ask those things which be requisite and necessary, as
well for the body as the soul. Wherefore I pray and beseech you, as many as be
here present, to accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the
throne of the heavenly grace, saying after me.

A general confession to be said of the whole congregation after the Minister,
kneeling.

Almighty and most merciful father, we have erred and strayed from thy ways
like lost sheep, we have followed too much the devices and desires of our own
hearts. We have offended against thy holy Laws. We have left undone those
things which we ought to have done, and we have done those things which we
ought not to have done, and there is no health in us, but thou, O Lord, have
mercy upon us miserable offenders. Spare thou them, O GOD, which confess their
faults, restore thou them that be penitent, according to thy promises declared
unto mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord. And grant, O most merciful father, for
his sake, that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, to the
glory of thy holy name, Amen.

The absolution to be pronounced by the Minister alone. Almighty God, the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which desires not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live, and has given power
and commandment to his ministers, to declare and pronounce to his people,
being penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins, he pardons and
absolueth all them which truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his holy Gospel.
Wherefore we beseech him to grant us true repentance and his holy spirit,
that those things may please him which we do at this present, and that the
rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last we way
come to his eternal joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The people shall answer, Amen.

Then shall the Minister begin the Lords prayer with a loud voice. Our father
which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done
in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not
into temptation. But deliver us from evil, Amen.

Then likewise he shall say. O Lord open thou our lips.

Answer. And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.


Minister. O God make speed to save us.


Answer. O Lord make haste to help us.


Minister. Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

Praise ye the Lord.


Then shall be said or sung this Psalm following. O Come, let us sing unto the
Lord: let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our salvation.

Let us come before his presence with tha^kesgiuing: and show our selves glad
in him with Psalms.

For the Lord is a great God: and a great king above all gods.

In his hand are all the corners of the earth: and the strength of the hills
is his also.

The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands prepared the dry land.

O come, let us worship and fall down: and kneel before the Lord our maker.

For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands.

To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: as in the
provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness.

When your fathers tempted me: proved me, and saw my works.

Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said: It is a
people that do err in their hearts, for they have not known my ways.

Unto whom I swear in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

Domine in virtute. Psalm. 21.
THe King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord: exceeding glad shall he be of
thy salvation.

Thou have given him his hearts desire: and have not denied him the request of
his lips.

For thou shall prevent him with the blessings of goodness: and shall set a
crown of pure gold upon his head.

He asked life of thee, and thou gave him a long life: even for ever and ever.

His honor is great in thy salvation: glory and great worship shall thou lay
upon him.

For thou shall give him everlasting felicity: and make him glad with the joy
of thy countenance.

And why? because the King puts his trust in the Lord: and in the mercy of
the most highest, he shall not miscarie.

All thine enemies shall feel thy hand: thy right hand shall find out them
that hate thee.

Thou shall make them like a fiery oven in time of thy wrath: the Lord shall
destroy them in his displeasure, and the fire shall consume them.

Their fruit shall thou root out of the earth: and their seed from among the
children of men.

For they intended mischief against thee: and imagined such a device as they
are not able to perform.

Therefore shall thou put them to flight: and the stringes of thy bow shall
thou make ready against the face of them.

Be thou exalted Lord in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy
power.

Benedixisti domine, Psalm, 85.
LOrd thou art become gracious unto thy land: thou have turned away the
captivity of Jacob.

Thou have forgiven the offense of thy people: and covered all their sins.

Thou have taken away all thy displeasure: and turned thy self from thy
wrathful indignation.

Turn us then, O God our savior: and let thine anger cease from us.

Will thou be displeased at us for ever: and will thou stretch out thy wrath
from one generation to another?

Will thou not turn again and quicken us: that thy people may rejoice in thee?

Show us thy mercy, O Lord: and grant us thy salvation.

I will hearken what ye Lord God will say concerning me: for he shall speak
peace unto his people, and to his saints, that they turn not again.

For his salvation is nygh them that fear him: that glory may dwell in our
land.

Mercy and truth are met together: righteousness and peace have kyssed each
other.

Truth shall flourish out of the earth: and righteousness has looked down
from heaven.

Yea, the Lord shall show loving kindness: and our land shall give her
increase.

Righteousness shall go before him: and he shall direct his going in the way.

Nisi quia dominus. Psalm. 124.
IF the Lord him self had not been on our side (now may Israel say:) if the
Lord him self had not bin on our side, when men rose up against us.

They had swalowed us up quick: when they were so wrathfully displeased at us.

Yea, the waters had drowned us: and the stream had gone over our soul.

The deep waters of the proud: had gone even over our soul.

But praised be the Lord: which has not given us over for a pray unto their
teeth.

Our soul is escaped, even as a bird out of the snare of the fowler: the
snare is broken, and we are delivered.

Our help stands in the name of the Lord: which has made heaven and earth.

The first Lesson, taken out of the xvii.xviii.xix. and xx. Chapters of the
second book of the Chronicles.
2. Chr. cha. 17. verse. 1. a. 3. etc.
IEhosaphat the son of Asa reigned over Judah. And the Lord was with him,
because he walked in the former ways of his father David, and sought not
Baalim: But sought the Lord God of his father, and walked in his
commandments, and not after the doings of Israel. And the Lord stablished
the kingdom in his hand, and al Judah brought him presents, so that he had
abundance of riches and honor. And he lift up his heart unto the ways of the
Lord, and he put down yet more of the high places and groves out of Judah. In
the third year of his reign, he sent to his Lords, even to Benhail, Obadia,
Zacharia, Nethanel, and to Michaia, that they should teach in the cities of
Judah: And with them he sent Levites, even Semaia, Nethania, Zebadia, Asael,
Semiramoth, Iehonathan, Adonia, Tobia, and Tobadonia, Levites: and with them
Elisama and Ioram, Priests. And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the
law of God with them, and went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and
taught the people. And the fear of the Lord fell upon all the kingdoms of
the lands that were round about Judah, and they fought not against Iehosaphat.

2. Chro. chap. 18. verse. 3. a. and 31. etc.
And when Iehosaphat, taking part with Achab in his wars against the king of
Syria, was in great danger to be slain, he cried unto the Lord, and the Lord
helped him, and chased his enemies away from him: but wicked Achab king of
Israel, was there slain.

2. Chro. chap. 19. verse. 1.4. a. etc.
And Iehosaphat came home again in peace to Jerusalem, and dwelt there. And
Iehosaphat went out to the people from Beerseba to mount Ephraim, and brought
them again unto the Lord God of their fathers. And he set Judges in the
Land, throughout all the strong cities of Judah, city by city, and said to
the judges, Take heed what ye do: for ye execute not the judgments of man,
but of God, which is with you in the judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of
the Lord be upon you, and take heed, and be doing the thing that pleases
him: for there is no unrighteousness with the Lord our God, that he should have
any respect of persons, or take rewards. Moreover, in Jerusalem did
Iehosaphat set of the Levites, and of the Priests, and of the ancient fathers
over Israel, in the judgment and cause of the Lord, and they returned again
to Jerusalem. And he charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of
the Lord faithfully, and with a pure heart: What cause soever come to you of
your brethren that dwell in their cities, between blood and blood, between
law and commaundment, between statutes and ordinances: ye shall warn them
that they trespass not against the Lord, and so wrath come upon you, and your
brethren: thus do, and ye shall not offend. And behold, Amaria the high priest
is among you in all matters of the Lord, and Zebadia the son of Ismael, a
ruler of the house of Judah for all the Kings matters: there be officers of the
Levites also before you, take courage to you therefore, and be doing manfully,
and the Lord shall be with such as be good.

After this there came an exceeding great army of the Moabites and Ammonites
against Iehosaphat. And Iehosaphat feared, 2. Chro. chap. 20. verse. 1.2.3. a.
and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed fasting throughout al Judah.
And he, with all Judah, a. 5. c. 18.
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem prayed, and fell before the Lord,
worshipping the Lord. d. 22. etc.
And the enemies fell out amongst themselves, and slew one another, until they
were al destroyed. And Iehosaphat, and his people, had the spoil of goods,
raiment, and jewels, more then they could carry away. And they blessed the
Lord, and called ye place, The valley of blessing unto this day. And they
returned to Jerusalem with great joy and gladness. And the fear of God fell on
the kingdoms of al lands, when they had heard that the Lord fought against
the enemies of Israel. And so the Realm of Iehosaphat was in tranquillity,
and his God gave him rest on every side.

Or this may be the first Lesson.
The history of King Hezekia, taken out of the fourth book of Kings, the
18.19. and 20. Chapters.
4. Reg. chap. 18. a. 1.3.
HEzekia the son of Ahaz reigned over Judah, and he did that which is right in
the sight of the Lord, according to all as did David his father. Hezekia
beguile you, for he shall not be able to deliver you out of my hands:

4. Reg. 19. verse. 1. a.
When king Hezekia heard of these words, he rent his clothes, and put on
sackcloth, and came into the house of the Lord, and sent Eliakim, will put him
in another mind, and he shall hear tidings, and so return to his own land,
and I will bring to pass that he shall fall upon the sword, even in his own
land. Sennacherib King of Assyria, I have heard it. Wherefore thus says the
Lord concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come to this city, 4 Reg.
20. chap. verse. 1. a.
About that time was Hezekia sick unto death, and the Prophet Isai the son
of Amos came to him, and said unto him, Thus says the Lord, Put thine household
in an order, the Lord.

Or this may be the first Lesson.
The sum of the history of king Iosia, taken out of the fourth book of the
Kings, the 22. and 23. Chapters, and the 2. of the Chronicles, the 34. Chapter.
2. Chronic. Cha. 34. verse. 1.2. a
IOsia reigned in Jerusalem, and he did that which was right in the sight of
the Lord, and walked in the ways of David his father, and bowed neither to
the right hand, nor to the left. 4. Reg. 22. chap verse. 3.4. a.
when he had purged the land and the temple, he sent Saphan the Scribe to
Helkia the high Priest, that he should see the decayed places of the temple
repaired, with such money as the keepers of the porche of the house of the Lord
had gathered of the people.

And Helkia, wept before me, that I also have heard, says the Lord.

4. Reg. cha. 23. verse. 1. a.
And then the king sent, and there gathered together unto him all the Elders of
Judah, and of Jerusalem. And moreover, all workers with spirits,

Te Deum. WE praise thee, O God: we knowledge thee to be the Lord.

All the earth does worship thee: the father everlasting.

To thee all angels cry alowde: the heavens and all the powers therein.

To thee Cherubin and Seraphin: continually do cry.

Holy, holy, holy: Lord God of Sabbath.

Heaven and earth are full of the majesty: of thy glory.

The glorious company of the Apostles: praise thee.

The goodly fellowship of the prophets: praise thee.

The noble army of martyrs: praise thee.

The holy Church throughout all the world: does knowledge thee.

The father: of an infinite majesty.

Thy honorable, true: and only son.

Also the holy ghost: the comforter.

Thou art the King of glory: O Christ.

Thou art the everlasting son: of the father.

When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou did not abhor the
Virgins womb.

When thou had overcome the sharpenes of death: thou did open the
kingdom of heaven to all believers.

Thou sit on the right hand of God: in the glory of the father.

We believe yt thou shall come: to be our Judge.

We therefore pray thee help thy servants: whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood.

Make them to be numbered with thy saints: in glory everlasting.

O Lord save thy people: and bless thine heritage.

Govern them: and lift them up for ever.

Day by day: we magnify thee.

And we worship thy name: ever world without end.

Vouchsafe, O Lord: to keep us this day without sin.

O Lord have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.

O Lord let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee.

O Lord in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.

The second Lesson, taken out of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, the
xiii. Chapter.
God for thy wealth: but if thou do evil, fear: for he bears not the sword
for naught: for he is the minister of God to take vengeance on him that does
evil. Wherefore ye must be subject, not because of

Give to all men therefore their duty: tribute, to

Love does not evil to his neighbor: therefore is

And that, considering the season, that it is now

Or the C. Psalm.
O Be joyful in the Lord all ye lands: serve the Lord with gladness, and come
before his presence with a song.

Be ye sure that the Lord he is God, it is he that has made us, and not we
our selves: we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with
praise: be thankful unto him, and speak good of his name.

For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures
from generation to generation.

Glory be to the father. etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

I Believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy ghost, borne
of the virgin Marie, suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead, and
buried, he descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the dead,
he ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father
almighty, from thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe
in the holy ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the communion of saints, the
forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting.
Amen.

And after that, these prayers following, as well at Evening prayer, as at
Morning prayer, all devoutly kneeling. The Minister first pronouncing with a
loud voice. The Lord be with you.


People. And with thy spirit.


Minister. Let us pray.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.


Minister. O Lord show thy mercy upon us.


People. And grant us thy salvation.


Minister. O Lord save the Queen.


People. Who puts her trust in thee.


Minister. Send her help from thy holy place.


People. And evermore mightily defend her.


Minister. Let the enemies have none advantage on her.


People. Let not the wicked approach to hurt her.


Minister. Indue thy ministers with righteousness.


People. And make thy chosen people joyful.


Minister. O Lord save thy people.


People. And bless thine inheritance.


Minister. Give peace in our time, O Lord.


People. Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O
God.


Minister. O God make clean our hearts within us.


People. And take not thy holy spirit from us.


A prayer for the Queens Majesty. O Lord our heavenly father, high and
mighty, King of kings, Lord of lords, the only ruler of Princes, which
do from thy throne behold all the dwellers upon the earth, most heartily we
beseech thee with thy favor to behold our most gracious sovereign Lady
Queen Elizabeth, and so replenish her with the grace of thy holy spirit, that
she may always incline to thy will, and walk in thy way, indue her plentifully
with heavenly gifts, grant her in health and wealth long to live, strength
her, that she may vanquish and overcome all her enemies, and finally after this
life, she may attain everlasting joy and felicity, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

The second Collect for peace. O God, which art author of peace, and lover of
concord, in knowledge of whom stands our eternal life, whose service is
perfect freedom, defend us thy humble servants in all assaults of our enemies,
that we surely trusting in thy defense, may not fear the power of any
adversaries, through the might of Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The third Collect for grace. O Lord our heavenly father, almighty and
everlasting God, which have safely brought us to the beginning of this day,
defend us in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that this day we fall
into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger, but that al our doings
may be ordered by thy governance, to do always that is righteous in thy sight,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

It is ordered, that the Letanie shall not be omitted the seventeenth day of
November, though it fall upon Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, or Saturday. O God the
father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the father of heaven: etc.

O God the son redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son redeemer of the world: etc.

O God the holy ghost proceeding from the father and the son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the holy ghost proceeding, etc.

O holy, blessed, and glorious trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, etc.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of
the devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all blindness of heart, from pride, vain glory, and hypocrisy, from
envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceites of the
world, the flesh and the devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence and famine, from battle
and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine and herisie,
from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and
circumcision, by thy baptism, fasting, and temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony and blooddy sweat, by thy cross and passion, by thy precious
death and burial, by thy glorious resurrection and ascension, and by the
coming of the holy ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us (O Lord God) and that it may please
thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant Elizabeth, our most
gracious Queen and governor,

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule her heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that she may always have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to be her defender and keeper, giving her the victory
over all her enemies.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to illuminate al Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of
the Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word, and that both
by their preaching and living they may set it forth, and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the counsel, and all the
nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to mayntaine truth.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to give to all nations, unity, peace, and concord.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to give to al thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the spirit.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have
erred, and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort
and help the weak hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to
beat down Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort all that be in danger,
necessity, and tribulation.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travail by land or by water,
all women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show
thy pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children
and widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutours and slanderers,
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy word.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

O lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world.

Grant us thy peace.

O lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

And lead us not into temptation.

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The versicle. O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

The answer. Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O God merciful father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor ye desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers that we
make before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress
us: and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtiltye of
the devil or man works against us be brought to naught, and by the providence
of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants being hurt by no
persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy names sake.

O God we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us, the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, etc.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ,

Graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

The versicle. O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us.

The answer. As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.

WE humbly beseech thee, O father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities,
and for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us all those evils that we most
righteously have deserved: and grant that in all our troubles we may put our
whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee, in holiness
and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only mediator
and Advocate Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Psalm. 66. c. 14.
O Come hither, and hearken, all ye that fear God: and we will tell you what
he has done for our souls.

Psalm. 59. a. 3. and 71. b, 9.10.
When men of power were gathered against us, and lay in wait for our souls:
they took counsel together, saying, God has forsaken them, persecute them,
and take them, for there is none to deliver them.

Psalm. 22. b. 12. and 56. a. 1.2.
Our enemies closed us in on every side: they gaped upon us with their mouths,
as it were ramping and roaring Lions, seeking to devour us, and to swalow us
up.

Psalm. 44. d. 20.
We were counted even as sheep appointed to be slain: many of us were for thy
sake killed all the day long.

Psalm. 107. a. 4 and. 44. d. 22.
And many went astray in the wilderness, wandering hungry and thirsty in strange
lands: our souls fainted in us, and were brought low, even unto the very
dust.

Psalm. 18. a. 3.4.
For why? the snares and sorrows of death compassed us: and the ouerflowings of
ungodliness made us afraid.

Psalm. 18. a. 5. and 107. b. 12.
Then we made our complaint unto our God, and cried unto the Lord in our
trouble: and he heard the voice of our prayer out of his holy temple, and
delivered us out of our distress.

Psalm. 107. a. 3.
He gathered us home again out of the lands: from the East, and from the West,
from the North, and from the South.

Psalm. 116. b. 8. and 4. a. 1. and 18. d. 27.
He delivered our souls from death, our eyes from tears, and our feet from
falling: he has set us at liberty, he has light our candle, the Lord our
God has made our darkness to be light.

Psalm. 18. g. 47. and 59. c. 16.
Wherefore we will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, and sing praises unto thy
name: we will sing of thy power, and praise thy mercy betimes in the morning,
for thou have been our defense and refuge in the time of trouble.

Psalm. 118.
O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the holy ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

Let us pray.

O Lord God, most merciful father, who as upon this day, placing thy servant
our Sovereign and gracious Queen Elizabeth in the kingdom, did deliver
thy people of England from danger of war and oppression, both of bodies by
tyranny, and of conscience by superstition, restoring peace and true religion,
with liberty both of bodies and minds, and have continued the same thy
blessings, without all desert on our part, now by the space of these Increase
this number, according to the years of her Majesty's reign.
twenty years: we who are in memory of these thy great benefits assembled
here together, most humbly beseech thy fatherly goodness to grant us grace,
that we may in word, deed, and heart, show our selves thankful and obedient
unto thee for the same: and that our Queen through thy grace, may in all
honor, goodness, and godliness, long and many years reign over us, and we
obey and enjoy her, with the continuance of thy great blessings, which thou
have by her thy minister powered upon us: This we beseech thee, to grant unto
us, for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake, our Lord and Savior, Amen.

Almighty and everlasting God, which only workest great maruayles, send
down upon our Bishops and Curates, and all congregations committed to their
charge, the healthful spirit of thy grace, and that they may truly please
thee, power upon them the continual dew of thy blessing: Grant this, O Lord,
for the honor of our advocate and mediator Jesus Christ, Amen.

In the time of any common plague or sickness.

O Almighty God, which in thy wrath in ye time of King David, did slay
with the plague of pestilence three score and ten thousand, and yet remembering
thy mercy did save the rest: have pity upon us miserable sinners, that
now are visited with great sickness and mortality, that like as thou did
then command thine Angel to cease from punishing: so it may now please
thee to withdraw from us this plague and grievous sickness, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer of Chrysostom. Almighty God, which have given us grace at this time
with one accord to make our common supplications unto thee, and do promise
that when two or three be gathered together in thy name, thou will grant their
requests: fulfill now, O Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as
may be most expedient for them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy
truth, and in the world to come life everlasting, Amen.

THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy ghost, be with us all evermore, Amen.

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Almighty God, unto whom al hearts be open, al desires known, and from whom
no secrets are hid: cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of
thy holy spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy
holy name, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

Minister. GOD spoke these words, and said, I am the Lord thy GOD: Thou shall
have none other gods but me.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.


Minister. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor ye likeness of
any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water
under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: For I the
Lord thy God am a gelous God, and visit the sin of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our. etc.


Minister. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: For the
Lord will not hold him giltlesse that takes his name in vain.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our. etc.


Minister. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou
labor and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son,
and thy daughter, thy man servant, and thy maid servant, thy cattle, and the
stranger that is within thy gates: For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rests the seventh day: Wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our. etc.


Minister. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the
land which the Lord thy God gives thee.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our. etc.


Minister. Thou shall do no murder.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our. etc.


Minister. Thou shall not commit adultery.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our. etc.


Minister. Thou shall not steal.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our. etc.


Minister. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.


Minister. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor
his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is his.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these thy laws in our hearts,
we beseech thee.


Let us pray.

Almighty GOD, whose kingdom is everlasting, and power infinite: have mercy
upon the whole congregation, and so rule the heart of thy chosen servant
Elizabeth our Queen and governor, that she (knowing whose minister she is)
may above all things seek thy honor and glory, and that we her subjects
(duly consydering whose authority she has) may faithfully serve, honor, and
humbly obey her, in thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed word and
ordinance: through Jesus Christ our Lord, who with thee and the holy ghost,
lives and reigns ever one God, world without end, Amen.

Stir up, we beseech thee, O Lord, the wills of thy faithful people, that
they plenteously bringyng forth the fruit of good works, may of thee be
plenteously rewarded, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.
1. Pet. 2.11.
Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from
fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul, in the day of ye visitation.

The Gospel.
Mat. 22.16.
ANd they sent unto him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, Master, we
know that thou art true, and teach the way of God truly, neither carest
for any man: for thou considerest not the person of men. Tell us therefore,

And he said unto them,

I Believe in one God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and of al
things visible and invisible: and in one Lord Jesus Christ, ye only begotten
son of God, begotten of his father before all worlds, God of God, light of
light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with
the father, by whom al things were made: who for us men, and for our
salvation, came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the holy ghost, of the
virgin Marie, and was made man, and was crucified also for us under Pontius
Pilate. He suffered, and was buried, and the third day he rose again,
according to the scriptures, and ascended into heaven, and sits at the right
hand of the father. And he shall come again with glory to judge both the
quick and the dead: whose kingdom shall have no end. And I believe in the
holy ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the father and the
son, who with the father and the son together is worshipped and glorified,
who spoke by the Prophets. And I believe one Catholic and Apostolic
Church. I acknowledge one baptism for the remission of sins. And I look for
the resurrection of ye dead, and ye life of ye world to come. Amen.

Mat. 5.
LEt your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven.

Let us pray for the whole state of Christ's Church, militant here in earth.

Almighty and everliving God, which by thy holy apostle have taught us to make
prayers and supplications, and to give thanks for all men: we humbly beseech
thee, most mercifully to receive these our prayers, which we offer unto thy
divine majesty, beseeching thee to inspire continually the universal Church
with the spirit of truth, unity, and concord: and grant that al they that
do confess thy holy name, may agree in the truth of thy holy word, and live
in unity and godly love. We beseech thee also to save and defend all
Christian kings, princes and governors, and specially thy servant Elizabeth
our Queen, that under her we may be godly and quietly governed. And grant
unto her whole counsel, and to all that be put in authority under her, that
they may truly and indifferently minister justice, to the punishment of
wickedness and vice, and to the mayntenance of Gods true religion and virtue.
Give grace (O heavenly father) to al Bishops, Pastors, and Curates, that they
may both by their life and doctrine set forth thy true and lively word, and
rightly and duly administer thy holy Sacraments. And to all thy people give
thy heavenly grace, and especially to this congregation here present, that with
meek heart and due reverence, they may hear and receive thy holy word,
truly serving thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of their
life. And we most humbly beseech thee of thy goodness (O Lord) to comfort and
succor all them which in this transitory life be in trouble, sorrow, need,
sickness, or any other adversity. Grant this, O father, for Jesus Christ's
sake our only mediator and advocate. Amen.

Almighty God, which have promised to hear the petitions of them that ask in
thy sons name, we beseech thee mercyfully to incline thine ears to us that
have made now our prayers and supplications unto thee, and grant that those
things which we have faithfully asked, according to thy will, may effectually
be obtained, to ye relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth of thy
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE peace of God, which passes al understanding, keep your hearts and minds
in ye knowledge and love of God, and of his son Jesus Christ our Lord: and
the blessing of God almighty, ye father, the son, and the holy ghost, be
among you, and remain with you always, Amen.

A thanksgiving, to be sung as the 81. Psalm.
BE light and glad, in God rejoice,
which is our strength and stay:
Be joyful and lift up your voice,
for this most happy day.
Sing, sing, O sing unto the Lord,
with melody most sweet:
Let heart and tongue in one accord,
as it is just and meet.
2
Sing lawde unto the Lord above,
serve him with glad intent:
O clappe your hands in sign of love,
for this which he has sent.
Sing praise, sing praise with Harp and Lute,
with joy let us be seen:
Before our God let none be mute,
but lawde him for our Queen.
3
Sound out the trumpe courageously,
blow as on solemn days:
Both high and low come fill the sky,
with sweet resounding praise.
For why? when we were bound in thrall,
and eke in grief did stand,
The Lord did set us free from all,
by this his servants hand.
4
Our selves therefore we wholly bind,
a Sacrifice to be,
In token of our thankeful mind
(O God most dear) to thee.
To thee we cry, and also give
most high thanks, lawde and praise,
For thy good gifts which we receive,
both now and all our days.
5
When we in grief did cry and call,
thou holpst us by and by,
And thou did set us free from thrall,
O God, our God most hye.
Thy mercy therefore will we sing,
and praise thy holy name,
For working of so great a thing:
O Lord preserve the same.
6
Blessed art thou, O Lord of hosts,
our shield and buckler tryde:
Thy name be praysde in all the coasts,
throughout the world so wide.
Vouchsafe this inward sacrifice,
to thee (O Lord) we call:
Our hearty thanks do not despise,
we yield our souls and all.
7
For thou through love, when we were lost,
did send to seek therefore:
This silly bark of ours so tossed,
thou broughtstfull safe to shore.
When we through blindness went astray,
with burdens sore oppressed,
Thou sentst and set us in the way,
that leads us to thy rest.
8
We praise thee therefore Lord on hie,
with heart and hearty cheer:
To thee we sing, we call, we cry,
O Lord our God most dear.
Thou art the worker of our wealth,
our safeguard and our stay:
O Lord grant this our country health,
on thee we wait always.
The second part.
9
To thee (O God) we yield all praise,
thou art our help alone:
To thee it is we sing always,
to thee and else to none.
Then bow to us (good Lord) thine ear,
and hear us when we cry:
Preserve thy Church now planted here,
and watch it with thine eye.
10
Lord keep Elizabeth our Queen,
defend her in thy right:
Show forth thy self as thou have been,
her fortress and her might.
Preserve her grace, confound her foes,
and bring them down full low:
Lord turn thy hand against al those,
that would her overthrow.
11
Mayntaine her scepter as thine own,
for thou have plaste her here:
And let this mighty work be known,
to nations far and nere.
A noble ancient Nurse, O Lord,
in England let her reign:
Her grace among us do afford,
for ever to remain.
12
Indue her (Lord) with virtues store,
rule thou her royal Rod:
Into her mind thy Spirit power,
and show thy self her God.
In truth upright, Lord guide her still,
thy Gospel to defend:
To say and do what thou do will,
and stay where thou do end.
13
Her counsel (Lord) vouchsafe to guide,
with wisdom let them shine,
In godliness for to abide,
as it becomes thine.
To seek the glory of thy name,
their countries wealth procure,
And that they may perform the same,
Lord grant thy Spirit pure.
14
So will we sing unto thee, Lord,
betyme yer day be light:
And eke declare thy truth abroad,
when it does draw to night.
To thee, O Father, with the Son,
and Spirit be therefore,
All glory now, as has been done,
from henceforth evermore. Amen.
FINIS.
An Antheme or prayer for the preservation of the Church, the Queens Majesty,
and the Realm, to be sung after Evening prayer at all times.
Save Lord and bless with good increase,
Thy Church, our Queen and Realm in peace.
AS for thy gifts we render praise,
So Lord we crave still blessed days,
Let thy sweet word and Gospel pure,
With us dear God for aye endure.
With prosperous reign increase it still,
That sound thereof the world may fill.
Save Lord and bless with good increase,
Thy Church, our Queen and Realm in peace.
That vine thy Right hand planted has
Preserve, O Lord, from enemies wrath,
And those that practice Sions spoil,
With mighty arm (Lord) give them foil.
Thy Church and Kingdom, Christ, we pray,
Increase and build from day to day.
Save Lord and bless with good increase,
Thy Church, our Queen and Realm in peace.
Like as thy grace our Queen has sent,
So bless her Rule and government.
Thy glory chiefly to maintain,
And grant her long and prosperous Reign:
All foes confound, and Rebels eke,
That Prince or Churches harm would seek.
Save Lord and bless with good increase,
Thy Church, our Queen and Realm in peace.
This English Isle, and people all,
Preserve for Christ's blood we call.
Grant peace to enjoy thy blessings now,
Because none fyghtes for us but thou,
So shall we live to praise thee then,
Which likewise grant. Amen, Amen.
Save Lord and bless with good increase,
Thy Church, our Queen and Realm in peace.
A song of rejoicing for the prosperous Reign of our most gracious Sovereign
Lady Queen Elizabeth.
Made to the tune of the 25. Psalm.

And praise his holy name:

Now magnify the same.

Who evermore has been

To our most Royal QVEENE.

Each where about us round,

The belles do make a sound.

Before the Lord our King,

With cheerful hearts to sing.

By thy good grace and will,

Thy Law for to fulfill.

With love to her again:

O Lord so still remain.

Against her mortal foes:

With her against all those.

Uphold her Scepter strong:

She may continue long.
I. C.

AMEN.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty.
Cum priuilegio.


