THE PVBLICAN Becoming A PENITENT: OR The Picture of a Penitent Sinner.

Delivered in TWO SERMONS in the City of LONDON: Anno 1625.

By ROBERT LOVELL, Minister of Gods word, and Curate of Allhallowes-Barking
within the same City.

I am Confounded and ashamed,

Ezra 9.6. Yet

Be not faithless, but faithful

John 20.27. For

He came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance.

Mat. 9.13. Therefore Perge Publicane, incaepto opere, urge and iusta.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Star under St. Peter's Church in Cornehill, and in
Popes-head-Alley. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Mr. THOMAS RYVES, Dr. of the Civil Law, His
Majesty's Advocate, and my singular good Master and Patron: All increase of
Honor here, and happiness here-after, humbly prayed for of your Poor
Scholar Robert Louell.
MVCH REVERENCED,
AND truly Honored Sir, To whom so much has been given (as by You to Me) of
him both piety and honesty require that something should be returned (from Me
to You.)

I never look on the Rivers which empt themselves into the Seas from whence
they came; nor on the Birds which whistle and sing to the glory of their Maker;
nor on the Beasts that yield themselves to be our food for their Fodder; but I
think what I should be unto You. You that clothed Me when I was naked; You
that fed Me when I was Hungry; You that entertained Me when I was a Mere
Stranger to you; You that since that, both countenanced and Comforted Me when
I was Cast out as an Outcast, and Offscouring; To You I owe My Self and
Service in such a manner and measure as that I wish (as a great part of my
happiness) it were in Me or Mine to do You any service that might be worth
your acceptance.

That little which I had in the Country from that Horn of my present Comfort,
Mr. Isaac Horn now Parson of Elsfield in Hampshire.
by your means I kept in the University, without whose Charity, (I confess
freely, I bless God humbly, and thank you heartily) both this Talent and
Trader had been buried: And what then can I do less (that can do no more)
but Agnoscere Thaletem, and with Mandratus, Non celere Autorem? To speak then
as it is -- Tu Herus, Tu patronus, Tu pater esses, si deseris Tu Perimus.

I am therefore again most humbly to beseech your good Worship to look on so
worthless objects as This Work and Workman, both which had long since suncke
without your Loving Supportation: of your woonted goodness then, which has
bin ever known to be ANY HONEST POOR MAN'S REFVGE, I am to crave this favor
also, which is, that you would Shroud this Sinner under your Sanctimony: he is
Ashamed to Speak unto God, and I to you, but Literae non erubescunt, and
therefore I bid my Lines beg the continuance of your Love, which if you shall
grant, I will promise, that if ever this Dry Tree does bring forth Better
fruit, you shall be sure of the First Taste; which if you grant, I shall ever
give you that which you have deserved, even The Praises which I cannot write,
and The Prayers which I am not able to utter, wishing the Increase of your
Honors here on Earth, and the Accomplishment of your Hoped-for-Happinesse in
the kingdom of Heaven, yea These shall be continually implored by

Your Worships poor Scholar and ever obliged Servant ROBERT LOVELL.

The Picture of a Penitent SINNER.
LVKE 18.13. But the Publicane standing a far off, would not lift up so much
as his eyes to heaven, but smote his breast, and said: O God be merciful to
me a Sinner.


IT is evident, that some seem just, and are so, as Noah: Genesis 6.9.
Others neither seem nor are so, as those in Isaiahs time. Isay. 5.11.
Some again seem to be righteous, but are not so, as the High Priests and
Scribes. Luke 20.20.
Others again seem not to be just, and yet are so, as the humble in Iohs
time. Job 12.4.
Of the two last speaks this Parable, under the names of a Pharisee and of a
Publican. Theodoricus Legic. Analys. in Dominic. 11. post Trin. fo. 346 in 88.
Sub quorum Persona inslatos Iusticiarios Graphise perstringit, miseros vero
and abiectos Peccatores paenitentiam agentes mirifice erigit: Under whose
person he does curiously paint out the proud Iusticiarie, and no less
admirably raise up the humble and abased sinner repenting and amending: yea,
see here our Savior resisting the former, but giving grace to the latter,
verse 14. whom he here brings in, first, standing a far off; secondly, not
daring to look up; thirdly, smiting his breast; fourthly, confessing his
misery, and Petitioning Gods Mercy. In whom behold, the very picture of a true
Penitent, who being truly humbled, cannot but manifest it, Et in signo, et in
animo, et in dicto, et in facto, Goran. ibid.
both outwardly and inwardly, both in word and deed. But as Christ said to his
beloved Disciple. John 19.27. Diuisio.
Behold thy Mother: so I now say to you my beloved brethren, Behold the Man.

Ecce timor, behold his fear. Ecce pudor, behold his shame. Ecce dolor, behold
his sorrow. Ecce vera confessio, behold a true and humble confession: yea look
on him again, and you shall plainly perceive: He stood a far off, as
knowing his Filthiness. He would not look up, as confessing his
Unworthiness. He smote his Breast, as showing his Pensiveness. He was a
Sinner, even laden with Miserableness.

These four, oh how seemly are they in a Sinner that means to be a Saint.
Sure me thinks they are like unto those four Heads of the River that ran
in Eden, Genesis 2.10.
which much refreshed the Earth: or I may compare them to those four Pillars
in the Tabernacle, Exodus 36.36.
which much strengthened it; or I may liken them to those four Rows of Stones
in Arons Breast, Exodus 39.10.
which much adorned it: Even so surely, these four gifts of Grace, do as much
refresh, strengthen, and adorn those that have them. Come then and let us in
Gods name and fear do as he did, even stand a far off. Ecce timor, Behold
his fear.

It is obseruable that there are two things which make unwillingness of
approach of one to the other.

The first is greatness without. The second is guiltiness within:
For the former, Psalm. 77.13.
whosoever great a God as our God? For the latter, whosoever guilty as a Publicane?
A man odious to the Jews, because that office of Tolegatherings was an
instrument and monument of their subjection to the Romans, held of the Jews
for the vildest that ever lived, and so accordingly packt and parralelled, even
with Sinners, Matthew. 9.9.11. with Heathen, Matthew. 18.17. nay, with Harlots,
Mat. 21.31. Publicanus, quasi Publicus Peccator, says one; for Amisso Pudore,
public peccat, Beda Aestiuale: de sanctis in fest. Mat. Tom. 7. fol. 138.
vel publicesceleribus foedatur: having eaten shame, he drinks after it; nay,
some straining the word beyond the Grammatical sense, Publicanum Dectorem
scilicet foenoris and auaritia. Iniquum rapacem, exactorem, furem and
desperatum. Peccatore^ fuisse inquit Chrysologus. 06 Ser. 28. Telonium, sieve
Domus Telonaria erat, in qua vectigalia colligebant and ^it vere officina
fraudem and Rapinarum erat. Theodoricus infest. S. Mat. Tom. 3. page 536.
say by way of Aggrauation, that it is, Publicanus, quasi publicus canis; one
who was gaping with his mouth, greedy in his heart, and griping with his hand;
searching diligently, toleing deeply, and taking unmercifully whatsoever was
uncustomed among the Jews. Of all which it may seem, this my Publican was
guilty, and that made him in the Temple, Stare, imo Distare, to stand; yea,
and to keep his distance too, standing a far off, but why a far off? even
for Fear: Whence may it please you to learn by his example, With what
Reverence and Fear Sinners should approach Gods Sanctuary.

If men were but once as thoroughly awaked from their sins, as Jacob was from
his sleep, Genesis 28.16. they would surely do, as Solomon says, Take heed to
their feet when they enter into the house of God. For verily (says Jacob) The
Lord is in this place, and I knew not of it; but when he perceived that it was
so indeed, what did he? Timuit itaque, therefore he was afraid and said; How
fearful is this place? it is none other but the house of God and Gate of
heaven, Verse 17. Terribilis plane locus, Genesis 28.16. Eccles. 4.17. Bern. de
dedicat. Ecclesiae. sermon 6. Psalm. 84 10. Luke 2.37. Genesis 28.10.35.7. Exodus
40.34. 1 King. 8.10.
quem fideles viri habitant, quem sancti Angeli frequentant, quem sua quoque
prasentia Dominus ipse dignatur. It is surely a fearful place, to which the
Saints on earth resort, which Angels in heaven frequent, yea which the Lord
himself, that is both Lord of heaven and earth does dignifie with his own
holy presence, and assistance in the public sacred duty which is performed by
the congregation of the faithful.

Is it then any marvel that this Publican stands a far off? or that we
sinners come not near but with Fear? If men would but duly consider in how
glorious a manner God is present in all his Ordinances, as in Preaching,
Hearing, Praying, and administering of the Sacraments; or if they would but
seriously call to mind, how true he is of his word, how sweet in his promises,
how terrible in his threats, could they then say less then Peter did? Luke ^.8.
Lord go from me for I am a sinful man; or do less then David did, Even in
fear worship toward his holy Tabernacle? or rather with my Publican, Stand a
far off? Psalm. 5.7.


But should we do so? Eccles. 4.17. Exodus 3.3.
take heed to your feet, put off your shoes, come ye more reverently and
religiously affected then many of you come; for Terribilis plane locus, it is
surely a fearful place. No Place of Princes, Theodoret in Exodus 3 3.
no Palace of earthly Potentates can be compared unto it. It exceedes the
Senators Seat, or Ahashuerohs Court, Hester 4.2.
into neither of which any might enter, but with regard and reverence. None
clothed in Sackcloth might appear in the latter, and if there were no
admittance for such course Habits, do we think to have here acceptance with
such Conscienceles hearts? No, no, if thither they might not come with such
bare suits, then much less hither may not you come with such bad souls. Here
is no room for such as come with crooked feet, Ezech. 44.7.
Indeed I cannot deny, but hither ye come in as great abundance, Jews did in
Ezechiels days, Corinthians in S. Paul's time, Ezech. 33.33. 1 Cor. 11.
that I much doubt and fear: for some come with unclean feet, that is,
without decency and reverence; yea, Take heed to thy feet; or then our
Savior admonishes, Eccles 4.17. John 13.10.
wash your feet.

hear the Charmer, Psalm. 58.4.5. Acts 17.21.
charm he never so wisely. These are of the Athenian breed, All for news,
so that if the Minister out of his store bring not every day new things, he
were as good say nothing, and indeed as good nothing, as never the near; for
what fruit comes to itching ears, but scratching or clawing Doctrines, which
where it abounds, in the end it will prove but a soar, if not a wound, and
where then is your Fear!

Israel was, even stained with their own works, and going a whoring after
their own inventions? Psalm. 106.39.
so that now many are broken out into the Jews outrage, and plainly say to
their Preachers as they did to their Prophets: The word that THOU have spoken
unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hear it, Ier. 44* 16.17.
but we will do whatsoever goes out of our own mouths: but to all such I
will say, they are Publicans, and being so, I would for their own sakes, that
they did know their Place, and I wish them for their own souls sake, that
they would keep their distance, and stand a far off.

All which though I speak to Publicans and Sinners, laden, Mat. 11.29. John
7.37. John 13.5. Mat. 25.34.
come and be eased; if thirsty, come and be refreshed; if unclean, come and
be washed; if seeming to be forsaken, yet come, and be recciued: Oh come and
make no long tarrying, but come to him as thou see him coming to thee, Cant.
2.8.9.
even leaping on the Mountains, and skipping on the hills, like a Roe or young
Heart; that is, with joy, speed, and great have.

Oh but I am afraid -- No matter, Fear like a Needle make its Entrance; Love
like a Thread will have its Continuance: and therefore for my part, I will
never be so much afraid of the fearful that stand a far off, though he be as
bad as a Publican, as of him that is Audatious, and approaches near though he
be as Strickt as a Pharisee; for to speak the truth that Faith is not, nor can
be firm, that is not accompanied with Fear; yea, Tunc sides solida est,
quando casto amori Diuinitatis adhibetur timor: ^assiodor. in Psalm. 5.7.
Then indeed is faith sound, when unto thy chaste Love of the Deity thou addest
fear, even fear of presuming, for This; 1 John 4.18.
Perfect love casts forth. Oh then approach and draw near thou fearful
soul, and hear what thy Savior says, attend to the things which belong to
thy peace; for God speaks peace unto his people, Psalm. 85.8.
and joy to his Saints, that they turn not again: Be not therefore overmuch
dismayed with any fear, Luke 16.20. Job 2.7.
for though thou beeft as full of sins as Lazarus was of soars, or Job of
blaines and botches, yet come unto him with fear, and kiss him with
reverence, and he will surely embrace thee on every side, and make thee to sit
with his Saints in Glory and great joy. But I will no longer burden you with
his fear, but will rather now discover his shame, which was such as that he
would not lift up his eyes to Heaven. Ecco pudor, behold his shame.

God, thirdly, weakness of his faith to look up; the last of these we may see
in this man's eyes, with which he would not so much as look up. Beda Glos.
ord. and Hug. Card. in loc.
Sicut humilis non audet appropinquare vt deus appropinquet, ita non aspicit vt
aspiciatur: As an humble man dares not draw near to God, that God may draw
near to him: so neither dares he look up unto God that God may look down on
him.

But why would he not look up unto heaven?

Quiase attendebat, et se ita attendebat; vt primo sibi displiceret, et sic Deo
placeret: Aug. in hunc loc. in Psalm 13. and ser. de verbis Domini. ser. 36.
fol. 99. Plautus in Mostell.
that God might be pleased with him through his Savior.

The Comicke could say, Male sibi conscius non audet recte intueri alios: A
thief dare not directly look an honest man in the face, much less dare this
Publican look up unto God. Ecce pudor, behold his shame.

And it is indeed a good sign for a Sinner, or rather of a Saint, to be
abashed and ashamed. Ecce pudor, behold his shame.

Diogenes could tell the young man that blushed, that it was virtues color:
Tullie tells us, Diogen. apud Diog. Laer. lib. Cicero de Orat. Quint. lib. 12.
Declamat. 12. Chrysostom. sup. Man Hom. 33.
that it is the Guardian of all the Virtues; and Quintillian writes it, the
Mother of Modesty, The Guardian of Virtue, and Mistrisse of Innocence: yea,
and that golden mouthed Father calls it, Fraenum vitiorum, the restrainer of
vices; yea, and note the Penitents of old, and see them approaching Gods
presence, Confounded and ashamed, so Ezra; with Open shame, so Daniel; Standing
at Christ's feet, Ezra 9 6. Dan. 9.7. Luke 7.38. Dyonis. Carth. in loc.
and behind him, so the woman that was a sinner: Considerando enim peccatorum
suorum enormitatem in tantum contempserint seipsos, etc. for considering the
enormiousnesse of their sins, so despised themselves, as that they thought
themselves in no wise worthy of approaching Gods presence, no not so much as to
fall down at his footstool, much less to look him in the face.

And if this be so, Sampson did the Gates of Azza, Judge. 16.3.
on his shoulders, and think it no burden, much less count it any shame. Men
can now a days be as proud as Pharaoh, as drunken as Balthazar, as covetous as
Nabal, as profane as Esau, as adulterous as Zimri and Cosbie; and yet are they
ashamed? no surely, as Jeremy said to the Jews, Ier. 6.15.
so I fear me may I say to some Christians, They are not ashamed: for it they
were, then would they not give their foul sins such fine names as some do,
or as one says, they would not die their course cloth in such fine colors,
palliateing their sins, that they may still keep them and commit them. No, no,
if shame had but its seat, then would they not make their Oaths, the
Gentleman's Arms, Blasphemies their ordinary speeches, Pride their
handsomnesse, Drunkenness their good-fellowship, Prodigality their bounty,
and Adultery but a trick of youth, Aug. Confess. dib. 2. cap. 6. Senec. Epist.
45.
which the holy Fathers, nay which is more, even heathen Philosophers do even
reprove most sharply, yea and what it differs from the calling of evil good,
or good evil, which carries with it such an heavy curse Esaias. 5.20. Esaias.
5.20.
surely I cannot tell. And sure I am that whilst we so look up, God will very
hardly look down. For if I regard wickedness in my heart, Psalm. 66.18.
the Lord will not hear my prayers, says David.

It is obserueable of the Peacocke, that in beholding his plume of feathers he
swells and waxes proud, Plin. Not. Hist. parts. 1. lib. 10. Cap 20.
but looking on his feet, he is abashed and ashamed. So me thinks should it
be with Man who rejoices in ought he enjoys so much as to make him proud. Oh
but look down a little, behold but the foulness of thy feet, or rather
consider the filthiness of thy affections, and then tell me whether thou can
look up without shame. But now least I should seem to glory in any ones wsnt
of this shame, let me thus breifely pass over this subject, and bring before
you this Publicans sorrow also, which seems to be such as that most
passionately he smites his breast. Ecce Dolor, behold his Sorrow.

Perge Publicane, incaepto opere, urge et Iusta, says an ancient Predicant:
Tho. de Trugilla post. Dominic. 10 post Penticost, Tom. 1 fol. 553 554.555.
Go on thou humble sinner having begun so good a work, urge it, be instant,
and never cease till thou have perfected what is begun, for anon heaven will
hastily bow down to thee, or rather, the God of heaven will bow the heavens,
come down, and help thee. Percutit pectus, quasi ictibus illud e somno
surgere et euigilare faciebat, Osorius ex Theophilect. Dominic. 10. post
Pentecost. Tom. 2. page 378.
that is Theophilacts conceit, that even as a Cock rouseth himself by
clapping his wings, and makes himself fit for crowing: so does this man, by
smiteing himself, make himself fit for crying. But leaving these conceits,
let us see the true sense of this Act.

Some interpret it to be a beginning of his Repentance or contrition of heart
for sins past, Alfonsus Salm. in Parab. tract. 32 a Sect 13 ad 17. page 260.
etc. (...) quarto. Aug. an Psalm. 51. obiter.
so Salmeron: others hold it to be Obtritio cordis, a bruiseing of the heart,
so S. Austine: beyond all these I prefer such as understand it For a sign of
an humble spirit, and contrite heart, for his sins committed: Reproucing it,
for that it had been the well and pit, root, and original, yea, the very
smoke of all evil, and therefore He smites it.

As a Tree that is well rooted in the earth, if it be grubd up, it will cast up
the earth that is round about it: so Sin that is deeply rooted in the heart,
when a man would pluck it up, Cor commotum and afflictum relinquere dobet,
Stella in loc.
it ought to leave behind it an astonished and an afflicted heart.

I remember what I have read of Thesius that Athenian King, who causing his
own wife and children to be mischieously murdered, cried out to the
Executioner: Stella ex Plut. de Thaeseo and Romulo. Hist. 1.3.
Percute, Percute ictu valido pectus illud. etc. Smite, oh Smite, and that with
a heavy stroke, that heart that hatcheth in it such mischiefs; wound it, but
slay it not at an instant, for hearts so conscious of mischief, must not be
put to sudden death but ought rather to be brought unto it by degrees, or
rather diversities of pains. And even thus dealt this doleful Publican with
his sinful heart, Pectus percussit, he smote his Breast, yea, his very Heart,
Ex quo omnia peccata pullulant, Albertus Magnus in loc.
out of which buds all sin and iniquity; even evil thoughts, Murders,
Fornications, Thefts, false testimonies, Slanders, Mat. 15.19.
etc. of all, or most of which, this man being in all likelihood guilty, He
therefore smites his Breast. Ecce dolor: behold his Sorrow, and learn from it;
What a sweet Sacrifice a Sorrowful Soul is.

Oh, an Heart Troubled, 1 Samuel 1.6. Molten, 2. King. 22.19. Afflicted, Psalm.
34.18. Anguished, Psalm. 77.3. Perplexed, Psalm. 143.4. Wounded, Prouer. 18.14.
Bruised, Isay. 42.3. Rent, Job. 2.13. Poor, Mat. 5.3. Pricked, Acts. 2.37. oh
such an heart is The Sacrifice of Sacrifices, who so has it, The Lord is near
unto them, Psalm. 34.18. The Lord will heal them, and bind them up, Psalm.
147.3. The Lord will look upon them, Isay 66.2. The Lord will revive them, and
give life unto them, Isay. 57.15. And hence it is that the Penitents of old are
for the most part brought in, not only having Sorrow, 2. Sam. 24.6.^
but even Indignation and Revenge: 2. Sam. 14.10.
See David once Touched in heart, Psalm. 73.22.
another time Smitten in heart, a third time Be-fooleing, Cant. 5.4.
and Be-Beasting himself, yea, behold The Spouse Fretting, Ephraim Smitting;
Ier. 31.19.
and Job Abborring himself, ob. 42.6.
here is their Iudignation; yea, but behold their Revenge also: Sin which
before Repentance came was so Dear unto them as that they could not endure so
much as Reproof for it, comes now to be Revenged, and that of Themselves, yea,
and On Themselves too: which thing the Apostle does in many places sweetly set
out, by Beating down the Body, Cor. 9.27. Romans 12.1.
1. Cor. 9.27. and by Sacrificing of the Body, Romans 12.1. which in a Penitent
looks for nothing but for a Clubbe, Mat. 5.29.30
or a Knife, which cuts out the Right Eye in regard of Pleasure, and cuts off
the Right hand in respect of Profit, and casts them all away, nay, the very
Heart shall not escape the scourging, but that shall be Broken and Contrite too,
or at least, if we cannot come at That, the Breast shall be surely Smitten;
which shows the vindictiue mind, and Reuengefull spirit which is in a Saint,
that has been a Sinner: in whom when God has once entered That Crucifying
Nail into his Side, Ier. 23.29.
he will take the Hammer of the Law and drive it in further, and hammer it even
to the very Head, charging it with its Dullness, Deafness and Stupidity, yea,
and rateing and rattling it up for its Blockish beastliness, as sometimes that
renowned Martyr Cranmer did his Right hand, Doctor Fox.
for Subscribing to some Popish Articles, for which says the story, He first
put his Right hand to the fire; and here this man smites his Breast: Totus ergo
interius and exterius veluti quodam humilitatis indumento amictus erat; Lud.
Granat. concio in Dominic. 10. post Penticost. page 525. in 8^.
therefore both inwardly and outwardly would he testify the truth of his
contrition, as if he had been from top to toe covered with the garment of
humility.

But alas poor soul why art thou so cast down, or why art thou so disquieted
for thy Sins, Savior? Oh fear not, neither be dismayed; for the fierce
indignation that thou now show on thy self, shall surely turn away Gods
fiery Indignation from thy soul: and therefore possess thy soul in patience,
stay a little while for God, as well as he has staid a long while for thee,
and behold anon he comes; he comes with a recompense of his seeming
slackenesse, and will for thy beating on thy breast fall on thy Neck, Luk
15.20. Cant. 1.1.
for thy Crucifying thy Self, even Kiss thee with the kisses of his Lip:
for the Renting of thy clothes, clothe thee with the best Robes: for thy
Fasting, feast thee with the Fat Calfe; and for thy heavy sorrowing, he will
give an Hearty Rejoicing, making his Ministers in the Church Militant, and his
Saints and Angels in the Church Triumphant, to be as so many Minstrels, or
Musicians singing unto thee one of the Lords Songs in this strange Land.

Oh, but I am not So Smitten, that is my Grief, So Sorrow, that is my Sorrow.

Why if not So, even So as thou Should, yet do So, So as thou can; so as
thou do it in some measure, doubt not, nor be dismayed, but God that has
begun that good work in thee, will surely add to thy stature, increase thy
store, and perfect his good work begun in thee. If there be but a Grain of
this Grace in thee, know thou thy self wonderfully Graced, for one Grain, of
what sort soever it be, is as truly Seed, as a Bushel; and one Grace is as
verily Grace as if thou had them in that measure as they that have them
Pressed down, Shaken together, and Running over. As therefore the Spirit spoke
in Paul's Buffetings without, and Fightings within, My Grace is sufficient for
thee, Cor. 12.9.
for my Power shall be made manifest by thy Weakness: so I say to Thee; that
thou have Grace, oh glory, and rejoice in That; as for the Measure let that
alone till the Growing time; for though the Winter be now, yet assure thy self
the Spring will come, wherein the Sun of Righteousness shall rise in thy
Heart, and vnthawe thy Frozen Soul, sending out the Oil that shall supple thy
bruised conscience, and pouring out the Wine that shall Lighten thy sorrowful
heart, and make thee glad above all thy Fellows, yea, above thy Condemners and
Contemners, nay, above That Pharisee that points thee out for This so vilde a
Publican. Why therefore as though we were cast out, should we be so much cast
down? Oh let us not fear, for, Aretius in 2 Cor. 12.9.
Si non ex Toto exaudiamur, exaudimur tamen Sic, vt Consolationem habeamus ex
ratione consilij Deie If we be not heard in All, let us not be dismayed, as if
we should not be heard at All; for though he hears us not at our pleasure, he
will do it at his leisure, when as we shall surely have comfort enough, as is
well seen in the secret of his Counsel; And therefore for That measure of
sorrow which thou have, be therewith content; and then God will add to thy
stature, and make thee at the last, even To weep bitterly with Peter, and To
wash thy Bed, and water thy Couch with David; Math. 26.75. Psalm. 6.6. Psalm.
119.136.
yea, Gush out Rivers of water, with which thou shall so rinse thy Heart, and
cleanse thy Soul, as thou shall in the Purity thereof be so blessed as to See
God, Math. 5.8.
and so happy as to say unto him, O God be merciful unto me a Sinner.

But I ask once more: Is a sorrowful Soul such a sweet Sacrifice? Be not ye
then deceived who say, We Repent; and yet the time is to come that ever you
truly sorrowed.

One says wittily, That some men deal with their sins, as corrupt Courts
do with their Informers; or as the Popes do with their Stews. The one
whereof because they bring Many Sackes to their Milles; and the other, because
they bring Great revenues to their coffars, likes them well enough; tho they
know them to be both Base and Beastly: So do the Ungodly and Impenitent deal
with their sins, which they will not leave, but rather love and cherish till
death does them depart, and all because they bring either Pleasure, or Profit,
Honor or Exaltation: Nay, observe some sinners, and you shall find them, that
when they are galled or grieved for their sins, either by Check of Conscience,
or by Plain Reproof out of the Word, or by some Affliction or Judgment, yet
will they not Leave them off, but as Beggars doc by their Soars, so will they
deal by their sins: The former will not be Quite healed, because with a
Little smart they get some Ease, and live in Idleness, yea, and have by it
Alms to their Advantage, and therefore they cannot endure the Chirurgian that
will quite recover them: So is it with these kind of Sinners, who cannot
endure The Balm of Gilead, nor yet the Physician there; because the one by his
Skill, the other by its Healing Power, would make them whole every whit; But
that is not for their Profit, and therefore it the Physician shall bring a
Purging Pill of Reproof to cleanse them, it will not down, it cannot be
endured: Sweet words they think will rather heal their corrupt soars, and if
by any but by Them you strive to bring them to this degree of Sorrow, as to
make them to Smite their Breasts, you shall perhaps be Smitten on your Backs;
if not so, (for fear of the Law) I am sure you shall have (without love to the
Gospel) Ieremiahs portion, Ier. 18 18. Gal. 4.16.
which was, To be smitten with the Tongue. The galled Galathians will repute
you Enemies. Gal. 4.16. The Amazed and Doubting Jews will account you Full of
New wine, Acts 2.13.15.
Acts. 2.13.15. and every Talkatiue Tertullus, though he be no Orator, will be
telling it out, that you are Pestilent Fellows, Mouers to Sedition, Acts.
24.1.2.3.4.5.6. Acts 24.1.2.3.4.5.6.


But oh I beseech you grieve not the Spirit, by which ye are sealed, and by
whom we are sent to speak the Truth, The whole Truth, and nothing but the
Truth, as we shall answer at our masters appearing, and if you do otherwise,
yea, the very contrary, know you that all the Sorrow you show either by
dejected Countenances, or by lifted up eyes, or by Holding up the Hands, or by
Bowed Knees, or Beating the Breast, or Crying Lord have mercy upon us, all
these things will not serve to make up true Repentance, such as will bring
Remission and Forgiveness. Come therefore I beseech you, and learn with
Humility and Patience, what this Sorrowful soul is, which is so sweet a
Sacrifice: It is a Soul full of sense and feeling, tender of every spot of
corruption that cleaues unto it, at which it quickly stirs, and checkes, and
if it slippes, through the frailty of Nature, it grieves and laments, wrings
and woes, as being wreched and miserable, blind and naked, without Christ
Jesus be his Deliverer. Get we then such Hearts, such Breasts as These, and
then fear nothing, but that our coming shall be wel-commed, and our crying
heard, if we do, with my Publicans mouth and mind, humbly confess that we are
in Misery, and have need of Mercy, and therefore cry, O God be Merciful, etc.
Ecce vera Confessio, Behold his true confession, which is the fourth limb of
my Text, of which in the next Sermon you shall (by Gods grace) have the fruit.

The Picture of a Penitent SINNER.
The second Sermon.
LVKE 18.13. O God be Merciful to me a Sinner.


THE things contained in the former words were: 1. His Fear: 2. His Shame: 3.
His Sorrow.
But now that Fear is past, Shame is discovered, Sorrow could not be hid: but
had I thought That all had been so whole as that none of us had needed the
Physician, I would have spared my pains, and never called the Righteous, but
only Sinners to repentance: Yet let him that is without sin cast the first
stone at me, and then will I leave preaching to Them, and only pray for My
Self; Oh God be Merciful to ME a Sinner.

But since it cannot be denied, That we are all sinners. I heartily beseech you
with patience to heed with your hearts what he says with his mouth, and
confesses with his tongue, saying; -- Oh God be Merciful to me. A Sinner.
Which is the fourth and last general part of my Text,

I read none almost weighing these words, but that they hold them, and handle
them too, as words of weight, commending them, not for their Multitude, but by
their Magnitude; not by their Sound, but for their Substance; not as Verbal,
but as Vertuall.

I remember that Plato, Plato.
that Prince of Philosophers advises, That in Speaking we should look unto
Three things: 1. Ad quem loquimur: 2. Quid loquimur: 3. Quam multa loquimur:
First, Whom we speak: Secondly, What we say: Thirdly, That our words be few.
All which as they are praiseworthy in an Orator, so in an Humble, Devout, and
Zealous Petitioner: and conceive you here how prettily they are comprised in
these words, O God be merciful, etc.

Some conceive this part of my Text to be A Song, D. Boyses Post. in Domine 11.
post Trin.
which if any grant, they must think withal that it will bear but a Doleful
Dittie: For though the first Note be raised so high as to him that is above all
Note, God.

a Mean, even Be merciful.

an heany Touch, fitted for the Base, Me a Sinner.

But I am now to Say, and not to Sing, yea, to present unto you, a Man of
Mourning, and not of Mirth, and therefore I must hang up the Harp on the
Willow, and wish you once again to behold the Man; and that

1. Confessing: 1.2.3.
2. Petitioning: 3. Condemning.
Confessing Gods greatness: as acknowledging in one word, both His Kingdom,
and Power, and Glory for ever and ever. Ecce Fides therein, behold his Faith.
Ob God.

Petitioning Gods goodness; as assuring himself, That that endures yet
daily: Ecce Petitio, therein see his Petition; Be Merciful.

Condemning his own wretchedness, as knowing himself not only Sinning, but
even Sinful. Ecce Condemnatio, Behold his damnatorie Sentence against
himself, Me a Sinner.

Prima pars.
And now if we have Faith, but even as much as a Grain of Mustard Seed; then
let us behold His Faith, who though a Sinner; nay, which is more even A
Publican, yet is he so faithful as to approach Gods presence, and to cry, O
God. Ecce Fides, behold his Faith.

Ludouic. Granat. ex Aug Confess.
Oh quam Excelsus es Domine? sed Humiles cord sunt Seeds tuae, Oh God how
excellent is thy name through all world? and yet thou beholdest the humble a
far off, and make their heart thy habitation, of which my Publican being
perfectly persuaded he comes (though a Sinner) into the sight of his and our
Savior and cries, 1. Cor. 6 19. Revel. 3.10
Oh God, whence learn we.

In all Crosses and Calamities, Distresses and Miseries whither to fly, even
unto God only, in Christ alone, for Comfort.

Look on David in all his Troubles, even when his Enemies oppressed him, when
his Sins suppressed him, yea and when his Sorrows could not almost be
expressed of him, in all These whither went he? whither fled he? but even unto
The Lord his God? He was so ignorant of any praying to Patriarch or Prophet, to
any Saint or Angel, as that when he was even Swallowed up with Sorrows he
said, Quis mihi in caelis praeter te? etc. Whom have I in Heaven besides Thee?
Psalm. 7.3.2^.
or whom on the Earth in Comparison of Thee? Non enim est in caelo, nec in
Terra, aliqua creatura quae mihi sufficiat pro beatitudine mea, Lira in loc.
etc. There is not in Heaven, neither can there be on Earth any creature that
can content me for blessedness, but only Thou Oh God: but what? None but God?
what say you to The Holy Angels? why alas, They are but Ministering Spirits,
Heb. 1.14.
Heb. 1.14 in whom there is no help without Thee Oh God: They have indeed
wrought wonders, but it has been through This Power, and for This his Glory,
Fabritius in Psalm 73.25. fol. 648 in fol.
In quos tamen fiduciam non collocandum, illis non intendum, illos pro Rupe and
Portione nostra non habendos monemur in Sacris literis: In whom though we must
put no confidence, they must not be our stay, we must not esteem them as our
rock or portion, as it is plainly pointed out in holy Scripture, yea but if
not unto Angels in Heaven what say you then unto Men and Other creatures on
Earth? Surely for Them I may also say: Revel* 19.10.22.9. Psalm. 62.9.146.5
In his omnibus nulla fiducia ponenda est, That in all or any of them there is
no confidence to be put; as the word it self does evidently and infinitely
witness. Prou 3.5. Ier. 9.24.17.7.
Yea and whither else should The Sinner fly? Is there any-where so precious
Balm as in Gilead; are there in any place such skillful Physicians as There?
are the Lame healed any where so soon as in The Poole of Bethesda: no. neither
is there any hope of Help for a Sinner but in his only Savior, to whom he
must call, and on whom he must cry; Oh God.

Which if it be so, Those Reeds of Egypt, nor Staves of Rome, nor Pillars of
Babylon, who say, That if thou be smitten thou must fly to this Saint, or
that Angel for Help and Saccour, which if we deny we shall presently have a
Romish Colt for to kick at us with his Heel, and call it Grauem Haereticorum
errorem, Mazarinus Jesuit, in Psalm. 51. Concio 125. fol. 250.251. in 4^.
A grievous error of Heretics; and mark his reason, which is as Strong as
True; for it is confirmed by the Council of Coline held in the year 1549.
under Adolphus Archbishop of that Province, so that if there it were to be
found it must needs be sound. Yea, but what will you say if that Jesuit did but
speak without book? Vide Lauren. Surius. Tom. 4. a fol 833. ad 856.
Sure I am, that if any credit may be given to a Carthusian Collector of the
Counsels, even to Laurentius Surius, he has not one word thereof in all
their Decrees; yet he to grace his margent with a Council, will needs
counsel his Proselites, from them that never said it, That they should go
from their Creator to a Poor Creature: Oh, what are these but Doctors of
Gentilisme? For among them you shall read of so many Gods, as that poor Atlas
shoulders were not broad enough to bear them, Juuenal. in Satyr.
as Neptune for Troy; Venus for Cyprus; Minerua for Athens; Juno for Carthage;
Mars for Rome, etc. And has not Rome now consecrated Oxen to S. Luke;
Mazarinus vbi supra. fol. 126.
the Pursse to S. Sithe; Horses to S. Loy; Teeth to S. Apolina; Swine to S.
Anthony; the Throat to S. Basil? Yes, yes, Benedicti fontis. Secundum vsum
Sarum. fol. 15 16. an. ^ 604. Letania Romans in Com. Suffrag. fol. 85.86.
it is evident, and which is much more Lamentable, even their souls too, to no
less then to some scores of Saints, as is apparent in their Roman Missals,
and common Suffrages, with their Catechismes and books of Devotion every where
to be seen, even in English. But herein let them do as it shall seem good in
the eyes of His Holiness of Rome; but as for Us and Our Children, Oh come, let
us Worship and fall down and Kneel (only) before the Lord our maker, saying
unto him alone, Oh God.

But again, if we must so do, Endor with Saul, 1 Samuel 28.7.8 2 King 1.2.3.
or to Baal-zebub the God of Ekron with Ahaziah; but take heed of such courses
for fear lest Gods holy Angels Meet with your Messengers, which shall assure
you that you shall never either Prosper or Recover: Nay, which is worse, let
him take heed That God does not set his face against him, Leuit. 20.7.
and cut him off from his People. Oh therefore take heed of going from the God
of Israel, to the Idol of Ekron, from Samuel in Ramoth, to the Witch of Endor,
from the Rivers of Samaria to the Waters of Damascus, from God to the Devil,
for surely for such an heinous sin, God will bring an heavy Revenge, and
therefore with my Publican, rather cry, O God.

But in the last place let me hence admonish you of that which is utterly a
fault among some: that is, Prayers, until they fall into grievous Extremities.
Some if Heaviness possess them, they will get them into merry Company; yea,
they will hang up Care, and drink down Sorrow; All which when they have done,
they shall find it doing them as much good, as cold water does him that
drinks in the fit of his Burning Fever: yea, even as much comfort is there to
the soul in such courses, as was from David's sweet Harp, to Saul's vexing
heart, which Eased him for a while, 1 Samuel 16.16.23. 1 Samuel 31.4.5.
but afterward tormented him even to Death. These are but toys, and can bring
no solace to a troubled soul; for howsoever in time of our Security we labor
to smother and quench the Burning fire of a wounded spirit by External
delights, yet as last Affection will be silenced, and Conscience will pronounce
sentence against us, and that with so shrill a voice as that the Deafest Adder
shall hear it, and the merriest Companion shall say, that there is no way for
the allaying of this spirit but one, even by Going unto the right Humbly, and
by Calling on his Name most Earnestly, and saying, Oh God be merciful.

Oh but there is in me such Dullness of Flesh, Heaviness of Spirit, there is
such Vanity and Vexation, as that I am altogether unfit for God, both
weakness and wickedness has so compassed me about, and hembd me in on
every side, as that I dare not look up unto such an one as God is.

This is indeed an heavy temptation, An utter disuse of prayer, and so take
from us our best weapon that we have in all our warfare: This was David's case
for a while, Psalm. 77.3.4.
who whilst he thought on God he was Troubled, and when he Prayed his Spirit
was full of Heaviness; yea, when he awakened he was astonished, and could not
speak: And why was David so disquieted? Franciscus de Puteo. Aurea ^ate^a in
loc.
Vel quia turbatus erat recordatione peccatorum proquibus pio dolor cruciatur,
says Cassiodor; Vel quia videns iram Dei per ea excitatam, says Lyra; Vel
quia non habuit audaciam aliquid petendi a Deo praeconfusione, says The
Gloss: He was so sore troubled, either because of the remembrance of his
sins, for which he was even crucified with a godly sorrow in his soul: or
because he saw the wrath of God kindled against him for them: or because he
had not the face to look God in the face, because of the confusion that was
before him; yea, but that he may be an ensample for us to follow, Verse. 6.
see what he says, Verse 6. I called to my remembrance my song in the night,
etc. etc. Yea, Verse. 10. I remembered (says he) the years of the Right hand of
the most High, Verse. 10.
v. 11. I remembered the works of the Lord, Verse. 11.
his Wonders of old, 12.
and devised on his Acts, v. 12. and out of this sucked he no small advantage;
Cassiodorus in loc.
Quia in haec cogitatione nullum est taedium, nulla satietas, sed quanto qui
plus hauserit, tanto plus dulcia sensu perquirit, says Cassiodor: for in such
thoughts as these he found no irkesomenesse, no tediousness, but by how much
the deeper he drew, by so much the more sweet he found the comfort of it to
his senses, yea, to his soul: And therefore in the greatest of the abundance
of thy grief, pour out thy soul, and what thou art not able to express in
Words, make it up in Sighs and Groans; Lam. 2.18.
and as Jeremiah has it, Let thine Heart cry it, though with Hannah, 1 Samuel
1.13.
Thy Lips only are seen to move: Oh so do, and thou shall see how it will
move the God of mercy, even to Pity and Compassion, doing unto thee as thine
heart desires; which is, To be merciful unto thee. Ecce Petitio. Behold his
Petition. 2da. 4tae.
Be Merciful.

Oh verbum satis Breue, sed vehementer Efficax: Diez. Lusitanus in Loc.
Oh here is a word wonderful short, but marvelous effectual, yea so
effectual as that our Savior himself puts to his Fiat, verse. 14. That he
went away more justified then the Pharisee. Veritas dicit, Deus dicit. Iudex
dicit. Truth speaks it, God says it, August. in loc.
yea, the ludge of all has adjudged it, and therefore it is most sure.

If a man should come into the Church, and see these diversities of behavior
in these two men: The Pharisee crakeing, and the Publican crying, whereto might
he liken them? surely to nothing better then to the Corn in the Field, Tho. de
Trucille. catena post in loc.
which the more Full it is, the more it hangs Downward, but the Emptier it is,
the Higher it is Exalted; even so is it with these two men: The Former, like a
light Ear, stands upright, saying, Oh God I thank thee, I am not as other
men, or as this Publican, v. 11. Ecce superba iactantia, behold his proud
boasting: But the Latter, like a Full Ear, stoopes down, and cries, Oh God be
Merciful.

Nulla praetendit Merita, nullas adfertexcusationes, Alfons. Salmer. in loc.
Tract. 32. a Sect 13. ad 17
sed se Peccatorem libere confitetur, says Salmeron, a Jesuit: He pretends
not Merits (as they of their Synagogue do) He extenuates not his sins (by
making them Venial as he himself does) but he freely confesses them:
Propitiationem petens, Ibid.
per quam sibi appropinquare dignetur, crying for Mercy, by which only he
might be esteemed worthy of approach amidst his Misery. In the same stream
runs another, though otherwise a Papist, saying; Non allego Merita mea, quae
nulla habeo, Lud. Granat. in loc. Concio 1.
sed prouoco ad misericordiam: I dare not plead my Merits, for they are
altogether none, but I will urge thy Mercy, for that endures for ever, and
therefore I acknowledging my sin, Pardon, oh pardon mine iniquity, and be
merciful unto me a Sinner. That (even by the judgment of Papists) Mercy, not
Merit, is the best of a Sinners Plea, in making suite against his sins.

The wounded and distressed Beggar when he would have an Alms, does not crack
of his Country, he stands not on his Gentility, but rather he Opens his Sores,
Lies in his Rags, deplores his lamentable estate, and by these he calls on
the Passengers for pity; so should it be with the Sinner, who is full of Sin
and Shame, whose soar runs and cease not, who might even Roar with
Disquietnesse of heart, because of the Increase of his iniquities; and what
remains then save only Obtestations, Obsecrations, Importunate entreaties,
grounded upon Grace, and all accompanied with an absolute disclaiming of all,
saving only, The goodness of God. Be Merciful.

As from the Sun, Diez* Lucitan. Summa Praedi. Tit. Misericord.
Moon, and other of the Planets, (which are as it were the Eyes of the world,)
as by the Aspect of them, so many good things grow, as Gold in the Earth, and
Grass on it; yea, Gemmes, and Jewels, Herbs and Flowers: So by Gods beholding
us in Mercy, Diuersa quaeque bona in animis gignentur, every good and perfect
gift are begotten in, and gotten to our souls, which may bring Comfort to the
Conscience, Joy to the Heart, Solace to the Soul, and what can we do less,
yea, or what else but cry, O God be merciful?

And if this be so: Crakeing Pharisee, and Boasting Iusticiarie, who yet do
stand in it, That there is something in thee for which thou art worthy to be
heard; If there be so, then I pray thee show it by these three ensuing signs,
and then will I say, That thou art more worthy then Other men are, or then this
Publican.

First, Free, and not bound of Duty to do that which thou do, then Boast.
Secondly, Of thy self, and By thy self, to do what thou do, then Boast.
Thirdly, once thou have done Well, thou never afterward committest Evil, then
Boast.
But who can thus do? and therefore, Why Boastest thou thy self? or rather
why with Fear, Shame and Sorrow smittest thou not thy Breast, and say not, O
God be merciful?

Surely, if I might be thought worthy to make a President for them that have
any Suite into the Court of Requests, I should cast his Purposes into this
Mould, and bring it in, in this Manner, Be merciful: for as mercy is the
inducement to be a suitor, so the maine ground of my Petition shall be mercy,
the substance of my request mercy, and the scope and conclusion, mercy; and
then I shall not fear, but that mercy being my plea, mercy shall be my
Portion; for God cannot but show mercy, where the Need of mercy is felt, where
the Desire of mercy is unfeigned, and when the Suite of mercy is importunate.
And therefore I amidst Popish Merit-mongers, who come with their works, Ex
Congruo and Condigno; Tho. Aquin. 1ma* 2. quaest. 114. Artio 3. Reynerius
Summae sub Tit. Meritum cap. 5. Rhemists Annot. in Romans 8.18. Annot. 5.
for Price, Value, and Worth; and among our Hypocritical Professors, who also
come with their Dista, stand off, For I am holier then thou; I, even I, come
and stand between them both, praying for Christ's Propitiation, and saying: Oh
God be merciful, for I am a sinner. Ecce condemnatio: Behold his Damnatorie
sentence, Me a Sinner.

Mark here, that he does not say, I am one that sins, 3^a. 4tae.
as in the Concrete, but (...), Mihi Peccatori, Hugo Card. Alfons. Salmar.
Gorran. in loc. Ioh. 9.34.
Me a Sinner in the Abstract; yea, even such an one in deed and truth, as the
Pharisees reputed the Blind man, Ioh. 9.34. Even a man wholly borne in sin.

What, such a Sinner? how dare thou then to approach This Presence? With what
face can thou come into These Courts? Does not the Scripture tell thee, That
God hears not Sinners? Ioh. 9.31. how much less Publicanes, Ioh. 9.31.
which are fitter for Harlots houses, Math. 21.31, Math. 21.31.
then to be seen at Heaven Gates? For what think thou, if Men will not cast
Pearl before Swine, or cast Bread unto Dogs, Math. 7.6.
will God then (think you) show mercy unto Sinners? Math. 15.26.
Oh I verily believe, That though he will not cast them Pearls, yet they
shall have Acrons; though he will not give them whole loaves, yet shall they
taste of his crummes: Math. 6.26. Math. 5.45. Psalm. 147.9.
For he that clothes the grass of the Field, Feeds the Ravens, Shines with
his Sun on the Evil; Shewers down his Rain on the Unjust: He (I verily
believe) will also be merciful to me a Sinner; yea, and from this Humble
Confession, I dare pronounce an Absolution; saying, That if we acknowledge our
sins, Ioh. 1.9.
he is Faithful, and Just to for give us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all our unrighteousness.

Had this poor Penitent lived in Rome, or among the Romanists of old, he had
not so soon had either Justification or Absolution: Council. Trid. Sess. 14.
cap. 9. can. 13.14. Cassand, de Confess. Artic. 12. Tollet. Ies. Institut. l.
3. c. II.
for besides his Contrition and Confession they would have had Satisfaction,
not by a Grief only, or by Restitution, which we hold both laudable, lawful,
yea, and necessary too; but such Satisfaction would they exact as, Ex proprijs
and ad aqualstatem, ac per hoc Just and ex Condigno satisfacere possumus: As
our owneact, whereby we may also satisfy according to the measure of equality,
Bellar, lib. 4. de Poenit. c. 7.
by the merit of condignitie, as satisfying the justice of Gods law violated.
Oh such Satisfaction who can make? surely no man, which though we cannot do,
yet let us not cease to confess humbly, and pray heartily: O God be merciful
to me a Sinner.

S. Gregory was of the mind, Greg. Moral. 26.
that, Apud aures Dei vox valida deuota confessio est: A lowly Confession was a
loud Petition in Gods ears. Genesis 18.27.
Abraham confessed, I am but Dust and Ashes, Genesis 18.27. Now says one: As
Ashes do preserve and keep in fire, so does an Humble Confession assure
Favor. You see that The lower the Pit, the sweeter the water; and be we also
assured, That the lowlyer the Sinner, the more loving our Savior. Psalm 32.5.
David did but say, I will confess my sinner, and hearken what is said
further, Thou forgauest me the punishment of my sin. Lo here, Nondum
pronunciat, sed solum promittit, and Deus iam dimittit: Cassiod in loc.
As yet he does not confess but he says, I will confess, and yet God
forgiues: Nondum est vox in Ore vt Confessionem exaudiat Homo, sed and Deus
audit: As yet what he means in his mind, is not come to his mouth, but
before his confession is heard of men, his petition is granted of God.

An other pattern of his readiness herein have we in the Parabel of the
Prodigal, Luke 15.18.
wherein you can no sooner hear the son; saying, Ego surgam, I will arise,
but you may also see, that Pater Surgit, the father does arise: notably
figuring unto us how gracious the Lord is, and how ready to forgive: oh blessed
soul wherein Mercy and Truth so meet together and kisseth each other; for
here is Truth in the Son, and therefore the Father meets him with Mercy. Ver.
20.
Nay if you note that which is recorded ver. 20. you cannot but say with S.
Bernard: Non pari vbertate fluunt Amans and Amor; S. Bern. in Cant. Ser. 8.
Sponsus and Sponsa; Creator and Creatura; non magis quam Sitiens and Fons:
that as there is great difference between the flowing of the Ocean, and of a
little River, and there is great odds between that which the thirsty man
drinks, and that which the fountain has to give him; so is there between
the creature loving God, and God who is love it self: come therefore and let us
all stoop in humility, and he will raise us in Mercy, let us confess that we
are Sinners, and he will surely raise us up a Savior.

A Sinner? who confesses not this? and if This be enough, who hopes not to be
a Saint? yea, but I will say of the Confession of our times as S. James did of
Petitioning in his time; Iam. 4.2.
Ye Confess, but ye Confess amiss; you say for the general That you are
Sinners, but you cannot abide to say, where in Particulars; oh those Pierce,
and Dart Deep. That all have erred and strayed like lost Sheep, the whole
congregation will confess; yea, but if the Minister shall say wherein, as
naming the peoples Simplicity, or Sensuality; their Envy, or Ignorance; their
Pride, or Couetuousnesse; you would be ready to say, That That were too much;
yea, That some hold unnecessary, since Auricular Confession grew out of date;
which manner of confession, the Popish Priests made a Bawd to their own lust;
(as if because that is not required that we make confession of our sins who
cannot help us, we might conceal them from God before whom our consciences
may accuse us) but hearken to the Wise-mans sentence, Pro. 28.13.
which me thinks is heavy: He that Hides his Sins shall not prosper; Aug
de Verbit Dom. Ser. 36. com. 10.
but he that Confesses and Forsakes them shall have Mercy. Dum Agnoscit Reus,
Ignoscit Deus, Whilst the Guilty Confesses, the God of Mercy pardons.

Yea, S. Bernlin speculo Monachi.
but then it must be on good conditions too, for it is not every Confession that
will bring Remission. Know you therefore that the conditions of this present
Obligation is such* that if it be, Fair. Feeling. Free. Full.
Then it is a well-conditioned-confession indeed.

Fair, that is, Pura and Simplici Intentions, Bern. vbi supra. Ludol. de Sax.
de vita Christi pars 1ma. cap. 41.
with a pure and simple intention. Teipsum ostendens, non Alios: Showing of
Shrifting thy self rather then others.

Secondly, it must be Feeling: that is, such an one as arises weight or
wickedness of our sins, in the feeling of either of which, we are forced to
confess with Tears, That they are weighty, and wearisome.

Free, not Forced or Constrained, either by Man's Laws, or Gods Judgments, as
they that by Plague or, Penury, by Sickness or Sting of an evil conscience,
have had their sins extorted from them. Greg. Epist. lib. 5. cap. 44.
Indictib. 14. fol. 393.
No says S. Gregory, Confessio extortafacit crimen, acknowledgment enforced
proves faulty, it is not Freewill offering, and therefore not regarded, nor
rewarded.

Full, not up to the Lips alone, but full to the very Heart, which consists not
of a particularizing of some of our faults, or culling out of our chief
transgressions, with Terms of General acknowledgement, but even with a
Ripping up of the Specialties: Psalm. 51. 4. 1 Timothy 1.13.
saying with David, This evil huae I done: With Paul, I was a Persecutor, a
Blasphemer, an Oppressor. Oh, better were it that we did even set our sins in
Order by an Humble Confession, then suffer God to set them in Order by a
dreadful remuneration, Psalm. 50. 21. Bernard.
come therefore and let us take the counsel of Mellifluous Bernard, which is
this:

Vide vnde veneris, and Erubesce: Vbies, and Ingemisce: Quovadis and
Contremisce.

These be the Paths of a Penitent, which will no longer live like a Publican:
like a notable and notorious Sinner, but like an holy and religious Saint.

But does my Publican confess, That he is a Sinner, Oh where then shall
appear those that are as notably notorious as He, and yet are found either to
Conceal, or to Excuse, or to Extenuate, or to deny; or, which is worst of all,
to defend their sins? Of any of which, if any that hear me this day be
Guilty, I beseech them in Christ's steed, that as they hope for Absolution, so
they would come to Confession: For hereby you shall. Bring Glory to God. 2.
Confusion to Satan: 3. And Peace to your own Souls.
Come we then to Gods house right early, and right humbly, and when we pray,
let us show rather Vulnera, then Munera, our wounds, then our worth; our
Misery, then our Bravery, our Rags then our Robes: for which though the World
condemns us for Puritanes, yet if Christ does commend us for Penitents it
matters not much; for hereby we shall have Glory after our Shame, when as they
shall be ashamed of their glory. Let us remember once again what we are, even
Stewards, and let us not forget, That we must render an Account of our
Stewardship: Isodor. Sum. cap. 14.
Codex ergo Rationum conscribendus est; It were well therefore that a count-book
were kept, Hic codex conscientia nostra est, etc. and this book is our
Conscience, wherein our sins both great and small should be written, that
there they may be viewed, and being viewed they may be confessed, and being
confessed they may be lamented, and being lamented they may be pardoned, and
being pardoned, we may be Everlastingly comforted: All which that we may have,
let us take to us this Peerless Pattern, and with him come unto God. 1. In
Fear, standing a far off: 2. With Shame, Not lifting up our Eyes to heaven:
3. With Sorrow, Smiting our Breasts: 4. With Confession and Petition, Saying, O
God be merciful to me a sinner. And the Though our sins were as red as
scarlet, Isay 1.18.
they shall be as Wool; though they were as crimson, they shall be made as
white as snow. For we shall be cleansed with his Blood, arrayed with his
Garments, graced with his Virtues, and glorified for his Names sake. All which
holy Father, grant unto us in Jesus Christ: To whom with Thee and the Holy
Spirit be rendered and ascribed all Honor and Glory, Power and Praise, for ever
and for evermore, Amen, Amen, Amen.

The Doctrines contained in the two foregoing SERMONS.
Sermon I.
Doct. 1. With what reverence and fear, Sinners should approach Gods
presence. Page 6. Doct. 2. It is indeed a good sign for a sinner, or rather of
a Saint, to be abashed and ashamed. Page 9. Doct. 3. What a sweet sacrifice a
sorrowful soul is. Page 15.
Sermon II.
Doct. 1. IN all crosses and calamities, distresses and miseries whither to
fly, even to God only in Christ alone for comfort. Page 17 Doct. 2. That
mercy, not merit, is the best of a Sinners plea, in making suit against his
sins. Page 22. Doct. 3. That if we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all our
unrighteousness. Page 24.
FINIS.

