Most certain report of a monster borne at Oteringham in Holdernesse, the 9.
of April last past. 1595.

Also of a most strange and huge fish, which was driven on the sand at Outhorn
in Holdernesse in February not passing two months before this monster was
brought into the world, and within 4 miles distance.

Both to be auerred by the credible testimony of diverse gentlemen of worship,
and others, now being within this City.

monster

Printed by P.S. and are to be sold by T. Millington.

A letter sent from Rosse by a Gentleman of worship to his friend at Oteringham
to be certified of the truth of the shape of the Child borne there.
SIR
understanding that there is a monstrus child Borne in your parish of
Oteringham to the great admiration of the people that have seen it, being a
thing as I take it sent of God to forewarne us of our wickedness. And hearing
diverse reports thereof, I desire you to do me that favor as to send me in
writing the true form of the monster, the day of the birth thereof, and the
names of the parents. I make bold with you, but if it like you to do me this
favor, you shall command me any thing that lies in my power to perform.

Thus commending my self vnt^ ^ou, I commit you to God:

From Rosse this ^^^sent. Tuesday being the 6. of May. 1595. Your friend to vs^
M.S.

To my very good friend M.S. at Rosse
SIR
having received your letter, I thought it no less then my duty too perform
and grant your reasonable request wherefore it may please you to understand
that the ninthe of April last past this admired Monster was brought into the
world, to the great amasement of all those that beheld it, but to observe
decorum it is requisite before I speak or write thereof, that I should show
some circumstances which went before the birthe thereof thereby to make the
matter more plain unto you and your friends.

There is in our parish of Oteringham a man of honest and good disposition
named John Rawling, who has to wife one Elizabeth Rawling, A woman of honest
life and conversation, who being conceived with child accomplished her days
with much grief: At length the time of her travel being come, she was the
seventh of April last, safly delivered of a jolly woman child, of right shape
and comely proportion, which child is now alive, whereat the parents and
neyghbors rejoiced, thinking al things had been well and their business ended
but so it fell not out. For you shall understand that after the former peril
was past, new panges began to arise upon the sorrowful woman in such sort that
it caused a lamentation among all the wives. Thus with painful throws she
endured two days more, and at the last was released of her painful burden,
the ninth day of the same month she brought forth this monsterous child, a
terror to all the behoulders. The head whereof was like a Conny: The hands was
like a mole: The body, legs, and feet like a woman, having also the
preueties like a woman, it had no hear on the head or other parts, and the
skin was very black and fearful to the eyes of the beholders, as M. Latham
M. Brown our minister with diverse others which have seen the same can
certify you.

Many times has the Lord showed us his wonders, and marvelous works, to be a
fore warning of the punishments which he has prepared for sin: What a number
of strange tokens, monsterus birthes, blazing stars, earthquakes, dreadful
signs in the air, and fearful storms and tempests to move us to repentance
and amendment of our wicked lives has he shown in our land, and yet few or
none regardes it. Let no man think that such things do come by chance or
fortune, but that they are appointed to be messengers of ensuing plagues which
are like to fall upon us, except with repenting hearts we turn un to our Godand
forsake our wicked ways.

Yours to use V. Duncalfe.

Here follows the description of a monstrous fish which was driven on the
shore at Outhorn in Holdernes the 12. of February 1595. Not passing 2. months
before this monster was brought into the world.
SUch is the mercifullnesse of our God that he will never punish any people or
nation without warning first sent unto them. And therefore, the Prophets in
old time cried unto the people before any destruction fell upon them. Many
other means has the Lord wrought to forewarne the children of men of ensuing
euilles. Before the destruction of Jerusalem a Comet like a sword hounge
ouerthe city the space of our whole year.

In the night time a light was seen in the temple the space of half an hour.

Also a cow being carried into the temple for sacrifice, calued a Lamb in
sight of all the people.

A great and mighty gate of brass, which twenty men could scantly shut opned
it self alone.

An army of soldiers was seen in the clouds. And a voice was hard in the
Temple that said, Let us go hence. Thus was (...) warned, that by repentance it
might escape the intended destruction.

The Lord be merciful to this our Country of England, unto whom our most
loving God has given many warninges, yea as many as ever Jerusalem had, and
yet we continue in our former sins.

The Air has been corrupted because of sin, the Sky has shot forth
fiery thunderboltes and l^ings because of sin, straung commes has ^^^eatned
destruction for our sin, the earth has quaked because of the wrath of God
for sin, and mountains have removed out of their places to give us* warning
to remove from our sin.

The Lord has sent us strange and monsterous birthes, because of our
monsterous sin. The ennemie has threatened war against us, the plague of
pestilence has afflicted and consumed us, dearth and famine has assailed us,
and all to drive us from our sins: yet who has regarded Gods threats, or
been amended by his punishments.

One token more the Lord has yet sent us from out the raging sea, to preach
repentance unto us: seeing that neither by the heavens nor earth, we will take
admonition, let us therefore consider it with heedfulnes and turn to the Lord
with spedines.

At Outthorne in Holdernesse the 12. of February last past, by the means of
wind and weather a wonderful huge fish was driven on the sands, of such
hugeness as has not been seen, being a fish of an unknown name. This fish
was in length 19. yeardes and three quarters, and in thickness at the middle
10. yeardes good measure. His tail in bredthe from the one web unto the other
was 16 foot: his head was in fashion like a great woolsacke: having very little
eyes in respect of his great head: his nether Iawe being little did fall as it
seemed in a trough much short of the end of his upper Iawe, and very little in
respect of the upper, and yet of such bigness that the very bone of the lower
Iawe, was 36. inches about, and the least tooth he had was 10. inches long and
6. about.

The people of the country came in great abundance to behold this strange
fish, marueling thereat, not knowing what to say or judge thereof, but only
resolves them selves that it was sent of God to some great purpose.

Thus within four miles space hapened these two strange things, within two
months the one of the other. The Lord grau^^ (...) we may take warning
thereby, to turn (...) to our God that he may turn his greeuou^ (...) plagues
from us, which our wickedness has (...) justly procured.

This Fish was measured by M. Richardson. deane of Holdernesse in the p^^^ence
of M. Houlden parson of Rosse. M. H. parson of Patrington. M. Ashton Parson of
Tunston. M. Fraunces Leedes Gentleman.



