The first part of the Key of Philosophy.

Wherein is contained most exexcellent secrets of Physic and Philosophy,
divided into two Books.

In the first is showed the true and perfect order to distill, or draw forth
the Oiles, of all manner of Gummes, Spices, Seeds, Roots, and Herbs, with
their perfect taste, smell, and virtues.

In the second is showed the true and perfect order to prepare, calcine,
sublime, and dissolve all manner of Mineralles, and how ye shall draw forth
their Oiles and Saltes, which are most wonderful in their operations, for
the health of man's body. First written in the German tongue by the most
learned Theophrastus Paraselsus, and now published in the English tongue by
Ihon Hester practitioner in the Art of distillation. 1580.

AT LONDON. Printed by Richard Day, to be sold at the long Shop at the West
ends of Paul's.

To the right reverend Father in GOD, and his singular good Lord Ihon Watson,
by the grace of God Bishop of Winchester, and Prelate of the right honorable
order of the Garter. I. H. wishes health and peace, and long life in Jesus
Christ.
Pretty and pithie is the tale (my good lord) that Plato tells in his
Protagoras, and somewhat appliable to my prsent purpose, and therefore not
absurd for me to set down, to the better preferment of my pretense. Among
other his excellent inventions (as he is in all his things most like himself
still very divine) he shows how Joue looking down from Heaven with a
pitiful regard, upon the hard and untoward condition of men, seeing the
sondrie calamities, and infinite miseries that they were subject unto, while
yet they lived savage like beasts amongst beasts, every man leadyng his life
after the level of his own lust: took order straight with his winged
messenger Mercury, to descend down with expedition, with travel to collecte
and gather together the dispersed multitude, that so united they might both
be stronger to defend them selves from the brute beasts their common
enemy: and lincked as it were in a body pollique, each presented as well with
the daily view of his own want, as the continual show of like lack in
others, might with joint assent and consent (as driven by necessity) endeavor
to drive necessity from themselves. For the spedier accomplishyng whereof, he
had in charge to establishe a law, that if any amongst them wear found
unfurnished with Justice, and void of shame fastness: the same should be
accounted as an unprofitable Droane among labouryng Bees, and should suffer
punishment accordyngly. A worthy tale, and fit so worthy a Philosopher. By
the which he lively delivered in general terms, that which we daiely find
in particulare proof: to weete, no common wealth, nor society to continewe
long happy where the members and parts thereof either for love of justice, or
fear of shame are not like affectioned each other. Now least J should seem to
allow of this tale in speech, and to dislike it in practice, J have presumed
by this bare translation, to testify my forwardness in furtheryng her that
fosters me. And yet is not my tra^slatio^ so bare (my good lord) but that it
carries in it more plainness to the readers, then perhapps they shall find
in the first writer: For beside that J have culled out their choice things, J
have from the same choice proined, and cut of their superfluities, I have
supplied their defectes, J have laid open their obscurity, and I have
shadowed their defaultes, neither yet arrogating to my self, nor derogatyng
from them, but as Dies diem docet, so Experimentu^ experiendo confirmatur.
What my travail herein shall profit, J know not: but sure J am my trouble
in the trial of them has been great, my expe^ces large, my proofs painful,
and nothing at all herein pleasant save only a little knowledge that I have
got, above the capacity of the common sort, a thing sure that I value far
above the price that it cost me. Which knowledge in deed such is my
grosnesse, or such the subtilnesse of the matter it self that I ca^ easilyer by
demo^stration show it, then by declaration teach it: and therefore dare I not
under credit warrant perspicuitie to all me^, but to those that are Filij
artis. I promise more then I found, and yet found J more then they having
would willingly lose: to the residue I may say, that as hens sit, but
hatche not chickens in one day: so men read, but learn not arts in one day.
To you my good Lord, whose countenance herein I crave for protection, whose
judgment and skill I appeal to for favor, I must needs confess they are not
written (although loath to have them masterlesse like their master, J am over
bold, to shroude them under your wings) to you J say they are not written,
except ouerladen with the deep and grave mysteries of higher and more heavenly
Philosophy, it may please you for delight, now and then to look down into
the plentiful and pleasant storehouse of Nature, a matter no doubt^ that all
your whole life time (...)ue been singularly delighted (...)as most plainly do
declare the singularity, that you have happily attained unto in all and every
the parts of her, no less to your great content at home, then to your like
commendation abroad: which because I can neither praise to your desarte, nor in
praisyng please your desire, I leave to speak farther of: only desiring your
good lordship with your wonted cleme^cie, to accept of this small testimony of
my great good will, assuring your self, that emongst the great number of your
well willers, there is no one more duetifull then your pore

Jhon Hester.

Experience the daughter of Time, the mother of Wisdom, the reward of
travel, and the only jewel of a few the wiser, is commonly good Reader
set out at so high a price, and valewed at so dear a peneyworth, that she
has ever more cheapners then Chapmen, more lookers on her, then likers of her:
and yet is she bought of some, though one dram of her cost them a whole pound
of repentance. To discende into the particulars, were but to tie thee to
awearisome tale, and to lead thee along through a tedious Laborinth, stuffed
full of examples of former age: a matter already so open to the view of the
whole world, that for me to stir farther therein, were but to set a light
Candle in the bright sunn. Only for proof, it may please thee good Reader to
admit the instance in my self. When I began first to shake hands with the
variety of delights, that unstayed youth, are commonly carried away with: and
looking back (as it were over my shoulder) saw the vast Sea of sugered miseries
that I had waded through: I then began to think it high time to set down a
surer compass to direct the remnant of the course that I have yet to run.
And although at that time I carried in my purse sufficient wealth to support my
calling, in my body sufficient health to maintain my life: and these both so
reasonable as might have satisfied a reasonable man, (were not Natura hominu^
nouitatis auida) yet found I neither such content in the one, nor the other, as
might longer content me to continue in that state. But drawn on a while by
this instinct or infection (I know not whither to call it) I was driven at last
by a greedy kind of Ielosie, to envy the store that I saw in others, in
respect of mine own penury: and therwithall I fell into consideration how I
might become one of the small number of those, who^ the greatest number wondered
at. To enter the straight path that many the learned had happily to their
great commendation perfectly trodden, I saw it almost impossible: unless
peradventure I should get me where the Muses dwell, to Oxforde and Cambridge:
and there puttyng my self a prentize seven years, to the seven liberal
sciences, might afterward become as long journey man I can not tell to whom:
and in the end (as too many the learned do) get I can not tell what. This course
yielded so course a liking, as I sooner passed over it, then into it: and
castyng about again with my self, I was combred with a hundredth other odd
crochettes, all as far beyond the compass of my reach, as they were short
of the condition of my liking: till at length in the midst of this muse, I
met in my mind with two such Minions, as in my conceit were the only
Paragons of the rest: the one gallant and gorgeous garnished with gold and
silver, bedect with iewelles, sole Lady and gouernesse of all the rich Mines
and Mineralles that are in the bowelles of the earth: the other sweet and
odoriferous, adorned with flowers and herbs, beautified with delicate Spices,
sole Lady and regent of all the pleasant things that grow upon the face of
the earth. These I vowed to serve and to honor, even to the loss of life and
lim: neither have I greatly broken promise with the^, though they have not kept
touch with me. Goodly and many golden Mountains they promised me, mary
hitherto have scantly performed any leaden Molehilles. But howsoever the
bargain stand between them and me, I am neither disposed to accuse them, nor
to excuse my self. We agreed upon wages, and I wear their liueries: their
cognizance such as it is, I bear wheare I am not ashamed to show it: diverse
and sondrie their affairs have they employed me in, in the which I have
faithfully, painfully, and chargeably applied my self, and have attained by
their instructions (to mine own destruction almost) many their hidden
secrets as well in Metalles, and Mineralles, as in Herbs and Spices: part
whereof I have diligently collected together, and for non payment of my
boordwages at their hands am forced to set them with the residewe of my skill
to sale, with offer to thee (good Reader) of preferment to the best things I
have: yet at a far easier price then they cost me, being no less my Su^ma
Summarum cast up, and the foot of my account set down, then the wastyng out
of my former health, and the wearyng of the little wealth I had. So that what
experiences soever I have dug out of hard stones, blown out from hot fire,
raked out from foul ashes, with great cost and greater travail, that have
thou hear in my book to see, and in my shop to use with great ease at thy
commandment.

Ihon Hester.

A TRVE AND perfect Order to make Oils out of al manner of Gummes, Spices,
Seeds, Roots, and Herbs. Whereunto is added some of their virtues gathered
out of sondrie Auctors.
To make Oil of Masticke.
TAke the purest Mastick that may be got which is not mixed with Sa^drake or
such like, and beat it to powder, then put it into a glass with a long neck,
and put therein as much pure Aqua vitae as will cover it three fingers high,
and the^ stop it close that it take no air, then set it in warm Horsedoung,
or in a soft Balneo, until it be dissolved: then power it into a glass, and
put therein as much Wine as you shall think good, and distill it with a head,
and receiver in sand, with a small fire, and you shall receive both oil and
water together, the which you shall separate one from another. Then increase
your fire, and there will come forth another oil which smells somewhat of
the fire, and is best to be used outwardly. Ye may rectify it again with a
small fire, and so it will come sweet.

The virtues of this oil. It is excellent against all cold diseases of the
Mawe: It comfort the Liver and the Lites, and all other inward parts of
the body. Being drounken it helps chose that vomit or spit blood. It
consumes and breaks all inward sores. This oil being anointed on the
belly it stops the Flixe, it stops wome^s terms, it is also good for
the mother that is fallen down, if you anoynte it therewith, and the
vnderparte of the belly. It is good for young children whose arse gutte
comes forth, if you annoynte it therewith, and put it up again. It is also
good for those that are burst if you anoynte them therewith, and let them wear
a trusse fit for that purpose. It helps fresh wounds very quicky if you
annointe them therewith, and lay thereon a clothe weate in the same. It
fasteneth the teethe if you annoynte the gummes therewith. It comforceth a
weak stomach and causes good disgestion if you annoynte it therewith.

This Oil has all the virtues of Masticke, but it is an hundredth times of
more force.

To make Oil of Mirra.
TAke pure Mirra that is new and fat, six ounces and put it into a glass
with a long neck, and put thereon twelve ounces of pure rectified Aqua vitae,
then lute the glass fast, and set it in Horsedung until it be dissolved.
Then power it into an Vrinall with a head and a receiver, and distill away the
Aqua vitae in Balneo, with a soft fire, and the Oil will remain in the
bottom, the which strain through a fine clothe, and keep it in a glass.
His virtues are these.

This Oil by his natural virtue preserves all things from putrefaction that
is anointed therewith: Likewise the face and hands being anointed therewith,
it preserves them in youthful state, a long time. It helps all stinkyng
sores and wounds quickly: It helps pains of the ears, if it be put
therein. It preserves the sight of the eyes, if you put one or two drops
therein. It helps al pains of the Moother if it be anointed therewith. It
staieth the hear from falling. If any be troubled with a Fever, let him
annoynte his whole body therewith, and lay him down to sweat. This Oil
dries and consumes all accidents after birthe. Being drunk it makes a
sweet breath, and helps the cough, it is good against short wind: it
helps the Stitche in the side if you drink thereof one dram. It stops the
flux of the belly. It makes a clean voice: The armepittes being anointed
therewith, it takes away the stinche from those parts. If ye mix it with
Wine and wash the mouth therewith, it will comfort the gummes and fasten the
teethe. It is also good for wounds in the head.

If thou will use this Oil to preserve any part, you shall use it in this
order, first make a bathe with some sweet herbs, and then hold that part
the which you will preserve over the fume, that the powers may open, then dry
it with a liunen clothe, and then annoynte it with this Oil and chafe it in:
that being done, if there remain any yellowness of the Oil, ye may wash it
away with white Wine. This Oil would be occupied when you are in the Stue or
Hothouse.

To make Oil of Storax liquida.
TAke the purest Storax that you can get, and put it into a glass with a
long neck, and set it in horsedunge for a month, then take it forth and
distill it in an Vrinall that has a wide mouth, in sand, with a gentle fire,
and you shall have both oil and water, the which you shall separate, and
keep to thy use.

Rifius writes in his great book of distillations, that this oil has the
same virtues that the Oil of Mirra has: but that it is a little more hotter
and pearsyng.

To make Oil of Storax Calamite.
THis Oil may be made diverse ways, of the which I will show you the
best. Take the pureste Storax that you can find, and beat it into powder,
then put it into a long necked glass, and put thereon pure rectified Aqua
vitae, and lute the glass, then set it in warm dounge, or in a soft Balneo
a monethe. Then distill it in Sand with a small fire, and thou shalt have
both oil and water, the which you shall separate. You shall understand,
that toward the end of the distillation, there will ascend a certain
matter like Manna, the which is pleasant.

The virtues of this Oil. Three or four drops being drunk, it comfort
the breaste and lunges, and all inward parts: it helps the pains of the
Mother if it be drunk, and also annoynte those parts therewith. It stops
the rewme that falls to the breaste and neck: This being drunk, it makes
a man merry, and of light courage, but beware you take not to much. If you
put two or three drops into the ears, it takes away the syngyng in them.

To make Oil of Benjamin.
THis is made as you made the oil of Storax Calamite, and is only used in
perfumyng: Some distill this Beniamine with Rose water but I think it will not
be so perfect in smell nor so easily done.

To make Oil of Galbanum.
TAke the purest Galbanum that thou can get, and put it into a glass,
close luted: then set it in Balneo Mariae until it be dissolved, then
distill it with a soft fire, and then will come forth a fair yellow oil,
the^ increase the fire, and then will come forth a red stinkyng oil, the
which ye shall separate.

This oil being drunk, is good against an old cough, and for such as are
short winded, and can not easily draw their breathe, but are always pantyng
and breathyng. It is also very good for such as are broken, and bruised
within, and against crampes, and shrinkyng of sinowes. This oil being drunk
in wine with Oil of Mirra, is good against all venom dronken, or shot into
the body with venomous darts, or arrows. Being taken in the same order, it
provoke women's terms, and delivers the dead child. It has the same
virtue, if a perfume thereof be received in the secret parts. This perfume
does also help women that are grieved with the risyng, or stranglyng of the
Mother, and them that have the falling sickness, and being laid to the
navel, it causes the Matrix or mother, that is removed from his natural
place, to settle again. This Oil does mollify and soften, and draws forth
thorns, splinteres, or shiuers, and cold humors, being mixed with any
convenient unguent. It is good to anoint the side against the stoppyng and
hardness of the Milte. The perfume or sent of this Oil, drives away
Serpents from the place where it is burned: and no venomous beasts have power
to hurt such, as be anointed with the oil of Galbanum, and if ye mix this
oil with the root of Angelica, or the seed or root of Spondilium, and touch
any Serpent or venomous beast therewith, it causes them to dye.

To make Oil of Sagapenum.
TAke this Gum and dissolve it in strong wine, in Balneo Mariae, and then
distill it in Sand with a gentle fire.

This Oil is good for the stitche in the side: It takes away the cough that
has continued long: It helps the swellyng of the breast, whereby the breathe
is stopped. It is very good against the cra^pe: It warmeth the joints, and
helps the pains of the hippes, and all such like diseases coming of cold.
It is good for women that have great pain in their childbedde, if you anoint
the nosethrelles therewith: For it drives for the both the quick and the
dead fruit quickly: being drunk with wine it helps against poison, and is
also good against the bityng of an Adder: being put into thee eye it takes
away spots: You shall note, that women with child must take great heed of
this Oil.

To make Oil of Opoponax.
THis is made as is aforesaied, and his virtues are these.

If you drink three or four drops with Wine, it helps the Cough and all
impedimentes of the Milte. It helps also all impedimentes of the Blather, and
cleanses it of all scabbes and sores: It helps the Stitche in the side. It
causes speedy delivery in women with child. It helps against wind in the
Matrixe, and dissolueth the hardness of those parts, and causes the pain to
cease.

To make Oil of Euphorbium.
THis is made as is said before, and his virtues are these.

Ye shall note that this Oil is not to be occupied inwardly, by reason of his
great heat: except it be mixed with some other thing, as if it be mixed
with Honnie it purges the belly marueilosly. It helps those that are
troubled with obliuiousnesse, if ye annoynte the parts therewith: It draws
forth Thorns and such like out of the flesh: it helps the bityng of an
Adder: It is also good for stiffness of the joints coming of cold, if ye
annoynte the parts therewith.

To make Oil of Ambre or Succinum.
TAke Ambre and beat it to powder, and put it into a glass with a head and a
receiver, and distill it in Sand with a gentle fire, and there will come forth
both Oil and water, the which ye shall separate one from another.

This Oil being perfectly distilled, is good against pains of the head, and
resolution of sinnewes, and against swimmyng in the head, and falling
sickness. If ye drink thereof three or four drops in the morning with
Pionie water, it preserves a man from all poysones and pestiferous airs, if
ye annoynte the nostreilles therewith, or put it into some medicine fit for
that purpose. It is excellent against diseases of the Blather and Raines, and
drives forth the Stone, and provoke urine, if ye drink it with Malmesie, or
Parcelie water, or such like. It helps the Collike and chokyng of the
Matrixe, if you anoynte the parts therewith. It drives forth the fruit, and
causes a woman to be fair delivered, if she drink three or four drops,
it is good against all fluxes of the head.

To make Oil of Amoniacum.
TAke this Gum and put it into a glass, close luted: and set it in warm
dunge, or in Balneo Mariae, until it be dissolved, then distill it in Sand
with a head and a receiver, and thou shalt have both oil and water, the
which ye shall separate one from an other: ye shall understand that there
will come forth more water then oil, as I have proved many times.

This Oil helps the cough coming of moisture: it purges the breaste, and
helps Ulcers in that place, three or four drops being taken in an Egg: it
helps pains in the side, if ye annoynte it therewith. It dissolueth all
hardness and swellynges, and takes away the pains of the gout. If ye mix
this oil with as much Oil of Galbanum, and a very little Oil of Wormwood,
and annoynte the Milte, it takes away all the pains: being mixed with Oil
of Wormwood, and anointed in the Nauill it kills worms.

To make Oil of Sarcocolla.
THis is an excellent Balsame against all wounds, and fills them with
flesh: it purges all old sores, with out pain and smarte, it breaks hard
Impostumes, it helps all runnyng eyes, if you use it in a Collirie it helps
wheales in the eye liddes: Being drunk with wine it helps the rewine that
falls to the teeth, and for that cause it is used of those that are troubled
with abundance of flegmatike humors: You shall note that this Oil is
specially used in fresh wounds and old sores. This oil is made as you made
the oil of Serapynum.

To make Oil of Castoreum.
TAke the fattest that thou can get and stamp it well, then put it into a
glass, and set it to putrify in Balneo Mariae five or six days, then
distill it with a soft fire, and thou shalt have an excellent Olye.

This is good against all cold Crampes and Palsies, being mixed with Rewe and
Vinegar: and put into the nosethrilles it comfort the brain, and takes
away pains of the head. Being anointed on the neck and also drunk with
Wine, it helps much those that are troubles with the falling sickness: It
helps convulsions and pains of the sinews, if you annoynte them therewith:
being drunk with Pepper and Hidromell, it provoke women's terms and also the
fruit, it warmeth cold places, it is also excellent against Appoplexia, it
helps those that are deaffe, it moves venery. It helps the Collike, and
the suffocation of the Matrixe, and strengthens the natural parts.

To make Oil of Frankencense.
TAke Frankencense as much as you will, and put it into a retorte of glass,
well luted: And put thereunto for every pound of stuff, four ounces of
clean sand, and then distill it with a gentle fire, until all the substance
be come forth, and thou shalt have both water and Oil, the which ye must
separate.

The water is good against wind in the stomach if it be drunk: it is also
good for choppes in the hands and feet, if ye wash them therewith, and
annoynte them with the oil against the fire, and straight ways put on a pair
of gloves, and so doing three times, they shall be hole.

This Oil helps simple wounds in three or four days, if ye annoynte them
therewith, and lay thereon a clothe weate in the same, it preserves all
flesh from putrifiyng and alteration, and takes away the pain: It helps
all aches and bruses if ye anoynte them therewith, Ye shall note that you must
use no tente where you occupy this oil, but wash the wound clean and join
it or stitche it close together, and them lay thereon a clothe weate in
the same, for if ye fall a tentyng, ye make work for the Surgeon.

To make Oil of Turpentine.
TAke pure and clean Turpentine as much as you will, and put it into a
glass, so that three parts be empty, and put therein a certain quantity
of sand, as much as you shall think good, then distill it in sand with a
soft fire, and there will come forth fewer licours: The one is a clear
water, the other a clear oil, the th^de a yellowe oil, the fowerth a dedde
and stinkyng, the which a number of Poticaries do sell in stead of Baulme:
Ye shall note that the first Oil is hot, the second hotter, the third
hottest of all, and not so good to occupy inwardly, as the first.

Falopius in his book of secrets writes, that this oil will help fresh
wounds in four and twenty hours, if ye anoynte them therewith, and lay
thereon a cloathe weate in the same. It is good againts contraction of sinnewes
coming of cold: it provoke Urine, if ye drink one dram of the first Oil
in white Wine: it breaks wind in the body, and dissolueth the Plurisie and
Pestilent Fever: it provoke an appetite if ye annoynte the stomach therewith.
It helps against cold deseases of the Mawe, and helps a stinckyng breath,
and the cough.

To make Oil of Wax.
TAke new yellowe Wax as much as you shall think good, and melt it on the fire,
then power it into sweet Wine, and wring it between your hands, then melte
it again, and power it into Wine again, and this you shall do five or six
times at the least, and every time you must have fresh Wine, then at the
last you shall put it into a retorie of glass, well luted with his
receiver, and distill it in Sand, and there will come forth a fair yellowe
Oil, the which will congele like pappe when it is cold. Ye shall understand
that for every pound of wax, ye shall put thereto four ounces of the
powder of brickes into the glass.

Raymonde Lullie greatly commends this oil, approuyng it rather to be a
celestial or divine medicine, then human; for because this in wounds
woorketh most miraculusly, which for his maruelouse commodity, is not so well
to be used of the common Surgeon: Because this preciouse oil heals a
wound be the same never so big or wide, being before wide stitched up, in
the space of aleuen days or twelve at the most: But those are small this oil
heals in three or four days, by annoyntyng only the wound therewith, and
laiyng thereon a cloth weate in the same.

Also for inward diseases this oil works miracles: For if you give one dram
at a time to drink with white wine, it staieth the sheadyng of the hear,
either on the heat or bearde, by annoyntyng the place therewith: Moreover it is
excellent in provoking of urine which is stopped: it helps stitches and
pains in the loins, if you drink the foresaied quantity with white Wine: It
helps the cold gout or Sciatica, and all other greefes coming of cold. Ye
shall understand, that if you rectify this oil it will congele no more, but
then it will be to hot to take inwardly, for it pearceth meruelously, and is
good to be mixed with other medicines to cause them to pearce the better.

To make Quintessence of Honey.
YOu shall understand that Honey is licoure rather divine then humane, because
it falls from heaven upon the herbs, and is such a sweet thing, that the
like can not be found upon the earth. And this Raimonde Lullie calls the
flower of flowers, because Bees gather it upon the flowers in the field. And
truly it is a most strange thing if we would consider well the quality of
honey and wax: and therefore the wise Baruch Arabico in the Academie of
Auicene did wright this sentence, Mel de^tro, and olio di fuori, satisfiyng us
by this, that honey and oil were the first two licours in the world. And
truly it is so if we consider well, as it niaie well be proved by holy
Scripture.

The order to make this Quintessence is thus. Take two pound of perfect pure
Honey, and put it into a great glass, that four parts of five may remain
empty: Lute it well with a head and receiver, and give it fire until there
appear certain white fumes, which you shall turn into water with weatyng of
clothes in cold water, and laiyng them on the receiver, and head: and they will
turn into water of a red color like blood. When it is all distilled, keep
the glass close shut, and let it stand till it be clear, and in the color
of a Rubine. Then distill it in Balneo Mariae at least six or seven times,
and so it will lose his red color, and remain in the color of gold having a
great smell, and so pleasant that the like can not be found in the world.

This Quintessence dissolueth gold, and makes it potable, and like wise any
sorce of Jewel that is put therein. It is of such virtue that if any be a
diyng, and drink two or three drammes thereof, presently he will recover, as
the Quintessence of Wine will do. If you wash any wound therewith, or other
sore, it will heal quickly. It is also good against the Cough, Cattarre, and
pains of the Milte, and many other diseases which I will not speak of: for
but few, and they were hardly, will believe the great virtue and operation
thereof.

I gave this six and forty days unto one that had the Palsy, and he was
helped. It helps also the falling sickness, and preserves the body from
putrefaction, so that by these you may perceive that it is a celestial
medicine. If therefore any virtuous man would take a little pain, in the
experience hereof, he shall do wonderful things, as many times I have done,
so that the people deemed that I wrought by Inchauntment, when as in deed I
did it by virtue of this licour, ministryng the same so priuiely that they
could not see it, which fell out to my great honor, and benefit of the
sick, as you shall read in my Thesauro della vita humana: And therefore I
would wish them that profess Physic, and Chirurgerie to use such
experience, whereby comes honor and gain to the Physician, and profit to
the patient.

To make Oil of Lignum vitae or Guaicum.
TAke the freshest Wood that thou can get, and make it in powder, then put
it into a vessel of glass well luted, and set it in horse dounge, or in
Balneo to digest, then take it forth and distill it with a gentle fire, as
thou would distill, Nutmegges, and thou shalt have both Oil and water, the
which thou shall separate by them selves: then take the feres and put it into
a new earthen pot, and set it in a furnesse of reuerberatione, until it be
burnt into ashes, then take that ashes and make thereof a lie with Fumetarie
water, and when thou seste that the ashes will make the water no more sharp,
cast them away, and let the water settle clear, then vapoure away the water
with a soft fire, and in the bottom will remain a salt, the which you
shall dissolve and congele until it be clear, and fair, as Sal atron or
Entallie, then keep it to thy use: the water is to drink with Wine.

The Oil is to annoynte the sores or aches, and the salt is to pourge, and
the order to use it is thus: Either in the Pox, the Gout, or the Palsy.

First you shall pourge the pacient well with this. Take of the salt half a
scruple, Theriaca Alexandria two drammes, mix them and give them thereof half
a scruple at a time: You shall give this three or four times, according to the
infection of the disease, for in this salt is virtue to pourge all humors
that causes the Gout, the Palsy, and the Pox, and such like, and the like
has not been found, neither vomityng or purging. Then when the pacient is
well purged, if the pacient have any sores or holes, you shall mundifie them
with this salt, and when they are mundified, you shall dress them twice a
day with the oil, until they be hole, but if the pacient have no holes, you
shall annoint those places where he fealeth ache or grief: Also every morning
early in his bed, and at night an hour after supper, you shall give him a good
spoonefull of the water with remmishe wine to drink, and let him sweat
thereon well, also he shall use this with his meat if he will. Ye shall
understand that the cure lies not in meat nor drink, but in the medicine,
and therefore keep him not to hungry: but let him have good meat and well
seasoned with salt, and let him drink wine, and so using this order, thou
shalt be able to help the Gout, Pox, or Palsy.

To make Oil of Butter.
TAke new fresh Butter as much as you will, and put it into a retorte of
glass, well luted: and there will come forth three licours, the which thou
must separate.

This Oil does pearce marueilously, and takes away the pains of the Gout,
if you annoynte them therewith: if you annoynte the hands and face therewith,
it will preserve them fair: it is also good for those that are troubled with a
Cattarre, if you give them thereof an ounce fasting, for presently it ariueth
to the stomach and mollifieth the Cattarre, in such order as you shall spitte
it forth at the mouth.

To make Oil of Eggs.
TAke Eggs and seathe them hard, then take forth the yelkes and sta^pe them
in a mortar, then put them in a friyng pan, and set over the fire, and
continually stir it until you see it turn to oil, then take it forth,
and put it into a canuas bag and press it forth. This oil helps moundes
with great speed: It makes ye hair of the haed or bearde black: it takes
away the pains of the Emerods, it is excellent against burning with fire or
scaldyng with matter: you shall understand this oil may be made very perfect
by the art of distillation without impression, as I have proved diverse times.

Here begins the Order to make Oils of all manner of Spices and Seed.
To make Oil of Synamon.
TAke Synamone as much as you will, and stamp it groslie: then put it into a
glass with pure Aqua vitae, and so let it stand five or six days, then distill
it with a small fire, and there will come forth both oil and water, the
which you shall separate one from another, for the oil will sincke to the
bottom: some use to distill this with Wine, and some with Rose water.

You shall understand that this oil is of a marvelous nature, for it pearceth
through flesh and bones, and is very hot and dry, and is good against all
cold and moiste diseases, and in special for the heart and head, in so much
that if a man did lie speacheles, and could scant draw his wind, it would
presently recover him again, so that his time be not yet come: most
miracolous to see: and to be short, this oil is of such operation and
virtue, that if a man drink never so little, he shall feel the workyng in his
fingers and toes with great marvel, and therefore to be short, it pearceth
through the whole body, and helps all diseases that are come through cold
and flegmatique matter. This oil is hot and sharp: It digesteth and makes
thine, and drives down women's terms: It helps women that have great
pains and smarte in their travel, and brings forth their fruit, if you
give the paciente a little of this oil, with oil of Mirra in Wine to drink,
and annoynte the parts therewith. The face and hands being anointed with this
oil, it drives away the meseles and spots. It warmeth the breaste, and
helps the cold Cough: it consumes all cold stuxes that proceed from the
brain and head, and causes quiet sleep.

This Oil may be occupied in stead of the natural Baulme for many
diseases: ye shall note that the water of Sinamone is also good against the
aforesaied diseases, but yet nothing of so much force as the Oil, for one
drop of Oil will do more, then four spoonfulles of the water, therefore
they would be used together.

To make Oil of Cloves.
THis Oil is made in this order. Take the best Cloves that thou can get,
and beat them grossly, then put them into pure Wine into a glass, with a long
neck close luted, then set it in warm horse dounge the space of a month,
then distill it in Sand with a soft fire, and thou shalt have a fair Oil,
which will sink to the bottom, the which you shall separate: and his virtues
are these.

It strengthens the brain, head, and heart, and reuiueth the spirits, it
serves against all cold diseases, it consumes all evil fleme: Being out
wardly applied, it has great virtue in healyng, and may be occupied in
steed of Baulme for wounds. One or two drops taken in the morning with Wine
helps a stinkyng breathe: It makes the heart merry, and cleanses the
filthiness thereof, and opens the Liver that is stopped: being put into
the eye it clears the sight. It comfort a cold stomach, and causes good
digestion, it purges Mellancollie: this oil may be made in Manus Christi
with sugar, and they will have the aforesaied virtue and strength.

To make Oil of Nutmegges.
THis Oil is made as the Oil of Cloves, and will swim upon the Wine: But
if you distill this again in Balneo, it will be most pure and subtle, and
may be kept an hundredth years in his perfect strength and virtue.

This Oil being drunk with Wine drives down women's terms, and also the
quick and the dead fruit: And therefore women with child shall not occupy
this oil, until such time as they be in travel with child, and then it
causes them to be fair delivered without pain and danger. Being drunk with
wine it takes away all pains of the head coming of It comfort the Mawe,
and opens the Liver, Milte and Kidnes, and such like, it is excellent against
beatyng of the heart, and faintness and soundyng, if ye drink thereof and
annoynte the region of the heart therewith: It makes good blood, and expels
flegmatike and mellancollie humors, and makes a man merry: Being used at
night it takes away al fancies and dreams: If any had a wound, or had
broken a ribbe within him with a fall, let him drink this oil with any
slight wou^d drink, and it will help him although he were almost dead: It
is good in all filthy sores the which are counted incurable: it is also
preciouse for all cold diseases of the joints and sinnewes: It makes a
sweet breathe: if the spleen do swell, ye shall annoynte therewith the left
side: it helps all effects in the blather if it be drunk.

To make Oil of Mase.
THis Oil is made as is a foresaid, and is hot in operation, it has great
virtue against the Collike which comes of cold causes or of a rewme,
desendyng from the head: It comfort the heart, the stomach, and the womb,
it is good in the strangurie, and al cold deseases: if ye drink thereof three
or four drops fasting with a spoonful of wine or broth, or eat two or
three Manus Christi made therewith.

To make Oil of Pepper.
THis Oil is distilled as is said before, and is very clear and light, and
his virtues are these.

This Oil has more virtue then the Pepper has in pearcyng, and specially in
the Collike, and other weak places filled with fleme, if you take thereof
three or four drops with one scruple of the joyce of a Quince, two hours
before the fit, after the body is well pourged, and let blood, it staieth
also the shaking at the first time, or else at the second, it takes away the
fit.

Ye shall understand that this oil is only the ayrie part, separated from
the other Elements. I saw once this Oil made of a German, the which had
the perfect taste, savor, and smell, and was so hot on the tongue as oil of
Vitriall.

To make Oil of Saffron.
TAke the best Saffron that thou can get, and put it into a glass, and put
thereon pure rectified Aqua vitae, then lute the glass fast, and set in warm
horse dunge a month: then distill it in Balneo Mariae with a soft fire,
until all the Aqua vitae be come forth: then take forth the Saffron and
press it in a press, made for that purpose, within a strong canuas bag, and
thou shalt have both oil and water, the which thou shalt disgeste five or
six days, and then separate them by art.

If this Oil be drunk with Wine it makes a man merry, and to have a fair
color: if ye annoynte the temples of a man that is over come with drink it
will help him. This oil being anointed on Saint Anthonies fire it quenches
it, and preserves the place: this oil being mixed with women's milk stops
the running of the eyes: Being anointed on the heart it makes it merry. The
head being anointed with this oil it provoke sleep, by reason whereof the
ancient Doctors heretofore did use it to such as were mad, annoynting the
temples therewith: it cleanses old sores.

To make Oil of Anniseede.
TAke as much Anniseede as thou will, and beat it grossly, then infuse it in
strong Wine four or five days, and distill it in a Gourde with a head and
receiver, in sand, and there will come forth both oil and water: the which
thou shalt separate.

This Oil being drunk with Wine in the morning fasting, makes a man to have
a sweet breathe, if ye put a little into the nosethrilles when you go to
bed, and annoynte the temples therewith. It takes away all pains coming
of cold, and causes the pacient to sleep quietly: It is good against wind
in the guts and stomach, and causes the pain to cease, if ye drink three
or four drops and annoynte the stomach therewith: it breaks also fleme
and causes it to come forth at the mouth: It provoke venerous acts: and
drives forth poison by sweat: It is most excellent for those that are short
winded, and can not fetch their breath but with great pain: It comfort the
breaste and Lunges: It breaks the stone in the raines and blader: it is good
against the bloody flixe and pills. If any chest be anointed therewith, it
will not suffer Mothes to breed therein.

To make Oil of Fennel Seed.
THis is made as is aforesaied, and his virtues are these. It is most
excellent against all pains of the eyes, in so much that if a man viere
almost blind it would recover his sight again, if he drink thereof once a
day, and drop one drop into the eye morning and euenyng: It makes a sweet
breath and comfort the head of cold humors. It comfort the Mawe, and
opens the Liver and Milte that is stopped: It helps the Dropsy and yellow
Iaundies of what cause soever it be: In hott diseases ye must occupy it with
cold waters, and in cold diseases with wine: Ex Philippos Hermanos.

This oil as writes Evonimus, breaks the stone in the raines, and provoke
menstrue and urine: it comfort the stomach and breaks wind, this Oil
may be made in Manus Christi, with sugar and is very pleasant, and has the
self same virtue.

To make Oil of Commin Seed.
THis Oil is made as is aforesaied, and is good against wounds that pearce
the Spleen: It is also most excellent to scatter and break all the windiness
of the stomach, the belly, the bowelles and Matrixe: also it is singular
against gryping torments, and knawinges or frettinges of the belly, not only
to be used inwardly, but to be put into Glisters, or to be laid to outwardly
with barley meal.

This Oil being drunk with Wine, is good for those that are hurt with any
venomous Beasts: this oil either eaten in Manus Christi, or drunk is very
profitable for such as have the cough and have taken cold, and for those
whose breasts are charged or stopped. This Oil being to much used, decaieth
the natural complextion and lively color, causing one to look waime and pale.

To make Oil of Caraway Seed.
THis Oil is made in the aforesaied order, and is very good and convenient for
the stomach, and for the mouth: it helps disgestion, and provoke urine:
It swageth and dissolueth all kind of mindinesse and blastynges of the inward
parts. And to conclude it is aunswerable to the oil of Annis seed, in virtue
and operation.

To make Oil of Dill Seed.
THis Oil is made in the aforesaied order: This Oil being eaten in Manus
christi, or dronk with wine, causes women to have great plenty of milk. It
drives away ventosite or windiness, and swageth the blastinges and gripyng
torment of the belly. It staieth vomityng and laskes, and provoke urine: It
is very profitable against the suffocation or stranglyng of the Matrixe, if ye
cause the woman to sit over the fume of it in a close stool, for that purpose
this oil being eat in Manus christi staieth the yexe or hiquet.

This Oil does heal hollow and moist ulcers, and especially in the share or
privy parts, this oil does digest and resolve and swage pain, and ripeneth
all raw and unripe humors. This oil may not be too much used inwardly, for
it diminishes the sight and the seed of generation.

To make Oil of Percelie Seed.
THis Oil is made in the aforesaied order, and his virtues is to open
obstructions of the Liver and Kindness: it provoke menstrue, if it be drunk
with convenient licours: it causes a good appetite and disgestion, and
comfort the stomach: It drives forth the stone and gravel and provoke
urine, and is a remedy against all poysones: it drives away all blastinges
and windiness: it is also good against the cough if it be mixed with medicines
made for that purpose.

To make Oil of Rewe or Herbegrace.
THis Oil is made of the seed of Rewe being putrified in Wine.

Cardanus writes that this oil being perfectly made, is of great virtue
against poysone being drunk with Wine, for it causes the pacient to avoid it
by vomitte, at the first time that he takes it: and at the second time it
expels the other evil humors that are infected therewith: and at the
third time it cures the pacient and makes him hole: and this is done in
three or four days: it helps also all diseases of the eyes, of what cause
soever it be, so that the apple of the eye be not perished. The use of this
oil to the eye is to annoynte it therewith twice a day, or wash the eye with
the water of Rewe, and drop one or two drops into the eye.

This Oil being drunk, suffers no poison to remain in manne that day: if
a man drink thereof fasting which is sore wounded, and that the other cure be
had accordingly he shall easily escape. This oil being drunk takes away the
Gout and Dropsy sprung of a cold cause: it restores al numbed members taken
with the Palsy if you annoynte them therewith.

Cardanus also affirms in his second book De subtilitate, that there are
certain poysones the which slaie with their only touching, against which
poison says he, the best remedy is not to tarry in any place until thy
hand wax hot, but often bathe the parts with warm water, and annoynte
them with Oil of Rewe perfectly distilled.

To make Oil of Iuie.
THis Oil is made as is aforesaied, and is good against these diseases
followyng.

Against gripinges or wind in the guts: against Gonorheam and pains in the
neck coming of a Cattare: this oil may be compared to Baulme, three or
four drops being dronk. It does prevent the resolution of sinews, the falling
sickness, and other deseases of the brain: It preserves the body from all
poysone and pestilent airs, it comfort a cold stomach. It staieth
vomityng: it pourgeth the raines: it breaks the stone, it provoke urine: it
helps the Collicke and pains of the guts: It helps pains in the
stomach and Lunges: it is good against the Dropsy and water between the
skin and the flesh: It kills worms: to be short it helps all sick
members: by the virtue of his pearsing being anointed outwardly, it staieth
consumptions: it helps scabbes and old evil ulcers: it helps pains if
the hippes, the Gout and Collicke: it helps the chappes in the hands and
feet.

Philippus harmanus writes that if this oil be rectified again, it will be a
hundredth times more purer and more pearsing, for I have seen those that could
not make water in three or four days: and after they have drunk four or
five drops of this oil, and anointed therewith the region of the blader,
presently they have made water without any tarriyng.

This oil is so excellent against the pestilence, that if any drink thereof
oftentimes, he shall not be infected: although he were in the house where the
Pestilence is. But if any have the plague already, let him drink three or
four drops in Wine and lay him down to sweat, and the next day he shall be
well again:

This Oil is so excellent against poys^n, that if a man use it there will no
poy^n remain within him: it strengthens the Mawe and all in ward parts, and
principally it warmeth the heart: it stops the ^odie flixe: it is also good
against all deseases of the kidnes and blader: if ye drink it with Wine it
stops women's terms: this oil being anointed from the navel of a woman
to the privy parts and raines of the back, it strengthens the Matrixe or
Mother, and dries up the moisture therein, and prepares it to conception.

This said oil of Iuneper being made up with Sugar in Manus christi, has the
foresaied virtues.

To make Oil of Rosemarie Flowers.
TAke Rosemarie Flowers and stamp them, then put it into a glass with
strong wine and stop it close, then set it in the Sun five or six days,
and then distill it with a soft fire, and thou shalt have both water and
oil, the which you shall separate and keep close in a glass, and his
virtues are these.

It helps against al pains in the head, although they have continued seven
years: it comforts the memory, and also preserves the eyes, if you drink
thereof now and then a drop or two, and put another into the eyes. It
helps those that are deaffe, if it be put into the ears, and also drunk
with good Wine: It opens all stoppinges of the Liver and Milte, and helps
against the Dropsy and yellowe Iaundize: it breaks wind and helps the
Collicke, and risyng of the Mother: it is also excellent for those that have
drunk poison, or that are infected with the Pestilence, if you drink thereof a
little and lay you down to sweat: It comfort the heart and cleanses the
blood, and makes a man merry, and causes a good color, and this oil is
most excellent for those that are full of itche and scabbes. And to be
short, it helps all deseases of the body, that come of cold and moiste
homours, although they were never so evil: it helps the Canker and
Fistelowes, and such like.

To make Oil of Wild Time.
THis Oil is made as is aforesaied.

This Oil being eaten in Tabletes of sugar, or drunk in Wine, brings to
women their flux natural, and drives out the stone and gravel, and
provoke vomit: the same taken in like manner stops the laske, and cures
gripynges or knawinges, and is excellent against cramps, and the contraction of
sinews.

This Oil being taken in meats or brothes, is a sovereign medicine against
all poysones, and against the bitynges and stingynges of venomous beasts and
Serpents. This being applied unto the forheade and temples with oil of Roses
and Vinegar, swageth headache, and is very good against rauyng and frenzy: the
fum of this oil drives away venomous beasts.

To make Oil of Time.
THis Oil is made as is aforesaied, and his virtues are these.

Three or four drops being drunk with honied water, helps a painful
Cough and shortness of breath: it provoke urine, and expels the secondine
and dead fruit from the Matrixe: it provoke menstrue, and dissolueth clotted
and congeled blood in the body: being taken with oximell and a little salt,
it purges tough and clammie fleme, and sharp cholerike humors, and all
corruption of the blood: being taken in the said manner, it is good against the
Sciatica, the pain in the side and the breast: it is also good against
blastinges and windiness in the side and belly, and of the stones and
genitores: it is good for those that are fearful, melancollie and troubled in
spirit and mind.

This Oil being often used, helps bleired eyes and pains of the same:
being drunk in Wine, it is most profitable for those that are troubled with
the Gout, but if it chance that their pains be on them, ye shall give them
five or six drops with a dram of oximell: if ye use this oftentimes with
honey, it will cleanse the breaste, and ripen fleme, and causes it to be
spitte forth with ease: the smell of this Oil is most comfortable for those
that have the falling sickness.

To make Oil of sweet Margerom.
THis Oil is made as is aforesaid, and his virtues are these.

Being drunk in white wine, it is most wholesome for those that begin to fall
into a Dropsy, and for such ^s cannot piss but drop after drop, and that with
great difficulty. It is also good for those that are troubled with griping
pains and wringynges of the belly: being taken in the said order: it
provoke women's terms.

If ye co^ueie this oil with oil of bitter Almondes up into the nosethrelles,
it will pourge the head of moist humors, and cause them to neese. It is most
excellent for those that have lost their smelling, and against all pains of
the head being used as is aforesaied: it is good against poison, and the
stingyng of Scorpions.

To make Oil of Sage.
THis Oil is made in the aforesaied order: And helps congeled blood within
the body, and cures inward wounds and bruses, either by a stripe or fall if
it be drunk with Wine: it provoke urine and breaks the stone: it
comfort the heart, and takes away the head ache. It is also good for women
with child, to use it now and then, for it closes the Matrixe and comfort
the fruit.

This Oil being often drunk causes women to be fruitful: If ye drink it
with Wine it helps the Cough, and opens the stoppinges of the Liver, and
swageth the pain in the side: if it be drunk with Worm wood wine, it
stops the bloody flixe: It is also good against the bityng of venomous
beasts, for it cleanses and helps them.

To make Oil of Peniriall.
THis Oil is made as is aforesaied, and his virtues are these.

Being drunk in the Wine, it moves monthly terms, brings forth the
secundine, the dead fruit and the unnatural birthe: it provoke urine, and
breaks the stone, especially in the Ridnies, being used with purified honey:
it cleanses the lunges and breaste from all gross and thick humors. This oil
being mixed with honey and Alloes, purges the melancholic humor and prevails
much against cramps, and the contraction of sinews.

This Oil being drunk with water and vinegar, staieth the inordinate desire
to vomit, and the gnawyng pains of the stomach, being drunk with Wine, it
helps the bityng of venomous beasts: it is also good against the falling
sickness: the temples and nosethrelles being anointed with this oil, it
takes awie the swimmyng pains and giddiness of the head. It is most
excellent for those that have cold and moist brains: it takes away the
pains of the Gout. The fume or smoke of this oil being taken at the secret
parts with a fonell, is good against ventosite, windiness, and blastinges,
and also against the hardness and stoppyng of the Mother.

To make Oil of Mynte.
THis Oil is made as is aforesaid.

This Oil being either eat or drunk, is most profitable for the stomach,
for it warmeth and strengthens the same, and dries up all moist and
superfluous humors gathered in the same, and takes away all pains thereof,
and causes good disgestio^: it staieth also vomityng in those that have a
weak stomach, being drunk with vinegar, it staieth those that vomit blood,
and kills the round worms.

This Oil being drunk four or five times with some convenient licour,
helps the gripyng pain and knawing in the belly, with the Collicke, and
stops the inordinate courses of the menstruall issue, being drunk with
wine, it eases women which are to much grieved with hard and perilous travel
in child bearyng: being dropped into the ears it takes away the pain: the
smell of this oil causes a man to be merry.

This Oil is singular good against the gravel and stone in the Ridnies, and
against the strangurie, which is when one can not piss but drop after drop,
if ye use to drink it in Wine.

To make Oil of Isope.
THis Oil is made as is aforesaied of Camomill. If ye use to eat this oil
either mixed with honey, or made into Manui Christi with Sugar, it will help
those that have obstructions or stoppinges of the breaste, with shortness of
breathe, it is also good against an old dificulte and hard cough: ye must use
this morning and euenyng for a certain space.

This Oil being drunk with sirrupe of vinegar, purges dounwarde tough and
clammie phlegm, and kills and drives forth worms: it has the like virtue
if ye eat the same with figs.

To make Oil of Radishe Seed.
TAke the seed of Radishe and stamp it small, the^ take for every pound of
seed, two ounces of good Wine, then stamp it again until it be mixed, then
put it into a vessel of Iron or Copper, and set it over the fire, and stir
it continually, until it be so hot as you may suffer your hand therein, then
put it into a canuas bag, and press it forth, and thou shall have both
oil and water, the which you shall separate one from another.

This Oil causes good disgestion, and provoke urine, the which is stopped
through wind and ventositie: it dissolueth wind in the stomach, and breaks
the gravel and stone in the bladder.

To make Oil of Musterdseede.
THis Oil is made by impression as is said before, and is excellent for those
that have the stone, and causes them to avoid gravel: it provoke women's
sicknesses, if you annoynte the body and raines, and within the neck of the
Matrixe, and also take it inwardly, it dissolueth the pains of the side and
Moother, if you eat it with a little Sinamon and white honey mixed together.

To make Oil of Colworte seed.
THis Oil is made as is said before, and of nature is hot and windy, and is
used much of lecherous persons, because it makes elevation of the yard, and
causes the^ to be lusty, being used in meats it causes good disgestion: it
preserves armor from rustyng a long time: it is good against inflammations in
all parts of the body, and is also good against worms.

To make Oil of Linseede.
THis Oil is made in the aforesaied order, and is good against the Pluresie:
if ye give thereof four ounces to drink, for it dissolueth the impostume
presently, and so preserves life. It is good against the Emerods in the
fundament. This oil of Lineseede being distilled with Frankencense and wax,
is most excellent to dissolve all contusions. With this oil they make Vernishe.

To make Oil of Saint John's woorte or Seed.
THis Oil is made of the seeds by impression, and is excellent to help
wounds, because it defends them from alceration, and maturation, and will
not suffer homours to run thither. It is also excellent against poison, and
the pestilent fever, all evil dispositions of the stomach: it is good against
the flux of the body and Emerods, and for all manner of scabbes. It helps
the rupture newly done, if you annoynte it therewith, and wear a trusse fit
for the purpose, and let him keep his bed, and walk as little as he can for a
certain time: it helps against all manner of sores, as well old as new, and
that it does by his proper quality, for it is neither hot nor cold, but
temperate.

To make Oil of Quinces seed.
TAke the seed of Quinces and stamp them, then put them into a Friyng pan
with a little Wine, and stir them well together, until it be so hot that you
can scarce abide your hand therein, then put it into a canuas bag, and
press it out in a press, and thou shalt have both Oil and water, the which
thou shall separate.

This Oil is excellent against all pains in the stomach, and helps
disgestion and dissolueth wind: It provoke venerous acts. It is also good
against the Emerods and Fistelowes that come in the lower parts.

To make Oil of Acornes.
THis Oil is made as is aforesaied, and is very restrictiue and driuyng, and
helps those that are troubled with the flux, if ye drink thereof a little
and annoynte the belly therewith: you shall note that this oil is not to be
occupied much inwardly: this oil is excellent to make Vernishe.

In this manner ye may make oils out of all manner of seeds.

To make Oil of Tartare by distillation.
TAke white Tartare beaten in powder, four pound, and put it into a strong
vessel of stone well luted, with a head and a receiver, and give it first a
small fire, and then increase it according to art, and at the last give it
extreme fire until all the moisture be come forth, then put the licour in to
a glass, and distill it in Balneo, and the oil will remain in the bottom:
the which thou shalt distill or rectify in Sand, and then the oil will have
the color of gold.

It is most excellent to cure ulcers caused of the pox: for it takes away
their malice in such order, that it can hurt no more: being drunk with Wine,
it breaks the stone in the raines and blader, and provoke urine, it purges
ulcers.

Another way to make Oil of Tartare.
TAke Tartare and stamp it small, and then put it in a new earthen pot
vnglased, and set it in a Potters furnesse, or furnese of reuerberation until
it be white, then lay it upon a smooth stone in a moist place, and it will
turn into Oil: the which is corrosiue: but one part thereof mixed with ten
parts of pure rectified Aqua vitae, heals ulcers quickly, if ye touch them
therewith: it makes the face fair: if ye wash the hair therewith it makes it
yellowe: it takes out black spots in linen cloth, and fixes the medicines
alchimical, with diverse other virtues, the which I will leave until another
time.

To make Oil of a Hearts horn.
YE shall take a Hearts horn in the month of August, and file it to powder,
the^ boil it in water until it be sufficient, then draw away the water in
Balneo, and take that which remains in the bottom, and put it in a glass
with little pieces of tyles, and distill it, and thou shall have a fair oil,
the which serves for sondrie purposes.

To distill Oil of a Man's Excrements.
TAke the dongue of a young sanguyne child or man, as much as you will, and
distill it twice in a Limbeck of glass. This helps the Canker, and
mollifieth Fistelowes: comfort those that are troubled with Allopecia.

To make Oil of the Skull of a man.
TAke the Skull of a man that was never buried, and beat it into powder, then
distill away the fleme with a gentle fire, and put it on again, and distill
it again, and thus you shall do three times upon the feses, and at the last
give it strong fire, until the oil be come forth: the which ye shall
separate by Balneo, and keep it close shut in a glass. The dose is three
grains, against the falling sickness. Ye shall understand, that there is
also a Salt to be drawn forth of the feses, the which is of great virtue
against the aforesaied deseases being drunk with Wine, as is aforesaied.

If any man be disposed to have any of the aforesaied Oils ready made, he
may have them at Poules wharf at the sign of the Furnases, by one Ihon Hester
practisioner in the art of distillations.

THE KEY OF Philosophy.

The second part.

Containyng the orderyng, and preparyng of all Metalles, Mineralles, Alumes,
Salts, and such like. For Medicines both inwardly, and outwardly, and for
diverse other uses.

At London Printed by Richard Day.

Cum Priuilegio.

IN this present book well-beloved Reader, I have taken upon me to set forth
the true and worthy cunning of the distillation of Mineralles, that is, of
those hi^ges the which are found in the Mines, as all manner of Saltes,
Allomes, Vitrioll, Sulfur, Mercury, and such like Mettalles as Saturnus,
Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Luna, Venus. And how you shall get the licour or moisture
out of them. And all that which appertains to the health of man. The which
I mean by the grace of God to set forth in this book, with a number of
Alchymistes preparations of the said things, the which works wonderfully
in man's body: so that it seems to diverse persons miraculous.

Therefore gentle Reader peruse this book with discretion, and then if thou
see it stand to thy mind, set thy hand to the Plough and be diligent in
the work, so that thou may know the proof, and feel the ready
commodity thereof, for ye shall understand that there is no medicine in the
world that can be found of so quick operation as the Mineralles are, if they
be truly prepared and as I will show you hereafter: But if they be not well
prepared they are very hurtful, and not to be allowed. Therefore look that ye
prepare them as I shall show you, and then you shall wonder at their workyng.

And although the worthy science of Alchymie is come in such disdain through
leude persons, that it seems lies and fables, and no true science: Yet that
ought not to hinder or derrogate any thing to our purpose, as long as our
matter is against the abuse of it, as for example

The Alchymistes have wrought in this work, to the intent that they might have
of lead and copper, gold and silver, or the mean to make them of all other
simples or slight Metalles. But whether god has given them that gift I know
not: therefore I leave it to the masters of that art. And albeit we have seen
many wonderful things in that art: yet will I not affirm that it is
possible to be done, for it seems unreasonable, that a man in so short time
should do that thing, the which nature does in many years. And that me^
should presume to do that which God does only him self, and not any of his
creatures. We therefore will not affirm it to be true or possible, nor yet
deny it utterly, or condemn it as untruth. But we will leave the answer
unto those that take it to be done.

But here in this treatise we will set forth that which we have seen and
wrought, and proved, and are expert therein. And although it be sprung out of
the art of Alchymie, yet it is not to that intent, for it serves not to
transmute Mettalles, but it serves to help those diseased both inwardly and
outwardly: who of the common Chyrurgions are counted incurable, and also given
over of the Physicians. Those pacients shall be helped through the hidden
mysteries and heavenly secrets of this science.

And for as much as it is impossible to prepare these things without the art
of Alchymie: therefore we must praise this art through our preparations above
al other sciences, that makes for the health of man, for they preserve a man
only touched and afflicted with slight wounds and griefs on his body, and
that with much pain and much ado. But this art gives unto man his health
again in short time, and with small pain unto the pacient, be he never so
desparatly sick, and to man's thinking past cure: for I have seen miracles
therein.

And in so much that it is all prepared with fire: the mean man calls it
Alchymia. How beit the intent of the Alchymiste is far from our intent. But
call it what you will, it makes not much matter of the name. For I am sure
there is nothing in all Physic that ministers either better or readier help
to cure man's body, then this science of preparing Mettalles with fire rightly.
I say rightly prepared, not as the unskillful Apoticaries have ordered them: or
as the unlearned Physician have occupied them, for the Apothecarie is no other
then a servant in the kitchen (as I may term him) and no Master Cook, so
long as he knows not these preparations, which I will show you.

In like manner it is to be thought of the Physician that has no skill in these
preparations. For we have seen and proved diverse times, that the first vapor
or smoke of any Herb or Spice is the best that is therein, and yet our
learned Physicians command it to be boiled until half be consumed, etc.
Then note if the best fly away in the boiling, what strength can the
medicine have. Therefore I say that the Physician without this art of
preparation is little or nothing worth, although they take the pacientes
money. For he goes to work blindly with a blind leader which is the
Apoticarie. But the Physician that is expert in this science, and does
prepare his medicines truly, he is to be praised above all other. For a man
ca^ not buy with any money that which is got by long careful travail.
Therefore is the art of Alkimie worthy to be praised, and the Alchymiste to
be praised also, although they attain not to their first intention, yet they
have opened the way, through the which this excellent cunnyng of preparation
was known and found, and through the which there are a number of wonderful
secrets opened, the which without this art were all unknown, to the great
hinderaunce of the sick and diseased persons. Therefore I will not speak
against it, but hold it in great estimation to our intention, that is to the
help of the sick and diseased person, and to prepare the Minneralles
wherewith you may do that which can not be done with any other Herbs, or
simples, or Spices. And hearewith will we finish this preface, and wright of
the names of the simples, the which are occupied in this art.

The names of the Metalles, Simples, or Medicines of this Science.
HEre will I well-beloved Reader, show thee for good will that thing which many
have sought with their money and labor, and yet could nere find it: especially
for that I will not have this worthy science trodde under foot. Therefore we
will write first of the names of the simples, and then of the names of the
preparations, and what they are.

Sall Armoniack, that is a Salt so called, the which ye shall find at the
Appoticaries.

Sall Gemme, is stone salt, found in the Mine as clear as the glass.

Sall Commune, is common Salt that we eat.

Vitriolum is green Coperas.

Calcantum, is yellowe Coperas a Matter like Oker.

Alumen is Alum: but there are diverse kinds.

Sulfur vine is the stone whereout the other Sulfur is melted, and is green of
color.

Antimonium is a certain Mynerall so called that ye shall find at the
Appoticaries.

Carrabe that is yellowe Ambre or Sucinum.

Tartarum, that is Argill or Wine leese.

Saturnus that is Lead.

Jupiter that is Tin.

Mars that is Iron.

Sol that is Gold.

Luna that is Silver.

Venus that is Copper.

Mercury that is Quicksiluer.

The names of the preparations.
CAlcinatio that is to make any of these Metalles as it were lyme, with great
fire sometimes, and other some time with small fire.

Solutio that is to dissolve and make as it were liquide like unto water, the
hard or tough substance of any thing.

Subblimatio that is a driving up, or aseution of the Metal by force of heat
into the top of the Limbecke, so that it may hang in the top of the
vessel hard and dry.

Distillatio, that is to take away the moisture by the heat of the fire.

Digestio that is to set the matter in hot water or in horse dongue.

Fixatio that is to sublime a matter, so long that it will sublime no more, but
remain fixte in the bottom.

There are a number of other preparations, but we will leave them because we
have written sufficient for our purpose already.

To prepare Crocum martis and such like which are prepared through Calcination.
CRocum martis, or Crocum veneris shall be made in this manner.

Take the limmall of Iron, as much as you will, and wash it with fair water
so long until that the water run as clear of as it was put on: then put
it in a glass, and put thereon strong vinegar until it be covered, and let
it stand so two or three days close shut: then pour of the vinegar and dry
the limmall well, then put it into a new earthen pot with a cover, and lute
it very well round about with lyme and hear mixte together: then set it in a
furnase of Calcination eight days and eight nights, so that it may
continually stand read hot, then take it forth and grind it on a stone, and
if it grind very smoothe without any hard matter that ye can either see or
feel, then it is calcined enough: but if ye feel any hard matter, put it
into the furnase again two or three days, and then grind it again, and
this order ye shall use until it be fine as can be possible.

This Crocum martis being so prepared, amongst all other medicines in the
world, it is the most excellent that can be found against the bloody flixe,
giuyng it in this order. Take conserve of Roses one ounce, Crocu^ martis one
scrupple mix the^ together, and let the paciente eat it in the morning, and
fast thereon two hours, and it will help him although he had had it never so
long, or never so sore. It is also given above all other medicines in the
latter end of a Dropsy, and also against the flux of menstrue, and against
bleeding at the nose, and all other fluxes. It helps those that spitte blood:
it is excellent to stop the flux in wounds, and to help them and dry them,
if ye straw the powder thereon, etc. Ye shall make Crocum veneris in the self
same order aforesaied: but where ye took limmall, ye shall take the scales of
Copper: and ye shall note, that when they be both calcined enough, they will
be as red as blood. Also ye shall note, that this Crocum veneris is not to be
used inwardly, but only outwardly.

Of the preparation of Alumes and Saltes.
TAke Sal Gem, or common salt, and set them in a calcinyng furnase with a
small fire, until it be red hot half an hour, and that it crake no more,
then let it wax cold and beat it to powder, then put it in clean rain
water and let it melte, and let it stand till it be clear, then power it
in a pot well nealed, and set it on the fire, and let it boil till it be dry,
and ye shall find the salt on the ground as white as snow, the which ye shall
neale once more in the fire, and then it is prepared.

The preparation of Alum.
TAke Alum and calcine it in an open vessel till al his moisture be gone, then
make it red hot, and after a while put it into an other pot with strong
vinegar, and set it on the fire and let it seathe dry, then set it on the
fire again till it be red hot and as white as snow, then keep it to thy use.

This is very excellent to dry up old sores if it be mixte with honey, and
takes away dead flesh without pain, etc.

To calcine Vitrioll.
TAke Vitrioll and beat it to powder, and put it into a new earthen pot that
is vnneiled, and set it in a oven somewhat warm till it be dry, then cover
the pot close and lute it well, that no air may come forth: then set it in a
calcinyng furnase the space of two hours, so that it may always be as red as
the coals, and then it will be as red as blood, then grind it on a stone, and
keep it to thy use.

There is no Corosiue the which works like this Vitrioll calcinated, for if
ye mix it with any Vngue^t, and lay it on a evil ulcer, it makes an Asker
the which in all Corosiues must be loused with fact or butter: but this
Corosiue needs not, for ye must still lay more thereon, and leave the Asker
in the sore, for the virtue of this Vitrioll is so great, that it causes the
flesh to grow under the Asker, and when the flesh is enough the Asker will
fall of, and then ye shall need nothing but to skin it, the which is not
commonly seen of other Corosiues: therefore I praise this for the best of all
Corosiues.

To calcine Quicksiluer.
TAke Aqua fortis.ij. Mercury.j. and put them in a glass, and set it on the
fire in a scaruell with sand or ashes, till the Mercury be dissolved, then
put it into an earthen pot well glased, and set it on the fire to boil till
it be dry, and stir it always with a stick that it may dry the better,
and when it is well dried, put it in another pot with a keuer that is very well
glased within, then lute it very well that no air may come forth: But ye must
note that the pot must be top full, then set it in a calcining furnase with a
good fire four days and four nights, then grind it to small powder on a
stone, and keep it to thy use. For then thou have Mercury calcinated, of the
which we have spoken much in our pearl of Chirurgerie.

This is excellent in all old sores, although they be never so evil, for it
cleanses without pain and heals them, that is, it cleanses as long as it is
needful, and than it heals, which is most strange to see: this eats
away al dead flesh, and preserves that which is good and sound, and causes
the vlceration to heal in short space. Ye shall note that when we speak of
Mercury calcinated or precipitate in any place, ye shall take this.

To calcine Tartare.
TAke good Tartare that is clear and without filthe, and stamp it to powder,
then put it in a scrauell that never was occupied, and set it in the calcinyng
furnase, so that it may stand but even read hot, and there let it remain
until it be as white as snow through out, then take it forth and keep it in a
glass close shut, until you read more how that ye shall make this Oil.

To Calcine Tynne or Lead.
TAke Tin or Lead and melte it on the fire, and when it is molte set it very
hot, then take an Iron skummer and stir it therewith so long, till it come to
ashes, then take that ashes and wash it so long that the water runs clear
of as ye put it on, then dry it in a calcinyng furnase till that it smoke no
more, then put it into another new pot with a cover that is vnglased, and lute
it very well, then set it in the calcinyng furnase again one hole day with a
good fire, then take it forth and ye shall find a Calxe in manner white, but
some what inclinyng to yellowe. The Time ye shall calcine in the self same
manner as ye did the Lead, but when ye burn it to ashes ye must give it
greater fire, but in calcinyng it shall not need greater fire then it was for
the Lead, and so keep your fire until it be as white as snow, and then it is
prepared to make his oil as we will show you hereafter.

To Calcine Silver.
TAke Silver and dissolve it in Aqua fortis, then cast a piece of Copper into
the glass where the water is with the Silver, and straight ways pour thereon
a good quantity of rain water, and then the Silver will fall to the bottom
in a Calxe: then let it stand so one night or as long as ye will, and then
power away the clear water, and dry the Calxe on the fire, then wash that
with warm water so long that it have no bitter taste of the Aqua fortis, and
when ye have so done, ye shall take common salt prepared as I have showed you
before, and lay it in a Crusible the thicknes of a straw, and then lay
thereon your Calx of Silver, and cover it with the same salt again, then lute
your crusible with a cover that no air may come forth, then set it in a
calcinyng furnase with a reasonable fire six hours long, then take it forth
and put thereon fair water, and let it seethe two or three Pater nosters, and
then the salt will seethe away, and the Calxe will remain sweet, the which
ye may prove upon the tongue: but if it be not sweet, wash it again till it
be sweet, and then keep it in a glass, for it is prepared to make his Oil.

To calcine Gold.
TAke gold and Mercury, and make thereof amalgamie as the Golde-smithes do
use to gilde their silver Plate: the which is made thus.

Take twelve parts of Mercury, and one part of Gold, the which ye shall
beat into very thin plates, and then cut it in as small pieces as ye can,
then take a Crusible and put therein the Mercury, and set it on the fire till
it begin to smoke, then put thereto the Gold and take it from the fire, and
stir it together so long til that ye may see no more Gold, then set it on
the fire again, and stir it so long that the Mercury be flowne all away, and
then ye shall find your Gold in the crusible like sand, then take that and
put thereto as much prepared salt, and grind them together on a stone as
small as is possible, then put it in a glass, and wash it with warm water so
long till that ye see the Calxe fair and yellowe and sweet upon the tongue,
so that it taste nothing of saltness, then it is prepared: and herewith will
we make an end of Calcination, and write of Sublimation..

To sublime Quicksiluer.
TAke Mercury and wash it with vinegar and salt a pretty while, then put
thereon very hot water and wash it therewith, till that the water run as
clear of as ye put it on, then dry it with a clothe and grind it with
vinegar and salt again, and wash it with warm water as ye did before: this
grindyng and washyng ye shall use till that the Mercury be no more black,
and that it be as clear as a glass, then take of that Mercury one pound,
Salt prepared two pound, Sall Armoniack subblimed as I will show hereafter one
pound, grind these saltes together with the Mercury, so long till that the
Mercury can not be perceived: then put all the substance in a subbliaiyng
vessel with his cover, the which has a hole in the top: as I will show
thee hereafter in the next book, if God permit me life. Then set it in a
calcinyng furnase, and give it first a small fire til that the moisture be
flowne out through the hole of the cover of the subblimatorie, the which ye
shall know by this means: ye shall now and then hold a knife over the hole
of the instrument, and then if the knife he weate there is moisture in the
vessel, but when ye see that the knife is still dry, stop the hole with a
stopple of paper, and increase the fire a little bigger, and let it stand so
four hours long, then increase the fire yet bigger, and let it stand four
hours: then make the fire so hot that the bottom may be all red, and that
continue six hours, but let not your fire slake, then let it wax cold and
take that which is subblimed, and grind it on a stone with two pound of salt
prepared, and subblime it again as ye did before in all points, the^ let it
wax cold, and grind it again with Salt prepared, and sublime it again.
This grindyng and sublimyng ye shall use until the Mercury be as clear as
Crystal, and as white as snow and then it is prepared, then keep it in a
glass till that I write more thereof.

To sublime Sulfur.
FIrst before that ye will sublime Sulfur, ye must prepare him thus.

Take Sulfur vife and grind it to fine powder, then searce it finely, then put
it in a pan with strong vinegar, and set it on the fire, and let it seethe a
whole day and a night, but ye must put thereto always more vinegar as it
consumes away, and still ye must skomme of the sko^me or filthe as fast as it
rises, and when it has sodden so in vinegar, ye shall seethe it two days in
the urine of young children, and always skomme of the frothe, and put thereto
more urine always as it consumes. This seething and skomming ye shall
continue until there rise no more frothe, then put it in a glass, and wash
it with warm water till all the stincke of the piss be gonne, and that it
remain as white as any snow: the^ dry it well for it is well purged, then
take of that purged Sulfur half a pound, Vitrioll calcined li. grind these
very fine together so that ye Sulfur can not be seen, then put them in a
sublimyng vessel, and set it in the furnase, and give it first a small fire
till all the moisture be gonne, the which ye shall know with a knife as I
showed you before: then stop the hole and increase the fire a little, and so
keep it six hours, then let it wax cold and take that which is sublimed,
and grind it with fresh Vitrioll and sublime it again as ye did before: this
sublimyng and grindyng with fresh Vitrioll, ye shall use till that the Sulfur
be as white as snow, and so clear as a glass, and then it is sublimed enough:
therefore keep it in a glass close shut with Wax, till that we write more
thereof.

To sublime Sall Armoniack.
TAke Sall Armoniack li. and as much limall of Iron and grind them together on
a stone, the^ put them in a sublimyng vessel, and sees it in the furnace
first with a small fire, and then increase it so that the bottom of the pot
may be red hot, and so let it stand half a Summers day, then let it wax
cold and take that which is subblimed and grind it on a stone, with as much
salt prepared and sublime it again: This grindyng with new salt and
subblimyng, ye shall use so long till that it be subblimed as white as snow
and then it is prepared: then keep it to sublime thy Mercury with.

To Sublime Copper, which is a great secret.
FIrst ye must calcine it with Sulfur thus.

Take plates of Copper beaten as thin as is possible, and cut them in little
pieces as big as a penye or there about, then take a crusible and put
therein Brimstone beaten a finger thick, then lay thereon a bed of these
plates and cover the^ with Sulfur, and then lay another bed and cover it with
Sulfur again, and this do till that the crusible be full, then set it in
the calcinyng furnace half a day long with a good fire, then let it wax cold
and grind it upon a stone, then put it into Aqua fortis and let it dossolue:
then distill away the water and make the powder very dry, the which
remains in the bottom of the glass and grind it on a stone: with salt
prepared, then put it in a sublimyng vessel, and set it in a furnase, and give
first a small fire, and then give it a very strong fire four and twenty
hours: and then let it wax cold, and in the vessel ye shall find a
green powder light and subtle, but nothing like the Copper the which ye had
to subblime. Then keep that in a glass close shut with wax, for there is no
better medicine in the world then this for the Canker, the Wolf, Fistelowes,
and all such like sores, for this does help them quickly: and when ye will
occupy it in such sores, ye must straw it thereon, and lay upon it a wound
plaster: of the which I have written a number in my pearl of Chirurgerie, and
it shall heal them how sore so ever they be.

To sublime Lead and Tin.
THese two are sublimed with less labor then the Copper: nevertheless when ye
will sublime them, go to work as thou did with Copper, saving that ye may
not calcine them with Sulfur, but as I have showed you before. And when it is so
calcined ye shall dissolve them in this strong water following: and when it is
dissolved distill the water away til it remain dry: then dissolve it again,
and distill the water away again, so that it remain scant dry: then take
that, and put thereto twice so much salt prepared and sublime them together
with a strong fire, and ye shall find a white pounder subblimed in the top,
the which serves to the same use that the Copper serves for: that is in all
foul Vlcerations and filthy sores, etc.

How to make the said Aqua fortis to dissolve Lead and Tin.
TAke salt Peter, Vitrioll Roman and Sall Armoniack, of each one pound beat
them well together and put them in a glass, the which is very well luted:
then set on the head with a great receiver, and lute the joints well that no
air may come forth, then give it a very small fire twelve hours long, and
then increase it according to Art: but take good heed that ye be not to rash
with your fire at the first, least that all the glasses fly in pieces: then
keep it to thy use, and when ye will dissolve your Lead, ye must take for
every pound of Lead, two pound of water, and dissolve it cold, for otherwise
it would blow the glass in pieces.

To make Oil of Sulfur, the which is a great secret.
THis oil is made in this manner. First ye shall have a bell of earth, or a
head of glass like the common Stilles of Tin, the which ye shall hang up
by a string: then take a plate of Iron of a finger thick, and two fingers
broad, and make it read hot in the fire, then lay it under the bell or
head, and cast thereon Brimstone, and let it burn, so that the fume may go
within the bell, and this ye shall continue possible a whole day, before that
one drop will fall. But when ye see it drop, then continue till ye have oil
enough and then haste thou a great Treasure, the which keep in a glass, for
it will help the Pox and all outward sores and Vlcerations, and also all
stinkyng and filthy sores, the which will not be help. It is also excellent
against the Rose, and against the Pestilence, the which ye must use in this
manner. Take water of Sorell, of Roses, of Cardus Benedictus of each.i. Oil of
Sulfer.i. mix them together, and give it the pacient as soon as he feels him
self sick, and lay him down to sweat one hour, and let him not stir that
he may sweat the better, then dry him well warm clothes, and let him rest
two hours, and then if ye have list to eat, let him have a a cullus made of
a Hen in this order. Ye shall boil the Hen or Chicken so long, that the
flesh fall from the bones, then sto^pe the bones and all, and strain it with
the said broth, then put thereto a good deal of Sugar, and a little Wine, and
let the pacient eat it with very little bread: and then two hours after,
ye shall give him the aforesaied receipte with oil, and let him sweat thereon
two hours, as is said before, and this ye shall do the next day once, and
by the grace of God the Pestilence shall not hurt him. But when ye will
occupy it to the Pox, or any other filthy sores, ye shall give it with water
of Hoppes, of Cicorie, of Germander, of each.i. water of Fumetorie.ij. Oil of
Sulfer.i. these ye shall mix together, and let the pacient drink it at seven
a clock in the Morning, and let him sweat thereon two hours: then dry
him with warm clothes, and then at night ye shall give him that portion in
manner as ye did before, and let him sweat thereon other two hours: and
this order ye shall use till that they be whole, the which will be in very
short time, so that it shall seem miraculous, for his sores will presently be
healed, although they were never so evil.

Against the Rose ye shall take the water of Sorell of, Purselene, and put
thereto.i. of oil of Brimstone, and let the pacient drink it, and lie down
to sweat thereon, and in one day he shall be help, although he have had it a
long time.

To make Oil of Vitrioll.
FIrst ye must have an eathe^ pot, the which holds about a gallon, and must
be about a foot, or fourtene inches hie, then ye must have a head of glass,
the which comes just over the pot, then take Vitrioll and put it in the pot,
and then set on the head with a great receiver, and lute the joints well,
them give it small fire, as I have showed you before in the making of strong
water, and when ye see that it will drop no more, then increase the fire a
little, and so keep it till it drop no more, then take away the receiver, and
power out the water and set it too again, and lute it fast, then increase thy
fire by little and little, till that the fumes come forth: then keep it bigger
and bigger, so that the pot may stand as hot as the coals, and so keep it
till that the head and receiver wax clear again, but in anywise slack not
thy fire: For I have seen fire kept a whole day, after that the water was
taken away, and never a drop fell into the receiver, but at the last it came
apace, therefore leave not till it be done. Then keep this Oil very close in
a glass, that the spirits flee not away, for when it has lost his
spirits, it is good for nothing, but to corrod and eat away dead flesh. But
when this Oil has his spirits, there is no better medecin in the world,
against the falling sickness and Apoplexia being used thus. Take Aqua vitae
perfectly rectified, with out fleme one pint, Oil of Vitrioll one spoonefull,
mix them and let the paciente drink thereof every morning one spoonefull, and
he shall be helped, although he have had it ten years, and fell every hour: and
for Apoplexia ye shall give it in the said order. But if he can not drink it
so, ye shall give it as ye think good, so that he have it in his body, and
presently he shall mende, although he have had it a long time, and were lame
over al his body. It is also excellent good against al hot fevers in the
Summer, for it helps them in one day, as I have proved diverse times my self,
and ye shall give it in this order. Take Burrage water as much as ye will, and
put thereto so much of this Oil, till it be sour like Veriuise, and thereof
let the pacient drink as much as ye will, and then ye shall see the pacient
help, and his thirst shall slake, and also his heat. This oil is also good
against all foul and old sores, and to take away their stincke, if ye mix it
with water of Egremonie, till it be very sower, and then wash the sore
therewith. If ye mix more Oil with the said water, till it be as four as
Vinegar, it takes away wartes if ye wash them therewith, and cause them to
fall out without pain. It helps all scabbes if ye wash them therewith, mixed
with Egremonie water as is before said. If ye mix it with Borage water,
Buglosse water, and Mellise water, it helps the beting of the heart, that
has continued a long time.

To make water of Mercury, the which Paraselsus writes of his book of
Chirurgerie.
TAke Mercury that is sublimed, as I have showed you before, and put it it a
glass, and set it in Furnace, and give such a temperate fire, that you may
hold your hand over it a Pater noster while and that degree of fire ye shall
keep, the space of six weeks, but look that ye increase not the fire, nor
yet per deminishe it: then take that Mercury and grind it fine, and put it
into a bag, like unto an Ipocras bag, and hang it in a moiste place, and
set a glass under it, and the Mercury will turn into water, the which keep
well: and when thou will occupy that water, thou shall weate a linen clothe
therein, and lay it on such kind of sores, as will not be help by no other
kind of means: for it will take away their corosiues, and cause them to
heal, although they were never so il. And more over, because that thou shalt
know wherefore that it serves, ye shall note that it is good against all
Cankers, Fistilous, the Woulfe, and such like, for it helps them all, though
they were never so evil, as Paraselsus writes thereof in his great Surgerie
in the Chapter of the Cancker and such like.

To make water of Sal Armoniake.
TAke Sal Armoniake that is sublimed seven times, and grind it to powder, then
put it into a glass, that has a hole in the bottom on the one side, and then
set that glass in an other, and set them in a moiste Seller, and then the Sal
Armoniacke will dissolve into water, and run into the nether glass, the
which ye shall keep close: In the aforesaid manner ye may make water of
Alum, the which is excellent to dry up all filthy wounds, etc.

The order to fix all things that are fliyng.
TO fix any thing, is to be understood thus. Ye shall sublime it so often, that
it will sublime no more, but will lie in the fire, so that the fire can not
consume it, and when ye will fix any thing, as Sulfer, Quicksiluer, or
Arsnicke, or such like, ye shall do it in this order: Ye shall take Mercury
sublimed, or sulfur sublimed, or Arsenicke, or such like, and put it into a
submyng glass, which I will show you diverse paterns, in the next book god
willing and set it in a furnace with a small fire, and the^ increase it
according to Art, the space of a whole day, and the^ at evening ye shall turn
tha glass and let it sublime up into the other end: and this order ye shall
use with sublimyng, from one end unto an other, till that it will sublime no
more: the which ye shall prove in this manner. Ye shall take a little thereof
and lay it on a red hot coal, and look whether it smoke or no, for if it
smoke it is not fixte, but if it smoke not it is fixte. But to know the very
trothe, ye shall take thereof and grind it to powder, and then put it into a
crusible, and give it as great a fire as though ye would melt Coper, and then
if ye see that there comes no smoke from it, it is fixed: but if that it smoke
away, ye shall put it into a new sublimyng glass, and sublime it again,
then keep it to thy use, till I write more thereof: for when you have your
spirits fixed, ye have a great Treasure, the which is not to be bought with
money, and principally of Sulfer fixte, for therewith ye may do what ye
list, for there can no sickness come unto man's body, but it may be help
therewith. Also Mercury being fixte, is such an excellent medicine against
the Pox, that the like can not be found in the world. But ye shall note, that
it mst not be occupied alone, but with other things, ye which I will show you
in an other place. The Arsnicke and the Sal Armoniacke may not be occupied in
any wise inwardly, but only outwardly, as ye shall hear hereafter, and
especially of the Salt of Arsnicke.

To make Oil of Antimonie.
IF thou will make this Oil, ye must look diligently to your fire, least ye
spoil all: then take a retoret of glass, and lute it very well, and put
therein three pound of Antimonie, and three pound of Sal gem calcined, beaten
together, then increase thy fire according to Art, three days and three
nights, and lute thy receiver very well, the which must be of the quantity
of five or six gallons, or more, the greater the better, and then thou shalt
have an Oil as red as blood, the which is not to be sold, or bought for
money. For it helps the Canker, the Woulf Noli me tangere, and Fistulais, if
ye anoint them therewith: first the dead flesh will fall out without pain,
and then it will heal, how sore so ever it be, although it were forty years
old.

In summa. It is a most excellent Oil against all sores, and venomous Ulcers,
for if ye annointe them three times therewith, it helps them, although they
were so venomous that they did eat a hand broad in one night, as it is diverse
times seen of the Woulf, and such like vlcerations, that eats so, that it
seems that a Dog had bitten out a great piece. These and all other
Vlcerations, the which will not be help by any means, ye shall help them
with this Oil in short time, so that it shall seem merueilous to behold.

How ye may draw forth salt out of all mettalles: and first out of Gold, the
which is called sall Sapientium.
FIrst if thou will make Salt of Gold, thou shall take Gold filed into
powder, and dissolve it in the before written strong water, and when it is
dissolved, ye shall boil away the water, till remain dry, then thou shall
put thereon fair water, and let it sees therewith three or four hours long,
and then power it awie, and put more thereon and let it seethe again, and
then power it of again: this powryng on and of ye shall use till that the
water have no taste of the strong water, but is sweet: and when it is so, give
it great fire that it may dry well, then put it in a glass and set it in a
calcinyng furnace, and there it shall calcine a whole month long, so that it
remain always red hot and at one degree of fire: the^ take it and grind it on
a stone, till that it be as fine as is possible: then power thereon good
distilled vinegar, and lay a cover over the glass, and let it seethe in
Balneo Mariae a whole day long, puttyng thereto always fresh vinegar: then
power of that vinegar into a glass and put thereon more, and boil it a whole
day as ye did before, and this ye shall do three times: then take that vinegar
that ye powered of, and distill it by Balneo Mariae till it remain dry, and in
the bottom ye shall find a Salt as white as snow, the which ye shall take
and put thereon more vinegar, and set it in the Balneo Mariae that it may
boil the space of two hours, then let it settle a whole day, and then power
of that which is clear, and then if there remain any thing in the bottom, it
is not enough preparde: then ye shall disolue it in Vinegar again, and distill
the Vinegar again as I have showed you, and ye shall find a whiter salt in
the bottom of the glass, the which ye shall put in Vinegar again, and let
that boil in Balneo Mariae two hours, as I showed you before, and then let
it stand and settle, and then power of the clearer part, and distill it in
Balneo Mariae, and the Salt will remain in the bottom as white as Snow. But
if there remain any in the other glass ye shall not do as I have showed
you, till it be all dissolved. Then dissolve that Salt in Rain water three or
four times, and look whether there remain any Salt in the bottom
undissolved, and if there remain none, it is well prepared, or else not, and it
is called Sal Philosophorum, or Sal Sapientiae, and when it is dissolved into
clear water, ye shall distill away the water, that the Salt may remain
very dry in the bottom, the which ye shall keep in a glass close shot:
for it is an excellent Medecin against all diseases of the body, for it
will leave nothing in man's body that shall hurt him, but it drives it out by
sweat, and makes the pacient sound and whole as ever he was in all his life.
It helps all outward sores, as the Canker, the Woulfe, Fistiloes, and such
like. This being taken inwardly does help those outward deseases most
wonderful. For it helps them in three or four days, and when ye will
occupy it against such deseases, ye shall use it in this order: Ye shall
take a viol full of wine, and put therein two or three grains of that Salt,
for it is sufficient for any sick person, for any kind of deseases, then
stop that Violl, and set it in warm water till the Salt be dissolved, then
give the sick person thereof to drink warm, and lay him down to sweat,
for it will cause him to sweat wonderfully, therefore keep him from the cold
in any wise, for that sweat will bring him to health again, although he were
a Leper, so that it come not by Nature of his mother, for if it come by kind,
there is no help that I do know, yet nevertheless this medecin can not
hurt, nor yet it can not help him. But other sicknesses, although they were
never so evil or sore, it will help the^. It helps the Pestilence
miraculously in one day, and likewise the Pox in short time, giuyng it as is
aforesaied in wine, and lay thereon and sweat, and the^ dry awie the sweat
with warm clothes, and when thou will help any outward sore, thou shalt
lay thereon a wound plaster, and let him drink the said Salt with Wine
morning and euenyng, as is said before, and in short space they shall be helped.

The order to distill Vinegar for to make the aforesaied Saltes.
TAke good strong Renishe Wine vinegar, and distill it in a Limbeck of glass,
and give it first a small fire till half be distilled, then take it away for
it is nothing worth to our work, then taste it on thy tongue whether it be
sharp or no, if it be not sharp it is not good: if not keep that small sire
till that the liquor come forth sour: for ye shall note that the worst of the
vinegar distilleth first, then distill that which is last with a reasonable
fire until it be almost distilled, but ye may not distill it all quite out,
least it should stincke of the fire and wax read, for then it will not serve
our purpose. Moreover ye shall note that it may not drop faster, but that a
man may say a Pater noster between.

To draw forth the salt of Arsnicke.
THe salt of Arsnicke is a marvelous salt, but it is sharp and corosiue, and
the order to make it is thus.

Take Arsnicke.j. the which is fixte and dissolve it in Aqua fortis made of
sale Peter and Alum, and when it is dissolved put thereon rain water, till
that it sincke to the bottom, and when it is sunck to the bottom let it
stand to settle, and then power of that part which is clear, and put on
more fresh water and let it sees and then let it settle and power of the water
again, and then power one more: and this order ye shall use till that the
water come of as sweet as ye put it on, then calcine it six days and six
nights, then power thereon distilled vinegar and sees it in Balneo Mariae to
dissolve, and at night let it settle and wax clear: then power of that
which is clear and put or more, and let it stand a day to dissolve as I
said before, and then let it wax clear and the^ power of the clear parts.
This ye must do three times as is said of Gold, and then dry it very well,
and put thereon fair rain water till it be dissolved, and when it is
dissolved ye shall make no more fire under it but let it wax cold, and then
power the clear parts of and distill it in Balneo Mariae till it be dry:
and then ye shall find your salt in the ground as white as snow: the which
is most excellent against the Canker, the Woulfe, and such like as comes of
wou^des, etc. ye shall help them thus. Take of this falt.i. and put thereto.i.
of Vnguentum fuscum, and therewith dress the sores and they will heal in
short time, although they wear never so old: and therefore if thou will
understand wherefore it serves: look in my pearl of Chirurgerie, and also
in the Chirurgerie of Paraselsus.

To make Oil of the Metalles and first of Lead and Tin.
IF thou will make Oil of these two Metalles, ye must first calcine them as I
have showed you and then dissolve them in the aforesaied strong water, and when
they be dissolved let them stand till it be as clear as a glass, then
distill away the water by a Limbecke till it remain dry, and when it is
dry, put thereon good distilled vinegar and set it in Balneo Mariae to
dissolve a whole day and let it boil, then let it wax cold and settle, then
power of that part which is clear and distill it in another glass, and when
your matter is dry, put thereon other distilled vinegar, and let it seethe so
long til that it be dissolved, then distill away the vinegar, and then put on
more vinegar: this dissoluyng and distillyng ye shall use so long till that the
matter remain in the bottom like Oil, then put it forth whilst it is yet
warm, for when it is cold it is so tough that ye can not get it from the
glass: This oil being so made is most excellent, for it healpeth wounds and
sores in very short time: and moreover there is no oil amongst all the
secrets of Physic or surgerie that heals a wound sooner then this oil
does, for it helps them in four and twenty hours, so that there be no
bones broke or cut, etc. There is another manner of making of this oil the
which is better, which we will not write of in this place.

To make Oil of Copper, and of Crocum martis, or Iron.
THese Metalles ye must first calcine, and then dissolve them in strong water,
then put thereon rain water till that the Metal sincke to the bottom,
then put to so much rain water till that it have no taste of the strong
water, then dry it well and put thereon distilled vinegar, and set it in
Balneo Mariae to dissolve, then distill away the vinegar till it remain dry,
and then put thereon fresh vinegar, and distill that away till that the matter
remain dry: and this order ye shall use till that ye matter remain moist in
the bottom like oil. This oil is of like virtue as the other, and therefore
we will write no more thereof in this place.

To make Oil of Quicksiluer.
IF thou will make this Oil, ye must have Mercury fixte or else it will not
serve to our use: therefore take that which is fixte and put it in strong
water, and set it in Balneo to dissolve, and set thereon a head, and when it is
dissolved let it settle, and then power of that part which is clear and
distill it in Balneo Mariae, and your Mercury will remain in the bottom,
then put thereon rain water, and wash it so long that the water have no taste
of the strong water, but remain as sweet as ye put it on: then put thereon
distilled vinegar, and set it in Balneo Mariae a hole day till that it be
dissolved, then distill the vinegar away, and put thereon fresh, and set it
in Balneo Mariae again to dissolve, and then distill it away again: and this
order ye shall use till that it remain like an oil in the bottom, then take
it forth and keep it in a glass close shut, least it should leese his
strength. This oil is of as great operation in fresh wounds as the other
aforesaied are: it is above all other against the pox to be used outwardly,
for it helps all sores that come of the pox, if ye anoint the sores
therewith and in the aforesaid manner: Ye may make Oils of all Metalles but
they are not to be taken inwardly, and therefore I will show thee another
order how you shall make Oils of all the Metalles to use inwardly.

To make Oil of Gold, the which is distilled through the helm, and is to be
used both inwardly and outwardly.
IF thou will make Oil of Gold, ye shall take his salt of the which we have
made mention before, and put it in to a glass with a long neck, and mix the
glass fast with hermes sell, that is with a pair of gloyng tongues, as I will
show you hereafter: then ye shall set the said glass in a calcinyng
furnace, with a fire so temperate as though it stood in the Sun: and there ye
shall let it stand eight days, and then increase the fire other eight days,
till that ye see it begin to wax yellowe, and then keep thy fire in that
heat till that thou see thy glass all yellowe, and then increase thy fire a
little till that ye see it wax a brouner yellowe: and when ye see that, ye
shall keep it in that heat eight days, and then if ye see it change no color
increase your fire a little more eight days, and then ye shall see it wax
red, and when it is indefferent red, ye shall increase your fire again eight
days, till that ye see it a broune red, then ye may give it a greater fire
for it is fixte, and no fire can consume it: and when ye have kept it eight
days in such a great heat, ye shall let it wax cold, and if ye will
make this oil, ye shall grind it in fine powder, and put it into a stone
pot, and put thereon distilled vinegar and set it in Balneo Mariae to
dissolve four days long, then let it settle and power of the clear parts,
and put thereon more vinegar and stop the pot very close, and set it again
other four days in Balneo Mariae to dissolve, and every day ye shall stir
it two or three times with a stick, then let it wax cold and settle, and
power of the clear parts, and then put thereon freashe Vinegar, and set it
to dissolve again, and let it stand and settle until the fifth day in the
morning, then let it wax cold and settle, and then power of the clear
parts, and if there remain any thing in the pottes bottom, cast it out: for
it is not profitable for our work, then wash the pot very clean, and
putt therein the said Vinegar that ye boiled before, and distill it per Balneo
Mariae, until it be dry, and ye shall find the powder fairer then it was
before, then put thereon freashe Vinegar, and set it to dissolve in Balneo
Mariae, as is said before. And when it has stood four days, ye shall power
it clear of, and look if there remain any feces or powder in the bottom and
if there be any, you shall power it out, and make the pot clean, and put
therein the said Vinegar which ye powered of, and distill it away per Balneo
Mariae, until that it remain dry: then put thereon fresh Vinegar, and
dissolve it as I have showed you, and then power of the Vinegar and distill it
again, and this ye shall use, until that you find no more Sand in the
bottom. But that it is all dissolved, and then it is prepared to make his Oil
of, then distill that last Vinegar away per Balneo Mariae, until that it be
very dry, then put it into a glass with a head and a great receiver, the
which ye must lute together very well, that no air may come forth, then
give it small fire iiij. houers long, and then increase it a little stronger,
and so keep it other four hours, and then ye shall see certain yellowe
fumes rise up into the head, then keep thy fire in that degree, until that
thou see the head wax read, then increase your fire a little, until that
the head be as read as blood, then keep thy fire in that state, until thou
see the color begin to slake. Then make thy fire greater, until that the
bottom of the Vessel be read, and then keep it in that stay one hour, and
then the head will seem to be full of Snow. Then make the fire as great at
thou canste, until the head wax clear again as it was at the first. Then
let it wax cold, and thou shall find an Oil in the receiver, the which is
not to be bought for any money: For because it helps all diseases in man's
body, both inwardly and outwardy: although they be never so evil, as the
Pestilence, the Pox, the Woulfe, the Canker, Consumptions, the Dropsy, and
the Leper, if so be that it came not by Nature of the Father and Mother. And
the order to take it is thus: Ye shall take a pot of wine and put therein. i.
of this Oil, and give the sick thereof to drink in the morning, and let him
lie in his bed and sleep, and then thou shalt see wonders. And if so be
that the pacient be full of evil humors, and that he shall need pourgyng,
it will cause nature to cast for the either by sweat, or urine, or by vomit,
or dounewarde, as long as the paciente shall have need, and then strait ways
amend and wax stronger: then if that he had eat a whole Capon and then if
the pacient do pourge no more by any of the said means aforesaid, ye shall
give it him but three days. For if he do purge more then one day, it is a
token that he is full of corruption, as of the Leprie, and the Pox, for those
are so full of corruption, so that he can not be help in one day by Nature.
Therefore ye shall give it more then three days, that is thus to be
understood, ye shall give it him so long that nature purges no more, and that
ye may see that the paciente waxes very strong, for this Medecin woorketh
with the help of Nature a long time after, and therefore this medecin is
precious, and of too quick operation to give to any sick person where no need
is. But as for the Woulf and the Canker, and such like outward sores, ye shall
understand, that there is need of no other help then the aforesaied drink,
as is said before: and ye shall lay upon the sore a cole leaf or li^te, and
you shall see great abundance of foul and rotten blood and such like come
forth: The which is scant to be believed, and then those holes or sores will
incarnace, and heal of the selves without fault.

FINIS.

