February 19. Numb. 19. A RELATION OF THE LATE HORRIBLE Treason, intended
against the Prince of Orange, and the whole state of the united Provinces,
according to the Dutch Copy Printed at the Hage. Whereunto is added these
particulars out of our Weekly News: A Declaration published by the French
King, in behalf and for the restoring of the Marquess of Rosny to his former
Offices and places of Government, by which it appears the peace is firmly
settled in France, etc. The arrival at Constantinople of the Ambassadors of
Sweden, Muscouia, and Polonia, with their several presents given to the Great
Turk. Whereunto is added A most true and wonderful Vision seen by Intien
Iansen, Elder of the Church of Jesus Christ at Oosterzee, being a confirmation
of the former Copy enlarged. With diverse other particular Relations, of many
parts of the world.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, Bartholomew Downs, and Thomas Archer.
1623.

A RELATION OF THE LATE INTENDED Horrible Treason against the Prince of Orange,
and the whole state of the United Provinces, etc.
THe last week we received and published certain private Letters concerning
the late intended horrible treason against the Prince of Orange, and the States
of the Low Countries; At what time the said Letters were written, little or
nothing was known concerning the said Conspiracy, but since diverse persons
have been apprehended, and some of them examined, and tortured; upon whose
examination the States have permitted something to be published to the world
thereof, which I having received in the Printed Dutch Copy, I have caused to
be translated and Printed together with the original; unto which I have added
the weekly Relation of News from several parts of the world; assuring you,
that so soon as more particulars shall come to my hand, by the like sure hand
with good approbation you shall receive it impartially, till when I bid you
farewell, this 19. of February, 1622.

Certain days ago, came certain men to some sailers of the Barge or small
Ship of the Prince of Orange etc., telling that they were Ingeners, and good
Parriots, and relating that they had in hand certain enterprises against the
enemies, in which they were to be employed secretly, and must cause certain
fireworks of Gunpowder and other matterialls to be made ready, without
reuealinge to any living body. For if they did otherwise and that it came to
the light they should suffer punishment on their body, in regard of these and
other speeches did the Sailers promise to assist them, and to keep counsel
for the good of the Country.

These Wolves in sheep skins hoping that they should come to their intent,
or purpose, one of the Traitors (as you shall hear hereafter) went to his
pocket, and gave each of the Sailers aforesaid three hundred Gilders (which
amount to thirty pounds sterling) to encourage them the better to the
business, and told them if they made their works well, and that they made
good operations that they should be better rewarded. But they admonished them
again to keep secrecy above all things, seeing (as they said) it concerned
mightily the Country, and charged them to bring the fire-workes aforesaid as
soon as they should be done, in Trunkes and Chestes, to the Hage and
Rotterdam, from whence they should carry them, where it should be required, and
they be ordered to transport them, assuring them to perform their promise,
within the space of a certain time.

One of these Traitors played afterward the Merchant and bought certain
Pistols to send them (as he told) to Count-Mansfield, and others; These being
packt up in a Truncke and sent by his direction to the house of one of his
consorts, who had a deep Seller into which they were presently carried, and
tried against a heap of sand whether they would give fire, and were fit for
their purpose. Afterward he caused them to be packt into another Truncke, and
to be sent to an Inn of the Hage, as it appeared lately.

About this time were the Conspirators and their consorts appointed to meet on
several places, where they intended to execute their wicked designs. And
amongst the rest, these Sailors aforesaid, came the 5. of February with some of
their fireworks to the Inn appointed unto them in the Hage, where they found
diverse other men besides them which had set them on work, upon the delivery of
it the Sailors were very well entertained with drink, and meat without any
charge of their own.

One of these Sailors perceiving with an eye cast, that the party who gave him
the money, had some conference with a man of Bleyswick as he suspected, and
took him, for such one, (as he was certain off) to be no friend or well
willer of the Prince of Orange. This Sayler musing about this, went to bed with
one of his loving fellows, and although he had well supped, nevertheless was
his head full of strange conceits, his fellow slept the same night very well,
but he dreamed many several dreams, and when he awaked he had many strange
fancies in his mind, so that this night seemed very long unto him, and wished
many times for the day light.

As soon as it was day light they rose with their other fellows and laughed
about the dreaming, falling tumbling and tossing of the dreamer aforesaid, but
he would not tell them what his mind did give him and how he was affected.
After that they two had tasted a Cup of Aqua uitae they went together walking
abroad, the rest remaining yet by their drink.

As soon as the Dreamer came on the street he told to his fellow his late
dreams, and what he had seen and observed, the day before, and said in plain
terms unto him, that he suspected these counterfeicted Ingeners were plotting
Treason, relating also that he thought it very convenient, to give the Prince
of Orange notice of their setting at work and proceedings and other
circumstances, for (said he) if this be a thing which is for the good of the
Country, without question the Prince of Orange shall know of it.

The other interposing presently his Judgment spoke in this manner, It cannot
hinder us although we give the Prince of Orange notice of this, for if the
matter be indeed intended for the good of the Country, we have done it, and
received therefore three hundred Gilders, And if it be otherwise the Prince of
Orange will moreover without doubt honor us with a piece of money, or some
drink money as they said, and we shall stand still in his favor. To be brief
they concluded amongst themselves to reveal it to the Prince of Orange, but
feared that they should not be able and resolute enough to speak to his
Excellency. But considering by themselves that it was a matter of great
consequence, they went toward the Court, intending to try their fortune
howsoever. When they came there, they perceived that his Excelency was rod
abroad toward Risewick, (where is one of his Stables of horses) whereupon they
went in all have thitherwards, and discoursing by the way, made one another to
believe firmly that it was but a foul business which they had taken in hand.
As soon as they arrived at Risewick, they found out one of the Pages of his
Excellency and entreated him, to give notice to the Prince his Master, that
they would feign speak with him: Hereupon he sent them word that he was
presently to take his Coach, and would come to hear them, Whereouer they
desired the Page again, to show his Excellency that they would willingly
speak with him instantly, even about a business which concerned himself
mightily.

The Prince having understood this, commanded his Page to bring these Sailors
aforesaid unto him, and when they stood before him, he asked them what their
desire was, they answered, that they had some secret matters to impart with his
Excellency. Whereupon he took them aside, and conferred privately with them,
and hearing of a thing of which he knew not before, he mused not upon the
business, but road in all have to the Hage, and revealed this matter at the
meeting, or Counsel Chamber of the States: Whereupon there was given order
that the 6. of February, (according to the new style) in the year 1623. (as
they reckon already, beginning their new year continually with the first day
of January) the Fiscall, or Provost, or rather the Attorney of the Court was
sent with certain men, which attended upon him, to search the Inn or Tavern
(seeing the Dutch word Herberge which in this place is used, signifies both)
of the Helmet or Casket in the street called the North-end.

Coming there he asked the Host for the Truncks and the owners thereof, two
of them which are named in the Proclamation hearing an inckling of this, stole
secretly at the same instant out of the said house, coming away betwixt the
Sergants and men which attended upon the Fiscall. All the the other were stayed
or arrested in the house until the Fiscall should come back again out of the
meeting of the States, where he told that this was not the house, for the Host
was much discontented, and said that he had no Trunkes of any lodgers or
strangers in his house, But being afterward informed and persuaded to the
contrary, he went to the said house again, and searched until he found the
Truncks, and ceased upon the Host his Mayden-seruant beside three other men,
amongst which was he who gave the money to the four Sailors, which being even
with the rest taken, were kept in a Chamber at the Fiscalls house, until such
time as the other had partly confessed the matter.

The Host and the other for all that they were mightily threatened, and
strictly examined, would confess nothing which had any likelihood or color of
truth. Whereupon there was presently ordered that the Soldiers which lay there
in Garrison should instantly beset and stop all the passages to wards the Hage.

This was not sooner performed, ere there came one of the Traitors aforesaid,
in a Wagon which he had hired to carry him to Delfe. The Soldiers perceiving
this Wagon, asked who was there, Whereupon he (knowing his Guilty conscience)
sprung or leaps from the Wagon intending to escape by running away, whereby
there arose a great rumor in the Hage, in such manner that even the Townsmen
armed themselves.

In the mean time there was a Sergant sent in all post have toward Leyden to
fetch the Hangman which put there the same day some Malefactors to the torture.
So that upon the fasting and prayer day (which was appointed by the States)
after the Sermon in the Church was done, they were examined by the hangman in
an other manner, which made them to confess so much, that the Piscall was
presently sent to the dwelling place of the widow and children of Barneuelt:
coming there he learned that his Sons were departed, although they were yet
the day before seen walking in the streets, whereupon two of their servants,
and the Pedagoge or Tutor of the children were apprehended, and the house left
in the custody of the Sergeants.

When these Malefactors had now ready enough confessed concerning the said
business, the States commanded the Sailors to be set instantly at liberty, and
bestowed above 20. double Ryders of the United Provinces (each one of them
amounts to twentie-one shillings Sterling) upon every one of them. Whereupon
they went away with good contentment, and hoped according to the Tenor of the
Proclamation, to get yet certain thousand Gilders.

On thursday night, there were yet three other of their consorts taken; and on
Friday one of Berckel, and two of S. Hertoghenbosh. Their names I will yet
keep secret, to blame them not before they are found guilty, and cannot
clear themselves.

The same Friday it was rumored in the Court, that a Soldier had deserved
already four thousand Gilders, having taken one of them which are mentioned
in the Proclamation.

Certain Citizens of Rotterdam and Delft, were taken the same Friday, and the
next Satterday.

The Confessions of the accused are kept very secret by the States, and there
is mightily doubted, whither the common people shall be acquainted with them,
even for great and weighty reasons, seeing also the old Proverb says, That
he shall seldom do evil, who knows it not. And there are some which are
well informed of their traiterous designs, that will say, that there is no
Chronicle nor History which makes mention, of such a Barberous Enterprise,
and relate moreover that if it had succeeded, that the Pillars had been fetched
from under out of the building, whereby the utter ruin of it would have
followed immediately: That a great number of the Inhabitants should have been
murdered, and blown up in the air besides them which should have been burnt,
and slain by the sword of our Enemies, which lay ready with many thousands
liering after this occasion and pray, which is for this time by the favor and
mercy of the Almighty fetched as if it were out of their Jaws, he having heard
the prayers of the faithful. For it is most constantly reported that the
murder of the Principal heads, and members of these Provinces, besides the
firing of the Magazins or store houses with powder, were intended upon the late
mentioned fasting day.

Here comes daily news, and we perceive it also, that diverse wicked persons
of their consort begin to absent themselves, as well hence, as from Rotterdam
and Leyden, besides other places.

As soon as they bring here any one to the Prison, the people runs together
in such manner as if they were going to an assault.

Here follows the Dutch Relation.
'T HAEGHSCHE DISCOURSE. Belangende de groote Verradery. Onlanghs ghehoort end
ghesien, met allen het gheene dat als tot in's Graven- Haegh ghepasseert is.
SEER Dircrete Cosijn, ick en hebbe niet na laten konnen V. E. mede te deylen
van het gheene dat onlanghs ghebeurt is, mits send u dit in ligghend Placcaen
der H. M. Heeren Staten.

Over eenighe daghen, so fijn sekere Mannen ghekomen by eenighe Matroosen van
het Iacht-schip van sijn Princelike Excelentie Graeff Mauritius van Nassou,
Prince pan Oraengiuen, etc. haer uyt ghevende voor Ingenieurs of Yverige
Patriotten. Woor-ghevende datse secret aenslagen op den Vyandt hadden, waer
toe datse hun moesten laten ghebruycken, end dit in aller stilligheyt eenighe
vyer-werken van Boskruyt end andere materie te maecken, sonder te openbaren.
Want so sysulex tegen eenighen mensch vande Werelt te kennen gaven, daer door
't selve mocht ruchtbaer worden, so souden sy ongenwijffelt aen den Lijve
gestraft worden, door dese end mere andere redden hebben de Matrosen haer
woort over gegeven, om dit in aller stilligheyt t^t dienst van het Lant te
done, met diversche Discoursen tot der materie dienende. Dese wolven in
schaeps-kleederen alreede gevoelende, dat de sake well wesen soude, so heeft
even vande Verraders als ghy hier na hooren sult. In sijn sack gheschooten, end
heeft elck van dese voorseyde Matrosen 300. gulden ghegheven, om dat het goede
loon, den arbeyt versoeten mocht, met conditie, so dese Instrumenten well
gemaeckt waren, end hare operatie well deden, so soude haer loon verbetert
worden. Maer voor all saecken anderwherf vermanende dese saeck niemandt te
openbaren, want het Lant daer veel aen ghelegen was, noch belastende, so haest
dese dinghen ghereet waren, souden sy de selve in Kisten, Koffers ter plaetse
bringen, te weten, eenige in den Haegh, andere tot Rotterdam, om also voorts te
brenghen daer 't selve haer belast soude worden, dit also beschict zijnde, met
vaste beloften alles op sekeren tijt te volbrenghen.

So heeft even van dese Verraders den loosen Koopman gemaect, end eenighe
Pistolen op gekocht, om deselve te versenden naer den Mansvelt end elders,
dese nu all hebbende in even seker Koffer ghepackt, end laten brenghen ten
huyse van even haerder Creaturen, de selve in eenen diepen Kelder intsant
dickwils afgeschoten, om te proberen, of de selve ooc vicx waren, naer desen de
selve in even ander koffer met sijn toebehoor in den Haegh heeft laten brenghen,
in sekere Herberge, als gheschiedt is.

In middeler tijt, so hadden sekere van hare Creaturen den weet om haer op
sulcke tijt alsser bestemt was te laten vinden, elck even daer sy haer schelm
stuck int werck souden ghestelt hebben. Dese voorseyde Matrosen oock op haer
saken niet slapende, maer hebben even ghedeelte van hare Brantwerck op den 5.
Februarij in den Haegh gebracht, daer sy vonden in seker Herberghe als gheseyt
is. Desen man end mere andere de welcke haer te werck ghestelt hadden, hebben
sy het selve goedt over ghelevert, voorts werden dese Matrosen seer well getra
and eert, van eten end drincken sonder hare kosten.

Even van dese Maets sagh met even swenck dat den gheenen, de welcke hare't gelt
gegeve^ had, eenighe correspondencie met eennen man van Bleyswijck had, den
welcken hy scheen te willen kennen, hy in hem selven overdenckende, soude desen
den Man wesen, de welcke ick my in bleed, so en kan dese saec niet also zijn,
als ons 't selve aen gedient is, want desen Man en was gheen vrient vanden
Prins. Desen Matroos met desen geladen kroop te bed gaende, maer dien nacht
by even van sijne getrouwe Maets slapende, al had hy well te Lijue gedaen, so
was doch sijn hooft vol vremde, ghedachten, zijn Maet well gherust slapende, hy
somtijts wat dromende, en dan wederom wacker zinde, beeldende hem veel
fantasien in, also dat dese nacht hem even half jaer langh scheen te zijn.

In middelertijt begint hy eenen vreemden droom te droomen,, alsoo dat hem
docht datter diversche (dewelcke hy well eer ghekent had) voor den dach quamen
springhen, den eenen uyt den Bogaert, den anderen uyt het Bernende Veldt
knaphandigh, van dit ghereetschap dat desen Matroos ghemaeckt had, even Oly
podery op sijn Spaensch begonste te koocken, end na dat het selve op gheschept
was, so quamen dese, onse Meesters end schoncken het selve de Hoofden des
Vaderlants. Desen dranck sy nu in hebbende, docht hem datse door de kracht des
Salpeters op swelden, end ten laetsten voor doot never vielen, waer onder
eenighe sijnder bekenden waren, waer over hy van bedroeftheyt scheen gheluyt te
staen, alsoo dat sijn maet ontwaeckten, hem aenstootede, mocht vragen wat hem
deerden, hy wacker werdende, seyde ick ben blijde dat het even droom is, daer
ick mede doende was, den anderen had geerne al slumerende gheweten wat den
droom geweest ware, maer hy seyde op morghen sal ick u den selven in het langhe
end breed vertellen. Na desen hy dese saeck wat na denckende, begonst hem
selven schier verbaest te maken dat hy vande doode menschen, de welcke van
Beuls handen woot hare misdaet ghestraft waren, alsoo het hooft onder de Deken
treckende, viel in eenen anderen droom seer vreemt, want hem dochte dat het
gelt (dat hy van dese fijne Broeders ontfanghen had) in sijne Beurfe also
begonste te swellen, dat int eynde sijne Beurse vant dicken berstede, het selve
gelt op de arde vallende, begonst daer in te wortelen, end even ander
Transformatie aen te nemen. Ia in de rest, worden het selvighe kleyne
Mannekens, vallende so dadelijck inde Princen Iacht, werpende den Prins met
fiijn Broeder over boordt.

Eenighe Staten met den Koninck van Bohemen aldaer te gast zijnde moesten oock
de Fock uytt houden, end allen het Scheepsvolck en wist niet om haer lijf te
berghen, nu eenighe van ons Scheeps-volck meende het eene gedeelte van het
Schip in te houden. Maer eer langhe bltes onsen Trompetter eene anderen Alarm,
ick te Loeff waert siende eenighe spaensche Galioenen op komen om hem voort te
over vallen, ick dit dachte te sien heeft andermael gheluit geslaghen hem om
smackende also dat hy uyt de Koy viel, sijn Macker van den slach ontwaeckten,
end nu int Bedt niet vindende word mere verschrickt als hy selver, nu wederom
opstaende, sijn kameraet wilden veel vraghen, maer heild hem slapende om
niemant suspicie te geven, also besweet van anghst den Dagheraet verwachtende.

So haest hy delelve ghewaer geworden is sijnse opghestaen lacchende met haer
andere Maets van het droomen, maer niet te kennen gevende hoe hem te moede was:
vorders nae datse even soopien Brandewijn te Lijve ghenomen hadden; so zijn sy
uyt wandelen gegaen, end de anderen zijn daer blijven sitten drincken.

Nusoo haest sy byten den Huyse quamen, heeft hy teghen sijn Kameraet sijnen
droom vertelt, end ooc wat hy des voorleden daeghs gesien had, also dat hy
recht uyt seyde dat hy hem inbleeden eeinige Verradiy te wesen, end daer goet
vonden dese saecke den Prins te vraghen want seyde hy so het eenige saken tot
dienst van het Vaderlant zijn, sullen onsen Prins ongetwijffelt bekent zijn.

Den anderen dadelijck oock sijn oordeel daer by stellende seide al gheven wy
dit den Princs te kennen daer en kan ons geen hinder van komen, want is de
saeck inder daedt voor het Vaderlandt wy hebben het gheene ghedaen daer voor
ons dese 300. gulden gegeven zijn, end issetter contrary, den Prins sal ons
ongetwijffelt noch eenen drinckpenningh gheven end altoos in sijne gratie
staen, dese twee zijn over even ghekomen om den Prins het selve aen te dienen
maer sy vreesden hem selfs qualijc te durven often te kunnen spreken: ten lesten
aen het Hof komende bevonden dat den Prins van Orangien na Rijswijk was, sy in
aller haestall d'tscourerende haer all beyde vast inbeeldende dat geen klaer
schapen en was, nu daer komende, deden door even van de Pagieu segghen datse den
Prins geeren spreken wilden, dit den Prins aengedient zijnde heest voor
antwoort gegeven hy soude haest uyt den Stal na sijn Koets komen, dese
Matroosen deden den Pagien anderwerff vermanen hem dadelijc te moeten spreken
daer by voegende dat het even saeck was daer den Prins veel aen gelegen was.

Den Prins dit verstaende, heeft dese Matrosen by hem done komen, end ghe
vratght wat de Matroosen versoeckende waren, sy meenedn, sy hadden den Prins
wat secreets te communiceren, den Prins haer alleenich verhoort hebbende,
verstaende even saeck daer hem in het minste niet afbekent en was, hier op niet
langh slapende, maer is in aller haest nae den Haegh ghereden, dese saeck ter
vergaderinghe gheopenbaert, daer op hebben de Heeren op den 6 Februarij, des
Iaers 1623. haren Fiscael met eenige Dienaers ghesonden ter Platetsen often
Herberghe van den Helm, aen het Noort-eynde, nu aldaer komende heeft hy den
Weert ghevraeght na suleke Koffers, end naer het volck het welck sulcks
toekomende was, twee vande dese de welcke in het naevolghende Placcaet ghenoemt
zijn, dese de voncken ghewaer werdende, zijn dadelijck beneffens de Dienaers
ter Deuren uytghestreecken, de andere zijn in Huys ghearresteert, totter tijdt
dat den Fiscael wederom ter Vergadering he ging, verklarende dat dit het Huys
niet wesen en moest, want de Weert was gheheel te onvreden, seggeude gheen
Koffers in Huys te hebben, nu beter in formatie krijgende als hy te vooren
had, heeft wederom naer de voorseyde Herberghe ghekeert end so lange
ghesocht dat hy het selve ghevonden had, voorts in hechtenisse nemende den
Weert, Maeghetende noch dry anderen, waer onder den gheenen was den weclken de
Matroosen het ghelt uytghedeylt had, de 4. Matrosen werden tot den Viscael in
even Kamer bewaert totter tijt dat de andere dit sy beschuldigt hadden
eenighsins beleden wat van de sake was.

Den Weere were met den andere seer scherp met dreygementen end woorden
gheexamineertzijnde, maer niets belijdende, het welck der waerheyt ghelijck
zijnde, so werde dadelijck ordere ghestelt, om de Soldaten op all uytganghen
op den Haghe te letten, so haest niet ter plaetsen ghekomen zijnde, so is even
van de voorseyde Verraders, hebbende eenen Wagen gehuert, meenende hem na Delft
te begheven, de Soldaten desen Wagen siende, ripen Kivala, desen misdadighen
dit hoorende sprongh van den Waghen, end salveerden hem met loopen, de Burgery
quamen oock inde Wapenen, alsoo datter veel te done was.

In middelertijt is even Dienaer dadelijck om den Scherprechter gheloopen, den
welcken den selven dagh tot Leyden eenighe misdadighen gepijnigt had, also op
den Biddach na de Predicatie zijnse by den scherprechter op even andere manier
gheexamineert, end alsoo veel verstaen dat den Vijcael ghesonden is na de
Wooninge van Bernevelt, daer komende bevonden dat de Soons vertrocken waren, de
welcke des voorgaenden daghs noch gesien waren, niet tegenstaende zijn 2
knechts met den Pedagoge van de Kinderen mede in hechtenissen ghenomen, en het
Huys were vorders met 14. Dienaers bewaert.

(...) noech bekent ter materij diende, so hiben de Heeren Staten de Matroosen
done vant Arrest ontslaen, vereerende elck even over de twentich dubbelde Ryers.

Dese well gemoet vertrocken sijnde, verhopende naer volgende Placcaets nock
eenige duysent guldens alsoo te gewinnen.

Donderdagh des nachts sijn noch dry gevangens boven gebracht, Vrijdaeghs des
morgens noch even van Berckel des selven dagh, noch twee van des Hertoghen-Bos,
what hunlieder namen syn, en is niet geoorloft te seggen, om alsoo door eenige
mislaghen niemant te beschuldighen, de welcke ontschuldiegh mochte bevonden syn.

Den selven Vrydagh so quamen de gerncht en op het Hof dat even Soldaet alreede
vier duysent gulden gewonnen hadr, daer uyt so veel verstaende als dat even
vande geene ghevangen was, de welcke int naer gaende Placcaet genomineertzyn,
dan wat hier aff is sal den tijt leeren.

Vrydagh end Saterdag sijn eenige van Rotterdam end Delft gevangen.

Voort volghen eenighe discoursen dewelcke inden Haegh onder all man om gaen
end het oude spreeckwoort segt dat all man seght is ghemeen waer.

De saken van haer belijdenissen were by de Heeren Staten seer secreet gehouden
end daer were seer getwijffelt of het voor eerst voor all man's oorden sal
komen, end dit uyt goede redenen, het is eene out spreeckwoort dewelcke het
quaet niet en weet sal het seldom done, want daerzijn eenige dewelcke desee
verradersche Aenslagen bekenczijn, seggen datse in gheen Cronick van sulcken
Barbarische Aenslagen gehoort hebben, ja so het aengegaen had, souden de
Stutten van onderen ghetrocken zijn, end het gheheel Huys over hoop ghevallen
soude hebben, alsoo datter even groote party Inwoonders vermoort, inde Lucht
ghevlogen, verbrant end de rest van onse Erfvyanden ons over vallen, dewelcke
met duysenden (...) welcke haer voor dese reyse door de hant des Almachtigen
haer als uyt den muyle getrocken is, end dit door den goeden will end het
ghebedt der geloovighen, het welck Godt all reden scheen verhoort te hebben,
al eer het selve met den monde uyt ghesproocken was, want het word voor vast
gesegt dat desen Moort van allen de principale Hoofden onses Vaderlants end
jop springen end verbranden aller Magesijnen op den Biddagh aenghegaen soude
hebben, och off Godt den Menschen int ghenerael in haer heart naer het leven in
beelden, de groote ellende de welcke uyt't Boskruyt end der selver brandt
ontstaen kan, ghelijck desen voorleden Somer inde Slagh van Tourlagh, Berghen
op Zoom, end Middelburch, ghesien is, wiens Historye in even Boecxken
Oorlooghs-memory te lesen: end afghebeelt is: Vorders isser oock te lesen war
wreeder moordadigher Tyrannen, dese Landen souden hebben kunnen komen te
overvallen. Oock kanmen daer uyt speuren wat voor Secktesy souden moghen in 't
minste verschout hebben.

Dit alles overgeslaghen so komt all dage tijdinghe, end men bevint datter
haer diversche boose menschen beginnen te absentieren, so well in den Haegh,
Rotterdam end Leyden, het schijnt dat hare conscientie haer selven begint te
beschuldighen end alsoo lopen sonder dat sy ghejaeght werden.

Voorders even weet ick niet te schrijven, dan als dat hier all uren wat nieus
is, so haest als even ghevangen, op de poort ghebracht were, so isser dadelick
zulcken afgrijfelicken loop gheweest, ghelijck of het ghemeene volck ten storm
gingh loopen.

Noch isser onder alleen even vijleyn Pasquill ghevonden, seer schelde op den
Prins end Regeringhe van het landt, wenden voor dat des Landts middelen op
gegeeten worden, sonder daer voor eenigh genoot te hebben, oock steect haer de
Schattinghezeer teghen de borst, zegghende daer te vooren maer vier Regierders
en waren, datter nu well ses zijn, och lachy! of dese Lants zaken mi alleen op
even mensch enstanden, hoe lange soude hy doch zijn leven voor sulcke
eer-vergheeren Verraders moghen bewaren, ten ware dat Godt Almachtich door syne
ongrondelicke Barmhertigheyt, de selve als ooghen-schijnlick op sijne handen
draeght, end nu in korte laren zeer menighmael als eenen oogh-appel bewaert,
sonder dat hy ghequetst often beschadicht mochte werden, daer voor nu all
Inghesetenen behooren van gantscher herten Godt den Here te voet te vallen,
end anderwerf te dancken, dat hy door sijne Almoghende voorsienigeyt. Nu den
Staet van het Landt door desen middel als uyt eene wild duysternisse
verlichten zal, want allen de Werelt heeft dus langhe gedacht, dat alleen dese
Raseryen eenighe poinctender Religie often saligheydt aen treffen mochten, daer
uyt nu so klaer, als den dagh blijckt, dat alleen hare aenhangers schandelick
bedroghen zijn. Het schijnt dat dese luyden de gheldt-sucht drinct, of yet
vremts mere Monstereus als Religieus, daer toe dit Ghesangh dient.

The Continuation of Weekly News from several parts of the world.
From Lion, January 14.
AT Paris is made great preparation to receive the King, who purposes to
consult there about the affairs of Veltolin and Italy. All things are daily
performed without any hinderance or difficulty (according to the Articles of
Peace) through the whole Kingdom: and amongst the other, the Marquis of Rosny
is established again in his former place of Great Master and Captain General
of the Artillery of France, which place the Count of Schonberg discharged by
the Order and Declaration of the King during the late Commotion in France, for
certain Reasons moving his Majesty thereunto as appears by these two annexed
Declarations of his Majesty.

The Declaration of the King concerning the Commission of the Count of
Schonberg, made in the behalf of the Marquis of Rosny, Great Master and
Captain General of the Artillery of France.
LEWIS by the grace of God King of France and Navarre, to all them which shall
see these presents greeting. The faithful and good services which have been
done unto Us by Our dear and well beloved Cousin the Marquis of Rosny in the
exercise of his charge of great Master and Captain General of the Artillery
of France, made us to expect that he would have continued in the same
affection during the time of the last Commotions in our Kingdom. But seeing
that in regard of his alliances (as well by blood as marriage) with some of them
against whom we bore arms, our Cousin was willing to forbear the exercise of
his charge aforesaid, We caused the 15. of Febr: last (in the year 1622) our
Letters of Commission to be dispatched to our dear and well beloved the Count
of Schonberg, Knight of our orders, and Counselor in our several Councels,
Captain of an hundred horse of our Ordnances, and Superintendent of our
Finances (or Treasure) charging him therewith to exercise fully the place of
great Master and Captain General of the Artillery, until such time as
otherwise should be ordered by us.

But because this is ceased now in regard of the Peace which we have granted
to our Subjects which are now a^ jointly inclined to our service, as likewise
the occasions which moved our Cousin aforesaid to forbear and discontinue his
charge of great Master aforesaid. And the Count of Schonberg aforementioned
has beseeched us to discharge him of the said Commission.

FOR WHICH CAUSES desiring to show to our Cousin the Marquis of Rosny the
contentment and satisfaction which we have of his person, and the good hope of
his services in the time to come.

WE HAVE declared, and do declare by these presents which are signed under our
hand, That the Commission which was granted by us to the Count of Schonberg
aforesaid, had no foundation in the person of our Cousin aforesaid (we knowing
his faithfulness and sufficiency to discharge his place) but only on the
resconters and accidents of time which cease now: And therefore we will and are
pleased that our Cousin aforesaid shall exercise hereafter freely and
absolutely his charge of great Master and Captain General of the Artillery of
France, and enjoy all the rights, powers or authority, and the dignities
granted unto him by his Letters of Provision of the 31 of April 1610. And
notwithstanding any hindrances or obstacles contrary to this, which we have
revoked and taken away, and do revoke and take away by these presents, BY
WHICH WE COMMAMD all our Officers, Iusticers, and Subjects, of what quality
and condition soever they may be, that they obey our said Cousin aforesaid,
and give diligent and good attendance when there shall be any thing to do about
the Artillery: For such is our pleasure.

IN WITNESS whereof we have caused our Seal to be affixed on these presents.

Given at Lion the 10. day of December, in the year of our Lord 1622. and of
our reign the 13. It is signed LEWIS, and upon the Reply or Confirmation, by
order of the King BRVLLART. And on a douhle tail is affixed a Seal of green
wax.

Here follows now the Commission which the King had granted before to the
Count of Schonberg, for to exercise the charge of great Master of the
Artillery, by reason of the abscence of the Marquis of Rosny.
LEWIS by the grace of God King of France and Navarre, to our dear and well
beloved the Count of Schonberg, Knight of our orders, Counselor in our
Councels, Captain of an hundred horse of our Ordnances, and Superintendent of
our Treasure, greeting. Our dear and well beloved Cousin the Marquis of Rosny,
great Master of the Artillery in France, having made his excuse unto us
touching his absence from our person at the sieges of Clerac, Montanban,
Monheur, and other places (...) he was bound, by occasion that some of his
nearest kindred are rebelled, and do keep certain places contrary to the
obeisance due unto us, and diverse other respects which might cause some
mistrust of his faithfulness and loyalty. And he to take all scruple away,
having also requested us to dispense with him for the said service: It is
necessary for the good of our service, and the present occasions which offer
themselves, to make choice of a qualified and worthy person which shall acquit
himself worthily in the said charge of great Master of the Artillery. For
which causes, we have (for the good qualities which are in you, and the great
experience which you have touching the said point of Artillery, as appeared by
the proofs which you have made during the sieges mentioned here in exercising
the said charge, whereby we have had great contentment and satisfaction)
appointed and ordained you, and by these presents signed under our hand, do
appoint and ordain you to exercise the charge of Superintendency, the
administration and government of the said Office of great Master and Captain
General of our Artillery, as well on this as on the other side of the
Mountains and Lands of our obeisance, and protection, until such time as we
shall order to the contrary, to serve us in the said charges of
Superintendency, exercise, administration and government of the said Office of
great Master, to command, to dispose and to order all things touching this
point, as well for warlike affairs, as the expenses to be made in regard of
it, to remove, change, depose, reestablish, appoint, and provide, all such,
Officers, as well ordinary, as extraordinary, as you shall think good, and
judge to be convenient for our service; with the same rights, powers, honors,
authorities, prerogatives, and preheminences, as our Cousin the Marquess of
Rosny, heretofore mentioned, enjoyed, or might enjoy, by virtue of the power
given unto him by the Letters of Provision which he has of the said Charges,
the true Copy whereof is hereunto annexed under our Counterseale, even in such
manner, as if the powers there mentioned were here specified, and declared at
large. To do this, we have given you, and give you full power, might,
authority, commission, and special charge: And command all Lieutenants, the
Commissaries as well ordinary, as extraordinary, the Keepers general, and
particular of the said munitions, the Bailiffe, Provost, and other Officers of
our said Artillery, of what quality, or condition soever they be, without any
exception. As likewise all Treasurers, and Controllers General of the
Artillery before mentioned, the Prouincials, and other Committies, to obey you,
and to acknowledge your authority in matters depending of the charges
aforesaid of the Artillery, the Superintendencie, and the Administration
thereof, and to exercise their charges or offices under you, as they were used
to do, and in such manner as shall be ordered by you. We forbid them likewise
to acknowledge any body else than you in the said function, or such as you
shall appoint thereunto, until such time as otherwise shall be ordered by Us.
So it is that we command our dearly beloved Cosins the Marshals of France, the
Governors of our Provinces, the Lieutenants general, the chief Leaders of
Armies and Nauies, Admirals and Vice-Admirals, Captains, and Governors,
Majors, Aldermen, Burrough-masters, and all other Officers and Persons
established in our Towns, Castles and Fortresses, Ships, Galleys, and Men or
Vessels of War, and all other Justices, Officers, or their Lieutenants, or
Deputies, every one on his side as shall be his due: That they abide and permit
you to exercise the said Superintendencie, Exercise, Administration and
Government of the said Office of Great Master and Captain General of our
Artillery, plainly and peaceably, and that they make known unto you, all the
pieces of Artillery, powder, and other munition, which are in the said Towns,
Castles, Fortresses, Citadels, or Forts, Galleys, Ships, and Vessels, for (if
you think it convenient) to make an Inventory of them, or to cause them to be
transported or removed from the said Towns, Citadels, Places, Galleys, Ships,
Vessels, and to augment, or diminish them, and to cause them to give account of
them, either to the Commissaries or other Officers of the Artillery aforesaid,
as you shall send to the said effect unto all the Storehouses, and other
places within the before mentioned Towns, Castles, Citadels, Fortresses,
Ships, Galeys, and other Men of War, in which the said munitions shall be,
and to make them obey and yield to the things touching and concerning the
exercise, and execution of the said charges, circumstances and dependances of
them, of every one, and in such manner as it shall be required and fitting;
charging them all to do it without making any difficulty: for such is our
pleasure.

Given at Paris the 15 of February, in the year of our Lord 1622. Signed
LEWIS. And lower, By the order of the King, BRVLART. And it was sealed with the
Great Seal upon yellow wax.

The Letters of Provision mentioned in this declaration, as likewise the grant
which the Duke of Sully, the father of Monsieur Rosny had of the said place, we
hope to communicate to you with the next News.
From Rome the 14 of January.
AT Naples (where the Viceroy is leuying two Regiments for the State of
Millane) are arrested three Galleys of Genua, because they would carry out of
the said Kingdom above 80000 Crowns: Whereupon the Captain Doria (who had
12000 Crowns amongst them) is fled thence with 2. men of War. The Prince of
Conde went on Wednesday last hence toward Florence.

From Venice the 20 of January.
WE have news from Constantinople, that there was arrived an Ambassador from
the King of Sweden: and that he, as likewise the Ambassador of Muscouia,
labored hard to hinder the Peace with the King of Polonia, who sent thither
the Duke of Barason, as his extraordinary Ambassador to confirm the Peace
betwixt the Great Signior and the Kingdom aforesaid. The Polonian Ambassador
came there with great state and pomp, being accompanied with diverse Noble and
Gentlemen out of his Country, besides many attenders and servants, so that his
train amounted to 800 persons, whereof 200 were on horseback.

The sixth of December he delivered these presents in the name of his Master,
viz.

An Ewer with a fair Basin which was in-laid with Bezar stones.

A Watch covered with Bezar stones.

An ordinary Watch.

A great looking glass.

A box of Indian work.

A Table-boord laid in with Bezar stones.

A Standish laid delicately in out of small pieces of wood with diverse figures
of silver.

A box with diverse little cups laid in with Bezar stones.

Eighty skins of black Foxes.

Two hundred and twenty Sable skins.

Five Faulcons.

Five Dogs to hunt withal.

With the next we intend to advise you, what Presents the two other
Ambassadors, namely of Sweden and Muscouia, have bestowed upon the Great
Signeur, and their further proceedings.

The Grisons and the Ambassadors of Archduke Leopoldus are agreed at Millane
with the Governor, to set a toll, or custom upon the wine, to pay therewith
the two Confederations in the Grisons, besides the Confederation of the
Hospital, the 25000 Crowns which they have paid for a tribute or taxation,
and to build a fort on the (...) of the mountains, seeing that the soldiers
of Leopoldus were there a while ago surprised, and defeated on a sudden, not
looking for any enemies.

From Vienna the 15 of January.
SEeing that all kind of victuals and other necessaries for man's life grow
here daily dearer and dearer, there was the last Wednesday a Proclamation
published (in all the usual places of this City) wherein were valued and
rated all kind of foul, and birds, besides cheese, butter, honey, wax, fish,
suet, candles, soap, linne, cloth, wood, leather, skins, shoes, boots, and the
labor of Smiths, Key-makers, Carpenters, Masons, Bricklayers, Watermen,
Carriers and Coachmen: and they have punished already some ingrossers, by
taking away their bought commodities; and some of them did not escape so but
were extended on the Cross upon the market place; and there will also shortly
be a course taken with the wares and commodities of Merchants for the ease of
the common people.

Another Letter of the 19 of the same Month, relates, that Bethlem Gabor
caused there stately and precious Jewels to be bought, intending to bestow them
upon a Princess in Polonia, which is promised in marriage unto him. As likewise
that the Turks make many Inroades upon the Christian borders near Canisia.

From Erfurt the 26 of January.
THe Forces aforesaid of Saxen Altenburg, lie yet here in the Villages of this
City, and seeing they can find now nothing more amongst the poor Country
people, they go now and rob most sacrilegiously the Churches, and bring thence
the cups and vessels, besides other ornaments of the Churches: and some of them
having invaded the villages of the Bishopric of Mentz, use the poor Country
people as bad as they have done with us. So suffers this Land of Thuringia an
vnreparable damage of these wilful and unruly soldiers.

From Collen the 28 of January.
THe last letters out of Swisserland, make mention that the French King had
sent again a great sum of money to Solathurne for the Swissers: And that on
the other side, the Spanish have granted the Grisons the free exercise of their
Religion, by which means they had drawn many of the Country to their
devotion, and obeisance.

The Regiment of the Duke of Holstein is inquartered in the County of Nassaw,
and the regiment of the Duke of Saxen-Lowenburg, was marched up toward Worms.

The 21. came the Count Henry Vandenberg with certain horses, many Carts and
Wagons, before the Fort of Papenmutz, and took the most part of the Ordnance,
munition, and other warlike preparations thence, besides many soldiers,
leaving but very few in it: and it is rumord that he takes his way toward
Lipstadt, and that he will besiege the said town, with the aid of the
soldiers which are coming out of the Palatinate. The speech goes likewise
that the Count of Isenburg is drawing down with his forces, so that it seems
that the Hollanders shall have the burden of the war upon their necks, and we
are likely to have a long lasting war in those parts.

We understand here for a certain that his Imperial Majesty has given
order, that both the Regiments of the Dukes of Holstayn, and of
Saxen-Lowenburg, as likewise the other which lay about Worms, shall march up to
join themselves to the forces of Tilly and Anholt, to set upon the warlike
troop of Count Mansfield, and the Duke Christian of Brunswick.

From Collen the 29. of January.
WIth the Fort of Papenmutzs it stands still as before, the most part of the
soldiers are sent thence somewhere else, and some four or five days ago
were 15 pieces of Ordnance carried back toward the town of Gulick, in the
mean time there remain but few soldiers in the Fort aforesaid, seeing there
is such stinking smell, that a man can hardly abide there: we hear as yet
nothing of the pulling down of it, but it seems rather that it will be
repaired again, the Ships pass as yet by it, both going and coming without
paying any tole or custom.

The Baron of Anholt, having lately taken Vechta, and Count Mansfield here
before the towns of Wildeshousen and Cloppenburgh, to stop one another
passage, their soldiers meet many times, and skirmish one against another.

The Regiment of Isenburgh is marching toward Westphalia, and is likely to
join with the Baron of Anholt, to resist the Count of Mansfield, but we guess
that the late snow has hindered mightily their purpose and marching.

We have here news from Antwerp, that the Captain Ponto Baglione goes
earnestly on with the building of the new Fort near the Abbey of S. Bernart,
to make it defensible with all haste. And the Marquess causes all the
fortifications to be surueyed, and to be repaired, where it is required; in the
mean time lay the soldiers which are come by land out of Italy, and out of
Spain by water, upon the country of Brabant, and it is rumored that they
shall march toward the forces of the Baron of Anholt in Westphalia.

We have here certain news that 16. ships of the West India fleet are
arrived in Spain, being well and richly laden.

From Paderborne the 30. of January.
WE are here advised that the Baron of Anholt is marching with great Forces,
and many pieces of Ordnance, toward the town of Lipstadt to besiege it, and
to stay their pillaging and excursions.

From Campen the 23. of February.
INto this city is admitted again M. Thomas Goswynius, who was an Arminian
Preacher in former time, after a long conference (...) the Magistrate and the
Church, upon his promise that he would come himself, and all his household to
our Church, and receive the Communion, besides some other conditions agreed
upon.

From Gennip the 24. of January.
SOme 15. soldiers of the Garrison of S'Hertogen-Bosh, went lately toward the
Betuwe to fetch booty (seeing it is given prise as they lay) they had a Boer
with them, to show the way, and a Wagon with a boat to cross the Rivers and
waters therewith. But those of the Castle at Gennip (where the revolted
Italians lie) met them by the way and slew some, bringing 5. or 6. of them to
the Castle as their prisoners. The Boer is amongst the other taken, but God
knows how he is like to speed.

From Rees the 25. of January.
HEre is little news, besides that the enemies make now daily several
excursions in great numbers doing it more than they did ever before, so that
the ways and passages hereabout are very dangerous.

They which come out of Germany relate that there are made great warlike
preparations for our enemies, here are likewise all things well ordered, and
good watches, kept. Here is also made a search, and taken notice of the
provision, to provide afterward the town as shall be thought fit.

From Emmerick the 27. of January.
THe Magistrates at Cleue and diverse other places have given warning to their
Inhabitants, that they should not trust any longer to their Neutralitie. There
is hard laboring now on the Fort against this Town, and in all the other
Sconses here-about are strong Watches kept, and all places well provided with
necessaries.

We have here related by men of credit, which came out of the Bishopric of
Munster, that an Imperial post was arrived at Munster, with command of the
Emperor that they should receive and inquarter the Spanish forces, as they
could do in the fittest manner, and if they would not obey, they should be
compelled thereunto, commanding them moreover to join their own forces, which
they have leauied with the Crabats under the Baron of Anholt.

Don Gonzales de Cordua is upon an enterprise gone toward the river of Weser,
to surprise there the Collonell Kniphowsen (as we understand) which lay there
abouts with some 4000. men, intending to meet with Count Mansfield, and the
Duke Christian of Brunswick. The Duke aforesaid having understood this, went
presently thitherwards with four thousand horse, and some foot, taking his way
toward Cloppenburg, so that by all likelihood there will be some blows given.

We understand that Count Mansfield causes a bridge to be made over the River
of Ems, intending to go on an enterprise, to which purpose he had provided 9.
pieces of Ordnance of the Count of Emden.

From Arnhem the 31. of January.
WE understand from Emmerick, that their neutrality is broken, seeing the
Ministers and Officers of the Duke of Newburg, have seized upon some of the
subjects of the Marquess of Brandenburg, and that they likewise apprehend the
subjects of the Duke of Newburg aforesaid.

The Colonel Gent, and diverse other Commanders have gotten commission again
to leauy soldiers.

The revolted Spanish soldiers strengthen themselves mightily about the town
of Heusden, and have sent their chief Commander to the States to treat with
them. We hear that the Ambassador of Bethlem Gabor, has had a good answer of
the States upon his propositions to them.

An Admonition to all Christians.
IT is no small token of Gods favor, (beloved brethren) that when he intends
to punish or chastise his people, he forewarne them of the same, sending some
messenger or sign before to divert them from their wicked ways. Nineveh had
experience thereof by obtaining a Jonah. The Israelites although heedlesse of
the same, by being forewarned of the Babylonian captivity: yea Jerusalem the
City of God, before their desolation under Vespasian, the true figure of that
final desolation to come. Some man may say, all that we know right well: well
then, how is it then that we at this day living in an age and time wherein all
wickedness is broke loose, and has got the bridle, as Pride, Whoredom,
Theeuery, etc. yea and to speak with the world, small sins are now adays
accounted no sins, and the very greatest crying sins, are esteemed but very
small and trifling sins: I pray God grant that in sinning we triumph not over
Sodom and Gomorrha; and that compared with them, we do not justify them. In
a word, our sins cry unto the heavens for vengeance, and the revenging hand
of God is in wrath and anger lifted up against us: we have had so many
forerunners (and fore-warners) who have traced and trod the footsteps and
paths of Jeremy, of Jonah, and of many others who have forewarned us of the
Lords indignation, and manifested unto us his anger, to see if we would
forsake the evil, and cleave unto the good way. But what has all their crying
helped? Is Pride, covetousness, or any other sin lessened or diminished? not
a whit, for I pray God better it, we grow wilful, even as stubborn and
froward children, and withstand and despise admonition, but woe unto us
notwithstanding, if we amend not.

Behold here a new messenger, forerunner or forewarner, a very sincere honest
man, namely, Intien Iansen, Elder of the Church of Christ at Oosterzee in
Friesland: but I pray you vouchsafe but to read his own Declaration, which
we do here present you withal; and setting aside all scoffing and mocking,
you may think your selves hereby sufficiently forewarned to amend your sinful
lives, that so the punishing hand of God so much threatened may be diuerted from
you, Amen.

The Copy of the Vision.
IN the year of our Lord 1622. on the eight day of December about eight of the
clock at night. I Intien Iansen, being at the house of Hermken Roemerts, where
having had some conference about Gods most holy word, yea and also of the great
and heavy dissentions and wars, which we acknowledged to be the punishing
hand of God merely for our sins sake: herewith having committed them unto God,
and so walking forward toward the highway; On a sudden I heard a voice crying,
O woe, O woe, O woe; looking about me, and not knowing what this voice might
be; the voice cried again, O woe, O woe, O woe; and then I beheld, and
immediately I saw three persons, of a most wonderful shape and proportion;
whereupon I was sore affrighted and cast down, so that I spoke unto my self
saying, O gracious God and Father, protect me from all evil; be merciful unto
me poor sinner. Then I spoke unto them saying, Are ye of God? then speak in
Gods name; Are ye of Satan? then depart from me, or avoid: then they cried
again, O woe, O woe, O woe, unto Brabant and Flaunders; If they repent not of
their Pride, Drunkenness, and accursed Idolatry, they shall be destroyed by
the sword, and perish in a bloud-bath: whereupon the one glistering like the
Sun, and having in his right hand a fiery rod, which dropped all of blood;
the second being like unto Death; the third having the shape of a Warrior,
being bloody up to the very knees, having in his right hand a sword, which
dropped all of blood: Then said the first; Look toward the South-west under my
right arm. Every place was then full of horsemen and soldiers, who to the
knee waded in blood: then he pointed me, Look toward the South-west under my
left arm; and then the whole Land was full of dead bodies. Then they cried, O
woe, O woe, O woe, unto Friesland; God can no longer bear the contempt of his
most holy word, and the great oppression of the poor. Then said he unto me,
Look under my right arm toward the North; where I beheld and saw a sumptuous
Stage or Scaffold, each corner thereof being curiously carved, with two gilded
Lions, whereupon there were set and placed a great number of Shepherds, having
staves in their hands, below there was a valley full of sheep. I also saw that
some of the Shepherds were clothed with strange apparel, sitting upon the
North part of the Stage, bearing no great love unto the sheep; and having sent
out a great number of Shearers arrayed in all kind of apparel; of which
Shearers also, some were in strange apparel clothed, having their sheares very
sharp, wherewith they shore off the sheeps wool, yea and that so near, that
in many places they fleyed and fetched off the very skin, so that the blood
gushed out on the ground. Whereupon the sheep began sore to groan, until I
saw a man come clothed in strange apparel, having a foure-cornerd Cap on his
head, and a great basket covered with leather, out of which he fetched certain
letters, which he gave unto the Shepherds upon the North part of the Scaffold,
so that some of the Shearers went about to fill it with a great deal of the
bloody wool; many of the sheep began to make a great rumor and noise, then I
saw two great Wolves, having a number of Foxes by them, attempting to make an
assault upon the valley: whereupon the Shearers with their sheep betook them
to their flight, sore complaining on these strange Shepherds; until that at
length there came an old Lion out of a Den or Grate, which Lion was bedeckt
with Orange from (...) number of young Lions by him, who in a great fury
surprised the Wolves, and all their adherents, worried and foiled them all: by
which means the Shepherds with their sheep obtained peace, with much rest in
unity, and the wool of the sheep began to grow again. Then he said unto
me, Look under my left arm toward the North, where the sheep are changed
and turned to men, even to Citizens and Husbandmen, the Shepherds were clothed
with long furred gowns, the Shearers with long cloakes, having broad swords or
hangers by their sides; then I saw that in many places in Friesland the
Husbandmen with the Citizens did rise up against their Governors. Then I began
to consider what it meant: and then they cried, O woe, O woe, O woe, unto all
Germany or Dutchland, if they turn not from and repent them of their sinful
lives, the Lord God will punish them with wars and dissentions, plague them
with pestilence and with dear times, until they wholly perish and come to
naught, even to nothing. Then he pointed me, Look toward the East under my
right arm: And I saw a great Eagle with golden feathers, which Eagle had thrust
out another fair Bird out of his place and residence, yea worried him, and had
almost driven away all Birds out of their places of residence. Then he said
unto me, Look toward the South-west under my left arm; Then I saw a great
Lion giving fire and flame out of his jaws, and then I saw how with great
fury and spite he overcame; establishing the foresaid fair Bird in his former
place and residence again, to the exceeding great comfort of all the other
expulsed or banished Birds. All which Birds unto the Lion yielded great
thankfulness. Herewith they committed me unto God the Father, charging me I
should make this thing known, and publish it unto all men, so that if they
repent them not of their sinful lives, then shall the Lord God let all these
plagues fall upon them within the term of two years. Then shall there come a
time of peace, so that love and peace shall increase and grow on: then when
they vanished away, I went home, where lying upon my bed musing and meditating
upon these great difficulties, and with my self concluding, and resolving, not
to publish or make known the same. Whereupon I apprehended a very clear
resplendent light, and looking up, I beheld three Visions or Apparitions, which
gave me three heavy strokes; one upon my right eye, the other upon my right
side, so that of mine eye I became stark blind, and therewith they vanished.
And then with great grief of heart I resolved to make it known: beseeching
all faithful and honest hearted Christians, both night and day to call upon
the Lord God by prayer, and earnestly beseech the Lord God, that he will be
graciously pleased to turn from us all these plagues, even according to his
own Divine and godly will.

Subscribed, By me Intien Iansen, Elder of the Church of Christ at Oosterzee, I
will take it upon my death, that I my self have both heard and seen this very
thing.


