THE PICTVRE OF INCEST.

Lively PORTRAICTED IN THE HISTORY of CINYRAS and MYRRNA.

By James Gresham.

LONDON. Printed for R. A. 1626.

A

OVIDIj METAMORPHOSIS.
LIB. X.
OF strange disasters shall my Muse now sing
Fathers approach not you my Carolling.
Nor you fair Daughters, that in virtue glory,
To taint your chaste ears with my lustful story:
Or if my poor unpolished lines have power
To yield delight unto those hearts of your,
Let me not be believed nor this my tale
Be thought of any credible avail.
Or if to so much truth they 'gaine consent
Yet with the fact believe the punishment.
And since Dame Nature has so far transgrest
To suffer such a deed to be confessed
I Am glad Ismaria and our Orphean Thrace
Are not polluted with an act so base.
And that our native soil so distant lies,
From those wherein there are such villainies.
Let Sweet Pancha^a be with riches spread,
And fragrant flowers rarely diapred.
May there the taste delighting Cynamon,
Sent pleasing Costus and the dainty gum
Of sweet extracted Frankincense there grow,
Whilst that alone can only MYRRHA snow.
But sure that tree could not enforce a deed
So bad, from so much goodness to proceed
No (MYRRHA) no CYPID himself denies
To lend his aid unto such surquedries,
And vindicates his flames from the least wrongs
That to such bestialitie belongs.
No, rather have some S^ygean fate inspired
Thee, with a wish by none to be desired.
It Is lewd to loath, the parent thou should rate
But this thy love does even exceed that hate,
Making thee odious and unfit to own
That good the Gods upon thee have bestowne.
On each hand art thou round beset with suers
Both home nobility and foreign woers.
That both in wit and arms contend and sey
How to bear thee (the wished prize) away.
Of these then (MIRRHA) choose thee one ^o
Thy happy Spouse, and let thy Sire be He.
Hereon she ponders, and her lust opposes,
And (to her self) what fury (says) discloses
My frantic mind? what can I better do?
You Sacred gods and laws Parentall too
As you prohibit such a deeds Commission
Resist in me this lawless disposition:
(If it at least be lawless) But such favors
Pity forbids to be thought misbehauiours.
Since other creatures without censuring crime
Do freely couple in their own due time.
The little Heifar scarce yet aged a year
Her own begetter on her back may bear
Yet not be turpious, And the lusty Steed
Cover the Mare which sprung from his own seed
The leacherous Goat too, leapes the female she
From whom himself was gendred: and that he
Proceeding from them both, by carnal use
Often tups the Dam that did himself produce.
Birds with each other too do mate and by
The so up hatched do like fruct. fie.
And I no reason see but we as well
May freely do, when nature does compel:
O happy they, that have this Freedoms bliss
To couple where they list without amiss,
But most unhappy we that must obey
Such laws as humane care prouides for stay.
And that whereto our natures most do plie us
That only should those envious laws deny us.
Yea, there are Nations too ('it is said) wherein
The bearing mother with her son does sin,
And the ingendring Sire his Daughter prove,
And by this course ingeminate their love,
Accursed I that (loving as I do)
'Twas not my fortune to be borne there too.
But by this Jstands too too happy fate
(Even) seeking love, must seem degenerate.
But why revolue I thus? what help accrewes
To my desires by the words I use?
Hence therefore you forbidden rhoughts and fly
The troubled breast wherein you lurking lie.
It Is true, my Father has a power to move
An ycie disposition unto love.
But yet in me can love, nor like no beauty,
That aims at ought beyond a filial duty.
Were my fate such, that I were not his daughter,
My wish would then be ^o such heinous matter,
"A smiling fortune might so far prevail
To bring me to his bed with wind and sail,
But now (so ill has destiny ordained)
That though she is mine there is nothing therein gained,
Since that proximitie which should combine
Denies me to be his, or make him mine.
O would I therefore were some other Sires,
That I on him might satiate my desires
"And lose my self amidst those pleasing charms
Which live within the circle of his arms:
Or that 'twere possible for me, by flight
(Leaving these confines and my Countries sight)
To fly my destinated woe, and shun
The shelfe that threatens my confusion.
But a preposterous-burning-lust restraines
My power from doing so, in amorous chains,
Permitting me thus far to reach at bliss
To hear, and see, and touch, and sometimes kiss
Though beyond that he grant me nothing more
To Enrich my wish, or make his virtue poor:
Beyond (said I) fie on thee wicked maid,
Can thou even hope for more then thou have enjoyed
Or so beguile thy thoughts to think that he
(Though thou should craue't) would act such villainy?
Do thou not weigh that further grants will cause
Both loss of name and breach of humane laws?
And make ensuing ages that shall read,
Thy hapless story, blush at thee though dead?
What? would^st thy Mothers rival be, yea more
Thy Fathers foul adulterated whore?
Or thy own Daughters sister? and a Mother
To that abortiue birth thou should call brother?
Do thou not dread those hair snak't furies ires
That do not only see thy foul desires
But can and will (unto thy deeds extent)
Add a condign ensuing punishment?
O quake to think on it, and wh^^st yet thou art free
Taint not thy virtuous mind, nor let there be
A base pollution of that natures h^sts
Which quite prohibites such unjust requests.
And which though thou should (as thou crau'it obtain)
Would even at best be but a fleeting gain.
My father too, is pious, and precise
In due observing of his Countries guise
And one that by no fafcinating art
Will be sed^ced to render up his heart:
(Though o I wish (and fervently defire)
There burnt in him the self same ardent fire,
That as my heart on his perfections doat
So he of me and mine would take like note.)
But deep and strange must that art be can lure
A mind so good to ought that is so impure.
Thus to her self she said. But stupid he
(Whom plenty of great suitors made to be
Ambiguous what to do) ^tle supposing
Her thoughts bent to a fact of so much loathing,
With secret scrutmy assa^es to know,
(By i^erating such as d^d her woe)
Toward whose desert, her best affection stands
To link herself in matrimonial bands.
To this at first she locks her lips (as gri^^ing
To think how far her wish was from relieuing)
But after looking with transpeircing eves
Upon her Sire! (whose love 'twas did surprise
Her heart with lust,) vents from her troubled breast
Vollies of sighs (^h^ symtomes of unrest)
And from her rose cheek a dew let^ glide
Of pearly tears (like those in summer tide
Falling on the ripe Cherries which the sun
After exhales from lying thereupon,)
And with this tear distilied shewre does shroud
Her star like cyes within her appr^n cloud.
Which strange distemperature of hers her father
Deeming of fear (not lust) yet knowing neither
^o bids her weeping and with gentle touch
Wipes her wet eyes, then kisses her as mu^ la^
With which she seems to be so much ore^oy'd
That she (^uen) wishes to be still thus cloyed
With the Ambrosiack: Nectar of his lips,
And never to be out of this Eclipse.
He thinking now, if ever had his carriage
Won a wished time to win her unto marriage,
Consults again with her desires to find
What kind of man it was would please her mind
To whom (as glad by this means to express
The whice she leveld at in this distress,)
She thus replies, the man that must obtain
The conquest of my heart, and my bed gain,
Must in all parts (dear Sire) resemble thee,
Or never look to be embraced by me.
Whilst he (not knowing her close thoughts) applauds
Of this her liking, and with lavish lauds,
Says, Daughter may thou be thus dutious still
And evermore obey thy fathers will.
The Gods will sure reward thee for it, and crown
Thy duty with perpetual renown.
No sooner was that word of (duty) spoken,
But straight her countenance with a change was stricken,
As conscious to herself of that soul fact
Which with her aged Sire she sought to act,
And grieuing that those words, which she intended
To break the ye, should be misapprehended.
It now was midnight and a silent sleep
Did cares from mind, and toils from body keep,
When watchful MIRRHA (too too hapless Maid)
Is to her former enemy betrayed,
And so pursued by her unquiet thoughts
That night no sleep unto her eyes allots,
But does again retract that lewd desire
Which blew the coals to this incestious fire.
And one while timerously dispaires to try
And yet again resolves it by and by.
Shaming to ask she couets what she shames
And these unwilling willing motions blames:
On every side is her attempt beset
With hope to forward and with fear to let
And in this conflict what her heart should do
Cannot resolve or give consent unto.
But as the tree hewne by the sharp edged steel
After a many wounds begins to reele,
Tremblingly doubtful on which hand to fall
And is on every side much feared of all,
So stood she shaken with a various passion
By her too ^emerous timorous inclination.
That which diswades seems light, and what allures
As great and just a punishment procures,
And nothing can her thoughts intend, but sirai't
One change or other on those thoughts do wait
"(Much like the billows of the boiling sea
"In a tempestious and cloudy day
"Where one wave following the first amain
"Comes straight a third that breaks them both (in twain)
No mean nor ease can her distempers find
But that which death affords the loue-sick mind
And that indeed she hugges and straight resolves
To put in execution: Then inuolues
Her fair neck with her Z^ne, tred to that height
That falling thence she so might clime to death.
And having thus prepared herself to run
On her own woeful sad confusion
Farewell Dear father (cries she) when l'medead
Let (yet) my deaths cause be remembered
And since my life durst not my love make known
Let my desires by this my death be shown.
And therewith apts her girdles knot t'enchaine
Her azure veyned-neeke, to case her pain.
It Is said the mournful murnour of her tears
And sorrows tones, came to her nurses ears,
Who then (full little dreaming what a fact
Her foster charge was now about to act
Of self contriuing death) was not far laid
From the sad stage whereon this Scene was played
And hearing her straight rises, and with speed
Opening the doors, and guessing at the deed
By what she saw provided; first, expresses
Her woe ider by her cries, tearing her tresles,
And mise rably macer^ting with her knife
Her age plough'd bosom; then (to save her life)
Breaks from her tender neck, that hand knot, tied
By which so sweet a beauty sought to have died.
And with sof^kind embraces, bids her clear
I hose heavens (her eye) that weepimg clouded were.
Earnesily craving what the cause might be
That dragged her thoughts to this self tragedy.
Whilst she as (one dumb stricken) stands at gaze
With a dejected look, and nothing says
But gri^ues that by her death's too slow dispatch
Her too kind nurse should her so tardy catch.
She good old nurse conjures her still with love
To show what did these tears effusion move
And with her nakd and wrinckled breasts displayed
(Which hoary age had dry and withered made)
Entreats her, by her infant Swathlings, and
The food she first received from her hand
(When in her now exhaust and shriueld nipple
There then was pleasant milk for her to tipple)
That unto her she would those griefs impart
Which seemed so much to ouerload her heart,
"Persuading her that griefs often kill concealed
"But find redress when they are in time revealed.
To all which MIRRHA still with silent gaze
(Turning aside) sighs, but yet nothing says;
"As one whose thoughts presaging no relief
Would rather dye then utter forth her grief.
The gentle Nurse (as yet in knowledge blind
What these distempers moved, but bent to find
The fount from whence they flowed: (with promise made
Both of her secrecy and utmost aid.
(To her best age worn strength) might that might
Assuage these passions, or her heart delight,)
Again thus woes her, Sweet child, let me know,
What sudden grief this is torments thee so.
And what my aged experience can redress
My willing power shall speedily express.
Be It a distracting frenzy, l'ue a charm,
Of sovereign herbs to cure thee of that harm
Or be thou hurt by some malignant fate,
I Have yet a spell shall shield thee from that hate.
Or dreadst thou some incensed god, lo I
With sacred rites that ire can pacify.
What should I more suggest? Good fortune, she
Sweetly smiles on thee, and as yet wee're free
From all incursions; yea, thy Sire and Mother
Are living too and nightly 'nioy each other.
MIRRHA no sooner hears the name of Sire
Fall from her nurses lips, but all on fire
"(Like the dry flax to which the smallest cole
"Serves as a taper to inflame the whole.)
She breaths forth many a sigh, whilst still the old crone
The cause conceaues not of her heavy moan
But yet suspects she loves, and therefore still
Sticks to her former purpose; and does will
That whatsoever it were she yet would please
To let her know it and try her ages ease.
And therewith takes the teare-distilling Maid
Into her lap, and (with weak arms displaid
Empaling her fair corpse,) says, come I know
The troubled spring from whence these streams do flow.
Thou art in love, and either sham'st to say
With whom, or doubtst lest I Will the same bewray.
But credit me my aid shall serve to express
How far I am from such perfidiousnesse:
Nor shall my tongue one word thereof reveal
Unto thy Father, but the same conceal.
At which her ill concluding words enraged
(Breaking the pale, wherein she was incaged
And with her face, pressing the neighbor bed
As one more grieved the^ joy'd by what sh'ad sed)
Cries, o depart, and spare a further quest
Of that which shame constraines me to detest,
And either leave me to my self alone
Or cease to question more, my ruefull moan.
For what you crave, to enrich your knowledge by
Is but a lewd incestious villainy.
Hereat the old beldam starts. and (what with fear
And bed rid age, of many a hoary year)
With trembling hands vpheau'd, does groueling lie
To gain the cause of this her misery.
And one while with delusiue flattery sues
To screw it out, another while does use
The sharp compulsiue menaces of death,
By showing her the means to do it with,
Adding withal to these her mixed persuasions
All her officious help t'asswage her passions.
Hart-grieued-MIRRHA, at these words erects
Her downe-cast looks, and with such sad effects,
As showed how deep sh'was hurt, with briny teare^
Bedewes her nurses bosom, and still fears
To let her know it, and yet was often about
To make it known, yet would not let it out.
But with her vesture clouding those fair skies
Wherein there shone at once, two sun like eyes.
"(And by these words like h^le sparks forshowing
"What kind of fire 'twas in her breft was glowing
Says. Happy o thrice happy art thou sped
(Dear mother) that enioy'st my fathers bed.
And therewith sighing, shuts her lips ashamed
To utter more, and therefore leaues't unnamed.
The aged nurse hereat, with tremor filled
Is almost to a jelly pale distilled,
And with her snow-white hairs, brisled upright
(showing how much these words her heart affright)
Strives with request, to make her shun that shelfe
By which she sought to shipwreck her fair self,
And (if 'twere possible) to quench that flame
Which seemed to kindle such a fire of shame.
But she, (though knowing what her nurse advised
Was friendly counsel (not to be despised)
And on what dangerous Seas her lust must Sail
Before it could arrive, where't might avail)
Resolves (for sure) that if she did not reap
The fruit Town with so many tears, to heap
Upon her lust, self murder, and thereby
To end at once both life and misery.
Her loving Nurse, fearing this resolution
Might prove indeed her beauties dissolution
(If not prevented) to her wounds applies
Sage sovereign oils of age-taught subtilties,
And bids her live, and rather then destroy
So sweet a fabric, fully to enjoy
Her so much loved --: but durst not (father) name
For fear to move in her both grief and shame,
And to these words of comfort, swears to join
Her best endeavor, to content her mind.
'Twas now the ripening Autumn, the wished
Wherein the aged matrons of that Clime,
With Snow white vestures over their bodies spread time
And each a Corn made garland on her head,
Did use to celebrate the annual Feasts
Of Sacred CERES with their corn and beasts.
Against which solemnity, for nine nights space
All venial acts of manly sweet embrace
Were quite prohibited: Unto this throng
Comes the aged wife of CINYRAS among.
Willing to act the secret mysteries
Of those Commanding Sacred Dieties.
And to omit no service, which might show
The great respect she to those gods did owe.
Whilst therefore by these rites, the nuptial bed
Was of its lawful charge disburthened.
The ill seducing Nurse, (whom age had made
A sound proficient in this kind of trade)
Having with wine and fascinating Art
Bereft the weak brained CINYRAS of his heart
And brought him to her lure (by cunning gloze)
Does MIRRHA'S love in a forged name disclose,
Flattering his fancy with a feigned lie,
That such a virgin loved him whose bright eye
Reflected rays of wonder, and should he
Deny her what she sought, 'twould doubtless be
Her lives consumer, therefore craves with speed
That he would accept her proffer in this need.
Adding such further praises to her feature
As she best thought might move a yielding nature.
He rapt with wonder straight desires to know
How old that beauty was, that loved him so,
To whom she (sense deluding-crone) replies
Her years and MIRRHA'S do just simpathize,
And through my life's long course I cannot tell
That e're I saw a nearer parralell.
Hereat he forthwith loves, and craves with speed
To bring her to his bed, (the mark indeed,
At which she aimed) that so he might possess
That sence-delighting-rate-delitiousnesse.
No sooner did his words his wish impart,
(As lust still speeds when it is helped by Art)
But back returns the old trott, to discover
To her sad charge, how she had won her lover
And thus begins, rejoice child the thing's done
And that great difficultie's overthrown
Which thou thoughtst so impossible, and he
To whom thou late were thrall'd, 's now slave to thee.
Ill did the unhappy virgin entertain
This hapless knowledge of her Fathers gain
As one whose heart too truly did presage
The sad events of her lust fired rage.
And therefore weeps; and yet (like April weather)
Again straight smiles, and so in truth does neither.
But as the current of her passions wind
So do the various discords of her mind.
Now posts swift wirged time toward night, with speed,
Making the same as black as was the deed.
And with a Death-like silence has posses^
Whateuer might disturb a quiet rest.
And even now, has Charliswaine-Chariot run
His midway Journey from the setting sun
When on ^he goes to perpe^rate that fact
Which none but such a Minotoure would act.
The pale-faced Moon thereat ashamed does s^^oud
Her silver rays, in an obscuring cloud,
And those bright Stars which nightly used to blaze
Their glorious splendour, (to the worlds amaze
^re with black Curtains so close ouerspred,
that not the least can be discovered.
^he night it self too wants that wonted light
which usually it had before that night
and each thing so prodigiously seems bent,
(...) if they justly feared a sad event.
^hrice did her stumbling feet seem to fore show
^ow swiftly she was posting to her woe,
and thrice the will boding screech-owle with harsh throat
^roakes out an ominous and fatal note,
^euining what that foul acts end would be
that in each Scene had so much prodigy.
But on she trudg^s (shrouded by the dark
^^om the least luster of a shameful spark.)
^ith one hand holding her lust guiding mother
and groping out the blind way with the other.
^t last ("as often bad actions hit their aim
Though in the end they perish with the same)
^he finds the Chamber door, and without din,
^pening the same with soft pace enters in,
^hen straight an aspen tremor does so shake
^er feeble timbred joints, and therewith make
^er legs so falter, that with fatal luck,
^^d she the fruit from that forbid tree pluck.
^^e milk dipped rose vermillion in her cheek,
^ed from its s^ate, some safer place to seek,
And that Angel-like face (in which before
There sat a godlike beauty to adore,
Did nothing but a bloodlesse pale retain
(To link both deed and issue in one chain.)
Her wonted courage leaves her too; and still
The nearer she approaches to her ill
The more she trembles, and abhorres to think
How nigh she was brought unto her wishes brinke
It irkes her now that e're she was so unwise
To undertake so hard an enterprise.
And only wishes to retire, so none
Might either see her, or she pass unknown.
But after long delay (still steered by
Her age experienc'st Nurses policy
In these distractions) she attaines the Port,
(Her fathers bed) so longed for in this sort.
Whom when her Nurse bequeaths to his desires,
Here (says she) CINYRAS quench thy lustful fires*
And ravell out thy thread of life in pleasure,
With that which thou accountst thy ages treasure
Here may thou satiate without surfeit, and
Enjoy more riches then thy Realm command.
And with this heart delighting-mu^icke-ioynes
Their destinated b^ests for amorous twynes.
Such as indeed are only free for those,
That in a lawful marriage bed repose.)
He sence-deluded-sire with arms displayed
As one not dreaming to be thus betrayed)
^eceiues into his dark and wanton bed,
The tender bowels he so sostered;
and with his Nectar-candied-words, assayes
^o drive the Damsel from her virgin maze
^dding unto these words such pleasing action
^s he best thought might give her satisfaction.
And to complete and make this tide of pleasure
^low to a greater height and fullier measure
Because her age so justly did resemble
^IRRHA'S, whom she both was and did dissemble,
^hey interchange like names (as being nather)
^e her sweet daughter calls; she him kind father.
^h'incestious game thus ended; and she full
^f that adulterate fruit she came to pull
^eparts, and leaves her new beguiled sire
^o guess what sweet thus pleased his fond desire
^earing within her wretched womb that seed
which nature made: but lust did merely breed,
and the next night returns to clear the score
which both had jointly left unpaid before
Pursuing her desires in that swift sort
As if she wished no end to such sweet sport.
At length, (when after many nights exchange
Of kind embrace betwixt these lovers strange
And equal intermixture of such sweets
As are there used, where love with like love meets)
His mind began to crave one happy sight
Of that obscured fuel of delight
Which he so often had locked within his arms
(And freed from rougher handlings and worse harms
But never viewed, and only in obscurity
Had cropped the sweet flower of her vergin purity
He forthwith craves accordingly, to see
What this same peerless paragon might be
Whom when apparently his eyes beheld
To be indeed his own and only child
And therewith weighed what an abisse of sin
His fordid beastiall lust had plunged him in
"(For vice as till't be acted's ever blind
"So when it is done it leaves a sting behind.)
Distracting rage then so possessed his heart
And grief his organ speech, that up he start
And in his fury drawing forth the blade
Which fate for this her fault had ready laid,
Thought to have sheathed it in that tender breast
In which but now his chief'st content did rest
But what with fear of this attempt, and stung
With the remembrance of that horrid wron^
Which she (as in a crystal mirror true
The veil uncovered) did now plainly view.
"(For perpetrated vice seen after action
"Appears so foul it often drives to distraction.)
Away she flies, and by the help of night
Auoyds the tragic end of her affright;
And vsher'd by her thoughts, at random roues
Among the large and solitary groves.
Leaving the sweet Arabia and those fields
Of Rich Panchaia which rare odor yields,
And nine Moons wanders in this careless race
Before her sear can find a resting place;
Till in the end not able to sustain
A longer durance of ^er grauid pain
She seats her in a Sabra where a while
She strives her lust bred sorrows to beguile,
But can scarce longer make her burdened womb
Th'incestious load therein enclosed entombe.
With grief whereof; (even ignorant of prayer)
And almost brought unto a foul despair
By a heart wounding and afflicting strife
Between^ a feared death and wearied life.
She thus in doleful and soul grieuing plaints
Bewailes the discord of these Combatants,
O you all-sacred-Dieties (quoth she)
That rule the world with sovereign Majesty
And guide the heavenly motions of the Spheare^
With supreme power, if you have any ears
To hear the woeful sad and mournful mones
Of poor distressed wretched mortal ones;
Such as with hearts unfeigned do confess
Their soule-deepe vlcerated wickedness.
Hearken o hearken then unto my cry
Who as I have deserved desire to dye
And will not your dread powers inuoke to shun
The smarting rod of your correction.
Power down your angry vengeance on my head
That against nature have thus trespassed,
And let me now no longer live to shame
The lovely sex and root from whence I came.
But least my lingering life may be offense,
To such as shall su^uiue my impudence,
And my dead corpse those neighbor graves distain
By whose offencelesse sides they must be layne
Let me partake neither of life nor death
To grieve the one, or soil the other with.
But so transformed be, that I of either
May seem possessed, but yet indeed have neither
No sooner were these words effus'd, but strait
A strange effect upon her wish did wait
Wrought by some certain Dietie whose ear
Was bent her pity moving moan to hear,
And give redress to; For whilst yet her prayer
Was uttering, (but not quite dissolved to air)
Thofe goodly pillars, which but erst did grace
Her stately moving fabric, in their pace
Were so inuolu'd within the humid earth,
As if they only there had had their birth,
And from her flesh transformed nails and toes,
And out-stretcht crooked winding root there grows
from whence the long truncke of the lofty tree
^eceiues its prime foundation and degree.
^er body sweet, so comely in each part
^oth to the middle of the tree convert,
Within whose metaphorphos'd Sapphire veins
The life maintayning marrowy-sap remaynes.
Her fair enclapsing arms, (which but ere while
Were snares for amorous lovers to entoyle
their lust-rapt senses in,) were now estranged
^o^ what they were, and to great branches changed
Through whose each little spray, her blood like juice
Dispreads it self with pros^^e avarice.
Her dainty fingers too, (not hereto borne)
Into sun shading little boughs do turn.
And finally her snow-white silke-smooth-skin
Becomes a rough hard bark of what't had bin,
Serving to shield her (as her clothes had done)
Both from the winters rage and peircing sun.
In this wise 'gins th'vprising tree t'entombe
Within its hollow grave her painful womb,
And has with quicker speed then thought, over pressed
Those loue-delighting hillockes of her breast,
And with swift change is hastening to enshrine
Her stately neck within its rugged rine,
All which she shuns not, but (as to her fate)
With willing mind her self does subiugate
To the surrescent barque; which gliding over
Does (as a cloud the sun) her fair face cover.
And though with this her bodies just correction
She loft both light of reason and affection
Yet still she weeps, in sign whereof her teares^
On the trees rine in luke-warne drops appears.
Wherein a sweet and odoriferous smell
Of sense delighting fragrancy does dwell.
Which for its worth a semblable name we give
That no age shall forget nor time out live.
^ut now begins th'incestious birth to grow
unto it is full maturitie of woe.
Within the barke-wall'd limitts of the tree
Wherewith she was enclosed in misery)
^triuing to burst away through the dark tomb
Of her transformed incarcerating womb.
^er grauid belly swells unto that height
That each small throb seems now to threaten
^aking her stretch and struggle with the pain death,
Which her ripe birth did urge her to sustain.
Words she has none to utter or express
The unknown measure of her wretchedness.
Nor to iuuoake a gracious help from those
Whose sacred powers help women in their
But still expects delivery from that sorrow throws,
Which as it had no mean, no help could borrow.
The bending tree seems with sad hollow tones
To echo forth her many ruthful groans.
And with a flood of tears (gusht from her eyes)
Bedewes and wets it self in piteous wise,
Where at the tenderhearted IVNO (grieved
To see so much distress, so vnrelieu'd.)
Standing as then close by the mourning sprayes
Puts to her helping hand, and then assaies
With words of Childbed comfort to delude
The wounding sense of this her sollitude.
Forthwith the wombe-swolne-tree-begins to crack
And through the cleaving bark does passage make,
For nine months growth to enter-at, when lo
She straight yields up, the burden of her woe,
Which had no sooner birth, but (as allied
Unto its mothers misery) it cried.
The neighboring Naydes (whose cells not far^^
From her distressed delivery, distant were)
Hearing the cry, approach and in their arms
First taking the young babe (yet free from harms)
And then with tender touch, laying him down
Upon the new grown, smooth, and soft grass't-ground,
Embalme him with the sweet-Mirrhe-trickling tears
Which on his tree-chang'd-mothers-barke appears.
Swift posting time had not long run his race
Before this birth began to wax in face.
And each part else so lovely, that his feature
Grew natures wonder in a so borne creature,
^^d Enuies self delight: For such as was
^at beauty of the world, which did surpass
(...) others, whom the curious Artists paint
^tables naked; and do do call Loves Saint.
^en such was he, and in a just compare
^ch way as lovely sweet, as young, as fair.
^^d taking from the first his bow and arrows
^herewith he heales by love, and wounds with sorrows.
(...) adding but the like unto the the other
^u'd swear that this were CUPID and no other.
^faire in matchless beauty did his fate
^^nspire to make him, though unfortunate.
FINIS.

