THE Golden Chain of Man's Salvation, and the fearful point of hardening,
opened and set down in two several sermons preached before the King.

By Anthony Maxey Batchelar in Divinity, and Chaplain to his Majesty in
ordinary.

The Points handled in the first, are these.

Predestination. Calling. Justification. Glorifying.
The points handled in the second, are these, with additions.

That there is an Hardening. That God Hardens not. How men become hardened.
Most woeful to be Hardened The means to auoidit.
LONDON Printed by G. Eld. for Clement Knight, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard,
at the sign of the holy Lamb. 1606.

Romans. 8. 30. verse. Moreover, whom he predestined, them also he called: and
whom he called, them also he justified: and whom he justified, them also he
glorified.
EVery Scripture (says the blessed 2. T (...)
Apostle) given by inspiration, is profitable to instruct the man of God, and
to make him perfect to good works. Yet notwithstanding, if a man should seek
upon purpose, and line by line, trace the whole body of the scripture over: of
all others, this one short verse, is most divine, most excellent. Singuli
Sermones, Hi (...) cap. 3. Ephesians.
Sillabae; apices, puncta, in Diuina scriptura plena sunt sensibus. In the holy
scripture every speech and sentence, every verse, every point and syllable, is
rich in sense, and full of divine and holy mysteries.

So is it here. For the points of doctrine, it contains the whole sum of
our religion: for the manner, it consists of a sweet gradation: for the
matter, it is full of comfortable instruction; for the depth of the
understanding, it has in it, such sweet, profound, and heavenly mysteries,
that, as it is written, the head of the River Nylus could never be found: so
the height, depth, and spiritual knowledge, which lies couched in this whole
verse, in every point, in every word it is unsearchable, it cannot be sounded.
Concerning the Doctrine.

Surely, howsoever men do live at ease for a time in this life, and carelessely
pass on in this busy world; yet the especial and maine point, is the
salvation of the Soul, to be assured of the life to come: and if a man might
be satisfied therein, then all were well, all were sure indeed.

Alas, this life ends, and God knows how soon, even this night before to
morrow, may my soul be taken from me: and if I could prove unto my heart,
that God had chosen me to eternal life, then I should think my self the
most happy and blessed creature alive. In this great and weighty point of
salvation, for ever, to answer a man thoroughly and soundly, to satisfy a
man's heart and soul unto the full, there is no one place in all the holy book
of God, that can, so briefly, so plainly, so sufficiently instruct us, as
this one short verse.

The ancient Fathers, in the course of their writings, they do call it the
Golden Chain of our Salvation, because each one of these: Predestination,
Calling, Justification, and Glorifying, are so coupled and knit together, that
if you hold fa^t one lincke, you draw unto you the whole Chain: if you let go
one, you loose all.

For the manner of my proceeding, according to the fathers allusion: First I
will vnty this Chain, and weigh every lincke in his own proper balance, and
so handling every point severally by it self, in the end I will knit them up,
and close them all together again. And here before I enter any further, I most
humbly crave pardon, and favorable construction in this matter. I know right
well, I am to touch a very great and weightye Pre (...) nati (...) part (...)
Gos(...) may (...) prea (...) of, d (...) ly a (...) uere (...) Aug (...) Bon
(...) cap. (...)
point of religion, indeed so secret and deep, that I do throw my self down
at the foot of Gods mercy seat, beseeching him with all humbleness, to
support my weakness, to enlarge my heart, and to give me an understanding
spirit, that whatsoever I shall speak, it may be with such truth of his
word, with such zeal of his glory, with such reverence of his Majesty, as
becomes his servant, and this holy place. For Predestination, being De (...)
tion (...) great (...) 5.14(...) Pe. (...) locis (...) clas. (...) Zan (...)
D^i, (...) cap. (...)
so high a point, wherein offense may be given by wading too far: by Gods
assistance, it shall be touched so plainly, and with such moderation, as
euer-more, I will be sure to keep the rule of the sacred word of God, for my
guide.

The purpose and drift of Saint Paul, in this place, is to prove unto the
Romans, being then in persecution, that howsoever in this life, misery and
afflictions did befall them, yet their salvation stood sure and most certain,
because it depended upon the infallible purpose of GOD, which here is called
Predestination. So that, Predestination is the secret and immutable purpose of
God: whereby he has decreed from all eternity, to call those whom he has
loved in his Son Christ* and through faith and good works, to make them
vessels of eternal glory.

That God of his free mercy, has made choice of some to eternal life, it is
apparent in diverse places. Ephesians 1. and the 5. ver. He has Predestined
(...)
us, to be adopted unto himself, through Jesus Christ: according to the good
pleasure of his own will.

In the 2. to Timo. 1. the 8. and 9. verse. He has (...). 1. 8
saved, us, and called us, according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given to us, through Christ Jesus, before the world was. So then, as the Potter
(...). ^^.
has power over the clay, to make it, either a vessel of honor, or
dishonor: so God has power over the sons of men: and of his own free
mercy, has made choice of some to eternal life, and others has left unto
perdition. God has created al for himself: and the wicked for the evil day.
(...) 6.4.


Now, if it be demanded, why God has made choice of some, and not of others,
and so thought injustice and want of compassion; that he should reject men,
before they be borne, and brought into the light: and ere ever they have done
good or evil, as it is said in the 9. to the Romans the 11. and 12. ver. Yer
ever the children were borne, when Rom^ 12^
they had done neither good nor evil (that the purpose of God might remain,
according to election) I have loved Jacob, and I have hated Esau: In this case,
I first answer plainly with the Prophet Isaiah. in his 45. Esa. (...)
Chap. the 9. ver. Woe be unto him, that strives with his maker: or, what art
thou (O man that dare stand up* to plead against God? The clay may not
dispute with the Potter. Man that is but dust and ashes, he may not reason the
case with his Creator. To know further, why God has made choice of some and
not of others: there is no other reason to be given, no other answer to be
made, but that it is his good pleasure, it is his will. Misericordia eius,
causa Misericordiae* God shows mercy, to whom he will show mercy: Rom^
and he has compassion upon whom it pleases him to have compassion. There is
power and free liberty in Exo. ^
GOD, to give and bestow his grace: both to whom, when, and how much-soeuer it
pleases him. Huic fit misericordia, tibi non fit iuiuria (says S. Augustine)
God chooses one, he refuses another: to him, he shows mercy, to thee he
does no injury.

Here then we must rest: here we must make Fat (...) nece (...) em: (...) uide
(...) ad sa (...) am: sc (...)
a full point. It is Gods good pleasure, it is his will. And this one answer,
it is a bar for all deep questions, either of of Predestination, Election,
Destiny, or any such like. Iris Gods good pleasure: it is his will. His will
is the cause of all causes: and (...) ad (...) fer(...)
further we cannot go. Whom this answer does not content, S. Gregory does
answer directly, Qui in factis Dei rationem non videt, infirmitatem suam
considerans, cur non videat, rationem videt, In Mag. ^.
the hidden works of God, he that sees not a reason, if he see his own
infirmity, he sees a sufficient reason, why he should not see. We conclude
then with good Saint Augustine, in his 59. Epistle ad Paulinum; occulta esse
causa potest, iniusta (...) m.
esse non potest. Why God has made choice of some, and not of others*
howsoever unto us the cause be hidden; yet undoubtedly it cannot be unjust.

This Doctrine briefly set down, and thus plainly appearing: that
Predestination is the immutable purpose of God: whereby he has made choice of
some, and rejected others, according to the pleasure of his own will: It
seems at the first, when men do commit sin, they cannot avoid it, as if
GOD had so ordained it. He has made choice of some to life, and others he
has rejected: therefore when they sin, and follow the course that leads
unto death; they do it of necessity. (...) 15.
O, God forbid, there should be unrighteousness in God, or iniquity in the
Almighty. For GOD has commannded no man to do ungodly: nether has he given
any man license to sin. Before we resolve this doubt, there arises a very
notable and necessary question, which (in times past) has troubled many wits.
If God be not the author of sin, if he be not the cause of man's offending:
how came sin first to be? how came it in? where was the first beginning of
it? The heathen Philosophers, they roued at the matter a far off. The
Epicures, they said it came by chance. Aristotle and his sect, they said, it
was the error of nature* Plato came a little nearer, and he said, it arose
(...) out of the nature of man* Manicheus the heretic (to avoid the former
opinions) he fained two Gods. Duos affirmanit esse Deos; alterum quidem Cle^
lib. 3^ cog^
bonum, alterum vero malum. One he auerred to be the author and first beginner
of all good: the other the first cause and author of all evil.

This opinion went current a long time, almost three hundred years, as
Nicephorus writes, and Nic^ eccl^ 6. ^^
the reason was, because, men never looking into the word of truth; by the
light of nature, they could never find from whence sin came.

That we may fully understand this point: very briefly, we will set down the
lineall descent of sin.

Sin first arises from concupiscence. Every Iam. ^
man is tempted, when he is drawn away, by his own concupiscence, and is
i^ticed. All sin, all wickedness of this life (whatsoever) first arises from
concupiscence, from our own wicked inclination. From whence then comes
concupiscence? That David Psalm. ^
shows: ex immundo semine, We are borne in iniquiti^, and we are conceived in
sin: as the original does (...). ^.
signify, we are all warmed in unclean blood. If we be all borne in sin, and
by nature corrupt, we must ascend higher to our first parents; and know how
they came first to sin. Adam and E^e (as appears in the 2. of Genes. they
first sinned, by yielding consent unto the Devil: they took it from Satan.
Here then comes in the maine question, how came the Devil first to sin? The
Devil at first was created in porestate standi and eadendi: he had in his
first creation, a possibility, to stand or fall: power of continuance: that he
had from God: possibility of falling: that he had from himself. For it is a
ground in divinity. Immutabiliter bonum esse, Dei propriumest. To be
immutablie good, without any change or alteration, it is only proper unto God:
therefore, had he possibility to stand or to fall. S. Augustine also, he
renders another reason, why the Devil (created an Angel of light) had
possibility of falling. Because (says he) at the first, he was created of
nothing, therefore he had in him possibility to retutne to nothing, if so be,
he did not rely in the goodness of his creator, if he did not subject himself
under the power of God.

To resolve then: Satan at the first was created an angel of light, and had
possibility to stand or fall: but in the 14. of Isaiah, and the 14. ver.
Whereas he says there: I will a scend above the height of the clouds: I will
be like the most high. Then did Satan choose rather, to be an absolute nature
in himself, to shake of his allegiance, and to abandon the goodness of God:
then (relying still in God) to be established by his power. Our Savior Christ
says; I saw Satan fall as lightning from heaven. And L (...)
the lightning we know, is not cast down by any other: but it falls, and
breaks out of it self alone. The Devil (says S. Peter) was cast down to
2. P (...)
hell, and delivered unto chains of darkness. The reason is rendered in the 6.
of Jude: because when he had possibility to stand or fall, he kept not his
first estate. Non perstitit in veritate: John the 8. 44. He ^boad not in the
truth. So then, to descend again. The Devil, he is Primitiuus pe^cator, he
was the first offender: For he sins from the beginning. 1. Io (...)
From the devil sin was derived unto Adam: from Adam, to all his posterity,
borne of unclean seed from the corruption of unclean birth, it is secretly
co^ueighed to our inclination, to concupissence. Thus from the Devil, sin
first boyleth up; as out of a maine Sea: from him, when it comes to Adam, it
arises, as out off a spring: from this spring, it is reserved in nature, as in
a Conduit: from nature, conua^ed to concupiscence; as hy a pipe: and from
thence, does issue a stream of wickedness, to the Sea again.

Now: although it be thus manifest, that sin does proceed from the
suggestion of Satan working with our own concupiscence: yet, evil and
godless men, they think they are tempted of God: and when they sin, they do
not stick to say, God has so decreed it, let him therefore work his will:
for who has ever resisted his will. Homer that notable Heathen Poet, he
answered such men very fitly, in the person of Jupiter, speaking in this sort.

(...) Od. 2.

(...)
(...)
O ye foolish mortal men, ever and anon, you cry out of the immortal Gods,
imputing to them the cause of yous miseries, when (indeed) your selves are the
workers of your own woe. (...) 4. 2.
Perditio tua ex te, O Israel, Thou have fallen by thine own iniquity. Stigias
vltro quaerimus vndas. Like the Ostridge, we do prick our selves with our own
feathers; and we our selves do cause the ship to leake, where we sail. Only
(lo) this have I found that God has made man righteous, but they have sought
out many inventions. Quare peccas, quianescis? (...). 31.
etc. How comes it to pass, says S. Aug. that thou do sin: because thou
art ignorant? it is not so. Why do thou sin? because thou art compelled?
there is no such matter: why do thou sin? because it pleases, it
delights thy wicked and corrupted nature. In the transgression of a (...) 9.
5.
man, is his sn^re. Of our own accord, we run wilfully into the dead fall
of sin: so is it in the 9. Psalm. and 16. verse. The ungodly is trapped, how?
not by God, but by the works of his own hands. The Lord our God is good, holy
and only holy: so holy, that (as Job says) the Angels are unclean in his
sight: so pure, that his Ministers, the Cherubins Isa. (...)
are of fire most clear: and yet, the Cherubins and Seraphins do cover their
faces with their wings, as not able to behold the perfect brightness of his most
pure and undefiled Majesty. Therefore, although no action can be done without
God, and that his power is so in all things, that we cannot so much, as lift up
our fingar without him. For in him we live, and move, and have all our being:
Yet is not God the cause of any sin: (...). Act. (...)
We cannot fasten the least touch of any evil upon GOD. But so it stands.
Vna eademque actio tribuitur and causae principali, and instrumentali. In one
and the self same action, there is a double cause. First, the isntrumental
cause moving: then God separated from the instrument; yet giving power of
motion to the same. Through this double cause of moving, there is a double
work, which unto us seems to be but one. For example: God (as appears in
the 2. of the Acts, and the 23. ver.) by his determinate counsel and
foreknowledge, delivered up our Savior Christ, as the principal cause; Judas
as the isntrumental cause: yet, neither is God to be drawn in, as a party in
Judas fault; nor Judas to be excused as furthering the work of God: For God
never commanded Judas to deliver up Christ: nor Judas in delivering him had any
such intention, as to do God service in the execution of his will. Deus agit
per malos, non in malis. The wicked are the instruments of God: Yet not God the
cause of their wickedness. God is the cause of the action, but not of the
evil, or quality in the action. For example: A man trauaileth his horse by the
way, he is the cause of his going: but, if his horse halts or have an ill pace,
he is not the cause of his ill going.

A cunning man strikes an instrument with his fingars; he is the cause of the
sound, but if the Instrument be bad, or the strings not well chosen, he is not
the cause of the ill sound.

The Iron rusteth: thou will not wite it upon the Smith. Wine sowreth, the
fault is not in the vintner. In the heavens, there is a double motion (...):
The fixed Stars, and the whole (...)^ lib. ^ami^t^.
Globe of all, is carried about with one Sphere, and with one motion: yet the
planets in themselves, have a wandering and uncertain course. The like, (...)
we may usually behold in every clock, the greatest and highest wheel moves,
and carries about all the rest, yet in this motion, some wheels turn to the
right hand, others to the left, and that by a contrary course.

So then it fares thus with the wicked. As he that has an evil and corrupt
stomach, if he do eat honey, it turns into gall: or, as if a man's hand be
out of joint, when he would move it one way, it turns another: so the wicked
and godless men, whereas the light of nature, Gods spirit* and his word
leads them one way, their own vil^ inclination, their own concupiscence
leads them another.

Now then, what shall we say? is there unrighteousness with God? does he cause
us to commit sin? No, God forbid, wickedness should be in God, or iniquity
in the Almighty. But as it is said before. Every man is drawn away by his
own concupiscence, Job. ^^
and is enticed: lust, when it has conceived, brings forth sin: and sin,
when it is finished, brings (...)
forth death.

Having hitherto freed God from all imputatation of evil, by showing from
whence sin comes, and that God is not the author of it, we do here meet
with the Pelagian Heretic (who not able to untie this knot) affirms that the
wicked are rejected, for the sins which God foresaw they would commit: and so
contrariwise, the godly, preventing the grace of God by their merits, are
predestined, and chosen through faith, and good works, which GOD foresaw,
they should do: Making Gods eternal election to depend upon our faith, and
upon our works; whereas (clean contrary) our faith, our good works, and all
the good that is in us, does wholly depend upon Gods free election.

Saint Paul says directly. God has chosen us in (...)
his son Christ, before the foundation of the world was. If in Christ?
Assuredly it appears, we were unworthy in our selves, and so Gods election is
the cause of our good works. Et causa non est posterior suo effectu, the
cause, it does never follow the effect.

The learned Schooleman, makes it plain: Non ideo electus est quis, quia talis
futurus erat, sed ex tali Lomb*
electione talis est factus: No man was ever chosen through faith and good
works, which GOD foresaw that he should do: but the faith and good works,
which we now do, proceed from the eternal election, which went before.

This does the Apostle very plainly set down. ^m. 1. 9
God has saved us, and called us, not according to our works, but according
to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us, through Jesus Christ,
before the world was.

Calling.
Moreover whom he Predestined, them also he Called.

AS from the maine Sea, we do strike into some channel or river: So from
Predestination (the great depth of Gods Council) the Apostle comes unto
Calling. For, whereas it has been shewedin opening the first point, that God
of his free mercy did choose some to life: and others has left unto Perdition.
In this case, if God should never Call men, if he should never offer them
grace, it might seem prejudicial to his mercy; and though we did sin, yet
it might be thought, our selves could not redress it. For this cause the
Apostle comes from Predestination to Calling: that is, from Gods determinate
counsel, to the means, which he has appointed for our salvation.

This Calling is twofold, either outward, or inward. The outward and general
Calling, is, by the works of God, and by his word. First, by his works. This
world, it is an University, or a College: wherein there are two Lectures,
whereof every man living must be an hearer, and a learner. The first, is the
Philosophy lecture, concerning Gods (...).
works, in the heavens, and all his creatures: by the which we are taught, and
daily Called to know God.

This, is a plain, and easy Lecture, written in great* Capital Letters, that
every simple, and ignorant man may read it running. The other is the Divinity
Lecture, when we are exempted from the first, and led on further to know God in
his word. Both these Lectures; they are expressed together (...)
in the 19. Psalm. From the 1. verse. to the 7. is contained the Philosophy
Lecture. The Heavens declare (...) 9. 1.
the glory of God: and the Firmament shows his handie work. Day unto day
utters the same, and Night unto night teaches knowledge* there is no (...)
speech ^or language, where their voice is not heard. Their sound is gone forth
through all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world. In them,
has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which comes forth as a Bridegroom
out of his Chamber; and rejoices like a mighty man, to run his race: His going
out is from the end of the heaven: and his compass is unto the ends of the
same, and none is hid from the heat thereof.

The Divinity Lecture begins at the seventh verse, and continues to the 11.
verse.

The law of the Lord; is an undefiled Law, converting the soul: the testimony
of the Lord is sure: and gives wisdom to the simple. The Statutes of the
Lord are right: and rejoice the heart. The commandment of the Lord is pure:
and gives light unto the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean: and endures
for ever. The judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether. More to
be desired then gold: yea, then much fine gold: sweeter also then honey, and
the honye comb: Moreover by them, is thy servant taught, and in keeping of
them there is great reward.

Touching the Philosophy Lecture: that we are all first Called, to know God by
his works; it is most apparent. For (...) est Diuinitatis symbolum: the world
is the glass of Gods Divinity. The heathen I (...) De (...) riis.
Philosopher says: Deus tangitur in operibus. God is even touched in his
works. He iumpeth with S. Paul. Acts 17. 27. The heathen by groping Act. (...)
might have found him. for doubtless, he is not far from every one of us. In
the 143. Psalm, and the 5. Psa. (...)
verse, the holy Prophet says thus. I will muse upon all thy works and
exercise my self in the works of thy hands. If a man will profi^ by this
philosophy lecture, he must use meditation. For indeed, if a man do rightly
consider of the Ebbing, and Flowing of the Sea, where of no reason can be
rendered. of the certain course, and change of the Moon, with the secret
influence of the same* the nature of wind, no man knowing, whence it comes,
nor whether it goes: the hugeness of the sweeling Sea, girt by Gods
commandment, that it does not ouerflow the banckes: the raging (...)
Thunder, which makes all the beasts of the field to tremble: the fearful
Lightning; which in the twinkling of an eye, passes from East to West; how
all things keep their appointed course, wherein they were created. As we walk
abroad in the fields, if we do behold, and view the glory of the Sun, and
Moon: the beauty of the Stars: the sweet Dew: distilling Showers: green
Pastures; (...)
pleasant Meddowes; clear Springs; thick Woods, gushing Fountains: the
wonderful increase of Corn, Cattle, and such like: Who is he (beholding
these things, and seriously meditating upon this Philosophy lecture) but he
must needs confess, that God does Call him, being so manifestly (...)
taught to know him in his works?

And, as God is thus seen, and taught unto all the heathen people by his
works, in (...) in the frame and composition of this great world, so likewise
GOD does Call us, by his works in (...) in the little World of man. Homo est
caeli simulachrum, and interpres naturae. Man, he is the picture of the
Heavens, and the interpreter of Nature. Concerning God, we acknowledge him to
be a spirit; concerning the World, we have found it to be a body: in Man, we
have an abridgement of both, namely, of God, in regard of his spirit; of the
World, in the composition of the body; as though the Creator (upon purpose, to
set forth a mirror of his works) intended to bring into this one little
compass of man, both the infiniteness of his own nature, and the hugeness
of the whole world together.

As in the World, so in the body of man, there is a wonderful mixture of the
four Elements. The Heart, placed in the midest, as the Earth our center: the
Liver, like the Sea, from whence the lively springs of blood do flow: the
Veins (like rivers) spredding themselves abroad unto the uttermost members:
the Brain, which gives light and understanding, placed aloft like the Sun:
the Senses set round about, like stars for ornament: the Countenance of man,
full of grace, and Majesty, striking a terror into all Creatures. Such and so
wonderful is God in his power, that he is seen in the workmanship of the
body.

But if man (as it were out of himself) could behold this body, receiving
life, and entering into the use of all his motions: Ioints, moving so actiuely:
Sinews, stirring so nimbly; Senses, uttering their force so sharply: The
inward Powers, so excellent: the Spirit, supernatural: Reason, so Divine: the
Mind and Cogitation, so quick and infinite: the Understanding, so Angel-like:
and the Soul (above all) Dei (...) the engraven image of the immortal God. If
man could enter into himself, and consider rightly of this, he must needs be
driven to confess, that God has Called him, by those works, which are most
apparent in himself. (...)


Therefore as Saint Paul soundly reasons, in the 1. to the Romans, and the
20. verse. No man can excuse himself. Neither the Turks, who acknowledge
Mahomet their great prophet: nor the Indians, that worship the Sun. nor the,
Egiptians, who offer sacrifice to all manner of beasts: neither they, or any
other remote, and barbarous people, that (...)
do worship strange Idols of their own invention: none of these can excuse
himself, and say he is not Called: because the invisible things of GOD (his
eternal power and Godhead) are s^ene by the creation of the world, being
considered in his works: to the intent, all men might be without excuse. Thus
(...)
we see, by this Philosophy lecture, all people (whatsoever) are instructed to
know God. But to his own people, God reads Divinity Lecture: he Calls and
teaches them by his word. In the 146. Psalm. and the two last verses. GOD has
given his word (...)
unto Jacob, his statutes, and his ordinances unto Israel. He has not dealt
so with every Nation, neither have the heathen knowledge of his Laws. So then,
as in the 1. of King. 6. 28 verse, there is mention made of three Courts of the
Temple at Jerusalem; wherein God was worshipped: so here are three Courts.

First, we behold God in the frame, and composition of the Heaven, and the
Earth, as the great and outtermost Court: then we see God in our selves, in the
workemanshippe of the body, in the powers of the mind, and soul: there is the
inner Court. Lastly, with the high priest, we enter into Sanctum Sanctorum;
that is, we behold God, and learn to know him, in his sacred and heavenly
Word. All the Prophets, and Apostles, all the Ministers of God, they are
Divinity Lecturers: and all Nations, people, and kindred, to whom they have, and
do preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ; all these have their outward Calling:
and unto all these, grace mercy, and salvation in Christ Jesus, has been
offered. And hereof is that place understood in the 20. of Mat. 16. verse, Many
are Called, but few are chosen (i) by the outward Calling, both of the works
of God, and of his word, many are Called (for this outward Calling is common
both to good and bad) but by the inward Calling, effectually working in them a
lively faith, apprehending Christ: so, very few are Called. Here in this place
of Saint Paul, is meant a more special, powerful, and inward Calling, which is
wrought by Gods spirit; and joined with faith: so does Saint August. expound
it, in his book de Predestinatione sanctorum. Non quacunque, sed qua vocatione
fit credens. Whomsoever God has chosen to life, him he has also Called by
that Calling, whereby he is made, and becomes faithful. Acts the 16. and 14.
A certain woman named Lidia heard us. There is the outward Calling: and the
Lord opened (...) 14. 13.
her heart* she attended to the things, which Paul spoke, and she was baptized.
there is the inward Calling. (...)
This then is the sound, and plain meaning of these words: Wbom he has
predestined, those he has called; that is, those whom he has chosen to
eternal life, he has also ordained to use the means of salvation, which is
an effectual Calling by his word and spirit.

Having discussed this second point whereby it appears, how all men living
are Called, both by (...)
the works of God, and by his word, we may here see, how the dissolute livers,
and profane Atheists of these our times deceive themselves. It is a common
conceit fostred in the bosom of many; yea; vile and sensual men, they will
not stick to say: If I be saved, I am saved: If I be chosen to life, I (...)
am sure of salvation: If otherwise, I cannot avoid it. Assuredly, such men,
they do speak as peruersly, and as senselessely, as if a man should say, that
he would gladly be at York, and yet will use neither horse, foot, nor Wagon,
but will fly thither. For the determinate counsel of God, it does not take
away the nature and property of secondary causes, it does not take away the
means of salvation: but rather, Gods secret counsel, it does set those causes
in order, and does dispose of those means to their appointed end.

Gods purpose, his eternal decree is not to be sought out in his botomelesse
counsel. For then To (...) 33.
we must all cry out with Saint Paul. (...) O the deepenesse of the riches,
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God: how unsearchable are his judgments?
and his ways past finding out.

But, Gods purpose, his eternal decree is to be sought out in the means, and
in the manifestation, appointed for the same.

The course and order of man's Salvation, is like a Golden Chain; And this
verse may fitly be called Jacobs Ladder, whereupon the Angels and Saints of
the Church, do descend, and ascend unto God. Jacob wrestled with the Angel, at
the foot of the Ladder: we must not be so hardye as to wrestle with God at
the top of the Ladder. We see here, God has set down, not only
Predestination, as though we should stay there: but Justification and Calling,
as middle steps and degrees, whereby we must ascend unto God. We must not
pull down the Ladder, and think to iumpe into heaven. To say, If I be saved,
I am saved; it is the Devils Divinity. When our Savior was upon the Pinnacle,
he bad him cast himself down headlong, for (says he) God has given his
Mat. (...)
Angels charge over thee, least at any time, thou dash thy foot against a
stone. He left out the chief point (in all his ways) it was not the right way
from the pinnacle, to cast himself down headlong.

No more is it here the way, to stand upon this high point and dangerous
pinnacle of Predestination, to cast a man's self down headlong, desperately,
saying: If I be saved, I am saved. In the 2. of (...) 11.
Oze. 11. ver. the Lord there promising temporal blessings, sets down an
order and a course, how they hang together. I (says the Lord) will hear the
Heavens, and the heavens shall hear the Earth, and the earth shall hear the
Corn, and wine and Oil, and the Corn and Wine and oil shall hear Israel.
So likewise, in the spiritual blessing of the Soul, there are (...)
means, and an order, how we come unto the same: God by his son Christ,
Christ by his Word: his Word works by his Spirit: his Spirit does certify
our hearts: our hearts stand fast by faith: Faith catches hold upon Christ:
and so back again, Christ presents us unto God.

Here likewise in this Scripture: God has Chosen us from everlasting; there
is Predestination; he does not there leave us, but then he does teach us by his
word; there is Calling: this word (through his spirit) engenders faith; there
is Iustifiyng: this Justifying faith lifts us up unto God, there is Glorifiyng.

Common sense and reason does teach us. (...). In every action, the end and ^h.
P. 7.
the means of the end, must go together. The end which every one of us does
desire, and aim at, it is eternal glory: we must be sure then to lay hold
upon Calling and Iustifiyng, as the means ordained to come unto this end. For
this is a certain and sure ground in divinity, and Religion: Whom-soeuer God
has appointed to eternal life, he has also appointed that man to use the
means whereby he may come unto the same.

To make this more plain, let it please you to vouch safe the hearing of an
accident, which fell out, very fitly to this purpose.

One Ludouicus a learned man of Italy, yet wanting the direction of Gods good
spirit, and so never considering advisedly, of the means of our Salvation; he
grew at last to this resolution. Si saluabor, saluabor. It boots not what I
do, nor how I live: For if I be saved, I am saved. Thus Ludouicus, bewitched
with this desperate opinion, continued a long time: till at length he grew
very dangerously sick: whereupon he sent for a cunning and learned Physician,
and earnestly requested his help. The Physician beforehand made acquainted
with his former lewd assertion, how in his health he would usually say, If I
be saved, I am saved: he likewise directed his speech to the same purpose, and
said: Sure it shall be needless to use any means for your recovery, neither
do I purpose to minister unto you: for, if the time of your death be not
come, you have no cause to fear, you shall live; and do well enough without
Physic: and if the time of your death be now come, it is impossible to
avoid it. Ludouicus, musing in his bed of the matter, and considering
advisedly of the physicians speech: finding by reason, that as means were to
be used, for the health of the body: so God also had (...)
ordained means for the salvation of the Soul, upon further conference (with
shame and grief) he recanted his former opinion, took physic, and so was
happily cured both of soul and body at one time.

By this doctrine of Gods love so manifestly Calling us: we directly learn,
that if a man do thirst after his salvation: if a man would be thoroughly (...)
assured in his heart and conscience, that God has chosen him to eternal
life, he must not rush presently into Predestination, into Gods secret
Counsel: but he must enter into himself to try, and examine, whether he be
rightly Called: for as the surest way to come unto the sea, is first to find
out (...)
a river: so concerning our salvation, the plainest and surest way, to find
out the depth of Gods counsel, is first to come unto Calling, unto Justifying
which are as sweet and lively springs flowing from the same.

We know, and see daily by experience, we are not able to discern, we cannot
pierce with the eye, to see what matter the Sun is of: but we can plainly
see, and manifestly perceive, both beams, and heat, and light proceeding from
the same. So here (concerning the first point of Predestination alone) we
cannot conceive it, we are not able to pierce it, for it is the way, which the
Eagles eye has not seen: but Calling and Justifying, which are as heat and
light proceeding from the same: those we may as comfortably perceive, as we
do sensibly feel the heat and operation of the Sun. Here then is the duty of
a true Christian, here is the part of a religious and good man indeed, not to
venture his salvation upon a bare speech, and presumption of Predestination: but
to use all means possible which God has ordained.

That he may truly be Called, to hear the word of God, and to joy in hearing
of it, with love, and with a desire to profit, that he may be Justified,
(when he has heard) to be fervent in prayer, zealous of well doing, and
abundant in all good works of Charity: that he may be Glorified in the life to
come, to consecrate both soul and body, and all the whole course of his life
unto God, that so growing up from faith to faith, from virtue to virtue, from
hearing to believing, from Calling to Iustifiing: at length, Gods spirit may
satisfy our spirits, that we are his, our bodies his, our souls his, and we
settled, and sealed up in a Christian joy for ever.

Wherefore, I beseech you all, by the mercies of God, and I entreat you, as
you hope to stand with comfort before God and his Angels at the last day: every
man lay hold upon his soul betimes: do not esteem the love of any thing in
this World, more then the love of God, purchased in his son Christ Jesus.
Take heed, and beware of this profane speech: If I be saved, I am saved; utter
it not in word, think it not in heart, away with it: (...)
For God is not the cause of our condemnation, it is our selves (Woe unto us
wretches) we our selves are the workers of our own destruction. Wisdom. 1.
13. O seek not Death in the error of the soul (...) 13.
and destroy not your selves, with the works of your own hands. Bis
interimitur, qui suis armis interimitur. Every man catch hold upon this Chain,
work and make sure his salvation, and strive to walk before (...)
the Lord in truth, and with a perfect heart. On the one side, let no man
pass on, in a secure and careless course of life: nor on the other side,
curiously pry into the hidden counsel of the Lord; but every good Christan,
with an humble spirit, with an honest mind; with a cheerful and good heart,
(...)
seek to apprehend those means which God has appointed for his salvation.

Justification.
The third Lincke of this Chain is Justification. Whom he has Called, those
he has Justified.

IT is a principle in reason. Actio perfect a non recipitur, nisi imperfecte
primo: An habit is not gotten at the first, the work of our regeneration is not
wrought on a sudden. But as the Psalmist says: The Codly grow from strength
to strength: and the wise Psalm. 8^
man shows how: The light of the righteous shines more and more, to the
perfect day: So here, the Apostle Pr. 56. ^
(foot by foot) leads us from one degree unto another, till at length, we
may come to make our election sure. This Justification, it goes a step farther
then Calling. For Calling, is an enlightening the mind with spiritual knowledge:
Justifying, an establishing the heart with a grounded persuasion* Calling, is
the beginning of conversion, but Justifying is a full clearing of the heart:
Calling, is the first change of one that is regenerate, but Justifying, is the
full persuasion of the Soul, when the spirit of grace rests in us, and we
settled and truly sanctified in an holy christian course of life.

So then, when we have not only sorrowed for sins past, which is the first
step of our Calling: but further, when we are renewed in spirit, and so
changed in our life, that for the most part our thoughts, words, and works,
are guided by the good spirit of God, for ( as many as are led by the spirit
(...) 8. 14
of God, those are the sons of God) then we may assure our selves, that we
are Justified. How soever we be chosen from the beginning by Gods love, and
after Called by his word, yet there is never assurance unto us, until the Holy
Ghost has sealed it up in our hearts, which sealing is our Iustifycation.

Thus to assure us of our Justification, it is not enough to be Called to the
knowledge of Salvation in Christ by his word; but after this knowledge, to lay
hold upon Christ by a working faith, and so to hold on, and continue still, an
holy, Christian, and sincere course of life, that at length, as Solomon says:
In water, face answers face: so in this (...) 27. 19
work of Justification, our spirit may answer unto Gods spirit, that we are
his. Even as the pure and Crystal Glass, does lively represent the Image,
which is set before it: so the heart once Justified by a liucly faith in
Christ, in some good measure does express the image of God, and strives to
come unto this mark, which is here propounded, namely our Glorifycation.

Glorifying.
THe fourth Link of this Cheine, is Glorifying. Which Glorifying, is the
highest step of Salomons Throne: it is the exceeding great reward, which God
promised unto Abraham: it is that eternal weight of glory, whereof, I neither
know how to begin, nor how to make an end of speaking. In vita aeterna,
facilius Au^ sim^
possumus dicere, quid ibi non sit, quam quid ibi sit. In describing the glory
of the world to come, it is easier to express what is not there, then what is
there. For there is no coffeehouse, nor grief, no faintness, nor
infirmity, no mourning, nor misery, no corruption, nor, death: but joy, and
fulness of joy for ever* such joy, as if we had once tasted, we would despise
the pleasures of a thousand worlds, in hope of assurance to enjoy it. For,
after we have waded through the miseries of this life, at length (in the
twinkling of an eye, in a moment, with the sound of a Trumpet) we shall be
carried into the heavenly Paradise, into Abraham's bosom: thousand thousands of
Angels and Saints, shall receive us with joy and singing: Our meat shall be
that bread of life, and that Heavenly Manna which will taste like whatsoever
thing we desire: our drink shall be the water of life; which, if we have once
tasted, we shall never thirst again, our mirth and music, shall be the song
of the Saints Alleluia, honor and praise, and glory be unto him, (...). 13.
that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore.

There shall we rejoice continually in the presence of the holy ONE, we shall
be his Saints, and he shall be our God: neither shall we fear death any more,
neither sorrow, nor crying, nor feel any want again.

The Lord of Hosts, who is the King of glory he will take us by the right
hand, and lead us to the garden of comfort, to the fountain of joy, where all
our garments shall be washed pure, in the blood of the Lamb, and allteares
shall be washed from our eyes.

There shall we see the Courts of the Lord of Hosts, new Jerusalem, the City
of the great king. Where there is no night, nor any candle, nor yet the light
of the Sun: for, the Lord himself shall be our light, and with him, we shall
shine as the star in Heaven.

Here shall we be clothed with white robes, the innocence of Saints; we
shall have Palms in our hands in token of victory. We shall be crowned with a
diadem of pure gold, which is immortality: and serving God a while in this
short life, there shall we have riches without measure; life, without death;
liberty, without thraldom; solace without ceasing; and joy without ending. O,
blessed are they (Lord) that dwell in thy house, where the Son of God in
glory, is light unto their eyes, music unto their ears, sweetness unto their
taste, and full contentment unto their hearts* where, in seeing, they shall know
him; and in knowing they shall possess him; and in possessing, shall love him:
and in loving, shall receive eternal blessedness, that blessed eternity, the
Garland we run for, and the crown we fight for. In a word. Here we shall come
unto the end of all our desires, for what else is our end, but to come to that
endless glory which has no end.

The Queen of Sheba, when she had seen the 1. Ki (...)
riches and royalty of Salamons Court, she said unto the King: It was a true
word, which I heard in mine own land, of thy prosperity and happiness: but
now I have seen it with mine eyes, lo, the one half is not told me: so
concerning the glorious fruition of eternity, in the life to come, whatsoever
may possibly he delivered by the tongues of men, yet undoubtedly the one half
cannot be told us.

By this place of Scripture (thus rising by degrees) the Katharistes, the
family of Love, and the Puritanes of our times, would gather this conclusion.
Forasmuch, as here are certain degrees set down, whereby Gods Church is
builded, and whereby the members of the same do grow up in Religion: therefore
now in this life, by a Godly reformation, we may attain unto perfection.

This self conceited and headstrong opinion of theirs, has been the first
cause* and ground of all the troublesome contentions, which long since have
been raised; and now (at this day) are continued in our Church. For diverse
men, while they take themselves (as Job says) The Onely-wise men, and pure in
their own eyes, dreaming still of a certain imagined perfection, they never
cease to be clamorous to the Christian Prince, troublesome to the quiet
state, and diverse of them, very dangerous people, to the whole Church of God.
In this verse of our text, there is an end propounded, there is a mark set up,
whereunto every Christian must labor to attain, and strive by all good
endeavor, to come. But (alas) who can say that his heart is clean? and man that
is borne in sin, and conceived in iniquity, while he is clothed with sinful
flesh, how can he attain perfection?

That the Militant Church of Christ has had imperfections in all ages, it is a
plain and an undoubted truth. For, if every member be imperfect, how can there
be perfection in the whole? Perfectio nostra magis constat remissione
peccatorum, quam perfectione virtutum. Our perfection consists (rather) in
the forgiveness of our sins, then in the perfection of our virtues.

In truth, thus stands the estate of a Christian man's life in this world.

As a man travailing a long journey, to a far city, he does not continually
go, but he rests here, and stays there, he baiteth in one place, and
lodges all night in an other, yet still he is going forward, and holds on
his journey: so in this life, we are pilgrims, we are trauailers, and
howsoever we do seek another country, and strive to come unto the City of
rest, yet in this journey we wander often out of the way, we take many
falls, we have many impediments, neither is it possible, the light of our
Faith should still hold out, and never be darkened in this pilgrimage, till in
the life to come, we be made Citizens of that heavenly Jerusalem, which is
above.

We conclude then with the sweet and modest saying of good Saint Augustine.
Haec est perfectio Christianorum, vt agnoscant se nunquam esse perfectos.
Herein stands the perfection of a Christian, to acknowledge himself, never to
be perfect.

The Conclusion.
Now it remains (as was promised in the beginning) to show the mutuali
coherence of these words, and to knit up again the Lincks of this Chain
together,

HEre, in four words, are contained the four causes of our salvation.

In Predestination, there is the efficient cause, which is Gods love. In
Calling, there is the material cause, which is Christ's death opened in his
word. In Justifying, there is the formal cause, aliuely faith: in Glorifying,
there is the final cause, which is everlasting life.

Thus, in Predestination, we behold God the Father chosing of his love: in
Calling) we hear God the Son teaching by his word* in Justifying; we feel
the comfort of God the holy Ghost: sealing by his spirit. The fruit of all
which: of Gods love, chosing: of Christ's word, Calling; of God the holy Ghost,
comforting: the effect of all these is our Glorifycation.

So that, as we do see far with our bodily eye, yet reach farther with
reason, which is the eye of the mind, but Faith (which is the eye of the soul)
out-strippeth both: So, Calling enlightneth the mind with spiritual knowledge:
Justifying goes further, and seals up the heart with heavenly comfort:
Glorifying out-strippeth all, and does ravish the soul with immortality.

Every one of us, after this life, we desire, and hope to enjoy eternal
Glory. Behold. Conceditur Ber^
in Predestinatione, promittitur in vocatione, ostenditur in Iustificatione,
percipitur in Glorificatione. In Predestination, there is the first grant: In
Calling, it is directly promised in Justifying, it is plainly showed: in
Glorifying, there is liuerie and seisin, the full possession of all.

In Predestination, God bestows upon us his love: in Calling, he grants
the blessing of his word in Justifying, he yields the fruit of his spirit: in
Glorifying, he does wholly give unto us himself.

Here are the sweet springs, issuing out of Nilus, the head whereof cannot be
found: here are the four pleasant rivers, which water Paradise, which run
through the Soul, with a Divine virtue, and comfortably cool all our
spiritual heat. Here is the holy and precious oil, powered upon the head of
Aaron, the exceeding love, and fullness John Of^ nes^ all
of grace, powered upon our head Christ Jesus, and running down to the skirtes
of his clothing, to every particular, and penitent member of his Church.

Here, we may see the spiritual regeneration, of the Soul, shadowed out in
the first creation of the World. In Predestination, there is the huge and vast
deep; the dark form whereof could not be discerned: in Calling, the
separating of light, from darkness; of knowledge, from ignorance in the Soul:
in Justifying, the Sun is created; the (...) 6
bright beams of his grace shine in our hearts: in Glorifying, we may behold
the new Adam, framed (...) 6
after the Image of God, and placed in the paradise of immortal joy.

Observe here (if you please) the kindness of alouing Father, who having many
sons, bears secret affection to some one, there is Predestination: this
affection in his good time he declares, by making his will known, and his
love manifest, there is Calling: after this Calling, he causes him to take up
his inheritance in Court, and gives him earnest, in token of assurance, there
is Justifying: lastly, he enters into his fathers joy, and is made neire of
all, there is Glorifying.

Again, in Predestination, the heavenly husbandman chooses out a plot of
ground at his own pleasure in Calling, he sows it with the seed of his
word: in Justifying, he waters, and cherishes it with his spirit: in
Glorifying, he reapes and carries into the barn.

Lastly, behold apparently in Predestination, (...) 5.5
how Joseph long before was sold into Egypt, by the determinate Counsel of
God: by Calling, how he was loosed out of prison, and delivered from the
bondage of sin: by Justifying, how his cause was made known, and so
acquitted innocent: in Glorifying, how he was clothed in Purple, placed in the
Kings Chariot, and made the chief of his Kingdom.

Now then, as Saint Paul says to the Romans: What shall we say to these
things? in like sort, what shall we say to these so excellent, so sweet, so
divine mysteries? to these so comfortable testimonies of Gods love? to this
Ladder of Jacobs, whereupon none but Angels do ascend? to this inward working of
the Spirit, which blows where it lists? to this Divine and hidden purpose,
which can not be deceived? to this ineffable glory of the Sons of God, which
they do expect and look for? what shall we say more effectual, and more
comfortable?

Can any thing be set down more plainly? or knit up more briefly? can any
demonstration be concluded more soundly? Whom the Lord has Predestined,
before all time, those does he Call in time: whom he Calls, those he does
Justify: and whom he Justifies, those does he Glorify.

Thus then, may every true Christian conclude, for the comfort of his Soul,
and the assurance of his salvation for ever.

I am Justified truly, by aliuely, and working Faith, therefore I am Called: I
am Called effectually by his word, therefore, I am Predestinate: I am
Predestinate, and chosen of his free love, from eternity, and therefore I
shall be Glorified unto all eternity again.

Osetled comfort, Osweete conceived hope of joy: That joy, which strength of
Hells ten thousand, can never take away. Wherefore should we fear? whereof
shall we be afraid? No, no force so mighty, so puissant, able to overthrow us.
No terror of sin; no plagues of death, no rage of the world, no power of the
Devil himself. In all these, we are more then conquerors. For all things shall
turn to the best, to them, that are settled in Gods fear.

That wicked, and most dangerous conspiracy, plotted against the Lords
anointed, when it came to the very pinch, when it was brought to the very
height, was not all turned topsie-turuie, and utterly disapointed? This day we
do acknowledge it, with thankful remembrance; this day, wherein we are all
met together, in a most happy, and blessed peace; this day does plainly
witness, that he had the deliverance, we feel the comfort, the Church has
an endless blessing, and God has his everlasting praises.

O, behold what it is to be knit unto God. For whom he does love, who is able
to wrong them whom he has chosen, how can they be rejected? whom he does
Call, how shall they be shut out? whom he does Justify, who dare accuse them?
Whom God will Glorify, how can they be forsaken?

Seeing my soul is lincked to that Chain, which can never be unloosed, my
soul grounded upon that foundation, which can never be shaken, what shall make
us to despair? nay, what is it, shall make us to waver, or doubt of the
singular love of God, which he bears toward us, in his Son Christ Jesus?
What shall separate us, from the hope of immortality, in the life to come?
shall the wearisomnesse of this troublesome life? shall the discontentments of
this transitory World? shall a little sickness, shaking this brittle house of
clay? No, all the afflictions of this life, which are but for a moment, they
are not to be accounted worthy that exceeding, si^ passing, eternal weight of
glory.

For God has chosen us before the world: he has Called us out of the World:
he has Justified, us in the World, and he will Glorify us in the World to
come.

God has Chosen us not being: he has Called us being enemies: he has
Justified us, being sinners and he will Glorify us, being mortal wretches.
Therefore we may cherefully sing with David. Misericordia Domini, abaeterno in
aeternum. The mercy of the Lord, is from everlasting, to everlasting: From
everlasting Predestination, to everlasting Glory, the one having no ending, the
other having no beginning.

This blessed fruition of glory, and immortality, that we may feel the
comfort of it, in our hearts and consciences, now in this life, and hereafter
enjoy in the life to come, the Lord grant, even for his blessed son Christ
Jesus sake to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three persons, and one
everliving God, be ascribed all power, glory, praise, and thanksgiving, for
ever, and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE KING.

BY ANT HONEY MAXEY, Batchelar in Divinity, and Chaplain to his Majesty in
ordinary.

The Points handled herein are these. That there is an Hardening. That God
Hardens not. How men become Hardened. Most woeful to be Hardened. The means
to avoid it.


LONDON Printed by G. Eld. for Clement Knight, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard,
at the sign of the holy Lamb. 1606.

HARDENING,
Exodus 10. 20. And the Lord Hardened Pharaohs heart, and he did not let the
children of Israel go.
THE heart of Man is deceitful and wicked above all Iere. 17.
thnigs, who can know it? Although the Heart of man be so little, that it
will scarce serve a Kite for a bait, yet there are not more windings, nor more
turnings in a Maze, or in a Laborinth, then are in the heart of man. The
Heathen were so forward in acknowledging a Divine power, that rather than they
would be without a God, they gave divine honor to any kind of creature.

The Assyrians worshipped Idols; the Persians Stars; the Aegiptians Plants,
and all manner of beasts; the Graecians their own conceits and the Romans
made their City a shop for all kind of Gods. So many were the windings,
and so infinite the turnings of the Heathen, touching divine worship; that
Varro observed in the world three thousand Gods. The dissolute and cunning
Atheist, he has a fetch by himself alone, he lets loose the reins, and
follows the stream of his sensual affections, because he conceiues in his
heart, and clean contrary to the Heathen, says there is no God at all. There
is a third kind, who though in (...). 14. 1.
show they outwardly acknowledge God, yet they again have an other winding,
secretly to themselves: they plod on, swallowing any sin, for why? The Lord
will neither do good nor evil. ^h. 1. 12.
Because there is not present punishment for every sin. Tush all is well, no
harm shall (...). 10. 12.
happen unto us; For God cares not for any thing. Lastly, in these our days,
there is a fourth sort, who have a more strange turning than all the former.
For many having a general notioh of Gods omnipotency, hearing and reading
sometimes of Gods Election and Reprobation (whereof they understand no ground,
nor conceive aright) they will presume to commit any sin; for (say they) All
is in God, no man can resist his power, if he has chosen me to life, I am
sure for one, if otherwise (as he did with Pharaoh) he has appointed me a
Vessel of his Wrath: it is not possibly to be avoided.

Such are the windings, and these are the turnings in the hearts, and secret
thoughts of men: either, every creature a God, or else no God; either a God
that regarded not sin, or else a God that causes us to sin. These turnings
Esa. 2^
and devises in the sight of the Lord, are esteemed as clay before the Potter.

To convince the Palpable errors of the three former, I hold it not
convenient: For, to think, there is any one here present, who does
acknowledge no God at all, or such a God, as regards not the actions of men,
I hold it wrong to this holy assembly, and I hope better things of this
Christian audience.

But to meet with this latter sort, who leaving all good means of their
salvation, do inwardly fall a way from God, and yet in their wilful ignorance
would shift off, and shoue the cause of their condemnation upon GOD. For such
chiefly, have I undertaken the exposition of this Scripture: in opening
whereof I will touch these five points.

First that there is 1 An hardening, 2 That God Hardens not. 3 How men become
Hardened. 4 Most woeful to be Hardened. 5 The means to auoidit.


There is an Hardening.
COncerning this first point there are in the Scriptures two Greek verbes,
which are commonly used for this Hardening. The first is (...), which does
properly signify, to dry up and wither, used often in the 3. to the Hebrews.
8. 13-15 verses: (...). Harden not your hearts. The other verb in (...), which
signifies to obdurate, or to make hard. Ephesians. 4. 18. (...), They became
strangers from the life of God, through the hardness of their hearts. Having
thus recourse unto the Greek tongue, we shall see, that in the heart of man,
first, there is a drying up, and a certain withering: For in natural things,
and also in the soul, as there is a watering which is good and comfortable, so
there is a drying up, and withering, which is dangerous and hurtful. In the
earth there is a watering, for the hills are the teates, and the springs the;
milk to moysten, and to water the valleys. Psalm. 104. verse 10. He sends
the springs into the rivers, which run amongst the hills. In the earth
(...) 20.
there is a dryness, for (says Joel) The people mourn for want of moisture,
the rivers of waters are dried up, and the trees of the field are withered. In
the body there is a watering, for the Liver is the spring of blood, that
runs into every vein, and therefore Solomon (...) 12. 7
calls the Liver the golden well. In the body, there is a withering, for
David complains in the Psalm. 22. 15. verse, My moisture is like the drought
in Summer, and my boanes are dried up like a pot-shard. As in the earth and
body of man, so like wise in the soul, there is a watering and a withering.
In the 4. of Saint John and 14. verse, there is mention of a well of living
waters for the Soul. The preaching of (...) 3. 6.
grace in Christ is called the watering of Apollo. The Prophet Esaias says, with
joy ye shall draw (...) 12. 3
waters out of the wells of Salvation. Contrariwise, where this grace does not
water, there is withering. Si spiritus irrigatio defuerit, omnis (...) g. mag.
plantatio exarescit. Every planting that has not the watering of Gods spirit,
it withers and dries away: therefore says the Psalmist, the (...) 1. 3.
godly, they are like the tree planted by the rivers side, there is watering:
but the ungodly are as a Garden that has no water, and as the Oaken leaf,
that Esaias (...)
fades, there is withering.

The other Greek verb is (...) which signifies to harden. There be Phisieae
and aethicae vicissitudines, there is a natural and a spiritual Philosophy.
In the natural course of things, there is a congealing and an hardening, as of
the ice and frost, which Job very fitly calls the bands of Orion. because, by
the cold Eastern Job. 3^ 31
and Northern winds the water becomes as a stoane, and the clods are bound
together. Contrary to this Hardening, there is a melting. He, Psalm. ^ 18*
sends out his word, and melts them. As when the Frost does give, and the
showers fall, which Job calls in the same place, The sweet influence of
Pleiades. Both in nature, and in the soul also, there is a Resolving, and a
Hardening: Deuteronomy. 32. verse 2. The word is called Dew, and there is a thaw or
spiritual melting, when the heavenly dew does cause the soul to give, and to
resolve into tears of Repentance: so in the 2. of Kings. 22. 10. Josias heart
did melt, when he heard the Law read. When King David had committed murder
and adultery, very grievous sins; he never be-thought himself of the
matter, but he began to congeale, and to be Hardened in his sin. But as soon
as the Prophet Nathan had awaked him, and his heart (like Gedeons fleece) had
druncke up the heavenly dew, then presently David began to relent, his soul
melted with sorrow, and as appears in the 51. Psalm, he resolved into
tears of Repentance. Hezechias, when God had given unto him a sudden and
triumphant victory over the host of Zenacherib; presently after, in the pride
of his heart, he forgot God, and began to congeale in sin: but as soon as
the word of the Lord came unto him by the Prophet Esaias, then presently his
heart melted, the blood of his soul flowed forth in his repentant tears, as
appears in the 38. of Esaias: he turned his face unto the wall, and wept
bitterly. (...) 38. 3.


Now, as there is a Meiting, so also there is an Hardening in the soul, and
that is, when the custom of sin has beaten such an hard tracke, and so
trampled the soul, that the word of God (the seed of life) cannot enter, This
is expressed in the 13. of Saint Matthew. by the parable of the seed which
fell by the high way side, where there was such an hard way, such a beaten path
made by the common entrance of sin, that the seed could take no root, but
the devil comes like an Harpie, and deuoureth it, before it can enter: For
example hereof, we will take Cain, and King Pharao, whom my Text concerns.
Cain having slain his brother Abell, and committed horrible murder, the word
of the Lord came unto him saying: Where is thy brother Abell? Did Cains heart
relent? did he confess and say, I have sinned? or did he resolve into tears
with David? No such matter: but first he answered with a foul word: I cannot
tell where he is: then he despised the Lord to his face, as if he should
say, you may go look him, am I my brothers keeper? mark but this answer of
Caine, and his carriage therein, and you need no other example of an heart that
is Hardened: neither affection in kindred could touch him, nor shame of the
world check him, nor the blood of his slain brother move him, nor the
glorious presence of the Lord astonish him, nor the guilt of his own thoughts
raise him, nor (at last) the quickening word of God, which is powerful to
raise the very dead; Hara Job. 15.
none of these could any whit revive him. Triplex circa praecordia ferrum, as
Job says of Leuiathan: his heart was harder then the nether millstone.

Pharaoh, when the word of God came unto Pha (...)
him by Moses and Aaron, he was so far from yielding, that he seemed
presently as though he would have fought with God: Who is the Lord? I know no
Lord, neither will I let Israel go. And whereas the word, and miracles joined
with that word were sufficient to convince any living, Pharaohs heart was so
stony, that though by a strange Miracle, all the water in the land were become
blood, and did savor most vnholsomely, yet it is said, Pharao went home, (...)
23
and all this could not enter into his heart, it could not pierce him. When the
Prophet cried to the Altar of Jeroboam, O Altar, Altar, hear the word of the
Lord: the Altar heard, and claue asunder. But the word of God which in Jeremy
(...) 13.
23. 29. is called an Hammer, because it bruseth the stony hearts of men: this
Hammer with ten miracles gave ten mighty strokes at Pharaohs heart, and yet it
could never bruise it.

Thus we may plainly see, there is a watering by Grace, and a melting by Gods
word, as appears by David and Hezechiah, who resolved into tears: again
through want of Grace, there is a withering, and by custom of sin, there is
an Hardening, as in Caine and Pharaoh, whose hearts the word of God could not
pierce, but the more they were beaten on, the more hard and flintie they became.

God hardens not.
IT Remains on the second point to discuss, whether this Hardening be of
GOD? In opening whereof, it is very strange to hear, how untruly, how
uncharitably we are charged by our adversaries: not only Campion and
Bellarmine, but especially in certain Articles, or Foreible reasons lately
published: wherein it is directly set down, that the protestants do make God
the author and only cause of sin: that they deride Gods permission; and
plainly affirm, God is worse Article. ^
then the Denill, and so are bound in conscience never to ask God forgiveness
for their sins. Oh fearful blasphemy, and words unseemly Christian
ears: Where is modesty? where is truth and Chtistian piety? Is this our
doctrine? do we thus teach? no verily: both in word and writing we
acknowledge the Lord our God to be full of compassion and love, the bowels of
his mercy sweet and amiable, he would not the death of any, he is gracious
and kind, gentle and ready to forgive, and (to the death) we affirm, more
then most holy, pure and just are all his works and ways: therefore the Lord
be judge between them and us, and lay not this sin unto their charge.

Touching this doctrine, how sin first came to be: how it came in, where it
first took beginning, and that God is not the author of it, I have showed
heretofore in handling the Golden Ch^ine, the means of our salvation: namely,
that the Devil was Primitiuus peccator, the (...) 6.
first offender for he sinned from the beginning. So that from him sin first
boyleth up, as out of the maine Sea. From Satan when it comes to Adam, it
arises as out of a Spring: from this Spring it is reserved in nature as in a
Conduit, from nature conveyed to concupisence (as by a pipe,) and from thence
does flow all the mischief and wickedness that is in the life of man. Well
then: if sin do proceed from the suggestion of Satan working through our
own concupiscence, and so God wholly freed from all imputation of evil: why is
it so often said in the Scripture. Deuteronomy. 2. 30. And the Lord hardened the heart
of Sihon King of Heshbon, and made him obstinate: Joshua the 11. 20. It came of
the Lord to harden their hearts: and here often in the book of Exodus, and the
Lord hardened the heart of Pharao.

To make this plain: it is a point well known unto the learned, that this
speech (where it is said) God hardened. The Hebrew Dialect does Flaccu^
Illiric^ P. Lon^ li. 1. di^ Tho A^ quin. ^ 23. arti (...)
signify a permission, and not an action. Verbes that signify to do, they
often express a suffering and not a doing. Destruit cum deserit: God is then
said to Harden, when he does forsake. Impios cum non retrahit a malo culpae,
dicitur dimittere. As the enduing with grace is the effect of Gods Election, so
the withholding of his grace is the effect of Reprobation. Dei includere est,
clausis non aperire, says Saint Gregory upon the 12. of Job. and foureteenth
verse. Every action has his quality from the root of the affection, and from
the intention of the Author: Deus autem (quoad peccatum) non habet positive
velle, sed tantum privative, Touching sin, God has no Positive will, but
only in regard of former sins a Privation of his grace. To be short: God
does Harden, as Saint Augustine Agust. ^
says: Non malum obtrudendo, sed gratiam non concedendo: not by causing us to
commit sin, but by not granting unto us his grace. I, but how comes it to
pass, that we as well as others) are not partakers of Gods grace? why have
not we also his good Spirit to direct and guide us? Saint Augustine makes it
plain again. Non ideo (...)
non habet homo gratiam, quia Deus non dat, sed quia homo non accipit: men
become Hardened, and want the spirit of grace, why? not because God does not
offer it unto them, but because they receive it not, when it is offered. For
example: One of us being sick, and like to die, the Phisician knowing our
case, he takes with him some preservation to comfort us, and comes to the
door and knocks, if we will not, or be not able to let him in, we perish
and die, and the cause is not in the Phisician, but in our selves that let him
not in. (...). Sin is (...) de 10.
a disease, whereof we are all sick, for we have all sinned: Romans. 6. 12.
verse. Christ, he is the Phisician of our souls: Venit de coelo magnus
medicus, (...) in (...) 9. 12.
quia per totum vbique iacebit aegrotus. Christ the great Physician came down
from heaven, because all mankind was generally infected. He comes to the door
of our hearts, and there he knocks. Revel.3.20. Behold, I stand at the door
(...) 6. 35.
and knock, He brings with him (...), the bread of life, his eternal word
to comfort us, if we let him in: if we open the door of our hearts, he will
come in, and suppe with us, as he did with Mary, and forgive us all our
sins. (...) 10.
but if we will not, or through long contagion of our sin be not able to
let Christ in, we die in our sins: and the case is evident, not because
Christ does not offer grace, and comfort unto us, but because we receive it
not, when it is offered. Merito perit aegrotus, qui non medicum vocat, sed
vltro venientem respuit: worthily does (...)
that sick patient perish, who will neither send for the Physician himself,
nor accept of his help, when it is offered.

More plainly thus, in the foureteenth of Saint Matthew. Our Savior walking on
the Sea, he bad Saint Peter come unto him: who walking on the water, seeing
storm and tempestarise, his heart failed, and he began to sincke: upon his
cry unto our Savior, he presently stretched forth his hand* took him into
the ship, and saved him. This world (we know by daily experience) it is a
sea of trouble and misery: our Savior (as he said to Saint Peter) so most
lovingly he wills every one of us to come unto him: as we walk, storms
and tempests do arise, through frailty of our flesh, and the weakness of our
Faith, we begin to sincke, our Savior he stretches forth his hand, he
gives us (...) his Word, his Sacraments, the good motions of his spirit, to
save us from sincking, and to keep us in the ship of his Church: if we
refuse these means, we perish, we sincke in our sins, why? not because
Christ does not most kindly put forth his hand unto us, but because in want and
distress we lay not hold upon him. This is condemnation, that light is come
into the world men refuse it, and love darkness more then light. Our blessed
Savior with great loving kindness, (...) 3. 19.
he does inuit all men to his Great Supper, if we make excuses, or wilfully
refuse to come, he may justly pronounce, none of those that were bidden shall
ever taste of my supper. (...) 14. 24


Therefore let not men deceive themselves, and complain, as though God did
harden their hearts and deny them grace and mercy, for as Jonas says in his
second Chapter, and 8. verse. (...) 2. 8.
They forsake their own mercy. Deus prior in amore, God never hates until
he be first hated: and so ^brose. ^no eu^ ^tit n^(...) i di(...) it. Aug ^essi.
I conclude with Saint Ambrose: Nemo tibi Christum potest auferre, nisi te illi
auferas: no man can separate Christ from thee, except first thou do separate
thy self from him.

This is plainly to be observed in Pharaoh: had he (being long before
peaceably settled in a rich and mighty Kingdom) made right use of the blessings
of God: had he at the first, or oftentimes after, yielded unto the word of the
Lord, he had never come to the state of Hardening, nor left himself such a
fearful spectacle of Gods wrath for ever. But Pharaoh, feeling wealth and
reuenew coming so fast and abundantly, that he builded new Cities ( Pithom
Exo. 1. (...)
and Raamses (to lay up his treasures, his heart was so bent and set upon
Covetousness (such multitudes of people moyling and laboring in sundry works
for his profit) that in no Exodus (...) Cha. 7(...)
case he could endure to hear of their departure. First, he said flatly, they
should not go. Secondly, he sought to shift off the matter, affirming the
miracle not to be done by Gods hand, but by enchantment. Thirdly, he yeldeed
8. 25.
they should offer sacrifice, but only in his own land. Fourthly, he was
content they should go sacrifice out off his land (but still he would
condition with God ( None but the 10. 11. 10. 24.
men should go. Fifthly, the men should go, the Women go, the Children go, but
their sheep and Oxen (wherein their wealth stood) should not go.

Thus Pharaoh (through a wretched and griple mind (never left winding and
turning, dallying and presuming of the Lords mercy, and patience, till adding
one sin unto another, his heart became Hardened. Nay notwithstanding so many
miracles, and that before he confessed the Lord to be God, He and his people
sinful, and earnestly desired Moses to pray for him, yet contrary to his own
thoughts, and against (...) eure how (...) esull a (...) g it is, (...) ully
(...) nne a (...)st our (...) e conce.
his own knowledge, when he saw the people of Israel were gone, he flies to
strength of war, he calls his Captains, he musters his people, he gathers
his Chariots, he pursues with all might and maine, till at last both he and
his (overwhelmed in the sea) received the fearful and final judgment of
wilful disobedience. Now then let all the earth know the goodness of the
Lord, and wisely observe his love unto mankind for ever. It is true, Pharaohs
heart was Hardened, and he with his Nobles utterly overthrown. But, before
this overthrow, all means possible that could be, were used to win Pharao.
Blessing upon blessing before received; punishment upon punishment after
inflicted; Moses still and again prayed for him; Aaron ever and anon persuaded
him; the plagues to astonish him, were sudden and exceeding wonderful. the
deliverance, to win him, was present, and more miraculous: the Enchanters
confessed, the People cried out, his Servants were offended, Egypt was almost
quite destroyed the land of Goshen was still untouched: God again, and again,
and still again was entreated, and yet Pharao remained obstinate. Shall we
then say, that God Hardened Pharaohs heart? Be it far from us: for it is
directly set down in the ninth Chapter. 34. verse. And when Pharao saw the
hail and thunder were gone, he sinned again, and Hardened his heart. And
again the 8. Chap. 15. verse. When Pharao saw that he had rest, he hardened
his own heart.

Oh, I would to God it were only Pharaohs case, and that we also being
Christians did not abuse the long forbearance, and much loving kindness of our
God. For, now fear of the storm is over, but even one year or two: now that
our loving God through his unspeakable mercy has so sweetly set all in
order, that all Nations round about us stand amazed; now that he has settled
amongst us a most happy and religious Behold our unthankful (...) nes to G
(...) enjoying so religious and peaceable a Prince.
peace, now that he has given honor, plenty, and rest throughout all the
Land, still, still we dally and trifle with the Lord: according to our private
humors, and several sects, we will not profess the Gospel, except we first
condition (as Pharao did) both with our God and King: with humble hearts we do
not submit our selves peaceably to serve the Lord: For this blessed
Catastrophe, our souls flame not with thankeful love, neither (as they ought)
break forth into everlasting praises: Nay, whereas the word of God came ten
times to Pharao, willing him to let the people of Israel go, and serve the
Lord, the same word comes an hundred times ten to our hearts, crying and
beating upon us to have us let go our contentions, our carnal and perverse
affections, and yet we never relent at the same. A man's heart will tell him
more then seven watchmen (...). 37.
in a trwer: We know, we know (every one in his own bosom) the sins which
we secretly foster, and will not let go. But as Saint Paul exhorts the Jews,
Hebrews 3. 12. so I advise you in the name of God. Take heed, take heed,
least in any of you there be found a false and an evil heart, to depart from
the living God. For assuredly, it is a fearful and bitter thing to carry ever
a selfe-wilde and perverse mind, to respect merely the applause of men, and
fading pleasures of this life; so, inwardly falling away from God, and loosing
the blessed comfort of our salvation. O Savior sweet, and secret hope, turn
us, that we may be turned; bow our hearts, and the hearts of our seed unto
thee, that we may fear thy judgments, acknowledge thy goodness, and stand fast
in thy love for ever.

How men become Hardened.
THe third point is, to show how men become Hardened: in opening whereof, we
are to understand, that there are three sorts of Hardenings: Naturalis,
Voluntaria, Iudicialis. The first is by Nature, the second by habit and
Custom, the third by the Just judgment of God. The first is the forgetfulness
or dullness in a natural man, when he ouershootes him self, for want of wise
observation and remembrance.

In the sixth of Mark, our Savior Christ fed Mar. 6.
five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes, a miracle sufficient to
prove unto his Disciples, that he was the Son of God. Yet presently after,
when he came walking on the Sea, and caused the wind to cease, they stood
amazed, and did not acknowledge his Divinity: for Gods children may be blind in
mind, hardened in heart for a tim^
(says the scripture) in the 52. verse. They considered not the miracle of the
loaves, because their hearts were hardened: that is, through natural
imperfection they had forgot it.

Secondly, there is an Hardening by habit, when (through a careless security)
men do continue in sin, and take such a custom, as they can hardly leave.
So Simon Magus, his heart by custom was so long bent, and set upon
covetousness, that being conversant amongst the Apostles, and daily employed
in most divine and holy actions: yet even then, his mind and thought still
ran upon money, upon gain. This is Habitualis obduratio, an Hardening which
grows by continuance in sin. He that is in this case, it stands him upon to
gather up his spirits, and strongly to resist sin, to sequester himself
ofttimes unto devout and private Meditations, to joy in hearing the word, with
reverence to receive the blessed Sacraments, especially to be fervent in
prayer, for so Saint Peter willed Simon Magus: Repent and pray, that (if it be
possible) the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee. (...) ts. 8. 22.


The third and last is Iudicialis obduratio, an Hardening which proceeds from
the just judgment of God. Cum peccatum fit paena peccati, when sin becomes a
punishment to him that commiteth it, as Saint Paul says (...) a recompense
(...) m. 1. 2. 7
offormer errors, when the thought is so poisoned, the mind and soul so
generally infected, that the spirit of God is utterly quenched: no light of
nature, no private Counsel, no public exhortation out of the word, no inward
motions of Gods spirit can prevail, but he goes on so long, and is so far
spent, that being past all fear to offend, carelessly he makes no scruple of
any sin whatsoever, till at length finding in himself no hope of recovery,
either God strikes him apparently with his judgment, as he did Pharao, or else
by his death he passes silent to the grave without repentance, as Dives, or
in this life (as Judas did) does plunge himself in the gulf of desperation.
This is that Hardening which is here meant of Pharao.

This Hardening is not all on a sudden: Non ruimus primo impetu, vt Deo
reluctemur, no man is Hardened at the first. Nemo fit repent miser. Calu.
Heb. 3. 13. Take heed least any of you be Hardened through the deceitfulness
of sin. The deceitfulness of sin, it creeps like a canker-worme, it
gathers, it steals upon us, and so under the foreknowledge of God, men come
unto Hardening by degrees. Naturalis est ordo, vt abimperfecto, Tho. Aq (...)
ad perfectu^ quis moueatur. It is a natural course even in evil (says the
schooleman) by degrees to come unto perfection. As they that dwell in Psalm. 84.
Gods house, will bring forth more fruit, and then appear before the God of
Gods in perfect beauty. so, on the contrary, the wicked are not Hardened all
at once, but as they offend more and more, so by little and little they grow to
the height of sin, and as the Psalmist says, they do fall from one sin to
another.

Judas was first a cunning Dissembler, secondly, (...) at. 26. 8.
he became a secret Thief; thirdly, he grew to be (...). 12. 5.
(...) t. 26. 25 48.
an impudent Liar; fourthly, he proved a bold Traitor; lastly* a desperate
Reprobate. (...) at. 27. 5.


The diseases of the body, they do not grow at one and the selfsame time they
do first appear but by riot, and distemperature used long before: so the soul
infected with unclean thoughts, and in youth accustomed to evil actions, at
length comes to the incurable disease of Hardening. S. Augustine in the 8. of
his Confess. Aug. con^^ss 8.
does open this point very plainly.

First the devil by concupiscence suggesteth evil thoughts: evil thoughts
egg on delight: delight tolleth on consent: consent engendereth action: action
brings forth custom: custom grows to necessity: and necessity in sinning
is the forerunner of death. For example. First the devil suggesteth evil
thoughts, so he did unto Eve, he wound her in by tainting her thought, by
telling her she should have al knowledge, and be as God: this evil thought
egged on delight; for as appearethin the sixth verse, the Apple grew pleasant
in her eyes: this delight tolled on consent: for then she took of the fruit:
lastly, of consent came the action, for she did eat and gave it to her
husband.

Now, when the action of sin is committed, there does not presently follow
Hardening: for, if the heart do melt and thaw, if the soul do give and resolve
into tears of repentance for the same, then there is no Hardening. But, if
from one action committed, we come unto another, and so to the custom and
continuance in sin, then are we snared with the cords of our own iniquity, and
fettered with this chain, against the general day of Gods judgment. To make
this plain, I will show you by seven degrees, as it were by seven stayres, how
men do descend into this pit of Hardening.

The first step is importabile: Sin at the first, it is 1 Import (...) bile.
importable, it seems intolerable to be borne. One that has bin religiously
brought up, has bin accustomed to a mild and honest conversation, and has been fearful to offend: at length, if through bad company, through his own
weakness, and the allurements of Satan, he falls into any foul sin; at the
first it is importable, it does strike such an horror into him, that he is in a
woeful taking and grievously tormented. This we may see by David, who having
always a tender conscience, loath to offend, yet after overtaken by committing
murder and adulter, a^soone as he saw what he had done, he was mightily
troubled, wheresoever he became, his offense so stuck in his thought, that in
the 51. Psalm. 3. he cries out, my sin is ever before me, that is, is
continually in my sight.

The second stayre is Grave, heavy: for sin 2 (...) ue.
being committed twice or thrice, it is not as it was at the first, importable,
but it is heavy. He sorrows, and is grieved, but he is nothing so troubled
in mind, nor afflicted in conscience as he was before.

The third stayre is Leave light. For he that has 3 (...).
used himself more often to sin that which at the first was importable, and
afterward heavy, at length becomes light. This appears by the unchaste
woman spoken off in the Proverbs, who having had some practice in sin, she
makes no more matter of it, but lightly passes it over with wiping her mouth,
and says she has not sinned. (...). 30. 20.


The fourth stayre is insensible, past feeling, for 4 (...) nsi(...)
after that sin be made light of, and that there be no remorse nor grief for
sin, then they grow past feeling: such were the Israelites of whom the
Prophet Jeremy speaks in his 5. Chap. and 3. ver. Thou have smitten them,
but they have not sorrowed, for they have made their faces harder then a stone,
that is* they have sinned so long, that now they are past feeling.

The fifth staire is Delectabile. When men take 5 ^ecta(...)
pleasure in sin (as Solomon says) They rejoice in Pro. 2. 1^
doing evil, and delight in wickedness. Hereof Saint Augustine says. Tum
est consummata infoelicitas, vbi turpia non solum committuntur, sedetiam
delectant: Then is the estate of condemnation certain, when foul sins are
not only committed, but are delightful also.

The sixth staire is Desiderabile, when (through 6 Desiderabile.
delight) men grow to such a custom, that they inwardly desire to sin, so that
as S. Gregory said: Si nunquam moreretur* nunqua^ vellepeccare desineret: such
a man, if he should never die, he would never cease to sin, for though he did
not commit it in action, yet still he would desire it in thought.

The seventh staire is defensibile. When he has 7 Defensibile.
gotten a forehead of brass. ^say. 48. 4. as the Psalmise says) when the
tyrant does boast that he can Psalm. 1. 1.
do mischief, when he sits in the seat of the scorner, when he does not
only by habit desire to sin, and delight in it, but now he will take upon him
to defend it. Peccatum porta mortis, defensio Origin.
est lumen inferni, Sin is the high way to death, but the defense of sin is the
very next step into hell. At this point were the Jews, who being reproved for
idolatry, the Scripture says, they said desperately, we have loved strange
Gods, and them will we follow again they refused to hearken, and pulled away
the shoulder, and stopped their ears, and Zach. 7. ^^
made their hearts as an Adamant stone. Impius cum ^. 2. 25. ^0. 18. 3.
venerit in profundum, contemnit: a dissolute liver once grown to the height
of sin, becomes desperate.

Thus Sin, first it is importable, secondly, heavy, thirdly it becomes light,
fourthly past feeling, fifthly delightful, sixthly desired, and lastly to be
defended. Here is descensus Auerni, these be the stayres that lead to the
chambers of death, and the stepswherby the reprobate do descend unto final
destruction. Indeed, at the first, when sin is importable, and that we are
wonderfully grieved for committing of it, there is great hope of recovery, and
he that so feeling the wound of sin, does there stay the course of it, it is
an excellent sign of salvation. Initium salutis notitia peccati, the first
step of repentance is the first finding out, and acknowledgement of sin. In the
second of the Acts, when they saw and knew their sin, they cried out, Men and
brethern, what shall we do to be saved. This horror, this troubled mind, it made
them seek for comfort, and so brought them to repentance. Secondly, when sin
is a burden unto our souls, so that we would feign be eased of it, there is
yet good hope. We may see it by David in the 38. Psalm 4. verse. Mine
iniquities are gone over mine head, and are as a burden too heavy for me to
bear. The weight of this burden made David in the 18. ver. following, to
confess his wickedness, and to be sorry for his sin, it made him fly unto God
for ease. O cast your burden upon the Lord, for he will not suffer the
righteous to fall for ever.

Thirdly, when men make light of sin, surely danger is not far off, for a
threefold cord is not easily broken, and the third letting of blood in the same
vein, is exceeding dangerous: but yet still there is some hope, for though in
the hot chase of our blind and youthful desires, though then for a time we
account it a light matter, to commit this or that sin, yet God may touch our
hearts, Christ may look back upon us, as he did on S. Peter, who denied him
thrice. His word may so strike us, that we may come to know our selves, to see
in what case we are, to bewail our infirmity, and so turn unto god by prayer
and repe^ta^ce. All these things (as Job says) will God work twice Job. 33. ^
O bew^ and sin more.
or thrice with a man. But if we come to Insensibile, the fourth stayre, so
that we grow past feeling, we sin daily and have no sense of it, if there be no
remorse, no grief nor dislike of sin, woe be unto us, 2. Amos. 6. For three
transgressions, and for four, I will not turn to Israel, says the Lord.
Without the infinite and extraordinary mercy of God we are the sons of wrath,
for the^ follows this deadly wound of Hardening. It is a principle in
Physic grauissime is aegrotat, qui se non sentit aegrotare: if a man be
sick, and know it not, out of question, he is very dangerously and deadly
sick: he that finds in himself no want of any thing (as the Church of
Laodicea) (...), I stand not in need of any thing. This deadness, ^uel. 3. 17
this unfeeling numnesse, it is a plain foreteller of death: for example, if a
man have taken a grievous wound in his body, if it ache, if it prick and
shoot, if it pain him, either it is healing, or else there is hope to heal
it: but (as Saint Augustine says) Quod non dolet, non pro August.
sano, sed pro mortuo computandum, if the wound be such, that it never causes
grief, if it never ache nor smart, undoubtedly it is dead flesh, of necessity
it must be cut off.

To commit actual and presumptuous sins, when a man's own knowledge and Gods
spirit cries in him to the contrary, these are wounds and grievous wounds
unto the soul, and whosoever has gone on so far, that he does delight in
these sins, so often, so long, that his mind is never troubled, his thoughts
never checked, his soul never grieved, surely such a one (being utterly past
feeling) is very near to this fearful estate of hardening.

Thus have I showed how, and after what sort men become Hardened, not of my
self, but as S. Augustine says: Ligatus teneor non ferro alieno; sed
meaferrea voluntate: velle meum tenebat inimicus, et inde mihi funes fecerat,
et consuetudini, dum non resistitur, fact a est necessitas. A man becomes
hardened, he is fettered, not by any other chain, but by the cords of his
own sin, the devil by deceit gets power over the will, and so does snare
us, and because in the beginning we did not resist custom, at length it
grows to necessity. This is the very same in effect setdown by Saint Paul in
the 4. to the Ephesians 18. where this manner of Hardening is also expressed.
first (...), the mind is darkened, they cannot rightly discern what to do,
then, (...), they become ignorant, thirdly, comes in (...), when the soul (for
want of heavenly dew) begins to wither and harden, fourthly (...) past
feeling, and lastly given over to commit all sin with greediness.

Most woeful to be hardened.
NOw, what a grievous and lamentable estate is it to be hardened, let it please
you with patience to observe a while and you shall briefly understand. The
comfort of man's life in this world, it consists in the enjoying, either of
temporal or spiritual blessings. But the strong man having once got
possession, when a man is fallen away from grace, and his heart Hardened* how
fearful, how mournful a case it is? it may manifestly appear in this; for
that such men, they can have no true joy of temporal things in this world, nor
any true comfort of the sweet graces in the life to come.

First concerning spiritual blessings: There is nothing more cheerful unto
man, then the knowledge of his mind, nothing more excellent in him then the
light of his understanding. This knowledge, this light of nature, this
understanding and judgment is utterly extinguished. Suffocatur naturae lumen,
cum ad huius abissi ingressum Cal^*
accedimus: the light of nature is choked, when they once enter into this gulf
of Hardening.

In man there is a threefold light. The light of the body which is the Eye, the
light of the mind which is Reason, and Faith the light of the soul, Ephesians. 1, 1^
1 Cor. 4. ^
by which we discern things that are not seen. In the obstinate their bodily
eye is full of adultery, and cannot cease to sin. 2. Pet. 2. 14. 2. Pe. 2. ^


The light of Reason, which is the law of nature is extinguished. Romans 1. 28.
Lastly Faith, which is Romans 1. 2
the light of the soul is wholly blinded, for such cannot see to take hold of
the mercies of God, nor to apprehend his comfortable promises. Ebre. 4. 2. Now
if the Eye, which is the light Ebr. 4. 2.
of the body. if Reason, which is the light of the mind, if Faith which is the
light of the soul be dimmed: If all that light which should be in us, be
darkness. Iustissima poena, vt qui sciens Aug. de. li (...) be. arbit. lib. 3.
rectum non facit, amittat scire quod rectum: (says Saint Augustine*) it is a
punishment that he (who knowing) does not well, at length should loose the
knowledge of well doing* so is it with the Hardened (as Job. says) The light of
the ungodly Job. 18. ^
shall be darkened, and the wicked shall become blind Zeph. 1. 1
because they have sinned against the Lord.

The judgment of the mind being thus perverted, and Faith, which in all
storms and temptations should guide the stern being overthrown, there
fellows a general shipwreck of conscience.

The word of God, is said to be sharper then a ^br. 4. 12.
two edged sword, it pierces the very sinews and marrow, it divides the
soul and spirit asunder: how wonderful it is in operation, how mighty to
convince our thoughts, how powerful to quicken the soul; how comfortable to
strengthen our faith; I doubt not but most here, to their endless comfort, do
effectually know. This word, this mighty word, which for the piercing operation
is resembled to fire able to soften iron, this word it cannot mollify the
hardened. But as the bright beams of Sun do harden clay, and soften wax:
and as the sweet drops of rain do mollify earth and harden sand: so the
heavenly and eternal word returns not in vain, but (by reason of different
disposition in the subject) it illuminateth, it melts the rightous, it
obdurates and Hardens the wicked, their Esaias. 6. 9.
hearts being fat, their eyes heavy, and their ears shut, they shall hear
indeed, but shall not understand, they shall see and not perceive.

Where the word of God cannot prevail there can be no repentance. It is true.
The scripture says, at what time soever a sinner does repent Eze. 1^
him of his sin, from the bottom of his heart. God will put all his wickedness out
off his remembrance. Thereupon many take their pleasure and glut themselves in
sin, and at last they think to make all good by repentance. Indeed it is true,
if they can repent: but they must observe what S. August. says, Qui promittit
paenitenti veniam, non promittit peccanti paenite^tiam. God, who promises unto
every one Aug.
that repe^teth forgiveness, does not promise unto every one that sins
repentance. Repentance is the gift of god, and such as are hardened, because in
times past they despised the riches of his bounty and grace, his long suffering
and mercy, that did call them to repentance, when they would they cannot repent.
To. 2. 5. after hardness, the heart it cannot repent. If there can be no
repentance: then lamentation and tears are bootlesse. Tears, they are the
blood of the soul, and the Wine of Angels, most Bern.
pleasing and acceptable in the sight of God. Yet the hardened, though they
should wash themselves in their own tears, it will not prevail. Nihil
prosu^t lamenta, si replicantur peccata: tears are not accepted, where sins
are still and again double. Ebr. 12. 17. Esau found no place to repentance
Ebr. 12. 1^
though he sought the blessing with tears.

The holy and blessed Sacraments now presently to be administered, are Pledges
of Gods love, and Seals of our salvation. By Baptism he breaks the Romans 4. 1^
heads of the Dragons in the Waters: et per Baptismum coeli ianua aperitur. And
by baptism even the door of heaven is set open. The sacrament of the Lords
supper, it is canalis gratiae, et lauacru^ animae, (...) l. 74. 14
the coduit of grace, and the bath of the soul. What can be more joyful, then
by receiving the sign of the cross, to fight under the banner of Chirsts
love, and to be knit into the mystical body of his saints? what can be more
joyful then to receive that pure and princely blood, the least drop whereof
being able to redeem a thousand worlds, I may rest assured it is a full and
perfect satisfaction for all my sins? so that if my body has sinned, his
body has made ame^ds, if my soul have sinned, his soul has made recompense:
and therefore both soul and body are his, and so we firmly and fully settled in
a Christian joy for ever.

These holy and heavenly Sacraments are not effectual in the obstinate. Judas
notwithstanding he was a disciple of our Savior, and that blessed hand (which
after for his sake was nailed on the Cross) did reach him the bread of life:
yet he was so hardened with secret sin, and a traiterous disposition: that as
soon as he received the sop, the deuilentred into him, took full possession
(...) h. 13. 27.
of him, and so brought him to a most fearful end. Prayer, what maruailous
things it has brought to pass? and indeed what greater comfort can there be
to a distressed mind, then to open our grief, to pour out our complaints,
and ease our wounded hearts, by making our moan unto God, by faithful and
humble prayer: yet in those that are Hardenedned, prayers of themselves are
frutelesse. Ioh. 9. 31. God hears not the prayer of sinners: that is, of such
as retain a will to sin. David says, He that enclineth his heart unto
wickedness, Psa. 6^
God will not hear his prayers.

To hope in the prayer of others, that also is in vain. Ier. 7. 16. Because
you have done these things, and I spoke unto you, and you would not hear,
therefore Ier. 7. 1^ 11. 14*
thou shall not pray for this people, nor lift up, cry, nor entreat me, for I
will not hear: Though Noe and Job, should entreat me, though Moses and Samuel
should pray unto me, yet will I not hear neither be entreated. In the 15. of
the Prou. and 15. it is said a good conscience is a continual feast.
Assuredly, if a man have all earthly blessings, which his heart can desire, if
he wax never so warm and wealthy, yet if he be at war with himself, if he
be stung with the guilt of his own thoughts, what comfort, what joy can he
have?

The spirit of a man may bear his sickness, or infirmity, Pro. 18. ^
but a wounded conscience who is able to endure? Contrariwise, peace with God,
peace of conscience, and quiet rest of soul, it is the greatest comfort that
man can enjoy upon earth. S. Augustine calls it. The beautiful Temple of
Solomon, the garden of Paradise, the golden bed of rest, the joy of the
Angels, the treasure of the great King, the mercy seat of the Cherubins, and
the tabernacle of the holy Ghost. This peace the Hardened can never be
partakers of. Their grief is doubled with mourning, (...). 11. 10.
and remembering things past: and it is plainly said, There is no peace unto
the wicked.

Hope is the treasury of all spiritual and heavenly (...). 48. 22.
blessings, in all wants and miseries, it is the safe and sure anchor of the
Soul. For by hope we are saved: but the hope of the ungodly is like the dust
blown away with the wind. They forecast unto (...)s. 17. 10.
themselves cruel things, and their thoughts are like the flights of a bloody
and vanquished field, where al hope and comfort lies slain.

Now when the soul thus affected, is not at peace with God, but given over to
sin, remains in the state of Condemnation, all temporal blessings, which are
comforts to Gods children, they do increase our condemnation.

Riches (weeknow) are the good blessings of God. but, to such as have no sin
in their conscience: otherwise, as Job says in his 15, Chap. 27. If his face
be so covered with fat, and that he has such collups in his flancks, that in
abundance and prosperity he forgets God, Dat legitimum, sed non sanctum vsum,
he gives a lawful and outward, but not a sanctified use.

Sleep is sweet unto every man: but a mind secretly wounded with sin, is
afflicted with fearful (...) is. 12. 13
dreams and visions in the night. The wicked that have lived a dissolute life,
they are tormented with their own imaginations, as Job says, The terrors of
God do fight against them.

Mirth and Cheerefulnes, the wise man says: they are the rejoicing of the
heart, and prolonging of the life* Job 14. 22. The sinner while his flesh is
upon him, he shall be sorrowful, while the soul is in him, he shall not cease
to mourn: Proverbs 14. 13. Even in laughing the heart is sorrowful, and the
end of that man's mirth is heaviness.

Now, if the estate of the Hardened be such, that the light of the mind and
soul be wholly darkened, if the word of God cannot pierce the^ if having made
shipwreck of conscience, their heart it cannot repent, and so neither
Sacraments, nor tears be available. If their own Prayers cannot be heard, and
others are forbid to pray for them: if their sleep be fearful, theirlaughing
inwardly mournful, their riches cursings, their hope utterly forlorn, and
they can never enjoy any peace of conscience or quiet rest of soul, judge you,
whether it had not bin better such a man had not been borne, or being borne
had presently bin flung into the bottom of the sea, and drowned in everlasting
forgetfulness. For (alas) when God is become our enemy, who is able to enter
into co^bat, to match with the wrath of the Lord of hosts? when a man's ownhart
does condemn him, who is able to put to silence the voice of desperation? Oh
happy is he that sins least, next he that returns soonest, but most
dreadful is the estate of him, who like Pharao is given over unto Hardening.
For he that is once come to this pass that as Jeroboam, he has sold himself
to commit sin, his mind reprobate, his conseience seared, and (...). 1. 28.
his soul frozen in the dregs of sin, then though (...) im. 4. 2
he weep and lament with Esau, though he would (...) h. 1. 12
restore that which he has wrongfully gotten with Judas, though he do gird
himself in sackcloth, and walk softly as Ahab, though he do pull the men of
God to comfort him, and pray for him as Saul did; though he do mourn like a
Dove, and chatter like a crane, with the Pellica^, though he do send forth
shril and fearful cries into the air, yet all this will not help, (woe alas)
there is no recovery, Ier 13. 23. Can the black-More (...). 13. 23.
change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, then may they do good, who have
accustomed themselves to do euilt? (...). He that (...)st. eth 7 ^. 7.
hardens his heart can never be cured. Habituati (...)s. 12. 10
in malo sunt impaenituri, their thoughts can never (...) l. 17. 14
be altered: their stony hearts cannot become fleshy, they (...) b. 10. 26
have denied the power of salvation, they have despited (...) b. 12. 17
the spirit of grace, and though they seek the blessing with tears, they can
find no place to repentance. This is a lamentable estate, this is a fearful
judgment, for man to be left unto himself, given up to Satan, and to be
forsaken of God for ever, from this estate the Lord for his endless mercy
deliver us.

The Remedy.
TO eschew this gulf, and to avoid the danger of this Hardening, either we
must cut off and stay the course of sin in the act, or else we must resist it
in the beginning, and stay it in our thoughts. It is an excellent saying of S.
Ierom. Ibi maxim oportet obseruare peccatum, vbi nasci solet: both in sin, and
also in curing the diseases of the body, it is the chiefest point, to observe
and find out where the malady first took beginning. It is plain, sin first
buddeth in the thought, and thereupon S. Jerome calls it primo genita Diaboli,
the Devils darling or first begotten. Satan dare not attempt any unto murder,
treason, or any such grievous sin; unless he send an evil thought before, to
try whether he shall be welcome.

The Philistines will not venture, till Dalilah has wrought the feat: as she
with Sampson never left fawning, and creeping into his bosom, til by
co^senting unto her; he lost both his strength, and his eyes, and became a
mil-horse for the Philistines: so il thoughts allure and toll on, so long, til
the light of the understanding being blinded, satan, that foul Philistine sets
them such a grist to grind as they must pay the loss of eternal life for the
toll.

The Philosopher said truly (...), custom arises of very small beginnings,
and though it seem a small matter to lend the devil an evil thought, yet the
wise man says in the 13. of Wis. Evil thoughts separate from (...) rd.
God: cogitationes malae, dum ludunt illudunt: evil thoughts, while they
dally, they do deceive. As the stream in the river Jordan does carry the fish
(...) hus.
swimming and playing, til on a sudden they fall in mare mortuum into the dead
sea; where, by reason of brimstone they presently die. so, many suffer
themselves to be carried away so long with vicious thoughts, and wicked
imaginations, that on a sudden, the powers of the mind be grievously infected.
The eye is fenestra mentis, and many times (...) 9. 21.
ere ever we be aware, death steals in at the window. The ear, Job calls
it in his 12. Chap. the taster of the soul: As the mouth tastes meat for 12.
11.
the belly: so the ear tastes words for the soul. He that has a wicked eye,
and an unchaste ear (as S. Peter says of Simon Magus) his soul will soon
(...) um (...) guae (...) pe(...) um.
be brought to the gall of bitterness. Therefore, wise men may hereby judge,
how carefully, how prouide^tly the educatio^ of youth (especially of the nobler
sort) ought to be respected. How flattering parasits and profane iesters ought
to (...) ld this (...) true(...) nside(...)
be warily shuned. Alas, the mind and disposition of youth, at the first, it is
like a sweet and brightsiluer dish you may put in what you please: but if
through vile Atheists, and dissolute company, the affection be once led away,
and the disposition infected, woe worth that company, for the infectio^ of Job.
36. (...)
sin taken in tender years: Job says, The soul dies in youth: as cloth
stained in the wool, does never lose the color, so the stain of sin taken in
tender years will hardly or never be taken out: nay, that which afterward,
discretion and years does know and judge in it self most hateful, (...)
Chrisost.
. By evil custom, he is enforced to put the same in practice whether he will
or no. In the 9. of Mark. ^1. ver. the foul spirit which kept possession from
a child, could not be cast out by any other but only by our Savior. Job made
a covenant with his heart, and David prayed the lord to turn away his eyes
from beholding vanity. Every good man ought to labor and strive with himself,
to quench his desires, to check his thoughts, to beat down and keep under his
affections, that though he do sin sometimes of infirmity, yet it may never
generally infect the mind: it may never be settled in the thought. There is no
sacrifice more acceptable unto God, then the nipping of a serpe^ts head:
therefore, as David speaks, or the children of Babylon, adpetras illidere; to
dash their brains Psalm. 137. 9
against the wall, while they are young: so the best way to prevent Hardening,
is to nip sin in the head at the first, to kill the strength of it in our
thoughts.

Now if God do not so strengthen us to overcome sin in the thought, the next
way to shun this Hardening is to stay the course of it in the act. For God
will wound the heary scalpe of such, as go (...) l. 68. 22*
on still in their wickedness. Paruus error in principio maximus est in fine, A
small escape in the beginning many times proves a mischief in the end.
Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati. The custom of sin takes away all
feeling of sin, as he that is stung with a viper, is so deadly benu^med, that
he feels the sting of nothing else: so he that has taken a custom of
offe^ding, never feels the infectio^ of any sin, though it rancle never so
grievously. In the 69. Ps. 16. ver. David prays, O let not the pitshut her
mouth vpo^me, To sin is to fall into a pit, but to take a custom in sin, is to
cover the pit and da^ it up, that we shall never get out again. Co^suetudine^
vincere dura pugna (says August) (...) ag. in sal. 36.
It is a difficult fight to overcome custom* for in all humane things (...),
custom is the mostintollerable tirant. Horatius the Roman* being to fight
with 3. enemies at once, did single them out, and then slew the^ one by one: so
the force of sin is to be cut off in every several actio^ (...) to. 28. 26
least by gathering strength it ourthrow us. He that trusts his own heart is
not wise. In this case it is good for a man ^o suspect his own heart, to call
his own way to remembrance, to take sometimes a survey and a view of the manner
of his life, and daily actions, and if he find in himself, that God has
suffered him so far to be tempted: that he is fallen into any foul offense,
which he knowethis directly both against God, and his own conscience, then
presently to bestir himself, never to suffer his eyes to sleep, nor his
eie-lids to slu^ber, til he have poured out his heart unto God, made bitter
lamentation; craved pardon with repentance, and vowed by Gods assistance never
to offend in any such sort again. Otherwise, if lightly he pass it over, and
so go on: as Mithridates accustomed his body so much to the receipt of poison,
that at length no poison would work on him, so he that has once taken in with
the custom of sin, shall at length come to that pass, that the greatest sin
that Aug. in se (...) 4* ^n adu. Dom.
is, he shall never feel it. Omne peccatu^ vilescit co^suetudine, et sit
homini quasinullu^, the greatest sin by custom comes to be accounted nothing.
When the body is sore hurt and wounded, there is no driving of time, but
presently it must be looked to: so when the soul is wounded, we must not defer
to turn unto the Lord, but fly to him with importunate prayer, with a broken
and mourning heart, for fear the wound do fester inwardly, and so there be no
recovery. I make it plain by example thus. If a ma^take in the spring 3. or 4.
plants, and set them al together at one time, if he come by and by, or within a
while after, he may easily pull up one of them: if he stay a fortnight, or a
month, he may pull up an other, but it will be somewhat harder, if he stay a
year or two, till it settle and take root, then he may pull and strain his
very heart strings, but his labor is lost, he shall never be able to pull it
up. One sin, one offense, if we labor to pull it up in time, it may be
forgiven, it may be taken away; if we let it go on to two or three, with
unfeigned repentance, with bleeding tears, with incessant outcryes unto a
gracious God, they may be rased out and wiped away, but with greater
difficulty: at length, if a man give over himself unto sin, so that it take
deep root in the heart, and be settled in the soul, he shall never be able
to pull it up, nor to arise from the death of sin.

Application.
TO draw then to an end: forasmuch as God desires not the death of any sinner,
but most lovingly offers his grace and means of salvation unto all: seeing
sin does proced from our own vile concupiscence, and we never striving to
stay the course of it in our thoughts, do secretly fall away: seeing by
degrees, against their own knowledge, men do wound their souls with many
actual sins, and thereupon God does withhold his grace, and so forsake them;
and this forsaking is such a forlorn estate, that as Job says: 12. 14. God
shuts a man up, and he can never be loosed: O how fervent ought we to be in
prayer, thereby to kindle in us, the heat of Gods spirit? how devout in sweet
and heavenly meditations, to stir up in us the good graces of God? how diligent
to show the fruits of our faith, ever stirring in the works and labors of
our calling; giving no advantage to our adversary? how careful, when we hear
the word of God, to do it with a humble spirit, with great reverence? thereby to
keep a tender heart, a mind and cogitation that may easily be touched with
remorse: how desirous and secretly joyful at this holy time to prepare our
selves to the receiving of the blessed sacraments, to have our hearts stripped
off worldly vanities, to call home our affections, to appease our thoughts, and
so peaceably to bath our souls afresh in the precious blood of our everlasting
redeemer. That so feeling our selves as it were newely created again, soul
and body, heart, hand and tongue, may never cease to sound praises unto him,
who does never cease to renew his mercies unto us.

The holy and kingly Prophet David, he is a worthy example for this roial
presence, set him before your eyes, and observe the whole course of his life
How sweet and mild was his spirit in forbearing to take revenge for himself?
how courageous and invincible his faith, when it stood in the quarrel of gods
honor? how dearly affected to his people, when he said to the destroying
Angel, not these sheep, but it is I that have offended? what melting and kind
affection did he show toward Jonathan, and those who^ he loved? what a
mournful and repenta^t heart, when he knew that he had offended? how full of
divine meditations to better his thoughts? how frequent in prayer, falling from
him as a continual stream? how joyful in Gods service, dancing before the
Ark? how reverend in Gods house kneeling and bowing in the temple before all the
people? what a thankful heart in offering to build a glorious temple to the
Lord? what an humble mind saying, what am I, and what was my fathers house,
that thou have brought us hitherto? what a chary and tender care of Gods glory,
whersoeuer he became? how abundant in praises and thanksgiving, calling every
member of himself, and all the creatures both of heaven and earth to make one
quire in setting forth, singing, and sounding the everlasting praises of his
God? But why did David thus? to what end was all this? that he might be sure
still to hold fast by God, to be entirely knit unto him, by all means possible to
retain his love, for fear least God having raised him to the height of
renown delivered him miraculously out off many eminent and bloody dangers, and
so set a crown of blessings upon his head: if David should have shown any
unthankfulness, any contempt, or the least neglect of his love, a mighty and
ielous god, he also, upon just cause might have withdrawn his love, and laid
al his honor in the dust again.

Now therefore, with all humbleness and duty, I entreat you, by the tender
mercies of Christ Jesus, and in the name of the living God I challenge every
christian which hopes for any joy in the life to come, take heed of actual and
presumptuous sins, in no case let them have dominion over you, Psalm. 19. 1
do not wou^d your souls as Pharao did, with wilful offenses against your own
knowledge try and examine all your thoughts, how and wherein they stand
affected, and above al grieve not the blessed motions of that comfortable
spirit, which keeps the very Life and Being of the soul. To conclude, let al
slanderous mouths be stopped, and all the factious scismatiques in the land
ashamed, in beholding your christian and Princely example: continue still to be
lovingly and kindly affected one toward another: celebrate this holy time in a
true religious manner. Sanctify the joyful beginning of this new years rain
with new devotion unto God: lay all your Honors down at the foot of the
altar: receive the holy Sacraments jointly together, and so be faithfully knit
in love and in one head Christ Jesus: go cheerfully on, delight still in doing
good: and the Lord God of our Fathers increase in you good desires, give you
zeal to perform them, confirm unto you, and to your seed, all his good
promises, and unto every one of us here grant pardon for offenses past, give
us comfort and strength in temptations to come, change all our lives more and
more to a better course, even for his blessed Son Christ Jesus sake: who with
the Father and the holy Ghost, be blessed and praised for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

