* The Fabulous tales of Esope the Phrygian, Compiled most eloquently in
Scottishe Meter by Master Robert Henrison, and now lately Englished.

Every tale Moralized most aptly to this present time, worthy to be read.

PATET OCCVLTA VERITAS TEMPORE

Imprinted at London by Richard Smith. Anno. 1577.

The books pasport.
THat man near wrote
whose write pleased all men's mind,
Nor I as now
think no such place to find:
For fyndfault he
him self that no good can,
By slanderous tongue,
does hinder many a man,
Which else would write
to many a ones content:
(But Bayard I)
cares not for being shent.
Go therefore book,
to each man's eye to vewe:
To wise and sad,
and all the carping crewe.
The wysest sort,
will well accept my skill:
Sir Momus mates,
takes all good things as ill.
And he that likes not
this as I do say:
Here is the door
and there forth right the way.
FINIS.
To his worshipful and especial good friend Master Richard Stoneley Esquire
one of the four tellers of the Q. Majesty's receyt of the Eschecker, and
Receiver of the first fruits and tenthes to her Majesty. R. S. wishes
increase of Worship to the glory of God.
Worshipful Sir, calling to my mind, that great good will that you have borne
unto me and mine, since the time of my first acquaintance with you: except I
should be to forgetful and ungrateful, I must remember you, and be as
thankful, as my poor ability will serve. But the woorme of good will still
gnawing my mind thereto at last, all dainty meats and viandes set aside,
which are common remembrances, yet vain and soon forgotte, but while they are
a eating. There came unto my hand a Scottishe Pamphlet, of the Fabulous Tales
of Esope, a work, sir as I think, in that language wherein it was written,
very eloquent and full of great invention. And no doubt you shall find some
smatch thereof, although very rudely I have obscured the Author, and having
two years since turned it into English, I have kept it vnpublished, hoping
some else of greater skill would not have let it lain dead. But whether most men
have that nation in derision for their hollow hearts and ungrateful minds to
this country always had (a people very subject to that infection) or
thinking scorn of the Author or first inuenter, let it pass, as frivolous
and vain matter: yet in my conceit there is learning for all sorts of people
worthy the memory. Therefore knowing not how by any means to let you
understand my good will toward you, but by this means, at last putting all
fear aside, I boldly present this unto your worship, hoping that at vacant
time when other matters of great importance be laid aside, that you will not
deine to recreate your mind with this trifle, where you shall find doctrine
both pleasant and profitable, and hoping as often as you look on this book you
will think on me, accept this poor Persian water or Jews mite, which in so
doing I care not for all the scoffers and taunters, which will do naught
themselves nor suffer others to do that may pleasure or profit the posterity.
I crave of God to increase you with worldly Worship to his pleasure.

Yours at commandment Richard Smith.

The argument between Esope and the Translatour.
LAte passing through Paul's Churchyard,
aside I cast mine eye,
And ere I wist, to me appearde
Sir Esope by and by,
Apparelled both brave and fine,
after the Scottish guise,
I stood then still with ardent eyne,
I viewde him twice or thrice.
Behold quoth he, now am I here,
and feign would meet some one,
To speak English that would me leare.
with that quoth I anon:
Why English Sir, you speak right well,
what more would you require?
Yea that's in prose: my tales to tell
in verse I do desire.
Alas I am not for your turn,
ye must repair unto
The Innes of Court and Chauncery,
where learned have to do.
At Helicon I never came,
the way I do not know,
(God Pan his servant sir I am,
and duty to him owe.)
On oaten pipe we still do play,
that's all that he teach can,
Of other lore he takes no way
this Growtnole rusticke Pan.
Mineruas impes they Orpheus keep,
in Music they delight,
To serve your turn before they sleep,
in verse to make you dite,
Your Fables wise and eloquent,
with phrases feate and fine,
Endewed with Apollo gent,
that passes Muse of mine.
Content your self quoth Esope than,
do thus much once for me,
To learn me verse so as ye can,
my self as plain as ye.
They do not care for Scottish books,
they list not look that way:
But if they would but cast their looks,
some time when they do play,
Somewhat to see perhaps they might,
that then would like them well,
To teach them tread their way aright,
to bliss, from pains of hell.
Farewell good Phrygian Poet now,
I may no more soiourne,
(If not says Esope) then adieu,
Int Scotland I Will return.
Nay rather will I venture hard
and bring your mind to pass,
If that I gain to my reward
King Midas ears of Ass,
And have a thousand ill reports
still tumbling down on me,
Than this to want unto all sorts
and view of every eye.
Therefore have here good reader now,
my rural skillesse skill,
I ask no more but this of you,
one ynche of your good will,
Which it to grant as I do crave,
that's even as much as I would have.
ORpheus once did walk abroad,
mong fragrant flowers tencreace his glet,
To set his harp in one accord,
in tune to make his strings agree,
Whereby was heard such pleasant sound,
that all the woods thereof rebound.
And playing thus in pleasant shade,
wild beasts and men to him did come:
With music strayte them stones he made,
his gift was such, them to transform:
He fell a sleep, and or he wooke,
in hand a while his harp I took.
This Scottish Orpheus I mean,
that Esops tales has made to gree
In Rethoricke both trim and clean,
that all my wits bereft has he:
His harp alas I make to jar,
and both his name and mine do mar.
But since I made them disagree,
leave me the blame the Laurel he.
FINIS.
* The Contents of the Book.
1 THe tale of the grossehead Chauntclere the cock, and the precious stone:
wherein is showed the wanton lives of Lascivious maids, with the little care we
have of the precious gifts of God. Fol. 3 2 The tale of the plain country
mouse and dainty town mouse, wherein is displayed our dainty citizens wives,
which can keep them selves in no mediocritie. Fol. 7 3 A pleasant tale of the
Cock and the Fox, how wily beguiles himself, wherein is to be seen the life
of the crafty circumucritours of the simple men, and yet some time how they
meet with their match. Fol. 16 4 The pleasant tale how this false dissembling
Tod made his confession to the hypocrite friar, Wolf wayt skath, that shows
the great hypocrisy of the Popish prelacie. Fol. 24 5 The Rhetorical tale of
the son and heir of the foresaid Tod or Fox, called father wars, also the
parliament of beasts holden by the Lion, which she weth our duty at all
assemblies commanded by our Prince or superiors, and how we ought to behave
our selves. 31 6 The woeful tale of the plaintiff dog, against the poor
sheep before Justice Wolf, notably showing the abuses of such Courts where
money and might makes the poor to beg. Fol. 44 A tale of the Lion and the
Mouse, with the authors prologue before, showing what reverence we owe to our
Princes person, yea though he be dead, and how we ought to venture our lives
to do them good. 51 8 The notable tale of the preaching of the Swallowe,
containing the office of a preacher and how they ought to warn us of Satan
his trappes, lest we be catched in his net. Fol. 62 9 The merry tale of the
Wolf that said would have had the neckeherring or Samon, through the wyles of
the Fox that beguiled the carrier, and of their hard adventures. Fol. 73 10
The excellent tale of the wily Laurence Fox that beguiled the covetous crafty
Wolf, where is showed deep dissembling frie^dship, and how briberie bears
sway. 86 11 The merry tale of the Wolf and the Weather, where is painted out
the lusty bloods, come up of low degree by unlawful means, and apparclling
them selves in their bravery, will give no place to their betters. 94 12 The
woeful tale of the cruel Wolf and the innocent Lamb, laying before our sight
the blood thirsty tyra^ts and oppressors of poor helples men. Fol. 101 13
The tale of the woeful end of the Paddocke and the Mouse, showing the well
deserved end of the holowe hearted dissemblers, and how God in the end does
requite them. Fol. 107


Lastly the translators Epilogue, showing that in a deformed creature God may
and will set forth his glory.

The Argument or Prologue.
THough feigned Fables of ancient poetry,
Be not all grounded upon truth (what than)
Their politic terms in sweet Rethory
Right pleasant are unto the ear of man,
And eke the cause that they first began,
Was to reprove the hole misliuing,
(Of man) by figure of some other thing.
In like manner thorough the boisterous earth,
(So it be labored with great diligence)
Springs flowers and corn to our great mirth,
Wholesome and good to man's sustenaunce.
So does spring, some moral sweet sentence,
Out of the subtle dyte of Poetry:
To good purpose, who can it well apply.
The nuttes shell though it be hard and tough,
Holds the kernel which is most delectable.
(So lies their doctrine wise enough,
And full of fruit, under a feigned fable.)
And wise men says, it is right profitable,
Amongs ernest, to mingle merry sport,
To recreat the spryte, and make the time be short.
Further, the bow that is ay bent,
Seems vnsmart and dui on the string,
So does the mind that is ay diligent,
In earnest thoughts and great studying,
With sad matters some myrrinesse to ming.
Accords well thus Esope said iwis,
Dulcius arrident s^ria picta locis.
Of this aucthor my masters with your leave,
Submitting me to your correction:
In mother tongue, out of Latin to prove
To make some manner of translation,
Naught of my self, for vain presumption,
But by request, and precept of a Lord,
Of whom the name I need not record.
In homely language and in terms rude,
I needs must write: for why of Eloquence,
Nor Rethorike, I never understood.
Therefore meekely I pray your reverence,
If that ye find through my negligence,
To be lacking, or else superfluous,
Correct it at your wills gracious.
My Aucthor in his Fables tells how
That brutall beasts spoke and understood,
And to good purpose dispute and argue.
And sillogisme propone and eke conclude,
Put in example, and in similitude,
How many men in operation,
Are like to beasts in condition.
No marvel then, though man be like a beast,
Which loves ay carnal and foul delight,
That shame cannot him pluck back nor artest,
But takes all his lust and appetite,
And that through custom and daily ryte,
Sin in their minds is so fast rooted,
That they into brutall beasts are transformed.
This noble clerk Esope, as I have told,
With great invention, as poet Laureate,
By figure wrote his book: for he naught would
Lack the disdain of hie, nor low estate.
And to begin, first of a Cock he wrate,
Seeking his meat, which fond a precious stone,
Of whom the Fable ye shall hear anon.
FINIS.
The tale of the Grosehead chaunteleare the Cock, and precious Stone.
A Cock sometime with feathers fresh and gay
Right cant and crows, albeit he was but poor,
Flew forth on dunghill early on a day,
To get his dinner, set was all his cure.
Scraping the mucke, there by adventure,
He found a Jasper stone, right precious,
Was casten forth by sweeping of the house.
As damsels wanton and insolent,
That feign would play, and on the street be seen,
To sweeping of the house they take no tent
They care nothing so the floor be cleene,
Jewels are lost, as sometime has been seen
Upon the floor, and so swept forth anon,
Peradventure so was this precious stone.
So marueling upon this stone (quoth he)
O gentle Iasp: O ritche and noble thing,
Though I thee find, yet art thou not for me,
Thou art a Jewel for a Lord or King.
Pity it were thou should lie in this midding,
Be buried this amongs this mucke and mold
And thou so fair and worth so mutch gold.
It is pity I should thee find, for why?
Thy great virtue nor yet thy color clear,
It may me another extol, nor magnify:
And thou to me may make but little cheer,
To great Lords though thou be lief and dear,
I love far better things of less avail
As draf or Corn to fill my tuine intrayle.
I had lever go scrape here with my nails,
Amongs this muck and look my lives food,
As draf, or corn, small worms, or snayles,
Or any meat would do my stomach good:
Than of Jasper stones a mighty multitude.
And thou again upon the same wise,
For less avail thou may me now despise.
Thou have no corn: and thereof have I need,
Thy color does but comfort to the sight.
And that is not enough my womb to feed,
(For the wise says) loking things are light.
I would have some meat, get it if I might.
For hungry men may not live on looks:
Had I dry bread, I count not for no cooks.
Where should thou make thy habitation?
Where should thou dwell but in a royal toure?
Where should thou sit but on a kings corone,
Exalted in worship and in great honor?
Rise gentell Iasp, of all stones the flower,
Out of this dunghill and pass where thou should be
Thou cares not for me, nor I for thee.
Leuing this Jewel lo upon the ground,
To seek his meat this Cock his ways went,
But when or how, or by whom it was found,
As now I set to hold no argument.
But of the inward sentence, and intent:
Of this (as mine Author here does wright)
I shall rehearse in rude and homely dite.
This precious Iasp, had properties seven,
The first, of color it was marvelous:
Part like the fire, and part like the heaven,
It makes a man stout and victorious,
Preserues also, from chances perilous.
Who has this stone, shall have good hap to speed,
Nor fire, nor water, he needs not to dred.
The Moral.
THis gentle Iasp right different of hue
Betokenith perfect prudence and cunning,
Ornate with many deeds of virtue,
More excellent, than any earthly thing
Which makes men in honor for to ring,
Happy and stout to win the victory,
Of all vices and spiritual enmity.
Who may be hardy, rich, and gracious?
Who can eschew peril and adventure?
Who can govern a Realm, City or House,
Without science, no man I you assure?
It is riches, that ever shall endure,
Which mothe, nor moist, nor other rust can freat,
To man's soul it is eternal meat.
This Cock desires more the simple corn,
Than any Iaspe, (may till a fool be peer)
Which at science makes a mock or scorn,
And no good can, as little will he leare:
His heart wambles wise argument to hear,
As does a Sow, to whom men for the nones,
Into her draffe would throw some precious stones.
Who is enemy to science and cunning,
But ignorance that understands naught?
Which is so noble, so precious and so digne,
That it may not with earthly thing be bought:
Well were that man of all other that might
All his life days in perfect study spend,
To get Science, to keep him till his end.
But now (alas) that stone is lost and hide,
We seek it not, nor prease it not to find,
Have we riches, no better life we bide:
Of Science though the soul be bare and blind,
Of this matter to speak, it were but wind.
Therefore I cease, and will no further say,
(Go seek the Iasp, who will, for there it lay).
The pretty tale of the plain country Mouse, and deyntie town Mouse.
ESope mine Author makes mention
Of two myse, and they were sisters dear,
Of whom theldest dwelt in a City or Town:
The other dwelte in the country there near,
Solitary under bushe, sometime under bryer:
Now in the corn, now in other men's food,
As thieves do, that live by others good.
This rural Mouse, in the winter tide
Had hunger, and cold, and also great distress,
The other Mouse that in the town can bide,
Was a sworn brother and made a free Burges,
And had all things toll free, by custom more or less,
And freedom had to go where ever she list,
Amongs the cheese in rack, and meal in chist.
One time when she was full, and longed sore,
It came in mind, her sister for to see,
And where she dwelt, and how her life she bore,
And how she farde, under the root of tree:
Bare foot alone, with staff so goes she.
As poor pilgrim, she passes out of town,
To seek her sister, both ore dale and down.
Forth many crooked ways, can she walk,
Throw moss and moore, throw bank, bush and bryer,
Thus ran she crying, while she came till a balke,
Come forth to me quoth she, mine own sister deart
Cry peep Anis, with that the Mouse could hear,
And knew her voice, as kinswomen will do,
By very kind, and forth she came her to.
The hearty joy (O God) if you had seen,
Between these two sisters, when they met,
And great love was shown them between,
For whiles they laugh, and whiles for joy they wept,
Somwhiles kissing sweet, somwhiles in arms replet
And thus they fare, while soberd was there mood,
So foot for foot, unto the chamber yoode.
As I hard say, hit was a simple one,
Of fog and serve full feebly was made,
A homely thing, over a steadfast stone,
Of which thentrie, was not hie nor broad,
And in they went, withouten more abode,
Without fire or candle, burning bright,
For commonly, such pickers loves no light.
When they wear lodged thus, these silly myce,
The youngest sister into her buttery glyd,
And brought forth nuttes and corn in steed of spice,
If this wear good I ask you here beside,
The town Mouse, promped forth in pride,
And said sister, is this your daily food?
Why not (quoth she) is not this meat right good?
Nay by my soul I take it but in skorne,
Madam (quoth she) ye be the more to blame,
My mother said sister, when we were borne,
That I and ye lay both within on wame,
I keep the rate and custom of my Dame,
And always lives, thus in poverty,
For lands have we none in property.
My fair sister (quoth she) have me excused,
This rude diet and I cannot accord,
To tender meat my stomach is ay used,
For whiles I fare as well as any Lord,
These withered pease, and nuttes or they be board,
Will break my teeth, and make my womb full slender,
Which was before used to meats so tender.
Well well sister, (quoth the country mouse,)
If it please you such things as ye see there,
Both meat and drink, my lodging and house,
Shall Be your own whiles ye remaynen hear.
Ye shall it have with mirth and merry cheer,
And that should make the meases that are rude,
Among friends, right tender and wounders good.
What pleasure is, in feasts delicate,
The which are given with a lowering browe?
A gentle heart is better recreate,
With hearty mind, than set to him a kowe.
A modicum, is more for to allow,
So that good will be caruer at the dease,
Than costly fair and many spiced mease.
For all her good will, and merry exhortation
This Burges mouse had little lust to sing,
But heauyly she cast her brows a down,
For all the daynties that she could her bring:
Yet at the last, she said half in skorning,
Sister this victual, and your royal feast,
May well suffice unto a rural geast.
Let alone this hole, and come now me after,
And I shall to you show by experience,
That my good Friday is better than your Ester,
My dishe lickings, is worth your hole expense,
I have houses more, of great defense,
Of Cat nor trap, iwis I have no dreede:
I grant, quoth she, and on together yeede.
In stubble array through grass and corn:
And under busshes privily can they creep,
Theldest was the guide and went beforne,
The younger to her ways took good keep:
On night they ran, and on the day can sleep,
And early in the morning, ere they blin,
They fand the town, and meryly went in.
Not far fro thence into a fair place,
This Burges brought the^ soon where they should be,
Without God speed, their lodging there they hase,
Into a spence with victall great plenty,
Both cheese and butter upon the shelues hie,
And flesh and fish enough, both fresh and salt,
And sackes full of meal and eke of malt.
After, when they were disposed to dine,
Without grace they wash, and went to meat.
With all courses that Cooks could devise,
As Mutton and Beef laid in chardgers great:
Yea Lords fare thus could they counterfeat,
Except one thing, they drank the water clear,
In steed of wine, but yet they made good cheer.
With face up cast and merry countenance,
The eldest sister spoke unto her gest,
If that she by reason, fond difference
Betwixt that chamber and her sorry nest:
Yea dame (quoth she) how long will this lest?
For evermore I wot, and longer to,
If it be so, ye are at case (quoth shoe).
To all this cheer a banquet forth she brought,
A plate of grotes and a dishe of meal,
Ote cakes also I trow, she spared naught,
Abundantly about her for to deal.
And manfully so, she brought in steed of geill,
A white candle, out of a coffer stale,
In steed of spice to taste their mouths withal.
This made they merry while they might no more,
All hayle all hayle, cried she on hie,
Yet after joy often times comes matter sore,
And trouble after great prosperity:
Thus as they sat in all their iolitie
The spencer comes, with keys in his hand,
Opened the door and them at dinner fande.
They tarried not to wash as I suppose,
But on to go who that might foremost win,
The town mouse had an hole and in she goes,
Her sister had no hole to hide her in,
To see that selly mouse it were great sin
So desolate there and hard bestead,
For very dred she fell in fowne near dead.
But as God would it fell an happy case,
The Spencer had no leisure for to bide,
Another to seek nor search to ^^ere ne chase,
But on he went and left the door up wide?
This bold Burges this passing well has spied,
Out of her hole she came and cried on hie:
How fare ye sister cry peep where ere ye be.
This rural mouse, lay flatling on the ground,
For fear of death she was full sore dredand.
For to her heart struck many woeful sound,
As in a fever she trimbled foot and hand,
And when her sister in such plight her fand,
For very pity she began to weep:
So comforted her with words honey and sweet.
Why lie ye thus rise up my sister dear?
Come to your meat this perrill is or epast,
The other answered her with heavy cheer,
I may not eat, so sore I am aghast,
I had lever this forty days to fast,
With water porrage, and to gnaw beans or pease,
Than all your feast in this dread and desease.
With fair treaty yet she made her rise,
And to the board they went, and together sat,
And scantly had they dronken once or twyse,
When in came Gib hunter, our ioly Cat
And bad Godspeede, the Burges up with that,
And till her hole she went as fire of flint,
But Gilbert the other by the back has hint.
From foot to foot he cast her so with pusshes,
Now up now down, now suffer her to creep
Now would he let her run under the rushes
Now would he wink and play with her bo peep
Thus to the silly mouse he did pains great:
Whiles at the last through fortune and good hap,
Betwixt a board and the wall she crap.
And up in have behind the cloth painted,
She clam so hie that Gilbert might not get her
There by the cludges craftily she hanged,
Till he was gone, her cheer was all the better,
So down she lap when there was none to let her,
And to the Burges mouse loud can she cry,
Fare well fair sister thy feasts here I defy.
Thy feastings are filled all with care,
Thy guyse is good, thend is sower as gall
The subchardge of thy services is fair fare,
So that thou find hereafter ward no fall
I thank you curtains, and you purple wall,
Of my defense, now from you cruel beast,
Almighty God keep me fro such another feast.
Were I into the cabin, that I came fro,
For weal nor woe should I near come again.
With that she took her leave, and forth can go,
Sometimes throw yt corn and sometimes throw ye pla^
When she was forth and free she was full feign:
And merely marched unto the moore,
I cannot tell how there she foore.
But I heard say she passed to her den,
As warm as woll, suppose it was not great,
Full well stuffed at each side and end
With beans, and nuttes, pease, rye, and wheat:
When ever she lust she had enough to cate,
In quiet and rest, without any dread,
But to her sisters feast, no more she yead.
Morality.
Friends, ye may find and ye will take heed,
In this Fable a good Morality:
As fitches mingled are with noble seed,
So intermingled is adversity
With earthly joy, so that no state is free
Without trouble and some vexation,
As namely they which clime up most hie,
That are not content with small possession.
Blessed be the simple life without dread,
Blessed be sober feast in quietie:
Who has enough, of no more has he need,
Though that it be little in quantity:
Great abundance and blind prosperity,
Ofttimes makes an evil conclusion:
The sweetest life therefore in this country,
Is a contented mind with small possession.
O wanton man, that use for to feed
Thy womb and makes it a God to be,
Like to thy self, I warn thee well to dreede,
The Cat comes, and to the mouse hies he,
What auayles than thy feast and royalty,
With dreadful heart and tribulation?
Best thing in earth, therefore I say for me,
Is content in heart, with small possession.
Thine own fire is best my friend; if thou take heed,
It warmes well, and is worth gold to thee:
And Solomon says, if that thou will reed
Under the Heaven there cannot better be,
Then for to be merry, and live in honesty.
Wherefore I may conclude by this reason,
Of earthly joy it is the best degree,
A heart contented with small possession.
FINIS.
The pleasant tale of the Coc^ and the Fox how wyly beguyles him self.
THough brutall beasts be irrational,
That is to say wanting discretion,
Yet every man in their kind natural,
Has many and diverse inclination.
The boystrous Bear, the Wolf, the wild Lion:
The Fox feyning, crafty, and cautelous:
The dog to bark on nights and keep the house.
So different they are in properties,
Unknown to man and so infinite,
In kind having so fell diversities,
My cunning is excluded for to endite.
Of them as now I purpose not to write
A case I fand which fell this other day,
Betwixt a Fox and a Cock full gay.
A wydow dwelt in a cottage many days,
Which ernd her food with spinning on her rock,
And no more had forsooth, as the Fable says,
Except of hens she had a little flock,
And them to keep she had a jolly Cock:
Right courageous, that to this widow ay,
Divided the night, and crowde before the day.
A little from this foresaid widows house,
A thorny thicket there was of great defense,
Wherein a Fox crafty and cautelous,
Made his abode and daily residence,
Which to this widow did great violence,
In picking of pultry both day and night,
And no way be revenged on him she might.
This wyly Fox when that the Larcke could sing,
Full sore hungry until the town him dressed,
Where this lusty Cock in the gray morning,
Weary of night was flowen fro his nest,
Laurence this saw, and in his mind kest
The ieoperdy, the ways, and the wyle,
By what means he might the Cock beguile.
Dissimuling in countenance and cheer,
On knees fell, and flattering thus he said:
Good morn my master gentle Chauntcleere.
With that the Cock start backward in abrayd:
Sir by my soul ye need not be affrayd,
Nor yet for me to start nor flee abacke,
For I come hither service to you to make.
Would I not serve you, I were to blame,
As I have done to your progenitor:
Your father full often filled has my wame,
And sent me meat from donghill to the moore,
And at his end I did my busy cure
To hold his head and give him drinks warm,
So at the last he sounded in my arm.
Knew ye my Father (quoth the Cock) and lough,
Yea my fair Son, I held up his head,
When that he died under a byrchen bongh.
And said the Diridge when that he was dead:
Betwixt us two how should there be any fead?
Whom should ye trust but me your seruitour,
That to your Father did so great honor?
When I beheld your feathers fair and gent,
Your beak, your breast, your hekell and your ^ome,
Sir by my soul and the blessed Sacrament,
My heart is warm, me thinks I am at home:
To make you merry I would creep on my women,
In frost and snow, in weather wan and neat,
And lay my golden locks under your feet.
This feigned Fox false and dissimulate,
Made to this Cock a crafty cauillation:
Ye are me thinks changd and degenerate,
From your Father of his condition,
Of crafty crowing he might bear the crown:
For he would on his toes slande and craw,
This was no lie, I stood beside and saw.
With that the Cock upon his toes hie,
Kest up his book, and sang with all his might,
Quoth sir Laurence well said so mote I thee,
Ye are your fathers Son and heir upright:
But of his cunning yet ye want one slight,
For (quoth the Tod) he would withouten don't,
Both wink, and crow, and turn him thrice about.
The Cock infect with wind and false vayneglore,
That many puts unto confusion,
Trusting to win great worship therefore,
Unawarely winked walking up and down,
And so to sing and crow he made him boune:
And suddenly by he had crown a note,
The Fox was ware, and catchd him by the throat.
So to the wood without tarrying he hi^d,
Of that crime having but little doubt,
With that Pertoke, Spratoke, and Toppoke cried.
The widow heard; and with a cry came out,
Seeing the case, she sight and gave a shoute.
With how murthrer hay, and gave her door a knock,
Saying now alas, lost is my gentle Cock.
As she were wood with many yell and cry,
Pulling her hear, upon her breast can beat,
So pale of hue half in an ecstasy,
Fell down for care in sowning and in sweat:
With that the silly hens left their meat,
And whylest their dame lay thus in sown,
They all fell into disputation.
Alas (quoth Pertok) making sore monyng,
With tears great, which down her cheeks fell,
Yonder was our le^man and our days darlyng,
Our Nightingall, and our morning bell,
Our walking watch us for to warn and tell,
When that Aurora with her coursers gray,
Put up her head betwixt the night and day.
Who shall our lemman be? who shall us lead?
When we are sad, who shall unto us sing?
With his sweet bill, he would break us the bread,
In all this world there was no kinder thing,
In paramory he would do us pleasing,
To his power as nature did him give:
Now after him alas, how shall we live?
Quoth Sprucock then, cease sister of your sorrow,
Ye be to mad such mourning for to gloss,
We shall speed well I find S. John to borrow:
The Proverb says, as good loves comes as goes,
I will put on my holydaye clothes,
And make me fresh against this jolly May,
So sing this song, was never widow so gay.
He was angry, and held us ay in awe,
And wounded with the spear of jealousy,
Of chamber glue Pertoke, full well ye know,
Wasted he was, of nature cold and dry.
Since he is gone, therefore sister say I,
Put care away, for that is best remead,
Let quick to quick, and dead go to the dead.
Then Pertoke spoke, with feigned faith before,
In lust without love he set all his delight:
Sister ye wot, of such as him a score,
Would not suffice to slake our appetite,
I hold here my hand since he is quite,
Within a mile for shame and I durst speak,
To get a lad should better clawe our breeke.
Than Toppok like a priest spoke full crous,
You was a very vengeance from the heaven,
He was so lowse and so lecherous.
He had (quoth she) Kittoks more than seven:
But rightuous God holding the balance even,
Smytes right sore though he be patient,
For adultery, that will them not repent.
Full of pride he was, and ioyed in his sin,
And counted not for Gods favor nor faith,
But trusted all to riot and so did rinne:
While at last his sins can him skayth,
To shameful end, and to you sodden death.
Therefore it is the very hand of God,
That causes him, be werried with the Tod.
When this was said, this widow from her sown,
Stert up on foot and on the dogs she cried,
How bercke, bery, bowsie, brown,
Ripe shaw, run well, curteys, nutticlyde,
Together all without grudging see ye speed,
Rescue my noble Cock or he be slain,
Or else to me, see ye come never again.
Withouten more for fear of being shent,
As fire of flint over the fields flawe,
Full swiftly through woods and waters went,
And ceased not sir Laurence till they saw:
But when he saw the hounds ^om^ on a raw,
Unto the Cock in mind he said God sen,
That I and thou were present in my den.
Then said the Cock with some good sprite ^nspirit,
Do my counsel, and I shall warrant they:
Hungry thou art, and for great travail tired,
Right faint of force, and may not further flee:
Quickly turn again, and say that I and yet,
Friends are made, and fellows for a year,
Then will they stint, I Will stand between ye here.
Thus Tod though he was false and frivolous,
And had craft his quarrel to defend,
Deceived was by means right marvelous,
For wyly beguiles himself at the latter end:
He start abacke and cried as he was lernd,
With that the Cock flew up into a tree,
Now whether sir Laurence laugh or no judge ye.
Beguyled thus the Tod under the tree,
On knees fell, and said good Chaunteclere:
Come down again, and without meat or fee,
I Will be your man, and serve you for a year.
No false thief and rouer, stand not me near.
My bloody comb and my neck so sore,
Has parted friendship, twixt us for evermore.
I was unwise that winked at thy will,
Where through almost I losed had my head,
I was more fool (quoth he) to be so still,
Where through to put my pray now into plead.
Away false thief, God keep me fro thy fead.
With that the Cock over the fields took flight,
And in at the widows window could he light.
Morality.
NOw worthy folk, suppose this be a Fable,
And ouerheled with tipes fugerall,
Yet may ye find some sentence right agreeable,
Under these feigned terms textuall.
To our purpose this Cock well may we call,
Nice proud men, void and vain glorious,
Of kin and blood, which are presumptuous.
Fie puffed up pride, thou art full poysonable,
Who favors thee of force must have a fall,
Thy strength is naught, thy stool stands unstable.
Take witness of the fendes infernal,
Which thrown down were from the heavenly hal
To Hels hole and to that hideous house,
Because in pride, they were presumptuous.
This feigned Fox may well be figurate,
To flatterers with pleasant words white,
With false meaning and mind most toxicate,
To gloss and lie, that settes their whole delight,
All worthy folk, at such should have despite.
For where is there more perilous pestilence,
Than give to liars hasty credence.
The wicked mind and adulation,
Of these sweet suckers having the similitude,
Are bitter as gall, and full of poison,
To taste it is, who clearly understood:
For this as now shortly to conclude,
These two sins, flattery and vaineglore,
(Are perilous) good folk flee them therefore.
FINIS.
The pleasant tale how this false dissembling Tod, made his confession to the
hypocrite friar Wolf, Waytskayth.
Leaving this wydow glad I you assure,
Of Chauntclere more iocund than I can tell:
And speak we of the subtle adventure,
And destinit that to this Fox befell,
Which durst no more with waiting intermell,
As long as leame or light was of the day,
But byding night full still lurking he lay.
While that the Goddosse of the flood,
Phoebus had called to the harbery,
And Hesperus put up his clowdy hood,
Showing his iusty visage in the sky.
Then Laurence looked up where he did lie,
And cast his hand upon his eye on hight,
Merry and glad that come was the night.
Out of the woodde unto a hill he went,
Where he might see the twinekling stars cle^re,
And all the Planets of the firmament,
Their course and eke their moving in the sphere:
Some Retrograde, and some Stationere:
And of the Zodiake in what degree,
They were each one as Laurence learned me.
Then Saturn old was entered in Capricorn,
And Iuppiter moved in Sagittarie,
And Mars in the Rams head was borne,
And Phoebus in the Lion forth can carry,
Venus the Crab, the Moon was in Aquarie,
Mercury the God of Eloquence,
Into the Virgin made his residence.
Without Astrolab, Quadrant, or Almanake,
Taught of nature by instruction,
The moving of the heaven this Tod can take,
What influence and constellation,
Was like to fall upon the earth adowne.
And to himself he said this one thing,
God have me Father that set me to learning.
My desteny and eke my death is known,
My adventure is clearly to me kend,
With mischief mortal men are overthrown,
My missyning the sooner but if I mend,
It is reward of sin, a shameful end.
Therefore I will go seek some confessoure,
And shryue me clean of my sins to this hour.
And (quoth he) right fearful are we thieves,
Our lives be each night in adventure,
Our cursed craft full many men mischieues:
For ever we steal, and over are like poor,
In dread and shame our days we endure.
Still hunting after mischief at every beck,
Till at last for our hyre we are hanged by the neck.
Accursing thus his cankred conscience,
On top of a crag he cast about his eye,
And saw coming a little from thence,
A worthy Docter in divinity,
Friar Wolf Waytskayth, in science wonders sly,
To preach and pray was commen from the closter,
With heads in hand, saying his Pater noster.
Seeing this Wolf this wyly traitor Tod,
On knees fell with hood into his neck,
Welcome my ghostly father under God,
(Quoth he) with many bow, and many beck,
Ha (quoth the Wolf) si^ Tod for what effect,
Make ye such moan, rise up on your foet?
Father, quoth he, I have great cause to doet.
Ye are Mirror, Lantern, and lively way,
To guide suth simple men as me to grace,
Your barefeete, and your u^sse^ ^^nle of gray.
Your lean cheeks, your pale pit^ous face,
Which shows to me your perfect holiness,
For well were him that once in his live,
Had hap to you, his sins for to shryne.
Nay silly Laurence (quoth the Wolf) and lough,
It pleases me that ye are penitent.
Of theft and flouth, sir I can tell enough,
That causes me full sore for to repent:
But Father bide still here upon the bent,
I you beseech, and hear me to deplore,
My guilty conscience that pricks me so sore.
Well, quoth the Wolf, sit down upon thy knee,
And he down barehead sat full humily,
And so began with Benedicitee.
When I this saw I drew a little by,
For it is no good manners to hear nor spy,
Nor to reveal things said under that seal,
Yet to the Tods conscience, the Wolf did thus appeal
Art thou contrite and sorry in thy spryte,
For thy trespass? nay sir I cannot doet,
My thinks that hens are so honey sweet,
And Lambs flesh that new are letten blood,
For to repent my mind cannot conclude:
But of this thing, that I have slain so few,
Well, quoth the Wolf, in says thou art a shrew.
Since thou cannot forethinke thy wickedness,
Will thou forbear in time to come and mende?
And I forbear, how should I live alas?
Having no other craft me to defend,
Need causes me to steal where ever I wend:
I shame to beg, and work I ne can,
Yet would I feign, pretend a Gentleman.
Well (quoth the Wolf) thou wantes points two,
That belong to perfect confession:
To the third part of penitence let us go.
Will thou take pains for thy transgression?
Nay sir, consider my complexion,
Sielly and weak, and of my nature tender,
Lo, will ye see, I am both leave and slender.
Yet nevertheless I would so it were light,
Short and not greeuing to my tenderness,
Take part of pain, fulfill it if I might,
To set my silly soul in way of grace:
Thou shall (quoth he) forbear flesh until Pase,
To tame thy corpse that cursed carrion:
And here I give thee full remission.
I grant thereto, so ye will give me leave,
To eat puddings, or lap a little blood,
Or head, or feet, or panches let me preue,
In case I fall no flesh unto my food:
For great need. I give thee leave good,
Twice in the week, for need may have no law:
God thank you sir, for that text well I know.
When this was said, the Wolf his ways went,
The Fox a foot he goth unto the flood,
To get him fish, hollily was his intent:
But when he saw the water and waves wood,
Astonished all, still in a muse he stood:
And said, better that I had bidden at hame,
Nor been a fisher in the Devils name.
Now must I scrape my meat out of the flood,
And I have another boots nor yet boat.
As he was thus for fault of meat near wood,
Looking about like a wyly soat,
Under a tree he saw a trip of goat,
Than was he merry, and through the hedge him hid,
And from the goat, he stale her little kid.
So over the hedge unto the water hies,
And took the kidde by the horns twain,
And in the water either twice or thryse,
He dowked him, and to him can he said:
Go down sir kid, come up sir Salmon again.
While he was dead so to the land him drough,
And of that new made Salmon he eat enough.
Thus finely filled with young tender meat,
Unto a thicket for dread he him adrest,
Under a bush, where the Sun can beat,
To beyke his breast and belly he thought best,
And scorningly, he said, where he did rest,
Stroking his womb against the Suns heat,
Upon this belly, what if a bolt should beat?
When this was said, the keeper of the gayt,
Careful in heart, his kid was stolen away,
On every side full warely could he wayt,
Till at the last he saw where Laurence lay:
A bow he bent, an arrow with feathers gray,
He drew to the head, and or he stearth,
The Fox he pricketh fast unto the earth.
Now, quoth the Fox, alas and well away,
Gored I am and may no further go,
Me thinks no man may speak a word in play,
But now adays in earnest its turned so,
He took him and his arrow drew him fro.
And for his Kid and other violence,
He took his skin and made a recompense.
Morality.
THis sudden death, and unprovided end,
Of this false Tod without provision,
Example is, exhorting folk to amend,
For dread of such and like confusion.
For many now has good profession.
Yet not repentes, nor for their sins weep,
Because they think their lusty life so sweet.
Some been also through consueted and ryte,
Vanquished with carnal sensuality,
Suppose they be as for the time contryte,
Can not forbear, nor fro their sins flee:
Use draws nature so in property,
Of beast and man, that needs they must do,
As they of long time have been used thereto.
Beware good folks, and fear this sudden shote,
Which smites sort without any resistaunce,
Attend wisely, and in your hearts note,
Against death may no man make defense:
Cease off your sin, remorse your conscience,
Obey unto your God and ye shall wend,
After your death, to bliss withouten end.
FINIS.
The Retoricall tale of the son and heir of the foresaid Fox called Father
Wars, also the Parliament of four footed beasts, holden by the Lion.
THis foresaid Fox, that did for his misdeede,
Had not one Son was gotten rightuously,
To be heir by law that might succeed,
Except one Son which in adultery,
He gotten had by purchase privily:
And he gave him to name father wurst,
That loud well pultry although he were cursed.
It folowes still by reason natural,
As degree by degree, of right comparison:
Of evil comes worse: of worse comes worst of all:
Of wrongful getting comes false succession.
This Fox bastard of generation,
Of very kind behooved to be false,
So was his Father and his Graundsir als.
As natural seeking his meat by sent,
By chance he found his fathers carrion,
Naked, new slain, and to him as he went,
Took up his head, and on his knees fell downne,
Thanking the Gods of that conclusion.
And said, now shall I walk since I am heir,
The bounds where thou were wont to repair.
Fie covetous, unkind, and venomous:
The Son was glad he found his father dead,
By sudden shot for deeds odious,
That he might reign and rage still in his stead,
Dreading nothing the same life to lead,
In theft and robry, as did his father before,
But to the end, attent he took no more.
Yet nevertheless through natural pity,
The Carrion upon his back he taeth,
Now find I well this Proverb true (quoth he)
Still runs the Fox, as long as he foot has,
So with the corpse unto a pit he gaeth,
Of water full, and cast him in the deep,
And to the Devil he gave his bones to keep.
Oh foolish man plonged in worldliness,
To gather gold and other worldly meede,
To put thy soul in pain and heaviness,
To ritche thine heir which has but little need:
Have be thy good once, he takes but small heed,
To execute, to do, to satisfy,
Thy latter will, thy debt, and legacy.
This Tod to rest him, he passed till a crag,
And there be heard a boystrous horn bloro,
Which as he thought, made all the world wag:
At last a Unicorn came running below,
Then start he up when he this heard and saw,
With horn in band, a bill on breast he bore,
The goodliest Pursiuant that erst was seen before.
Unto a bank where he might see about,
On every side, in have he began him hie,
Shot out his voice full shrill and gave a showte,
And on this wise, twice or thryce did cry:
With that the beasts in the fields thereby,
All meruayling what such a thing should meene,
Greatly aghast, they gathered on a green.
Out of a wood a Bull so began he brayde,
And read the text withouten tarrying,
Commanding silence, sadly thus he said:
The noble Lion, of all beasts the King,
Greeting to God health everlasting.
To brutall beasts, and irration all,
I send as to my subjects great and small.
My celsitude, and hie magnificence,
Let you to wit, that even incontinent,
As to morrow with Royal diligence,
Upon this hill to hold my Parliament,
Straytly therefore I give commandment,
For to appear before my trybunall,
Under all pain that may thereof befall.
The morrow came, and Phoebus with his beams,
Consumed had the misty clouds gray,
The ground was green and as gold it gleames.
With grass growing goodly great and gay,
The spice they spread to smell on every spray:
The Lark, the Mauis, and the Metle full hie,
Sweetly can sing skipping fro tree to tree.
Two Leopards came with crown of massiue gold,
And so they brought it to the hills height.
With Iaspers, Ionet, and royals Rubies rold.
And many diverse Diamondes ydight,
With speaken roapes a pauilion down they pight.
And there in throne sat a mighty wild Lion,
In robe Royal, with Scepter, swoorde and Corone.
After the tenor of the cry before,
That all four footed beasts should appear in place,
Is they commanded were withouten more,
Before the Lord the mighty Lions grace,
And what they were to me, Laurence told apace,
As I shall rehearse apart of every kind,
As far as now occurreth to my mind.
The Minotaur a monster marvelous,
Bellerophon that beast of bastardy,
The Warwolf, and the Pegase perilous,
Transformed by assent of Sorcery:
The Linx, the Tiger, full of tyranny:
The Elephant, and eke the Dromedary,
The Camel with his crane neck, forth can carry.
The Leopard, as I have told beforne,
The Intlop, the Sparth forth can speed,
The painted Panthor, and the Unicorn.
The Rayndeer run through tyuer, rush and reed,
The jolly Gennet, and the gentill steed.
The Ass, the Mule, the Horse of every kind,
The Do, the Roe, the horned Heart, the Hind.
The Bull, the Bore, the Bugle, and the Bear,
The tame Cat, Wildecat, and the wild wood Swine,
The hardbacke Hedgehogge, and pennde Porcupine,
The crookehorne Goat, the silly Sheep, the Swine,
The wild Ounce, the Buck, the halting Brocke,
The Fowmart, with the Fybert forth can flock.
The gray Greyhou^d with Sleuth hou^d forth ca^ slide,
With Dogs all, diverse and different,
The Rat ran, the Glybard forth can glyde,
The pilde Polcat, with the Wesill went,
The fine Fycho that has furre, money vent.
The Merten, with the Cony, and the Con,
The Bowrabant, and eke the Lerion.
The Marmesset the Moule can lead,
Because that nature denied had her sight,
Thus dressed they all forth for dread of dead,
The Musk, the little Mouse with all her might,
With have she hied unto that hill of hight,
And many kind of beasts I could not know,
Before their Lord (the Lion) lowted low.
Seeing these beasts all at his bidding boun,
He gave a brayde and looked him about,
Then flatlings to his feet they fell all down,
For dread of death, they drouped all in doubt,
He looked when that he saw them lowte,
And bad them with a countenance full sweet,
Be not afraid, but stand upon your feet.
I let you wit my might is mercyable,
And hurtes none that are to me prostrate,
Angry, austerne, and also vnamiable,
To all that stand against my royal state,
I true of life all beasts that make debate,
Against the might of my magnificence,
See none pretend to quarrel in my presence.
My celsitude, and my hie majesty,
With might, and mercy mingled shall be ay,
The lowest here I can full soon raise hie,
And make him Master over you all I may.
The Dromedary if he will make deray,
The great Camel though he were near so crouse,
Can bring as low as the little Mouse.
See that within twenty miles where I am,
The Kid go fault by the Goats side,
The Tod for his head look not on a Lam,
Nor no rauenyng beast, neither run nor ride.
They couched all after this was cride,
The Justice bad the court for to begin,
The suits called, and forfaytes bring in.
The Panthor with his painted coat sheene,
Fenced the court as the law hyd,
Then the Tod lurkt back for fear being seen,
And starte back behind one, and so him hid,
Pulling his bear piteously he cride,
Quaking for dread, and sighing can he say,
Alas this hour, alas thus dollfull day.
I wot this sudden assembly that I see,
Having the points of a Parliament,
Is made to mar, such misdoers as me,
Therefore if I me show I shall be shent:
I will therefore go and be absent,
To bide or flee, I wot not in faith,
All is a like, there folowes naught but death.
Perplexed thus in heart can he mean,
Throw falshod how he might himself defend,
His hood he drew right ore his tyne,
And winking with one tie forth he wend,
Halting he came that he might not be kend:
And for dread that he should be arrest,
He playde bo peep behind fro beast to beast.
O troubled spryte and cancred conscience,
Before a King rayning with righteousness,
Blushing cheeks, and shameful countenance,
Farewell thy fame, now gone is all thy grace,
The Phisnomy, the favor of thy face,
For thy defense, is foul and disfigurate,
Brought to the light by these tokens of late.
Be thou attached with theft or with treason,
For thy misdeedes, wrongs, and wicked fay,
Thy cheer changes Laurence, thou must look don
The worship of this world is gone thee away,
Look to this Tod, how he was in affray.
And flee the sin of falsehood I thee reed,
Where through there follows sin and shameful deed^.
Appearing thus before their Lord and King,
In order set all in joy and mirth,
Of every kind he made forth bring,
And awfully he spoke and thus put forth,
If there was any kind of beast on earth,
Absent? and thereto made them deeply swear:
And they said none, except one Stud gray Mare.
Let send a message unto that Stud,
The court then said, now who shall it be,
Come forth Laurence lurkyng under thy hood,
A ha sir mercy, lo I have but one eye,
Hurt in the hoghe, and crookt as ye may see:
The Wolf is better far in embassage,
And thereto learned, wise and sage.
The King stood up, and said hence away both,
And they to go without any tarrying,
Over hill and dale, for fear of his wroth,
And found the Mare at her meat in the morning,
Now (quoth the Tod) Madame come to the King,
The court is called, and ye are found contumax,
Let be Laurence (quoth she) your courtly knax.
Mistress (quoth he) come, to the court ye must go,
The Lion has commanded so in deed,
Sir Tod (quoth she) go you and your felloe,
I have respite a year, and ye will reed,
I cannot spell (quoth he) so God me speed:
Here is the Wolf a noble Clerk at all,
And of this message is made principal.
He is autentike and a man of age,
And he has great practike of the chauncelery,
Let him go look and read your privilege,
And I shall stand and bear witness you by.
Where is thy respite (quoth the Wolf) on hie?
Sir it is here under my boofe well hid,
Hold up thy heel (quoth he) and so she did.
Though he were blinded, with pride yet he presumed,
To look down low where that her letter lay,
With that the mare gyrt him upon the gums,
And struck the Hat of his head away:
Half out of life, lying down there he lay.
Alas (quoth Laurence) Lupus thou art lost,
His cunning (quoth the Mare) was worth some coll.
Laurence (quoth she) will thou look on my letter,
Since that the Wolf nothing thereof can win?
Nay by S. Bryde (quoth he) me thinks it better,
To sleep in a whole, than in a hurt skin.
Once a scrole I fand, and this was written in,
For five shillings I would not lose all nor some,
Folix quem faciunt aliena pericula caucum.
With broken skalpe, and cheeks that were blouddy,
This wretched Wolf wiping them as he went,
Of amends inuenting to get remedy.
To tell the King the case was his intent,
Sir (quoth the Tod) bide still upon this bent,
And fro your brows wash away this blood,
And take some drink for it will do you good.
To fetch water this fraudefull Fox fore,
Sidelong abacke as though he were sick,
And as chaunst he met coming fro the moore,
A trip of Lamb, dancing on a dike,
This traitor Tod this tyrant and this tikt,
The fattest of the flock he killed haes,
And eat his fill, so to the Wolf he goes.
They drank together, and so there journey takes,
Before the King, soon kneeled on their knee,
Where is the Mare? sir Tod, was contumax.
Then Laurence said, my Lord, ask not me,
Demand of your Doctor of Divinity,
With his red Cap can tell you well enough:
With that the Lion, and all the rest lough.
Tell on the case now Laurence let us hear:
This witty Wolf, quoth he, this Clerk of age,
On your behalf he bad the Mare to appear,
And so she alleged her privilege,
Come near and see, and you shall have your wage.
Because he red her respit plain and well,
Yonder red bonnet she raught him with her heel.
The Lion said, by yon cap I see then,
This tale is true, who heed unto it takes:
The greatest Clerks are not the wysest men,
The hurt of one, happy the other makes:
As they were talking of these merry knakes,
And all the Court in mirth and in gam,
In comes the Ewe, the mother of the Lam.
Before the Justice on her knees she fell,
Put out her playnt on this wise woefully:
This Harlot bore son, and this hound of hell,
Devoured has my Lamb full doggedly,
Within a mile, contrary to your cry,
For Gods love my Lord give me the law,
Of this lurker: with that Laurence let draw.
Bide (quoth the Lion) limmer, let us see,
If it be sothe the silly Yewe has said,
A ha sovereign Lord, please your grace, quoth he,
My purpose was with him for to have playde,
And causles he fled as he had been affrayde.
For dread of death over a hedge with mischief,
And brake his neck, thou lies, quoth she, false thief.
His death by practice may be proved ^ith,
Thy gory gums, and thy blondy snoute,
The wool, the flesh, it sticks in thy teeth:
That is evidence enough without doubt,
The Justice bid choose the quest then about:
And so they did, and found that he was false,
Of murder, theft, and treason alse.
They bound him fast, the Justice bad beliue
To give the dome, and take of all his claes,
The Wolf that new made Doctor began him shryne,
So forth was led, and to the Gallows him haes,
And at the ladder foot his leave he taes,
The Ape was hangman, and bid him soon ascend,
And trussed him up, and thus he made his end.
Morality.
RIght as the miner in his mynerall,
Fair gold with fire may from the lead well win,
Right so under a Fable figurall,
Sad sentences may seek, and after fine,
As daily does the Doctors of divine,
That to our living full well can apply,
And paynt the matter out with Poetry.
The Lion is the world by likelynesse,
To whom bows, both Emperor and King,
And thinks of this world to get increase,
Minding daily for to get more living,
Some for to rule, and some to rack and ring,
Some gathers gear, some gold, some other good,
To win this world, some work as they were wood.
The Mare is men of good condition,
As pilgrims walking in this wilderness,
Approving that for right religion,
Their God only to please in every place.
Abstract from this worlds wretchedness,
Fighting with lust, presumption and pride,
And from this world in mind are mortifide.
This Wolf I liken to sensuality,
As when like brutall beasts we do accord,
Our minds all to this worlds vanity,
Liking take, and love it as our Lord,
Flee fast therefore, if thou will right remord:
Then shall reason raise, reign and ring,
And for thy soul there is no better thing.
Her hoof I liken to the thought of dead,
Will thou remember man, that thou must die,
Thus may thou break sensualities head,
And fleshly lust away fro thee shall fly,
As Soon as thou thy mind do mortify.
Salomons saying thou must remember herein,
Think on thy end, thou shall not gladly sin.
This Tod I lyken, to temptations,
Bringing to mind many thoughts vain,
Assaulting man with sweet persuasions.
And ready for to trap them in a train,
Yet if thou set, sensuality near slain,
And sodeyn death draw near with pangs sore,
They quickly go, and tempts them no more.
O mediator merciful and meek,
Thou sovereign Lord, and King celestial,
Thy mercies most humbly we beseeke.
Us to defend fro pain and perils all,
And help us up to thy heavenly hall,
In glory where we may see the face of God,
And thus ends, the talking of the Tod.
FINIS.
The woeful tale of the playntife Dog, against the poor Sheep, before
Justice Wolf.
ESopt a tale puts in memory,
How that a Dog, because that he was poor,
Called a sheep to the Consistory,
For certain bread fro him for to recover:
A crafty Wolf was Judge that time, and boore
Authority, and Jurisdiction,
And for the sheep sent forth a strayte summon.
For by the use and course and common style,
On this manner made his citation:
I master Wolf, partlisse of fraud and guyle,
Under the pains of hie suspension,
Of great cursing and interdiction.
Sir sheep, I chardge thee, for to appear,
And answer to Perry Dog, before me here.
Sir Corby Raven, was made a parratour,
Who picked had, full many sheep eye,
The chardge he takes, and on the letters boure,
Summond the Sheep before the Wolf, that he,
Peremptorly, within two days or three,
To appear under the pains in the bill,
To hear what Perry dog, will say thee til.
The summons made before witness inowe,
The Raven as to his office well offerth,
Indorsed has the writ: and on he flewe,
The silly sheep for sorrow, durst lay no mouth on earth
Till he before the lawful judge apperth.
The hour of cause, which that judge used than,
Was, when Hesperus to show his face began.
The Fox was Clerk, and notary in the cause,
The Kight, and the Crow at the bar could st^^
As Advocates expert in the laws,
The Dogs to plead together took in hand,
Which were con^ederate straytly in a band,
Against the sheep for to procure sentence,
Though it were false, they had no conscience.
The Clerk called the Sheep, and he was there,
The Advocates on this wise could propone,
Of certain bread worth five shillings or mere,
Thou owes the Dog, of which the term is go^^
Of his own head without Advocate alone,
The sheep innocently gave answer in this case,
Here I appeal fro the Judge, the time, the place.
This is my cause I will show in effect,
The law says, it is right perilous,
To enter in plea before a judge suspect,
And you sir Wolf have been full odious
To me, for with your tuskes ravenous,
Have stayne full many kinsmen of mine,
Therefore as judge suspect, fro you I do decline.
And to be brief, of this court ye members all,
Both Assessors, Clerks, and Advocate,
To me and mine, are enemies mortal,
And ay has been as many Sheperds wate,
The place I suspect, the time is very late:
Wherefore no Judge should sit in Consistory,
So late at even, I you accuse for thy.
When that the Judge on this wise was accused,
He bad the parties choose with one assent,
Two arbitrators, as in the law is used,
For to declare, and give arbitrament,
Whether the Sheep should answer in judgment
Before the Wolf, and so they did agree,
Of whom the names, ye shall shortly see.
The Bear, and Brocke, the matter took in hand,
For to decyde, if this exception
Was of no force, or lawfully might stand.
And thereupon as Judges they sat down,
And held along while disputation,
Seeking full many decrees of the law,
And glozes also the verity to know.
Of Civil law volumes full many they reuolue,
The Codies and Digesters new and old,
Contrait, prostrait arguments they resolve,
Some obiecting, and some began hold,
For prayer or price trow ye they would be controld.
But hold the gloss* and text of the decreis,
As true Judges, I beshrew them ay that leis.
Shortly to make an end of this debate,
The arbytratours thus they swearen plain,
The sentence given, and process fulminate.
The Sheep should pass before the Wolf again,
And end his plea, then was he nothing feign,
For fro this sentence could he not appeal,
Now Clerks I ask, if this sentence were wea^^.
The sheep again before the Wolf appeard,
Without Advocate, abashedly could stand,
Up rose the Dog, and to the Judge thus sweard,
A sum I paid to him, before in hand,
For certain bread, a witness here does stand.
That wrongfully the sheep does hold the bread,
Which he denide, and there began to plead.
And when the sheep this strife had contestate,
The justice in the cause forth began proceed,
Laurence the acts, and the process wrate,
And thus the plea unto the end they speed:
This cursed court corrupted all for meede,
Against good faith, law, and eke conscience,
For this false Dog pronounced the sentence.
And so forthwith put it in execution,
The Wolf charged the sheep without delay,
Under the pains of interdiction,
The sum of silver or the bread to pay.
Of this sentence, alas, what shall I say?
Which condemned has the silly innocent,
And justified the wrongful judgment.
The sheep dreading more the execution,
Obeying to the sentence: he could take,
His way unto a merchant of the town,
And sold the woolle that he bore on his back,
So bought the bread, and to the Dog can make
Ready payment, as it commanded was,
So naked and bare to the field can pas.
Morality.
THis selly sheep may represent the figure,
Of poor commons that daily are oppressed,
By tyrannous men which settes all their cure,
By false means to make a wrong conquest,
In hope this present life should ever lest:
But all beguyld, they will in short time end,
And after death to lasting pains* wend.
This Wolf I liken to a Shryue stout,
Which byeth a forfayte at the Kings hand,
And has with him a cursed assise about,
And endites all the poor men upon land,
Or if the Baylife has laid on him his wand,
Though he were true as ever were S. John,
Hanged shall he be, or with the judge compone.
This Raven I lyken to a false Coroner,
Which has a portion of the indictment,
And passes forth before the Iusticiair,
All misdoers to bring unto Judgment,
But look if he was, of any true intent,
To scrape out John and write in Will, or Wat,
And take a brybe at both, how like ye that.
Of this false Tod of which I spoke before,
And of this fight, what they might signify:
Of their nature, as now I speak no more,
But of this Sheep and of his careful cry,
I shall rehearse: for as I passed by,
Where that he lay, I chanced to look down,
And heard him make fore lamentation.
Alas (quoth he) this cursed consistory,
In mids of winter now a days is made,
When Boreas with blastes bitterly,
And hard frostes, the flowers down can fade,
On banks bare now may I make no bade:
And with that word into a bushe he crap,
Fro cold weather, and frostes him to hap.
Quaking for cold, sore mourning ay among,
Cast up his eye unto the heavens hight,
And said, Lord God why sleeps thou so long?
Walk; and discern my cause grounded on right,
See how I am by fraud, mastery, and slight,
Pilled full bare, and so is many a one,
Now in this world, right wonder woe begone.
See how this cursed son of couetice,
Bought has the Lawier, and ^ke the law,
Now few or none will execute Justice:
In fault of whom the poor man is overthrow,
The verity suppose, the judge it know,
He is so blinded with affection,
Without dread, for might, he lets the right go down
See thou not (Lord) this world ouerturnde is,
And who will change good Gold in Lead or Tin,
The poor is pulled, the Lord may do no mis,
And Simony is holden for no sin,
Now is he glad with craft that most may win:
Good neighborhood is slain, and pity is ago,
Alas (good Lord) why lets thou it be so?
Thou lets it thus be for our great offense,
Thou sendes us trouble, and plagues sore,
As hunger, dearth, great war, or pestilence,
But few amends now their life therefore,
We poor people as now may do no more,
But pray to thee, since that we are oppressed,
Here in this earth, grant us in heaven good rest.
FINIS.
The exemplatiue tale of the Lion and the Mouse: With the Authors Prologue
before.
IN mids of June, that sweet season,
When that fair Phoebus with his beams bright,
Had dried up the dew, fro dale and down,
And all the land ^ade with his beams light,
In a morning betwixt midday and night,
I rose, and put all sloth and sleep aside,
And to a wood I went, alone without guide.
Sweet was the smell of flowers white and read,
The noise of birds right delicious,
The Beuis ^ong right above my head,
The ground growing with grass gracious,
Of all pleasaunce that place was plenteous,
With sweet odours, and birds hatmony,
The morning mild, my mirth was more for thy.
The Roses red growing on banks could rise,
The Prymerose, Violet purple and blake,
To hear it was a heavenly Paradise,
Such mirth the Mauis, and the Merle could make,
The blossoms brave, brake up in bank and brake,
The smell of herbs and of the fowls cry,
Contending who should have the victory.
Me to conserve fro the Suns heat,
Under the shadow of a Hawthorne green,
I laid me down among the flowers sweat,
So cladde my head, and closed both mine eyne,
On sleep I fell among these birds fine,
And in my dream me thought came through the feld,
The fairest man that ever I beheld.
His gown was of a cloth as white as milk,
His Iacket was of chamlet purpure brown,
His hood of Scarlet brod^red well with silk,
And hangyng wise unto his girdle down,
His bonnet round of the old fashion,
His bearde was white, his eyne were great and gray,
With locks of hears, which on his shoulders lay.
A roll of paper in his hand he bare,
A Swans pen stickyng under his ear,
An inkehorne with a pretty gilt pennayre,
A bag of silk all at his gyrdle bear,
Thus was he goodly girded in his gear,
Of statu^e large, and with a fearful face,
Even where I lay he came a sturdy pace.
And said God speed my son: and I was feign,
Of that good word and of his company,
With reverence, I answered him again,
Welcome father: and he sat down me by,
Displease you not my good master, though I,
Demand your birth, your faculty and nome,
Why ye come here, or where ye dwell at home.
My son (said he) I am of gentill blood,
My native land is Rome withouten nay,
In that town first to the schools I yeude*
In civil law studied full many a day,
And now my wonning is in heaven for ay,
Esope I hight, my writing and my warke,
Is kend and known to many a cunning clarke.
O master Esope Poet Lawreat,
God wot ^e are full decre welcome to me,
Are ye not he that all the Fables wrate,
Which in effect suppose they feigned be,
Are full of prudence and Morality?
Fair Son (said he) I am the self same man,
God wot if that my heart was merry than.
I said, Esope my master venerable,
I you beseech most intierly,
Ye would not deyne to tell a pretty fable,
Concluding with a good Morality.
Shaking his head, he said, my son let be,
What does it profit to tell a feigned tale,
When holy preaching may nothing avail?
Now in this world my think right few or non,
Unto Gods word that has devotion,
The ear is deaf^, the heart is hard as ston,
Now open sin without any correction,
The heart enclining to the earth adowne,
So rusted is this world with canker blake,
That now my tales may little succor make.
Yes gentle sir (said I) for my request,
Not to displease your fatherhead, I pray,
Under the figure of some brutall beast,
A moral Fable that ye would dayne to say,
Who knows, not I may learn and bear away,
Something thereby, hereafter may avail?
I grant (quoth he) and thus begins his tale.
The end of the Prologue, and here begins the Tale.
A Lion at his pray was ouerrunne,
To recreate his limbs and to rest,
Beking his breast and belly at the Sun,
Under a tree lay in the fair forest:
Then comes there a trip of myce out of their nest,
Right merry and glad, all daunsing in their guise,
And over the Lion vaulted twice or thryse.
He lay so still, the Myse wear not afeard,
But to and fro, ore him took their trace,
Some twirled at the muchachos of his beard,
And some spared not to clawe him on the face,
Merry and glad thus daunced they a space,
Till at the last, the noble Lion wooke,
And with his paw, the master mouse he took.
She gave a cry, and all the rest aghast,
Their dancing left, and hyd them soon elsewhere,
She that was taken, cried and wept full fast,
And said, alas, the time that I came here,
Now am I taken a woeful prysonere,
And for my gilte, must bide incontinent,
Of life or death to hear the judgment.
Then spoke the Lion to that careful mous,
Thou caytife wretch, and vile unworthy thing,
Over malapert and eke presumptuous,
Thou were to make out over me thy tripping:
Knew thou not I was both Lord and King,
Of beasts all, yes, quoth the mouse, I know,
But I wist not because y^ lay so low.
Lord I beseech thy kingly royalty,
Hear what I say, and take in patience,
Consider first my simple poverty,
And then thy might and hie magnificence:
See also how things done of negligence,
Neither of malice, nor of presumption,
The rather should have grace and remission.
We were replete, and had great abundance
Of all things such as to us belonged,
The sweet season provoked us to dance,
And make such mirth as nature to us ^earned,
Ye lay so still as though ye had been strangled,
That by my soul we wend ye had been dead,
Else would we not have daunced ore your head.
Thy false excuse, the Lion said again,
Shall not avail one whit I to thee say,
I put the case I had been dead or slain,
And so my skin been stopped full of hay,
Though thou had found my figure in the way,
Because it bare the print of my person,
Thou should for fear on knees have falen down.
For thy trespass thou can make no defense,
My noble person this to vilepend,
Of thy fellows, nor thy own negligence,
For to excuse thou can no cause pretend,
Therefore thou suffer shall a shameful end,
And death, such as to treason is decreed,
Upon the gallows all hanged but the head*
Nay mercy Lord, now at thy grace I ask,
As thou art King of all beasts coronate,
Assuage thy wrath, and let it ouerpasse,
And make thy mind to mercy inclinate,
I grant offense is done to thine estate,
Wherefore I worthy am as now to die,
But if thy kingly mercy pardon me*
In every Judge mercy and ruth should ^e,
As assessors, and Colaterall,
Without mercy justice is cruelty,
As said is in the laws special,
When rigor sittes in the trybunall,
The equity of law who may sustain?
Right few or none, least mercy go between.
Also ye know the honor triumphall,
Of all victory, upon the strength depends,
Of his conquest, which manfully in battle,
Throw ieopardy of war long defends,
What price or praise when the battle ends,
Is said of him that ouercomes one man,
Himself to defend, which neither may nor can.
A thousand myse to kill and eke devour,
Is little manhood to a strong Lion,
Full little worship shall ye win therefore,
To whose strength is no comparison:
It will appayre some part of your renoume,
To slay a mouse, which may make no defense,
But asking mercy at your excellence.
Also it seems, not your celfitude,
Which uses daily meats delicious,
To file your teeth or lips with any blood,
Which to your stomach is contagious,
Unwholesome meat also, is a sorry mous,
And that namely unto a strong Lion,
Wont to be fed with gentill venison.
My life is little warth, my death is less.
Yet and I li^e, I may p^raduenture,
Supply your highness being in distress,
For often is seen a man of small stature,
Rescued has a Lord of great honor,
That was beset and in point overthrown,
^hrow misfortune, such case may be your own.
When this was said, the Lion his language,
Pawsed, and thought according to reason,
And made mercy his cruel ire assuage,
And to the mouse granted remission:
Opened his paw, and she on knees fell down,
And both her hands unto the heaven heild,
Crying almighty God your grace ever shield.
When she was gone, the Lion went to hunt,
For he had naught but lived by his pray,
And slew both tame and wild as he was wont,
And in the country, made many a great fray,
Till at the last the people fond the way,
This cruel Lion how that they might take.
So of Hempon cords strong nets can they make.
And in a lane where be was wont to ryn,
With ropes rude fro tree to tree they hing,
So cast a ring without wood and within,
With horns fast blowing, and hounds crying,
The Lion fled, and throw the lane running,
Fell in the net, and so caught by chance,
For all his strength could make no resistaunce.
Weltring about with hideous roaring,
While to, while fro, while he might succor get,
But all in vain, it auayled him nothing,
The more he flong the faster was the net,
The ropes rude were so fast about him set,
On every side, that succor saw he none,
But still lying, and mourning made his moan.
O lamentable Lion lying here so law,
Where is the might of thy magnificence?
Of whom al brutall beasts in earth stood aw,
And dread to look upon thy excellence,
Without hope, or help, without succor or de^ence,
In bands strong here must I lie (alace)
Till I be slain I see no other grace.
There is no wight that will my harms wreke,
Nor Creature, do comfort to my crown,
Who shall me help? who shall my bands break?
Who shall me put fro pain of this prisoun?
By that he had made this lamentation,
Through adventure the little Mouse come by,
And of the Lion heard the woeful cry.
And suddenly it came in till her mind,
That it should be the Lion by his close,
And said now were I false, and right unkind,
But I quite of his goodness some part, I suppose
Thou did to me, and on her ways she goes,
To her fellows, and on them fast can cry,
Come help, come help, and they came by and by.
Lo (quoth the mouse) this is the same Lion,
That grace granted me when I was taken anon,
And now is fast here bounden in prison,
Breaking his heart with great mourning and moan,
Without we him help, of succor wotes he none,
Come help to quite one good turn for another,
And lose him quickly: they answered yea good brother.
They took no knife, their teeth were sharp enough:
To see that sight, forsooth it was great wounder,
How that they ran among the ropes tough,
Before, behind, some above, some under,
And shore the ropes of the net in sunder,
Then had him rise, and he start up anon,
And thanked them, so on his way is gone.
Now is the Lion free from all danger,
Loose and delivered to his liberty,
By little beasts, and of simple power,
As ye have heard, because he had pity,
(Quoth I master) is there a Morality,
Of this fable? yea Son (he said) right good,
I pray you sir then, (quoth I) conclude.
Morality.
AS I suppose this mighty gay Lion,
May signify a Prince or Emperor,
Any potestate, or any King with crown,
Which should be captain, guide and governor,
Of his people that takes no labor,
To rule, and stere, the land, and justice keep,
Without lying still in lusts, flouth, and sleep.
The fair forest with leaves fresh to see,
With fowls singing, and flowers fair and sweet,
Is but the world and his prosperity,
As false pleasaunce mingled, and care replete,
Right as the Rose, with frost and winter wete,
Fades, so does the world and them desaue,
Which in their lusts most confidences have.
These little myse are but the commontie,
Wanton, unwise, without correction,
Their Lords, and Princes, when that they see,
Of Justice make no execution,
They dread nothing to make rebellion,
And disobey: for why, they stand in no awe,
That makes them, their sovereign not to know.
By this Fable ye Lords of prudence,
May consider the virtue of piety,
And to remit sometime a great offense,
And mitigate with mercy, cruelty,
Ofttimes is seen a man of small degree,
Has quitte a King either with good or ill,
As the Lord has done, rigor or grace him till.
Who knows not, how soon, a Lord of great renown
Rolling in worldly lust and vain pleasaunce,
May be overthrown, destroyde, and put down,
Through false fortune? which of all variaunce,
Is hole mistress and leader of the dance,
To unjust men, and blindes them so sore,
That they no peril can provide before.
These rural men that hanged has the net,
In which the Lion suddenly was thrown:
Waited always amends for to get,
(For hurt men, wrytes in the marble stone)
More to expound, as now I let alone,
Both King and Lord may well know what I meene,
The figure hereof, ofttimes has been seen.
When this was said (quoth Esope) my fair child,
I thee beseeke, and all men for to pray,
That treason of this country be exilde,
And Justice reign, and Lords keep their say,
Unto their sovereign Prince both night and day:
And with that word he vanished, and I wooke,
So through the wood my journey when I took.
FINIS.
The notable tale of the preaching of the Swallow.
THe hie prudence, and working marvelous,
The profound wit of God omnipotent,
Is so persite, and so ingenious,
Excellent far, above man's judgment,
For why to him all things are ay present,
Right as it is or any time shall be,
Before the sight of his Divinity.
Therefore our souls with sensuality.
So settred are in this prison corporal,
We may not clearly understand nor see,
God, as he is, nor things Calestiall,
Our dark and deadly corpse natural,
Blinds the spiritual operation,
Like as a man were bound in prison.
In metaphislcke Aristotle does say,
That man's soul is like a backs eye,
Which lurketh still as long as light of day,
And in the twylight comes forth to fly,
Her eyes are weak, the sun she may not see,
So is our soul with fantasy oppressed,
To know the things in nature manifest.
For God is in his power infinite,
And man's soul is feeble and over small,
Of understanding weak and imperfect,
To comprehend him that contaynes all:
None should presume by reason natural,
To search the secrets of the Trinity,
But believe firmly, and let vain reasons be.
Yet nevertheless we may have knowledging,
Of God almighty, by his creatures,
That he is good, fair, wise and benign,
Example take by these jolly stoures,
Right sweet of smell, and pleasant of colors,
Some green, some blew, some purple, white, and read,
Thus distributed by gift of his godhed.
The firmament painted with Stars clear,
From east to west rolling in cirkle round,
And every planet in his proper Spheire,
In morning making harmony and sound,
The fire, the air, the water, and the ground,
To understand is enough iwis,
That God in all his works witty is.
Look well on the fish that in the seas be,
Look well in the earth all kind of beastiall,
The fowls fair so forcely they flee,
Parting the air with wings great and small,
Then look to man, that he made last of all,
Like to his Image, and his similitude,
By this we know that God is fair and good.
All Creatures he made for the behoue,
Of man and to his supportation,
In this earth, both under and above,
In number, weight, and due proportion,
The difference of time and each season,
Concordant to our opportunity,
As daily by experience we may see,
The Summer with his jolly mantell of green,
With flowers fair to furre it, him has sent,
Which Flora Goddess of the flowers Queen,
Has to that Lord as for his season lent,
And Phoebus with his golden beams gent,
Has purfelled and painted pleasantly,
With heat, and moisture, stilling fro the sky.
Then Harvest hot, when Ceres that Goddess,
Her Barnes blessed has with abundance,
And Bacchus God of wines renewed hes,
The tonne pipes, in Italy and France,
With wines wight, and lycours of pleasaunce,
And Copia temporis to fill his horn,
That never was full of wheat, nor other corn.
Then comes winter wanne, when austerne Eolus,
God of the wind with blastes boreall,
The green garment of Summer glorious,
Has all to rent, and reuen in pieces small,
Then flowers fair faded with frastes, must fall,
And birds iocond changing their notes sweet,
Still mourning, near slain with snow and sleate.
The dales deep with snow drowned is,
Both hill and holt beled with frostes hoore,
And Larkes been left bare of any blis,
By wicked winds of the winter woore,
All wild beasts then from the fields frore,
Draws for dread unto their dens deep,
Couching for cold in hooles them to keep.
After comes Ver, when winter is away,
The Secretary of Summer with his cell,
When Columbine up pears through the clay,
Which fled was before with frostes fell,
The Mauis, and the Metle, begins to meil,
The Larkes on loft, with other birds their sown,
They spread abroad over dale and down.
That same season in a fair morning,
Right glad that bitter blasles near ago,
Unto the wood to see the flowers spring,
And hear the Mauis sing and birds mo,
I passed forth, and looking to and fro,
To see the soil, that was right sesonable,
Sappie, and to receive all seeds able.
Thus passing on great mirth I took in mind,
Of laborers to see the business,
Some making dikes, and some the plough can wind,
Some sowing seeds fast fro place to place,
The Harrowes hopping in the furrows trace,
It was great joy for him that loves corn,
To see them labor both at even and morn.
And as I went along a bank thereby,
In heart greatly rejoicing of that sight,
Unto an hedge, under a Hawthorne hie,
Of small birds there came a great flight,
And down quickly on the leaves light,
On every side about me where I stood,
Right marvelous and a great multitude.
Among the which a Swallow loud can cry,
On that Hawthorne hie in the top sitting,
O ye birds all hear me by and by,
Ye shall well know, and ye will ponder one thing,
Where danger is or peril appearing,
It is great wisdom to provide before,
It to avoid for fear it hurt you more.
Sir swallow (quoth the Lark again) and lough,
What have ye seen, that causes you to dread?
See ye yonder churl, quoth she, beyond you plough,
Fast sowing hemp, and good Line seed:
Yonder lint will grow in little time in deed,
And thereof will this churl his nets make,
Under the which he thinks us to take.
Therefore my counsel is when that he is gone,
At even, and with our nails sharp and small,
Out of the earth scrape that seed anon,
And eat it up, for if it grows we shall,
Have cause to weep hereafter one and all,
See we remedy it with Instante,
Nam leuius laedit quicquid preuidimus ante.
For Clerks says, it is not sufficient,
To consider that is before thine eye,
But prudence is an inward argument,
That makes a man, provide and fore see,
What good, what evil, is like for to be,
Of every thing behold the final end,
And so from peril, the better him defend.
The Lark laughing thus the Swallow to scorn,
Said she fisht long before the net,
The child is soon broke that is unborn,
All grows not that in the ground is set,
The neck to stoop when it the stroke shall get,
Is soon enough: death on thee fast fall,
Thus mocked they the Swallow one and all.
Despising thus her wholesome document,
The fowls forthwith took their flight anon,
Some with their make into the field went:
And some again are to the green wood gone,
Thus under the tree they left me alone,
I took my clubbe, and homeward cold it carry,
As fearfully as I had seen some Fayry.
Thus passing forth while June that jolly tide,
And seeds that were sown erst beforne,
Were grown hie, that Hares might them hide,
And also the Quayles craking in the corn,
I moved forth betwixt midday and morn,
Unto the hedge under the Hauthorne green,
Where I before, the foresaid birds had seen.
And as I stood by adventure and case,
The same birds as I have said you ere,
I hope, because it was their haunting place,
More of succor, or yet more solitaire,
They light adowne: and when they lighted were,
The Swallow again put forth a piteous pime,
And said, woe is him cannot beware in time.
O blind birds and full of negligence,
Unmindful of your own prosperity,
Lift up your sight and take good aduertence,
Look to that lint that grows on yond le,
That same is the thing forsooth, that we,
As I said erst, should root out and kill,
Now is it lint: we can do it none ill.
Go yet while it is tender and small,
And pull it up, let it no more increase,
My heart groans, my body quakes with all,
Thinking on it I may not sleep in peace,
They cried all, and bad the Swallow cease,
And said yonder lint hereafter will do good,
For line seeds to little birds are food.
We think when that yonder lint seed is ripe,
To make us feasts and fill us with the seed,
Mauger the churl, and on it sing and peep,
Well (quoth the Swallow) friends hardly beet,
Do as ye will, but certain sore I dread,
Hereafter ye shall find all sour, and not sweet,
When ye are spitted on the churles spitte.
The owner of yond lint a fowler is,
Right crafty, and full of subtilty,
His pray full seldom time will he mis,
But if we birds all, the warer be,
Full many of our kin he has causde to die,
And thought it but a sport to spill their blood,
God keep me fro him, and the holy roode.
These small birds having but little thought,
Of peril that might fall by adventure,
The counceil of the Swallow set at naught,
But took their flight and forth together fure,
Some to the wood, some marched to the moure,
I took my staff, when this was said and done,
And walked home for it drew near to none.
The Lint riped, the Carle pulled the line,
Rippilt the bowels, and in boundles it set,
It steeped in water and dried it fine,
And with a betell knocked it, and bet,
So swingled it well and hekled it in the flet,
His wife it span, and twinde it into threede,
Of which the fowler nets made in deed.
The Winter come, the wicked wind can blow,
The woods green were faded with the weate,
All things decade with frostes and with snow,
Puddles and lakes made sliddery with sleate,
The fowls fair for fault they fall on feate,
On bows bare it was no boot to bide,
But hied them to houses them to hyde.
Some in the barn, some in the stake of corn,
Their lodging took and made theri residence,
The fowler saw, and great oaths has sworn,
They should be taken truly for their expense,
His nets then he set with great diligence,
And in the snow he showled has a plain,
And heled it all over with chaf again.
These small birds seeing this chaf were glad,
Thinkyng it had been corn, they lited down,
But of the nets no inkling they had,
Nor of the fowlers false intention,
To scrape and seek their meat they made them bowne,
The Swallow on a little branch near by,
Dreading some guyle, thus loud to them can cry.
Into that chaf scrape whiles your nails bleed,
There is no corn ye labor all in vain,
Trow ye yond churl for pity will you feed,
Na, na, he has it here laid for a train,
Remove I read you, or else ye will be slain,
His nets he has set full privily,
Reddy to draw: in time beware, or ye die.
Great folies in him that puts in danger,
His life, his honor, for a thing of naught,
Great follies in him, that will not gladly hear,
Counsel in time, while it avail him might.
Great folies in him, that has nothing in thought,
But things present: and after what may fall,
Nor of the end has no memorial.
These small birds for hunger famisht near,
Full busily scraping for to seek their food,
The counsel of the Swallow would not hear,
Suppose their labor did them little good.
When she their foolish hearts understood
So indurate, up in a tree she flewe,
With that this churl over them his nets drew,
Alas it was great pity for to see,
That bloody Boucher to beat the birds down,
And ah to hear, when they wist well to die,
Their careful cry and lamentation,
Some with a staff he struck to earth on fowne:
Of some the head he struck, of some he brake the crag:
Some half on live he stopped into his bag.
And when the Swallow saw that they were dead,
Lo (quoth she) these chances do arise,
On them that will not take council nor head,
Of prudent men, or Clerks that are wise,
This great peril I told them more than thryse:
Now are they dead, woe is me therefore,
She took her flight, and I saw her no more.
Morality.
LO worthy folk, Esope that noble Clerk,
A poet worthy to be Lawreate,
When he had leisure, from more autentike work,
With other mo, this foresaid fable wrote,
Which at this time may well be applicate,
To very good moral edification,
Having ay sentence according to reason.
This carle, and bond of gentry spoliate,
Sowing this chaf, the small birds to sla,
It is the fend, which fro the angelike state,
Exiled was as false Apostata,
Which day and night werieth not to ga,
Sowing poison in every wicked thought,
In man's soul, which Christ full dear has bought.
And when the soul, as into earth the seed,
Gives consent unto delectation,
Then wicked thoughts begins for to breed,
In deadly, sin which is damnation,
Reason is blinded with affection,
And carnal lust, grows full green and gay,
Through consuetude haunted from day to day.
Proceeding forth by use and consuetude,
Then sin ripes, and shame is set aside,
The feende makes his nets sharp and rude,
And under pleasaunce privily them hide,
Then on the field he sows chaf full wide,
Which is but dross and very vanity,
Of fleshly lust and vain prosperity.
These little hirdes, wretches we may call,
Still scraping in this worlds vain pleasaunce,
Greedy to gaher goods temporal,
Which as the chafe or dross without substance,
Little of avail, and full of variaunce,
Like to the dust, before the blast of wind,
Which whisks away and makes wretches blind.
This Swallow which escaped is the snare,
The holy preacher well may signify,
Exhorting folk to walk and ay beware,
From the nets of our wicked enemy,
Who sleeps not but ever is ready,
When wretches in this world chafe do scrape,
To draw his net, then they may not escape.
Alas what care, what weeping is and woe,
When soul and body departed are in twain?
The body to the worms kitchen does go,
The soul to fire to everlasting pain,
What helps then this chafe, these goods vain,
When thou art put to Lucifers hyre,
And brought to Hell, and hanged in the fire?
These hid nets for to perceive and see,
And this sorry chafe, is wise understanding:
Best is beware in most prosperity,
For in this world there is nothing lasting,
There is noman certain how long shall be his being,
How long his life shall last, nor how shall be his end:
Nor after his death whether he shall wend.
Pray we therefore while we are in this life,
For four things: the first, fro sin remove,
The second is, fro all war and strife,
The third is, perfect charity and love,
The fourth thing is and most for our behoue,
That is in bliss with Angels to be fellow,
And thus ends the preaching of the Swallow.
FINIS.
The merry tale of the wolf, that woldshaue had, the Neckhering through the
wyles of the Fox, thnt beguiled the Carrier.
WHylom there wound in a wilderness,
(As mine Author expressly can declare)
A rauenyng Wolf, that lived upon purches,
On all beasts and made him well to fare,
Was none so big, about him he would spare,
And he wear hongry, other for favor or faith,
But in his wrath, he weried them to death.
So happened him in rouing as he went,
To meet a Fox in mids of the way,
Laurence him first saw and feared to be shent,
And with a beke, he bad the Wolf good day,
Welcome to me (quoth he) thou russet gray,
So bowed he down, and took him by the hand,
Rise up Laurence I give thee leave to stand.
Where have thou been this long out of my sight?
Thou shall bear office, and my steward be,
For thou can knap down Capons in the night,
And lurking low thou can make hens die,
Sir (said the Fox) that agrees not for me,
And I am read, if they see me afar,
At my figure, beast and birds will skarre.
Nay (quoth the Wolf) thou can in covert creep,
Upon thy belly, and catch them by the head,
And make a sudden show upon a sheep,
So with thy weapons weary him to dead,
Sir (said the Fox) ye know my robe is read,
And therefore there will no beast abide me,
Though I would be so false as for to hide me.
Yes (quoth ye Wolf) through hedge and through bush,
Low can thou bow to come to thine intent,
Sir (said the Fox) ye wot well how I pushe,
And long fro them they will feel my sent,
Then will they escape, suppose I should be shent,
And I am ashamde to come behind them,
Into the field though I should sleeping find them.
Nay, quoth the Wolf, thou can come on the wind,
For every wrinke forsooth thou have a wyle,
Sir, said the Fox, that beast ye might call blind,
That might not escape then fro me a mile,
How might I one of them that ways beguyle?
My tipped two ears, and my two gray eyne,
Makes me be known, where I was never seen.
Then, said the Wolf, Laurence I hear thee lie,
And castes for perrlis thy doings to defend,
But all thy sayings shall not avail thee,
About the bush with ways though thou wend,
Wyly will beguile himself at the latter end,
To bow at bidding, and bide not while thou breast,
Therefore I give thee council for the best.
Sir, said the Fox, it is now Lent ye see,
I cannot fish for weting of my feet,
To take a banstakle, though we both should die,
I have no other craft to win my meat,
But were it Easter that men should pultry eat,
As Kies, Lamb, or Capons then to ply,
To bear your office I would full gladly.
The^, said the Wolf, in wrath weenst thou with wyles,
And with thy many mockes me to mate,
It is an old dog doubtless that thou beguiles:
Thou thinks to draw the straw before the cat.
Sir, said the Fox God wot I mean not that,
For and I did, it wear well done that ye,
In a hempen halter had tied me to a tree.
But now I see he is a fool parfay,
That with his master falls in resoning,
I did but feel what that ye would say,
God wot my mind was on another thing,
I shall fulfill in all things your bidding,
What ever ye chardge me other night or days,
Well (quoth the Wolf) I hear thee what thou says.
But yet I will, thou make to me an oath,
For to be true at all times and tide,
Sir (said the Fox) let no word make ye wroth,
For now I see that you have me in dread,
Yet shall I swear suppose it be naught neade:
By Jupiter, and on pain of my head,
I shall be true to you, while I be dead.
With that a Carrier with pannier and creyles,
Came singing forward: and Laurence could him spy?
The Fox the smell of the fresh herring feels,
And to the Wolf he roundes privily
Sir yonder are herring the carrier carries by,
Therefore my counsel is to see for some ways,
To get some fish against these fasting days.
Since I am steward, I would we had some stuff,
And ye are silver sick, I know right weel,
Though we would beg, yond very churlist chuffe,
He will not give us a herryng of his creell,
Before the churl on knees though we would kneel,
But yet I trow full quickly ye shall see,
If I can craft to bleare the carles eye.
Sir, one thing is, and we get of you pelf,
Ye must take travail and diligent be,
For he that will not labor, and help himself,
In these days he is not worth a flee,
For I think to work as busy as a be,
And ye shall follow a little afterwart,
And gather up herring, and that shall be your part.
With that he cast a compass far about,
And laid him down in mids of the way,
As he wear dead he feynd without doubt,
And then all a long unlikely he lay,
The white he turned up of his eyne tway,
His tongue out hang a handbreath of his head,
And still he lay, as stife as he were dead.
The Carrier found the Fox and he was feign,
And to him self thus softly can he say,
At the next bayte in faith ye shall be flayne
And of your skin, I shall make mittens tway,
He lept full lighty about him where he lay,
And all the trace he tript on his toes,
As he had hard a piper play he goes.
Hear lies the Devil, quoth he, as big as a hog,
Such a fellon saw I not this seven year,
I trow ye have been tired with some dog,
That makes you lie so still withouten steare,
Sir Fox in faith you are well welcome hear,
It is some wines blessing as far as I know,
For poultry picking that light on you I trow.
There shall no peddler for purse ne yet for gloves,
Nor yet for points pick your pelft from me.
I shall of it make coufes to my loves,
To keep my hands warm where ere I be,
To Flaunders shall it never sail the sea,
With that in hy he took him by the heels,
And with one swage he flange him on his creels.
So by the head the horse in have he took,
The Fox that saw, as crafty thief alone,
And with his teeth the stopple out he shook,
And so the herryng threw out one by one,
Out of the creels he threw them down anon,
The Wolf was ware, and took up speedily,
The Carrier sang, hunt is up, up upon hie.
Yet at a brook the Carrier lokt about,
With that the Fox lept quyte the creels fra,
The Carrier would have raught the Fox a rout,
But all for naught, he wan his spurs that day,
Then with a shoute thus can the Carrier say,
Abide, and of neckherring shall have best,
Is worth my horse, the creels, and all the rest.
Now, quoth the Fox, I shrew me and we meet,
I hard what thou hight to do with my skin,
Thy hands shall never in thy coufes heet,
And thou wear hanged carle and all thy kin,
Do forth thy market by me thou shall not win,
And sell thy herring thou have there, for hie price,
Else thou shall win naught on thy marchandice.
The Carrier trembled for anger as he stood,
I am well worthy (quoth he) to lose yond tike,
That had naught in my hand to do so much good,
As staff or stick, this fellon for to strike:
With that he lightly lept out over the dike,
And cut down a staff, for he was angry,
That heavy was, and of the green holly.
With that the Fox unto the Wolf could go,
And fond him by the herrings where he lies,
Sir (said he then) have I not playde the shrow:
A wight man wanted never and he were wife,
A hardy heart his hand for to supprise,
(Than said the Wolf) thou art a barn full bold,
And wise at will, in good time be it told.
But what was that the Carle cried on hie,
And shook his hand, quoth he, did thou not here?
Sir (said the Fox) that can I tell truly,
He said his neck herrings were in there,
Knows thou that herryng: ye sir with good chere,
And at the creele mouth I had thryce without doubt,
The weight whereof near plucked my tuskes out.
Now sothly sir, might we that herring have,
It would be fish to us these forty days:
(Then said the Wolf) now so God me save,
But to be there I would give all my clayes,
To see if that my weapons might it rays,
Sir (said the Fox) God wot I wished you often,
When that my strength might not bear it alofte.
It is a side of Salmon as it were,
And colored much like the Partrich eye,
It is worth all the herrings ye have there,
Ye and we had it sir, is it worth such three,
Then, said the Wolf, what counsel gives thou me?
Sir, said the Fox, work after my reed,
And ye shall have it, and take ye no dreede.
First ye must cast a compass far about,
So lay you down in mids of the way,
Both head, feet, and tail, ye must stretch out,
Hang forth your tongue, and cloze your eyne tway,
And see your head, on a hard place ye lay,
And doubt ye no peril, that may appear,
But hold you close, when that the Carle comes near.
And though ye see a staff have ye no doubt,
But hold you wounders still, in that steed,
And look your tyne be close as they were out,
And see that ye shrink neither foot, nor head,
Then will the hoorson Carle trow ye be dead,
And so in have, will take you by the heels,
As he did me, and swinge you in his creeles.
Now, quoth the Wolf, I swear thee by my thrift,
I fear the Carrier carle he will me bear:
Sir, said the Fox, on lofte he will you lift,
Upon his creeles, and do him little dear:
But one thing sothly I dare to you swear,
Get ye that herring in some place sicker,
Ye shall not need go a fishing more while Easter.
I shall say in principio over you,
And cross your corpse fro top to the fa,
Wend when you will I dare warrant you,
That ye shall die no sudden death this day.
With that the Wolf girt him up, and away,
And cast a compass before the Carrier far,
So laid him down in the way, or he came na^^e.
He laid the side of his head both hard and sad,
So stretched his forefeete fro him and his head,
And hang his tongue forth as the Fox him bad,
Also still he lay as he had been dead,
Caring nothing of the Carles favor nor fewd:
But ever upon the neckherring he thinks,
And quite forgets the Fox and all his wrinkes.
With that the Carrier wavering as the wind,
Came riding on the lode for it was light,
Thinking on the Fox that was behind,
Upon what wise, revenged on him he might,
And at the last on the Wolf he has the sight,
Where be in length lay stretched in the gate,
But if he lighted down, or not, God wate.
Softly he said, I was beguyled once,
Be I beguyld twice. I be shrewe us bathe,
That evil now shall light upon thy bones,
He should have had it that has done me the skath,
On hie he lifted the staff for he was wrath,
And ^it him with such will upon the head,
That we^neere he sowned to the dead.
Three battes he bore, or he his feet might find,
But yet the Wolf was wight and ran away,
He might not see, he was so very blind,
Nor wit readily whether it were night or day.
The Fox beheld that service where he lay,
And le^ght aloft, when he the Wolf so sees,
Both deaf and stonnishst, fall sowning on his knees.
He that with reason cannot be content,
But couetes all, is likely all to lose:
The Fox when that he saw the Wolf was shent,
Said to himself, these herrings with me goes,
I lie, or else he after got blows,
That found such ways his master for to grieve,
With all the fish thus Laurence took his leeue.
The Wolf he was, welneere done to dead,
That uneath with his life away he ran*
With the Bastianado, broken was his head,
The Fox into his den soon drew him than,
That had betrayed his master, and the man,
The one wanted the herrings out of his creeles,
The others blood it ran down by his heels.
Morality.
THis tale is mingled with Moralitee,
As I shall show somewhat or that I cease,
The Fox, unto the world may li^^ned ^ee*
The ravening Wolf unto man, but lease
The Carrier death, whom all men do oppress,
That ever took life, through course of kind must die,
As man and beast, and fowls aloft that fly.
The world ye wo^e, is steward to the man,
Which makes him have no mind of dead,
But settes for winnyng all the crafts be ^an*
The herring, I liken unto the gold so r^ad,
Which made the Wolf in peril put his ^ead,
Right so the gold, makes ^andes and cit^ies
With war be wasted, daily as men sees.
And as the Fox, dissembling with guyle,
Made the Wolf ween to have worship for ever:
Right so this world with ^ayneglory for a while,
Flattereth with folk as they should die never*
Yet suddenly men sees it often disseuer
With them, that thinks to ^ll at length the se^ke,
Death comes behind; and ^^ps them by the neeke.
The getting of gold makes many so blind,
That settes on auari^^ their fe^^citce,
That they forget the Carrier comes behind,
To strike them off, what ^^a^e so ere they be:
What is more dark than blind prosperiter?
Wherefore, I council ^^^che men to have mind,
Of the Neckherring, interpret in this kind.
FINIS.
The excellent tale of the wyly Laurence Fox, that beguylde the covetous
crafty Wol^e, with the shadow of the Moon.
IN elder days as Esope can de^lare,
There was a husband man which had a ^low to ^^eare,
His use was a^ in morning to rise rare,
So it happened him, in stirring time of year^,
Early in the morning to follow forth his fear^,
Unto the psough only his gadman and he,
His Oxen he blessed, with Be^^dicite.
The driuer cried hop, ho^^ on height,
Well drawn my dow^es so spoke them fair,
The Oxen were lusty young and light,
And for fearcenesse they laid the forrow for fair:
The husband then wore angry as a hare,
So cried and cast his pattell and great stones,
The Wolf, quoth ^e might have y^ all at ones.
But yet the Wolf was nearer than he wen^,
For in a bush he lay, and* Laurence bathe,
Among rough sh^ub was at the ^urrowes end,
And heard the height, then Laurence ^aught full rath,
To take yo^d offer, quoth ^e it were no s^ath:
Well, quoth the Wolf, I hold thee her^ my hand,
The Carles word, as he were king shall stand.
The Oxen waxte more rul^ at the last,
So after they lowsed when it was somewhat late,
The husband homeward with his ^attell p^st:
Then soon the Wolf came hopping in his gate,
Before the Oxen, and shope to make debate:
The husband saw him and was somewhat aghast,
And backwarde with his beasts, would have past.
The Wolf said whether dryues thou this pray?
I chaleng^ it* for none of them are thine,
The man ther^at was in a fellon fray,
And soberly to the Wolf, answered sine:
Sir by my soul these Oxen are all mine,
Therefore I^nuse, now why y^ should stop me,
Considering I never, offended* you truly.
The Wolf said Carle, did thou not give this drift,
Early, when thou was earing ^n you bank?
And is ther^ any thing more fr^er than gift?
This ^arrying, will lose thee a^ thy thank^,
Far better ^is freely for to give a planke,
Nor be compelled by force, to give a mart,
Fie on that gift, that comes not with good heart.
Sir, quoth the husband, a man may say in grief,
A word and call again, if he advise and see,
I promise to ste^le, am I therefore a thief?
God forbid si^, all heights should holden be,
Gave I my hand or obligation, quoth he,
Or have ye witness, or writing here to shaw,
Sir trouble me not, but go^ and seek the law.
Carle, quoth the Wolf, a Lord and he be leill,
That shrinkes for shame, or doubts to be reproved,
His word is as fure as his feill:
Fie on that man that is not true and loved,
Thy argument is false, and eke contraried:
For it is said in Proverb, ye may see,
All other virtues is naught worth a flee.
Sir said the husband, remember this thing,
A true man is not taken at half a word here,
I may say, and unsay, I am not a king:
Where is your witness, I promisd you this gear?
Than said the Wolf, therefore he shall come near,
Laurence (quoth he) come out of that shawe,
And say nothing but as thou heard and saw.
Laurence came louring, for he loud never light,
And soon appeared before them in that place,
The man laughed not, when he saw that sight:
Laurence (quoth the Wolf) thou must declare the ^ace,
Whereof we shall show the truth in short space,
I have called thee true witness to bear,
What heard thou, this man promise me here.
Sir said the Tod, I cannot hastily,
So soon as now give sentence final,
But would you both submit you here to me,
To stand to my decree perpetual,
To please both I should preue, if it may fall:
Well (quoth the Wolf) I am content for me,
The man said, so am I, how ever it be.
Then show they forth and allege without Fable,
And both propones their plea to him compleet,
(Quoth Laurence) now I am a judge amiable,
Ye shall be sworn to stand at my decree,
Whether hereafter ye think it sower or sweet:
The Wolf put forth his foot, the man his hand:
And on the Tods tail sworn they are to stand.
Then took the Tod the man a little beside,
And said to him, friend, thou art in trouble brought:
The Wolf will not forgive thee one ox hide,
Yet would my self feign help thee and I might,
But I am loath to hurt my conscience in ought,
Lose not thy quarrel in thine own defense,
This will not through withouten great expense.
See thou not brybes bears all the sway now?
And gifts makes crooked matters hold even?
Sometimes an hen, saues a man a fow,
All are not holy that heaues their hands to heaven:
Sir said the man, ye shall have six or seven
Right of the fattest hens of all the flock,
I count not all the rest, leave me the Cock.
I am a judge, quoth Laurence, then and lough,
There is no brybes shall bar me fro the right,
I may take Hens and Capons well enough,
For God is gone to sleep as for this night,
Such small things are not seen in his sight,
These hens, quoth he, shall make thy matter sure,
With empty hand no man should hawks lure.
Agreed thus, then Laurence took his leeue,
As to the Wolf he went into a linge,
So pryuely he plucked him by the sleue,
Is this in earnest, quoth he, ye ask such thing,
Nay by my soul I trow it be in jesting,
Then said the Wolf, Laurence why fayst thou so?
Thou heardst his promise thy self not long ago.
The height (quoth he) the man made at the plough,
Is that the cause why ye the cattle crave:
Was half in jest (said Laurence then) and lough,
Sir by the toode me thinks that now ye rave,
The Devil at all one tail that ye shall have,
Think you I Will take upon my conscience,
To do so poor a man as he offense?
Yet have I commoned with the Carle, quoth he,
We are accorded upon this covenant,
Quite of all claymes so ye will make him fire,
Ye shall a Cabbock have into your hand,
That such a one shall not be in all this land.
For it is a Summer cheese both fresh and good,
He says it weyes a stone down by the rood.
Is that thy counsel, quoth the Wolf, I do,
That yonde Carle for a cheese should be hei?
Yea by my soul and I were sworn you to,
Ye should no other counsel have for me,
For go ye to the most extremitee,
It will not win you worth a withered nepe,
Sir trow ye not I have a soul to keep?
Well, quoth the Wolf, it is against my will,
That yond cattle for one cheese should go quite,
Sir (quoth the Tod) take it not in ill,
For by my soul your self had all the wit:
Then, said the Wolf, I bide no more to stitte,
But I would see the Cabboke of such pryze,
For, said the Tod, he told me where it lies.
Then hand in hand, they walked to an hill,
The husband toward his house has ta^e the way,
For he was glad be seaped from their ill,
And on his feet did walk while once did the day:
Now will we turn unto the other t^ay,
Through woods wast these freekes forth can fore,
Fro bushe to bushe, till near midnight and more.
Laurence was ever remembering upon wrinkes,
And suttilties, the Wolf for to beguile,
That he had promised a chief, be forethinkes.
Yet at the last he finds forth one wyle,
That to himself softly could he smyle:
The Wolf says, Laurence thou plays belly blind,
We seek all night, but nothing can we find.
Sir, said the Tod, we are at it almost,
Soft you a little, and ye shall see it soon,
Then to a manor place they hied in have,
The night was light and fair ^hone the moon:
Then to a draw well these Senyors both are come,
Where that two b^ckets hang ^^uerall, it was so,
As one came up, an other down would go.
The sh^^ow of the Mo^^e sh^^e in the well,
Sir, said Laurence, once ye shall find me ^eill,
Now see yt not the ch^^se that I you tell,
White as any milk and round as any ^^ele,
He hanged it yonder that no man should it steel,
Sir trust me well, the cabboke ye see hing,
Might be a present to a Lord or King.
Nay, quoth the Wolf, might I this cabbok have,
On the dry land as I it yonder see,
I would qu^te claim the Carle of all I eraue:
His durty Ox^^ I c^re not for a ^^e^,
You were more me^te for such a man as me:
Laurence, quoth he, leap in the bucket soon,
And I shall hold the one, while thou go down.
Laurence girde down both soon and suttilly,
The other bode about and held the flayle,
It is so much, quoth Laurence, it masters me,
On all my toes it has not left one nail:
Ye must needs help upward, and it hayle,
Leap in the other bucket man hastily,
And come soon down and help me by and by.
Then lightly in the bucket leapt the ^owne,
His weight stray^ made the other and ar^^^,
The Tod came merrily up, the Wolf yeed down,
Then angerly the Wolf upon him cries,
I coming thus downward, why thou upward hyes?
Sir, quoth the Fox, thus fares it often in town,
As one comes up, so goes another down.
Then to the ground soon went the Wolf in have,
The Tod lept on land as blyeth as any bell,
And left the Wolf in water to the wast,
Who halde him out I wot not of the well:
Here ends the text I have no more to tell,
Yet may men find some good Moralitee,
In this sentence, though it a Fable be.
Morality.
THe Wolf I liken to a wicked man,
Which does the poor oppress in ery place:
And pykes at them all quarrels that he can,
By rigor, rape, and other wickedness,
The Fox the feend, I call into this case,
Egging all men to run unrighteous raynes,
Thinking thereby to lock him in his chains.
The husband may be called a godly man,
With whom the fiend fault finds (as Clerks ^eedes)
Busy to tempt him with all ways that he can:
The hens are works, that fro firm faith proceeds,
Where such sprouts spreds, ye evil sprit there not speeds
But wends unto the wicked man again,
That he has lost his travel is full feign.
The woods waste, wherein was the Wolf wild,
Are wicked riches, which all men gapes to get,
Who trustes in such trustery, are often beguylde,
For Mammon may be called the Devils net,
Which Sathanas, for all sinful folk has set:
Such proud pleasure who sets his trust therein,
Without special grace lightly can out wine.
The cheese may be called couetice,
Which blometh broad in many men's eye,
Woe worth the well of that wicked vice,
For it is all but fraud and fantasy,
Driving all men to leap into that buttery,
That downward draws unto the pain of hell,
Christ keep all Christians from that wicked well.
FINIS.
The merry tale of the wolf and the Weather.
WHylom there was, as Esope can report,
A Shepherd dwelling by a forest near,
Which had a Dog that did him great comfort,
Full ware he was to keep his fold fro fear,
That neither Wolf nor wildecat durst appear,
Nor Fox on field, nor yet no other beast,
But he them slew, or chased at the least.
So happe^ned it (as every beast must sleep)
This Dog of sudden sickness to be dead,
But then God wot the keeper of the sheep,
For very woe woxe wanner than the wead:
Alas, quoth he, now see I no remead,
To save these selly beasts that I now keep,
For why the Wolf will weary all my sheep.
It would have made a man's heart sore to see,
The selly shepherd make such lamentation,
Now is my dearling dead alas, quoth he,
For now to beg my bread I may be bowne,
With pike staff and with skrip fro town to town,
For all the beasts before that bandoned wear,
Will now return again, and all my sheep to tear.
With that a Weather stoutly stood on foot,
Master, quoth he, make merry and be light,
To break your heart for bale, it is no boot,
For one dead Dog ye must not take such flight,
Go fetch him hither and flay his skin ere night,
So sow it on me: and look that it be meet,
Both head, and neck, body, tail, and feet.
Then will the Wolf believe that I am he,
For I shall follow him fast where ere he fare,
All hole the charge here I take upon me,
Your sheep to keep at midday late and rayre,
And he pursue, by God, I shall not spare,
To follow him as fast as did your dog,
So that I warrant, ye shall not want a hog.
Than said the Shepherd, this comes of a good wit,
Thy counsel is both good, faithful, and true,
Who says a shepes a wretch, they lie of it:
With that in have the dogs skin of he flewe,
And on the sheep right softly could it sewe,
Than was the wether wanton of his weed,
Now of the Wolf, quoth he, I have no dreed.
In all things he counterfayte the dog,
For all the night he stood and took no sleep,
So that long time there wanted not an hog,
So ware he was, and watchful them to keep,
That Laurence durst not look upon a sheep,
For and he did, he followed him so fast,
That of his life he made him all aghast.
Was another Wolf, wildeeat, nor yet Tod,
Durst come within the bounds all about:
But he would chase them both throw rough and snot,
These baylefull beasts had of their lives such doubt,
For he was great and seemed to be stout,
That every beast did dread him and eke fear,
Without the wood that none durst once appear.
It happened there an hungry Wolf to slide,
Out throw his sheep where as they did lie,
I shall one have, quoth he, what ever betyde,
Though I be weried, or else I will dle:
With that a Lamb he got by and by,
The rest start up, for they were all aghast,
But (God wot) if the Weather followed fast.
Went never hound more hastily from the hand,
When he was runnyng most rashly forth roe,
Nor went this weather over moss and strand,
And stopped neither at bank, buske, nor bro,
But followed still, ay fiercely on his foe,
With such a drift, while dust and dirte ouerdraue him,
And made a vow to God that he would have him.
With that the Wolf let out his tail at length,
For he was hungry, and it drew near even,
And shope him for to run with all his strength,
When he the weather so near coming had seen,
He dread his life, and he had taken been,
Therefore he spared neither buske nor bogge,
For well he knew the kindness of the Dog.
To make him light he cast the Lamb him fro,
So lept ore leys and ran through dirt and mire,
Nay (quoth the Weather) in faith we part not so,
It is not the Lamb, but thee that I desire,
I shall come near for now I see thee tire,
The Wolf ran still and durst not look behind him,
But ay the nearer the weather he could wind him.
Soon after that he followed him so near,
While that the Wolf for fear befiled the field,
And left the way, and ran through bushe and bryar,
And thought within the woods him for to shield,
He ran still restles, or else he must needs yield,
The weather followed him out and in,
While that a bryar bush, tare rudely off the skin.
The Wolf was ware and blinked him behind,
And saw the weather come flinging through ye bryer;
So saw the dog skin hanging on the lynd,
Nay (quoth he i^ this ye that is so near?
Right now a hound, and now white as a friar,
I fled ore far, and I had known the case,
To God I vow that ye shall rewe this race.
What was the cause ye gave me such a catch?
With that in have he took him by the horn,
For all your wyles, you met once with your match,
Suppose ye laughed ^e all this year to scorn,
For what treason have ye this dogges*skin borne?
Master quoth he, but even to play with you,
I you require that ye none other trow.
Is this your jesting in earnest then, quoth he,
For I am very fearful and also flote,
Come back again and I shall let you see.
Then where the way was berayed he him brote,
Whether call ye this fair play or not?
To set your master in so fell afray,
The which for fear thus filed has the way.
Thryse by my soul ye made me look behind,
And upon my hotches my sinews may be se^ne,
For feardnesse full often I field the wind,
Now is this ye: nay but a Dog I ween,
My thinks your teeth ore short to be so keen,
Blessed be the bushe, that reft you your array,
Cls flying bursten had I been this day.
Sir (quoth the weather) suppose I ran in hy,
My mind was never to do your person ill,
The flear gettes the follower commonly,
In play or earnest, prove who so ever will,
Since I but played, be gracious me until,
And I shall make my friends to bless your bones,
For sure good servant will help his master once.
I have often times been set in great affray,
But by the roode so rayde yet was I never,
As thou have made me with thy pretty play,
I shote behind when thou ore took me ever,
But ^ertaynly now shall we not disseuer,
Then by the neckebone surely he him took,
Or ever he ceast, and it in sunder shook.
Morality.
ESope that Poet first father of this Fable,
Wrate this parable which is convenient,
Because the sentence was fruitful and agreeable,
In morality examplatiue prudent,
Whose problemes been very excellent,
Through similitudes of figures to this day,
Gives doctrine to the readers of it for ay.
Here may thou see that riches of array,
Will cause poor men presumptuous for to be,
Then think to hold of none be they as gay,
But counterfayte a Lord in every degree,
Out of knowledge in pride they clime so hie,
That they will forbear their better in no stead,
Till some man turn, their heels over their head.
Right so in service other some exceedes,
And they have wages, wealth and cherishing,
That they will be lightly Lords in deeds,
And look not to their blood and ofspryng,
But yet none knows how long that rule will ring,
But he was wise that bad his son consider,
Beware in wealth, for the hall bench is right slyder.
Therefore I counsel men of every state,
To know them self, and whom they should forbear,
And fall not with their better in debate,
Suppose they be as gallant in their gear:
It comes not a servant to bold war,
Nor clime so hie, while he fall of the lather,
But think upon the Wolf and on the Weather.
FINIS.
The woeful tale of the cruel Wolf and the innocent Lamb.
ACruell Wolf right ravenous, and fell,
Upon a time past to a river,
Descending from a rotch, unto a well,
To slake his thirste drank of the water clear,
So upon chance, a selly Lamb came near,
But of his foe, the Wolf nothing he wist,
And in the stream leaped to cool his thrist.
They drank both but not of one intent,
The Wolves thought was all on wickedness,
The silly Lamb was meek and innocent,
Upon the river in an other place,
Beneath the Wolf, he drank a little space,
While he thought good, thinking of none ill,
The Wolf him saw, and rampant came him till.
With grinning teeth, and fearful angry look,
Said to the Lamb, thou caytife wretched thing,
How durst thou be so bold to file the brook,
Where I should drink, with thy foul slauering?
It were alms deed thee for to draw and hing.
That should presume, with thy foul lips so vile,
To mar my drink, and this fair water file.
The selly Lamb quaking for very dread,
On knees fell, and said sir with your leave,
Suppose I dare not say, thereof ye lied:
But by my soul, I wot ye can naught preue,
That I did aught in any, that should you grieve,
Ye wot also that your accusation,
Bears no truth, and is against all reason.
Though I cannot, nature will me defend,
And of the deed perfect experience,
All heavy things must of themselves descend,
But if some things by force make resistance,
Then may the stream in no way make ascence,
Nor run backwarde: I drank beneath you far,
Ergo, the water therefore I did not mar.
Also my lips, since that I was a Lam,
Touched no thing that was contagious,
But sucked milk from pappes of my dam,
Right natural, sweet, and also delicious,
Well, quoth the Wolf, thy language rigorous,
Comes thee of kind: so thy father to,
Held me at bay, till he no more could do.
He angered me, and then I could him warn,
Within one year and if I broke my head,
I would be venged on him or on his barn,
For his spiteful and froward plead,
Thou shall doubtless, for his deeds be dead.
Sir it is wrong that for the fathers gilt,
The fautlesse son should punished be or spilt.
Have yt not heard what holy Scripture says,
Spoken by the mouth of God almight?
Of his own deeds each man shall bear the praise,
As pains for sin, rewards for works right,
For my trespass why should my son have plight?
Who did the miss let him sustain the pain,
A, A, (quoth the Wolf) yet answerest thou again.
I let thee wit, when that the father offends,
I will refuse none of his succession,
And of his sons, I well may take amends,
Unto the twenty degree descending down,
Thy father thought to make a strong poison,
And with his mouth, in my water did it spue,
Sir, quoth the Lam, these two are nothing true.
The law says, and ye will understand:
There should no man for wrong or violence,
His adversary punish at his own hand,
Without process of law, and evidence,
Which should have leave to make lawful defense,
And thereupon summoned peremptorily,
For to propone contrary, or reply.
Set me a lawful court, I shall appear,
Before the Lion Lord and true Justice,
And by my hand, I bind my faith right here,
That I shall bide an vnsuspect assise,
This is the law, this is the instant guise.
Ye should pretend therefore and summons make,
Against that day to give reason and take.
Nay (quoth the Wolf) thou would intruse reason,
Where wrong and robry should dwell in property,
That is a point and part of false treason,
For to make ruth remain with cruelty,
By his wounds, false traitor, thou shall die,
For thy trespass and for thy fathers deed,
With that anon he caught him by the head.
The silly Lamb could do nothing but bleate,
Soon was he dead, the Wolf would show no grace,
So drunk his blood, and of his flesh can eat,
While he was full and went his way apace,
Of this murder what shall we say alace?
Was not this ruth, was not this great pity?
To make this silly Lamb, without fault thus to die.
Morality.
THe poor people this Lamb may signify,
As evil men, Merchants, and laborers,
Of whom this life is half a purgatory,
To win their food continually like misers,
The Wolf betokens false extortioners,
And oppressors of poor men as we see,
By violence, craft, or usury.
Three kinds of Wolves in this world remaynes,
The first are false peruerters of the laws,
Which under suttill terms falshead mayntaines,
As though all were Gospel that he shows,
But without brybe the poor he overthrows,
Smoothering the right, making wrong proceed,
Of such Wolves, helles fire shall be their meede.
O man of law let be thy futtletie,
With nycequips, and frauds intricate:
And think that God in his Divinity,
The wrong and right of all thy works wate,
For prayer, price, for hye, nor low estate,
Of false quarrels see thou make no defense,
Hold with the right, hurt not thy conscience.
An other kind of Wolves ranenous,
Are mighty men, having full great plenty,
Which are so greedy and so covetous,
They will not let the poor in peace be,
Suppose he and his household both should dye
For fault of food, no care will they make,
But over his head his house will they take.
O man without mercy what is in thy thought,
Were thou a Wolf, and could understand,
Thou have enough, the poor husband right naught,
But little croppe of corn upon a clot of land,
(For Gods aw) how durst thou take in hand,
And thou thy Barnes full, and yet do egg,
To put him fro his living, and make them to beg.
The third Wolf are men of heritage,
As Lords that have lands by Gods leave,
And lets out to poor men a village,
And for the time incomes does receive,
Ece half spent the time, ^exeth him and berene,
With picked quarrels, for to make him feign,
To flitte, or pay his income new again.
His horse, his ^are, ^e must lend to the Lord,
To drudge and draw, in court or in carriage,
His servant, or him self may not be spard,
To swing, or sweat, withouten meat or wage,
Thus how he stands in labor and bondage,
That scantly can he purchase bear or wine,
Course brown bread, or drink that is thin.
Have thou no pity to make thy te^aunts sweat,
In thy labor with faint and hungry women,
And see, has little good to drink and eat,
With his meyny, at even when he co^mes home,
Thou should fear for rightuous God his dome,
For it cries vengeance to the Heavens hie,
To make poor men work, without meat or f^e.
O thou great Lord that riches have and rent:
Be not a Wolf thus to devour the poor,
Think that nothing crue^l or violent,
May in this world perpetually endure,
Thus should thou believe, and certainly assure,
For to oppress thou shall have as great pain,
As thou the poor, had with thine own hand slain.
God keep the Lamb (which is the innocent,)
From Wolves bit, and fell extortioners,
God grant that wrangling men of false intent,
Be manifested, and punished as offenders,
And God as thou all rightuous prayers hears,
To save our Queen, and give her heart and hand,
All such Wolves, to banish out of the land.
FINIS.
The tale of the woeful end of the Paddocke and the Mouse: showing the
mischief of desemblers.
Upon a time (as Esope could report)
A little Mouse came to a river side.
She might not wade, her legs were so short*
Neither could she swim, she had no horse to ride,
Of very force behind ^er to bide,
And to, and fro, besides the river deep,
She ran crying with many pit^ous p^epe.
Help over, help over, this selly Mouse can cry,
For Gods love, some body over the brim,
With that a Paddocke in the water by,
Put up her head, and on the bank began clim,
Which by nature could douke, and gayly swim,
With voice full rank, she said on this manier,
Good morn sir Mouse what is your errand here.
See thou (quoth she) of corn yonde jolly plat,
Of ripe Otes, of Barley, Pease, and Wheat,
I am hungry, and feign would be thereat,
But I am stopped by this water great,
And on this side I get nothing to eat,
But hard nuttes, which with my teeth I bore,
Were I beyond, my feast were much the more.
I have no boat, here is no mariner:
And though there were, I have no fraught to pay,
(Quoth she sister) let be thy heavy cheer,
Do my counsel, and I shall find the way,
Without Horse, Bridge, Boat, or else gallay,
To bring thee over safely, be not affeard:
And not once to wet the compass of thy beard.
I have great wonder quoth the little Mous,
How can thou flote, without feather or finne:
This river is so deep and dangerous,
Me thinks, that thou shuldst drowned be therein,
Tell me therefore, what faculty or gin,
Thou have, to bring thee ore this water wan?
That to declare, the Paddocke thus began.
With my two feet (quoth she)long and brade,
In steed of ores I row the stream full still,
And though the bryme be perilous to wade,
Both too and fro, I row at mine own will,
I may not drown for why my open gill,
Deuoydes all the water I receive,
Therefore to drown forsothe no dread I have.
The Mouse beheld then her frowning face,
Her wrinkled cheeks, and her lips side:
Her hanging brows, and her voice so harce,
Her lagring legs, and her harsky hyde,
She ran a back and on the Paddock cryde,
If I can any skill of Phisnomy,
Thou haste some part of false villainy.
For Clerks says, the inclination,
Of man's thought, proceeds commonly,
After the corporal complexion,
To good or evil as nature will apply,
A froward will and crabbed Phisnomy,
The old Proverb, is witness of this lorum,
Distortum vultum, sequitur distortio morum.
Nay (quoth the Frogge) that Proverb is not true,
For fair things ofttimes are found infakin,
The Blaberys though they be sad of hew,
Are gathered up when Prymrose is forsaken,
The face may fail, to be the hearts token,
Therefore I find this written in each place,
Thou should not judge a man after his face.
Though I be irksom for to look upon,
There is no cause why I should lacked be,
Were I as fair as jolly Absolon,
I am no causer of that great bewty,
This difference in form and quality,
Almighty God has caused dame nature,
To print and set in every his creature.
Of some the face may be full flourishing,
With silken tongue, and cheer right amorous,
With mind inconstant, false, and varying,
Full of deceyte, and means cautelous,
Let be thy preaching (quoth the hungry Mouse)
And by what means now make me understand,
That thou can help me unto yonder land.
Thou know, quoth she, a body that has need,
To help them self, should many ways cast,
Therefore go get a double twined threede,
And bind thy leg to mine, with knottes fast,
I shall thee learn to swim, be not aghast,
(As well as I) As thou, then quoth the Mous,
To prove that play, it were right perilous.
Should I be bound, and fast, that now am free,
In hope of help, nay then beshrew my head,
For I might lose, both life and liberty,
If it were so who should amend the deed?
But if thou will swear to help me with speed,
Without fraud, or guyle, to bring me ore the flud,
And without hurt or harm in faith, quoth she, good.
She goyked up, and to the heaven can cry:
O Jupiter of nature God and King,
I make an oath truly to thee, that I
This littell Mouse shall over this water bring,
This oath was made, the Mouse without perceiving,
The false engine of this foul carping Pad,
Took threede, and bound her leg as she her bad.
Then foot for foot, they lap both in the brim,
But in their minds they were right different,
The Mouse thought of nothing, but for to swim,
The Paddock for to drown set his intent,
When they in midway of the stream nere went,
With all her force the Paddock pressed down,
And thought the Mouse without mercy to drown.
Perceiving this, the Mouse on her can cry,
Traitor to God and forsworn unto me,
Thou tookest upon thy faith, right now, that I
Without hurt or harm, should ferried be and free,
And when she saw, there was but do, or dee,
Withal her might, she forced her self to swim:
And pressed upon the Todes back for to clim.
The dread of death, her strength made increas,
And forced her defend with might, and main,
The Mouse upward: the Paddock down can pres,
While to, while fro, while dowked up again,
This silly Mouse plunged into great pain,
Can fight as long as breath was in her breast,
Till at the last she cried for the priest.
Fighting thus together, the kight sat on a twist,
And to this wretched battle took good heed,
And with a whiske, or any of them wist,
He clenchet his talens betwixt them on the threede,
So to the land he flew with them good speed,
Glad of that catch, piping with many pew:
So lowsed them, and without pity slew.
Then bowelled them that butcher with his bill,
And belly drawn full featly them he fleede,
But all their flesh, would scant be half a fill,
And guts also unto that greedy gleede.
Of their debate thus when I heard the reed,
He took his flight and over the fields flaw,
If this be not true, then ask of them that saw.
Morality.
MY brother if thou will take aduertence,
By this Fable thou may perceive and see,
It passes far all kind of pestilence,
A wicked mind fraught with words fair and s^ee,
Beware therefore with whom thou matchest thee,
For thee were better go to carte and plow,
And all thy days to delue in wet and dry,
Than to be matched with a wicked fellow.
A false intent under a fair pretense,
Has caused many an innocent to die,
Great folly it is to give ouersoone credence,
To all that speaks fayrely unto thee,
A silken tongue, an heart of cruelty,
Smites more sore than any shot of arrow,
Brother if thou be wise, I red thee flee,
To match thee with a fained froward fellow.
I warrant thee also, it is great negligence,
To bind thee fast, where thou were frank and free,
When thou art bound, thou can make no defense,
To save thy life, nor yet thy liberty.
This simple counsel brother take of me,
And it to conne forth both early and late,
Better without strife, to live alone we see,
Than to be matched with a wicked mate.
This hold in mind, right more I shall thee tell,
What by these beasts may be fygurate.
The Paddocke using in the flood to dwell,
Is man's body, swimming rare and late,
In this wretched world with cares implicate,
Now hy, now low, whiles plu^ged up, whiles down,
Continually in peril, and ready for to drown.
Now dolorous, now glad as bird on breere,
Now in freedom, now wrapped in distress,
Now hole and sound, now dead and brought on beer,
Now pore as Job, now rolling in riches.
Now gowns gay, now rags laid in press,
Now full as pease, now hungry as the hounde,
Now hoyst on wheel, now thrown upon ye ground.
This little mouse, here knit thus by the shin,
The soul of man betoken may indeed,
Bounden, and from the body may not win,
While cruel death come break of life the threede,
The which to drown should ever stand in dread
Of carnal lust, by the suggestion,
Which draws the soul continually a down.
The water is the world aye weltering
With many waves of tribulation:
In which the soul and body be sturring
Standing right different in their opinion,
The soul upward, the body preaces down,
The soul right feign would be brought ore ywis,
Out of this world, into the heavens bliss.
The Right is death, that comes suddenly,
As does a thief, and ends soon the battle:
Be vigilant therefore, and still ready,
For man's life is brickle and aye mortal.
My friend therefore make thee a strong wall,
Of faith in Christ: for death will the assay,
Thou know not when, even morrow or midday.
Adieu my friend: and if that any ask
Of these Fables, so shortly I conclude,
Say thou I left the rest, unto the learneds task,
To make example, and some simlitude.
Now Christ for us that died on the rood,
Of soul and life, as thou art savior,
Grant us to pass into a blessed hour.
Finished in the vale of Aylesburie the thirtenth of August. Anno Domini. 1574.

THE EPILOGVE.
BEhold ye men) Esope that noble clerk
Although of body yformed wondrous ill,
His fables wrote with wisdom deep and dark
To stir our minds (to good which had no will)
By beasts and fowls, he spoke to warn us still,
As Fox, Woulfe, sheep, dog, cock and hen,
To stir our minds to live on earth like men.
Its writ of old by authors that are past,
That Esope was crook backed, great belly and head,
Crook legged, splay foot, and like a Cow in wast
Yet virtuous of his life, as it is sead,
Whose good examples lives though he be dead,
In each man's mouth, and shall do still for aye.
Lo virtue brings forth fruit without decay.
Thus as ye hear ill shapen of his body,
Yet of his mind none perfecter then he:
But mark his Sawes, and ye find him no noddy,
But perfect aye, as perfect lo may be,
Who lendes you light good virtuous ways to see.
Then love this work, and and read it at your will,
I but eclipse his tales of so great skill.
FINIS.

