THE ART OF DYING WELL.

Divided into two Books.

WRITTEN By ROBERT BELLARMINE of the Society of Jesus, and Cardinal.

Translated into English for the benefit of our Countrymen, by C. E. of the
same Society.

^imortui qui in Domino moriuntur.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE L. M. M. the Translatour wishes all true Honor
and Happynes.
HAVING nothing of mine own worthy of your Honorable Acceptance, or any way
proportionable to your Merits; I present you with a Strangers Labor in an
English attire: which although for quantity it be one of the least, and for
time the last that has come from that learned Pen: yet for general profit it
may prove the best, as treating a more familiar Argument then any of his other
spiritual Books have done.

Nothing is more certain, nothing more usual then Death, which has consumed
all that have gone before us; and we, whether we will or nill, must tread the
same path, and follow them. There is no exemption from this passage, to which
(such is the swift and short course of our life) we do not so much run, as
fly: and yet for the most part come to it before we would, yea altogether
against our will; and that specially for the great horror we conceive thereof,
which for the most part is grounded on the guylt of Conscience. For as the
Wiseman says, Sap. 17.
timida est nequitia, wickedness is full of fear, and condemns it self, and
where the soul is surcharged with sin, and hell fire prepared to receive the
sinner, no marvel though he fear and tremble: or else for want of Faith of
the future life. For such as make their souls as mortal as their bodies, and
stretch their thoughts no further then to that which like beasts, they see with
their eyes, do easily with the Philosopher esteem of death as if it were,
Arist. 3. Moral. 6.
Maxim omnium rerum horribilis, of all things the most dreadful, in regard
that it depriues them of their temporal Emoluments, their Friends, Honors,
Disports, and all esteemed Happiness; so as the first for fear of what is to
come, these for grief of that which is past esteem death dreadful. Or
finally this falls out for want of due consideration thereof, of death I mean,
which to such as have it still before their eyes, as it is a bridle from sin,
and spur to virtue; so is it an encouragement against the poison thereof. For
the sting of this snake (as the Apostle says) is sin, Stimulus mortis
peccatum, 1. Cor. 15.
which by continual meditation thereon, is taken away: memento mortis tuae
(says Saint Hierome) and non peccabis, Hier. ad Cypr. Greg. 13. Moral. c. 10.
remember thy death, and thou shall not sin; or as Saint Gregory says,
culparum laqueos euadent, such shall walk so warily as they shall not fall into
the snares of the enemy, or sting of death; and consequently shall be free from
al fear which the moral Philosopher did rightly observe, and therefore gave
this advise to his friend Lucilius: Seneca ep. 30.
Tu, vt mortem numquam timeas, semper cogita, that thou may never fear
death, be always thinking on it.

Which contemplation is so sovereign and effectual, as our worthy Bishop of
Canterbury S. Anselme writing to one, Ansel. ep. 113.
whom he very dearly esteemed in England, who had demanded his counsel for
spiritual direction, he gave him only this advise saying: So live every day as
thou do desire to be found at the last hour of thy life; and so every day
prepare thy self as if to morrow thou were to dye, and to give account unto
God; by this means thou shall proceed from virtue to virtue. So he. Which
grave advise little needs any Commentary, and your Virtuous Disposition as
little needs my incitement. I know you are not unmindful heerof; I know your
Zeal and Constancy in Gods cause; I know your Charity toward the afflicted,
and cannot doubt of the continual use of prayer and virtuous actions, wherewith
now for many years you have been so well accustomed; which so dispose you to
this end, as you need not fear, but with desire expect this passage, which
will open heaven, which will take you from the world, and restore you to God;
which will loose the bands of this corruptible clogge, and inuest you for ever
with immortal glory; and which finally from the sight of these transitory
things, the mere shaddows of true pleasure, will bring you to the full sight
of the Blessed Trinity, the maine ocean of all true delights, and there (as the
Apostle says) semper cum Domino erimus, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
we shall for ever be with our Lord.

This is the happiness of the Vetuous, for ever in the next life, to be with
our Lord, who never in this life would forsake him, but still continued in his
fear, and favor until the end. These with triumphant security tread Death
under their feet, whiles the wicked surprised and conquered by his force, are
made a prey to his Tyranny, who is not moved at all, with their tears, cries,
or any entreaty, but no less scorns this their fruitless grief, then he
does the frail power of the most potent Monarch of the world, whom he
overthrows with as great facility, as the poorest beggar, and that without all
regard of degree, age, strength, riches, or what else soever the earth affoards.
This did Clotharius King of France (to name one for all) acknowledge, when
being dangerously sick as Saint Gregory of Towers does recount, Greg. Tu. l.
4. hist or. cap. 21.
he said unto such as stood about him: Vah quid putatis? qualis est ille Rex
caelestis, qui sic tam magnos Reges interficit? What think you my masters?
How great is the King of heaven, who in this manner does kill so potent Kings?
Death is the instrument of execution, which to such as prepare themselves unto
it is a sleep and quiet repose, to others a most dreadful bitterness and vexing
torment; a Lamb where it is subdued, a lion where it does overcome. The good
wish for it, the bad abhor it; but both the one and the other must of
necessity undergo it; and I know not what greater folly or frenzy can be
imagined, then to be watchful in light matters, and to forget this; to behold
with attentive affection the things that fly from us, and not to fee whither
our selves, by the swift wings of time, are incessantly carried; to see others
every where to dye, and yet to live in such careless neglect as if even in this
life we were immortal; to believe that there is a Hell, and Heaven, and
neither to fear the one, or to desire the other; to know that every one shall
receive according to the works he has done good or evil: Referet vnusquisque
(says the Apostle) propria corporis prout gessit, 2. Cor. 5.
sieve bonum sieve malum: Every one shall receive according to that he has done
in this life, either good or evil; and yet not to furnish himself with true
merits, by the practice of virtue, which alone will crown him with everlasting
felicity. Filij hominum vsquequo graui cord! Psalm. 4.
O you sons of men, how long will you be heauy-harted?

But in vain do I speak to them who have their eyes shut, their ears stopped,
and their hearts hardened; who will not understand to do well, who are fallen
into the depth, and therefore contemn all counsel, and will not be withheld
from running headlong into the gulf of perdition: there is no salve for such
desperate soars, unless God by a singular mercy, Psalm. 135.
in manu potente and brachio excelso, in a strong hand, and powerful arm do
reclaim them, which in many, yea most, he does not. For albeit his Mercy be
great, yet is his Justice exact; and the number of the damned in hell fire, is
far greater then of the servants of God that are crowned in heaven; and often
it is repeated in the Scripture, that many are called, but few elected; that
the way to heaven is narrow, and few enter; the way to hell is wide, and trodden
by many; with the like. All which will not awake them out of this dead letargy,
and drowsy sleep, no warnings, no books, no threats, no persuasion will avail
them. And albeit I could wish that this work might benefit all, yet that I may
well wish, but cannot expect. To your self I know it will be grateful, and
beneficial also, I hope unto yours, and others: at least so from my heart I do
desire it may be: and the subject thereof being so necessary, and points
therein treated so important, they cannot but much stir up any well disposed
mind to reflect upon them.

For in this little Treatise you have the principles and precepts of good Life,
the use of Prayer, Fasting, Alms, and other virtues; you have Aduertisements
for the Sacraments, how to prepare your self unto them, how to receive them;
you have remedy against Tentations, Comforts in afflictions, Instructions for
security, Fore-warninges against dangers; in one word hence you have what to
fear, what to follow, what to fly. So as this little book to such as can use
it well, and frame their lives to the prescript thereof, is a rich Jewel, and
heavenly Treasure, of which we may truly say, Prouer. 21.
procul and de vltimis finibus pretium eius, and the Author being perhaps never
to write more, by reason of his great age, and weakness, (for he wants not two
years of fourscore) this his last begotten Benjamin deserves more respect.
For besides the subject and substance thereof, it lays open the true Idaea (or
Image) of the Writer, what his Judgment is of all wordly felicity; where all
his thoughts and endeauours have still been fixed and directed; how he is
disposed to shut up the last period of his life; although his own actions are
more lively characters heerof, then any of his books have yet expressed; in so
much as of his Familiars he is more admired for his rare virtue, then he is
renowned amongst Strangers for his exquisite learning.

These motives with the band of Gratitude for former Merits have emboldened me
to make this Present unto your Honor, as well by this means (seeing by better
I cannot) to discharg my duty for your deserts as also for that I tender your
spiritua^ good, which hereby may not a little be advanced. The root seems
bitte^ but the fruit is pleasant, yea the bitterness it self is intermingled
wit^ delight: for the contemplation o^ death is only fearful to such as ar^
unacquainted with it; when use hat^ made it more familiar, then will the
remembrance thereof be delightful because as the Prophet says: Cu^ dederit
dilectis suis somnum, ecce hereditas Domini, Psalm. 126
when he shall bestow thi^ sleep on his friends, then lo, is the inheritance
of our Lord at hand. So as death is the end of all our labors in this life;
and the end (as the Philosopher says) is, or ought to be first intended, and
specially regarded, because all does depend thereon. What avails it a Ship to
have escaped many storms in the wide Ocean, if in the return within sight of
the haven it be cast away? What is the Husbandman the better who having had a
prosperous spring, if a little before harvest his corn be blasted? Or for
Soldiers to have fought a long and sharp battle with valor, if in the end
they be overthrown, and discomfited? The end must carry the crown; till then
all is subject to uncertain mischance. And so we see many for a long time to
have lived well, and even then when they seemed ready to have received their
rewards, to have miscaryed, and lost all; but this commonly never befalls the^
who having their end still before the eyes of their soul, do with continual
fear and trembling work their Salvation. Of which point, for that the work
it self will speak at large, I shall not need to adioyn more, but leaving the
same to your serious view, co^me^d the success of all unto Almighty God; unto
whom I commit you, this second of November, wherein we pray for all faithful
souls departed, that they may be fellows with the Saints; and for our selves,
that we may be fellows of them both, in everlasting happynes. 1620.

Your Honors poor Beadsman, and dutiful servant. C. E.

The Preface of the Author.
CONSIDERING with my self in the last time of my usual retirement (in which
setting aside all public affairs I attend only to my self) what should be
the reason that so few do labor to learn the Art of dying well, which should
be best known and most familiar unto all, Eccles. 1.
no other answer did occur unto my mind but that of the Wise Man, Stultorum
infinitus est numerus, the number of fools is infinite. For what greater folly
can there be thought or imagined then for men to neglect that art on which all
their chiefest good and euerl^sting weal do depend and with so great care and
no less labor to practice so many and almost innumerable other arts by which
their temporal good so soon to be left and lost may either be kept or
increased? For truly none can deny the art of dying well to be the art of arts,
who with due attention will consider that in the hour of our death we are to
render an account unto God of whatsoever we have done, said, or thought in the
whole course of our life, and that ^^en unto the least idle word that we have
spoken, ^he Devil being then our accuser, our conscience the witness, God the
Judge; nothing then remaining but ^sting glory for the blessed, and never
e^ding woe for the wicked.

We see by daily experience in such as contend even for small matters, when
the time of judging the same is at hand, both the plaintiff and defendant to
take no rest, but to recurre now to their lawyers, now to their Attourneyes,
now to the Judges, now to the friends and allies of all these to have the
definitive sentence given in their favor: and at our death the cause of all
causes being brought before the supreme Judge to wit of everlasting life or
death, the defendant that is guilty oftentimes found unprovided and so
oppressed with sickness as he is not his own man, and is then compelled to give
an account of these things of which perhaps whiles he wa^ in good health he
never so much as thought upon.

Hence it comes that miserable me^ do fall so fast headlong into hell fire:
and truly, as S. Peter says, If the just man shall scarce be saved, 1. Pet. 4.
where shall the wicked, and the sinner appear? Wherefore I esteem it a
matter of special moment first to admonish my self, then my brethren that
they duly regard this art: and if there be any that have not learned it of
better masters, at least that they contemn not these things which we have
labored to collect or gather together out of the holy Scriptures, and the
writings of our ancient masters.

But before we come to the rul^s or precepts of this Art, I have thought it
expedient to search somewhat into the nature of death, and to se^ in what rank
it is to be placed, either amongst the things that are good, or else the
contrary amongst the evil. And truly if death be absolutely taken without any
other respect or relation, then doubtless is it to be esteemed evil, as being
that privation which is opposed to life, which life no man can deny to be a
good thing. Again we may add, that God is not the Author of death, for as the
Wise man teaches us: Through the envy of the Devil, Sap. 1. and 2.
death entered into the world, which is confirmed by Saint Paul when he says:
By one man sin entered into the world, Romans 5.
and by sin death, in whom all have sinned: hence I co^clud that if God made
not death, then is not death in it self good, because all that God has mad is
good, as Moses says: God saw all things that he had made, and they were all
very good. Genes. 1.


Notwithstanding although that death be not good, yet has the wisdom of God
so found out a means as it were to temper or season the same, as that out of
this bitter root much sweet sruit may grow. Hence it comes, that David says,
The death of the Saints of our Lord is precious in his sight; Psalm. 115.
and the Church in the preface of the Mass of the Resurrection speaking of
Christ says, Who by dying destroyed our death, and by rising again repaired
our life: Truly that death which destroyed ours, and repaired our life cannot
be otherwise then very good, and therefore albeit every death be not good, yet
we must grant that some are; and therefore Saint Ambrose feared not to entitle
one of his books: De bono mortis, of the good of death, in which he clearly
demonstrateth death (although begotten of sin) to bring with it many and no
small vtilityes.

Finally the same is confirmed by reason which does show death howsoever in it
self ill, by the grace of God, to work and procure much good: for first we
reap great good by death in that it riddeth us from all the miseryes of this
life, which are both very many, Job. 14.
and very great. Holy Job in plain words lamenteth of these miseries thus: Man
born of a woman, living but a short time, is replenished with many myseryes.
Eccles. 4.
And Solomon says: I have commended more the dead then the living, and have
judged him more happy then both who is not ye^ borne, nor has seen the
wickedness committed under the sun. And Ecclesiasticus adds saying: Ecl.
c. 40.
A great turmoyle is made for all men, and a heavy yoke is laid on the
children of Adam, from the day of their issuing forth from their mothers womb,
until the day of their burial, or return to the common mother of all, to wit
the earth, which finally as the parent of all receaueth them into her bosom,
and turns them into corruption. The Apostle in like manner co^plaineth of the
miseryes of this life and says, Unhappy man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death?

By these testimonies of sacred Writ is sufficiently proved death to have this
good annexed unto it, that it delivers a man from infinite miseryes of this
life. Moreover it yields us another far more eminent good then this,
because it is the gate by which we enter and pass from a prison to a Kingdom.
This was revealed by our Lord to Saint John the Apostle and Evangelist, whiles
for the faith of Christ he lived in banishment in the I Will of Pathmos: Apoc. 14.
I heard (says he) a voice from heaven saying unto me: Blessed are the dead
who dye in our Lord; from hence forth now says the spirit they may rest from
their labors, for their works do follow them. Blessed truly is the death of
Saints which at the command of the heavenly King delivers the soul from the
prison of the flesh and brings it to the Kingdom of heaven, where the holy
souls now free from all labors do sweetly repose, and for reward of their
works do receive the crown of a Kingdom: and even unto the souls which are
carried to Purgatory death yields a great benefit, whiles it delivers them
from the fear and danger of hell, and makes them secure of their future and
everlasting felicity: yea, even unto the damned death seems to yield some
good, when delivering them the sooner from their bodies, it makes that the
measure of their torments shall no more increase by the sins they would have
committed in their longer life.

For these so notable vtilityes death shows not a dreadful but a smiling,
not a terrible but an amiable countenance toward the good: and hence it
proceeded that the Apostle so securely cried out, Christ is my life and death
my gain, Phil. 1.
being desirous to be dissolved and to be with Christ: and in his first Epistle
to the Thessalonians he warns the good Christians not to be contristated with
the deaths of their dearest friends, neither to bemoa^ them as dead, but rather
to behold the^ resting as it were in a sleep.

And there lived not long since a holy woman called Catharine Adorna of the
City of Genua, who was so enflamed with the love of Christ, that she had an
incredible desire to dye and go to her beloved Savior, and for this cause
transported with the love of death she did often praise the sam as most fair
and beautiful, only misliking that she fled from such as sought her, and
sought for such as fled from her. The Reader may see more hereof in the 7.
Chapter of her life. Out of these things which we have said we see that death
as it is the child of sin is evil but through the grace and mercy of Christ
who vouchsafed to die for us, to become many ways profitable and wholesome,
amiable and delightful.

THE CONTENTS.
THE FIRST BOOK.
Chap. 1. Of the first Precept, which is, That he who desires to dye well, do
live well. page 1. Chap. 2. Of the second Precept of dying well, which is to
dye first to the world. page 5. Chap. 3. Of the third Precept of the Art of
dying well: which is of the three Theological Virtues. p. 17. Chap. 4. Of the
fourth precept of the Art of dying well, which conteyneth three Evangelical
documents. 26. Chap. 5. Of the fifth precept, in which is detected the error
of the Rich me^ of this world. page 39. Chap. 6. Of the sixth precept of the
Art of dying well, in which are explicated three Moral Virtues. 47. Cap. 7. Of
the 7. precept, which is of Prayer. 57. Cap. 8. Of the eight precept, which is
of fasting. 71. Cap. 9. Of the 9. precept, which is of almesdeeds. 72. Chap.
10. Of the tenth precept of dying well, which is of the Sacrament of Baptism.
page 97. Ca. 11. Of the 11. precept, of Confirmation. 107. Chap. 12. Of the
twelfth precept, which is of the Eucharist, or Sacrament of the Altar. page
113. Cap. 13. Of the 13. precept, of Penance. 122. Chap. 14. Of 14. Precept,
of Order, page 132. Chap. 15. Of the 15. Precept, which is of Matrimony. page
142. Chap. 16. Of the 16. precept, which is of Extreme Unction. page 154.
THE SECOND BOOK.
Chap. 1. The first Precept of dying well when our death is near at hand which
is meditation of death. 181. Chap. 2. Of the 2. Precept, is of Judgment. 199.
Cap. 3. Of the third precept, which is of Hell. 204 Chap. 4. Of the fourth
precept, which is of the glory of the Saints. page 213. Chap. 5. Of the 5.
precept when our Death is near which is of making our last will and testament.
pa. 223 Cap. 6. Of the 6. precept, which is of Confession. 228 Cap. 7. Of the
7. precept, which is of receiving the B. Sacrament, given us for our Viaticum.
page 234 Chap. 8. Of the 8. precept, which is of Extrem^ Unction. page 250
Chap. 9. Of the first Tentation of the Devil, (...) wit, of Heresy. page 256
Cap. 10. Of the 2. tentation to Desperatio^. 162 Chap. 11. Of te^ptatio^ to the
hatred of God. p. 269 Chap. 12. Of the first Remedy against the temptations of
the Devil. page 270 Cap. 13. Of the 2. Remedy against Te^ptatio^s 283. Ca. 14.
Of such as die not of an ordinary death. 290 Chap. 15. Of the happy death of
such as have learned well this Art of dying well. page 296 Chap. 16. Of the
unfortunate death of such, as hau^ neglected this Art of dying well. page 304
Chap. 17. The su^me, of the Art of dying well. 320
THE ART HOW TO DYE WELL. THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the first Precept of this Art of Dying well, which is, That he who
desires to dye well, do live well.
I Begin now to treat of the precepts or rules of this Art which I will divide
into two parts. In the first, we will set down rules which men should observe,
whiles they are in good health. In the second others which shall be necessary
when they are dangerously sick, and by all probability in danger to dye soon.
In the first part, we shall deliver the precepts which appertain unto the
virtues; then those which appertain unto the Sacraments. For by these two
ways we are most of al helped both to live, and to dye well.

But before both these, this general rule is to be premised, to wit that he
liu^ well, that desires to dye well: for since that death is the end of our
life, certainly every one who lives virtuously until the end, does dye well:
and he cannot dye ill, who never lived ill. As on the other side, he who has
always lived ill does so dye; and he cannot but dye ill who never lived well;
and so it fares in all other like things. For every one who keeps on the
right way to the place where he goes, arryueth without any missing or going
out of the way: but he who mistaketh the right way shall never come to the end
he would; he who studyeth diligently to attain learning, will soon become
learned, and doctor also in that he professes; and he who goes always to
school, but applies not his mind unto learning, does but le^se both time and
labor.

Some perhaps will allege the example of the good thief, who always lived
ill, and dyed well, and made a happy end. But it is not so: For that good
thief rather lived devoutly and religiously, and therefore dyed also so
saintly. For notwithstanding that he spent the greatest part of his life
wickedly, yet he so well bestowed the other, as he easily blotted out all
former offenses, and attained unto great and singular merits. For enflamed with
charity toward God, he openly defended Christ from the flaunders of the Jews;
and having the like love toward his neighbor he warned and checked his
blaspheming companion, and endeauored all he could to recall him to a better
life; for as yet he was in this mortal life when he said unto his fellow,
neque tu times Deum qui in eadem damnatione es? Et nos quidem just: nam digna
factis recipimus; hic vero nihil mali gessit? Neither do thou fear God who
art in the same condemnation? and we indeed justly: for we receive according to
our deserts; but this man what has he done amiss? Neither was the same thief
as yet departed this life when he spoke those noble words in which he confessed
Christ, Luc. 23.
and inplored his help, Domine memento mei cum veneris in regnum tuum: O Lord
remember me when thou shall come into thy Kingdom: and therefore this good
thief seems to be one of those who came last into the vinyard, and received
his reward before the first.

Matthew. 20.
True then, and general is this principle he who lives well, does dye well.
And this other in like manner, he who lives ill, does dye ill. Neither can it
be denied that it is a very dangerous matter to delay the change of our life
from vice to virtue until the last cast; and those to be far happier, who
begin to bear the yoke of the law of God, Thren. 3.
as Hieremy says, ab adolescentia sua, from their youth; and those in every
respect to be happiest of all, Apoc. 14.
who as the Apostle says, empti sunt ex hominibus primitiae Deo et Agno, were
bought from among men the first fruits unto God and the Lamb, who, not only,
were not defiled with women, but neither, was there any lie found in their
mouth; and they are without spot before the throne of God. Such was Hieremy the
Prophet, S. John Baptist, and above al, the Mother of our Lord, and many other
Saints of both sexes, which the knowledge of God alone does comprize.

Wherefore let this principle stand without all check, or control, that the
rule of dying well, depends upon the other rule of a good life.

CHAP. II. Of the second precept of dying well, which is to dye first to the
world.
NOw then to proceed that a man do live well above all things, it is necessary
that he dye to the world, before he dye to this corporal life. For all such as
live to the world, are dead to God; and it is impossible that any can begin to
live to God unless he first dye unto the world. This verity is so evidently
delivered in the holy scriptures, as it cannot be called into question but by
Infidells and misbelieuers: and that in the mouth of 2. or 3. witnesses every
word may stand, I will allege the holy Apostles, S. John, S. James, and S.
Paul, witnesses beyond all exception, as in whom the holy Ghost, who is the
spirit of truth, did most clearly speak. So then writes S. John the Apostle
and Evangelist, Joan. 14.
or rather affirms Christ thus to speak, Venit Princeps mundi huius, and in
me non habet quicquam, the Prince of this world comes, and in me he that
nothing: where by the Prince of the world he understands the devil, who is
the Prince of all the wicked, and by the world the company of all sinners who
love the world, and are beloved of the world: and the Evangelist adds a little
after, si mu^dus vos odit, Joan. 15.
scitote quia me priorem vobis odio habuit: si de mundo fuissetis, mundus quod
suum erat diligeret, quia vero de mundo non estis, sed ego elegi vos de mundo,
propterea odit vos mundus. If the world do hate you, know ye that it hated me
before it hated you: if you had been of the world the world would love his
own, but because you are not of the world, and I have chosen you out of the
world, Joan. 17.
therefore does the world hate you: and in another place, ego non pro mundo
rogo, sed pro eis quos dedisti mihi: I pray not for the world, but for those
whom thou have given unto me. In which words our Savior plainly declares by
the word world, to be understood those who with their Prince the devil shall
hear in the last day of Judgment that sentence pronounced against them, Ite
maledicti in ignem aeternum, go ye accursed into hell fire. The same Apostle in
his epistle adds, nolite diligere mundum neque ea quae in mu^do sunt. etc.
Do not love the world nor those things which be in the world: if any man love
the world, the charity of the father is not in him, because whatsoever is in
the world is the concupiscence of the flesh, the concupiscence of the eyes, and
pride of life, which is not of the father, but of the world, and the world
passes away, and the concupiscence thereof; he who does the will of Go^
remains for ever.

Now (...) us ^eare his fellow-Apostle S. Iame^ who thus speaks in his
epistle Adulteri, nescitis quia amicitia huius mundi inimica est Dei? Jacob. 4.
quicumque ergo voluerit esse amicui saeculi huius, inimicus Dei constituitur.
Aduouterers, know you not that the friendship of this world is the enemy of God?
whosoever therefore will be a friend of this world is made the enemy of God.
Finally let us hear S. Paul fellow-Apostle of them both and the vessel of
election: he in his first epistle to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 5.
writing unto all the faithful says, debueratis de hoc mundo exysse, you
should have gone forth out of this world: and again in the same epistle, dum
iudicamur a Domino, corripimur, 1. Cor. 11.
vt non cum hoc mundo damnemur, whiles we are judged of our Lord we are
punished, that we may not be damned with this world. Where evidently he
declares the whole world to be damned at the latter day, and therefore by the
world he understands not heaven and earth, nor all the people of the world,
but those only who love the world; for the just and virtuous in whose breasts
the love of God, and not the lust of the flesh does reign and prevail, are in
deed in the world, but are not of the world; but the wicked and ungodly are not
only in the world, but are of the world, and for that cause not the charity of
God does rule and reign in their hearts but the concupiscence of the flesh,
that is leachery, and the concupiscence of the eyes, that is covetousness; and
pride of life, that is swelling a^bition, by which they advance themselves
above others, and imitate the arrogance and pride of Lucifer, and not the
humility and meekenes of Jesus Christ.

And this being so, if any man will indeed learn this art of dying well, he
must seriously, not in word and tongue, but in work and truth, go out of the
world, yea and dye also to the world, and say with the Apostle, mihi mundus
crucifixus, Galat. 6.
est and ego mundo, the world is crucified to me, and I to the world. This
great and weighty affayre is not ludus puerorum, sport and pastime of children,
but a most important and difficult matter: and for that cause our Lord being
demanded, whether the number of such as are to be saved were small, answered,
contendite intrare per angusta^ portam: strive to e^ter in at the narrow gate;
Luc. 13.
and more largely in S. Matthew, intrate per angustan portam, quia lata est
porta, and spatiosa via est quae ducit ad perditionem, Matthew. 7.
and multi sunt qui intrant per eam: quam augusta porta and arcta via est quae
ducit ad vitam, and pauci sunt qui inueniunt eam? Enter in at the narrow gate
because the gate is wide, and way is broad which leads to perdition, and many
there be who do enter by it: how narrow is the gate and strait is the way that
leads unto life, and few there be that do find it?

To live in the world and to contemn the commodities of the world, is a most
hard and difficult thing: to see fair things and not to love them, to taste
sweet things and not to be delighted with the^; to despise honors, to desire
labors, to put himself in the lowest place, to yield unto others all higher
degrees, and finally without flesh as it were to live in flesh, is rather to be
termed an Angelical the^ a humane life; and yet the Apostle writing to the
Church of Corinth, in which almost every one lived together with their wives,
and consequently were neither Clergy men, nor Monks, nor Anchorets, but as we
now use to term them, were secular men; in this manner notwithstanding he
speaks unto the^: hoc itaque dico fratres, 1. Cor. 7.
tempus breue est and. This therefore my brethren I say unto you, the time is
short; it remains that such as have wives, be as though they had them not,
and those who weep as though they wept not, and those who are glad as though
they were not glad, and those who buy a^ though they did not possess, and they
wh^^ use this world as though they used it not for the figure of this world
does pass away. Of which words this is the sense, that the Apostle exhorts
the faithful, that having their hope fixed on heavenly happiness, they be so
little addicted to worldly things, as though they had nothing at all to do with
them: that they love their wives, but with so moderate love as if they had them
not; if necessity cause them to mourn for the loss of their children or
goods, that they mourn in such manner as though they were neither grieved nor
mourned at all; if they have cause to rejoice for the wealth or honor they
have gotten, that this joy be so small as if they did not rejoice, that is, as
if their joy apperteyned not unto them: if they buy lands or howses, to show so
little affection to those things as if they did not possess them as their
own; and finally the Apostle commands us so to live in the world, as if we
were strangers, guests, or pilgrims in the same, and not true inhabitants:
which the Apostle S. Peter more plainly teaches saying: 1. Pet. 2.
Obsecro vos ta^quam aduenas and peregrinos abstinere vos a carnalibus
desiderijs quae militant aduersus animam: I beseech you as strangers, and
pilgrims to refrain your selves from all carnal desires, which war against
the soul. By which words this most blessed Prince of the Apostles will have
us so to live even in our own town and house, as if we lived in another man's
house, and in some foreign country abroad; not heeding at all whether ther^ be
plenty or want in the place: which therefore he does command us, That w^ may
absteyne from carnal desires which war against the soul, for these carnal
desires do not so easily assault us when we see other men's things that do not
belong unto v^ as when we see those which we esteem our own. This then is to be
in the world and not to be of the world, which properly concerns them who are
dead t^ the world, and live to God, and for tha^ cause they fear not temporal
death, which endomageth them nothing, bu^ rather is gainful unto them,
according to that of the Apostle, Phil. 1.
mihi viuere Christ^^ est, and mori lucrum, Christ is my life, and death my
gain.

But how many (trow you) shall we find in these days so dead to the world, as
that they have already learned to dye also well to the flesh, and thereby to
make sure their salvation? Truly I do not doubt but that in the Cath. Church,
not only in Monasteryes, and in the Clergy, but amongst secular people also
many holy men may be found, and such as are truly dead to the world, who have
learned this Art how to dye well: yet withal this cannot be denied, that far
many more without comparion are to be found not only not dead to the world,
but so without measure tied and addicted to the same, and so fervent lovers of
pleasures, honors, riches, and the like, that unless they determine with
themselves to dye to the world, and do dye indeed, will doubtless come to a
miserable death, and as the Apostle says, be damned with the world.

But these Worldlings will say, it is too hard a matter to dye to the world,
whiles yet we live in it; and to neglect these benefits which God has created
for men to enjoy. To these I answer, that God does neither will, nor command
men altogether to cast away wealth, honors, and other worldly emoluments: for
Abraham was a special friend of God, and yet abounded in riches. David also
and Ezechias, and Josias were very rich Princes, and withal dear friends unto
Almighty God: and the same we may say of many Christian Kings and Emperors,
and therefore the commodityes of this world, riches, honors, pleasures a^e not
absolutely forbidden unto Christian people, but the immoderate love of the
things of this world, which are called of S. John, the concupiscence of the
flesh, concupiscence of the eyes, and pride of life. Abraham certes was
exceeding wealthy, but he not only used moderatly his riches, but was most
ready presently a^ the command of God to spend them all: for he who spared not
his only Son, most virtuous and most dear unto him, when God commanded that
even by the hands of Abraham himself he should be sacrificed; how easily at
the same comaund had he bestowed or given away al his other wealth? Therefore
Abraham was rich in substance, but richer in faith and charity, and for that
cause was not of the world, but rather dead unto it: and the same we may say of
other holy men, who abounded with riches, power, and glory, yea with Kingdoms
also and Empires, because being poor in spirit, dead to the world, and living,
only to God, they had most exactly learned this art how to dye well. And
therefore not abundance of wealth, or sublimity of honor, or Kingdom, or
Empire make a man to be of the world, or that he live in the world, but
concupiscence of the flesh, concupiscence of the eyes, and pride of life, which
in one word is called Cupidity, or disordinate affection, and is opposite to
the Theological virtue of Charity; and therefore if any through the grace and
mercy of God begin to love God for himself, and for his sake his neighbor, he
begins to go out of the world; and this Charity increasing, the other
disorderly appetite will go less and less, and so he will begin to dye to the
world: for charity cannot increase without the diminution of the other: and by
this means it will come to pass also that, that thing which whiles those
other passions were predominant seemed impossible, to wit, that a man living in
the world should not be of the world, through this increase of the love of God,
and decrease of disordinat affections, will become most easy; for that which to
this cupidity is a hard and insupportable yoke, is unto charity a sweet yoke
and light burden.

That then which before we said, to wit, that to go out of the world, and to
dye to the world, is not the play of boys, or pastime of babes, but a most
weighty and difficult thing, and most truly said of such as have not known the
power of the grace of God, nor tasted the sweetness of his charity, and of such
as are sensual without spirit: for he who has once tasted of the spirit of
God, does loath whatsoever flesh and blood do suggest: therefore every one who
earnestly desires to learn this art of dying well, upon which his everlasting
weal, and all true happiness does depend, let him protract no time, but
presently go out of the world, and perfectly dye to the world; when as
otherwise it cannot possibly be, that a man can live to the world and God
together, and at once enjoy both earth and heaven.

CHAP. III. Of the third precept of the Art of dying well: which is of the
three Theological virtues.
WE have showed in the former chapter that he cannot dye well who goes not out
of the world, and dies not to the same. Now is to be added what he is to do,
who is dead to the world that he may live to God, because it is granted to
none to dye well, that have not lived well in this life, as I have written in
the first chapter. The brief sum of living well is expressed by the Apostle
in his first to Timothy in these words: Finis praecepti caritas de cord puro
and conscientia bona, and fide non ficta: the end of the commandment is
charity from a pure heart, and a good conscience, 1. Tim. 1.
and an unfeigned faith: the Apostle was not ignorant of the answer which our
Savior did give to him who demanded, quid faciendo vitam aeternam possidebo?
Matthew. 19.
what shall I do to attain everlasting life? For he said: Si vis ad vitam
ingrediserua mandata, if thou will enter into life keep the commandments, but
he would explicate in few words the end of the principal commandment, on
which the whole law and the understanding and fulfilling thereof, and the way to
everlasting life does depend; and withal he would teach us what virtues, are
necessary to perfection, of which elsewhere he said, nunc manent fides, spes,
caritas, mayor autem est caritas: now there remain faith, 1. Cor. 13.
hope, and charity but the greater of those is charity, he says therefore that
charity is the end of the commandment, that is, the end of all the
commandments, the observance of which commandments, is necessary unto good
life: and this end is so placed, in charity, as that he who has the Charity of
God, fulfilleth all the commandments which apperteyne unto the first table,
and he who has the charity of his neighbor, fulfilleth all the commandments
which belong to the second table. This later part which might seem more
obscure he declares in his epistle to the Romans, saying, Qui diligit proximu^
etc. He who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law, for thou shall not
commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, thou shall not
bear false witness, and if there be any other commandment it is comprised
in this word, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: the love of thy
neighbor works no ill, the fullnes therefore of the law, is love. Out of
which discourse every one by himself may perceive all the commandments which
are referred to the worship of God, to be fullfilled by charity alone; for as
the charity of our neighbor toward our neighbor works no evil, so neither
does the charity of God toward God work any evil, and therefore the fullnes
of the law, as well toward God as toward our neighbor is love or charity.

Now, which is true and perfect charity as well toward God as our neighbor,
the same Apostle declares saying, Charitas ex cord puro, conscientia bona,
and fide non ficta, charity out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and
unfeigned faith; in which words by a good conscience, we do understand with
S. Augustine, Praefat. in psalm. 31.
the virtue of hope, which is one of the three Theological virtues, and Hope
is called a good conscience, because it proceeds from a good conscience, as
desperation proceeds from a bad: hence is that saying of S. John: Carissimi
etc. my dearest if our heart do not reprehend us, 2. Joan. 3.
we have confidence toward God: there are therefore three virtues in which the
perfection of our Christian law does consist, Charity from a pure heart, Hope
from a good conscience, and Faith not feigned: and as charity if we respect the
order of pefection is the first, because most perfectest, so if we respect the
order of their proceeding, to wit how they are produced, then faith is the
first according to the prescript of the Apostle, nunc manent fides, etc. Now
there remain faith, hope, and charity, these three, but the greatest of these
is charity.

Let us begin with Faith, which first of all before the other is in the heart of
him who is to be justified. Not without cause did the holy Apostle add unto
faith this condition non ficta, not feigned, for faith begins our
justification if it be true and sincere, not if it be false and feigned; the
faith of heretics begins not justification, because it is not true but
false: the faith of ill Catholics begins not their justification, because
it is not sincere but feigned: a feigned faith is taken two ways, as when one
indeed does not believe and yet feigneth himself to believe; or else indeed he
does believe but lives not as his belief teaches him that he should; and the
words of S. Paul to Titus seem to bear both the one, and other sense, and to
be understood of them both: confitentur se nosse deum, Hierom. in com. Aug.
ser. 31. de verb. Apost.
factis autem negant; they confess themselves to know God, but in their deeds
deny him, for so the holy Fathers S. Hierome, and S. Augustine do interpret
them.

And out of this first virtue of a just man it may easily be conceived how
great the multitude is of such who do not live well, and consequently come to
an ill death. I let pass Inf^dells, Pagans, Heretics, and Atheists who know
nothing of this art how to live well: amongst Catholics how great number is
there of those who in words confess that they know God, but deny him in their
deeds? Who confess Christ to be the Judge of the living and the dead, and yet
so live as though they had no Judge at all? Who confess the Mother of our Lord
to be a Virgin, and by their blasphemies fear not to call her a Harlot? who
commend prayers, fastings, alms and other works of virtue, and yet always
practice the contrary vices? I omit the rest which are known unto all; let
them not therefore brag and vaunt that they have not a feygned Faith, who
either do not believe at all that which falsely they affirm to believe, or else
they live not as the Catholic faith does command them to live: and by this
they may know that as yet they have not begun to live well, neither let them
hope to dye well, unless through the help of Gods grace they learn in time this
Art we treat of.

The other virtue of a man truly just is Hope, or else a good conscience, as
our master S. Paul the Apostle has thought fit in this place to call it, this
virtue proceeds from faith, for no man can hope in God who either knows not
the true God, or else does not believe him to be either powerful or merciful:
but to stir up, and strengthen hope, in so much that it may be termed not hope
only but also confidence, nothing so much avails as a good conscience: for
with what face will he come unto God, and ask any blessings and benefitts of
him, who is guilty of sin committed against him, which yet by true penance
he has not blotted out? For who will ask for any favors at his enemies
hands? Or who thinks that such an one will help him whom he knows to be
grievously ince^sed against him? Hear I pray you what the Wise man says of the
hope of the wicked, Spes impij tanquam lanugo etc. Sap. 5.
The hope of the wicked is like light dust which is carried away with the wynd,
or as thin froth of water which by the tempest is dispersed, or like smoke
which is dissolved by the wind, or as the memory of a passenger that stays
but one day: so the Wise man, who most wisely warns the wicked that their
hope is a frail and no solid thing, short and not permanent: for they whiles
yet they are alive, in some sort hope that they may do penance and be
reconciled unto God, but when death shall approach, unless God of his special
mercy prevent them, and move their hearts to do penance, their hope will be
turned into desperation, and they will say with the other wicked that which
follows in the same place; Errauimus etc. We have erred from the way of
truth, and the light of justice has not appeared unto us: what has our pride
auailed us, or what has the boasting of our riches helped us? All have passed
away like a shadow. Thus the Wiseman, who gravely advises us, that if we will
live well, and dye happily that we presume not to live one minute of an hour
in sin, deceauing our selves with a vain persuasion that as yet we have a
long time to live, and that hereafter at fitter opportunity we will do penance;
for this vain hope has deceived many, and will still deceive them, unless
prudently they learn this Art whiles yet they have time to do it.

There remains the third virtue which worthily is called the Queen of
Virtues, to wit, Charity, with which none can perish, and without which none
can live, either in the passage of this life, or in our desired home of
everlasting happiness: that charity is said to be true and sincere which
proceeds from a pure heart, not for that purity of heart does properly beget
charity, for charity, as S. John says, is from God, and S. Paul, 1. Joan. 4.
Romans 5.
The charity of God is powered forth in our hearts, by the holy Ghost which is
given us; wherefore charity is said to be from a pure heart, because it cannot
be kindled in an impure, but in such a one as is purged from all error by
divine Faith, according to that of S. Peter the Apostle, Act. 15.
fide purificans corda eorum, cleansing their heart by faith: and by divine
hope, being cleansed from al love and desire of earthly things: for even as
fire is not kindled in green, sticks full of moist humors, but in dry; even
so the fire of charity requires clean hearts purged from al earthly love and
vain confidence in our own strength and forces.

By this may we understand which is true Charity, which false and counterfeit:
for if any one do willingly speak of God, shed tears through compunctio^ of
mind in his prayers, and do other good works, as giving much alms, and
fasting often, yet so as he enterteyneth impure love in his breast, vain glory,
hatred toward his neighbor and the like, which make the heart impure and
filthy; this man has not divine and true charity but a vain show or
resemblance thereof: for which cause the Apostle most prudently named not
absolutely faith, hope and charity when he spoke of true and perfect virtue; but
said Finis praecepti etc. The end of the commandment is charity from a pure
heart, and a good conscience, and faith not feigned: and this indeed is the true
Art of living well, and of a happy death, if any persevere unto the end in this
true and perfect charity.

CHAP. IIII. Of the fourth precept of the Art of dying well, which conteyneth
three Evangelical documents.
ALTHOUGH to live and dye well that which we have said, of faith, hope, and
charity may seem to suffice; yet to perform the same the better, and wit^
more facility, Christ himself has vouc^ saved in the Gospel to give us
thre^ lessons or documents: for thus he says in the Evangelist S. Luke: Sint
lumbi vestr^^ etc. Luc. 12.
Let your loins be girt, and burning candles in your hands, and be you lik^
unto men expecting their Lord when h^ retourneth from the Marriage, that when
he shall come and knock, they may presently open (the gate) unto him; blessed
are those servants whom our Lord when he shall come, shall find watching. This
parable may be understood two ways, either for the preparation to be made for
the coming of our Lord at the day of judgment, or else for his coming at the
death of every particular man, and this later which is the exposition of S.
Gregory, makes more for our purpose in hand: Greg. ho^. 13. in Euang.
for the expectation of the last day shall apperteyne only to those, who shall
then live, and Christ spoke this parable to his Apostles and to us all;
certainly the Apostles and those who succeeded them were by many ages very
far off from the last day; again there shall many signs go before the last
day, which shall stir up men to attendance: for Christ says, Erunt signa etc.
There shall be signs in the sun, and moon, and stars, and the earth, Luc.
21.
great calamity of nations, men withering away for fear and expectation of
those things which shall come upon the whole world. But no certain signs shall
go before the coming of God to particular judgment which every man is called
unto at the hour of his death; and this coming is signified by those words so
often repeated in the holy Scriptures, that our Savior will come as a thief,
to wit when he is least thought upon or expected.

Let us now then briefly expound this Parable, and let us well conceive that
this preparation to death is a thing most of all to be respected of al, because
of al other things it is most necessary. Three things does our Lord here
command us: first that we have our loins girded, that we have candles burning
in our hand, last of all that we watch and expect his coming, who when he will
come, we know as little, as most men do when the thief will come to rob
their howses. Let us explicate the first sentence: Sint lumbi vestri
praecincti. Let your loins be girded: this is the literal sense of these
words, that we be ready and stopped by no entanglements to run to meet with
our Lord when he shall call us by death to this particular judgment. This
similitude of girding the loins is taken from the custom of the Eastern
people, who did wear long garments almost to their feet, and when they were to
walk apace, they did gather up their garment and girded therewith all their
loins, least the length of their weed might hinder their have, and make them
go more leasurely: for which cause it is said of the Angel Raphael, who ^ame
to accompany the younger Toby; Tunc egressus etc. Then Tobias going forth, Tob.
5.
found a faier young man standing girt, and as it were ready to walk. By
occasion of this custom of the Eastern people, 1. Pet. 1.
S. Peter wrote; propter quod succincti lumbos mentis vestrae, soby perfect
sperate etc. For the which cause having the loins of your mind girded, sober,
hope perfectly etc. and S. Paul to the Ephesians, state succincti lumbos
vestros in veritate: stand ye having your loins girded in truth.

Now to have our loins girded, does signify two things, first the virtue of
chastity, secondly a promptitude or readiness to meet with Christ, whether he
come to the particular or general judgment. Aug. lib. de contientia. Loco
citat.
The first sense is admitted by S. Basil in his exposition of the first chapter
of the prophet Isaias, by S. Augustine and S. Gregory: and truly amongst all
the passions and perturbations of the mind no one does so much hinder our
swift and ready passadge to meet with Christ, as the concupiscence of the
flesh; as on the other side nothing makes a man more ready to run and follow
Christ, then does virginal chastity, Apoc. ca. 14. 1. Cor. 7.
for we read in the Apocalips, that the Virgins do follow Christ whersoeuer he
shall go: to this does S. Paul exhort us saying, qui sine vxore est etc. He
who is without a wife is careful of those things which concern our Lord how
he may please God, but he who is with his wife is careful how he may please
his wife, and is divided.

But the other exposition which does not restrain and limit these girded loins
to chastity alone, but extends it to prompt obedience of Christ in all
things, is of S. Cyprian, Lib. de exhor. Mart. cap. 8.
and is generally admitted by all Commentours on S. Lukes Gospell^ the meaning
then of this place of the Gospel is, that all the affaiers of this world,
albeit very good and necessary, should not so far forth possess our minds,
as that they should hinder this chiefest and most principal care of being
ready to meet our Savior when he shall call us by death to yield an account of
all our works, yea also of our words, and thoughts, even our idle words, and
vain cogitations. For what shall men wholly drowned in the world at that time
do when death at unawares and not looked or provided for, shall come, who in
the whole course of their life have never thought of giving an account unto God
of all their works, of all their words, of all their thoughts, of all their
desires, of all their omissions? shall such, think you, be able to have their
loins girt, and run to meet with Christ? Or rather shall they not be tossed
and entangled in their filthy life, and become both dumb and desperate? What
will they answer to the Judge when he shall demand of them, why did you not
give ear unto my words by which I warned you, saying: Seek first for the
Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be
given unto you? why did you not consider the words so often and so publicly
song and said in the Church, Martha, Martha, sollicita es etc. Martha, Martha,
thou art careful and troubled about many things, but one is necessary, Mary
has chosen the best part which shall not be taken from her? If I have
reprehended the care of Martha, who most devoutly desired to serve my self,
do you think that your care of gathering superfluous riches, of greedy gaping
after dangerous honors, of satisfying your hurtful appetites, and in the
mean time forgetting the Kingdom^ of God, and the righteousness thereof, which
above al things in this life is most necessary, can please and content me?

But let us come to another duty of a diligent and faithful servant, and
lucernae ardentes in manibus vestris, and burning candles in yours hands: it is
not inoug^ for a good servant that his loins be gir^ whereby he may freely and
without le^ run to meet with his Lord, but it i^ further exacted of him that
there be also a burning candle in his hands, which may show him the way in the
night, at what time his Lord is expected to return^ from this marriage feast.
The candle in this place signifies the law of God, which shows us indeed a
good way to walk in: Lucerna (says David) pedibus meis verbum tuum. Psalm. 111.
Thy word is a candle to my feet: and lex lux, says Solomon in his Proverbs,
Prouer. 6.
the law is a light; but this candle gives no light to a traveler, or shows
any way at al if it be left at home or in our chamber, and therefore if we will
have it to show us the way, we must carry it in our hands: many there be that
know the divine and humane laws; but therefore they commit many sins and
pretermit many necessary good works, because they carry not this candle in
their hands, that is, they apply not their knowledge unto the works of the
law. How many great learned men are there who commit most grievous offenses
because in their actions they take not direction from the law of God, but are
transported by their own anger lust, or some other disordinate passion of
their mind? When King David saw Bersabee naked, had he recurred to this law, he
had found, Non concupisces vxorem proximi tui, thou shall not lust after thy
neighbors wife, and had never fallen into such an enormous crime, but because
he made no further recourse then to the woman's beauty, fogetting the law of
God, though otherwise a very just and holy man, he committed adultery. We must
not then have this candle hid and shut up in our chamber, but must still have
it in our hands, and obey the voice of the holy Ghost, which commands us
that we meditate day and night on the law of our Lord, Psalm. 1.
and that we say with the Prophet; Tu mandasti etc. Psalm. 118.
Thou have commanded thy commandments most diligently to be kep^ I would to
God my ways may be directed to keep thy iustifications. He who has always
the candle of Gods law before the eyes of his soul, Psalm. 118.
will securely meet with our Savior at his return from the marriage.

There remains the third office or duty of a faithful servant, that he
always watch, because he is uncertain when his master will come: Blessed are
those servants (says Christ) whom their master when he shall come shall
find watching. God Almighty would not have all men at a certain time or
period of their age to depart this life, least they should bestow all the time
of their life til then in gluttony and drunkenness, plays and desportes, or in
other ill works, and then, afterward a little before their death to recall
themselves and return unto God: wherefore his divine providence has so
ordained that nothing should be more uncertain then the hour of our death,
whiles some as we see dye in their mothers womb, others as soon as they are
borne, if not in their very birth, some in hoary old age, others in the very
flower of their youth: again some we see by long lingering to languish away,
others to dye suddenly, some to recover from a most desperate sickness, others to
be but a little sick and whiles they seem free from death, the disease
increases and they depart this life: and to make us the better see this
uncertainty our Savior said; Et si venerit etc. Luc. 12.
If he shall come in the second watch, or if in the third watch, and so shall
find his servants (to wit watching) blessed are those servants, for know you
this that if the master of the house should know at what hour the thief would
come, truly he would watch and not suffer his house to be ransacked; and be you
prepared because the Son of man will come at such an hour as you think not
on. Moreover that we might understand of what weight this matter is, to be well
persuaded of the uncertainty of our life, and of the hour in which our Lord
will call us to judgment, either in the death of every particular, or else at
the later day, the Scripture does repeat nothing so often as that one word
Vigilate, watch; and the similitude of a thief, who uses not as you know to
come, but at such a time and place, where and when he is least expected; the
word watch is in many places repeated in the Ghospells of S. Matthew, Mark and
Luke, and the similitude of a thief is not only in the Gospels but also in the
Epistles of the Apostles and Apocalypse of S. John.

Of all which we may evidently perceive how great the negligence and ignorance,
not to say madness and folly of most men is, that so often admonished by the
spirit of truth, by the pens of the Apostles, who could not lie nor deceive us,
that we be still prepared for death as a thing most great and difficult, and on
which depends our greatest and everlasting happiness, or our greatest and
everlasting destruction; and yet that there be so few that are stirred up by
these words or rather thunderings of the holy Ghost to prepare themselves
thereunto.

Here some will say, what counsel do you give us that we may watch as we
should, and by watching be prepared to make a happy end? I can think of
nothing better then that we often prepare our selves to death by a serious and
due examination of our conscience: and truly Catholic people when they come
every year to confession omit not to examine their consciences, and again
when they begin to be sick; and the Physicians by the decree of Pope Pius V.
are forbidden to come the second time unto them unless after the examination
of their conscience they have also made a confession of their syns; finally
there are none in the Catholic Church, but near the hour of their death
examine their consciences and confess their sins. But what shall we say of
such as are taken away by soden death? What of such as become mad or leese
their wits before they can make their confession? What of those who are so
ouerburthened with the extremity of sickness as they cannot so much as think
how many, or what sins they have committed? What of those who in dying do
sin, or in synning do dye, as those who fight in unjust war, or in single
combat, or are taken in adultery?

To avoid therefore prudently and religiously these and the like
inconveniences, nothing better can be devised then that all those who esteem
and make account of their salvation, do twice every day, to wit at noone and
night diligently discuss their conscience, what the night or day before they
have done, what they have said, what they have desired, what they have thought,
in which any spot of sin may be found; and if they find any such, especially
any thing that may seem a mortal sin, let them not delay the remedy of true
contrition, with firm purpose at the first opportunity to come to the
Sacrament of penance; wherefore let them ask of God the gift of true
compunction and sorrow, let them call to mind the grieuousnes of sin, let
them detest from their heart the fault committed, let them seriously discuss
who it is that does offend, and whom he has offended, to wit a vile wretch
Almighty God, an unprofitable servant the Lord of heaven and earth; let not
their eyes cease from tears, nor their hands from knocking their breast, and
finally let them make a true and resolute purpose never more to provoke Gods
wrath, nor to offend their most loving Father. This examination if it be well
made morning and evening, or at least once in the day, it can very hardly
happen that any one in dying should sin, or in synning dye, or be prevented
with giddines, madness or other like misfortunes, and so being well prepared to
dye, neither the uncertainty can hurt us, or we be deprived of the glorious
reward of everlasting life.

CHAP. V. Of the fifth precept or rule of the Art of dying well; in which is
detected the error of the Rich men of this world.
TO that which has been said we are to adioyne the refutation of a certain
error very vulgar amongst the rich men of this world, and it much hinders
the good life and death we have spoken of. The error consists in this that
rich men do esteem the goods which they possess to be absolutely and truly
their own, if they possess them by due claim and title, and therefore that
they may lawfully wast them, give them as they list, neither may any man say
unto them why do you thus? Why go yo^ so brave in apparel? Why do you fa^^ and
feast so daintely? Why are you so prodigal and lavish in feeding dogs o^
hawks, or in play at d^ce or cards, o^ in like delighting pastimes? For the
will forth with answer you, what (...) that to you? May I not do with my^^
own goods what I list? or must I ask^^ your leave and counsel how to bestow
them? This truly is a most grievous and pernicious error. For suppose the rich
of this world are true owners of their own wealth, if they be compared unto
other men who can lay no claim unto the^; yet if they be compared unto God,
they are not masters but administratours, o^ stewards or bailiffs of them;
which I ca^ prove by many authorityes. Hear the kingly Prophet what he says
hereof, Psalm. 23.
Domini est terra (says he) etc. The earth is "our Lords, and all the plenty
thereof, the whole world and all that dwell therein. And again in another
place: Psalm. 29.
Meae sunt omnes etc. All the wild beasts of the forests, and all the cattle on
the mountains are mine, if I shall be hungry I will not tell it unto thee, for
mine is the whole world and the plenty thereof: and in the first book of
Paralipomenon, when as David had offered toward the building of the temple
three thousand talents of gold, 1. Paralip. 29.
and seven thousand talents of most pure silver, and wonderful great store of
white marble, and when the other Governors of the Tribes following the example
of the King had offered five talents of gold ten of silver, and eighteen of
brass, besides a hundred thousand talents of iro^, David said unto God: Tua
est Domine etc. All majesty and power and glory O Lord is thine, 1. Paralip. 29.
all things which are in heaven and in earth are thine; thine is the Kingdom
and thou art over all Princes; thine are riches, and thine is glory, thou
rulest all: who am I, and who is my people that we may promise thee all these
things? All things are thine, and what we have received at thy hands, that we
have given thee. Again by the Prophet Aggaeus God says, Aggaei 2.
mine is silver, and mine is gold, which therefore our Lord did say, that the
people might know that there should nothing be wanting for the buylding of the
temple, seeing it was he that commanded it to be buylt who is true Lord and
owner of all the gold and silver, and what else soever is in the whole world.

To these testimonies of the old testament I will add two more of the new, taken
out of the very words of our Savior. There is a parable in S. Luke of the
wicked Bailiffe: Luc. 16.
Homo quidam erat dives etc. There was a certain man that was rich (says
Christ) and he had a bailiffe who was ill spoken of to his master, as one that
had wasted his goods, and he called him and said unto him, How comes it that I
hear this of thee? Render an account of thy bailifship, for thou can no more
be bailiffe. By this rich man there can be no doubt but that God is meant, who,
as now out of Aggaeus we have heard says meum est argentum and meum est aurum,
all silver and gold is mine: by the name of a bailiffe or steward as it is in
the Greek copyes, is understood a rich man, as the holy Fathers S. John
Chrysostom, S. Angustine, S. Ambrose, S. Bid, Theophilact, Euthimius, and
others on this passage of Saint Lukes Gospel do interpret: every rich man
then of this world if he believe the Gospel, must confess that all the
riches he enjoys, whether by just or unjust claim, not to be his own; for
if his title unto them be good, then is he only the bailiffe and steward of
God: if unjust then is he a thief and a robber.

That this worldly rich man in this world is not the true master of the goods
he possesses is clearly euinced, because he is chardged with injustice before
God, who either by bodily death, or beggary discharges him of his
Bailiffeship, for so much do these words import, Read rationem villicationis
tuae, iam enim non poteris villicare, Yield an account of thy bailiffeship for
thou can no longer be bailiffe. Neither does God want ways to make rich men
poor, and to put them from their bailiffeship, for he can send them
shipwarcks, robberies, hail, worms that devour the herbs, and vynes, too
much rain, too much droth, too great storms, and other the like: these are
the words of God which h^^ said unto the rich man non poteris diutiu^
villicare, thou can no longer be bailiffe

That clause in the end of the parable where our Lord says, Make y^^ friends
of the mammon of iniquity, that when y^^ fail they may receive you into the
eternal tabernacles; does not signify that we are to giu^ alms out of
unlawful riches, but tha^ alms are to be given out of those riche^ which
indeed are not such, but only the shadow of riches; which is evidently g^thered
out of the same place of the Go^pell of S. Luke where our Savior says If you
have been unfaithful in the wicked mammon who will trust you for that which
is the true The meaning of which words is, Luc. 16.
if (...) wicked mammon, to wit in false riches, yo^ have not been faithful
and bountifully bestowed them on the poor, who will commit true riches unto
your charge, the riches I mean of virtue which indeed do make a man rich?
Cyprian. lib. de opere and eleemosyna. Aug. Quaest. Euang. quaest. 34.
So S. Cypria^ understood and explicated this place: and not much unlike is the
exposition of S. Augustine when he says, the mammon of iniquity, is that
riches which only wicked men and fools repute for such; whereas the good and
wise men make no account of it, but affirm the spiritual gifts of grace alone
to be the treasure of the faithful.

The other place of the Gospel is also in S. Luke, Cap. 16.
which may serve for a commentary of the former parable now mentioned of the
wicked Bailiffe: Homo quidam (says our Savior) erat dives etc. There was a
certain rich man who was clad in purple and silk, and fared every day
sumptuously, and there was a certain beggar called Lazarus who did lie at his
gate full of soars, desiring to be fed with the crumms that fell from the table
of the rich man, and no body did give them unto him, but the dogs did come and
lick his soars, and it came to pass that the poor man dyed and was carried
by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, and the rich man dyed and was buried in
hell. Doubtless this rich glutton was one of them who esteemed themselves true
Lords and owners of their riches, and not the bailiffs or stewards of God, and
consequently he was persuaded that he did not sin against God although he
wore purple and silk and fared every day daintily, and fed many dogs, and
perhaps some Comicall iesters and stage-plaiers also, for he said (...)
himself I spend mine own goods, (...) do no man wrong, I do not transgres^^
the laws of God, I do not blaspheme^ I do not forswear my self, I keep t^
sabbath, I honor my parents, I neyth^ kill nor commit adultery, nor steal, nor
gi^^ false witness, nor seek after another m^ wife, or any other thing of his;
but if t^^ case stand thus, why is he buried in he^ fire? truly here we must
needs grant a^ such to be in error who persuade the^ selves that they are the
absolute Lords masters of their goods, for if this r^ glutton had, had other
sins more normous, the holy Scripture some w^^ or other had insinuated so
much; but s^ing that nothing is said more, it seem^ necessarily to be
understood of this, w^^ that the superfluous setting himself forth in brave
apparel, his daily and great cost in banquetts, the number o^ his retinew, and
dogs, together wit^ his want of all charity toward a poo^ man full of
sores, to have been a sufficient cause why he is buried in hell, for ever to
be tormented in those euerlastin^ flames.

Let this then be the infallible law of living and dying well, often to think
and seriously to consider and ruminate in our mind, that there is an account
to be made to God of all superfluous cost bestowed in palaces, in gardens, in
coaches, in multitude of attendants, in costly apparel, in banquetts, in
heaping up of riches, and all other whatsoever not necessary expenses, by which
means there is injury done to the great number of poor and sick people who
want that, with which the other are surchardged, who doubtless do now cry unto
Almighty God, and will not cease in the day of Judgment to cry, until these
also be delivered over for ever, to be punished in unquenchable fire.

CHAP. VI. Of the sixth precept of the Art of dying well, in which are
explicated three Moral Virtues.
ALBEIT the three Theological virtues conteyne as it were in a short
abridgement all the precepts of good life, and consequently also of this whole
Art, yet the holy Ghost principal Author of of all divine Writ, for the
better understanding of this most vholsome Art o^ dying well would further add,
three m^rall virtues which exceedingly do help, man to live and dye well, and
these a (...) Sobriety, Justice, and Piety, of all which S. Paul speaks in
this manner in his Epistle to Titus: Tit. 2.
Apparruit gratia Dei Saluator nostri omnibus hominibus etc. The grace o^ God
our Savior has appeared unto (...) men, instructing us that we renounci^^
impiety, and secular desires do live soberly, justly, and prou^ly in this world
expecting the blessed hope and commin^ of the glory of the great God, an^ of
our Savior Jesus Christ. This the^^ shall be the sixth rule of this Art, that
w^ renouncing impiety and secular desires, do live soberly, justly, and piously
in this world. Here we have the sum and effect of all Gods law, with
admirable breuity contracted into one short sentence: Declina a malo, and fac
bonum, Decline from evil and do good, says the holy Prophet David. Psalm. 36.
In sin there are two things, an aduersion from God, and conversion unto
creatures; according to that of Hieremy: Duo mala etc. Hierem. 20
Two evils my people have done me; they have left me the spring, or fountain
of lively waters, and have dug for themselves cesternes which can hold no
water. What then is he to do who will avoid both the one and other evil? He
will renounce impiety and secular desires. For impiety turns him from God, and
secular desires draw him to the creatures, and then (which apperteyneth unto
the other part of doing good) do we fulfill the law, when we live soberly,
justly, and piously, that is, when we are sober toward our selves, just
toward our neighbors, and pious toward God.

But it will not be amiss to handle these points more largely, that this most
wholesome and brief precept may the better be put in practice: what then is
impiety? A vice contrary to piety. What is piety? A virtue or gift of the holy
Ghost by which we regard God, worship him, and reverence him as our Father. We
are therefore commanded so to renounce impiety, that we may live piously in
this world, or which is all one, so to live piously i^ this world as we
renounce all impiety: bu^ why are both these members set down when as one
alone had been sufficient Truly it pleased the holy Ghost so (...) speak, to
the end we should know the we ought (if we will please God) so t^ embrace piety
as that it have no admixture of impiety with it: for there wa^ not Christians
who embrace piety whiles they pray unto God, whiles the^ are present at the
dreadful sacrifice^ whiles they hear the Priest to preac^ but in the mean
time, at their pl^^ they blaspheme God, they swear by hi^ name without
occasion, and fulfill no^ the vows which they have made unto him: and what is
this else then piously to worship God, and yet to be impious against him?
Wherefore such as desire (...) live well that they may obteyn that grace at Gods
hands as to dye well, ought so piously to worship God that they renounce all
impiety, yea every shadow although never so little of impiety, for it avails
little to hear Mass every day, and to worship Christ in that dreadful
mystery if in the mean while thou do impiously blasphe^ God, or swear falsely
by his name.

And this also is diligently to be noted, that the Apostle said not, renouncing
impiety in general, but omnem impietatem: that is all manner of impiety great
or small, damnable or light, which is spoken against them who make it a small
matter to swear when there is no need, to look with a wanton and lascivious
eye upon women, even in holy places, to talk in the time of Mass, and to
commit other the like lighter offenses as if they did not beliue God to be
present to see all things and to note all their faults although never so small.
Exodus 20.
For God is a jealous God, chastizing the iniquity of the parents on their
children until the third and fourth generation of such as have hated him; and
on the other side, he shows mercy on thousands to such as love him and keep
his commandments. And this did the son of God teach us by his own example,
who although he were both meek and humble, and when he was reuyled, did not
reuyle, when he suffered he did not threaten, 1. Pet. 2.
yet kindled with great zeal having made a whippe of coards he cast the buyers
and sellers out of the temple, Joan. 2.
overthrew the bankers tables and said: It is written that my house is (...)
house of prayer, and you have made it a den o^ thieves: and this he did
twice, once in the first year of his preaching as S. John reco^deth, and once
in the last, as all the oth^ three Evangelists do testify.

Let us proceed to the second virtue which directs our actions toward our
neighbor. The second virtue is Justice, of which the Apostle said, Renounci^
secular desires let us live justly; and here al^ that general sentence takes
place, decli^ a malo and fac bonum, decline from evil a^ do good: for there
can be no true iustic^ toward our neighbor where those secular desires do yet
remain; for wh^ else do these desires signify but the conc^piscence of the
flesh, the concupiscenc^ of the eyes, and pride of life, which ar^ not of God
but of the world? Therefore as justice cannot be unjust, so neither can these
desires be any way conjoined wit^ true justice. A child of this world man
counterfeyt in word and tongue true justice, but indeed and truth he cannot
possibly perform it; most prudently therefore did the Apostle not only say,
let us live justly, but promised before, abnegantes saecularia desideria,
renouncing secular desires, to signify that the root infected with the poyso^
of concupisce^ce, is first to be pulled out, before the good tree of justice
can be planted in a virtuous and Religious heart.

What it is to live justly, seems a matter of it self so perspicuous, as it
cannot be doubted of, for all men know that justice does command, Romans 13.
that we give to every man his own: reddite (says the Apostle) omnibus debita
etc. Yield you unto all that which is due unto them; to whom tribute, tribute;
to whom custom, custom; to whom fear, fear; to whom honor, honor.
Tribute is due unto the Prince, honor to our parents, Malach. 1.
fear to our masters: for so God says by the prophet Malachy; If I be a
Father, where is my honor? And if I be a Lord or a master, where is my fear?
A just price is due to the seller, a just reward to the workman, and so of
others after the same manner; and with no less reason but rather with much
more those unto whom the distribution of the common goods of a Kingdom or
common wealth pertayne ought to bestow the same according to the prescript of
distributive justice, to such I mean as deserve them best, not according to
the acception of persons, as unto their kinsfolks, and such as they affect and
favor. If any I will then learn well this art, let him hear the Wiseman thus
calling upon men of authority in the beginning of his book; Sap. 1.
Love justice you who judge the earth. And let them hear S. James lamenting in
his Epistle: Behold the reward of the workmen who have reaped your ground
which is defrauded by you, Jacob. 5.
does cry, and their cry has entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath.

There remains the third virtue unto which these secular desires are no less
contrary then unto justice; neither do we understand in this place by Sobriety
that virtue only which is contrary to drunkenness, but in general the virtue of
Temperance or moderation which make a man to measure these things which
concern the care or preservation of his body by the rule of reason, and not
according to his sensual desire: and this virtue is rarely found amongst men:
for secular desires seem to have filled all the houses of rich men, but those
who are wise are not to look unto that which fools do, although they be never
so many and almost innumerable, but unto that which wise men do. Doubtless
Salomo^ was a most wise man, Prouer. 30.
and yet he made this prayer unto God saying, Duo rogaui te etc. Two things I
have prayed for that thou would not deny me before I dye, to wit, that thou
neither grant me beggary or riches, but those things only give me which are
necessary for my life. 1. Tim. 6.
S. Paul was also a wise man, and yet he said: Habentes etc. Having wherewith
to cover our nakedness, let us be contented: for we brought nothing into this
world, and without doubt neither can we carry any thing hence. Which reason is
most witty, for why should we take such immoderate care for superfluous riches,
seeing we cannot carry them with us to that place unto which by death we come
unto? Christ our Lord was not only wiser then Solomon and S. Paul, but was very
wisdom it self, and yet he said. Luc. 6. Luc. 9.19. Deuteronomy.
Blessed be the poor, and woe be to you that be rich: And of himself he said:
The foxes have holes, and the fowls of the air nests, but the son of man
has not where to repose his head. If every word is to stand in the verdict of
two or three witnesses, how much more ought it to stand in the verdict of these
three most wise men? What if we should yet add that the riches which we have
more then our necessityes require are not our own, but are the substance of the
poor as is the common opinion of holy Father and school Doctors? are not
then suc^ men very fools who with so great diligence keep that, for which by
God himself they shall be condemned to hell fire?

He then who will learn this ar^ of living and dying well, let him not imitate
the multitude or common people who believe or esteem nothing but wh^ they see;
but let him follow Christ an^ his Apostles, who in word and deed hau^ taught us
that the things of this world are to be contemned, and that we are to expect,
The great hope and coming of the glory of the great God, and of our Savior
Jesus Christ. Truly the thing is so great which w^ hope for at the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ from heaven unto judgment, that all the glory and all the
riches, and all the joys past of this world are in respect thereof to be
esteemed nothing, or as though they had never been, and they are to be held
most foolish and most unhappy who in a matter of this consequence will rather
give credit unto fools, then unto wise men.

CHAP. VII. Of the seventh precept of the Art of dying well, which is of
Prayer.
OVT of that which hitherto has been said, we have drawn the precepts of
dying well from the three theological virtues Faith, hope and charity, and
also from three moral, Sobriety, justice and piety, of all which the Apostle
Saint Paul has admonished us: now I will further adioyne another precept of
three other works of virtue, of prayer, fasting and alms, which we have
learned of the Angel Raphael, for we read in the book of Toby, the Angel to
have spoken in this manner: Prayer is good with fasting and alms, and better
then to heap up treasures of gold. And this threefold number of these works is
the fruit of three virtues, of Religion, of mercy, of temperance, which have
great resemblance with piety, justice, and sobriety before mentioned: for as
piety concerns God, justice our neighbor, sobriety our selves; So prayer
which is an act of religion respects God, alms which is an act of mercy
respects our neighbor, fasting which is an act of abstinence respects our
selves. Of Prayer many Authors have written many things, we for our present
purpose will explicate three only; one of the necessity of prayer, another of
the vtilityes, and the third of the manner how we may fruitfully make it.

The necessity of prayer is so evident and perspicuous in the Scriptures as
tha^ nothing can be more clearly commanded or delivered then the same: for
notwithstanding that God do know what we want, as he says of himself in Saint
Matthew, yet will he have us to demand them and receive them as it were by
spiritual hands, or some instrument fit for that purpose. Luc. 18.
Hear our Lord in S. Luke We must always pray and never cease. Again,
VVatch ye praying at all times. Hear S. Paul, Pray without intermission. Luc.
21. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Eccles. 18.
Hear Ecclesiasticus: Be not stopped from continual prayer. Which precepts or
commands do not import that we should do nothing else but pray, but that we
should never forget this most wholesome exercise, but very often have recourse
thereunto, which both our Lord and his Apostles by their example have taught
us; for Christ and his Apostles did not so always pray, but that they bestowed
some time in teaching the people, and in confirming their doctrine with signs,
and miracles; and yet they may be said always to have been in prayer, because
they did pray very often: and other phrases in the Scripture of like tenor are
to be understood in the same manner, as, My eyes are always on our Lord, Psalm.
24.
and his praise is always in my mouth, Psalm. 33.
and that of the Apostles, they were always in the temple praising and
blessing our Lord. Luc. 24.


Touching the vtilityes of prayer three are most eminent, to wit, merit,
satisfaction, and impetration: of merit we have the testimony of our Lord in
the Gospel, Cum oratis etc. When you pray, you shall not be like hypocrites
who affect to pray standing in the synagogs, and in the corners of the streets
that they may be seen of men. Amen I say unto you, that they have received
their reward: but thou when thou shall pray, enter into thy chamber and the
door being shut, pray thy Father in secret, and thy Father who sees the in
secret will reward thee: by which words our Savior does not forbid prayers to
be made in public; for he himself did publicly pray before he raised
Lazarus, Joan. 11.
but he forbids a man to pray i^ public when he does it with intention be
seen of many, to wit out of the desir^ of vain glory: for else we may pray i^
the temple, and therein also find the chamber of our heart, and in that chamber
pray unto our Father in secret: these words, reddet tibi, will repay or rewar^
thee, do signify merit. For as before h^ said of the Pharisee, recepit mercedem
suam, he has received his reward, to wit, humane praise; so of him who prays
in the chamber of his heart, regarding God alone is to be understood this
repayment, to wit, that he so shall receive his reward from his Father who
sees him in secret. Of satisfaction for our syns past, it is evident by the
practice of the Church, in which when any satisfaction is imposed, with alms
and fasting is conjoined prayer, yea oftentimes alms and fasting are not
enjoined, but prayer is never omitted; lastly that it is impetratory, or of
force to obteyn us many great blessings and benefits, S. John Chrysostom does
excellenly declare in two books which he wrote of this subject, in which he
uses the similitude of our hands: for as a man is borne weak, naked, and
needy of all things, and yet cannot complain of his Creator, because he has
given him hands, which are the instrument of instruments, by which a man may
provide for himself meat, clothes, a house, armor and what else soever; so a
spiritual man can do nothing without the help of God, but he has the virtue
of prayer, the instrument of all spiritual instruments, by which he may
obtain whatsoever he shall want, or be in need of.

Besides these three principal fruits, there are very many other: for first
prayer does illuminate or lighten our mind; for it cannot otherwise be, but
that he who fixes fast the eyes of his mind on God who is all light, but that
he be lightened, accedite ad eum (says David) and illuminamini: Psalm. 33.
come you unto him and be lightened. Again prayer does nourish our hope and
confidence, for by how much the more often we speak unto one, by so much the
more confidently do we confidently com^ unto him: thirdly it enflameth our
charity and makes our mind more capabl^ to receive greater gifts as S.
Augustine dot^ affirm: Lib. 2. de sermon dom. in monte cap. 7.
fourthly it increases humilit^ and chaste fear, for he who comes t^ pray,
perceaues himself to be a beggar o^ God, and therefore is wont with all
humility to appear in his sight, and most diligently to take heed least he
offend him whose help in all things he does want. Fifthly prayer engenders in
the mind of the maker the contempt of all temporal things, for it cannot
possibly be, bu^ that all earthly things must seem base and filthy unto him,
who daily contemplateth those things which are heavenly and everlasting: Cap.
1. and 10.
see S. Augustine in the 9. book of his Confessions. Sixthly it begets
incredible delight, when as by the same a man begins to taste how sweet our
Lord is, which sweetness how great it is, from hence we may gather, that we have
known many not only to have bestowed the whole night, but to have joined whole
days with whole nights without any difficulty in prayer. To conclude, besides
the profit and pleasure, prayer yeldeth great dignity and honor to the maker;
for the Angels themselves honor that soul which they see so familiarly, and
so often to be admitted to the speech of his divine Majesty. See S. John
Chrysostom in his first book of prayer.

It remains that we say somewhat of the manner how to pray well, in which
this art of living Well does chiefly consist, and consequently also of dying
Well, for that our Lord said, Ask, and ye shall receive: and every one who
asks does receive, which S. James in his Epistle declared to be understood
with this condition, If we ask well: You ask (says he) and do not receive
because you ask ill: out of which rule we may thus discourse, he who asks
well the gift of good life, shall certainly receive it, and he who asks well
for the perseverance of the same until death shall doubtless receive it. Let us
briefly explicate the conditions of good prayer, that we may learn to pray
well, to live well, to dye well.

The first thing required is Faith, as witnesses S. Paul saying; How shall
they call upon him in whom they have not believed? With whom accords Saint
James: Let him ask in faith without w^uering: Romans 10.
but this necessity of faith is no^ so to be taken as though is were necessary
for us certainly to believe that Go^ will do those things that we desire,
Jacob. 1.
for (...) should our faith be very often found fal^ and consequently we should
obtain nothing; we are therefore to believe tha^ God is most potent, most
wise, mos^ good, most faithful, and for that caus^ to be able, to know, and to
be ready t^ do that which we desire, in case he think it fit for himself to
bestow it, o^ expedient for us to receive it. Matthew. 9.
This fait^ did Christ require of the two blind men who desired to be cured; Do
ye believe that (...) am able to do (this cure) for you? With the same faith
did David pray for his Child that was sick; for that he did not believe
certainly that God would do it, yet believed he undoubtedly that God could do
it, as these his words do demonstrate: VVh^ can tell whether our Lord perhaps
may not bestow him upon me? 1. Reg. 12.
and no doubt but S. Paul prayed with the same faith, that the sting of flesh
might be taken from him, for he prayed out of faith, and his faith had been
falfe, if he had certainly believed that God would have granted him that
thing which then he demanded, for at that time he obtained it not; neither
does the Church pray with any other faith, when she prays that all heretics
Pagans, Scismatickes, and ill livers may be converted and do penance, and yet
it is certain that all will not be converted: Lib. 1. c. 4.
of which matter read S. Prosper in his book of the calling the Gentills.

Another condition of a good prayer and that very necessary is hope or
confidence, for albeit we must not determyne absolutely by faith (which is a
work of our understanding) that God will do what we desire him, yet must we
by hope and confidence (which is an action of our will) steadfastly adhere unto
his divine goodness, and certainly confide that he will grant us those things
which we ask him: this condition did our Savior require in him who was sick
of the palsy, unto whom he said: Confide fili etc. Have confidence my son,
Matthew. 9.
thy sins are forgiven thee: and the same does the Apostle require of all men
when he says: Heb. 4.
Let us come with confidence to the throne of his grace, that we may obtain
mercy: and long before him the Psalmist makes God (...) say: Psalm. 90.
Because he has hoped in me I will deliver hi^ and because this confidence
springs from perfect faith, therefore the Scripture w^^ in great matters it
requires faith, a^deth commonly something apperteyni^^ unto confidence, and so
we read in Sa^^ Mark: whosoever shall say unto this mountain thou taken hence
and cast into the sea, Mar. 11.
and shall waver in his heart, but shall believe that whats^uer he says may be
done, it shall be done unto hi^ of which faith begetting confidence, to be
understood that of the Apostle: 1. Cor. 13.
I^ had so great faith as that I were able to remo^^ mountains. For which
cause Cassian in h^^ Collation or Conference of prayer wr^teth, Colla. 9. cap.
52.
that it is a certain sign of obteyni^^ that we would have, if any one in his
pra^er do certainly co^fide that he shall recea^^ the thing he asks for, and
does no w^^ stagger, but fyndeth in the same, himse^ much moved with spiritual
comfort.

The third condition of prayer charity or justice by which we are justified
from our sins, for none are sure to obtain the graces and blessings of God
but they who are his friends; for so sait^ David in his psalms, They eyes of
our Lord ar^ over the just, Psalm. 33. Psalm. 65^.
and his ears are (attent) unto their prayers: and in another place, If I have
looked upon iniquity in my heart, our Lord will not hear me: Joan. 15.
and in the new testament Christ does say: If you shall abide in me and my
words (that is my commandments) remain in you, you shall ask whatsoever
you to will and it shall be done for you. And the beloved disciple: 1. Joan. 3.
If our heart reprehend us not, we have confidence in God, and whatsoever we
shall ask, we shall receive, because we keep his commandments, and do those
things which are pleasing before him. Neither does it contradict this doctrine
that the publican craving pardon of God for his sins returned justified; for
this remission a penitent sinner does obtain, not as he is a sinner, but as he
is penitent, for as he is a sinner he is the enemy of God, but as he is
penitent he enters into his friendship. He who synneth does that which
displeases God, whom it grieueth to have offended, and does that which is
most pleasing unto him.

The fourth condition is humility, whereby he that does pray relyeth not on his
own righteousness, Isay 66.
but on Gods mercy. Whom shall I regard (says God) but the poor and
co^trite in spirit, and him that reuerenceth my words? Eccles. 35.
And Ecclesiasticus adds: The prayer of him who humbles himself shall
pierce the clouds, and it shall not depart until the highest do behold it.

The fifth condition is devotion, which causes him that does pray, not to pray
negligently as many use to do, but attentively, carefully, diligently, and
fervently. Matt. 15.
Our Lord does grievously check such who do pray only with their lips, This
people honors me with their lips but their heart is far from me; this
devotion we speak of arises from a lively faith, and such as is not only in
habit but in act also and operation; for he who attentively and with firm
faith does ponder, how great the majesty of God is, how great our profit how
great the thing which we ask, i^ cannot otherwise be, but that he will come to
his prayers with deep humility reverence, devotion, and favor.

It will not be amiss here to se^ down two notable testimonies of the holy
Fathers. S. Hierome in his dialogue against the Luciferians: Ad orationem
assisto etc. I stand at my prayer; I would not pray unless I did believe. But
in case I did truly believe, I would make clean that heart with which God is
seen, I would knock my breast with my hands, I would water my cheeks with
tears, I would tremble in body, wax pale in visage, I would lie prostrate at
my Lords feet, and with weeping bedew them, I would wype them with my hair, I
would stick fast to the cross and would hot thence till I had obtained mercy;
but now very often in my prayer I walk through the galleryes, or cast up the
accounts of usury; or carried away with a filthy thought do think on those
things, which cannot without shame be spoken. Where is our faith? Do we think
that Jonas prayed thus? That thus the three children? That thus Daniel amongst
the lions? Or that thus the thief on the cross? So he. And S. Bernard in his
sermon of the four ways of praying says: Omnino nos opor^et etc. It is
altogether necessary that in ^he time of prayer we do enter into the court of
Heaven, that Court truly in which the King of Kings sits in his throne of
stars, compassed about with an innumerable and unspeakable army of Blessed
spiritts: with how great reverence then, with how great fear, with how great
humility ought a base little frog, going forth and creeping out of his puddle
appear in that place? How trembling, how suppliant, how humble and solicitous,
and how with all his mind attentive ough^ a poor wretched man to stand before
the majesty of glory, in the presence of Angels, in the Council and
congregation of the just? Truly in all our actions there is great need of watch
and vigilance, bu^ especially in our prayers.

The sixth condition is perseverance, which our Lord in two Parables hat^
commended unto us in S. Luke; Luc. 11.
the first i^ of him who went at midnight to his friend and requested that he
would lend him three loaves, Luc. 18.
who although he were often rejected because it was at an unseasonable time,
yet perseuering in his demand, he got what he desired; the second is of the
widow that called upon the Judge that he would deliver her from her enemy;
which Judge although he were a very bad man, and neither feared God or
respected man, yet ouercom^ with the perseverance and importunity of the woman,
delivered her from he^ adversary; out of which our Savior makes this
collection, that much more are we to persevere in prayers unto God, who is both
just and merciful, Jacob. 1.
and as Saint James does add, gives unto all men abundantly and vpbraideth
not; That is, he gives liberally to all such as ask his gifts and never
vpbraideth their importunity in that they are too troublesome unto him in
asking, for God is without measure rich, without measure merciful. S.
Augustine hereunto does add in the explication of the last verse of the sixth
Psalm on those words, Blessed be God who has not removed my prayer and his
mercy from me, says: If thou shall perceive that thy prayer is not removed, be
secure, because his mercy is not removed from thee.

CHAP. VIII. Of the eight precept of the Art of dying well, which is of fasting.
IT follows that briefly now we speak of fasting according to the method
observed by the Angel, and omitting many things which Deuines dispute of in
this matter, we will only bring that which makes to the matter in hand. Our
purpose is only so far forth to touc^ the art of living well, as it makes wa^
to the other art of well dying, and to this ar^ these three things may seem to
suffic^ which we have spoken of prayer; the n^cessity of fasting does depend
upon a tw^ fold law, Divine and Humane: of the Divine, Joel. 1.
Joel is witness, who in the person of God says: Be you converted unto me with
(...) your heart in fasting, weeping, and mourning; (...) the same we have from
Jonas the Prophet who testifyeth, the Ninevites, to the en^ they might please
God, to have preache^ fasting, and sackcloth; and yet at the time there was
not any set law for f^sting: Matthew. 6.
and the same is gathered out of t^^ words of our Savior in S. Matthew: (...)
thou do fast anoint thy head that thou may seem unto men to be fasting,
but to thy Father (...) sees thee in secret, and thy Father who sees the in
secret, will reward thee.

Let us allege one or two of the Fathers in this behalf. S. Augustine thus
speaks in his Epistle to Casulanus: I searching into this matter do see that
fasting is commanded in the Evangelical and Apostolical writ, and in the
whole book which is called the new Testament, but on what days we ought not to
fast, or on which we ought, I find not either by the commandment of our Lord
or his Apostles to be determined. So he. And Saint Leo in his sermon of the
fast of the tenth month: Sermon. 4.
Illa quae rerum futurarum figuras gerebant etc. Those things which prefigured
things to come, are at an end when the things which they did prefigure are
accomplished, but the grace of the new Testament has not taken away the
vtility of fasting, but with religious obserua^ce has embraced abstinence as
profitable unto the body and soul, for as that still continues in Christian
knowledge, Dominum Deum tuum adorabis, and illi soli seruies, thou shall adore
the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve, and other the like
commandments; so likewise what is commanded in the same books of the
sanctifying of fasts, is not shifted of by any gloss. So S. Leo, whose meaning
is not that Christians are to fast the same time that the Jews did, but the
commandment of fasting delivered to the Jews is to be observed of Christians
according to the appointment of those who govern the Church, as far forth as
concerns the time and manner; which determination is better known unto al,
then that it needs my declaration: and so much for the necessity of fasting.

As for the fruits and vtilityes of fasting these we shall easily declare: and
first of all fasting is most profitabl^ to prepare our soul to prayer, and to
the contemplation of celestial things, as the Angel Raphael insinuated when
he said, prayer is good with fasting thus did Moses by fasting forty days
prepare his soul, before he durst aduentur^ to come to the speech of Almighty
God: so did Elias fast forty days that he might in such manner as he could,
talk with Go^ in the mount Horeb: so Daniel by thre^ weeks fast was prepared
and made fit to receive the revelations of God: so the Church has appointed
fasts on the eue^ of the chief feasts, that the Christian may be the better
disposed to attend (...) heavenly things: and ancient Fathers do in many
places express this vtility of fasting; let the Reader see Saint Athanasius in
his book of virginity, Saint Basil in his first and second oration of fasting,
Saint Ambrose in his book of Elias and fasting, Saint Bernard in his sermon on
the eve of Saint Andrew; but the words of S. John Chrysostom because they are
few and excellent I will not omit to recite: Fasting (faith see) is the food of
the soul, and makes it light feathers that it may be carried aloft, and
contemplate most high and supreme things.

Another vtility of fasting is to tame the flesh, and for this respect it
greatly pleases God that we crucify our flesh with the vices and
concupiscences thereof, as the Apostle teaches in his Epistle to the
Galathians, who also for this cause said, Galat. 5.
I chastise my body and bring it into subjection, 1. Cor. 9.
least whiles I shall preach to others I become reprobate my self. For so
Saint Chrysostom and Theophilact in their commentaryes expound these words of
fasting, as also Saint Ambrose in his Epistle to the Church of Versells. This
vtility also do the Fathers extol: Saint Cyprian in his sermon of fasting,
and Saint Basil in his oration of the same, S. Chrysostom in his first homily
on Genesis, Saint Hierome in his Epistle to Eustochium of the keeping of
virginity, Saint Augustine in his first book of Confessions the 21. chapter,
and the whole Church in the office of the first hour out of the hymn of Saint
Ambrose does sing, carnis terat superbiam potus cibique parcitas, Let the
parsimony of meat and drink tame the pride of the flesh.

The third vtility is to worship God, for God esteems it as honor done vn^^
him when we fast, for so says the Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans: 1.
Romans 12.
Obsec^ vos etc. I beseech you that you yield you^ bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, pleasing to God, your reasonable service, for which in the Greek it is
(...), Luc. 1.
which (...) reasonable worship; and of this worshi^ S. Luke speaks when he
says of An^ the widow, She did not depart from the Te^^ serving God day and
night in fasting and prayer^ and the great Council of Nice in the fif^ canon
calls the fast of Lent a clean a^^ solemn gift that is offered of the Chur^
unto God: and Tertullian speaks after t^^ same manner in his book of the
resurrec^on of the flesh, where he calls stale and d^ meats acceptable
sacrifices unto God: and Saint Leo in his second sermon on the fa^ of the 10.
month, says: For the full rece^ of all the fruits of the earth the sacrifice
of abstinence is most worthily offered to God, the bestowe^ of them. Last of
all, Saint Gregory in his 16. homily writes, that by the fast of Lent, are
offered unto God the tithes and first fruits of our life.

The fourth vtility is satisfaction of our sins, and this first of all do
the examples of holy Scriptur demonstrate: Joan. 3.
the Ninevites as Jonas writes pacified God by fasting; 1. Reg. 7.
the same did the Jews who fasting with Samuel assuaged Gods wrath, and got
the victory over their enemies: Achab a wicked King by fasting and haircloth in
part mitigated Gods displeasure against him, Judith. 4. Hester. 4.
the Jews in the time of Judith and Hester by no other sacrifice then by
fasting, weeping, and mourning found mercy with God: this doctrine have the
ancient Fathers always taught. Tertullian in his book of fasting says: As
first of all the use of meat did destroy us, so let fasting make satisfaction
unto God. S. Cyprian: Sermon. de lapsis. Orat. 1. de leiunio. Hom. 1. in Genes.
Lib. de Elia and ieiunio. Com. ad 3. cap. Ionae.
Let us appease the wrath and offense of God as himself warns us with fasting
is fruitelesse and vain: by fasting do thou satisfy God. S. John Chrysostom:
God as an indulgent Father has sound out this cure which is affected by
fasting. Saint Ambrose: Fasting is the death of sin, the destruction of
vices, the remedy of salvation. Saint Hierome: Haircloth and fasting are the
armor of penitents, the helps of sinners. Saint Augustine: Let no man fast
for humane praise, Sermon. 60. de tempor.
but let him fast to obtain pardon (...) his sins. Saint Leo affirmed God to
be pacifyed with the sacrifice of fasting: and la^ of all Saint Bernard: Leo.
sermon. 4. de ieiun. 7. mensis Bern. sermon. 66. in Cant.
I sometimes do make a^stinence, but my abstinence is a satisfaction for (...)
sins, not a superstition for impiety.

Finally, the fifth vtility of fastin^ is, that it is meritorious, and very
much available to obtain benefits from God Anne the wife of Elcana being
barren, by f^sting obtained a son, for so does Saint Hierome in his second
book against Io^^nian interpret these words of the Scripture: 1. Reg. 1.
Porro illa stebat, and non capiebat cibu^ But she wept and took no meat,
Anna, (says this Father) inanem cibo ventrem, f^lio meruit implere: Anne
merited to fill h^ belly empty from meat with a Sonn^ Sara by three days
fasting is deliuer^ from the Devil, as is recorded in the boo^ of Toby. Tob. 3.
And there is a notable place f^ the merit of fasting in the Gospel: for thus
speaks our Savior, Matthew. 6.
Tu autem cu^ ieiunas etc. Bu^ when thou do fast annoint thy head and wash
thy face that thou may not seem to men to fast, and thy Father which sees
thee in secret will repay thee. Where the words will repay, signify that he
will pay them their reward, for they are opposed to those other, They disfigure
their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast; Ame^ I say unto you they
have received their reward. So as the hypocrites receive the reward of their
fasting, to wit the praise and applause of men: and the just also receive their
reward given them (not by the tongues of the people) but by the hands of God:
neither do there want most evident testimonies of the ancient Saints. S. John
the Evangelist being to write his Ghospel, appointed solemn fasting that he
might obtain the grace of writing well, as Saint Hierome avouches in the
preface of his commentaries on S. Matthew, and out of him Venerable Bede on the
first of Saint John: and Tertullian insinuates the same in his book of
fasting: Fastings do merit of God even the knowledge of mysteryes; New masters.
Saint Ambrose in his Epistle to the Church of Versells says: Who be these
new masters that will have no merit to be in fasting? S. Athanasius; Whosoever
is vexed with an unclean spirit, Ath. lib. d^ ieiunio. Bas. or. 1. de ieunio.
must be fully persuaded these wicked sprits tormented with fasting to leave
their hold, as fearing the force thereof. Saint Basil: Fasting is profitable
both for the eschewing the miseries of this world, and also for the atteyning
of the things that be good. S* Gregory Nazianzen explicating with wha^ weapons
a certain holy virgin repelle^ the Devil from her, says, that she opposed
against him the remedy of fastin^ and lying on the bare ground. Chry. sermon. 1.
de ieiun.
Saint John Chrysostom says: Fast, because thou hat^ sinned, fast that thou
may not sin, fa^^ that thou receive (spiritual blessings,) fa^^ that those
things which thou have received may not be lost. Saint Hierome in hi^ book
against Iouinian does of set purpose dispute and prove the merit of fasting. S.
Augustine says: sermon. 62.
Fasting is either a remedy or (...) reward, that is, either is procures us
pardon o^ our sins, or the reward of the Kingdom of he^uen. Last of all,
Saint Leo: By the humility of fasting we do merit Gods assistanc^ against all
our enemies. Ser. 1. de ieiunio 7. mensis.


We have then the necessity and fruit of fasting: there remains only the
manner, that we also briefly show how we are to fast, that our fasting may
avail us to good life, and thereby also to dye well. Many there be that do
fast on all the days appointed by the Church, to wit, on eues, on ember days,
and in Lent, and there are some who also voluntatily fast in Aduent, ^^reby
devoutly to prepare themselves (...) celebrate the fast of our Saviors
nativity; some on every friday for the memo^^ of his passion; and some on the
saturday in the honor of the Blessed Virgin and mother of God: but whether
they do (...) fast as that they reap the fruits of fasting may well be
doubted. The first and principal fruit of fasting is mortification of the
flesh, that our spirit may become more strong: and to attain this end it is
necessary that we feed on sparing and course diet: and truly our mother the
Church insinuates this when she commands us to eat not twice but one in the
day, and to eat not flesh and white meat but herbs, pease, beams, fish and
the like: this Tertullian explicateth in two words when he calls lenten fare,
ser as and aridas escas, stale and dry meats; Lib. de res. Carnis.
ce^teinly they do not observe this, who when they do fast eat as much at one
dinner as in other days they do at dinner and supper together; and who in
that dinner dress so many dishes of all sorts of fish and other meats as
they seem not to prepare a dynner for mourners and penitents, but a marriage
supper that (...) last for a great part of the night, such (...) so fast
without question reap not (...) fruits of fasting.

Neither in like manner attain the this fruit who though they feed not
^daintily but much more moderately, y^ on the fasting days do no more refra^^
from plays and sportes, from brawlin^ and wranglings, from wanton songs and
^ce^tious mirth, and that which is more g^^uous, from sins and naughtines:
then upon other days which are not faste^ hear what the Prophet Isaias says
(...) such fasters: Isay 58.
Behold in the day of your fast y^ self-will is found, and you call all your
debtors to^ count; behold you fast to make debates and wr^lings and wickedly
strike with your fist; fast no^ you have done hitherto, that your cry may be
he^^ on high. This kind of fasting did Go^ mislike in the Jews, because in
the f^sting days which are days of pennan^ they would follow their own wills
a^ not the will of God, and that they wou^^ not only not forgive their poor
debtours, as they desired to be forgiven o^ God, but that they would not so
much a^ grant them any respit in the payment; again for that the time which
those who truly fast ought to have bestowed on prayers unto God, they bestowed
in profane wrangling and contention: and last of all that not only as was
requisite in fasting days did not atte^d unto spiritual matters, but adding
syn to sin, they did wickedly beat their neighbors and abuse them. Virtuous
men must beware and avoid these and the like offenses, if they desire indeed to
have their fasting grateful unto God, and profitable unto themselves that from
thence they may be able to hope for a good life and a precious death. There
remains of the three works Alms which the Angel Raphael praised, and
proposed unto all to imitate.

CHAP. IX. Of the ninth precept of the Art of dying well, which is of
Almesdeeds.
OF Almesdeeds three things briefly are to be explicated as in the former, the
necessity, fruit, and manner. That there is a precept of giving alms no man
has ever doubted of, for in case we had no ^ther testimony, the sentence of
the (...) just and supreme Judge might abund^ly suffice, who in the last
judgment (...) say unto the wicked: Matt. 25.
Discedite a me ^ledicti in ignem aeternum etc. Depart from ye accursed into
everlasting fire which prepared for the Devil and his Ange^ for I was hungry
and you gave me n^ eat, I was thirsty and you gave me^ drink, I was a
stranger and you en^teyned me not, I was naked and you (...) not cloth me, I
was sick and in pris^ you did not visit me. And a little aft^ added: As long
as you did it not to one of (...) lesser ones, you did it not unto me. Our of
wh^ we do gather that none are bound to g^ alms but such as are able, for our
L^ himself is not recorded to have given any, but only to have commanded
(...) part of the money that was given h^^ (...) be bestowed on the poor, as
may appear out of that place of the Gospel, wh^^ when our Lord had said unto
Judas: Q^ facis fac citius: That which thou do d^ quickly, the Apostles did
think that (...) had commanded him out of the pu^ which he did bear, to give
somewha^ the poor.

But the deuines will have this precept (...) contained in that commandment:
not a parents, honor thy parents; others that, non occides, thou shall not
kill; but it not necessary that this precept be con^yned in the ten
commandments. When (...) alms belongs unto charity, and the ^ommandements of
both tables unto iu^ice; but if all moral precepts be to be ^educed to the ten
commandments, the ^pinon of Albertus the Great is probable, ^ho will have this
commandment of ^iuing alms to belong unto that non fu^aheris, thou shall
not steal, for it is a kind ^f theft, not to give that unto the poor which we
owe unto them; but more pro^able is the opinion of Saint Thomas of A^uin who
assigns it to the first commandment of the second table Honora parents,
honor thy parents, for by the honor of our parents in this place, is not
understood only a reuerentiall honor or dutiful respect, but also the
provision of all necessaryes for their life and sustenance, which is a certain
alms which special^y we do owe to our principal neigh^ours, as Saint Hierome
says, In com. ad 15. Matthew.
of which we ^nfere that this alms is due also unto other neighbors that are
in want; m^ouer for that the precept of giving a^ is not negative but
affirmative: bu^ amongst all the commandments of the ^cond table there is none
affirmative (...) only the first. Honor thy parents; but to ^pute more of this
matter stands not (...) my purpose in this place, and this may ^fice for the
necessity of alms.

Now for the fruit of this v^ that is most copious and abundant, (...) first
is that Alms deliver a man from e^ ^sting death, whether this be done by w^
satisfaction, or by way of disposition (...) to grace, or by any other way;
this (...) have clearly in the Scriptures, Tob. 12.
in Toby (...) read: Alms does deliver a man from all (...) and from death,
and permits not a soul to g^ to darkness; And in the same book the ^gell
Raphael says in express words. (...) delivers from death, and it is alms
which ^geth sins, and makes a man find mercy ^uerlasting life; Dan. 4.
and Daniel unto King N^chodonsor says: Wherefore O King follo^ counsel,
and redeem thy sins with alms, thy iniquities with the mercyes of the poor.

Again alms if it be done by a (...) man and out of true charity, has the
(...) of everlasting life, of the truth whereof Christ himself will be wittnes
when being Judge of the living and dead he shall say in the last day: Come ye
blessed of my Father, Matt. 25.
receive a Kingdom which is prepared for you from the beginning of the world,
for I was hungry and you gave me to eat. And afterward, That which you have
done to one of my least brethren you have done to me.

Thirdly alms has the effect of a certain Baptism, to wit of cleansing
sin, as well the fault as the punishment, Ecclesiasticus telling us: As water
quenches fire, so does alms extinguish sin; And water does so qu nch the
fire as it leaves not so much as any smoke, and this also is the doctrine of
the ancient Fathers: so S. Cyprian, Saint Ambrose Saint Chrysostom, and Saint
Leo do teach. S. Cyprian in his sermon of alms thus writes; As the fire of
hell is quenched with the lauer of healthful water, so with alms and good
works is allayed the flame of our faults: Saint Ambrose: Sermon. 31.
Alms in a certain manner is an other lauer of our souls, as our Lord says,
Give alms and all things are clean unto you: and without prejudice of faith
be it spoken, alms is more indulgent or remissiue then the lauer, for the
lauer is given but once, and once also it does pardon, but as often as thou
give alms so often do thou merit pardon. Saint Io^ Chrysostom: There is
no sin that alms cannon make clean, Hom. 25. in Act Apost. Leo. sermon. 5. de
Coll.
or that it cannot quite blot out. Saint Leo: Almesdeeds do blot out syns, do
kill death, an^ take away the punishment of everlasting fire. And this is a
great prerogative of this virtue and ought to stir up all men to the love
thereof. But this is not to be understood of all alms whatsoever, but of that
alone which proceeds in us from great contrition, and great fervor of
charity: such was the alms of Saint Mary Magdalen, who out of the tears of
her contrition bathed our Saviors feet, and anointed the same with the alms
of a most precious ointment.

Fourthly, alms do increase our confidence to God, and engender a spiritual
joy or comfort in us: and although that this be common to all virtues, yet in
special manner it apperteyneth unto this, whereby in one action we perform a
double duty, and that very grateful both to God and our neighbor, and is a
work which not by signs or deductions, but of his own nature is most
evidently descerned to be good. Tob. 4.
Hence is it, that Toby said, alms will yield great confidence before the
suprem or sovereign God unto all such as give it: Heb^. 10.
And that o^ the Apostle, You have had compassion on the imprisoned, do not
therefore leese your confidence. And to conclude, Saint Cyprian in his sermon
of almesdeeds, calls it, the comfort of the faithful.

Fifthly, alms gets the love and good will of many who do pray unto God
for their benefactours, and obtain of God for them either the grace of their
conversion, or the gift of perseverance, or the increase of grace and glory;
for all these ways may that saying of our Savior be understood, Make your
selves friends of the mammon of iniquity, that when ye shall fail, Luc. 16.
they may receive you into their everlasting tabernacles.

Sixthly, alms is a disposition unto our justifying grace, of which fruit
Solomon speaks in the proverbs when he says: Syns are cleansed by alms and
faith: Prouer. 15.
and Christ having heard of the liberality of Zachaeus saying, Behold I give
half of my goods unto the poor, and if I have defrauded any man, I render him
four times as much; he said unto him: To day salvation is brought to this
house. And in the Acts of the Apostles it is recorded of Cornelius not yet a
Christian, who was a bountiful bestower of alms: Act. 10.
Thy almesdeeds have ascended into the remembrance in the sight of God: o^^ of
which place Saint Augustine prouet^ Cornelius by his alms to have obtained o^
Almighty God the grace of Christian faith and perfect justification. Lib. 1 de
praedestin. Sanctor. cap. 7.


Last of all almesdeeds are oftentimes the cause that our temporal store does
increase, and is augmented: which Solomon does approve when he says: he takes
usury of our Lord who has compassion of the poor: and again: he who gives
to the poor shall never wa^; which our Savior confirmed by his own example,
when he commanded his Disciples to distribute five loaves and two fishes,
Proverb. 19. Proverb. 26.
which was al he then had, amongst the multitude, and so handled the matter as
they gathered up twelve baskett^ full of the leauings of the bread and fishe^
which sufficed his Disciples for many days after; Tobias who imparted so
liberally his goods to the poor, got in short time great wealth: the widow of
Sarephta who bestowed a little meal and oil on the Prophet Elias, received
that blessing at Gods hand that herself never wa^ted for for a long time
either meal or oil: there are many and most worthy examples in this kind
extant in the fifth book of the history of France written by Saint Gregory of
Towers; Cap. 105. and 201.
in Leontius in the life of S. John the Almenor; and Sophronius in prato
spiritualli, and the same auerreth Saint Cyprian in his sermon of fasting and
alms, and Saint Basil in an oration he made unto rich men, in which by an
excellent similitude he compares riches unto well-water, out of which if much
be drawn there do spring continually more abundant and better waters, if they
be let to to stand still, they decrease and corrupt: rich men as they will not
willingly hear these matters, so will they scarce believe them: but after this
life they shall know it to be so, and believe it to be true, when their
knowing, and believing shall steed them nothing.

Let us now speak of the manner of bestowing Alms for that is necessary more
then any other thing, that we may virtuously live and dye most happily. First
it is necessary that we give alms with a most sincere intention of pleasing
God, and not for seeking of popular praise: this does Christ teach us when
says: When thou do give alms, do not sound the trumpet, and let not thy
left hand know what thy right hand does, Matthew. 6.
Saint Augustine explicateth this place in his commentary on the Epistle of
Saint John, where by the left hand he understands the intention of giving
alms for temporal honor, ^ract. 6.
or whatsoever commodity: by the right hand he will have to be signified the
intention of giving alms in respect of everlasting life, of the glory of God,
and charity toward our neighbor.

Again, our alms is to be given readily, and with facility, that it may not
seem to be wrunge out by entreaty, nor delaied from day to day when it may
presently be dispatched. Say not (says the wiseman) go thy ways and come
again, to morrow I will give thee somewhat, when thou can give it presently.
Abraham the friend of God requested the passengers that they would come to his
house, and expected not to be entreated by them; and his nephew Lot did do the
same: so neither did Toby expect that the poor people should come unto him,
but he himself did seek for them.

Thirdly, it is requisite that our alms be given cheerfully and not with
grudging. ^ap. 31.
In every thing (says Ecclesiasticus) thou give, show a cheerful
countenance: and the Apostle, Not out of sadness, or out of necessity, for our
Lord does love cheerful giver.

Fourthly, it is necessary that our alms be given with humility in such
manner, as the giver may know himself to receive more then he gives, of which
point thus writes Saint Gregory: Lib. 21. Moral. ca. 14.
multum ad edomandum dantis superbiam valet etc. It helps much to check the
pride of the giver of alms if when he bestows his earthly substance he do
weigh well the words of the heavenly master, Make you frinds of the mammon of
iniquity, that when you shall fail they may receive you into the everlasting
tabernacles; for if by the friendship of the poor we do gain the eternal
tabernacles, doubtless we who give are to persuade our selves, that we do
rather offer presents to our benefactours, then bestow alms on the poor.

Fifthly, it behooves that we give abundantly according to the proportion or
measure of our ability, for so did Toby that famous almes-giuer: As thou shall
be able, Tob. 4.
so be thou pitiful to the poor, if thou have much give plentifully, if thou
have but little study how to give that little willingly: and the Apostle
teachet^ us that an alms is to be given as a blessing, Sermon. 3. ad pop. Ant.
not as covetousness; and S. Chrysostom adds: not to give only but to give
abundantly i^ to be called alms, and in the same Sermon he adds that such as
desire to be heard of God when they cry, Have mercy on me o Lord God according
to thy great mercy, must also have mercy on the poor according to their great
alms.

Last of all it is specially required that he who will be saved and dye well do
diligently search out either by his own reading and meditation, or by other
devout and learned men whether a man may keep superfluous riches without
sin, or whether such be not of necessity to be given to the poor; and then
further which are to be deemed superfluous riches, which necessary, for the
case may so stand that mean riches to one be may superfluous, and great wealth
to another may seem necessary. And for that this small treatise cannot comport
any prolixe dispute of scolastical questions, I will briefly repeat certain
passages of the holy Scriptu^es, and Fathers as well ancient as modern, and so
conclude this difficulty.

The places of the Scripture are the sixth of S. Matthew: You cannot serve God
and mammon; the third of S. Luke: He who has ^wo coats let him give to him
that has none; and and he that has meat let him do the like: and in ^he
twelth of the same Gospel it is said to a rich man, who so abounded in
substance as that he scant knew where to lay them: Tom. 7. ex. 50.
Thou fool this very night they will take from thee thy soul: which words S.
Augustine does thus expound, that this rich man was everlastingly damned,
because he retained superfluous wealth.

The chiefest authorityes of the ancient Father for this matter are these. S.
Basil; And art not thou a thief or robber, Basil. orat. ad diuites.
who esteemest that as thine own which thou have received only to dispense and
give away? And a little after: wherefore thou do injury to so many poor, as
thou were able to give unto. S. Ambrose; Ambr. ser. 81.
What injustice is there, if I who take not other men's goods from the^ do
diligently keep mine own? O impudent assertion! Do thou call them thine
own? Which are they? And after: It is no less a crime when thou art able and
wealthy to deny alms to the poor, then to steal or take away from him that
has it. S. Hierome; Ep. ad He^. quest. 1.
Whatsoever thou have more then is necessary for thy diet and apparel, that
bestow (on the poor) and know that for so much thou art a debtor. S.
Chrysostom: D^^ thou possess that which is thine own? Chrysostom. hom. 34. ad
pop. Antioch.
the goods of poor are committed to thy custody, whether t^^ possess them out
of thine own just labor, or b^^ne all descent of inheritance. Saint Augustin^
The things that are superfluous to the rich, are ^^cessary to the poor, they
who possess more then t^^ want possess more then is theirs. S. Leo: Ear^^ and
corporal riches do come unto us from the boun^ty of God, Aug. trac. in psalm.
147.
and therefore worthily is he to exact (...) account of these things, which he
has no more c^^mitted unto us to possess, then to disburse or distribute.
Leo. ser. 5. de Collect.
S. Gregory: Such are to be warned who neither desire other men's goods, nor
bestow their own, that they attentively know that the earth of which we are all
made is common unto all, 3. p. Past. admonit. 22.
and therefore in common yeldeth sustenance for all; and in vain do they think
themselves without fault who challenge as their own that gift of God, Ber. ep
ad Henric. Arch. Sen.
which h^ has bestowed upon all. S. Bernard: The poor cry out and say it is
our goods that you wast, it is with cruelty taken from us, which you so vainly
spend. S. Thomas of Aquine: 22. Quae. 66. art. 7. Quast. 87. a^^. 1. Distin. 15.
The things which some have more then they need is by the law of nature dew
unto the maintenance is the poor. And: Our Lord commands not only the tyth
or tenth part, but whatsoever is superfluous to be given to the poor. And upon
the fourth book of Sentences he affirms this to be the common doctrine of all
deuines. Here if any will contend that these superfluous goods are not to be
given unto the poor out of the rigor of ^he law, yet truly he cannot deny but
that they are to be given them out of charity, and it imports little God wot,
whether a man go to hell for want of justice, or for want of charity.

CHAP. X. Of the tenth precept of dying well, which is of the Sacrament of
Baptism.
HAVING explicated the virtues which teach us the art to live well, we will
adioyne somewhat out of the doctrine of the Sacraments which concur no less
then the former to the atteyning of this art. The Sacraments ordained by Christ
are seven, Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Order, Matrimony,
Extreme Unction: all which are as it were divine instruments which God uses by
the ministry of his servants to give his people grace, to increase it, to
restore it. That being freed from the bondage of the Devil, and adopted with
the honor of being the sons of God, the^ may at length come to be partakers
of everlasting blessedness with the holy Angels in heaven. Out of these
Sacrament then, our purpose is briefly to show who profits and who fails in
this art of good life, that so he may know how to hope for a happy death, and
who on the contrary may look for a miserable end, unless he do the sooner
change his life and behavior.

Let us begin with the first Sacrament. Baptism Baptism.
in order and number of the Sacraments is the first, and is fittly called the
gate or entrance of the Sacraments, for unless baptism go before, no man can
be fit to receive the other Sacraments: In the Sacrament of baptism these
rites or ceremonies are observed; first of all who is to be baptized must
either by himself or his Godfathers make confession of the Catholic faith,
then he must renounce the Devil, his Pompes, and works, thirdly he is to be
baptized in Christ, in which Baptism he is translated from the thraldom of
the Devil unto the grace of the children of God, and al his sins being
blotted quite out, he receaueth the gift of heavenly grace, by which he is now
made the adopted son of God, the heir I say of God, and fellow heir of Christ.
Fourthly there is given him a white stole, and he is willed to preserve the
same clean and unspotted until death; fifthly there is given him a burning
candle which signifyes good works, which whiles he lives he must join with
the former purity signified by the white stole, for so says our Lord in the
Gospel, Let your light so shine before men as that they may see our good
works and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

These are the chiefest ceremonies which the Church does use in the
administration of this Sacrament; I omit the rest which apperteyne not unto
this matter: out of this every man may conceive whether he have always lived
well from the time he received his Baptism unto this present year of his age:
I do very much doubt that there are very few to be found who have performed
these things which they have promised to do, Matthew. 20. Matthew. 5.
or truly which they were bound to do, For many are called, but few are chosen:
and, narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there be that do find it
out.

Let us begin with the Apostles Creed: how many country people, how many
beggars, how many inferior artificers are there who either cannot say their
Creed, or never learnt it, or know how to say the words, but understand little
or nothing at all of the sense? And yet they in Baptism by their Godfathers
and Godmothers answered unto every article that they did believe: and if
Christ be to dwell in our hearts by faith as S. Paul does testify, Ephesians. 3.
how shall he dwell in their hearts who can scantly rehearse the words of their
Creed, and have nothing at all thereof in their hearts? and if God by faith do
purify our hearts as Saint Peter the Apostle says, Actor. 15.
how impure will their hearts be, who have not in their hatts received the faith
of Christ, although in flesh they have received his Baptism? I speak of such
as have the use of reason and not of infants, for infants by the habit of grace
of faith, hope, and charity are justified, but when they are grown in years,
they ought to learn their Creed, and in heart believe the Christian faith for
righteousness, and confess it in word for salvation: Rom 10.
as the Apostle teaches in the Epistle to ^he Romans.

Let us come to another rite. All Christians either by themselves or by the
help of others who answer for them, being demanded whether they renounce the
Devil, his pompes, and works, do answer I renounce; but how many be there
that in word renounce, but renounce not indeed? Or rather how few be there who
with all their heart do not love and follow the pomps and works of the Devil?
And yet God sees all and cannot be illuded: he then who desires to live and
dye well, let him enter into the closet of his heart, and and let him not deceive
himself, but seriously and attentively think and think again, whether he be
delighted with the pompes of this world, or with the works of the Devil, and
whether in his heart, in his deeds, in his words, he have given place unto
them; for so either a good conscience shall comfort him; or a bad conscience
bring him to repentance.

In the third rite is laid open unto us a benefit of God so high, so deep, so
long, so lardge, that in case we bestowed whole days and nights in admiration
thereof, and in yelding his divine goodness thanks for the same, we should do
nothing in respect of the thing it self: good God, who can conceive, who is
not astonished, who does not languish away and is not resolved into devout
tears, when he considers how a wretched man most justly condemned unto hell,
suddenly by virtue of this Baptism of Christ t^ pass from this most miserable
thraldom to the right and claim of a most happy and ever enduring Kingdom?

And by how much this benefit is the greater, by so much is the vngratitud^ of
most men more detestable; for there are not a few who as soon as they arrive
unto the use of reason, return this admirable benefit back upon God again,
and deliver themselves up for slaves to the devil; for what is it in the
flower of our age to follow the concupiscence of the flesh, the concupiscence
of the eyes, and pride if life, but to contract league and friendship with the
Devil, and in deeds and facts to deny Christ? They are rare to find who
prevented with the special grace of God do diligently keep this Baptismall
grace, Thren. 3.
and as Hieremy speaks begin to bear the yoke of our Lord ab adolescentia
sua, from their youth: but unless we keep well this grace, or by true
penance do again renounce the devil and return to the service of Christ,
and remain therein until our death, it cannot be that we live well, or be
delivered from an evil death.

The fourth ceremonial rite consists in this, that he who is baptized
receaueth a white stole, and is commanded to bear the same until he come
before the face of our Lord. By which as we said is signified innocency or
purity of life obtained by the grace of Baptism, and diligently to be kept
until the hour of our death: but who can express how many snares there be of
the Devil, the continual enemy of mankind, who lauours nothing more then to
defile this garment with all manner of spotts? And therefore very few are found
who if they live any while do avoid this filth. Psalm. 118.
Truly holy David pronounced them happy who remain immaculate in the way (of
this life) and walk in the law of our Lord: and by how much the difficulty is
more great to wall in a durty and filthy way without spots so much more
glorious is the conquest and Crown of an innocent life. Wherefore all that
desire to live and dye well, ought by all means to keep this white garment of
innocence, and if perchance it should happen to be spotted, that then again
and again they make it white in the blood of the Lamb, which is done by true
co^trition and repentant tears. Holy David after he had bewailed a long time
his sin, reposed at length in the hope of mercy, and yielding thanks unto
God confidently, said: Thou shall sprinkle me with hissope and I shall be made
clean; thou shall wash me and I shall be made more white then snow.

The last rite is to receive a lighted candle, and to bear it in our hands,
which signifies nothing else, as I have said, but our works, which must
accompany innocence of life: what these good works are which must be done of
the regenerate in Baptism, 2. Tim. 4.
the Apostle teaches us when he says: I have fought a good co^bat, I have
ended my course, I have kept my faith; as for the rest there is laid up for me
a Crown of Justice, with the Just Judge at that day will render me: in these
few words are briefly set down all the good works which are to be done of
the regenerate in Baptism by Christ. For we must fight stoutly against the
tentatio^s of the devil, who, As a roaring Lion goes about seeking whom he
may devour. We must also accomplish or end this course of good works in the
observance of Gods commandments according to that of the psalm, I have run
the way of thy commandments when thou have enlardged my heart. We must finally
fulfill our promise to God in multiplying his tallents, in cultiuating his
vineyard, in the baylifship committed unto us, or in the government of his
family imposed upon us, or in whatsoever other employments committed to our
charge: for albeit that it has pleased the high wisdom of God to admit his
adopted children unto the heavenly inheritance; yet that this might be effected
with his and our greater glory, it has pleased the same wisdom that we should
merit the same heavenly inheritance, that is, everlasting blessednesses, by our
own good works, proceeding from his grace and our own free will; therefore
that most rich and most glorious inheritance shall not be given to such as
sleep, as loyter, as play, but unto such as watch, as labor, as persevere
unto the end of their lives in good works.

Now let every man discuss his works, let him diligently examine his life and
manners, if he will live and dye well, and if his conscience yield him
testimony that he has fought a good combat with vices, and concupiscences, and
with all the tentations of the old serpent, and that he has happily ended his
course in all the commandments and iustifications of our Lord without
complaint, and that he has been faithful to our Lord in all the charges or
offices committed unto him, then let him securely rejoice and say with the
Apostle, There is laid up for me a crown of Justice, which our Lord the just
Judge will give me: If so be that our conscience exactly discussed do testify
that in this conflict with the enemy of mankind it has been grievously
wounded, and that his fiery darts have penetrated even unto the very soul, and
that also not once but often: and further that it has often failed in the
course of good works; and that not on^y it has not run on cheerfully but
through faintnes to have sit down, yea ^ayne along in the way; and finally if
^n the things committed unto it by God it has not kept promise, but that
either vain glory, or acception of persons, or the like have taken part of the
gain, let him recurre without delay to the Sacrament of penance, and unto God
himself as his Physician, and let him not delay this business of all
businesses the greatest, until another time, because we neither know the day,
nor hour of our death.

CHAP. XI. Of the eleventh Precept of dying well, which is of Confirmation.
AFTER the Sacrament of Baptism follows the Sacrament of Confirmation, out of
which we may draw a document of good life no less agreeable to that we treat,
then from Baptism: for notwithstanding that Baptism be a Sacrament more
necessary then is the Sacrament of Confirmation, yet is the Sacrament of
Confirmation more noble then the sacramen^ of Baptism: which may be proved
from the minister, from the matter, from the effect. The ordinary minister of
Baptism is the priest or deacon, and in time of necessity, whosoever. The
ordinary minister of Confirmation is the Bishop, and by dispensation of the
supreme Pastor the Priest alone. The matter of Baptism i^ natural water,
the matter of Confirmation is precious oil mingled with balm, and consecrated
by the bishop; the effect of Baptism is grace and the Character, such a one as
is necessary to frame a spiritual child according to that of Saint Peter; As
children newly borne seek or hunger ye after milk; the effect of
Confirmation is grace and the character, such as is requisite to make a
Christian soldier to fight against invisible enemies, Ephesians. 6.
as S. Paul writes: We have not to encounter with flesh and blood, but
against the Princes and powers, against the Governors of the world, of this
darkness, against the spiritualls of wickedness, that are above in the air, as
S. Hierome and S. Ambrose interpret it. Last of all in Baptism salt is given
unto the infants to taste; in Confirmation there is a blow given them, that the
Christian soulders may learn to fight, not by striking but by pacie^t suffering
for the love of Christ.

But that we may the better perceive the office or duty of a man anointed with
holy oil, that is to say of a Christian soldier, let us see what the Apostles
received in their Confirmation which was given then upon White sunday. The
Apostles were not properly confirmed by the Sacrament of holy Chrisme but
received from Christ the Prince of priests the effect of the Sacrament without
the Sacrament, and they received three gifts, VVisdome, Eloquence, and
Charity, in the highest degree; and besides this the gift of miracles most
profitable for the conversion of Infidels unto the faith, and these gifts did
the fiery toungs which appeared on the day of Pentecost signify, as likewise
the great noise that then was heard; for the light of fire signifies Charity,
the figure of the tongue Eloquence, and the great noise the gift of Miracles:
the Sacrament of our confirmation brings not with it the gift of diverse
tongus, nor the gift of miracles, because these things were not requisite for
the good and perfection of the Apostles further the^ for the conversion of
Infidel but it brings the gift of spiritual wisd^^ and the gift of charity
which is gentle patient, and in sign of this patience which is a most rare and
most precious virtue, (...) Bishop openly gives a blow to the pa^^ confirmed,
that he may know that by th^^ Sacrament, he is made the soldier of christ, not
to fight but to suffer, not to do any iniu^yes but to bear them; for so in
Christian warfare are we to fight not against men whom we see, but against the
Diuel^ whom w^ see not, and so our Captain and Emperor Christ did both fight
and overcome, who nailed to the Cross subdued the powers of the air; and so
did the Apostles fight who newly confirmed were grievously whipped in the
Conuenticle of the Jews, Act. 5.
And they went from the sight of the Council rejoicing, for that they were
found worthy to suffer reproach for the name of Christ. This certes is the
grace of the Sacrament of confirmation to effect that a man unjustly injured do
not think of revenge, but rejoice that for justice sake he is sound worthy to
suffer all wrongs and iniuryes.

And here again let him that is confirmed enter into his own heart and
carefully attend whether he find in the same ^^e gifts of the holy Ghost, and
especially ^isdome and fortitude; let him mark I ^^y whether he find the
wisdom of Saints which highly prizeth Eternal things, and despises
temporal; and the fortitud ^f the soldiers of Christ, who more willingly do
receive injuries then offer them: and least there should be any mistaking let
him com to the practice, let him examine his conscience; for if indeed he find
himself prompt and ready to give alms, not to heap up riches, and having
taken an injury if he do not think on revenge, but does most easily and
willingly pardon the same, he may well rejoice in spirit, as one that has in
his heart the pledge of the adoption of the Sons of God: but if after the
taking of the Sacrament of Confirmation, he perceive himself no less desirous
of riches, no less covetous, no less angry, no less impatient; and when
trial shall be made, does with great difficulty endure a little gold or silver
to go out of his purse to help the poor; and on the other side he find
himself wholly inclined to snatch at all occasions of gain, and find himself
very prone unto anger, and requested even by (...) friends to pardon an
offense, will bec^^ inexorable, what else can he gather h^reof but that he has
received the Sac^^ment, but not the grace which it yield o^ to the well
disposed receauer.

These things I have said for suc^ as are of riper age, when they come to
receive this Sacrament, for such as come to receive it very young, etc as yet
scarce c^pable of deceyt, to such because nothin^ does hinder, it is to be
thought the gifts and virtues mentioned to be infused, but they are to fear
least for their sins after committed, and by to long protracting of penance
that they do not extinguish this spirit received in Confirmation, that is that
they do not loose the grace of the holy Ghost.

Therefore he that will live and dye well, let him greatly regard the grace of
the Sacraments, which are the vessels of celestial treasures, and amongst
others these especially, whose grace being once lost ca^ no more be found, as
is the Sacrament of Confirmation, in which is received an incomparable
treasute. For though the Character of all Sacraments cannot be blotted out, yet
the Character without ^^e gifts of grace yeldeth no comfort, but ^^creaseth the
punishment of our confu^^on.

CHAP. XII. Of the twelfth precept of the Art of dying well, which is the
Eucharist, of Sacrament of the Altar.
THE most holy Eucharist is the greatest of all Sacraments, in which not grace
only is most abundantly contained, but the Author also himself of grace and
glory is given. That a Christian man may live and dye well in respect of this
Sacrament two things are necessary: one is, that sometimes he take this sacred
food, our Savior warning us: Joan. 6.
Unless you eat the flesh of the son of man you shall not have life in you,
another thing that he do receive worthily so excellent a meat, 1. Cor. 11.
for else as the Apostle says unto the Corinthians: who eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself not discerning the body
of our Lord (from other meats.) Now the question is how often it is expedient
to receive this food, and what preparation is esteemed sufficient that we may
worthly, and not unworthily, come unto thi^ celestial banquet.

Touching the former question we fyn^ many and these also different customs to
hau^ been used. In the primitive Church the faithful did very often receive
the body of our Savior, and therefore did S. Cyprian in his Sermon on our Lords
prayer expl^cat those words of this B. Sacrament, Gi^^ us to day our daily
bread, and teaches us that it is to be received every day, unless a man be
hindered by some lawful let: afterward charity waxing cold many did differ
this communion for some years; wherefore Innocentius the third set forth a
decree that once every year as well men as women, at the time of Easter should
be bound to receive the holy Eucharist; and and now it seems to be common
opinion of learned men, that it is very godly and laudable that such as are not
Priests should not neglect to come to receive this Blessed Sacrament every
Sunday, and festival day: that saying is famous amongst Authors as held to be
Saint Augustines: Every day to receive the holy Eucharist, I neither praise,
nor mislike: but I persuade and exhort all to communicate every Sunday; and
although the book De Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus, of Ecclesiastical doctrines,
out of which this short sentence is taken, seem not to be ^he work of S.
Augustine, yet was it writ^en by an ancient Authors and is not contrary to the
doctrine of same Father, who in his Epistle to Ianuarius expressly teaches
neither them to err who think we are daily to communicate, Epist. 118.
nor those who deny it, and think we are to communicate more seldom. Truly he
who so speaks would in no wise find fault with those who would follow the
middle way between both extremes, which is to come at least on the Sondayes to
this Sacrament; and the same to have been the opinion of Saint Hierome is
plain by his commentary on the epistle to the Galathians, Cap. omnis de Panit.
and remiss.
where expounding the fourth Chapter thus he writes: As it is lawful for us
ever to fast, or ever to pray and without intermission, having received the
body of our Lord, joyfully to celebrate the sunday: so is it not lawful for
the Jews to sacrifice their lamb etc. And this opinion liked well Saint
Thomas in the third part of his Quaest. 80. art. 10.
theological Sum.

As touching the other point of preparation to receive so great a Sacrament,
that it may be received to the health of our soul, and not to our judgment
an^ condemnation, first of all is required tha^ our soul be living with the
life of grace, and not dead with the death of mortal sin, because for this
respect it is called meat and given under the form of bread, for that it is
not the meat of the dead, but of the living, as (says our Savior in S. John)
He that eats this bread shall live for ever; and in the same place, my flesh
is truly meat; and the Counsel of Trent adds further, that it is not a
sufficient preparation to receive duly this celestial food, that he who is
defiled with mortal sin content himself with co^trition alone, but that he
be careful to purge his sins by the Sacrament of pe^nance in case he can
have a Ghostly Father. Again for that this Sacrament is not only bread but
also a medicine, and that an excellent one, and most wholesome against all the
diseases of vices, therefore secondly is required that a man do desire perfect
health and to be cured from all the maladyes of sin, and principally from ^he
chiefest of them as leachery, covetousness, pride. That this Blessed Sacrament
is a medicine Saint Ambrose clearly avouches: Lib. de Sac. Cap. 4.
He that is wounded (says he) seeks for a me^icine; the wound we have is
because we are under ^ynne, the medicine is the heavenly and venerable
^acrament. So he: and Saint Bonauenture: He ^ho reputeth himself unworthy, let
him think that so much the more he needs, and has necessary occasion to
seek for the Physician by how much more he feels himself to be sick. And
Saint Bernard warns his brethren that they attribute it to the grace and
virtue of this Sacrament, that they find their bad inclinations, and other
infirmityes of the mind to be diminished.

Lastly this most holy Sacrament is not only the food of travelers, and
medicine of the sick, but is also a most learned and most loving Physician,
and therefore when he comes to visit us he is to be received with all joy and
reverence, and the house of our soul is to be adorned with all manner of
virtues, and in particular with the ornaments of faith hope, Charity, Devotion,
Piety, and with the fruits of good works, as of prayer, fasting and alms. For
these ornaments does this sweet guest of our soul require, who yet wants
nothing of that which we ar^ able to give him; again consider that thi^
Physician who comes unto us, is bot^ King, and God, whose purity is infini^
and requires a most clean tabernacle (...) our breast: Let us hear Saint John
Chrysostom in this matter: Then what should not he be more pure who enjoys
this sacrifice? Sermon. 66 ad pop. Antioch.
then wh^^ sun beam ought he not to be more resplenden^ who deuideth this
flesh? The mouth that is replenished with this spiritual fire?

Now let any one who is desirous to liu^ and dye well make recourse to his own
soul, and shutting the door against all distractiue businesses let him
consider alone with his own heart before God who searches the reins and hearts
of all, how often and with what preparation he does communicate and receive
this Sacrament of our Lords body, and if he find that by Gods grace he does
often and with fruit receive it, and thereby in spiritual life to be
nourished, and by little and little to be cured from the diseases of sin; and
morouer that he does more and more daily profit and proceed in virtue, and good
deeds; let him rejoice with trembling and go on to serve God in fear, not with
that servile of slaves, but with that sincere and chaste which is of children.
But if he be one of those who contented with communicating once in the year do
never more think on this most wholesome Sacrament, but forget to eat this
bread of life, by how much more they grow fat and broad in body, by so much the
more are their souls weakened and do wither away: and let such a one know that
he wa^teth wit, and is far of from the Kingdom of God; the yearly
communicating is not decreed by the holy general Council for this end that
none should communicate but once in the year, but that once in the year they
should be compelled thereunto, unless they would be cast out of the Church,
and delivered over to Satan. And Such men for the most part do not receive
their Lord in the Sacrament with filial love but with servile fear, and soon
after return to the husks of hoggs, to the pleasures of the world, to
temporal commodityes and ambitiously to gape after false and fugitive honors,
that so at the day of their death they may hear with the rich Glutton: Memento
fili, quia recepisti bona in vita tua. Remember so^ that thou have received
good things (...) this life, and therefore must not expect f^^ any more in the
next: and if any be foun^ who makes often recourse to the mistery^ of this most
holy Sacrament and that e^^ uery Sunday, or else every day if perhap^ he be
Priest, and yet neither refrayneth from mortal sins, nor seriously
exercyseth himself in good works, nor (...) not yet truly gone out of the
world but another men who are of the world thirste^^ after riches, is carried
away with carnal delights, sees and sigheth after higher degrees of honors,
and dignityes, he truly eats the flesh of our Lord to his judgment, and by
how much the more he unworthily frequenteth these mysteryes, by so much the
more nearly does he imitate Judas the traitor, of whom our Lord said: Melius
erat eisi natus non fuisset homo ille, it had been better for him if ho had
never been borne. Let no man despair of his salvation whiles yet he lives,
and therefore let him with himself call to account his years, and works and
then he shall find that hitherto he has run much astray out of the path of
salvation, let him know that yet there is time left to return, so that he will
seriously do penance, and come again into the way of truth.

I think it convenient to end this ^hapter withal, that I adioyne what S.
Bonauenture writes in the life of the holy Father S. Francis, I mean of the
admirable devotion and love of this most holy man toward this divine
Sacrament, that by the example of his fervor our tepidity or coldness rather
may be kindled. He was enflamed (says S. Bonauenture) with the fervor of al
his soul toward the Sacrament of our Lords body, admiring with wonderful
great astonishment that most dear humility, and most humble charity. He did
often so devoutly communicate that he made others to become devout; when he came
to the sweet taste of the immaculate lamb, as it were drunk in spirit, he was
for the most partrapt into a trance or rauishment of mind. So he: From which
devotion not only many lay men that communicate, but many Priests also who
celebrat are far short especially such of the latter as say Mass with
incredible have, as they seem not to know themselves what they do, nor permit
others that hear the^, to consider with any attentio^ so great a mystery, or
that which else they would at that time contempla^

CHAP. XIII. Of the thirteenth precept of dying well, which is Penance.
AFTER the Eucharist follows the Sacrament of Penance, which it respect of
him who receaueth, consists specially in three virtues, in contrition of
heart, confession of mouth, and satisfaction of work. For they who perform
these three things well, do without al doubt obteyn forgiveness of their
sins: but it is most diligently to be seen and considered, whether our
contrition be true, our confession entiere, or satisfaction be full and
agreeable to the offenses committed.

Let us begin with contrition. Joel the Prophet cries out: Contrition.
Rend your hearts and not your garments. The Jews when they would make
remonstrance or sign of sorrow they did cut or tear their garments: the holy
prophet then warns us that if in the sight of God we will show true and
inward grief for our sins commit^d, that we cut or tear our hearts, and the
prophet David will not have us only to cut o^ tear them, be to pound them small
and ^^^ing them into dust, as we do things that are beaten in a mortar, Thou will not o God (says he) despise a heart (so) broken and humbled: which
similitudes do evidently show that to pacify God by penance, it is not
sufficient in word only to say, I am sorry that I have offended, but there is
required inward and great grief of heart, which without many sobbs, sighs, and
tears is hardly found; and wonder it is to behold how severely the a^cient
Fathers do speak of true contrition. S. Cyprian in his sermon of such as were
fallen from the faith has these words: Look how great our sins are, let us
so greatly also deplore them: to a deep wound let there not want a diligent
and long cure, let not the penance be less then the fault; it behooves us to
pray and callon God more earnestly to pass the day in mourning, to spend the
night in watching and weeping, to bestow all our time in tears and
lamentations, and lying on the bare ground, to be sprinkled with ashes, to
trumble and turn in a hairecloth and rags. Lib. 3. cap. 17 all. 24.
Clemens Alexandrinus, as we have in Eusebius in his history, calls penance
Baptismum lacrimarum, the Baptism of tears. Orat. 2. de bapt. Ca. 1.
S. Gregory Nazianz^ says: I willingly receive penitents if I shall them
bedewed with tears. Theodoretus in (...) abridgement writes that the woun^
received after Baptism are indeed c^pable, Ep. divine. decret. cap. de poenit.
but not with so light labor as before the lauer of regeneration, but by mani^
tears and toylsom works.

These things and the like have a^^ the holy Fathers left written of the tru^^
of contrition: many now adays come (...) confession who show either very
little o^ no contrition at all; but such as sincerel^ desire to be reconciled
unto God, that the may live well and socurely dye, must enter into their own
hearts, and excluding all other matters of less moment, with all attention must
seriously reuolue these and the like things in their mind, and sayech one to
himself: woe be to me poor wretch what have I done when I committed this and
this sin? First I have offended that most sweet Author of all goodness, and
my most loving Father, who on all sides, as with a rampire, has compassed me
about with his benefits, of whose great charity I see so many signs as I see
good things in my self or others. But that shall I say of my loving Redeemer
Christ, who has loved me being his enemy, and unworthy, and he has given
^^mselfe up for me, Ephesians. 5.
an oblation and sacrifice unto God in an odor of suauity? And I still
vn^ateful and wretched man do not cease from ^ffending him? How great is my
hard^es and cruelty? My Lord was beaten with ^odds, was crowned with thorns,
was fastened to the Cross with nails that so he might cure my old sins and
offenses, and yet shall I never cease to add more and more new? He hanging
naked on the Cross did cry out that he thirsted my salvation, and do I still
offer him gall and vinegar to drink? who also shall explicate from how great
glory I have fallen when I committed this and that deadly sin? I was an heir
of the Kingdom of heaven, of a life eternal, and most happy: from this
felicity and truly so noble and every way so great, have I fallen by that most
short pleasure, by those words either contumelious against men, or blasphemous
against God, by which I reaped no profit or commodity at all; and from that so
great felicity to what state am I fallen? to the thraldom of the Devil (...)
most cruel enemy, and as soon as the rott^ wall of my body shall be beaten
down (...) which expects every moment to fall, (...) soon also shall I without
al hope of re^^uery descend into hell fire. Alas po^^ wretch that I am, perhaps
to marow, pe^haps this night, I shall begin to dwe^^ in these eternal fires,
But above all things my ingratitude of a son and most vile servant against
his most loving Father and most sovereign Lord does torment and wound my heart,
for by how much the more he has heaped his benefits upon me, by so much more
grievously have I by my sins offended him.

These and the like things if thou will with thy self carefully consider
whosoever thou be who vouchsafest to read this title treatise, I hope that
thou shall receive the gift of contrition of our most merciful Lord: the
penitent King David once entered into the desert solitud of his heart after his
aduoutry committed, and presently having gotten true contrition he began for to
wash his bed with tears: Saint Peter did the like after the denial of his
master, and presently fleuit amare, he wept bitterly. S. Mary Magdalen also
entered ^^to her heart, and forth with, she began to ^ash our Saviors feet with
her tears, and to dry ^^em with the hair of her head; these are the^ ^^e
fruits of contrition, which do not ^row but in the solitude or desert of our
^art.

Now let us speak a word or two of confession. I see many men to come to ^his
Sacrament with very little or no fruit ^t all, Confession.
and that for no other cause but ^or that they enter not into their heart when
they prepare themselves for to make their confession. Some there be who go
about this matter so negligently, that in general only and after such a
confuse fashion they can say that they have broken all the commandments and
committed all the deadly sins; to such there should be given no other then a
general and confuse absolution, yea they are not worthy of this; for they
confess perhaps that which they have not done, and that which indeed they have
done they confess not: others there be that have learned distinctly and
orderly to recount their sins, but they make no account of the quality, of
the person, of the place) of the time, of the number and of other circumstance
which is a notable and dangerous neg^gence, for it is one thing to strike a
pri^ another to strik a lay man, when as to t^ the former is annexed an
excommu^cation, and not to the latter; again it one thing to have carnal
knowledge w^^ a virgin, another thing with a religion Nun, another thing with a
married w^ma^, another thing with his own kinsw^ma^ another thing with a
harlot. Morou^ it is one thingto have committed it on^^ another thing to have
fallen ten times into the same sin, for the same sin oftentimes repeated is
not one syn but manifold. Finally there are some (which is more to be wondered
at) who are persu^ded that the inward sins as the desires of fornication,
adultery, murder, theft and the like are not sins, unless they be actually
committed by the exterior wor^. Yea they scarce account wanton looks, or
lascivious words to be sins, and yet our Savior Christ says in plain
terms: He who shall see a (married) Woman to lust after her, Matthew. 5.
has already committed adultery in his heart: Wherefore he who will have care
or his conscience and make a profitable and good confession, let him read some
good book of the art of confessing his sins, or let himself seek out a
virtuous and learned ghostly Father, and let him enter into his own heart
discuss his conscience, and that not hastily and briefly but exactly and
seriously, and let him diligently examine his thoughts, desires, deeds, words,
and also omissions, and then let him lay open his soul unto his virtuous and
skilful Physician, let him humbly crave absolution of him, and be ready to do
that penance which his Ghostly Father shall think necessary to impose.

There remains satisfaction, of which our Ancestors most wise and prudent
men did make more far account then we seem now to do, for they when seriously
they did consider that it was far more easy to make satisfaction unto God on
earth then in purging flames of the next life, did impose most heavy and very
long penaltyes; and as for time they enjoined pennances of seven years, of
fifteen, of thirty, and sometimes of their whole life; and as for the quality
they enjoined very frequent fasts, and yet more frequent prayers; again they
did forbid their penitents to go to the bathes, that they should not ride, go in
coach, or use any bravery in apparel; that they should absteyn^ from plays,
from sports, from spectacles in the open theaters; and finally their whole life
was consumed as it were i^ grief and mourning as became true penitents: I will
allege one only example.

In the tenth Toletan Council we read the Bishop of Bracchara called
Potamius, for that he had defiled himself with touching a woman (for so
speaks the Council) without all compulsion of others voluntarily of his own
accord to have shut himself up in prison, and for nine months to have done
penance, and then by his own letters freely to have manifested this his sin
and penance, which he had undergone unto the Concell of the Bishops. And then
the Council further to have determined that he should continue in doing
penance all the days of his life, when as notwithstanding the Council there
declares that it had dealt more favorably and mercifully with him then the
rules and severity of the Ancient Fathers did permit. This was the ancient
severity. Now we are become so weak and tender, forsooth, that a penance
imposed of fasting in bread and water for a few days, with the seven psalms
and letanyes to be rehearsed in the same, and an alms of a little money
bestowed on the poor, does seem severe enough, although it be imposed for
cleansing the soul f^^m many great syns and enormityes. But that wherein here
we favor selves we shall grievously smok for in purgatory, Gods justice
requiring full satisfaction, unless in this life our contrition be so great as
proceeding from most fervent charity, that it be able to obtain of the mercy
of God full remission and pardon of all sin, and punishment due unto the
same: truly a contrite and humble heart do much move the bowels of the mercy
of God our Father, for the goodness of our Lord is such as he cannot hold when
he sees the prodigal child truly penitent, but that he must go and meet him,
but that he must embrace him, but that he must kiss him, but that he must give
him a ring of peace, but that he must wipe away all tears of sorrow, and
replenish him with tears of joy, more sweet then all honey; and what else can
be devised more comfortable.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the fourteenth Precept of the Art dying well, which is of the
Sacrament of Order.
THE two Sacraments that ensue now briefly to be considered do not apperteyne
unto all Christians, but one to Clergy men to wit Order, the other to lay men
to wit matrimony: let us speak a little of the first, I mean not all things
that belong to this Sacrament, but those things only which are necessary to
this art of living and dying well.

Orders in number are seven, four lesser, and three greater: of which the
chifest which is Priesthood is divided into two, for there are greater Priests
which are called Bishops, and lesser which are single priests; before all these
Orders is given prima tonsura, which is it were a gate unto all the Orders, and
properly makes them clarks or Clergy men; and for that the things which are
required of these inferior Clarks, especially what concerns virtuous and
religious life, by greater reason are to be exacted of the^ who have taken the
lesser or greater Orders, and especially of Priests and Bishops: therefore I
will restrain my speech to consider and explicate those things only which do
belong to these inferior Clerks.

Two things there be in these Clarks that require explication. First the rite
or manner of their ordering, then the office which they are to exercise in the
Church. The rite or manner of their ordering, as appears by the Pontifical
is this, that first of all some little part of their hairs be clipped of, by
which ceremony is signified the casting off of all superfluous thoughts and
desires, as are the thoughts and desires of temporal things, riches, honors,
pleasures and the like: and that they be commanded whiles the Bishop cutteth
away their hayers to say that verse of the 15. psalm, Our Lord is the portion
of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou (O Lord) shall restore me again
mine inheritance; Then does the Bishop call for a surplise and causes the new
Clarke to put it on, saying that of the Apostle to the Ephesians: God vest thee
with the new man, which is created according to God in justice and holiness of
truth: Cap. 4.
but there is no office assigned to this new Clarke, but out of the ancient
custom, we gather his office to be to serve the priest when he says Mass in,
ease he say it privately.

Now let us contemplate what height of perfection is required in a clark, and
if so much be required in a Clarke, what is required in an Acolite, in a
Subdeacon, in a Deacon, in a Priest, in a Bishop. Truly I find in my self a
horror of mind to think thereon, when as there are scant found these things
in many priests which by virtue of the ordering is required in a simple Clarke.
The Clarke is willed to cast away superfluous thoughts and desires which are
proper unto secular men, that is to say men which apperteyne unto this world,
who are of the world and who do always think and desire the goods of the
world: a good Clarke is commanded to seek no other part or portion or
inheritance but God, that God alone be his riches and inheritance, and that he
may truly be said and found to be the part and inhertance of God. O height of
Clericall perfection, which forsakes the whole world that it may possess God,
and may again by reciprocal love be possessed of God alone.

This is the meaning of the words of the psalm, Our Lord is the part of my
inheritance and of my cup, pars haereditatis, the part of my inheritance.
This part is called that portion which out of the division of an inheri^^^^
amongst many brothers, does befall to each one a part, the sense then of the
words is not that a Clergy man should make God one part of his inheritance,
and earthly riches another, but that from his heart he desire that God be all
his part, portion, or inheritance: that is all that he may expect in this world,
and that whatsoever here he may have, out of a religious affection he may make
it all over unto God. Between the cup and the inheritance there is this
difference, that the cup belongs unto pleasure and delights, the
inheritance unto wealth and honors. Wherefore the full and entiere sense of
the verse is: O my Lord God, from hence forward whatsoever I might hope for in
this world of riches, of delights, of temporal commodityes, all that
whatsoever it be I do desire to have in thee alone, thou alone do
abundantly suffice for all other things, and for that the plenty of heavenly
riches is not to be found on earth, therefore does this Clark go on in his
prayer, and says tu es qui restitu^ haereditatem meam mihi, thou art he who
shall restore me again mine inheritance; for what I have contemned and cast
away for thy sake either i^ giving it to the poor, or in freely pardoning them
that have taken it from me: thou have laid up all safely for me, and in due
time thou will restore it, not in the same corruptible substance but in thy
self, the inexhaust fountain of all goodness.

But least that any should call in doubt our explication, I will confirm it by
two witnesses not liable to reproof, to wit Saint Hierome and Saint Bernard.
Saint Hierome in his Epistle to Nepotianus of the life of Clergy men says:
Therefore let the Clergy man that serves Gods Church expound his own name, and
having defined it, let him endeavor to be that which he is called, for if
(...) in Greek do in Latin signify a lot, therefore they are called Clergy me^,
either for that they are of our Lords lot, or for that our Lord is the lot,
that is to say the part or possession of Clergy me^, and he who either is the
part of our Lord or has our Lord for his part, ought ^o to behave himself
that he may possess God, and be possessed of him: be who possesses our Lord
and can say with the prophet pars mea Dominus, our Lord is my part, can have
nothing besides him; for if he have any thing besi^s our Lord, our Lord shall
not be his part; or example if he have gold, silver, possessions, store ot
household stuff, with these parts our Lord will non vouchsafe to be made a
part. So he. Whose whole epistle he that listes to read, shall find truly a
very great perfection of life to be required in Clergy men. To Saint Hierome
let us add Saint Bernard who not only allows the opinion of the said Saint,
but sometimes uses his words, although he name him not: so then he speaks
in that very prolixe declamation upon the words of Saint Peter in Saint
Mathews Gospel: Behold we have left all and have followed thee. The Clergy man
who has part in earth shall have no part in heaven. If a Clergy man have any
thing else besides our Lord, our Lord will not be his part, and a little after
declaring what a Clergy man may keep to himself out of his Ecclesiastical
benefices, he says, Not (...) give the goods of the poor unto the poor^ is no
less a sin then sacrilege: certainly it is taken with sacrilegious cruelty
fr^ the patrimony of the poor, whatsoever the Ministers and dispensers, not
Lords and owners of the goods of the Church do take more then is necessary for
their diet and apparel: so Saint Bernard, who with Saint Hierome does not
speak that which is false, but that which is perfect.

There follows the rite of putting on the white surplice with those words of
the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.
Put on the new man who is made according to God in justice and holiness of
truth: For it suffices not Clergy men that they be not wealthy, but it is
further required that they live an innocent and clean life, because they are
dedicated to the ministry of the Altar, in which the lamb without spot is
daily sacrifyced: moreover to put on the new man is nothing else then to shake
of the vices of the old Adam, who corrupted his ways and put on the virtues of
the second Adam, that is of Christ, who being borne after a new manner of the
Virgin ordained a new way in justice and holiness of truth: That is not only in
mo^all Justice, but also in most true and su^ernaturall holiness, which Christ
shew^d in himself, who (as Saint Peter witnesses) committed no sin, neither
was there any deceit sound in his mouth. 1. Pet. ^.
O that we had many such Clergy men who in their life abd conversation would
perform that which their white garment does be toke^ and signify.

Finally it is the duty of Clergy men with Angelical purity devoutly, grau^ly,
daily and diligently to assist at the divine sacrifyce, in which daily the
lamb of God is offered. I know that in the Church there are many devout Clergy
men: and I do not only know but I have very often seen many very male part of
the same rank, so casting their eyes hither and thither when they were at the
Altar, as if they were about a matter not only not full of sacred horror, but
triuiall, light, and of no account: and perhaps this great fault is not so much
to be imputed unto the minister as to the priest that does celebrate, who
sometimes does so huddle up his words, and so without devotion carry himself as
he seems not (...) know or understand what he does: (...) both the one and
the other hear what (...) John Chrysostom speaking of the time of celebrating
of Mass says: Lib. 6. de sacerdotio.
At the time (...) the sacrifice the Angels assist the Priest, (...) the whole
Order of the heavenly power^ are heard, and the place near the Altar in the
honor of him who is offered, i^ filled with the quiers of Angels. Which
without further proof by reason of the singular sacrifice then offered we may
easily believe. Let them also hear S. Gregory who writes hereof as a thing
not doubted of saying: 4. Dialog. cap. vltim.
What faithful man can make any doubt that in the time of the sacrifice, at
the voice of the priest that the heavens are opened, the quiers of Angels are
present, the lowest and highest things are coupled together, earthly things,
are conjoined which heavenly, and one thing made of visible and invisible and
things together. So he: which if the Priest that does celebrate and the
Clarke that does serve did seriously ponder, how could it be that they should
handle so great a matter in such sort as they do? O how doleful and lamentable
a spectacle were it (in case the eyes of our soul were ^pen) to see the Priest
handling the di-^iuine mysteryes, environed on all sides with quiers of
Angels, who all stand a^^onished tremble and make spiritual clamours at that
which they see him to do, whiles the Priest himself in the midst of them all
is cold, and as one without sense does neither mark what he does, nor
understand what he says, and so to poast to an end, as he distinguishes not
the ceremonies, and choppeth up his words as he seems not to know what he
does; and in the mean time the Clarke who serves him is always gazing on this
and that, or tatling with some other body; so is God scorned, so are the most
sacred mysteryes contemned, and so is occasion given unto Heretics to detract:
and contemn our rites and religion. Which being so, I admonish all Clergy men
as well greater as lesser, and as much as I can do exhort them that being dead
to the world they live to God alone, that they seek not for abundance of
te^porall things, that with great zeal they preserve purity of life, that
religiously, as it is fitting, they do handle divine things, and that they
procure the some to be done of others: so shall they (...) great confidence in
God, and shall co^nually fill the Church of Christ with sweet and fragrant
odor of their g^^ example.

CHAP. XV. Of the fiftee^^^ precept of the Art (...) dying well, which is of
Matrimony.
WE come now to Matrimony which has a twofold institution or ordinance: one
as it is a civil contract: by the law of nature, another as it is a Sacrament
of grace by the law Eua^gelical; both which we will speak not absolutely, but
according to the subject of this work which is only in respect of living and
dying well. The first institution was appointed by God in the earthly paradise
for these words of God, It is not good for man to be alone, let us give him a
help like himself, cannot well be understood but of the help to propagate
mankind, Lib. 9. de Genesis ad lit. cap. 7.
and bring up children: for as S. Augustine well notes, men need not the help
of women in any thing ^^t in these respects; for in other things ^en are
better helped by men then by ^omen; and therefore a little after that the ^oman
was made, Adam out of divine in^piration said: A man shall leave his Father and
mother and adhere unto his wife: which words our Savior in Saint Mathewes
Gospel at^ributeth not to Adam but unto God himself saying: Matthew. 1^.
Have you not read that he who from ^he beginning made man, made them man and
woman, and said, for this shall a man leave his Father and mother and shall
cleave to his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh? That therefore which God
has conjoined let not man separate. Our Lord then does asscribe these words
unto God, because that Adam did not speak them of himself, but by his
inspiration. And this was the first institution of Matrimony.

Another institution or rather advancement of Matrimony is the excellency of a
Sacrament: Ephesians. 5.
this we have in the Apostle in these words of his Epistle to the Ephesians:
For this cause shall a man leave his Father and mother and shall cleave to his
wife, and they shall be two in one flesh, this is a great Sacrament, but I say
this in Christ and his Church; and that Matrimony is a true Sacrament Saint
Augustine does teach saying: Lib de bono Coniu. cap. 18.
In the Marri^^^ of our women the sanctify of the Sacrament is (...) to be
valewed then the frutefullnes of the wom^^ And again: The good of matrimony
with all nations and people stands in the cause of beget^^ children and in
the fidelity of conjugal that chastity (...) in respect of the people of God
it consists also in the Sanctity of the Sacrament. Cap. 24.
Lib. de fide and oper. cap. 7.
And in anoth^ book: in the City of our Lord and in his (...) hill, that is
in the Church, not only the band of Marriage, but also the Sacrament is
commendab^^ but to dispute more exactly of this point belongs not to our
present purpose, but rather this more properly apperteyneth thereunto, that we
explicate how men and women joined in matrimony may so live as that confidently
they may trust to dye well.

Three things in Schools are called the good of Matrimony, if it be well
used, to wit issue, fidelity, and the grace of the Sacrament: he who will use
Matrimony well must not only have care to beget children, but also and that
much more to bring them up well; and o^ the other side he most grievously
sins who seeks not for children by Marriage, but only for carnal
pleasure: for this cause one of the sons of Judas the Patriarcke is ^^arply
reprehe^ded for that when he knew is wife, he cast out the seed on the earth
^^at no child might be born: for this is not ^o use, but to abuse Matrimony:
and if so^^^mes it happen that the virtuous parents ^re ouerburdened with
multitude of their ^ssue in so much as (by reason of their po^erty) they cannot
mainteyne them; there (...) a remedy in it self, good and grateful unto God
by continual consent to sepa^ate themselves from the bed, and knowledge of
each other, and for the time to come to attend unto prayer and fasting: for it
it be grateful and acceptable unto God for man and wife to continue still even
unto their old age in virginity, after the example of the mother of God and
Saint Joseph, whose example Saint Henry the Emperor, and Chunegunda his
Empress, Saint Edward the Confessor King, and Editha his Queen, Elizearius
Earl, and his Lady Dalphina, and many others did follow, why should it
displease God or men that married folk having now children, by mutual consent
should refrain from copulation, that they may bestow what rests their life
in fasting and prayer?

Moreover it is a grievous sin for any in the state of Matrimony to ^^glect
his children, and let them want either virtuous education, or necessary
maintenance of clothes, diet, and the li^^ many examples there are extant of
the matter at well in sacred as profane historyes, but for that I intend to be
brief (...) will content myself with one which (...) in the first book of
Kings. Thus in that place does God himself speak: In that (...) I will raise
up all these things which I have spoken against the house of Heli. I will
begin, and I will end. For I foretold him that I was to judge his house for
ever for the iniquity thereof, because he knew that his children did wickedly
behave themselves and he did not correct them, therefore have I s^^orne to the
house of Heli, that the iniquity of his houses shall not be blotted out for
ever with victimes or gifts: This did our Lord fortell, and a little after did
execute: for the children of He^^ were slain in war, and Heli himself
s^ting on his seat fell backward, brake his neck, and dyed miserably: if then
Heli who was otherwise a good man, and just Judge of the people, for the sins
of his children which he had not brought up so well as he should have done, and
when afterward they became worse and worse he ^ad not cheked and amended them,
came ^ith his Children to a miserable end, and (...) the government or
principality over ^he people: what shall become of them ^ho not only do not
endeavor to bring up their children well, but by their own example of bad life
teach them to do ill? Surely they can expe^^ nothing else for themselves or
their children, but a dreadful death unless they amend be time and do penance
condign to their former offenses.

Another good of matrimony is fidelity, which consists in this, that each of
the married couple do know that their bodies are not their own but that the
body of the wife is the husbands, and the body of the husband is the wives, and
as the one cannot deny conjugal duty unto the other, so can neither of them
both yield their bodies to be used by any other: the sign of this fidelity is
the ring given in the solemnity of Marriage, this doctrine is clearly delivered
by the Apostle saying; Let the husband render duty to his wife and she
likewise to her husband: the woman has not power over her but the husband, 1.
Cor. 7.
and likewise the husband has not power over his body but the woman; defraude
not one another unless it b^ mutual consent for a time, that you may atten^
prayer. This is the Apostolical doctri^^ which all Christian married folks m^^
diligently observe, if they desire to live dye well: if there be any public
adulterers, either the Judges do justly puni^^ them, or else the friends and
kinsfolk^ of the party revenge the wrong offered by that disgrace: but for
secret adulterers who are many more then the open, the Almighty and most just
Judge from whom no secrets lie hid, will doubteles in the end condemn them to
everlasting torments.

The third good or perfection of Matrimony and that most noble, is the grace of
the Sacrament, which God powers into the hearts of the married couple if in the
time of their Marriage they be duly disposed and prepared thereunto: this grace
besides other good which it brings with it, is of wonderful force to effect
mutual love between both the party, notwithstanding that different
judgments, manners, diseases, diuersitys of dispositions of body and mind, may
easily sow dissensions between them, but above all the ^mitation of the
wedlock or Marriage that is between Christ and his Church makes this
corporal Marriage most ^weet and blessed, of which matter thus writteth S.
Paul. Viridiligite vxores vestras etc. Ephesians. 5.
Husbands love your wives as Christ has loved his Church and delivered up
himself for it that he might sanctifye it, cle^nsing it by the lauer of water
in the word of life, that he might present or exhibit unto himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle. Which Blessed Apostle also admonishes
women saying: Let women be subject to their husbands as unto our Lord: because
the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is the head of the Church: But
as the Church is subject to Christ so let the women be subject in all things
to their husbands: and in fine thus he concludes, Let every one love his wife
as himself, and let the wife fear or reverence her husband. This doctrine if
it be so considered and practiced as is requisite, will make the Marriages
happy both in earth and heaven,

Let us in brief explicate this Apostolical doctrine of Saint Paul: first of
all he exhorts husbands to love their wives as Christ loved his Church; Truly
Christ loved his Church Amore amicitiae, with a fi^endly love, as Schools do
speak, and ^more concupiscentiae, with the love of desiring any thing for
himself; he sought the goo^ of the Church, the profit of the Church the
salvation of the Church, not any profit or pleasure of his own. And therefore
they do not imitate christ who love their wives for their great beauty, allured
with the love of her fairenes, or for her dow^ of many thousand crowns, or for
some rich and wealthy inheritance, for such do not love their wives but
themselves, desiring to satiate or satisfy the concupiscence of the flesh, the
concupiscence of the eyes which is termed covetousness. So S^lomon wise in the
beginning and a foole^ the end, loved wives and concubines, not for the love of
them, but for the love o^ his own lust, desiring not to gratify a^^ do them
good, but to fulfill his own carnal desire, with which he was so blinded as
he made no conscience to sacrifice to strange Gods, least he should never s^
little cross his delights. That Christ i^ this wedlock did not seek
himself, the is his own profit or pleasure, but the good only of the Church
his spouse, is clear by ^he words that follow: And he delivered ^imselfe up
for her that he might sanctify her, cle^nsing it in the lauer of water by the
word of life. This indeed is true and perfect charity, to ^ield himself up
unto torments for the e^erlasting salvation of the Church his ^pouse: and
Christ did not only love his Church Amore amicitiae, and not concupiscen^iae,
but with an euer^^^ting love, not for time only, for as he never left of our
hu^ane nature which once he assumed, so ^lso did he knit this Church unto him
by ^he band of indissoluble wedlock: In caritate perpetua dilexi te, Hiir. 31.
says God by the Prophet, I have loved thee with endless charity, and this is
the cause why matrimony consummated by the conjugal act amongst Christians is
inseparable, because ^t is a Sacrament signifying the marriage of Christ with
his Church, which wed^ocke cannot possibly be dissolved, whereas the matrimony
of Jews and Pagans in some cases may be broken off, and made void.

After this the Apostle does add instructing women, and teaching them that they
be subject unto their husbands as the Church is subject unto Christ: this
p^cept Iezabel who would domineer other husband, did not observe and there^^
overthrew her himself, him, and all hi^ children: and I would to God there we^
not many women amongst us who stri^^ to bear rule over their husbands: but
perhaps this is the fault of the me^ who know not how to keep their authority
over their wives. 3. Reg. 21. 4. Reg. 10.
Truly Sara the wife of Abraham was so subject and obedient to her husband, as
that she called him her Lord: I am (says she) grown far in years and my
Lord is old: which virtue of Sara Saint Peter in his first Epistle does
commend saying: The holy women were subject to their husbands, as Sara obeyed
Abraham calling him Lord. And it seems strange that the Apostles S. Peter and
Saint Paul do always teach that husbands ought to love their wives, 1. Pet. 3.
are to fear their husbands, or which is al one, to be subject unto them; but
is not the wife also bound to love her husband? she is truly to love her
husband, and to be beloved of her husband: but she must love him with fear and
reverence, so as that love do not hinder fear, for otherwise the woman becomes
a tyrant: for so Dalila mocked her husband Sampson (though otherwise most
^trong) not so much as her husband, Iudic. 16.
as her ^^ue: and in the third book of Kings it ^s recounted of a King
enamoured of his concubine who permitted this his harlot to sit on his right
hand, 3. Reg. 4. Genes. 2.
to take the Crown from the Kings head and put it on her own, yea and with
her hand to strike the King himself; therefore it is no marvel that God said
unto the first woman: Thou shall be under the power of thy husband and he shall
bear rule over thee. For which cause there is much wisdom required in the
husband, that he love and govern his wife, and withal that he warn and teach
her, and if need be correct and amend her; yet so, as he truly love her as
part of his own body, and procure likewise that she love him, and be
assuredly persuaded that she is so beloved, and that his admonishments proceed
out of Charity, and not out of hatred: an example we have in Saint Monica
mother of S. Augustine, who albeit her husband was a fierce man, and a Pagan,
yet did she so prudently and religiously endure him, that she was beloved of
him, and he afterward was converted to the Christian faith. The Reader may
repair unto the books of Confessions of S. Augustine, and there find more
hereo^

CHAP. XVI. Of the sixteenth precept of the Art of dying well, which is of the
Sacrament of Extreme Unction.
THERE now remains only the last Sacrament which is called Extrem^ Unction,
out of which is gathered a most profitable document, not for the end only but
for the whole course of our life, for at that time are anointed all the parts
of the body in which are the five senses, and at every one it is said, God
pardon th^^ in whatsoever thou have offended, by thy sight etc. and so of the
rest. From whence we are given to understand the five senses to be the gates by
which all manner of sins do enter in to our souls, and therefore if any
keep well these gates he shall easily eschew a great multitude of sins, and
consequently shall live and dye most happily.

Let us speak somewhat of the custody of these five gates. Sight.
That the eye is a gate by which all the sins that apper^eyne unto leachery
do enter, he who is master of us all, Christ himself I mean does teach us
when he says: Matthew. 5.
whosoever shall see a woman to lust after her, has already committed aduoutry
in his heart: if thy right eye do scandalize or offend thee, pluck it out, and
cast it from thee, for it is better that one of thy members should perish then
for thy whole body to be cast into hell: And we know that the old men who saw
Susanna naked were kindled with lust toward her, and for that cause came to
miserable ends; we know also that David that great friend of God at the sight
only of Bersabee washing her self to have fallen into adultery, out of which
followed man slaughter and innumerable other calamityes. And the reason hereof
is evident because the beauty of a woman is very forcible to allure a man to
love it, as the beauty of a man works the same effect in a woman, and this
love never rests until it come to carnal copulation, the effect of
concupiscence remaining in us after original sin: which calamnity the
Apostle does deplore saying: I see another law in my members repugning to the
law of my mind, and keeping me captive in the law of syn^^, which is in my
members; I unhappy man who s^^ deliver me from the body of this death? The
gra^^ of God by Jesus Christ our Lord. So the Apostle.

What remedy shall we find out against this great tentation? The remedy i^ at
hand, and that with the help of God very easy if any list to use it, and this
^^medy is extant in Saint Augustine, in an ^pistle of his where he sets down
a rule for Nuns, Ephesians. 109.
and thus amongst other thing he speaks unto them: If your eyes by chance be
cast on any, let them be fixed on none: For a bare only seems a thing
unavoidable, but it cannot, or truly is not wont to wound the heart unless it
endure longer, and therefore although of set purpose one should accustom
himself to see such women or by casualty light into their company, if he
presently turn his eyes from them, there will be no danger, for not the sight
but the delay in seeing as S. Augustine says, is dangerous, and this is that
which holy Job taught us out of his own example when he said: I have made a
pact with mine eyes that I would not so much as think on a maid. Where he
says not, that I have made a pact that I would not see her, but that I would
not think upon her, that is that I would not stand long in beholding her, in
so much ^s that the sight might pierce the hatt, and ^o I do begin to think on
her beauty, and by little and little to desire her talk and company; and he
yields an excellent reason hereof well worthy of so holy a man: For then what
part should God have in me? As if he would have said, God is my part and all my
good, and a good above all goods, then which no better can be imagined, and God
loves none but such as are chaste and virtuous.

And to this also tends that admonition of our Savior, If thine eye shall
scandalize thee, pull it out. That is, so possess it, as if thou did not
possess it at all, and so accustom thy self to keep thine eyes from such
sights, as if thou were blind; and truly such as from their youth begin this
care and practice, they find no difficulty to eschew and avoid these vices;
such as have accustomed themselves unto them find it more hard, but yet with
the grace of God they are sufficiently able to change their life and escape
this most pernicious snare and entanglement.

But some will say perhaps, why has God made fair men, and women if ^e will
not have them to be seen, will (...) have them to be loved? there is an easy
(...) twofold answer to this demand. For that God has made men and women f^^
wedlock, and so he said from the beginning: It is not good that man be
solitary alone, let us make him a help like himself: But the m^^ does not
need the help of the woman but only to beget and bring up children, as we
said before out of Saint Augustine, Lib. 9. de Genesis ad lit. Cap. 2.
and the man and woman would not easily for all their lives agree so well
together unless there were beauty to delight them both, and make them love
each other; wherefore sithence that the woman by nature i^ adorned with beauty
that she may be beloved of her husband, she court not be beloved of any other
husband with that love which prouokes to generation, for which cause it is
prohibited so expressly in the law, Thou shall not lust after the wife of the
neighbor, Exodus 20. Ephesians. 5.
and the Apostle says unto husbands, Ye husbands love your wives. Furthermore
there are many good things and those also fair, which all are not to be
desired or sought for, but of such only unto whom they belong, and to whom
they agree: the ^he eating of flesh and drinking of wine ^re good things, but
for such as are in health, not for such as are daungerously sick; so likewise
the beauty of men and women after the common resurrection when we shall be
perfectly cured from all inordinate concupiscence with which mortal men in
this life are troubled, may securely be beloved of all. And therefore even in
this life it must not seem strange if it be granted unto all, even with
delight to behold the sun, moon, stars, the flowers of the field, and the
like beautiful objects, which nourish not the inbred corruption of lust, and
yet it is not permitted to behold with delight fair women or fair men least
that aspect do increase and nourish that malady.

After the sense of seeing follows the other of hearing, Hearing.
no less carefully to be kept then the former, but with the ears is co^ioyned
the tongue which is the instrument of speech, for words be they good or bad
come not to our hearing unless first they be delivered by the instrument of
the tongue, and for that the tongue unless it be most vvatchfully guarded is the
cause and founteyne of very many evils, therefore Saint James says: he who
offends not in word is a perfect man: And a little af^^ Behold a little fire
how it kindles a great wood, (...) the tongue is a fire, and a whole world of
iniquity. Three things does the holy Apostle teac^ us in this place. First,
that to keep we^^ the tongue is a matter of singular difficulty, and such as
know how to keep the same, to be very few and perfect men; secondly from a bad
tongue in very short space great hurt to proceed, which he explica^ by the
similitude of a small spark of fire which unless it be suddenly quenched, is
able to consume a great wood of many trees: so one word spoken unawares is able
to cause suspicions of some crime committed, whence presently follow emnityes,
brawles, contentions, murders, and (...) subversion sometimes of a whole
family; lastly the Apostle teaches a bad tongue not to be one single evil,
but to compri^^ a great multitude of evils together, (...) by the same all
mischiefs are either prepared, as whoredoms and thefts, or committed, as
periuryes and false testimonies or else defended, as when a wicked man either
excuses the fault he has committed, or dissembles the good that he has not
done; again the tongue is worthi^y called a whole world of iniquity, because by
^he tongue a man sins against God by ^lasphemy and perjury, against his
neigh^ours by detraction and railing, against ^imselfe by boasting of the deeds
which ^ndeed he has not done, or by lying in ^he denial of that which he has
committed.

To this testimony of Saint James I will add another of the Prophet David,
Psalm. 119.
where he says: O Lord deliver my soul from wicked lips, and from a bad
tongue. If this holy king had such fear of a wicked and deceitful tongue,
what ought private men to do, and much more if they be not only private but
poor, base, and obscure? The Prophet does add: What may be given unto thee,
or what may be added unto thee, to a deceitful tongue? The words are obscure
by reason of the hebrew phrase, but they seem to me to bear this sense; not
without cause am I affrayed of a wicked and deceitful tongue because such a
tongue is so great an evil that nothing (as it seems) can be added unto it:
the Prophet goes on and says, The sharp arrows of the mighty with burning
and consuming coals: in which words is laid open an excellent similitudc to
decla^^ how great a mischief a wicked tongu^ is, for the Prophet compares it
unto fiery arrows cast forth from a strong hand^ first arrows do strike a
far off, and fl^^ with so great swiftnes as it is hard to avoid their blow;
again these arrows unto which the tongue is compared are said to be shot from
a strong arm, and mighty shooter; thirdly is added that these arrows are
sharp that is made of a cunnin^ workman who knew well how to point them; and
lastly these arrows are like unto kindled coals that are able to consume any
thing be it never so hard; so that a deceitful and wicked tongue is not so much
like unto the arrows of men, as unto arrows cast down from heaven as are
thu^ders and lightnings in the air, against which nothing is able to resist.
Truly this Prophetical description of the wicked and guylefull tongue is such
as no evil can be imagined so great that can be compared thereunto.

And that we may the better understand this matter, I will add two example^
taken out of the Scriptures, one of that most wicked Doeg the Idumean who
accused Achimelech the Priest unto King Saul for that he had conspired with
David against the King, which was a mere slander and deceit, 1. Reg. 22.
yet because King Saul at that time was very ill affected toward David, he
did easily believe all, and forthwith commanded not only the priest Achimelech
an innocent man to be slain, but also all the other priests to the number of
fourscore and five men, who had not offended the King at all: neither was Saul
satisfied with this slaughter, but commanded all the inhabitants of the
priestly city Nobe to be slain, and he not only raged against all the men and
women, but also against young children and sucking babes, yea he extended his
cruelty even unto beasts (a greater beast himself) and slew their sheep,
oxen, and asses. And it is probable that David in the words of the psalm
which we have now expounded of the wicked and deceitful tongue, did speak of
this Doeg the Idumean, and this example shows us of what power a bad tongue
is in working mischief.

Another example we have in the Gospel of Saint Mark, the daughter of
Herodias da^cing before Herod the Tetrarch and his nobility, so much did that
daunci^^ delight the King as he swear before al the were present that he would
give the youn^ maid whatsoever she should demaun^ although it were half of
his Kingdom^ this foolish and rash oath was the cause o^ much mischief. First
the maid demanded of Herodias her mother what she should ask, who bid her
tou^^e for the head of Saint John Baptist, and presently was the head of our
Lords precursour cut off, an^ brought to him in a dish; how many mischiefs in
one fact? The mother most grievously sinned in asking a thing most unjust;
neither was Herod's sin less then his wives, in that he commanded a most
i^nocent man to be slain, and such a on^ as was the Precursour of Christ, more
then a Prophet, and then whom there had not risen a greater amongst the
begotten of women; such a one I say whom Her^ himself knew to be both a just
and holy man, and all this without cause, without Judgment or form of law, at
the time of a solemn supper, at the reque^^ of a dancing girl. But let us
hear the punishment who have now heard the o^fence. Herod soon after was
deposed by the Emperor Caius from his principali^y, and condemned to
perpetual banish^ent, and he who swear that he would give half of his
Kingdom, did leese the whole, and exchaunged the same with ^erpetual exile as
witnesses Josephus in his history; the daughter of Herodias whose dancing was
the cause of Saint John's death passing over a river that was frozen, Lib. 18.
c. 9.
the ice breaking she fell down with all her body saving the head which was
cut of in the fall, and leaped over the ice, that all might perceive wherefore
she came to so lamentable an end. Herodias her mother hearing this il news
overcome with grief did presently dye and followed her daughter into hell
fire: Lib. 1. c. 2
which tragedy Nicephorus Calistus has related in his history: and here we may
behold the manyfold harms as well in respect of the offense, as also of the
punishment that have ensued of the foolish and rash oath which Herod made.

Let us come to the remedy which by wise and virtuous men is to be applied
against these sins of the tongue. The holy Prophet David in the beginning of
his 38. Psalm. 8.
psalm shows what remedy him self used laying: I said I will keep my
ways, that I may not offend in my tongue: That is, the I may fly the sins of
the tongue, I d^ diligently observe my ways, for I do neither speak, nor
think, nor do any thing without due premeditation and pondering well of these
things which I am to do, speak, or think: these be the ways by which men
do go in this life, therefore the remedy against hurtful words and not only
against hurtful words, but against hurtful deeds, hurtful desires, or
hurtful thoughts, is forethinking or premeditation of those things which I am
to do, to think, or to desire: and this is the proper character of a man
(unless he will degenerate and become a beast) not to do any thing rashly,
but reflect his consideration those things that are to be done, and then if
they stand with reason to do the^; if not, to leave them undone. And what I say
of the work is to be understood also of our speech, of our desires, and other
works of our soul, will, or understanding.

But in case that some are not able to premeditate all things which they are
to do or speak; truly there should be no man of wit and desirous of
everlasting salvation that would not every day early (...) the mourning before
he went about o^^er temporal affairs recurre first unto ^od by prayer, and
desire that his ways, ^is deeds, his words, his desires, his thoughts may be
directed to the glory of God and health of his soul: and then when the day is
ended before he go to bed to sleep to discuss his conscience and call himself
to an account whether he have offended God by thought, word, deed, or desire,
and if he find any offense of God especially mortal, let him not shut his eyes
to sleep until he be reconciled unto God by true repentance, making a firm
and set purpose to keep his ways that he offend not in his tongue, or in his
works, or in his desires. And this may suffice for the custody of the tongue.

Touching the sense of hearing little is to be said, Hearing.
for the tongue brideled by reason that it break not forth into bad words,
there is nothing that can hurt the sense of hearing. Four sorts of words
there be against which the door of our hearing is to be shut, least by our
ears they enter so far as to corrupt the heart: the first of which are the
words that are s^oken against faith, which (such is the curiosity of men) are
not unwillingly heard, and yet if they once penetrate they take (...) way faith
from our hearts, which is the root and beginning of all our spiritual good: and
amongst these words of incr^dulity none are more hurtefull then the words of
such as either deny the providence of God, or the immortality of the soul of
man: for these words do not so much make heretics as Atheists, and lay open a
wide gappe to all villanyes. Another kind of these words is in detractions,
which quite destroy all fraternall charity, and are greedily heard but of the
curious only, Psalm. 100.
for holy David who was a man according to the heart of God says in the psalm,
I persecuted him who did secretly detract his neighbor; and for that
detractions do very often happen to be table-talke, Saint Augustine to prevent
this abuse at his own table, as recounteth Possidius in his life, caused these
two verses to be written in the wall over, Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere
vitam,
Hanc mensam indignam nouerit esse sibi,
Who others out of sight,
Do with detractions stain;
I warn that from this place,
They do themselves refrain.


The third kind of ill words are such as be adulatory, for flattering
speeches all men do hear willingly, and yet they breed animosity and pride;
and pride is the Queen of all vices and most repugnant against God. The fourth
kind is of ill words that belong unto carnality, and consists in amorous
speeches; and lascivious or wanton songs, then which by the lovers of this
world no thing is heard with more delight, when as nothing is more hurtefull
or dangerous: these wanton songs are like unto the songs of Mermaydes
recounted by Poets which for no other end delighted the passengers then that
they might thereby cast them into the sea and devour them.

Against all these dangerous darts one sovereign remedy is to have honest and
good friends, and withal care to be separated from the wicked; for such as are
strangers dare not detract, speak any heresy, flattering or lascivious
speeches unto them whom before they never saw, or have no aquaintance withal.
And therefore Solomon instructing his son in the beginning of his Proverbs,
sets down his first lesson in these words: Audi fili etc. My son hear
the instruction of thy Father: if sinners shall seduce thee yield not unto
them, if they shall say come with us, let us lay snares for blood, let us lay a
trap against the innocent, let us swallow him like hell alive, and whole as one
descending into the lake, we shall find all precious substance, we shall fill
our howses with spoils, cast in thy lot with us, let there be but one purse
amongst us. My son walk not with them, they ly in wait for their own blood,
and machinate deceits against their own souls. So he, and this counsel of a
most wise man can easily remedy this sense of hearings that a man be not led
away with ill words, especially if we add thereunto that sentence of our
Savior who was more wise then Solomon, who plainly says that, The enemies of
a man are those who dwell within him. And so much of hearing.

Smelling.
The third sense is Smelling of which I shall not need to speak because this
sense respects only sweet odours which have no great power to hurt the mind,
and precious perfumes are not for all but concern a very few, such as are
common, as of flowers, roses, ^^llyes, and the like, are harmless, and may be
used without offense.

The fourth sense is of Tasting; Tasting.
the sins that enter in at this gate to destroy the soul generally speaking
are two, gluttony and drunkenness, but from these two many more do flow, and of
both the one and the other we have one admonition of our Savior in Saint Luke:
Luc. 21.
See that your hearts be not ouercharged with gluttony and drunkenness; and
another of the Apostle, not in bankettings and drunkenness. And these two sins
in the Scriptures are reckoned among the mortal or deadly crimes by Saint Paul
in his epistle to the Galathians saying: Romans 13.
The works of the flesh are manifest, which are fornication, uncleanness,
lasciuiousnes, seruings of Idols, witchcrafts, murders, drunkenness,
banquettings, and the like, which as I have foretold you so do I again fortell
that they which do such things shall not possess the Kingdom of God. Neither
is this alone the punishment of these sins; but besides, this surfeit and
drunkenness do ouercharg men's hearts in such manner, that they are not able to
rise up to think and embrace divine and spiritual things, which our Savior
has thaught us, and S, Basil in an oration of fasting does explicate by two
most fit similituds; the first of the su^ and vapors; for as the gross vapou^
which asce^d out of moist places do with their clouds so cover the heaven as
they hinder the beams of the sun from shining on the earth, so out of
gluttony and drunkenness there are raised up certain smokes and vapors in us,
which darken the heaven of our understanding, and take from us the heavenly
beams of Gods grace The other similitud is drawn from smoke and bees, for as
bees, the cunning artificers of honey, are driven out of their hiues with smoke;
so likewise the wisdom of God which like unto a be does engender in our
minds the honey of virtues, of grace, and heavenly comforts is no ways so
soon expelled as by the smoke of gluttony and drunkenness.

Add hereunto that gluttony and drunkenness are both very hurtful to our
corporal health. Antiphanes a most skillful Physician, as Clemens Alexandrius
reports, did affirm that there was but one cause of all sickenesses, Lib. 2.
Ped.
to wit, multitude and variety of meats: and on the other side S. Basil judged
it fit to call abstinence the mother of good health. And it is the custom
every where of Physicians, first to prescribe abstinence to the sick, and
command them to forbear from flesh and wine; yea this riotous surfeit of meat
and drink is not only hurtful unto the body and soul, but also to our
temporal estate and substance, for this excess of feeding has made many rich
men to become poor, and finally it depriueth the poor and needy from the
alms of rich, for such as are not contented with moderate diet, do easily wast
al their goods on their own voluptuous pleasures, that nothing is left to give
to the poor, and that of the Apostle is fulfilled, one does hunger, and the
other is drunk.

But leaving this let us come to the remedies, the first of which may be the
example of all the Saints of God: I omit holy Hermits and Monks of whom S.
Hierome writes to Eustochium that to eat any sod meat was held for lascivious
diet. De custod. Virginit. ad Eusto^.
I omit Saint Ambrose who as writes Paulinus in his life, did fast every day
but on great holidays and sundays; I omit S. Augustine who as writes
Possidius had always for himself set one the table pulse, as beans, pease
etc. and herbs, and sometimes for his guests, or such as were sick, flesh. I
omit all other Saints, let this suffice tha^ if any one attentively consider
what he w^^ is Lord and Father of all did do when he took upon him the office
of feeding the people in the desert, without doubt he sh^l need no other
Master to teach him this art of sobriety, for God who is only powerful, only
wise, and only good, who could, and knew, and would well provide for his
beloved people, he I say for forty years together did rain them Manna from
heaven, and caused water to flow out of the rock. This Manna was lik a cake
made of meal and honey, as is said in the book of Exodus: behold with what
sobriety our most wise and provident Lord would have his people to dyne and sup:
a cake was their meat, water their drink, and yet were all in health, all
sound until such time as they began to desire flesh.

The son of this everliving Father Christ Jesus in whom were All the
treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God, Coloss. 2.
imitating the former example, Joan. 6.
whereas he would make a dinner and supper for many thousands of his auditour,
he laid before them pieces of bread and fish, and drink of water, and this he
did not only whiles yet he remained in this mortal life, but also after his
resurrection when as there was given him all power in heaven and in earth,
Matt. vlt.
he made a dinner for his Apostles at the sea side of a little bread and fish,
Joan. 21.
and there is no mention there of wine or any other thing: o how far are the
counsayles of God different from counsels of men! The King of heaven takes
pleasure in the simplicity of the earth, is delighted with sobriety, and
specially careful for the enriching, filling, and cherishing of our soul: and
yet men had rather give care unto their own concupiscence, unto the devil
their enemy the^ unto God, Philip
unless we conclude with the Apostle, that the God of carnal men is no other
but their belly.

There rests the sense of touching Touching.
which of all the rest is most gross, and yet most quick and full of life: by
this sense the works of the flesh do enter in to defile our soul and corrupt
others, which the B. Apostle recounteth saying: The works of the flesh are
manifest which are fornication, uncleanness, lasciuiousnes. So as in three words
he expressed all the kinds of leachery, neither is it needful to proceed
further in the explication of these things which should rather be unknown
amongst Christians, and their names not so much as once to be heard o^ for so
says the same Apostle writing unto the Ephesians: Let not fornication or any
uncleanness be named amongst you, Ephesians. 5.
as it becomme^^ Saints.

These remedies occur unto me against all the sins in this kind, and they
a^e in manner the same wherewith Phisitia^s do use to cure the sick. First
they begin with fasting or abstinence, they forbid such as fall sick the
eating of flesh, and drinking of wine: the self same must he do that is given
to carnal lust, abstain I say from over liberal diet, and excess in
drinking: the same did Saint Paul prescribe unto Timothy saying: Use a little
wine for your stomach, and for your frequent infirmityes: That is to say, use
wine for the weakness of your stomach, but a little, to avoid lust for in
wine is leachery. Again the Physicians do assign bitter potions, Ephesians. 5.
letting of blood and the like, which are repugnant to nature: 1. Cor. 9.
so holy men did say with the Apostle, I do chastize my body and bring it into
subjection least whiles I preach to others I become reprobat my self: hence it
comes that the ancient Hermites and monks did institute new orders ^f life
quite repugnant to the delights and ^leasures of the flesh, in fastings, in
watchings, in lying one the ground, in disci^lins, in haire-cloths, not for
hate of their ^ody, but for hate of their rebellious flesh; out of many I will
allege one example.

Saint Hilarion as testifyeth Saint Hierome in his life when he was tempted
with lascivious thoughts, Ego, says he, speaking to his body, faciam, vt non
etc. I will take order that thou may not kick, I will not feed thee with
barley but with straw, I will make thee to starve for hunger and thirst, I will
load thee well with weight, I will follow thee through heat and could, that
thou may think more upon thy meat then upon wan^onnes. So he. Besides this
the Physicians appoint moderate exercise of the body as walking, playi^g at
ball, or the like to to preserve health, and this also does much help for the
health of the soul: that is to say, if a man desirous of everlasting salvation
bestow one hour every day in meditating on the mysteryes of our redemption, or
on the four last things death, judgment, heaven, and hell, or in some such
like arguments of devotion, if the meditation succeed not as we would, ^t least
let him bestow some time every da^ in reading the holy Scriptures, or other
spiritual books, or else in the lives of Saints.

Finally to overcome all the tentations of the flesh and sins of leachery,
the only and most effectual remedy is to avoid idleness, for none is so much
subject unto filthy thoughts as he who hat^ nothing to do, and bestows his
time i^ loking on such as walk up and down before his window, or in talking
with his frinds, or in play and gaming. And again none are more free from
impure thoughts then such as for whole days together are employed in tilling
the ground, or continual exercise in other occupations, for which cause our
Lord and master Christ did choose poor parents that they might get their
living by their own labor, and himself also before he would undertake the
labor of preaching, would have his supposed Father to be a Carpenter, and did
help him to labor in t^^ same trade, for the people said of him, I^ not this
the Carpenter the Son of Mary? This have I thought good to adioyn in the end
of this book that artificers and husbandmen may not repent them of their state
of life, seeing that the wisdom God chose the same state for himself and for
his mother, and for the holy man Joseph his supposed Father, not for that they
needed this remedy, but that they might warn us that are weak to fly all
sloth in case we will avoid many other sins.

The end of the first Book.
THE ART HOW TO DYE WELL. THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the first Precept of dying well, when our death is near, which is
of the Meditation of Death.
WE divided in the beginning this Art of dying well into two Parts; in the
first of which are set down those precepts of dying well which belong unto
that time in which Death might seem to be further off: in this other which we
have now in hand, we will lay down those which apperteyne unto Death when it
is present or near at hand Death is said to be at hand or expecting v^ at the
gate, when we are either worn out with old age, the Apostle telling v^ Quod
antiquatur and senescit, prope interitum est, That which grows ancient and
waxes old is near unto death or destruction; Heb. 8.
or else are taken with some great sickness and in the judgment of Physicians
very dangerous whether this do befall an old man or a young, a youth or a
child. Of this second rank it seems to us the first precept to be the
meditation of death, for although Death be thought upon and considered with
never so great diligence or attention whiles we are in our youthful years,
yet does it very little move us, because we apprehend it as far off, and
therefore less dreadful; but when we see it so present as it may in a manner
be felt with our hands, then it stirs us up indeed, and the consideration
thereof is very profitable: all Arts are better attained by practice then by
teaching: and those who (if not more often) did twice at least dye, as Saint
Christine, and Drithelmus the English man of whom I made mention in my book
De gemnitu Co^umbae (of the mourning of the Dove) the noble woman raised by
Saint Malachy, of whom I shall speak in the 8. chapter, and that Hermit
whose history Climacus does relate, of whom also we in the end of this Chapter
will say somewhat, it is evident that they died cheerfully; but for us who are
permitted to dye but once, there is no better way then to meditate and to
think often of what is done, or to be done in that hour.

First then we are to think that then there shall be a separation made of the
soul from the body, and that neither the soul is to be extinguished, nor the
body to fall and be resolved to dust without hope of rising again and being
reunited unto the soul, for in case the soul should be annihilated and the
body be subject to eternal corruption as the Atheists do surmize, then should
they seem to have spoken well who contemned death and said: Edamus and
bibamus, eras enim moriemur: Let us eat, let us drink for to morrow we shall
dye: which proverb is most ancient as we may see in the Prophet I say, Cap.
22. Cap. 15.
and in the first of S. Paul to the Corinthians: and surely there are some even
amongst Christians who in words say that they do believe, but deny it by their
deeds, which may be proved out (...) this principle: that very many even i^
their old decrepit age never think upon death, as though that they were never
(...) dye, or as if they thought with the death of the body, the soul also did
perish and resolve to nothing; but whatsoever such men do dream, the
separation of the body from the soul as it were of the spouse from her husband
is but an absenc^ for a while, not a perpetual divorce, for the soul is
immortal, and the flesh without all doubt shall rise again at the later day.

We must therefore if we be Christians, and have any wit, daily think of death
at hand: in this stands the total sum of all our weal, that we dye well.
In this life the passage is not hard from virtue to vice, and with the grace of
God from vice unto virtue; for he who is now heir of the Kingdom of God may to
morrow by sin fall from the inheritance o^ God and become guilty of hell
fire; and co^trarywise he who is a slave of the Devil may be delivered from
that bondage, and be again enrolled amongst the children ^f God and heirs of
the heavenly King^ome. But he who dies the enemy of God and guilty of
euerl^sting fire, he shall always remain the enemy of God, and tied to these
torments: and on the other side he who dies the friend of God, and heir of the
Kingdom of heaven shall never fall from grace and that most excellent glory:
wherefore all our felici^y or infelicity depends upon our good or bad death;
who then that has not lost all is wit and judgment will adventure to depart
out of this life until withal diligence he has learned, and prepared also
himself to dye well.

Another consideration and that most profitable touching death may be to
conceive well, that although, death be most certain the prophet worthily
demanding; Who is the man that lives and shall not see death? Psalm. 88.
with whom Saint Paul agrees, saying, It is decreed for all men once to dye;
Heb. 9.
Yet is there nothing more uncertain then the day and hour of our death:
which the Scripture clearly pronounces saying, VVatch, because that you do not
know the day nor hour: many are taken away in their infancy, some arryue
arryue unto crooked old age, some dy^ young, some at matures years, and which
is more miserable, some do die so suddenly as they have no leisure left then to
call upon God, or to commend their souls to his mercy: and these things does
the diui^^ providence of God according to the treasures of his wisdom for no
other cause ordeyne after this manner, but to the end that none of his elected
children and servant should presume, or be so hardy as to remain for one
moment plunged i^ the dirt of deadly sin: and therefore whosoever thou be
that do read these things if perhaps thy conscience give testimony against
thee of a deadly sin, be not so bold as to stay till to morrow in it, nor yet
to expect till the end of this day or hour, but presently with a contrite and
humble heart before God, detest and be sorrowful for the same.

The third Consideration no less profitable then the former may be, if in the
morning before thou go out to thy daily business, and at night before thou go
to bed, least soden death should tak^ thee at unawares, that thou diligently
examine thy conscience what thou have done the night past, what the day
immediately before, especially whether there be any ^ing that may seem a
deadly syn; and if ^ou find nothing yield thanks unto God ^e Author of all
good; and it thou find ^^y thing committed against God seri^usly repent thee
from thy heart, and at the ^rst occasion prostrating thy self at the feet of
the Priest confess the same, receive willingly the penance imposed, and
faithfully perform it: ^his method of exami^ing our selves twice in the day,
wonder^ully helps that death never take us hence ^nprouided.

The fourth consideration may be that which Ecclesiasticus sets down that:
In every thing thou do remember the last things and thou shall never sin.
For how can he o^^end in any work who first does weigh ^ll his works in the
balance of Gods judgment as they shall be weighed at his death? To which
purpose we may apply that remarkable saying of a man twice dead, which
Climacus in his book entitu^ed the Ladder, recou^teth: for thus he says:
Grad. 6.
Non omitta^ etc. I will not pretermit to recou^t the history of that Anchoret
who dwelled in Choreb: this man after that he had lived most negligently for a
long time together, and had, had no care at al of his soul taken at length
with sickness and by ^^^nes with the death, when as he was p^^fectly departed,
after the space of an ho^ the soul returned again to the bod^ (...) then he
desired us that were present (...) incontinently we would all depart, (...)
then stopping up the door of his cell wi^^ stones he remained there for twelve
year^, never speaking one word to any, or (...) tasting any other thing then
bread and w^ter, and sitting with great amazement (...) reuolued in his mind
the things whi^ in the time of his departure he had seen and that with so
steadfast apprehension a^ he never changed his countenance, but remaining
always astonished he shed in silence great abundance of tears; but when the
time of his departure was at ha^^, breaking down the wall and opening the door
we went in unto him, and humbly entreating him to speak somewhat for our
instruction; this only we heard from him: Nemo qui reuera mortis memoriam
agn^^rit peccare vmquam poterit: No man who indeed shall thoroughly conceive the
remembrance of death, can ever sin. Hitherto Climacus. Now let the Reader
consider ^ell and know that this is a true history ^d no fiction or fable,
written by one ^ho was a very holy man, and he wrote (...) otherwise then he
saw with his own ^^s, and heard with his ears.

Out of which it is easy to perceive ^w important a thing it is daily to
me^ate upon death, and always to have the s^^e present in our remembrance:
this man had been before very negligent in procuring his own salvation, but
out of the great mercy of God he tasted death and risi^g again unto life for
twelve years together he did daily think upon death, and moreover bewailed
his sins with con^i^uall tears, and those things which be^e his first death
he accounted light, and ^iall matters; having tasted the bitter^ of death he
judged to be most grievous, and such as required the penitential tears ^welue
years to blot the^ out. This then ^he true commentary of these words of (...)
Scripture, Remember the last things (to wit ^th, judgment, heaven, and hell)
and (...) shall never sin; and if the remembrance (...) one only of these
four was so auailable (...) this Monk, as that for twelve years penance he
redeemed the everlasting to^ment of hellfyre, and gained the glory (...) a
never ending Kingdom, what will (...) perpetual memory of al four work in
(...) in case we would exercise our selves theri^ I would to God men would but
know (...) try this short and compendious way to (...) great and unspeakable a
gain.

CHAP. II. Of the second Precept of dying well, when our Death is near, which
is of the last day of Judgment.
THE second of the four last things i^ Judgment which is twofold, the one
particular in which every soul in particular is judged at the departure from
the body; the other general which shall be of altogether in the later day:
both are most horrible and dreadful unto the wicked; delightful and glorious
unto the good And often and attentively to think of t^ one and other is most
profitable for s^^ as desire to atteyne a happy death. No (...) can doubt but
that the particular Judgment of every man alone is to be made pre^^ntly at his
death; when as in the Coun^ell of Florence it is declared against the he^etiks
that such as depart out of this life in ^eadly sin straight ways to descend
in^o hell fire; and those who dye out of the ^tate of deadly sin, but with
the debt of ^emporal punishment to be carried to purgatory: and finally such as
after baptism are free from sin, and debt of punishment presently to ascend
into heaven to receive everlasting felicity.

And it is very credible as Deuines do hold, S. Tho. in 4. did. 47. Dom. Soto
in 4. did. 45.
the judicial sentence of Christ either to be signified unto them by Angels
or to be revealed immediately unto their souls by God himself: and the souls
of the virtuous guarded by Angels either to ascend into heaven or to descend
into Purgatory; but the souls of the damned to be carried by the Devils and
by them to be cast headlong into hell. This judgment may be dispatched in a
moment because the Judge is present, who being God and man according to his
divine nature is every where, and as he is man does know all things. For most
truly did Saint Peter say unto our Savior. Domine tu omnia nosti, Joan. 21.
O Lord thou know all things: the accuser which is the Devil, called in
the Apocalips, Accusator fratrum nostrorum, the accuser of our brethren is at
hand and he runs to such as are sick and ready to dye as a wolf, lion, or
dog to his prey. The witness is also ready the conscience it self of the soul
which now separated from the body can no more be deceived by ignorance or
oblivion, but thoroughly knows it self, and incontinently sees whether it be
grateful, or hateful unto God, and therefore nothing hinders but that this
judgment may presently be made and put in execution: this judgment is to be
called private, if it be compared with the judgment at the the later day which
shall be public and general before all the Angels and men of the world.

But here briefly is to be yielded a reason why it is required that such should
be judged again, who not only are judged already but are also either punished
in hell, (...) rewarded in heaven: for this point no^ one reason alone but six
may b^ allead^^^. The first is in respect of God, for in this li^^ there want
not many who seeing many virtuous men to be unjustly af^licted and punished by
the wicked, and on ^he other side many wicked me^ to abound with temporal
wealth and prosperityes do ^uspect that either God does not see these ^hinges,
or else that he has no care of them: therefore that all mankind may ^now this
world to be most prudently ^uyded by God, he has determined at ^he later day,
before all the Angels and men to manifest his justice, and to render unto
every man according to his deserts; rewards to the good, punishments to the
wicked, Apoc. 16.
that all may be compelled to avouch and say Iustus es Domine, vera and iusta
iudicia tua: thou art just o Lord and thy Judgments are true and just.

Job: Job. 16.
Thy cause is judged as the cause of a wicked man, thou shall receive or take
to thy self both cause and Judgment; And therefore the ignominious shame of
the passion of the son of God, shall be justly recompensed with the glory of
his being Judge, and maiestically sitting in the Theater of whole world, and
then shall be fulfilled that of the Apostle, At the name of Jesus, let every knee
be bowed, of all that are in heaven, in earth, a^^^ hell.



Cyprian writes in his book of the unity of the Church: Ardeant ^icet fla^mis
etc. Let them burn in flames, and ^et them leese their lives either by the
fire ^r beasts, that death of theirs shall not be ^he crown of faith, but the
punishment ^f their perfidiousnes: it shall not be esteemed the glorious issue
of religious virtue, ^ut a wicked or desperate death. So he. Therefore it is
necessary that the hipocri^y of seducers or seduced people be at least detested
and laid open in the universal Judgment, which in the particular cannot so
conveniently be done.



which we have don in this life may have their rewards or punishments, but also
the good or il which do proceed from (...) good or bad works, and are
propagated, spread, and continued unto the end of the world, that such in the
end of the wo^^d may have their due praise or reproof.

And to make this more plain we will express it by some examples, there want
not good men who do build hospitalls, or monasteryes, or schools in which many
sick recover their health, many religious are trained up in virtue, many
scholars are instructed in learning, and these works well founded continue for
a long time: some write books profitable for the spreading abroad of wisdom,
of arts, of virtue, of all good actions, by which many in all ages do profit,
and help their neighbors. On the other side there b^ many lewd men who with
their wa^to^ or seditious, or heretical books do seduce and destroy many, and
building up Theaters for Fencers, or Stageplayers, or the like do hurt their
neighbors for a long time after their death: wherefore seeing the in the end of
the world, all process^ shall have also an end, and ^he meritt^ and demeritts
of all shall be finished, it is very meet that in that day of all others which
ever were from the beginning of the world most remarkable, the definitive
sentence of the most suprem powerful, and most just judge be delivered, to end,
decide, and determyne all.

These are the causes why besides the particular judgment which shall be made
in the death of every particular man; there is another general to be expected
in the end of the world. It remains now to explicate who shall be the Judge
in this dreadful judgment from whence he shall come, to what place he shall
come, whom he shall judge and what shall be the sentence. The Judge, without al
doubt shall be our Lord Jesus Christ, Matt. 25. Act. 10.
for thus himself speaks in S. Matthew: When the Son of man shall come in
his majesty, and all his Angels with him, then he shall fit on the seat of his
majesty and all nations shall be gathered together before him, and the rest
which follows. The same is confirmed by the Apostles Saint Peter, Saint Paul
and Saint John. Saint Peter says in the Acts: It is he who is appointed Judge
of the living and dead. Saint Paul in the same Acts: Act. 17.
God has appointed a day in which he is to judge the would in justice, by the
man whom he has ordained raising him from death. Joan. 5.
S. John thus writes in his Gospel, The (Father) has given him power to do
justice, because he is the Son of man. And in another place, The Father
judges not any man, but has given all judgment to the Son.

The place from whence he shall come to judgment is from heaven, and he shall
come as far as the air near unto the earth that he may be seen and heard
of all that shall be on the earth under him. Hear I pray Christ himself in
Saint Matthew; You shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
Hear the Apostle Saint Paul writing unto the Thessalonians: We shall be taken
up with them to meet with Christ in the air; Joel. 3.
And the same did the Prophet Joel foretell saying; All nations shall be gathered
together, and I will bring them into the vale of Iosaphat, and there will I
plead with them: Out of the words, into the vale of Iosaphat, we may well
gather this judgment to be the greatest that ever was, for the hebrew word
Iosaphat signifyes properly the judgment of God: and for that the vale of
Iosaphat is near unto Jerusalem (at the East side of the Temple, as S.
Hierome testifyeth in his Commentary on the third chapter of Joel) then which
no place can be more fit for so great a judgment, for from thence is seen
Jerusalem when our Lord did preach, and foretold that the last judgment
should be from thence: also is seen mount Caluary where Christ for the
redemption of mankind was nailed on the Cross, and mount Oliuet from whence as
a Conqueror, he ascended into heaven.

To this place Christ shall come in the clouds of heaven with all his Angels
which are at the least thousands of thousands, and ten thousand hundred
thousands, Daniel 7.
as Daniel writes; I say at least, for in the opinion of Saint Denis
Areopagita, and S. Thomas the number of holy Angels exceeds the number of all
corporal things; there also will be present with Christ the King, all the
multitude of Saints, in glorious bodies, of whom it is said in the Apocalips:
I saw a great multitude which no man was able to count of all Nations, tribes
and tongues standing before the throne.

There will be then in this judgment such a spectacle as the like was never
from the beginning of the world, nor shall be again: for all the wicked shall be
guilty of hell fire who in their resumed ^odyes shall stand naked and doleful
wh^ excessive and incredible grief on the arth, brought by the Angels from a^
places of the world to the vale of Iosaph^^ and places adjoining, and the
number^ such shall be far greater then the number of Saints, for our Lord
himself has said; Matthew. 7.
many are called few are chosen: and more plainly; narrow is the way that
leads unto lif^ and few there be that do fyn^e it. The way (...) large that
leads to perdition and many there be that enter by the same: which i^ it be
true, as it is most certain, that t^^ great multitude of Saints cannot be
numbered, how much less can be numbered the multitude of the reprobate. To these
also shall be adjoined the wicked spirits who also are inumerable.

Those things thus disposed before the sentence of the Judge be pronounced,
the books of accounts will be opened as appears by Daniel and Saint John:
Daniel 7. Apoc. 20.
what those books are which shall be opened in this judgment Saint Paul does
explicate to the Corinthians saying: Do not ye judge before the time until our
Lord come, 1. Cor. 4.
who will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the
Counsayles of hearts: For God will power ^^orth such a light, that in the same
all the ^onsciences of wicked men may be seen, ^ea all that shall be in that
Theater or ^ublike spectacle shall see the consciences ^f all men, and thereby
their deeds, their words, their thoughts, their desirs. O what a spectacle will
this be to see all the consciences of hypocrites of liars, of traitors of
cauillours who made no account to periure themselves by all the sacred things
they cold name. By out of this publishing of the sins and villainies of al men
whereby they will come to know the sentence before it be given, that will follow
which we read in the Apocalips: Reges terrae etc. Apoc. 6.
The Kings of the earth and Princes, and Tribunes, and Rich men, and Captains,
and bond men and free shall hide themselves in caves and in the rocks of the
mountains, and they shall say unto the mountains and rocks fall upon us, and
hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne and from the wrath of
the Lamb, because the great day of theirs is come, and who shall be able to
stand? And the same has our Savior foretold in the Gospel when as he carried
the Cross on his sholders speaking unto the virtuous women that beheld him:
Daughters of Jerusalem weep not over me but (...) over your selves and your
children, for behol^ days shall come in which they shall say, Luc. 23.
Blessed (...) the barren and the wombes that have not borne (...) the papps
that have not given suck: then they s^^ begin to say unto the mountains,
fall upon us, a^^ to the hills cover us: Last of all the sentence shall be
pronounced by the Judge, Venite benedicti, ite maledicti, come you Blessed,
depart you cursed; Matthew. 25.
and the good shall go into everlasting life, and the wicked into everlasting
fire.

And now I beseech my Readers to think, and think again both often and with
attention that themselves also shall be present in this Theater, and the^fore
now whiles they have time let them seriously deliberate what is to be done;
neither let them object that the day of judgment is far of and it were
bootles to trouble o^ afflict themselves so long before the time, as if the day
of judgment were at hand: for although this general judgment be not so
near, yet is not the particular far of but at hand and expectes us at the
gate: and look what the sentence shall be of the particular judgment the same
stalbe also of ^e general: he therefore that is wise ^ht so to prepare
himself to hear the ^en^e of Gods judgment, as though it ^e to day or to
morrow to be deliue^, for the hour of this judgment is no ^u^ther of then the
hour of our death, and ^he hour of death from an old man, or who is
grievously sick cannot be far of: therefore whiles we expect this great
judgment in which stands all our hope or ruin, we must earnestly call upon
our advocate who is the Judge himself. 1. Joan. 2.
We have an aduocat Jesus Christ the just, as S. John teaches us, and
moreover to solicit the friends o^ the Advocate, and first of all the most
ben^gne Virgin the Mother of our Aduocat, then the Angels and holy Saints:
neither is (...) convenient that we come to our Aduocat or his friends with
empty words only, but also with gifts, for the Saints refuse not gifts which
avail them nothing but the poor members of Jesus Christ, for they being
blessed for all eternity in heaven want none of our temporal commodityes on
earth.

CHAP. III. Of the third Precept of the A^^ of dy^^ well, when our Death is
near which is of Hell.
AFTER the consideration of death (...) Judgment, it is also convenient (...)
think with earnest attention on the p^nishments of Hell, and joys of hea^^^
for of the four last things these are the two last of all, and only
everlasting: of which two Christ being the Judge either the one or the other
will befall unto every man; and these two are so contrary both in nature and
their effects, as that the one makes us most miserable, the other most happy:
but for that we have written of both these in the book of the Ascending of our
mind unto God toward the end, and of the Joys of the celestial Paradise in
a whole book of that argument, entitled of The eternal felicity of Saints,
and of the torments of hell in the second book of The mourning of the Dove,
and of the good and profit, we reap by tears, and finally (...) all the four
last things in our Latin ^^r^ons; and what occurred touching ^is subject we
did then both deliver to ^^e people, and left in writing, I judge it best in
this place to touch the heads of matters already treated whereon a man may
profitably entertayne his thoughts ^hiles he expects death and with joy
prepare himself to receive, and meet the same.

Therefore touching the most vn^^ppy state of the damned to hell, three ^^ings
occur to be considered, the place, The Place.
^^e time, the manner. The place is depth; ^^e time eternity; the manner,
without ^easure. I say that the place is depth, for ^^at the reprobate persons
for their great sins committed against the divine Maie^y of God, shall have
their prison in the deepest place of the world, and which is furthest of from
the palace of God which is in heaven, for it was convenient that the pride of
the Devil and of proud men should be condemned to this ptnishment, Isa. 14.
for the Devil said, I will ascend into heaven, I will advance my throne over
the stars, I will be like unto the highest; but it was answered him, Thou
shall be thrown down into hell, into the depth of the lake; and the same shall
befall unto all such as are the children of pride.

Out of this first infelicity o^ the reprobate there do flow three other,
darkness, straitnes of place, and beggary. For whereas hell is in the center
of the earth, to which place neither the beams of the sun, Moon, or stars
can penetrate, there can be no ^ight therein more then that which proceeds
from the brimstone fire which shall increase and not diminish their torment,
for by that dark and stinking light they shall see the Devils their most
cruel enemies, they shall see also those men whether their friends or
kinsfolks who were cause of their destruction; they shall finally see, their
own nakedness, their beggary, their bands or chains, their own torments,
all which perhaps they would desire not to see; certain it is that any thing
which may yield them any comfort they shall never see. O darkness, not
darkness! darkness to keep from our sight all that is good, no^ darkness in
laying open before us all that may be to our discomfort, affliction, and
torment.

As for the straitness of place, that ^halbe so great as it shall scarce be
able to ^ake the multitude of the damned bodies. For if the whole earth seem
in compari^on of the vastnes of heaven to be as ( Pliny with moral
Philosophers say) but an in^iuisible point or prick of a pen, and the place of
hell comprizeth not the whole ^arth nor yet the one half, but the lower part
and center only, and the number of the damned be far greater then the number
of the saved, Apoc. 5.
of which notwithstanding we read in the Apocalypse, I saw a ^reat multitude
which no man was able to number; who can conceive or imagine what straites
there be in hell? Now let the great Kings Nabuchodonosor, Darius, Alexander,
Julius Caesar and others whom the whole world cold not co^teyn whiles they
lived on earth, go and enlarge if they can their strait habitation in hell,
let them see with all their wit and power if they can procure to lie more at
ease, or more mildely to be tormented. O vanity of vanities! all mortal men
labor to extend and enlarge their fields, their territoryes, their Kingdoms,
that for a short time they may vaunt and brag of the great multitude that is
under their command and never think what a strait place expects them in hell,
where not for a short time, but for all time and eternity will they nill they,
they must dwell.

Now what shall I say of the incredible beggary of the damned? All the
inhabitants of hell want all things that be good and are only in the abundance
and multitude of then to^ments rich: there shall the rich remember how they
wallowed in their delights whiles they did live on earth either in meat and
drink, or in brave apparel, or in hunting or hauking or in gardens or
vineyards, or in theaters, plays or other disportes, but all this remembrance
shall increase their punishment, when they shall see themselves naked in hell,
lying in torments, contemned and most miserably despoiled of all their wealth
and prosperityes; then will they say that which we read in the book of wisdom
spoken in the person of such men: Sap. 5.
What has our pride profited us, and what have we goften by the bragging of
our wealth? All these things have passed away like a shadow.

Let us come to the second head which is Time. Time.
How long shall this banishment of the damned endure in hell fire? I would ^o
God no longer then was the length of our mortal life. But there will be no
co^^arison between the one and the other ^ndurance; for to time past there
shall not succeed a set time to come, but eterni^y, which is beyond all time:
therefore so ^onge shall the wicked dwell in these torments as long as the
eternity of God himself shall endure, which as it wants a beginning so is it
without al end everlasting: ^he wicked shall be tormented so long as ^he Saints
shall be in glory, and the damned shall dye as long as God shall live, and
unless God do cease to be that which he ^s (which is impossible) the reprobat
shall never cease to be in the torments wherein they are. O deadly life, o
mortal death! If thou be life, how do thou kill? If thou be death, how
do thou endure? Truly thou art neither to be termed death nor life, for
either of them have some good thing in them; life has rest, and death an end.
But thou have neither rest nor end. What then shall we say, that thou art but
the heap of all that evil which life and death have in them? A great thing
doubtless it were if we could but meanly understand what the eternity of
torments does mean; this thought alone as a bridle would hinder all licentious
liberty, and so make us order and direct our lives ^s we should all seem not
to be Christians only but most holy Anchorets, most virtuous and religious men.

There remains of three things proposed the manner Manner.
only, which as we said is punishment without measure, for the punishment of
hell is not one particular punishment, but the heap of all punishments and
torments together: for in hell all the powers of our understanding, soul, and
all the senses as well internal as external are tormented, and that not by
course or one after the other, but all these torments like a torrent rush on
altogether violently upon man: here on earth as we have no trial or
experience of the general joys or comforts of Saints, so neither of the
general calamnityes of the damned: for here he that has sore eyes, has not
commonly at the same time a king teeth, and he who is troubled with hi^ teeth
complains not of his eyes, and so likewise in the rest of the senses and
corporal infirmityes: but in hell at the self same time are sustained most
cruel torments in all and every member together, when as the fire compasses
about the whole body, most severely torments it, and yet consumes it not. Go
you (says the Judge) into everlasting fire: and the Prophet Isay: Matthew. 25.
Isa. 66.
their worm does not dye, and their fire is not quenched: which words our
Savior Christ thrice repeated in one chapter of Saint Mark the better to
imprint in our hearts the punishments of hell for durance to be eternal, Marc.
9.
and for this eternity most cruelly to torment the bodies of the damned with
incredible grief. Those who on earth by order of justice have seen a man
burned in the fire, have been scant able to endure the sight of that torment,
which yet is dispatched as it were in a moment; but in case one never so faulty
should endure for a whole day in the flames, certainly none were able to endure
so dreadful a spectacle. Let then every one within himself make this
discourse: if I cannot endure to see the burning of a man alive, with whom I
have nothing to do, how shall I be able to endure the burning of mine own
body for an hour, day, month, or year? And if this breed in me so great
horror and dread that I cannot so much as think upon it, with what
intolerable folly do I put my self in so great danger as to burn for ever?
If we believe not the matter to stand thus, where is our faith? If we believe
it where is our judgment? where is our wit? If we be Christians, if we believe
the holy Scriptures, how can it be that so great danger hanging over our head,
we are not waked, and stirred up to prevent it? He truly that will be saved let
him enter into his heart, and having diligently weighed all these things in
their own balance, let him so carry himself as that death may find him
prepared, and hell fire not receive him, but rather he may happily deserve to
enter into the joys of his Lord.

CHAP. IIII. Of the fourth Precept of the Art of dying well, when our Death is
near, which is of the glory of the Saints.
THERE remain^th now the last of the four last things which is of the glory of
Saints, in ha^dling whereof I will briefly consider the three heads above
mentioned in the former chapter of Hell torments, the place, the time, and the
manner. The place of the glory of the Blessed Saints is the heavenly Paradise,
the time eternity which has no end, the manner is celestial happiness
exceeding all measure. Let us begin with the first.

The celestial Paradise is a place Place.
most high above all the mounteynes of the earth, above all the elements, above
all the stars and therefore the Kingdom of heaven is called in the Scriptures
The house of God, the city of the great King, the city of the living God, the
celestial Jerusalem.

Out of the most high situation of this City we may easily perceive that there
are many privileges of this place above all the places of this world: first by
how much this place is higher a^ongst worldly things created, by so much it is
the greater and more capable for receipt, for the form or fashion of this
world as it includes heavens and elements as we see is crowned ^n so much as
all the whole earth is but the center thereof and the highest heaven or utmost
sphere including all the rest must needs be of infinite capacity, a thing so
evident as it needs no proof.

The place therefore of the Saints as it is most high, so is it also most large
and spacious; as on the contrary side the the place of the damned as it is of
al others most low so is it also most straight as we have said. Again the
place that is most high is also most pure, for certainly the water is purer
then the earth, the air the^ the water, and fire then the air and heaven then
fire, and the supreme heaven then that of the stars: finally the place that i^
most high is most secure, in so much as there can no harm reach thereunto, and
no scourge as the psalmist says can come ^^^l. 60.
near unto his tabernacle.

First then the seat of Saints is most ^^m^le and large that they may freely
go from o^e place to another: neither is there any danger least they be wearyed
by their travel: for having the gift of agility or nimblenes they can in a
moment pass from place to place without labor or difficulty, now what
pleasure and delight will it be now to pass from the east to the west, now to
transport our selves from the south to the north, and in an instant to compass
or go about the whole world whils the damned in hell being bound, hand and foot
remain for all eternity without further motion in the same place? and this
felicity of Saints shall be the greater, for that they enjoy that most pure
refreshing in heaven, which neither darkness, nor clouds, nor vapors, nor
blasts of wynd nor any contagion can defile, whiles the most miserable captives
of hell are constrained to lie in the thick darkness and smoke of that
burning furnace, in that place so ouercharged with horror without al hope or
expectation of any though never so little refreshment.

Now what shall I say of that supernall City, most safe from all trea^on and
harm? Praise Jerusalem our Lord, praise ^^y God o Sion, Psalm. 147.
because he has made strong the b^^^s thy gates; This defending or making
strong of the gates, does not signify that whi^^ the words seem to sound, for
it is sa^^ in the Apocalips of the heavenly City; Et portae eius non
claudentur per diem, nox enim no^ erit illic. The gates thereof shall not be
sh^^ in the daytime for there is no night there, and therefore God has made
strong the bars of the gates because he has made i^ impregnable by reason of
the height: and although the Dragon fought in heau^^ with Michael the
Archangell, the cause thereof is not for that he ascended out of hell into
heaven, but that being created in heaven before his confirmation in grace he
rebelled against God, and puffed up with pride affected his equality, but
because t^^ heavenly Jerusalem is fonded in peace, (...) enemy of peace could
not stay therein, but presently like a flash of lightning fell from heaven, and
after that time could never set his foot therein, and from that time no man is
admitted to inhabit this Jerusalem unless he be grounded and perfectly
confirmed in peace. And so much of the place.

Let us speak now of the time: the time of inhabiting the celestial
Jerusalem is ^ft^^ the fall of the devil, Time.
a time without ^yme, that is an everlasting durance without the enterchange of
days and nights: so in the Apocalips the Angel swore by him that lives for
ever, that there shall be no more time, and Christ in the Gospel, the
judgment being ended will say, Hi ibunt sic in ignem aeternum, iusti autem in
vitam ae^ernam, so they shall go (to wit the wicked) into everlasting fire, and
the just into everlasting life, but this difference there shall be between
these eternities that they damned shall against their will endure theirs, and
shall seek for death and shall not find it; but contrarily the just shall
hear nothing so joyfully as their eternity that is, a life without fear of
dying, standing in virtue without fear of falling.

It rests that in few words we explicate the manner how the Saints shall be
in heaven after the resurrection. Manner.
And I hold this may most truly be affirmed that whatsoever good things are
wished for on earth although combined and mingled with many bad, the same, but
far better and without all mixture of any evil ^o be enjoyed of the Saints
in heaven. The things that on earth are valued and es^eemed for good are these
three, honou^s, riches, pleasures: the honor of the Saints in heaven is such
as it seems incredible unless it were warranted by his word who cannot lie,
hear our Savior Christ who is truth it self thus speaking in the Apocalips
of Saint John: To him that overcomes I will grant to sit in my throne,
Apocal. 3.
as I also have overcome and sitten in my Fathers throne: and what I pray you
can be added to this honor? Doubtless the throne of the Son of God is the
highest in heaven, and he who sitts thereon may well be thought to have gotten
unspeakable honor: what applauses, what praises shall there sound out in
heaven before God and all the Angels, when as a man once mortal, and frail
shall by the hands of God himself be placed in the throne of the Son of God,
who is the Prince of all Kings of the earth, and King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, nothing I say can be added unto this glory.

As touching the power of a Saint that also shall be so great as that we are
sca^t able to imagine it, for there is extant a promise of the same Christ the
eternal truth in the Gospel of the faithful ser^ant: Matthew. 24.
(...) men I say unto you he shall make him gouer^ur over ^ll his goods: which
words do plain^y show this faithful servant to be made partaker of that power
in heaven which God himself has over all his creatures: and how great think
you is the power of God over all creatures? Truly most great, most
incomparable: therefore all the Saints shall be called, and truly shall be Kings
of the whole world, not for a few years but for ever: and this is the sentence
which Christ the supreme Judge will pronounce in the last judgment when he
shall say to the just, Come ye Blessed of my Father, Matthew. 25.
possess a Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.

Of the riches of the Saints this alone might suffice, that the riches shall be
most copious and for ever permanent, the Prophet telling us: Psalm. 112.
Glory and riches are in his house: and, God himself will be all in all, as the
Apostle says in his epistle to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 15.
which words Theophilact and S. Anselme do so expound as they make them to
yield this sense: God shall be all in all, for here meat is one thing unto
us, drink another, another our garment, another our house, another honor,
another power in heaven: after the resurrection Go^ himself will be to all his
Saints mea^, drink, garments, house, riches, pleasure, honor power; all
things then that the Saints shall have in heaven shall be most precious, all
incorruptible, all divine, all God himself. Saint Hierome adds in his
epistle to Amandus, that God will be all things unto the Saints, not only
corporal but also spiritual, for now all divine graces are not given unto
all, but unto one wisdom as unto Solomon, to another piety as unto David, to
another patience as unto Job, but when the end of all things shall be, then
shall all things be in all, that so every one of the Saints only may possess
al virtues, all gifts, all things. What I beseech you would a covetous man
give in this world that he might possess alone all the riches and wealth
thereof? what the leacherous man that he might atteyne all the wanton pleasures
which he does desire? What the ambitious that he may get all the honors and
preferments which he does aspire unto? And yet are these temporal matters, and
soon to be lost, and which is more miserable, after a very ^^ort time are to
be exchanged with ever. ^sti^g beggary, grief, and shame. Why ^^en do we not
seek God in whom alone ^e shall possess all spiritual and corpo^all
blessings which shall last and continue ^ith us for ever.

But what finally shall we say of the joy and pleasure of Saints? Isay and
Saint Paul do preach and ^ell us: The eye has not seen, the ear has not
heard, nor has it entered ^^to the heart of man what God has prepared for such
as do love him. Truly God has prepared ^or the Saints who love him in their
hea^enly home joy, mirth, pleasure, delights, ^weetnes, and that such as no
mortal man has ever tasted, or was ever able to have imagined: three things
are required to procure delectation, the power of the soul, the object, and
the union or conjunction of one with the other: and by how much these are the
greater, by so much also the delectation which is caused by the^ is the
greater: there is no power created greater or more lively, or more capable of
delight then the will of man or Angels, there is no object more noble, more
amiable, and sweet then the essence of our Creator: Psalm. 33.
Gustate and vi^^te^ (says David) quoniam suauis est dominus, taste and see for
that our Lord is sweet; and the wise man speaking of the sun and star^s
says: With whose beauty if they being delighted thought them to be Gods, Sap.
13.
let them know how much (...) beautiful their maker is, for the Author of
beauty has made all these things: and there can be no conjunction or union
more great then is that of God with a reasonable will, the Apostle telling us,
1. Cor. 6.
That, he who adhereth (...) God is made one spirit with him. The conjunction
of bodies for the most part is but superficial, and does not penetrate all the
interior parts, and yet this corporal pleasure so rauisheth men's minds as it
makes them almost to become mad: what suauity, what sweetness then shall the
soul taste when it shall be inwardly conjoined with God who is infinite
sweetness, and ^e made one spirit with him? Here I wa^^ words and am no way
able to express what with my self I conceive and ruminate.

Add hereunto that all humane pleasure which is caused by the creaturs is bu^
momentary, or certainly very short; but the pleasure that arises out of the
conjunction of men's spirit with God who is ^nfinit sweetness will never be
ended, and yet so great madness is in many me^ as they had rather enjoy carnal
pleasures, base, ^mall, and for a short time, then those that are most great,
most pure, most per^ect, and to continue for all eternity: and ^his may suffice
in this place for the four ^ast things Death, Judgment, Hell, and Heaven.

CHAP. V. Of the fifth Precept of the Art of dying well, when our Death is
near, which is of making our last will and Testament.
THE consideration of Death at hand and the four last things being premised,
it follows that he who maks himself ready to go out of the world do dispose
of his house: Isay. 38.
for so the Prophet Isay warned King Ezechias saying; Dispose of thy house for
thou shall not live, from which trouble all Religious men are discharged, who
can say with the Apostle: Ecce nos reliquimus omnia and secutisu^^s te: Be hold
we have left all and have followed thee: Matt. 19.
of which number Saint Augustine was one, of whom Possidius writes th^^ in
his life: He made no will or testament, because the poor servant of Christ had
not whereof to make it; for albeit he were a Bishop, yet according to the
custom of Religious men he kept nothing as his own.

But this Will is to be mad at the beginning of the sickness in case the patie^t
have not prudently prevented it by making it whiles he was in good health; and
they do much hurt and hinder themselves who never think on making a Will,
until (their sickness still increasing) they be forced thereunto by their
friends, at what time they either begin to leese their senses, or certainly
cannot then dispose of their things with that wisdom, judgment, and maturity
as they had disposed them, had they made their Wills whiles they were in good
health.

First of all before the sick men make their wills, they must think of paying
their debts if so be that they be charged with any, then to leave their good
unto them, to whom of right and equity they shall know them to appertain, and
not suffer themselves to be carried away with affection toward those persons
who^ they most love, in case this be any way repugnant to justice. In such
things as depend on their own free gift let them first lay before their eyes
the glory of God and then the necessityes of their neighbors, and if they be
very rich, those things which before they ought to have given to the poor,
let them not now think to have satisfied their conscience if with their other
sins they confess also this unto the priest their ghostly Father, unless they
take order that the same things be given to the poor, or rather unless that
they themselves do presently give them. For it is a common opinion of the holy
Fathers and chief school Doctors, that all superfluous things which the
rich enjoy are due unto the poor, of which thing we have written in the former
book and ninth chapter, and it is not needful here again to repeat what I
have there said: but of things which they may dispose of at their pleasure,
let them confer with virtuous discreet men which be the works of charity
that then for the time and place are more acceptable unto God: somewhere
perhaps it will more import to buyld a Church or place for common burial,
elsewhere to place poor maids in honest wedlock, elsewhere to ^uyld an
Hospital to help the number of sick persons, elsewhere to bestow alms on such
as beg in the streets, elsewhere to redeem captives and the like: and finally
in such distributions there if no better rule to be observed, Lib. 3. off. Cap.
48.3. p. Past. adm. 21.
then, as Saint Ambrose says, sincere Faith and discreet providence: or as
Saint Gregory says: Charity with prudence, or prudence conjoined with charity.

This in my judgment is of special moment and seriously to be considered that
the alms which are given by the living, or else are appointed to be given by
such as are to dye, that then they be specially given or appointed when as he
that gives or appoints them is grateful unto God, for then both to the one
and other they are very meritorious, and such bountiful almes-giuers are
received of their good friends into the everlasting tabernacles, according
unto Christ his promise in S. Luke; for if they be given or appointed to be
given by a wicked man, the alms avail nothing to everlasting life, whatsoever
it do in respect of other merits, neither for them are the giuers received
into the everlasting tabernacles: wherefore the party that is guilty of mortal
sin, and has made his last will and testament in that state, is to ask
counsel of a discreet ghostly Father, or some other of his virtuous friends
that after a Confession entierly and perfectly made, he confirm, allow and
ratify whatsoever he had disposed in his former will, especially for the
bestowing of alms on the Church or poor people after his death.

Hereunto last of all is to be added that he who in his last will and testament
has been liberal unto his neighbors, that he be not unmindful of his own
soul, when as it may very well fall out that he go not directly after his
death into heaven but first pass through the place of purging fire: wherefore
he shall do both prudently and religiously if he command one part of the alms
to be given unto Priests who may offer up sacrifices unto our Lord for his
soul, for as the Scripture testifyeth: It is a holy and wholesome thought to
pray for the dead, 2. Match. Cap. 12.
that they may be delivered from their syns: so in the second of the Machabees:
out of which place Saint Augustine gathers a fortiore that the souls of
faithful Christians departed this life are much more helped by the sacrifyce
of the body and blood of Christ in the Mass, then they other were by the
sacrifices of beasts in the old testament.

CHAP. VI. Of the sixth Precept of this Art of dying well, when our Death is
near, which is of the Confession of our sins.
AFTER the consideration of the former points it is necessary that a man gone
in years, or taken with a dangerous sickness, do seriously casting aside all
other cares apply his mind duly to receive the Sacrament of Penance, for it
often happens that at what time the Sacrament of Penance is most necessary,
that then it is with less disposition received of the Penitent: such as are
grievously sick, or hindered with sorrows, or weakness, or want of
judgment, or horror of death at han^, or love of their dear friends who^
unwillingly they leave, make a very maimed and imperfect confession, for being
in those ^nguishes they can hardly stir themselves up unto true and sincere
contrition or sorrow for their offenses.

My self can be a witness of this difficulty which such for the most part do
find: for when at a time I visited a friend, a rich Gentleman, (who by reason of
a great sin he had committed, fell into a deadly disease) and told him, that
there was nothing better for him to seek for, as things then stood, then true
repentance and contrition for his sin, because that God never despises a
contrite and humbled heart: he answered me with this demand: What is
Contrition? I do not understand what you would have me do. I replied, that
which I require, is that from your heart you abhor your sins and be sorry
that you have offended God thereby, and firmly determyne with your self if
longer life should be granted you, never more to offend God, and all this for
the love that you be are his divine Majesty who has bestowed upon you
innumerable benefitts, and to whom you most ungrateful for benefitts have
returned iniuryes. He answered again, I understand you not, I am not capable
of these matters: and so dyed, leaving behind him evident signs of his
damnation. These and the like examples are admonitions for us that whiles we
are well we do so disburthen our conscience and do true penance, as though
every confession were the last that ever we should make.

Yet notwithstanding even in the sickness it self a confession is to be made
with as great diligence as may be, especially the sick man is to be stirred up
to co^trition out of true grief for his sins past and firm purpose of not
sinning again if his life should be prolonged, and we must not only do
penance for our sins committed, but also for the omission of good works, to
which by reason of our office, or out of charity we were bound to do: for many
there be that do curiously enough consider their sins committed against God
and their neighbor, but easily forget their omissions, or set light by them. I
can add for demonstration hereof a very profitable example.

A very learned and devout Bishop was deadly sick, there came a Priest unto
him that was his friend and mine of who^ I heard what I now relate; he demanded
of the Bishop as a familiar friend whether his conscience were quiet and free
from trouble; the Bishop answered that by the grace of God all was well, that
since his last confession he could call to mind nothing of momen^ wherein he
had offended God; the Priest further demanded whether his conscience did not
accuse him of Omissions, 2. Tim. 4.
seeing that the Apostle so carefully warned Timothy a Bishop saying: I testify
before God and Christ Jesus who shall judge the living and the dead, by his
coming and Kingdom, preach the word, be urgent in season, out of season,
reprove, beseech, rebuke, in all patience and doctrine: the Bishop hearing this
did sigh, and said; indeed my omissions do much terrify me, and forthwith
there came from his eyes whole streams of tears.

But above all Contrition is requisite for one that will dispose himself to
dye well, for confession without contrition or true attrition is not sufficient
for salvation, and without contrition satisfaction is inualid, or of no force,
which yet at that time can hardly be performed of the sick man, but contrition
which in his own nature includes charity, although with confession and
satisfaction when they cannot be performed is alone sufficient; for as we said
a little before God will not despise a contrite and humbled heart, the sick man
then must carefully labor to have true contrition of which endeavor we have a
notable example in S. Augustine as Possidius testifyeth, who in his last
sickness whereof he dyed caused to be written out for him the psalms of David
which belong unto penance, and se^ting the leaves against the wall lying in
his bed he did look on them and read them: Et iugiter and vbertim flebat, and
did always and that abundantly weep, and he took order before that none
should hinder or distract him, for ten days before his departure he gave order
that none of hi^ house should enter or come unto him, but at such time of the
Physicians came to visit him, or else when he was to take some meat, all the
other time he bestowed in prayer: O most Blessed and most prudent man, he lived
after his Baptism, and after that the sins of his former life were remitted
him, three and forty years, in which even until his last sickness he daily
preached the word of God, he wrote innumerable books and most profitable for
the whole Church, he lived without complaint an innocent and most holy life;
and yet at the very end of his years, and in his sickness he so gave himself
for many days together ^o contrition and penance, that in reading the
penitential psalms he continually and abundantly wept: and these two words
are much to be noted iugiter, and vbertim, continually and abundantly, for this
study to attain contrition was not for one day or hour, but for many days,
and he did very often and with great abundance of tears bewail his sins:
and what manner of sins were they which this most holy man did thus bewail?
Truly I am of opinion that they were only venial, that so he might not only be
delivered from hell fire, but from Purgatory also, and so presently ascend into
heaven. And if so holy and wise a man did weep continually and abundantly for
so many days together his venial sins, what should they do who are yet to
make satisfaction unto God not only for their venial, but also for their mortal
sins.

Therefore let all old men who are near the end of their days, so dispose of
themselves before they fall sick that they may not need in their old age or
sickness to blot out any deadly sins, but to do penance only for such as
are light and venial, and let them before hand so provide to arm themselves
against che snares of the Devil by holy Confession, Communion, and Extreme
Unction, that God being their guide and their good Angel acccompayning them
they may happyly arryue unto their heavenly country.

CHAP. VII. Of the seventh Precept of the Art of dying well, when our Death is
near, which is of the B. Sacrament the^ given for a Viaticum, or parting-food.
THE ancient Christians in the administration of this sacred food, and Extreme
unction unto the sick, did first an^ise the sick with holy oil, and then
after ^ue unto then the most sacred body of ^r Savior: and to allege a
testimony (...) two for this matter, there is extant in the first tome of
Surius the life of S. VVillian Archbishop of Bourges in France, who lived in
the time of Pope Innocent the third, in which it is said: He humbly and
devoutly received the Sacrament of Unction, and having received that, he
desired most earnestly the Blessed Sacrament to be given him, that being armed
with so good a guide for his journey he might the better pass through all the
squadrons of his enemies. So he: and the same is related in the life of Saint
Malachias written by Saint Bernard, to wit, that he took his last voyage
food, the most Blessed Sacrament I mean, after that he had received the
Sacrament of Extreme unction.

Besides these two testimonies which show the order observed between the two
Sacraments, Extreme Unction and ^he holy Eucharist, there may be produced ^wo
other which show the Blessed Sacra^ent to have been the last, although no
^ention be made in them of extreme Unction: In the life of Saint Ambrose which
Paulinus wrote, there is mentioned that he at the point of death received this
heavenly food, and having received it presently departed this life; and the
same writes Methaphrast of Saint John Chrysostom in his life, so as it is
clear that this was the last Sacrament that was given to the sick in ^ncient
times.

Now a day^s we first arm the sick with the Blessed Sacrament and then after
some days the disease continuing or increasing we anneyle them with holy oil:
both customs have their reasons for approuance, the ancient Fathers did
consider the Sacrament of Extreme Unction to be instituted both for the
recovery of perfect health and to take away sins or the relikes that remained
of them, for so speaks Saint James: Is there any sick amongst you? Iac. 5.
Let him fetch the Priests of the Church, and let them pray over him,
annoynting him with oil in the name of our Lord, and the prayer of faith shall
save the sick, and our Lord shall raise him up, and if he be in sins they
shall be forgiven him. The ancients then hoping by this sacred Unction the
corporal health of the diseased, delayed not this Sacrament until that time
when in the judgment of Phisiti^ns the disease was desperate, but as soon ^s
it seemed in their judgment to be dan^erous presently they made recourse unto
^he holy unction, which also may be gathered of that which Saint Bernard
writes, in the life of Saint Malachy: the same Saint being sick came down on
his feet from his chamber which was in the top of the house, to the Church,
that first he might receive the holy Unction, then the Blessed Sacrament, and
having received them both he returned again on his feet without the help of
any to his chamber, and bed. But now a days when they hear any mention to be
made of extreme Unction they think all at an end, and that the sick man
cannot escape, for which cause the kinsfolks and friends of the parties that
be sick, not to terrify them with the apprehension of present death do delay
as long as they can this Sacrament.

There is also another reason hereof which moved the ancients first to an^eyle
the sick, and then to give them their ^eauenly food, because in the Sacrament
of Extreme Unction the sins are forgiven as we have heard out of the Apostle
Saint James, and therefore of some ancient writers Extreme Unction is called
Po^nitenti^ infirmorum, the penance of the sick: and remission of sins
together with penance are most worthily premised as a preparation or
disposition to the most high and divine Sacrame^^ of the Eucharist, which
requires the greatest p^^ity that can be gotten in this life.

Finally all the Sacraments are ended and as it were sealed up with the
Sacrament of the body of our Lord, and so we see that such as are of ripe age
when they are baptized, as Turks, Jews and the like are presently after their
baptism confirmed, admitted to be present at the sacrifyce of the Mass, and
to receive the holy Eucharist, so likewise such as did public penance, after
their penance performed, at least according to the ancient custom, al ways
received the Blessed Sacrament, and they who take Orders whether the lesser or
greater after they have taken them, come to the holy communion; and lastly,
such as are married do strengthen and confirm the Sacrament of Marryage with
the Sacrament of the Altar: now in our days this order is alte^ed and that not
without a just cause. For oftentimes it happynes that Extreme Vn^tion (that the
sick person may not be a^frighted) is put of for a long time, and there is
danger least he leese his senses or use of ^eason, or for some other cause
become unfit if not unable to receive the B. Sacrament, and therefore this
wholesome food is given before, for it is better that the order of giving these
Sacraments be changed, then that the sick should be deprived of the one, and
that also most wholesome and comfortable: and Extreme Unction may be given unto
the sick, albeit he be in his agony or last pangs and conflicts with death,
although he neither understand or feel what is done, so as yet he be alive,
for the dead are capable of no Sacraments: and so much of the order of
ministering these Sacraments to the sick.

Now I come to speak of the precious body of Christ to be fruitfully given to
the sick, and first I will briefly explicate what the sick man is to do,
before this Sacrament be brought unto him, then what the same sick man is to
do when the body of Christ is present, lastly how he ought to behave himself
after that he has received it.

As for the first my counsel shol^ be (unless his Ghostly Father should
suggest some other thing according to the present occasions more necessary)
that the sick man diligently ponder these words of Saint Thomas: O sacred
banquet, in whi^^ Christ is received, the remembrance of his pass^^^ is
recounted, the soul is filled with grace, and a pledge is given us of the
glory to come. First then he shall attentively consider the holy Eucharist to be
given to us travelers (which title by Deuines is applied unto all mortal men)
by way of food, that we faint not in the way in which we travel toward out
country, especially at that time in the which we being wearyed with a long
iuorney we become weak and feeble: this food is called a banquet and a sacred
ba^quet, for although it be given under the form of bread alone, yet is it an
entiere and great banquet, and a banquet not profane but sacred, not of the
body but of the soul and therefore it is added, In quo Christus samitur, in
which Christ is received, for under the forms or accidents of bread is the
true body of Christ not separated from his soul and divinity, and for that it
is a most great, most excellent and most precious thing, a great and most
sweet banquet, far exceeding the taste of all earth^y sweetness, but fit to
feed and delight the ^oule, not the body.

What the fruits or commodityes are of this food, is added when it is said:
The remembrance of our ^auiour his passion is recounted, the soul is filled
with grace, and a pledge is given us of our future glory. The first fruit then
is the remembrance of our Saviors passion, for which cause the body and blood
of our Lord are consecrated under the twofold forms of bread and wine, that
the form of bread may represent his body separated from the blood, and so
consequently dead, and the form of wine represent his blood separated from the
body although that Christ be entiere and living both under the one and other
form. Our Lord then would that by these mysteryes there should be extant
amongst us a continual and daily remembrance of his passion, by which we have
escaped all evil and obtained al good: hence it came that our Lord said unto
his Apostles speaking of this Sacrament: Do ye this in my remembrance: and the
Apostle S. Paul expounding these-wordes of our Lord, says: As often as ye
shall eat this bread and drink the cup, you shall show forth the death of our
Lord until hecome; That is to say, as often as you shall come unto this most
sacred mystery, you shall be mindful that Christ left his life for you, and this
remembrance shall still endure or continue until the second coming of our Lord,
that is even until the end of the world. And our Lord would have us daily to be
mindful of his passion and death, because he knew this remembrance to be very
profitable for us that being mindeful of his great charity toward us, we
should as well in our life as in our death, repose all our trust or confidence
in him, for what will he be able to deny them, for whom so freely and
liberally he has bestowed his own life?

Another fruit of this celestial banquet is designed in these words men's
inpletur gratia, the soul is replenished with grace, which is the singular
privilege of this Blessed Sacrament when it is received with due preparation
and disposition of the receauer, for as corporal food is but one thing and by
eating is conveyed into the stomach, yet notwithstanding it does repair,
nourish, strengthen and com^rt all the members of the body; and con^ary wise to
much abstinence from meat ^ot only makes the stomach empty, but ^eakens and
extenuates all the members, it makes them ugly, and languishing, and in fine
kills the body: so this Divine meat does repair, nourish and strengthen all
the spiritual power of our soul, the memory by this sacred food is filled
with grace of the most sweet remembrance of the benefits of God, and especially
of our Lords passion, by which we are delivered and saved; our understanding by
this food is filled with the grace of faith not habitual only but also
actual, and faith purifyes the heart from very many errors, and fills our
mind with the knowledge of duiine things which breeds an unspeakable joy and
comfort within us; and last of all the will by this divine food is filled with
the grace of most certain hope, and most ardent charity, which for that she
is the Queen of virtues draws all virtues unto it, with the possession whereof
a man becomes most rich of spiritual wealth. By these means then is our
soul filled with grace by this most Divine Sacrament, and on the other side
too much abstinence from this food hinders all the former effects, it makes us
in them al^ feeble, weak, deformed, and draws in the end unto spiritual
death.

The last fruit is, futurae gloriae (...) pignus datur, there is a pledge
given us (...) this most soueraygne Sacrament of the glory to come: the
metaphor of a pledge (...) taken from the ordinary condition annexed to a
promise made amongst men, because that which is promised cannot be denied when
there is a pledge given for the performance: our Lord left his body in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist as a pledge of our heavenly felicity, and therefore
he who at his death receaueth his Blessed body with due purity of mind and
reverence, he shall before his Redeemer show his pledge and cannot be excluded
from hi^ celestial happiness. And he indeed shows this pledge who dies
united with Christ by true charity, which the worthy receiving of this
Sacrament did leave in the soul, for then the soul issues forth of the body,
as an Espouse leaning upon her beloved. Cant. 8.


And this is that which S. John writes in the Apocalips, when he says: Apoc.
14.
Blessed ^re the dead who dye in our Lord; That is, bles^ed are they who do dye
conjoined unto ^ur Lord as members unto their head: Joan. 3.
No man ascends into heaven but he who came down from heaven, the Son of
man who is in heaven. The Son of man is Christ who ascended not without his
body of which he is the head, and for thi^ cause only such do dye in our Lord,
who in their deaths do adhere unto him as members to their head, which
blessing al they do get who a little before they die do worthily receive Christ
in the holy Eucharist.

And this hitherto have we said touching the preparation of the sick man to
receive his last food and heavenly Manna before that it be present and brought
unto him. For as soon as it is brought the sick man must as he is able lift
himself up and either on his knees, or with humble bowing down his head adore
his Lord and Savior: and often it falls out that our Lord gives such strength
and vigor that men eue^ ready to dye do rise at that time and fall on their
knees: and so we read of Saint William Archbishop Bourges in France: Vt autem
etc. When he knew that his Lord and Creator was come unto him, presently
recovering his strength he lept out of the bed as though that the ague had
quite left him, not without the amazement of such as were present, especially
for that he seemed to be at the last gasp, and went wi^^ a speedy pace to meet
his Savior, chari^^ yielding him strength thereunto, and kneeling down all
bid wed with tears, he adored him, and to the end he might often kneel he
was often lifted up from his knees, and with singular devotion he commended his
last agony unto Christ; earnestly praying that if yet any things remained to
be purged that he would here cleanse it, that the wicked enemy might find
nothing in him. So far the history of his life.

Now it seems to me a thing most requisite and to be practiced at that time;
that before the sick man do receive the body of his Lord, he repeat, or hear
an other read unto him those verses of Saint Thomas of Aquin, which at once do
profess our faith, stir up our hope, and kindle our charity; the verses are
these.

Adoro te deuote latens Deitas,
Quae sub his figuris vere latitas etc.
I thee a^dore O hidden Deity,
who covered in these outward signs do lie.
My heart to thee does tender all his might,
which contemplating is dazeled quite.
My sight, my taste, my touch in thee do fail me,
my hearing only does for faith avail me.
To all that Christ has spoken I agree,
then this truths word no truth can ever be.
Upon the Cross thy Godhead sole was shrouded,
thy Godhead here and ma^hoodly or' clowded.
Yet them believing both, and both confessing,
I beg the happy theefs obtained blessing.
Thy wounds with Thomas I nor see nor touch,
Yet thee my God to be I do avouch.
Make me believe in thee still more and more,
Of hope and charity increase my store.
O sweet remembrance of my dying Lord,
true bread that unto man do life afford:
Daigne to my soul on thee alone to live,
and always with that food sweet taste to give.
Sweet Pelican, and dearest Sovereign,
my unclean heart cleanse with thy bloody rain;
VVherof one drop sufficient power contaynd,
to purg the world, though al with sin destaind.
Jesus who now do under veyles appear,
when shall it be (which I esteem so dear)
That I beholding thy revealed face,
May by that glorious sight with thee find place.
Amen.

Having dououtly said or heard these verses, having made the ordinary
confession which begins with Confiteor Deo etc. and having taken the
absolution and blessing of the priest, and said, Domine non sum dignus, let him
add with as great ^^mility and devotion as he can these words, Into thy hands
O Lord I commend my soul, and then he may securely ^^ceaue this sacred and
celestial Sacrament.

After the communion there remains thanksgiving unto God for this so
excellent a benefit, and besides vocal prayers which he may read out of some
pious books: it were also very behofull that he who has now received his last
food for his journey and passadge unto heaven, should enter into the closet of
his heart and meditate with himself in silence on those most sweet words of
our Lord Jesus in the Apocalips: I stand at the door and knock, if any shall
open it unto me, Apoc. 3.
I will enter in unto him, I will sup with him, and he shall sup with me: for
these words do most fittly agree with those who come from the holy communion:
for our Lord who instituted this Sacrament in the form of a ba^quet, desires
nothing more then that all Christians should repair unto this feast, and this
is signified ^y those words: Ego sto ad ostium and pulso, I ^tand at the door
and knock, that is, I do ^nuite my self to this common feast, that ^ may
also be fed; si quis mihi aperuerit, if any shall open the door unto me
assenting unto this good desire which I have inspired, that we may feed and
feast together, intrabo ad eum, I will enter in unto him, by the communion of
this holy banquet, Psalm. 103.
I will sup with him, and he shall sup with me; Because that God is said to sup
with us when he is delighted with our spiritual progress in virtue, according
to that of the Psalmist: Our Lord will rejoice in his works; And in another
place: Let my speech be delightful unto him, and I will be delighted in our
Lord: in which words is expressed the mutual delight and as it were a sweet
banquet of God with the soul, and of the soul with God: for God is delighted
with the spiritual profit of the soul, and the soul is delighted with the
benefitts received from God, of which the chiefest is that by this sublime
Sacrament, he vouchsafes to link and unite himself after a sweet manner with
our soul.

Wherefore let the faithful soul after the receiving of this Sacrament
reflec^ and think with it self how sweet and sovereign a thing it is to have
Christ himself as a guest within it, whiles the Sacramental forms remain,
not only as God but also as man, and to be able to deal confidently with him
and to confer with him our dangers and anguishes (...) our passadge from this
body, from his ha^^ to commend himself unto him, and to desire of him to beat
back the common tempter of mankind then most busy, to send us an Angel to
accompany us, and to bring us safely into the port of salvation.

CHAP. VIII. Of the eight Precept of the Art of dying well, when our Death is
near, which is of Extreme Unction.
THE last Sacrament is holy Unction which is able to yield great comfort unto
the sick if the force and virtue thereof be well understood, and the Sacrament
itself taken in due time. There be two ^fects of this Sacrament as we said in
the ^rmer Chapter, corporal health and re^ission of sins: let us speak a
little of ^yther. Of the first thus writes S. James: ^s any sick among you?
Let him bring in the priests ^f the Church and let them pray over them,
annoyn^ing them with oil in the name of our Lord, and ^he prayer of faith
shall save the sick; These words are plain and conteyne a promise.

Two reasons may be given why in our days so few sick men do recover their
sickness, notwithstanding that they receive this Sacrament: one is, for that
now a days this remedy is applied to the sick later then it should, for we
must not expect miracles by this or any other Sacrament, and it were a miracle
if one that is at the last gasp should presently recover, but if this
Sacrament were ministered unto then when first of all they begin to be
daungerously sick, we should then often see this effect of recovery, which
would not be done in a moment, but would follow in time: and this is the cause
why that such as are to be executed by way of justice are not anneyled, because
that they cannot without a manifest miracle be delivered from the danger of
death. Anoth^ reason is, because it is not expedient eu^ for the sick man to
he delivered from h^ disease, but rather it is better for him to die, and the
prayer of the Church which is made in this Unction does not absolutely desire
the health of the sick party but only to recover his health at that time, if
i^ be auayleable for his salvation.

Another effect of this Sacrament is remission of sins; for thus speaks
Saint James: Et si in peccatis fuerit remittentur ei: and if he shall be in
sins they shall be forgiven him. But for that the remission of original
sin does belong properly unto Baptism, the remission of actual to baptism
also in case the baptized be grown in years, or to the Sacrament of pe^nance
for syns committted after baptism, therefore the Deuines do teach the sins
which are remitted in the Sacrament of Extreme Unction to be the relickes or
remuants of sin, of which relikes or remnants there be two sorts, sometimes
relikes of sins are called either the mortal or venial sins which are
committed after that we have received the Sacrament of penance, and are no:
afterward confessed to our ghostly Father, ^yther out of ignorance for that ^he
penitent did no take them for mortal; or out of forgetfulness because he did
not ^hen remember them, and therefore the sick man sought not for a priest to
whom he might confess them. These reliks does the Sacrament of Extreme Unction
take away, and of this kind of sins Saint James says: If he shall be in
sins they thall be remitted him; which the Councels of Florence and Trent do
teach, especially the latter in the 14. session and second Canon.

Another kind of the relikes of syns is a certain horror or stupidity, or
rather sorrow and heaviness which oppress sick, to which apperteyneth the
promise of Saint James: Et alleuiabit eum Dominus, and our Lord will lift him
up: this Sacrament recomforteth the sick, when they mark the divine promises
expressed in the same, and for that cause it should not be differred until the
last hour when the sick man does not hear, or else understands nothing at
all.

What vtility is reaped out of this Sacrament may be gathered by the words of
the form thereof. Five places there be which are specially anointed, in which
the five se^ses are situated: to wit the sense of seeing, the sense of
hearing, the sense of smelling, the sense of tasting, and the sense of
touching: and in the mean time the priest says: Indulgeat tibi Dominus
quicquid deliquisti per visum, auditum etc. Our Lord pardon or forgive thee in
whatsoever thou have sinned by sight, by hearing, and so of the rest: and
because that prayer is the form of the Sacrament without all controversy it
effectually works that which the words do sound and signify, unless there
be some impediment on the behalf of the receauer.

How great the bountifulness and mercy of our Lord God is in this Sacrament,
he will soon find that shall consider with himself what a main multitude of
sins do flow from these five fountaynes: and this was the occasion why Saint
Malachy a Bishop of Ireland, whose life Saint Bernard wrote, after that for
some hours he had delayed to minister this Sacrament of Extreme Unction to a
certain noble woman that was sick, and she the mean time had departed out of
this life, he so far forth repented himself that with his priests he lay in
the chamber of ^e dead woman all the night praying, ^d lamenting and imputing
it to his own ^ult that the virtuous woman either had ^ot recovered by the
virtue of Extreme Unction, or had not received that ample pardon of her sins
from the liberal mercy of our loving Lord: and because this holy Bishop was
the friend of God, by his prayers and tear^^ (...) obtained of him that the
said woman should come again to life and receive from the hands of the same
Saint, both the effects of this holy Vnctio^, for she recovered her health and
lived many years after; and as we may piously conjecture gained also the
pardon of her sins. This example of so worthy a man, and of another most holy
man faithfully related is enough to persuade all who with reason or authority
will be persuaded how much they ought to esteem, this venerable Sacrament.

CHAP. IX. Of the ninth Precept of this Art of dying well, when our Death is
near, which is of the first tentation of the Devil, to wit, Heresy.
WHEN our death draws near, our adversary the devil as a ro^ring lion is not
wanting to himself, but swiftly approaches as unto a prey, and with all his
power assayles the sick man in his last conflict, and he is wont to make his
first assault with the tentation concerning faith, for the things which we
believe do transcend not only our sense, but also natural reason, and faith it
self the ground of our justification, and that being overthrown, all the
buylding of our good works falls down: this of all other tentations it most
grievous, because we are to encounter with an Adversary not only most learned
and subtle, but trained in this warfare from the beginning of the world. He it
is that has seduced all the heads or ringleaders of heretics, of whom not a
^w were excellent and very wise men: ^ell therefore does the Apostle warn us:
^ur combat or conflict is not against flesh and blood: Ephesians. 5.
that is to say against men) but against the ^iritualls of wickedness, that are
above, That is ^gaynst the Devils which are spirits, most ^icked and crafty
spirits, and see us, all from the air above called Coelum aereum the aerie
heaven: our weapons in this bat^ell are not disputations but simple belief of
the truth, for so do the two chief A^ostles teach us. S. Peter says: Ephesians. 6.
Your aduer^ary the Devil goes round about as a roaring lion ^eking whom he
may devour, against whom make ^esistance being strong in says: and Saint
Paul. 1. Pet. 6.
In all things taking the shield of faith in which you may be able to quench
all the fiery darts of the most wicked (enemy.) Therefore out of the doctrine
of the Apostles we must dispute with the Devil, but with the shield of faith
take all his darts and beat them back again, although they seem to be both
fiery and burning, that is efficacious and subtle.

There is a very dreadful example hereof in Peter Barocius Bishop of Padua,
who wrote three books of the method of dying well: he his second book thus
speaks: Fuere quemadmodum audiui etc. Two there were as I have heard in their
time most learned and of all others of th^^ university in which they studied
the chi^fest disputers, both of good behavior an^ very devout, of which one of
them aft^ his death appeared unto the other at suc^ time as he was in his
library and studyin^ of the holy Scriptures, and that all in bu^ning fire; the
student a mighted at this spectacle, and asking what the cause shol^ be of so
great torment, the other wit^ grief and sighs replied saying: when I was to
depart out of this life the enemy o^ mankind, to wit the Devil, came vn^^ me,
and for that he knew me to be we^^ learned he began to ask me about m^ faith
what I did believe, I answered that (...) believed whatsoever was contained in
the Apostles Creed, he willed me to explicate somethinges unto him which seemed
not to be so clear, I did so, and that in such manner as I had read in the
Creed of Athanasius, for I thought that they could not be more carely, or more
truly explicated. Then the Devil: It is not so as tho^ do surmize, for
those things which belong to God the Father are in part plain and true, in
part obscure and false, for (...) indeed is eternal, but as he has ever ^^ene
God, so has he not ever been a fa^^er, but first God, and after a Father;
a^^inst this when that I cried out and said ^^at it was an heretical position,
and diabo^call doctrine, the Devil said this matter (...) not to be decided by
clamours but argu^ents if we be moved, with desire of fyn^ing out of truth. I
can easily allege rea^ons for my opinion, as for your opinion defend it if
you can, and then shall you deliver me from a great error: I poor wretch who
presumed more on my wit and learning then was fit, began seriously to dispute
with him as with some ordinary man, till at length by little and little with
the arguments that he objected against me, he drew me into that wicked error
as now I neither believed the Son nor the holy Ghost to be God, presently death
took my soul hence, and in what state it found it, in the same it presented
it unto the Judge, and by him I am adjudged unto this fire, which although most
raging, yet in some sort I should think more tolerable if that after a
thousand, thousand years it might have an end, but it is eternal and there
withal so great tha^ none whatsoever that ever has been^ seen in earth can
match it, in so much (...) almost every hour I repent me of my lea^ning, which
has brought me to thi^ dreadful destruction. And having the spoken he
vanished away: but the other exceedingly astonished as well for the n^uelty of
the thing, a^ with the miserab^^ case of his damned friend, as soon as he
recovered himself co^ferred with such as we^^ his greatest friends touching
this vision, and asked their counsel what they thought best in such a case to
be done; and it w^^ determined by them all, that every one a^ such a time and
occasion should without dispute refer himself to that faith which the
Catholic Church does maintain. Not long after he fell into a sickness
whereof he dyed; when lo the same enemy emboldened with the success of the
former dispute, asked him of his faith what he did believe, to whom he
answered that he did believe that which the holy mother the Church did believe:
again the Devil demanded what does the Church believe, he answered: the same
that I believe, and in this manner in the hearing of all that were present, as
though ^e had s^oken unto him he never ceased ^om saying, I believe what the
Church ^^liueth, and the church belieueth what I ^elieue, until he gave up the
ghost: and by this mea^s deluding the subtilty of the enemy he passed into
heaven. And a few days after he appeared unto his friends of who^ before he had
asked ^^unsayle what was to be done in such a case, in a far different shape
from that wherein his fellow before had appeared unto him, and he gave them
thanks for that by their counsel he passed all difficultyes and aryued unto
heaven; which things we have not thought amiss to set down as they happened,
that so either out of fear by the misfortune of the one, or out of confidence
by the good success of the other every one may learn that there is no
disputing with the Devil, and that it is enough to refer himself to that
faith which the Catholic Church does teach and mainteyne. Hitherto Barocius,
and I need not heerin say any more, then he already has said.

CHAP. X. Of the tenth Precept of the Art of ^^ing well, when our Death is
near which is of the second tentatation of the Devil, to wit, of Desperation.
ANOTHER tentation at this tym^ wont to be touching Despair, b^ which the
Devil if often wont to trouble not only wicked men, but also such as be very
virtuous: and truly as for wicked me^ when their death is at hand, he easily
casts down into the pit of desperation, for he lays before their eyes all the offence^ which in the whole course of their life they have committed, as
Venerable Bede in the fifth book of his history recounteth of a certain
soldier in these words: Fuit quidam temporibus Coenredi, qui post Edilredum
regnauit etc. There was one in the time of Coenred who raygned after Edilred, a
lay man and by profession a soldier, who by how much the more grateful he was
to the King for his exterior diligence, so much was he displeasing unto him
for the inte^^our negligence of himself, and therefore ^^e King carefully
warned him that he ^ould confess his sins, that he would ^^mend and leave
them, before that he were ^^rprized by death, and before that it were ^^olate
for him to repent and amend them, but the soldier notwithstanding his often
admonitions despised all good counsel, and promised his Admonitours that
afterward he would do penance; in the mean time falling sick he lay on his
bed, and began to be tormented with great ^ayne: whom the King visiting (for
he ^eerly esteemed him) did earnestly per^uade him that now at last before he
departed, that he would do penance for his sins: but he answered that he
would not then confess them but would do it after that he were recovered,
least that his fellows should vpbraide him and say that he had done that out
of fear in his sickness which he would not do whiles he was in good health,
speaking as he thought courageously, but indeed as after appeared miserably
deluded by the Devil: for the sickness increasing when as the King came again
to visit and admonish him, he forthwith with cried out with a pitiful voice,
what will you now have? for what are you come hither? now there is no more
salvation t^ be hoped for; unto whom the Kin^ said: speak not in this manner,
see that now you leese not your self. I am not man quoth he, but I have now my
most wicked conscience before mine eyes; a little since there entered into my
chamber two most beautiful young men, and they sat by me, one at my head and
the other at my feet, and one of them took out a book very fair but
wonderful little, and gave it me to read, and reading the same I found
registered therein all the good deeds that I had done, and these were to few,
and to little or small; then presently rushed in an army of wicked and horrible
spirits, and he who for the darkness of his clowdy face, and for his
preferment in sitting seemed to be chief, brought forth a book of a
dreadful aspect, of an excessive greatness, and for weight almost importable,
and commanded the same to be brought me to read by one of his guarde, which
when I had read I found all my wikednes and whatsoever I had offended in, not
only in work and word, but also in my secretest thought to be written most
clearly in ugly letters. Thus spoke this desperate wretch, and soon after
dyed, and that penance which for a short time he omitted to do with the fruit
and pardon of remission of his sins, he now without all fruit does undergo
in everlasting torments. Hitherto Saint Bede. Where evidently we see the Devil
first to have persuaded this miserable soldier not to do penance under the
precept of longer life, and then to have brought him into desperation.

There is another example in the same Author in the next Chapter where thus he
writes. Noui ipse fratrem etc. Lib. 5. c. 1 historiae Angl.
I knew a brother whom I would to God I had not known, whose name also I
could tell if the telling thereof would avail any thing, who was placed in a
famous monastery though he lived infamously: this man being overtaken with
sickness and brought even unto the point of death, called for the brethren of
the monastery and with great dolor like a damned wretch began to tell them
that he saw hell open, and the Devil drowned in the depth of the pit, and
near unto him Caiphas and others that killed our Lord given over to those
reue^ging flams: near also unto the^, he said, Owre t^ that I am, I see a
place prepared for (...) everlasting damnation: the Brethren hearing this began
earnestly to persuade him that yet whiles he was in his body he would repent;
he utterly despayring answered, it is now to late to change my life, seeing
that I have seen my judgment ended, and thus speaking without receiving the
B. Sacrament he departed this life, and was buried in the utmost part of the
monastery. So Saint Bede, and whereas this wretched Monk said there was now no
tym^ left to amend his life, he speak not that out of truth but out of the
suggestio^ of the Devil, for the holy Ghost expressly pronounces by the
Prophet Ezechiel: ^zechiel. ^. and 33.
that God is always ready to embrace such who are converted from sin to
repentance: and more plainly S. Leo in his epistle to Theodorus Bishop of
Forotulia in these words: To the mercy of God we can assign no measure or
apoint any time, to whose presence a true conversion fyndes no delay, the
spirit of God saying in the Prophet, when thou shall lament thy sin, then thou
shall be saved.

I will add an example or two more to show that virtuous men also at their
passadge out of this life are often tempted with the sin of desperation: there
is extant in Surius the life of the Count Eleazarus who lived a Virgin with his
wife Dalphina and shined after his most holy death with many miracles: this
Count notwithstanding at his death endured most strong tentations, for thus
writes the Author of his life in the last Chapter: Ad extremum in agone
positus etc. At last in the agony of death he showed a very dreadful look,
whereby it might be coniectured that he was in perplexity for somethings that
were objected unto him; and in this conflict he cried out, the power of the
Devils is great, but the force and meritts of the sacred incarnation and
passion of Jesus Christ has broken and made weak their forces: and a little
after cried out again; Plane vici. Now I have overcome: a little after that
again with a strong cry he said: I do commit my self wholly unto the judgment
of God, and so saying his contenance returned to the former wont, and graced
with a fair red in his cheeks, with a splendor, and very much beauty he
yielded up his soul unto God.

There is another example much more dreadful then this in John Climacus who
r^counteth that a certain very Vene^able Monk called Stephen after that he had
lived well near forty years in the wilderness, in fasting, watching, tears
and prayers, being adorned with many virtues, he came at length to dye, and
when in his last agony the Devils had found him guilty of many great crimes
ther^by to cast him into despair, he was suddenly amazed in mind, and his eyes
being open with a loud voice he began to say sometimes thus: Ita sane, reuera
ita est, sed poenitentia and lachrimis crimen dilui: It is just as you say, so
indeed it is but with penance and tears I have washed away that spot:
sometimes thus: Non estita, mentimini, it is not so, you do belly me, Then
again: Verum loquimini, sed fleui, sed ministraui: you speak the truth but I
have wept, I have served: in some other things he said: Vere me accusatis, and
quid respondeam non habeo. You do truly charg^ me and I know not what to
answer, and so dyed, leaving it in doubt whether he were saved or damned.
These the^ and other the like examples do admonish us with all diligence to
cleanse our conscience before that hour, that so we may not distrust in ^he
mercy of our Lord.

CHAP. XI. Of the eleventh Precept of the Art of dying well, when our Death is
near, which is of the third tentatio^, that is of the hatred of God.
OUR Adversary the Devil does not only labor as much as he can to rob such as
are to dye, of their faith and hope, to draw them into heresy and desperation,
but also strives to separate the friends of God from his friendship and to draw
them into his hatred, by blasphemies, and magical arts; these men for the most
part neither fear death nor hell, persuading themselves that in hell they shall
lead a merry life being now become the fellows of Devils, who raygne and rule
in those parts: of this point writes Grillandus, Lib. desor quaest. 9. number. 2.
lib. 6. d^ mag. ca 1. sect. 3
and out of him Martinus Delrio affirming that when the witches are taken by
the officers as themselves have often confessed, that then the Devil seeks
for no more, or is busied in any other thing but in persuading them to remain
obstinate even until death, y^^ though they should be brought to the plac^ of
execution, and the fire should be kindled, promising them to deliver their
bodies from the halter or fire, and to procure that they should feel no payns
in the flams, or in case they should dye by that burning yet that their death
should be without all sense or feeling of any pain, and so to pass without
torment out of this life into the happiness of the next, that there they shall be
like the Devils themselves endued with as great strength knowledge, wealth,
power, pleasure as the Devil himself is. So does the lying Devil delude and
deceive them.

There is also another sort of these people who albeit they be not properly
witches or magitians, yet are so blinded with the inordinate love of worldly
wealth as that they differ very little from Infidells: ^hes. 5. ^lloss. 3.
neither was it without cause that the Apostle called covetousness the worship
of Idols, for that wealth is the Idol, the God, and all the love and delight
of the covetous.

My self going one day to visit one that was sick and very near his death,
when I began to speak unto him about the ^reparing of himself to die, he
with stout courage and without all fear answered me and said: I have desired,
Sir, to speak with you not for my self but for my wife and children; for I
now hasten unto hell, so as you need not for me to trouble your self any
further. And this he spoke with as great a peace and quiet of mind as if he had
talked of walking into the fields, or going to some town near at hand, for so
far forth had the Devil subdued and possessed his soul, as now it desired
not, nay it would not be separated from him, and yet was this man no Magitian
or Necromancer, but practiced an art which was very dangerous and wholly set
upon gains whether by right or wrong: and thus he forgot not only God but also
his own soul. The conclusion in fine was that having long labored to
reclaim him and draw him to a better mind, I could do nothing with him. Some
perhaps will desire to know of what profession this man was, of which to the end
his death may be a warning unto others that practice the same in case that any
be like him as there are to many, I will not dissemble: he was a lawyer but one
of the number of the^ which care full little whether the cause which they do
defend be just or wrong, and a^ little do they care though the iniure both
parts, so that they may fill their own purses.

And for that I am fallen into this mattter, I will add this also: when on a
time a very learned lawyer talked with me and explicated the ^quity of a
certain cause, I breaking off his speech said: you seem to me to defend a bad
cause. The lawyer answered that so indeed it was, but quoth he, I am not an
Attorney for truth or justice, but for my clyent, I am to make the best of the
cause with I have taken upon me to defend, let the Judge look how he pronounce
the sentence and in favor of whom. I replied that in this matter I did not
desire that he should believe me, but that he should believe Saint Thomas of
Aquin a most learned, 2. quaest. p^art. 3.
and most holy Doctor, who writes in this manner: Respondeo, Dicendum etc. I
answer, and conclude that it is unlawful for any man to cooperate either by
counsayling, helping, or consenting to do evil, because he who is the
counsailour or cooperatour is in some sort also the dooer: and the Apostle
writing vn^^ the Romans says: that not only such as ^o sin ^^t such also as
consent to the doers ^^e worthy of death, and hence follows (...) before has
been said, that all such are ^ound to restitution: but it is clear that ^he
Lawier, Attorney, or Advocate does ^ffoard his client both help and counsel
and therefore if wittingly he defend a wrong cause, doubtless he sins
grievously and ^s bound to the restitution of whatsoever ^osse the other party
has incurred by his means, help, or assistance: if out of ignorance he do
defend an unjust cause thinking it to be just, he is excused in such sort as
ignorance can be excused. So far Saint Thomas, and his Commentour Cardinal
Caietan explicateth the last words of Saint Thomas saying: Qui omnino
defendisset etc. He who had defended the cause whether it were just or unjust,
although he know it not to be unjust does plead unjustly not out of ignorance
but with ignorance, which does not excuse, and they also who care not to see
and penetrate whether the cause that they maynteyne be just or unjust, do
manifestly neglect to know that, which they are bound to know. So he.

To these tentatio^s another may be added which does not so much hurt as help
(...) although the Devil use it with in (...) only of hurting: for the Devil
uses ofte^tymes to be present and to show himself i^ most dreadful and ugly
shape to such as a^^ tody, that in case he be not able to deceive them yet,
that thereby at least he may hinder their alacrity and fervor of prayer: so
writes Sulpitius of Saint Martin, to wit that the Devil appeared unto him
when he was to dye, unto whom Saint Martin said What sta^ds thou here for
thou bloody beast? Thou shall find no filth in me: and the ven^rable man
Petrus Damianus, in the life of S. Odilo does write that the Devil appeared to
the same Saint in a most fearful shape a little before his death, of whom
Saint Odilo is recounted to have spoken: In the hour of my departure in that
corner (for he pointed as it were at the place with his finger) I saw a cruel
and most dreadful shape which endeavored to strike a horror and dread into
me of a most monstrous vision, but Christ's grace assisting me it could do me no
hurt: And Saint Adelinus Bishop of Sagium writes of Saint Oportuna the Virgin,
extant in Surius that the Devil appeared unto her when she was to dye in the
form ^2. April.
of a blackemore, from whose a head and ^eard did drop down hot and liquid
^ytch his eyes were like burning iron that ^s taken out of the forge when it
casts out many sparks, out of his mouth and nose issued forth a flame of
fire, and a stinking vapor like unto brimstone.

The cause why God permits holy men to be tempted with those fearful
visions, is delivered by an Angel of our Lord in the life of Saint Aicardus to
be seen in Surius, 15. Sep^.
for whereas the Devil at a certain monastery was busy to get his prey, a
holy Angel who was the Guardian Angel of that monastery said unto the devil.
Thou shall here have an employment fruitful for the monks, but not
profitable for thee, for the Monks to cleanse their sins, for thee to
confusion: and the devil replying, am I bound either to these or to any other
Christians to further their salvation? The Angel answered in this thou art
bound, because whatsoever is in them that is to be cut of, through the horror
of thy vision shall be purged or made clean. And a little after the same
Angel speaking of the devil said unto S. Aicardus: Be not afraid of him, he
has no power given him to hurt any in this family, but that only his ugly
vision shall cast the beholders now ready to depart out of their bodies into a
wholesome fear which shall take away whatsoever yet remains to be purged.

CHAP. XII. Of the twelfth Precept of the Art of dying well, when our Death is
near, which is of the first remedy against the Tentations of the Devil.
WE have laid open in the former Chapters four tentations which do much
molest such as are to dye, against which tentations there may be applied two
sorts of remedies; one of them is for such as yet have the use of reason and
can both hear and understand what is said unto them, the other is more
general and common unto all, and it is most profitable, and secure.

Concerning the first, if the tentation impugn the Catholic faith, it is no
way convenient as before we said to dispute with the Devil: but in general
such as be ^o tempted are to be advertised that if the tentation be touching
the nature of God whom we are to believe to be one in substance, and three in
person; the sick man is to be taught that he reflect with himself that there
be many things created not only spiritua^ but also corporal of which we are
ignorant; for most men will not be drawn easily to believe all the stars of the
firmament to be greater the^ the whole world, and yet the mathematitians do
easily demonstrate it to be most true: and in case this thing which is
corporal be of many not understood who yet believe learned men that affirm
the same, why will they not believe those things which God himself by his
Apostles and Prophets has revealed of his own nature, and by so many, so
great signs and miracles has confirmed the same?

If the tentation be touching those things which we beliue God to have done or
still to do, as specially the transmutation of bread and wine into the body
and blood of Christ, the accidents of bread and wine remaining as before,
diverse examples are to be alleged of innumerable thinge^ which we beliue God
to have done when as yet we are able to yield no reason hero^ Who can conceive
the whole world a^ the only will and command of God to have been able to be
made of nothing? And yet many do believe it, who yet cannot be brought to
believe the mystery of the Blessed Eucharist? Who also (were it not warranted
by di^ine authority) would believe the bodies of all dead men turned into ashes,
or into dust, or devoured by beasts or changed into grass in a moment at the
command of our Lord to rise again? And yet all Catholics believe this and
confess it in their Creed, and the same believed the holy Job before some
thousands, Job. 19.
of years for he says: I know that my Redeemer does live, and in the last day
I shall rise again out of the earth, and shall be clad again with my skin:
out of these then and other wonderful works of God which f^r surpass our
reach and capacity and are by the holy Catholic Church propounded for all to
believe, we may be induced to believe the other, because the Church as
testifyeth the Apostle is: 1. Tim. 3.
The pillar and foundation of Truth. These things and the lik may be proposed
unto such as are tempted about matters be^onging unto faith.

Such as are tempted about their hope, to them the greatness of Gods mercy which
is infinite and far exceeding the number or greatness of all our sins, is to
be explicated. Holy David says in the psalm: Our Lord is gracious and
merciful, Psalm. 144.
he is patient and very merciful, our Lord is good unto all and his mercyes
are over ^ll his works. Again he is to be put in mind of the propitiation or
sacrifice to appease Gods wrath offered up by the mediator of God and man
Christ Jesus upon the cross, of which S. John says: He is the propitiatio^
for our sins, and not for our^alon, 1. Joan. 2.
but also for the sins of the whole world. Thirdly the force of penance is to
be laid open before him, which if it proceed from a heart truly contrite, it
never has any repulse from God, for the prophet most truly wrote: Psalm. 50.
God will not despise a contrite and humbled heart; Then also let such a one
call to his remembrance the example of the prodigal child who had scarsely
pronounced these words: Father I have sinned against heaven and before thee:
when as presently the bowels of his loving Father were moved to compassion,
and he cast himself on his sons arms, embraced him, vested him a new, put a
ring on his fingar, and caused a great banquet to be made ready for him, and
all this because his son that had been lost was now found again.

Last of all the example of the Apostle S. Paul is to be proposed, who whiles
yet he did persecute the Church was prevented by the grace of God and changed
from a persecutour into a pr^acher, and this as the same Apostle writes happened
to him, that all sinners by his example might be converted, and no man though
never so wicked might despair of the mercy of God: This is a faithful saying
and worthy of al acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into this world to save
sinners, of whom I am the first or chief: but therefore have I obtained mercy
that in me Christ Jesus might show all his patience for the instruction of such
as should hereafter believe in him to everlasting life.

But such as are tempted with the most grievous tentation of al other, I mean
with that which is against the love of God, and are provoked to hate him, and
to love the Devil: First they are to be taught that the Devil is a liar: for
thus said our Savior of him: When the Devil speaks a lie he speaks of
his own, because he is a liar, and Father of it: where these words, and Father
of it, Tract. 41. in Joan. hom. 42. in Joan. Genes. 3.
do signify the Devil to be the Father of lies, as both Saint Augustine and
Saint Chrysostom do teach, for the Devil first before all other began to
lie when he said unto Eve and by her unto Adam: nequaquam moriemini, you shall
not dye: for God had said unto Adam, that he should not eat of the forbidden
tree if he would never dye: on the other side the Devil said, that they should
eat because they should not dye: therefore there is no credit to be given unto
the Devil because he is a liar, and the Father of lies: again the Devil is
already adjudged unto hell fire withal his accomplices, for thus God will speak
unto the wicked at the day of judgment: Go ye accursed into hell fire which
is prepared for the Devil and his Angels; they do therefore greatly err who
submit themselves to the Devil hoping after death to rule and reign in hell
with him, and there to have great wealth and all manner of pleasures; and
finally it is clear by experience that all the promises of the Devil are
deceatfull: for hitherto there has not been one found that ever I could hear
of who has ever received the great treasures which the Devil promised him, or
being condemned by lawful authority to prison, or to the galleys, or to death,
has been able by his means ^o be delivered.

These three things if they were seriously considered of such as desire their
own salvation, perhaps there would be very few, or rather none at all that
would ever presume to fall from him who is true God, and truly most powerful,
most wise most good, to the devil most lying, most beggarly, most miserable.

Of the fourth tentation we need not speak seeing that it has evidently been
showed that this tentatio^ is not so hurtful as healthful unto such as do
dye; or if any desire a remedy out of the Scriptures to be able the better to
bear and endure the same, let him whils that horrible spectacle does last,
either read or cause to be read unto him the six and twentieth psalm, which
begins thus, Dominus illuminatio mea and salus mea quem timebo? Our Lord is
my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear?

CHAP. XIII. Of the thirteenth Precept of this Art of dying well, when our
Death is near, which is of the second remedy against the tentation of the
Devil.
WE have ^^spatched the first remedy against the particular assaults of the
Devil, now we will explicat the second which is common to all tentations: this
great and soueraygne remedy consists in prayers made unto God whether the
sick man be able to pray for himself, or whether others pray for him, or
whether both the one, and the other, that is the prayer of the sick man, and
prayers of such as shall then be about him be united jointly together, for
certain it is the prayers of such as fear God to be of great force,
especially seeing that we know for certain that the Devil can no further
tempt us then it shall please God to permit him, for like a roaring lion, or
mad dog he is bound with an iron chain, and can not byte at his pleasure, but
as far forth as God who with his Almighty hand does govern the same cnayne,
permit him t^ byte. This we have in Saint Augustine expounding these words of
the psalm: Psalm. 34.
Di^ animae meae salus tua ego sum: Say unto my soul I am thy salvation: where
alleging the example of Job thus he writes: Ostendit hoc Deus etc. This does
G^d show in the true cause of that holy Job, because the devil himself has
no power to take away these temporal things until he have received it from
that supreme power: he could envy at the holy man, but could he hurt him? He
could accuse him, but cold he condemn him? Was he able to take any thing from
him? Was he able to take so much as one nail of his hands or feet? Could he
hurt the least hair of his head, until he said unto God: Mitte manum tuam,
extend thy hand? What is meant by this speech extend thy hand? Give me power:
well; he received power, he did tempt, the other was tempted, yet he that was
tempted did conquer, and the tempter was vanquished. For God who permitted the
D^u^ll to take all away from the Saint; he interiourly left not his servant,
but made the soul of his servant a sword to subdue the Devil himself. What
power is this? I speak of man: ^or man in Paradise is overcome, and Job,
ouercometh on the dunghill: in Paradise man was overcome of the Devil by the
woman; here Job overcame the Devil and the woman together.

The same thing which Saint Augustine teatheth to wit that the Devil can do
no more then God permits him, S. Antony, and S. Francis have taught us by
their examples, of the former thus speaks Saint Athanasius who wrote his
life: Antonius multitudine daemoniorum vallatus etc. Antony being environed
with a multitude of devils as one that scorned his enemies, said unto them, if
that you had any strength one were enough for the co^bat, but for that God
having weakened you, your strength is lost, and you strive by multitudes to
cast us into fear, whereas this very attempt is a great sign of weakness,
because you take upon you the shapes of unreasonable beasts: again with great
confidence he said; if you be able to do any thing, if our Lord has given you
power over me, devour what is granted you; and if you cannot, why do you
leese your labor in vain? The sign of the Cross, and faith toward our Lord
is an inpregnable bulwark for our defense.

Saint Bonauenture relates almost the very same of Saint Francis saying: Loca
solitaria quaerens etc. In vita ca. 10.
Seeking for solitary places, to them and to forlorn Churches he went in the
night time to pray, where he oftentimes endured most horrible assaults of the
Devils, who sensibly contending with him labored to hinder his earnest desire
of prayer; but he defended with heavenly armor, by how much more strongly he
was assailed by his enemies, by so much the more strong was he and more fervent
in his actions; confidently saying unto Christ, protect me under the shadow of
thy wings, from the face of the wicked that have afflicted me: and then to the
devils he said, do what you can against me you wicked and deceatfull fiends:
for you can do no more then the hand of God permitts you, and I stand here
ready with all comfort and joy to suffer whatsoever he has determined to be
inflicted: which courage of mind the proud devils not enduring departed with
confusion. S^ he. And this firm and sure foundation being laid, that the
devil can do no more then that God permits him, it cannot be doubted of, but
that a fervent prayer made unto God, either by the sick man, or standers by or
all together is of great force in this behalf especially if such as pray be
in Gods friendship and favor.

There is a most notable example of this thing in Saint Gregory who affirms
this example to have happened in his own monastery and says, that he had spoken
thereof in a sermon to the people: these are his words: Is de quo etc. 4.
Dialog Cap. 37.
He of whom I remember to have made mention in my homilyes made before the
people was a very unquiet child, his name was Theodorus, who more out of
necessity then any desire entered with his brother into our monastery, to whom
every thing seemed troublesome which any did speak unto him for his
salvation, for the things that were good he could not only not do, but
neither could he endure to hear them, and by swearing, fretting, and scoffing,
protested that he would never take the habit of the holy rule: in the last
contagious sickness which took away no small part part of the people of this
City; the infection took him about his groine, and was brought so low as that
he was rea^y to dye; and being in his agony the brethren came about him to help
his passage with their prayers: now his body from the utter parts was dead, and
the vital heat did only pant within his breast, all the brethren began so
much the more earnestly to pray for him, by how much they saw his end more and
more to hasten: then on a soden he began to cry out to the brethren there
present, and with great noise to break of their prayers, or at least to hinder
them saying: depart, depart, behold I am given over to a dragon to be devoured
who for that you are present cannot devour me: he has taken in my head into
his mouth, depart I pray that he may torment me no more, but let him do that
he is come for; if I be given over to him to be devoured why for your sake do I
stay? The brethren began to say unto him: what is that thou say brother?
Make the sign of the holy Cross: he answered saying I would sign my self,
but I am not able because I am pressed down with the scales of this dragon: when
the brethren

lasting happiness, when as no man can fall away from that happiness, but he
must fall into the gulf of endless perdition.

To conceive this matter the better as being of greatest importance I have
thought it expedient briefly to ponder the words of Saint Paul in his second
epistle to the Corinthians: Id enim quod in praesenti est momentanem etc. 2.
Cor. 4.
For our tribulation which in this life is momentary and light, works in us
above measure on high an everlasting weight of glory, we not contemplating the
things that are seen, but which are not seen: for the things which are seen
are temporal, the things which are not seen eterna^^. These Apostolical and
golden words to a spiritual man are most easy and plain, and out of them
alone without al^ difficulty he learnes the art of living, and the art of dying
well: but to a carnal and sensual man, they are as obscure as any Cymmerian
darkness, and sound as the Hebrew or Arabicke tongues do to one who knows no
other but the Latin or Greek.

A spiritual man gathers out of these words the tribulations of this life
although most grievous, endured and born for the love of God to be most light,
and most short, albeit they should last for many years, because whatsoever
has an end cannot be properly said to be of long continuance; and the same
tribulations to merit before God so great riches as that an unmeasurable and
ever during treasure of glory, and all good things is purchased by them; out of
which al men of capacity may see that these tribulations are not to be feared,
but we are to fear our sins, neither are temporal emolume^ts to be much
regarded, but eternal only. And hence it follows that men are to live well
on earth, that they may happily reign in heaven, and consequently live and die
most securely.

But sensual men, that have no spirit, who in words say that they believe the
words of the Scripture, and deny it in deeds, they do plainly pervert the
words of the Apostle, and say, if not with their tongue, yet in their heart,
that poverty, ignorance, ignominy, iniuryes, tribulations are most grievous,
and therefore with all care to be avoided, prevented, and repelled; albeit they
should for that end lie, deceive, commit murder, offend God, and afterward go
to hell fir^ ^or say these men, who knows whether any where there be a hell?
Or who has ever seen this eternal weight of glory? But we find by
experience, we know for certain, yea we feel with our hands poverty, ignominy
and iniuryes to be ill. Thus does the world and such as are of the world not
deliver in words, but testify in their actions, and this is the cause why the
greatest part of men do live ill, and dye most miserably.

And to allege an example or two of the bad death of the damned, we have in
the fourth book of S. Gregoryes Dialogues, the example of one Crisorius, who
being one of them whom I now described, a politic fellow, wise, and in worldly
affairs very practical, but withal as S. Gregory notes very proud, and
covetous; this man being now come to the end of his life, opening his eyes saw
most filthy and ugly spirits to stand before him, and to draw near that they
might take him away perforce, and carry him into hell; the poor man began to
tremble, to wax pale, and with lo^d cries to ask for respit, crying and
saying: Inducias vel vsq^ ^ane, inducias vel vsque mane: res^it (...) till to
morrow, respit but till to morrow, and whiles he thus cried, even in the very
speaking his soul was taken away from his body: by which it is most clear
that he saw that vision for our instruction that it might be a warning to us,
seeing that in respect of himself it was nothing auayleable. And this usually
happens unto such as differ or delay their amendment until the last hour of
their life, and of this number are they to be reckoned who as Saint Gregory
says in the beginning of his fourth book, do not easily believe any thing
that they do not see with their eyes, or if they believe, they do not believe
as they should, by reforming their lives to the prescript of virtue.

Another example is in the same place where Saint Gregory writes of a Monk
that was an Hypocrite, who was thought to fast whiles in the mea^e tym he did
secretly eat and drink: and the same Saint affirms the said Monk to be
damned in hell fire, for he acknowledged his sin but did no penance for it:
for God on the one side would have his Hipocrisy detected, and on the other
gave him not grace to repent, that oth^^ ^ay learn not to delay their
confession ^^pe^nance until the end of their life. But not to stay longer in
discoursing of such who through their own negligence have not learned the art
of living well and therefore have miscaryed in their ends; I return to the
words of S. Paul which are very full of mysteryes and most wholesome docume^ts.

First it is good to note how far the Apostle does extenuate his own merits,
and labors endured for Christ, and extolleth the glory of the Kingdom of
heaven which is the reward of our merits: That (says he) of our tribulation is
momentary and light, this is the extenuation of his merits. The Apostle with
all possible endeavor had labored almost forty years, for when he was
called by a voice from heaven unto Christ he was a young man, Cap. 7.
for so it is written in the Acts of the Apostles: the stoners of Saint
Stephen, deposuerunt vestimenta sua secus pedes adolescentis qui vocabatur
Saulus: they laid their garments at the feet of a young man called Saul. He
lived a Christian even unto his old age, for so he writes of himself unto
Philemon: cum sis sicut Paulus senex, seeing th^^ ar^ like Paul an old ^an, and
therefore he ^^towed his youth, his middle and old age in the service of Christ,
and yet h^ says, that his tribulations which were continual without
intermission, from his conversion until his Martyrdo^, were out momentary: and
what he says is true, if his tribulations be compared unto the eternity of
everlasting felicity, though in respect of our time they dured for a long while.

To the shortness he adds their lightness: Momentaneum and leave tribulationis
nostrae; And yet how shar^ and cruel his tribulations were, himself declares
when in the first to the Corinthians he says: 1. Cor. 4.
Vsque in hanc horam etc. Even unto this hour we hunger and thirst, are naked
and are beaten or buffetted with fists, and have no place of abode and labor
with our own hands; we are cursed, and we bless; we suffer persecution, and
endure it; we are blasphemed and we entreat, we are made as it were the filth
of the world and the scum of all even until this present time: and in his
other Epistle unto the same Corinthians he adds further: 2. Cor. 11.
In laboribus plurimis etc. In very many labors, in prisons more often, in
strips above measure, in deaths often, of the Jews five ^^^es had I forty
lashes save one, thrice was I beaten with rodds, once was I stoned, thrice I
suffered shipwreck, night and day I was in the depth of the sea, often in
trau^ll, in dangers of waters, in dangers of thieves, in dangers by mine own
countrymen, in dangers by Gentiles, in dangers in the city in dangers in the
wilderness, in dangers on the sea, in dangers amongst false brethren; in labor
and trouble, in often watching, in hunger and thirst, in often fasting, in cold
and nakedness. These are the tribulations which he calls light, which although
in themselves most heavy yet the love of Christ and greatness of reward made
them worthily to seem most light.

The Apostle annexeth the greatness of reward saying: that this momentary
tribulation works in us on high the everlasting weight of glory; where after
the manner of holy Scripture which accommodates it self to our capacity, the
Apostle describes the reward of our labors by the similitude of the greatness
of some corporal thing: for a corporal thing is then said to be great when it
is hig^, permanent, large, and deep: of the height of the glory of Saints he
says, above measure in height, that is, the reward of ou^ labors shall be above
measure high, in so much as no height can be conceived greater; of the durance
or length he says aeternum eternal, to wit, it shall have no end, in
comparison whereof all durance is most short and may be termed mome^tary; of
the largenes and depth he says, the weight of glory; the name of glory
signifies the blessedness of Saints to be like unto splendor or light which is
spread abroad and fills all things: the word weight signifies the depth of
some solid and full thing, and which is not superficial and empty, but most
solid, most full. The glory then of the Saints shall be a certain thing above
al manner and measure high, it shall be eternal, most solid, most full, most
happy.

And for that sensual men conceive not these things, the inhabitants I mean
of this world, the Apostle added: we not beholding the things that are seen,
but the things that are not seen, for the things that are seen are
temporal, the things which are not seen eternal: this is the entiere, and
true cause why so few do learn this art we treat of, for either men do not at
all think, or else think not seriously as they should on these things which are
not seen and are eternal, but are altogether busied in considering the
beauty and vtility of corporal and transitory things which are seen with
their mortal eyes, and this only is the difference betwixt brute beasts and
sensual men without spirit, that beasts think on nothing but that which is
present before their eyes, because they are not capable of reason whereby they
might reflect on things to come which are eternal: but carnal and sensual
men do not think or consider things to come and eternal, because they being
taken and tied with the birdlime of carnal concupiscence will not lift up
their mynds from their present delights, and direct it to things to come which
alone are truly great, precious, everlasting: and this much of the first
consideration of the words of S. Paul.

Another consideration no less profitable and fruitful is peculiar for them
that already have descended into the pit of perdition, for they whose eyes of
their soul, the smart of torments which they endure, has opened, which in
this life sin had shut; they I say do now manifestly perceive the
prosperityes of this world, as riches, honors, delights, Kingdoms, and
Empires in respect of their ever during, never ending torments, to have been
both momentary and light, and yet for the att^yning of them they are not only
thus punished, but have also lost unspeakable joy, and everlasting glory, for
which cause they shall still with excessive grief lament, and shall find no
comfort, because whiles they lived on earth they were such fools as for so
frail and transitory things, not indeed good but the shadows rather of good
things, to loose these heavenly riches, which have above measure in height the
everlasting weight or poyse also of glory.

Let us hear their words in the book of wisdom for it pleased the holy
Ghost in that book to set down the speeches of these fools, nothing at all
auayleable to the speakers, but unto us if we will our selves they may be very
fruitful and profitable: thus they speak: Ergo erauimus a via veritatis, and
iustitiae lu^en non luxit nobis etc We have erred therefore from the way o^
truth, and the light of justice has not shined unto us: we are wearyed in the
way of iniquity and perdition, and we have walked hard ways, but we have not
known the way of our Lord: what has pride auayled us, or what has the
vanting of our riches yielded us? All these things have passed away like a
shadow, and as a forerunning messenger, and as a ship that passes over the
wauing water, whereof when it is past no sign can be seen, and like a bird
that flies through air, of whose passadge there is no mark or token. So the
wise man. Out of which we do not only perceive that sensual men are to do
penance in hell for that for this small and temporal trash they have lost
infinite great and eternal wealth, but also for that they have so much
labored and wearyed themselves in pursuying and preserving these temporal
commodityes, which is most true: and often it falls out that such as contemn
all earthly things do live more merrily and cheerfully then those who abound
with all wealth and honor.

Truly Saint Paul whose words we endeavored to explicate, says of himself,
Repletus sum consolatione, super abundo gaudio in omni tribulatione nostra. 2.
Cor. 7.
I am filled with comfort, I do over abound with joy in all our tribulation.
Saint Athanasius in the life of Saint Anthony who had left all, writes; that
he was never seen to be sadd: and the same may be said of all the Saints,
although most poor and laboring perpetually in prayer, in fasting, and
mortification of their own flesh: and therefore they who for the gayning and
getting of worldly riches are not afraid to leese eternal, they do only
altogether leese the later, but for the most part they leese their internal
comfort and joy; and so whiles they seek for earthly happynes, they leese both
earthly and heavenly together.

Is it not therefore expedient that we who are yet living should learn to be
wise by the example of such as have gone before us? truly if when we make a
journey one should tell us that the way we took did not lead unto the place
where we meant to go, but to a dangerous downfall or den of thieves; there is
no man but would thank his admonisher, and presently put himself into the
right way: and if we have so great care in a corporal and temporal danger,
truly it is meet that much more willingly and cheerfully we do the same where
the danger is both corporal and spiritual, temporal and everlasting.

Lastly there remains a consideration for these men who are so carnal and
sensual that they esteem not the loss of eternal life, and that glory which
surpasses all understanding: these men are to be warned that in case they
esteem not the glory of heaven which they never saw; at least they contemn
not the fire and brimstone and other corporal punishments which they know, and
which in hell are found to be most outrageous: truly carnal pleasure which in
this life is light and momentary does work in the wicked above measure an
everlasting weight of misery. And truly our Lord and Savior Christ in the last
day in few words will make this evident, saying: go ye accursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

But S. John i^ his Apocalips has expressed more fully what manner o^ torments
are prepared for the Devil and his Angels and for men circumuented and
seduced by these Apostata spirits of the Devil Prince of the wicked: thus we
read in the Apocalips: Apoc. 20.
Et Diabolus etc. And the Devil who seduced them was cast into the sake of
fire, and brimstone where the beast and the false Prophet shall be tormented
day and night for ever: and in the next Chap. of others condemned to hell he
says: Cap. 21.
to the fearful and unbelieving, and to the execrable and murderers, and
fornicatours and sorcerers and idolaters, and al liars, their part shall be in
the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death: of
which words, the very first only needs explication, for the other sins are
manifest and clear. S. John calls the fearful, those who dare not resist
the tempter be he Devil or man, but presently yield and consent to the
tentatation; to such S. James says: resistite Diabolo and fugiet a vo^is,
resist the Devil and he will fly from you, and there are not a few but rather
innumerable who have not learned to fight in our Lords warfare, but without all
resistance receive the wounds of the Devil, and die the first death which is
deadly syn, and because they are fearful also in doing penance, whiles they
dare not chastise their body and bring it in subjection, they fall upon the
second death which is hell: and therefore S. John put the fearful in the first
place, because this timidity draws infinite men into hell.

What here will carnal men say? For that all temporale moluments whatsoever
are momentary and light, we have all learned by our own and other men's
experience: that the torments of hell fire are most weighty and to e^dure for
ever, the holy Scripturs, in which no falsity can be contained, do clearly
testify. Out of which it follows that the total sum of this Art of dying
well is, that which is comprised in the three ensuing propositions, or which is
euinced in the sillogisme following in the next, and last Chapter of this book.

CHAP. XVII. The Sum, or Abridgement of the Art of dying well.
AS well the comfort as the tribulation of this life is momentary, and small;
the comfort and tribulation of the next life is for dura^ce everlasting, for
greatness without measure: therefore they are fools who contemn the comfort
and tribulation of the next life. The first proposition of this argument is
clear by experience, the assumption is more clear in the Scriptures which are
penned by the holy Ghost; the conclusion follows ineuitably out of them both;
if the^ any one will easily and soon learn this art, let him not content
himself with the reading of this or the like books, but let him attentively
consider not once but often, not of curiosity to learn, but out of sincere
intention to live and dye well what distance there is between momentary things
and everlasting, between things of no moment, and such as are of most
importance, most weighty? and if he desire to be thoroughly grounded in this
most profitable and perspicuous truth let him call to mind the examples of
such as have been before us, whether by good life they came to a good end, or
by their il behavior have everlastingly perished; and to case him of the
labor of seking after examples, I will help him to three pair of them, one of
Kings, one of private men, and the last pair of Clergy men; and all these I
will take out of the holy Scripture.

The first shall be of Saul and David. Saul whiles that he was a private man,
and poor, was so honest and good as that the Scripture testifyeth there was
not a better then he amongst the children of Israel: being made King he changed
his behavior, 1. Reg. 9.
in so much as there was not found a worse then he: for he persecuted David who
was innocent even unto death, and that for no other cause, but for that he
suspected that David should be a King and reign after him: and when he had
raygned 20. years he was slain in war and descended to hell. David a
faithful and virtuous man, after a long persecution procured by Saul, was
declared King, and for forty years raygned and governed his Kingdom most
prudently and justly, in which time he endured many tribulations, and at length
rested in peace.

Now let us compare together the comforts and tribulations of them both, and
see whether of the^ had better learned the art of living and dying well. Saul
whils he lived had not that clear and perfect delight, which yet of all others
is wont to be greatest in Kings, and men of supreme authority, whiles he swayed
the scepter, and that for the great hatred wherewith he pursued David, and
therefore he tasted not in the twenty years of his reign the sweetness of his
crown without the gall of envy: those years being expired all the pleasure of
this life left him, and there succeeded a perfect, and everlasting calamity:
and now for the space well near of two thousand threescore and ten years, his
chiefest part to wit his soul, lives in unspeakable torments, and that which
is more miserable these torments are to endure for ever. David on the other
side lived 70. years and reigned of that number forty, and although he tasted
of tribulations, and these neither few nor small, yet found he very frequent
and singular comforts out of the revelations he had from God which he expressed
in his most sweet and heavenly psalms, and after his death descended not into
torments but with the holy Fathers into repose, and the bosom of Abraham, and
after the resurrection of our Savior, he ascended with Christ into the
everlasting Kingdom of heaven.

Let the Reader now judge whether the passadge of the wicked from their body be
not most miserable; although it be of Kings, and Emperors, and the passage of
the just most happy be it also either of Kings or Emperors. Saul as I said
raygned twenty years and now after his death for two thousand years and more
has remained without all rest in hell fire: what comparison (dear Christian)
is there between twenty and two thousand years? who would desire to have
twenty years of all possible and perfect pleasure in this life, if for certain
he should know that for the same he should remayn two thousand years in a
burning furnace? And is there any so sensles who would undergo the greatest
torment that can be devised, I say not for two thousand but two hundred years,
that he might here enjoy never so great pleasure? Wha^ if hereunto I should add
the torment of hell which is not to endure for two thousand years only, but for
ever without any end at all? Surely this eternity of torments, without all
intermission, without all rest of repose is so great a matter as it may make
even an iron heart, or brazen breast to stoop and do penance. And the same
consideration may the reader apply unto David, and weigh as it were in a
balance his tribulation which was mome^tary and light, with that eminent and
everlasting glory and pleasure, which the same King now after his death
atteyned in heaven; although the torments of hell use more to move us then the
joys of paradise.

The second example shall be of the Glutton and Lazarus in S. Luke. The rich
Glutton for a small while made merry with his friends, for he was clad in
purpose and silk, and feasted every day su^ptuously. Lazarus on the other side
was a beggar and lay sick at the gate of the glutton full of soars, and
desired to b^ fedd with the crummes which fell f^^m the rich man's table, and no
man did give the^: but a little after al these things were changed and turned
vpside down: the rich ^lutton dyed and descended into hell: La^arus also dyed
and was carried by the An^ells into a place of rest, to wit, into the ^osome of
Abraham. And truly the Glutton after a very short comfort began to be
^ormented in the infernal flames, and ^here now is tormented, and for ever
shall ^e without all rest or stop. Lazarus being ^oore, patient, and virtuous,
after a short ^ribulation passed unto rest in the bosom of Abraham, and after
the resurrection of Christ entered into heaven, where for ever he shall remain
in glory. Certainly had we lived at that time few or none of us would have
desired to be like Lazarus, but all or the most part had desired to be like the
rich Glutton, and yet now all of us do esteem Lazarus to be most happy, and
the Glutton most miserable: why then do we not now whiles the choice is in our
hands choose the virtue of Lazarus rather then the vices of the glutton? I say
not that riches are to be condemned, seeing that Abraham, David, and many other
Sa^^ts were rich, but gluttony, riot, vanity ^ant of compassion, and other
vices which brought this Glutton unto hell fire are to be condemned: neither do
we only look on the poverty and soars of Lazarus, but we commend his patience
and piety although that this be much more to be admired in us, that we knowing
things to stand thus, and esteeming the glutton most foolish, and Lazarus most
wise, yet that there are so many found that continually imitate the folly of
the glutto^, when as they may be assured that they shall be like unto him in
torments, as they have been like him in their vicious life and wicked courses

The third example that remains is of Judas the traitor and S. Matthias,
(...) 1. (...)
who succeeded the said Judas in the Apostleship. Judas was unhappy in this
world, and most unhappy in the next; (...) ^ra
three years he followed our Savior, still laboring by sacrilegious theft to
fill his purse; not contented with that money which he took for himself out of
the common allowance, but the infectio^ of covetousness pricking him forward he
came at last to that point as he sold his Lord and master, but afterward
being driven by the devil into despair, he restored the money, and hanged
himself, and so lost both tempora^ and everlasting life: and therefore our
S^^^our pronounced that dreadful sent^^^e of him: It had been good for him
that he had never been born. S. Matthias w^^ succeeded him, Matthew. 2
that is to say was chosen in his place, endured a mome^tary labor and trouble
not without great abo^ndance of heavenly delights; and now al his labor and
trouble being ended he reigns most happily with Christ in heaven, whom most
faithfully he served and honored upon earth.

This comparison of Judas with S. Matthias perteyneth unto Bishops and
religious me^. Judas was an Apostle and consequent^^ designed to be Bishop, for
of Judas and S Matthias S. Peter interpreted these words of the psalm, Let
another tak his Bishoprike; and the same Judas is to be reckoned among the
religious, because S. Peter said of all the Apostles: Behold we have left all
and have followed thee, what shall we have for the same? Judas then of al
others most unfortunate, after he had fallen down from the sovereign state of
perfection, by restoring the money he lost that little gayn which he had so il
gotten, and making himself his own hang-ma^, is now damned to endless
punishment; who may be an example unto al Bishops and religiou^ men to look
about them, and see how the ^alke, and what danger hangs over their h^^ds unless
by good life they be answereable to the perfe^^^o^ of their sta^ unto which God
h^ (...) called the^: for Sa^ and the Glutton departed by death from the
temporal felicity, and came into endless mis^ry: Judas had no temporal felicity
at all, bu^ the shadow only and hope of felicity, and y^^ by killing himself he
came to euerlastin^ damnation and that more grievous then the other, either
Saul I mean or the glutto^. An^ in case that Judas had enriched himself a^^^^
all me^ of the world, and yet had afte^ ^on to eternal poverty, and endless
torments of hell, as indeed he came, what good had the huge heap of all his
riches done him?

Let then the argument which I made in the beginning of this Chap. and which
now I repeat out of the words of the Apostle, remayn most firm and
vnco^troled. Our tribulation which now is but for a moment and light, works
above measure, most eminently, an everlasting weight of glory in us: we not
looking at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen: for
the things that are seen are Temporal, but the things which are not seen
are Eternal

FINIS

