THE DIVINE POVRTRAIT. OR, A true and lively Representation of the blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: with our due Preparation how to receive the same
worthily. Delivered in a Sermon, at the Reformed Church of Paris (on Easter day
last:) By Monsieur John Mestrezat, Minister of the Word of God there: Upon
these words of our Savior, This is my Body.

Englished by John Reynolds.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for G. Baker, and are to be sold at his shop near
Charing-crosse. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Most Religious, and Virtuous Lady, MARIE, Countess
of DORSET, Gouernesse to our High and Hopeful young Lord, and Master, Prince
Charles.
MADAME,
KNovving, and considering, that your Honor, (as a sanctified vessel of
Piety, and as another Elect Lady) spendes the greatest part of your time, and
of your Self, in Prayer, and in the sweet and sacred calmes of Heavenly
Meditations, and Contemplations; And that you make, and esteem the first to
be, (as indeed it is) your chiefest Joy; the second, your greatest Delight,
and both of them your divinest Ambition, and Felicity here on Earth. I
therefore (according to the dignity of your merits, and the quality of my
duty) do here embolden my self, most humbly to present, and Dedicate to
your Honor, a small Translation of mine from French, Of a Sermon lately
delivered (by a worthy Servant of the Lord) in the Protestant Church of Paris,
upon the firmest point of our Faith, and the greatest, and most Sacred Mystery
of our Salvation, The Lords most blessed Supper; And if my affection to the
Author thereof, do not deceive my judgment, He has drawn this Divine
Pourtrait of that blessed Sacrament, so divinely, and so artificially and
curiously depaynted it at life, according to the sacred Will and Testament of
the Great and Heavenly Institutour thereof, Our Lord and Savior CHRIST JESUS;
as I both hope with confidence, and presume with safety, that your Honor will
receive it graciously, behold it affectionately, and love and cherish it
religiously; and (consequently) that all other Readers will do the like, by
the powerful Influence of your Honorable President, and pious Example.

And in regard, that your constant Piety, and inflamed Zeal toward God, (as
the Queen of all your other relucent Virtues) generally makes you to be,
rather admyred, then imitated of the best and Noblest Ladies of Great BRITAIN;
Therefore (neither to flatter your Honor, or to infringe the truth) I
confidently believe, that this Piety, and this Zeal of yours, was the
primarie cause, which first moved God, to move and inspire the heart of our
Potent and Prudent King, to give you the Superintendencie over his young Son,
our Prince; A singular favor of God, a most special honor of our Sovereign
toward you, which yet your Honor deserved before desired, and received before
you (any way) expected, or dreamt thereof; And the which so infinitely
rejoices the hearts and and souls of the most and best of all his Subjects,
that they triumph in this his Majesty's happy choice and election of you, and
in your Honorable and Virtuous Administration over this our Royal Faglet; As
fully hoping, and therefore perfectly assuring themselves, that as you are now
made Governesse to the first Son, of one of the first and greatest Kings of
the world: So that, your Illustrious virtues in your self, your watchful eye
over him, and vigilant care of, and for him, will (by Gods propitious Favor
and Assistance) infallibly crown his Royal Parents, with true Content, and
their Kingdoms and Subjects with perfect Felicity, to see this Princely
Blossom, and Royal Plant, futurely flourish, and sprout forth to be one of
the loftyest Cedars of Christendom, and (next to our Sacred Sovereign, King
CHARLES his Father,) the greatest Champion of Christ and his Gospel, and the
Truest Defender of his Heavenly Spouse the Church.

And Madame, because if we make Piety and Religion the Soul of our life
here on Earth; That we are therefore assured, God will then hereafter
infallibly make it the life of our Souls in Heaven; was likewise a strong
motive, and a most pleasing and acceptable Inducement to me, to make this
Sermon, (or Divine Pourtrait of the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper) to
speak English; for that this spiritual and celestial Banquet, (given by our
great Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST to his beloved Apostles, and in them to us,
a little before his glorious departure, and ascension from Earth to Heaven) is
the very true life and essence, yea, the spiritual Food, and sacred Manna,
whereby all faithful and regenerate Christians, are eternally incorporated
into Christ, and Christ into them A sweet and sacred Meditation, for every one
to know and contemplate, and also most infinitely necessary for all, (by a
lively Faith) very often and frequently to apply unto their Consciences and
Souls, because it is a matchless Jewel, and an inestimable Treasure, which
includes all earthly riches, and compriseth and contains all Heavenly
benefits and felicities in it.

Neither am I, or so Ignorant, or so Presumptuous, to direct this Sermon of the
Lords Supper to your Honor, out of the least shadow of any premeditated intent
or purpose, thereby to instruct, or teach you in this sacred Mystery of your
Salvation; because contrariwise I firmly know, that your Honor is truly able
to teach, and infinitely capable to instruct others therein: But I did it
purposely to recreate your Zeal, and to foment and cherish your Piety, in
this your solemn Preparation to receive that blessed Sacrament, now at this
approaching, great and joyful Feast of Easter, and next thereunto, as an
eternal pledge and testimony of my duty to your Honors Service. The
operation, ^ind benefit, which the reading and meditating of this small Book,
may work in your heart and soul, I wholly leave to the Divine Providence and
Pleasure of Almighty God, whom I religiously pray, may ever bless your Honor
(and yours) with all true prosperity and happiness in this life, and with all
perfect felicity and glory in that to come.

April 2. 1631. Your Honors humblest servant, John Reynolds.

THE TRANSLATOR his Preface to the Christian Reader.
IT was with a holy admiration, and a religious and sanctified zeal, that the
Royal Prophet King David (contemplating on the excellency of Gods creatures,
and meditating on the pre-eminence and dignity which he gave man over them)
Cried out, Psalm. 8.4.
O Lord, our God, how excellent is thy name in all the world, And what is man,
that thou art so mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou visitest him.
If David (who was a lively Type and Figure of Christ) were rapt into this
spiritual ecstasy of admiration and joy, when he considered of Gods power and
providence, in the works of his creation; How much more infinitely and
thankfully should we poor miserable sinners, rejoice with true admiration,
and admire with perfect joy, at the unspeakable and incomprehensible love of
God toward mankind; Phil. 2.8. Col. 1.14.
In giving up his only begotten Son Christ Jesus to death; yea, to the
shameful death of the Cross for our redemption, and that he was so gracious a
God, and so merciful and indulgent a Father to us, that he suffered his
blessed Son to dye for us, Tit. 2.14.
That he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us, to be a peculiar
people to himself. For, wretched sinners that we are; In Paradise, where our
Forefathers gained their life, there (by their wilful disobedience and
transgression) they lost their righteousness and we in them; because the foul
stain and Leprosy of that their original sin, has successively and
actually, made us, their unfortunate seed and posterity, guilty both of Death
and Hell; and there justly adjudged to have our Portions with the Devil and
his Angels. But notwithstanding all this; God (yet) has been as merciful to
us, as we have been sinful to him; for although we were lost in Adam, by
Nature, yet we are again, both found and saved in Jesus Christ by grace; 1 Timothy 2.6.
Who has given himself a ransom for all men; Isai 53.4,5
Has borne our infirmities, and carried away our sins and sorrows, by
suffering himself to be wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our
iniquities. So that it is the present joy of our hearts, and the future
happiness of our souls, Ephesians. 2.4,5.
That God, who is rich in mercy, Ephesians 2.4,5
(through the great love wherewith he loved us) when we were dead by our sins,
has quickened us together in Jesus Christ, by whose grace we are saved.

And to the end that all true Christians should not despair of Christ's
promises unto them nor so much give themselves over, either to the reprobate
sense and pleasures of sin, or to the sugared insinuations and treacherous
temptations of Satan, as any way to doubt of their salvation in the Lord: Why,
this our sacred Lord and Master, Christ Jesus (the great Shepherd of his
Flock, and Savior of his people) who by incorporating his Divinity with his
humanity) was wholly composed of love and mercy toward them. He, I say, a
little before his bloody, yet blessed death and passion on the Cross) was
graciously pleased, to honor and sanctify his Apostles, and, in them us, who
are of the true seed of Abraham; with the holy Sacrament of his most blessed
Supper, as a divine pledge, and a firm and authentical confirmation of his
inestimable love toward us, and of his watchful care and vigilance for our
salvation; I mean for the full perfecting and accomplishing of our
glorification in Heaven with God his father: Rom 6.4.
That sin might have no more dominion over ver us; because we are now no longer
under the Law, but under Grace; but that by the worthy receiving, and holy
partaking thereof (In the imitation of Christ and his blessed Apostles) Ephesians.
2.6.
we might be raised up together with him in heavenly places.

It is therefore not our own merits, but only Gods mercies, not our own
works which are sinful, but only the blessed death and passion of Christ
Jesus which is sacred, that must be, both the triumph, and glory of a
Christian: And I confess with joy, and acknowledge with Confidence and
Consolation, that this holy Sacrament of his most blessed Supper (wherein the
bread of his body was broken, and the wine of his blood powered out and shed,
for the sins of all mankind) is the perfect pledge, the sacred seal, the
full ransom, and the divinest mystery of our redemption in Jesus Christ: And
that as we are absolutely cleansed and washed from our original sin, by the
water of Baptism, when we enter into the State of Grace, in the Church
militant here on earth; That so by the blood of this Paschall Lamb, Christ
Jesus (in the Sacrament of his blessed Supper) our sins are wholly defaced,
and washed away and consequently, that therefore we shall enter into the state
of glory, in the Church triumphant in heaven; So that fighting under the banner
of Christ his Cross, and being spiritually armed with these two sacred
Sacraments, we may boldly believe, and confidently assure our selves, that
neither Satan, nor hell shall have power to prevail against us.

And here (Christian Reader) before I proceed farther in this my Preface to
thee; I give thee to understand, That I am not ignorant, with what a great
world of different opinions and controversies this our little world of
Christendom, is perplexed and troubled with, about this blessed Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, betwixt the Protestant, and the Papist, and especially about
Transubstantiation, the Real Presence, and communicating in one kind: In so
much that an infinite number (yea too great a number) of pens, pulpits, and
presses, are pitifully (because unprofitably) oppressed therewith: and that
Christ's blessed body in this Sacrament (without piety, reason, or charity) is
daily dilacerated and torn in pieces with these contentions, whereas his own
Coat, (or vesture) was without piece or seame; So that our silly souls may
well fear drowning, when the bark of our weak faith (masted and rigged with
curiosity) sayleth in so dangerous and turbulent an Ocean, that has neither
bottom nor shore; and which is daily and hourly tossed, and ready to be
split, and dashed in pieces, either with the wavering waves of levity and
inconstancy, or with the boisterous winds of propensd malice, or scandalous and
erroneous virulency: without looking up to the true Day Star of their hope,
Jesus Christ; or to the Sun of their salvation, God; or without endevoring or
thinking, safely to arrive, and cast anchor in the Cape of good hope; Heaven. O
that the spirit of Piety, should (without piety) thus be converted, and
transformed into the spirit of Contention. And as for me (who am the meanest,
and most unworthy of all Gods Servants and Children) bingeniously confess and
acknowledge; that in some few languages I have read so many of these
intemperate Contreversies, and untimely Contentions, that I am weary of
reading them; And yet so, That I rather pity, then malign, first their
Authors for their sakes, and then them for their Authors sakes; and my witness
is in heaven and in mine own besome, that with my heart and soul I wish, that
all these vnspirituall quarells might be composed in peace and amity, and that
these unfortunate disputes and lines might terminate in one, and the same
Center, Charity, and that their learned Authors, (having their curiosity
vanquished with the honor and glory of God) as Christian members, might be
inseparably fast knit and united to their Head, and grand Captain, Jesus
Christ: and because contention is not the way to heaven, and that God was found
in the still and quiet, and not in the whirle and tempestuous winds; As also
that where the great Lamps of learning and lights of the Church, contend and
fight about matters of faith, that there assuredly the weak ones, and the more
illiterat Christians do infinitely suffer in this quarrel: That therefore (in
the name and fear of God) they would please to take up, and embrace this
saying of the blessed Apostle Heb. 12.14
Follow peace with all men, and also holiness, without which no man shall see
God: and again to the same purpose, Ephe. 4.15
Let us fellow the truth in love, and in all things grow up in him, who is the
Head, (to wit) Jesus Christ.

To call our religion in question, is to doubt thereof, and to halt between two
opinions in matters of says is (with the Lukewarm Laodicean) to be of
neither: I know we are commanded by the Apostle, To make our election sure,
and taught by the Prophet, Hosh. 4.14.
That the people who do not understand shall fall. I likewise know, that
curiosity in matters of Faith and Religion is dangerous, and that for being
too curious in prying into the sacred secrets of God, it is a fatal Rock,
whereon some excellent judgments have suffered Shipwreck wilfully, and a
world of weak wits ignorantly. That Gods vnrevealed mysteries and purposes are
as secret, as sacred, and as occult, and abstruse, as they are divine, and that
we are positively told, and taught by the Prophet, Isa. 40.28.
That there is no searching out of Gods understanding; Wherefore as I envy no
man for his religion; so (I praise and bless my Redeemer) I am not so
wretchedly instructed in piety, as to deny mine to the world: much less to
dare to desemble it to God: It shall suffice me; that I had rather believe the
truth, then quarrel with it, and far sooner (and with more alacrity and
promptitude) to embrace and follow it, then to contend or contest against it.

As therefore we cannot believe in God, before we first know him; So we
cannot perfectly know this Sacrament of his blessed Supper, except we first
believe in it, and in the pure truth, and naked virtue and integrity thereof.
I am not therefore of the union or communion of those vncatholique Romanists,
who are carnal, and not spiritual eaters of this blessed Sacrament, and who
tie their implicit faith only to the bare letter, not to the true sense, and
to the sight, not to the figure or commemoration, which this heavenly mystery
infoldeth and contains; Who can dispense with their consciences (yea with
their souls) rather to eat their God, then to obey him; and daily to tear his
blessed body in pieces with them teach, as they do hourly with their sins;
and who rely on their own poor and wretched merits, rather then on Christ's
rich promises, or on the inestimable treasor of his blessed death and passion,
premised and prefigured unto us, in the bread and wine of his sacred Supper:
But for my part; I really and confidently believe, that Christ's own words,
Take, eat, and drink this in remembrance of me; does make this Sacrament of
his holy Supper to be a mystical, not a corporal, a spiritual, and not a
carnal sacrifice.

But to leave Controversy and contention, to those who love them, (in and
about this divine doctrine of this Sacrament of the Lords Supper) and to come
to that which more nearly and narrowly concearnes our edification to Christ,
and sanctification by Christ; I joyfully affirm, and aver, That it has been
a great part and degree of my earthly selicity, to have heard many excellent
Sermons, and seen, and read many comfortable Tracts upon this sacred Supper of
the Lord, as well on this side, as beyond the seas; and preached and written,
as well by the Samts of God abroad, as by our own English Saints and Servants
of the Lord here at hom^ who have most painful^ and industriously travell^
herein, with much tru^ glory to God, with infini^ praise and honor to the^
selves; and with a world o^ consolation and happines^ to their Christian
Auditor^ and Readers; have piously chalked them out the tru^ and safe way to
Heaven, and most divinely pointed and showed them the righteous pathway, and
glorious narrow way to God.

And now (by Gods providence and mercy) meeting very lately with a Sermon of
that heavenly nature, preached (on Easter day last) to the famous and
flourishing assembly of the Protestants in the reformned Church of Paris, (at
Charenton) upon these words of our Lord and Savior (in the blessed Sacrament
of his last Supper) This is my body: By the learned and reverend Servant of the
Lord, Monsieur John Mestrezat, the first Pastor and minister of that great, and
godly congregation, and the worthy Successor of that famous divine, Monsr. P.
Du. Moulins, the great light of his time, and Ornament of his Church. I say, I
no sooner seriously perused and religiously considered it; but finding it to
be pend in an elegant and excellent phrase, and digested and cast into a most
spiritual order a^ method; at last (after ^ short parlie with my soul^ and a
little reluctation wi^ my resolutions) God n^ only suggested, but comanded me
to teach it to spea^ English, and especially for these two reasons, and
considerations.

I. That the translation thereof, infinitely tended t^ Gods honor and glory, a^
being a perfect and a promising way to draw many souls to God, as well by their
seeing and knowing of it, as by practicing and putting into execution, that
sacred discipline, and doctrine which it contains.

II For that the Author and Preacher of it, is so worthy a Minister of Gods
word, as Saint Paul wished and counseled his beloved titus to be, (to wit)
Titus. 2.7.
That his life is a Pattern and example of good works, and of vncorrupt
doctrine, gravitie, and integrity; for to my knowledge (as also to all others,
who know him, or his endowments and abilities) he is so learned, and of so
meek, and Saint-like a conversation, that it is a disputable question, whether
his doctrine do more crown, and grace his life, or his life his doctrine: And
that thorefore it might well stand with Gods pleasure (as it does refer, and
conduce to his honor) that the reading hereof might refresh, and profit some
Christians here in England, as well as the preaching thereof has done many in
France. As also, that as (at my residence in Paris) I have taken singular
delight and comfort to have often heard him preach, so consequently that others
might do the like here, by visibly reading, or tacitly seeing, and hearing him
preach in this his Sermon, (or Divine Pourtrait) which so lively (yea so truly
at life) represents the Sacrament of the Lords blessed Supper unto us, I
being as confident of this truth, as of this presumption; That as in most of
his Sermons he excels and surpasses others, so in this; that he has
infinitely both surpassed and excelled himself.

And although (Christian Reader) I have formerly in this my Preface, expressed
and signified to thee, that this little, (yet most excellent) Sermon of his
does most sweetly show thee, the sure, the righteous way to heaven and to God,
and with a happiness (peradventure) beyond expectation, has most fully
performed, and most divinely acted thee that part, (whereunto I will refer
and commend thee in the Lord) Yet because I am an humble Servant to Christ
(both in my desires and affections) as well as I am the shadow, and Echo of my
Author in this my translation: Therefore I trust in the goodness of God, and
hope in the integrity of mine own heart, that I shall rather right thee, then
any way wrong him, in presuming poorly to gleane after his rich harvest, by
aduenturing to propose and give thee a word or two of spiritual advice and
directions of mine own, upon the receiving of this blessed Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, before I commend this Divine Pourtrait thereof to thee, thee to
it, and you both unto God.

When therefore thou resoluest Iam. 4.8.
to draw near unto God, that God may draw near unto thee, by receiving and
partaking of this his blessed Sacrament, Thou must (in the innocence of thy
heart, and the purity of thy soul) 1 Pet. 5.6.
first humble thy self under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt thee.
Iam. 4.10.
And cast thy self down before him, that he may lift thee up. 1 Cor. 15.34.
Thou must awake to live righteously, and resolve to sin no more; but
henceforth to become a new man, and a new Christian: Gal. 3.24.
for they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the lusts thereof.
Thou must set thy affections on things which are above, and not on things which
are on the Earth. Phil. 3.20.
An^ thy conversation must be i^ heaven, from whence tho^ must expect thy
Savior, eve^ the Lord Jesus Christ; Gal. 5.25,
For if thou live in the spirit, tho^ must also walk in the spirit, Psalm. 4.4,
Thou must tremble, but n^ sin, and thou must examin^ thy self upon thy bed:
Psalm. 68.1^
For God will try thee, as silver i^ tried: Thou must not deceive thy self,
Galat. 6.7.
for God will not be mocked. Thou mus^ not be hot in thy sins, an^ cold and
frozen in thy devotion and piety toward God, neither must thou seem now to
be that in thy humility and zeal, which thou art not: Because Hypocrisy
toward God, proves treachery toward our own souls: But run thou a
Contrary Course with thy heart and soul, at thy receiving of this great act of
thy Salvation, this blessed Sacrament; for be thou the death of thy sins,
and then God will assuredly be the life of thy Soul.

As for those who either unworthily receive, or carelessly defer, or wilfully
contemn the receiving of this blessed Sacrament, they do assuredly spin out
the web of their own damnation, and so being dead in the Lethargy of their
own security and profaneness, they hoodwincked ride post to Hell: Consider
and remember with thy self, Joel. 1.15.
That the day of the Lord is at hand. 2 Pet. 3.10
And that death and destruction comes from the Lord, as a Thief in the night:
That death (the grimme Pursivant, and Sergeant of the Lord) does neither spare
nor pardon any sex or age, but with his fatal Dart, and Mace (without respect
or difference) aresteth as well the King as the beggar, the Priest as the
people, and the young as the old.

We must not therefore put far from us the evil day, Amos. 6.3,4,5.
nor stretch our selves on our beds of Ivorie, nor sing to the sound of the
Violl, whereby the Prophet means all excess of riot, and understands all
degree of obscene pleasures, and beastly voluptuousness: For if we love God,
we must honor him, and if we will honor him, we must love him, Amos 6.3,4,5.
And not weary him with our sins, nor press him down with their burden,
as a Cart is with Sheafes.

Consider we again, That as there is but one way forvs to come into the
world, so that there are a thousand ways to go out of it. That we are subject
to as many diseases as sins; yea, and that diseases do as frequently, and as
insensibly steal into our bodies, as sins do into our souls; That we are
never nearer death, then when we think our selves farthest from it, and that
when we suppose our selves to be strongest in Nature, we commonly are then
weakest in Grace: As also, that a theeuish Impostume, a poor Apoplexy, a
Cutthroat Squinancy, or a fierce and furious visitation of the Pestilence,
does many times (in a moment of time) violently snatch us away from the world,
and the world from us, yea, and which is more to be admired, though no less to
be pitied, That some times, in the very twinkling of an Eye, we are choked
with a Fly, a Kernel of an apple, a crumm of bread, or a small Fish bone; Or
else have our brains dashd out with a fall, either from a Horse, or a staire.
O (therefore) how seriously ought we to ponder in our hearts, and how maturely
and religiously to consider in our souls, how extreme dangerous it is for us,
to procrastinate, and defer: and (consequently) how infinitely necessary, and
expedient it is for us frequently to receive this blessed Sacrament of the
Lords Supper.

Consider we further, Iam 4.14.
That we cannot tell what shall betyde us to morrow, for that our life is but
a Vapor, that appears for a small time, and then vanishes away. 1 Pet. 1.24
That all flesh is grass, and all the glory of man, is as the flower of
grass, and that the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away,
Heb. 13.14.
That we have no abiding City here, but must therefore seek one to come,
which is above: That as the tree falls it lies. That there is no sorrowing
for our sins in the grave, and that after our death, there is no place nor hope
left us for a second repentance: Heb. 10 31
And that it is a fear full thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

Armed in this manner with a lively faith toward God, and with periect love
and Charity toward our neighbor, and having freed and cleared those sinful
spots of our hearts, and reformed and cleansed those foul affections and
imperfections of our souls by our (unfeigned) godly repentance and sorrow; And
having now assumed and taken up a firm resolution, ever hereafter, Ephesians. 5.10.
to approve and do that which is pleasing to the Lord; And contracted a
solemn Covenant between God and our souls, Ephesians. 5.11.
never any more to have any fellowship with the works of darkness, but
reprove them, and not henceforth to dare to look back (with affection) on our
forepast, dearest and darling sins, but with infinite hatred and detestation
of them. Then, I say, let us follow the advice of the Apostle. Heb. 4.16.
Let us go up boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may receive mercy. Let
us go boldly to this table; to this precious banquet of the Lords blessed
Supper, and eat that sacred bread of his body, and drink that heavenly wine of
his blood, in a strong Confidence and Co^memoration, That Christ dyed for us on
the Altar of the Cross, and for the free reconciliation, and full
satisfaction, and redemption of our sins.

And having thus filled our hearts with sacred Joy, and replenished our souls
with spiritual and heavenly gladness, by receining of this most blessed
Sacrament, we must then have an infinite watchful eye over our hearts, and
place a most strong and religious guard over our souls, that we do not
henceforth once presume to hearken to sin, or so much as give way, or dare to
consent to look, or listen after the treacherous lures and temptations of the
world, the flesh or the devil; and so to fall back into a spiritual relapse
of sin, which is ten thousand times worse, and infinitely more dangerous and
pernicious then that of any Corporal disease whatsoever, For it is a woeful,
yea a wretched misery, which leaves us no hope of better fortunes, nor place
for worse, 2 Pet. 2.22
If with the Dog we return to our own vomit, and with the Sow, that we
again wallow in the filthy mire of our former beastly sins and
transgressions, For then our end will be far worse then our beginning, Hos
4.7.
Then God will change our glory into shame, And then we shall make our selves
guilty of the body and blood of Christ, (which without his all saving grace and
mercy) is the high way to endless perdition, and the true way to eternal
damnation. No, No, far be such ungodly and rebellious thoughts from our
hearts, and such vnspirituall treason against God from our souls; And let us
(who are the seed of Abraham by nature, and the Sons of God by Grace) Hos.
10.12
still break up the fallow ground of our hearts with a holy repentance and
sorrow for our sins, and with a constant and inviolable resolution never to
sin more; and as (therefore) we have received Christ Jesus by faith, Collos.
2.6.
So let us walk in him, These. 1.11,
and walk worthy of him, who now calls us to his Kingdom of glory, and,
which is more, who in a spiritual Contract, Hos. 2.19.
has united and married us to himself in righteousness.

In which regard and consideration, because we are so highly beloved of God,
and so infinitely honored with the name of Christians (wherein we ought more to
insult, and triumph, then in all things else which are under Christ) Let us, I
say, forsake the stinking garlic and unions of Egypt, (I mean our old
beastly sins and transgressions) and for ever henceforth smell to the sweet
Roses and Lilies of Heaven, (the delectable love, and promises of our Savior
Christ Jesus unto us) which are so sweetly watered with his precious blood, and
so odoriferously perfumed, not with fragarant odors, or costly spices of
Arabia, but with the rich myrrh of Gods sacred mercy, and with the sweet and
precious frankincense of his divine favor and loving countenande toward us.
Psalm. 134.2
Let us (I say) lift up our hands to his holy Sanctuary, and praise the Lord,
Ier. 31.3.
for that he loves us with an everlasting love, and that (by the blessed death
and passion of his Son Christ) Psalm. 68.20
he is become our God, and the God that saves us, The which, If we
religiously and constantly perform; Ier. 31.12.
Then our souls shall be as a watered Garden, and we shall know no more
sorrow: Then we shall be as the Hos. 14.6.
Dew unto Israel, and God will make us grow as Lilies, and will fasten our
roots as the trees of Lebanon; Then 2 Cor. 3.18
we shall see God face to face in his Kingdom of glory, and there (both) live
and reign with him eternally, 1 Timothy 4.8.
And then he will crown us with a Crown of righteousness which he has
reserved and laid up for his elect, Children and Servants. Of which blessed
number, I beseech thee, O God, who art our Creator and Reedeemer, (for thy
promise sake, for thy Sions sake, and for thy Son, Christ Jesus his sake) to
make us: Amen.

Thy Christian Friend, JOHN REYNOLDS.

THE DIVINE POVRTRAIT. OR, A TRVE AND lively Representation of the blessed
Sacrament of the LORDS SVPPER. With our due Preparation how to receive it
worthily. Upon these words of our Savior: This is my Body, etc.
THe Sacrament of the Eucharist.
Lords Supper, (because of its excellency) has bin, and is worthily termed a
Mystery; for this Sacrament collecteth and gathers together all that the new
Testament has of most admirable, and most excellent; and discovers unto us
the Treasures of Wisdom and Intelligence, which are hidden in Jesus Christ;
And truly, that which men and Angels themselves have most to admire in this
new Testament, are especially two things: The one is the means whereby
Salvation has been purchased, and procured to poor sinners; The other the
means whereby this Salvation being first merited, procured and given to them by
Jesus Christ, is afterward applied, and administered to them. In the first is
seen the height, and depth, the length, and breadth of Gods mercy, in sending
here below on Earth his only Son in the form of sinful flesh, and for
exposing him to the shameful death of the Cross, for sinful Creatures, and
conioyntly therewith is likewise seen, the infinite virtue of Christ's blood, to
redeem and expiate the sins of the world, and to obtain eternal life and
glory for those who were dangerously ingulphed, and almost lost in the death
and misery thereof: In the second is remarked and seen, that by the means of
faith and repentance, wretched sinners, are so united to the Son of God, as
if they were composed of that body, whereof he is the head, and they the
members; and by this Communion are made Partakers of all the graces and
benefits which Jesus Christ has deserved and purchased for them.

Now this blessed Sacrament of the Lords holy Supper, which is as visible as
his Sacred written Gospel, and Divine Testament; produces and exposes to us
th^se two efficable points and considerations. One way the bread broken, and
wine filled out, presents to our eyes the first: To wit the body of Jesus
Christ broken, and his blood shed and spilt on the Cross, for the remission of
men's sins: And on the other part, man's action in taking and eating this
bread, and drinking this wine, denotes and shows us the interior action of
the soul, who being hungry and thirsty, has justly her recourse to this body
and blood offered up to God on the Cross, and there finds her peace and
society, uniting her self by faith unto Jesus Christ, the Head spring, and
fountain of righteousness and life.

Wherefore one way to contemplate the wonders of God toward us, and the other,
our duties toward him, that hereby we may partake worthily of this blessed
Sacrament, It is needless for us to extend the eyes of our understandings any
farther, then to this very same Sacrament, which in it self will furnish us
with all things needful and requisite for the pertinent disposition of our
souls, in the participation and receiving thereof. But the excellency of this
Sacrament is fully comprised and containd, in the very words wereby our Lord,
and Savior Jesus Christ does institute it to us, which were a brief
declaration of his own use and custom; So that, as this Sacrament is a short
abridgement and epitome of the mystery of our redemption, so the words which
Jesus Christ has pronounced therein, contain the most excellent matter, and
the most necessary meditations of faith, and to give but a word for all, is the
very true Epitome and Compendium of all that which Faith ought to contemplate
and behold in Jesus Christ.

Wherefore, Since by the Grace of God, we are here this day assembled, to
prepare and dispose our selves for the celebration of the Lords holy Supper,
We have now purposely chosen for our text and meditation the words of Jesus
Christ, which he used in that Supper not to stay, or make you listen to points
of Controversy, which at the first hearing of the text you may conceive or
imagine, (which is not so requisite for this time and occasion; wherein we
have more cause to dispute, and reason, to fight against the obduratnesse of
our own hearts, against our impenitency, diffidencie, presumption, and the
like vices and sins, then against our adversaries;) But to represent and show
you what meditations and functions, the words of Jesus Christ should produce
and propagate in our souls, when we present our selves to his holy Table to
receive this Sacrament. And although (as we have formerly said) It be not now
my intent or meaning to treat of Controversies, yet notwithstanding, we are
obliged to deduce and give you the occasion, and reason of these words, and to
show the clear and pure sense thereof, thereby to cause to slide into your
hearts, and to distill into your souls, the holy doctrine and Instructions,
which they contain: To which end and purpose by Gods assistance we will
especially treat and insist on three main points and general heads. 1. The
Reason and Sense of these words. 2. The Meditations which these words
administer, and furnish us with. 3. The Duty and Functions whereunto they
oblige us.


I. Point, or General Head.
The words are; Take eat, this is my body, which is broken for you; Where first
we must know, why it was that Jesus Christ spoke of eating, and why he
proposed this Sacrament under the words of Meat, and Drink. It is not
sufficient to allege that Jesus Christ did this occasionally, that is to say,
because he was at Table, as by occasion he found himself near a well, and
demanding water to drink of the Samaritane woman; that the spoke to her of
the grace, and efficacy of the holy Ghost, under the names of water and drink.
This answer suffices, when we demand why Jesus Christ speaking to the
troops and multitude of people, before he instituted the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, proposed himself as bread descended from Heaven; and his flesh as
meat, which gave everlasting and eternal life; For it is clear and apparent
that Jesus Christ spoke so by occasion, answering those troops and multitudes
which asked him for bread, and who followed him for earthly meat, and for this
occasion he therefore assumed the names of those things, to the which he saw
them affected: But here, where it concerns and depends of the Institution of
the Sacrament, the answer drawn and derived from the occasion to be at
Table, is not sufficient; For we may demand again, why Jesus Christ placed
and sat himself at Table, to institute and celebrate this Sacrament: For
answer whereof, they allege, and propose three reasons.

I That Jesus Christ having already instituted Baptism under the similitude of
a Birth; It, was likewise very fit, and expedient, that he should institute
his holy Supper under the similitude of nutriment, or nourishment; For if the
beginning of Grace, and of spiritual life had bin proposed in the first
Sacrament, by a Birth in comparison of a temporal life: It was very requisite
and reasonable, that the advancement, and progress of Grace, should by the
same comparison, be proposed by a nourishment in the second Sacrament. As then
Jesus Christ had in Baptism given water, which is the principal of the
generation of corporal things, to be a figure of the Holy Ghost, which is the
principal, and efficient cause of the regeneration of our souls; So he
instituted the Sacrament of his blessed Supper, by those things from whence we
have and receive our temporal nourishment, to wit, Bread and Wine; thereby to
represent unto us the life, which our souls receive of his body and blood
offered on the Cross, from whence it follows, that the word of eating is no
more meant, or taken of the letter in this Sacrament, then that of Birth in the
Sacrament of Baptism, and that he who thinks or pretends to nourish himself
of Jesus Christ, by his bodily mouth, commits the same error which Nicodemus
did, who because Christ spoke to him of being borne again, John. 3.4.
Asked, if man, when he were grown old, could reenter into his mothers belly,
and be borne anew.

II. Reason. That our union with Jesus Christ, being the foundation of the
application which is made and given us by the merits of Christ (For the death
and passion of Jesus Christ is not applied or given, but to those who are one,
and the same body with him; according as it is said, that Jesus Christ is the
Savior of his body,) It is expedient that this union should be represented
unto us: But it cannot more perfectly, or lively be represented or figured to
us, then by the union of meats with our body, Since there is nothing which
nature does more strictly or efficably unite to our bodies, then meats by our
eating thereof. As then by eating, meats do become our own proper flesh and
bones, so we are taught, that by the faith and virtue of Christ's holy Spirit,
we become one with Jesus Christ, and are made flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone: And again, that as by the union of meats we receive our temporal
life, so by our union with Jesus Christ we receive our spiritual and eternal
life.

III Reason. That Jesus Christ would institute his holy Supper, at the
Sacrament of Easter, in which Sacrament the Jews were accustomed to eat a
Lamb. And indeed Jesus Christ was at the table for the celebration of Easter,
But at the Sacrament, or Passover of Easter, two things were done and
performed, first there was a Lamb eaten, and after as for a banquet (and this
is verified and recited by those who have written the Jews Liturgy) the
Father of the family took bread, to wit, unleavened bread, which was held
course and poor bread, and in giving it to every one of his family, which were
sitting at Table, said. Take, eat, this is the bread of misery, which our
fathers have eaten in Egypt, and taking the Cup, blessed it with a solemn
prayer, which done, they rendered thanks to God, for that he had brought and
established them in a Country, which abounded with all prosperity, and plenty
of Bread, and Wine, in Comparison of the misery and dearth, wherein their
Fathers had lived in Egypt, As in very deed all believed and held, That the
unleavened Bread, which God had appointed and instituted for Easter, was a true
simbole and figure, of the bread of misery and affliction, which the Israelites
had eaten during their captivity in Egypt. Now Christ Jesus, who would not
permit or suffer that Jewish Ceremonies should any longer remain in the
Christian Churches; instead of the Passover or Feast of Easter, placed and
instituted his blessed Supper, as he had formerly appointed and introduced,
Baptism instead of Circumcision, leaving in all Christian Churches, none but
these two figures and Sacraments in place and steed of all that great
multitude, which were formerly under the old Law. And according as the service
of the new Testament was spiritual, It was also convenient and fitting, those
few Ceremonies, which Christ instituted, were likewise simple and easy, as
depending and having relation to the Nature and Condition of the Evangelical
Law and service, which is wholly spiritual, and heavenly, whereunto these
Ceremonies were tied and conjoined; In which regard Jesus Christ in his Supper,
took no figure of any formerly prepared meat, procured with cost or care, or
which could not be hourly provided, and had, as was the Paschall Lamb, but
took simply Bread, and Wine, as in the same sort and manner that in the
Sacrament of Baptism, instead of the painful and grievous Circumcision, he
instituted the easy and simple aspersion of water.

Now for that Jesus Christ has substituted his blessed Supper instead of the
feast of Easter: It follows of necessity, that there must be some
resemblance and conformity of the Lords Supper to the Feast of Easter, and of
the actions of Christians in receiving the same, to the actions of the Jews in
eating of their Paschall Lamb. But as this great Feast and Passover of the
Jews, was a Sacrament and religious mystery; so, notwithstanding, it was yet
more to feed the mind then the body; wherefore we must observe and remember,
that besides, yea above the eating of the mouth, there was the eating of the
mind, which was a holy and religious meditation, whereby their souls should be
refreshed and comforted according to the quality and Condition of the Churches
of their time. That which they did eat with their Corporal mouths, was a
Lamb, some bitter herbs, and unleavened bread; And that which their minds
and heart ought to meditate on, was the grace and favor, which God had
bestowed on them, in delivering them from the miserable servitude and slavery,
wherein their Forefathers had lived in Egypt; and for bringing them to enjoy
the fruits and fatness of the Land of Canaan. So that at the same time, which
their bodies did eat; their souls likewise had their spiritall meat and
food, and tasted how good and gracious God was to them, by giving them their
deliverance. In the same manner Jesus Christ, instituting his Blessed Supper at
Easter, proposed to Christians a double form of eating; the one of the mouth,
which was that of Bread; and the other of the Soul, which was the meditation
of the great goodness and mercy of God, whereby Jesus Christ having been
crucified to death for us, has victoriously and gloriously delivered us from
all our miseries.

Now let us here remark and observe, the excellent sympathy and conformity,
whereunto the Israelites were called at their Passover, (or Feast of Easter)
to the meditation wherein our Savior Christ called Christians in his blessed
Supper, to relish the goodness of God. The Jews in their Passover,
considered that by the blood of a Lamb, their Forefathers were delivered from
the destroying and persecuting Sword of the Angel; the slayen and immolated
Lamb, being the Ransom of the first borne; And in the fraction (or breaking)
and eating of the Bread of the Eucharist: we Christians do consider, That the
body and blood of Jesus Christ, (as of an immaculate Lamb without spot or
blemish) has been offered up to God in Sacrifice, and that by this Ransom
we are delivered delivered from the destroying Sword of the Angel, (to wit)
from all the power and malice of Satan. As the Apostle tells the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 5.7.
that Christ our Paschall Lamb has been sacrificed up for us. As then the
Jews considering the Lamb, meditated and celebrated the goodness of God, for
giving deliverance to their Forefathers, by the Ransom of a Lamb: So we
Christians should feast our minds, and refresh our hearts with the meditation
of Gods singular goodness toward us, which is infinitely greater and more
admirable, in that he has delivered up his own, yea his only Son, to
death for the Ransom of we poor and wretched Sinners, wherein appears a
dilection and love, which surpasses all understanding, and wherein (faithful
Servants of the Lord,) you may apparently see the excellency of your advantage,
and benefits above those of the ancient Testament: That which they meditated in
their Passover, was a temporal deliverance; That which you meditate in the
Lords Supper, is a deliverance both spiritual and eternal: That which they
considered for a Ransom and deliverance, from the Angels Sword of persecution
and pestilence, was a simple terrestrial, and carnal Lamb; But that which
you meditate on for your Ransom in this sacred Supper, is the proper body of
Gods only Son, crucified and slayen for your Sins. The Joy and refreshing
which the Israelites conceived in their hearts and minds by their meditation,
was their delight and contentment to have been delivered from Pharaoh, and to
be brought into the promised Land of Canaan: But what is this in Comparison of
the Joy and refreshing, which our souls conceive, to see, and contemplate the
unspeakable goodness of God, whereby you are delivered from eternal death,
and conducted and brought into a spiritual, and heavenly Canaan; O therefore
if those of the Church of Rome, would consider, how great, how excellent, and
how inexpressable, this feeding and refreshing of our souls is by this
meditation; They would not then say, that we return empty from this blessed
Sacrament; It is then the Church of Christ, which has the true eating and true
refreshing and sacietie thereof, and there only it is, where true peace and
felicity is to be found; And therefore it is, that the word of God teaches us
concerning the ancient Israelites, That what content soever they received by
their Passover, there yet remained in their memories a degree of slavery and
servitude, Romans 1.15.
whereof they were still afraid, and the Reason of it was, that the curse of
the Law, still echoed and resounded aloud in their ears; and that the promises
of remission and pardon for their sins, were still concealed and obscured
from them, and the death of Christ crucified for the transgressions of men, was
hidden, and over-clouded from them by the veil of Ceremonies. Whereas here (O
ye faithful Christians,) Jesus Christ calls you to the public Meditation
and Contemplation of his death, and of the pardon and remission of your sins,
to refresh and fill your souls with peace and felicity; And for which cause
and reason he says, in Saint John, Ioh. 6.35.
Whosoever comes unto me, shall not be hungry, and those who trust in me,
shall not be dry, or thirsty.

And, therefore Jesus Christ taking bread, said, Take, eat, and then he added,
thereunto, This is my Body; So that which he came from taking of, and which he
held, (to wit) Bread, he said it was his body, A thing which he then spoke
most easily, and clearly; For as there was not the smalest Child among the
Jews, but understood, when the Father of his family said, (Take eat, this is
the Bread of misery, which our Forefathers, did eat in Egypt) that this Bread
was so named and called by the Father of the family, because it was a
Commemoration of the bread of affliction, which their Forefathers had eaten in
Egypt, according as it is said in Deutr. Deuteronomy. 16.3.
Under the Law seven days thou shall eat unleavened Bread, which is Bread of
affliction, because thou did hastily depart and fly away from Egypt:) So
there was none so ignorant, or simple, but understood well, That Christ said
the bread was his body, because he was the Co^memoration thereof, and as the
unleavened bread had been yearly or dayned for a Memorial, (or Comemoration)
of the miseries, which the Israelites had suffered in Egypt: That Jesus Christ
established Bread to remain till the end of the world, the sign and
Commemoration of his Body offered on the Cross: which again was clear and
evident, because they named the Lamb, which they did eat, Pasque, an Hebrew
word which signifies Passover, and which every one well understood in that
Language; Where will thou (said the Apostles to Jesus Christ) Mat. 26.17.
that we prepare for thee, the Passover. The Lamb which they eat was so
called, because it was instituted in Memory and Co^memoration of the Passing
over of the destroying Angel from above, and beyond the Israelites houses. And
in this same sense they easily understood, that the Bread was called the body
of Jesus Christ, because it was purposely instituted to be the Remembrance or
Commemoration of his body offered on the Cross, for the sins of the world:
Now although this were sufficiently clear and palpable of it self, yet
observe here the singular bounty, goodness, and wisdom of Jesus Christ, to
repel, and prevent the error which he foresaw; In that he conjoined and
added thereunto (as Saint Luke and Saint Paul affirm it, in express terms;
Do this in remembrance of me; Is there not here then, just cause to admire and
wonder, that after all this, That Bread should be understood by
transubstantiation, to be the body of Jesus Christ, and far different and
otherwise then by Remembrance, or Commemoration; From whence it necessarily
results and follows; That in the Church of Rome, a morsel of Bread, is adored
for the body, and person of Jesus Christ, The Sacrament and Remembrance having
been confounded with that, whereof it is the Sacrament and commemoration.

So then Christ Jesus said, This is my Body, This is my blood, and yet not
simply so, but according as Saint Luke tells us; Luc. 22.19.
Which is given for us, and as Saint Paul affirms, Which is broken for you, So
then Christ representing us his body, understands thereby, that he has been
delivered up for us to the Cross, that is to say, that he has been broken,
and sacrificed, And likewise for the Cup, he said, This is my Blood which is
shed for you, speaking in terms of the time present, and not only for regard
of what he knew should befall him the very next day, in respect of the truth
thereof; But also because he gave and rendered in a present figure, that which
should be done on the Cross, the fraction of Bread being a true, and lively
representation of the fraction of his body, as a canon of the Church of Rome,
acknowledges it in these words. De consecr. Did. 2. Canon Hoc est quod.
The immomolation of the flesh of Christ, which is done by the Priests hands,
is termed the Passion, Death, and crucifiing of Jesus Christ, but not by the
truth of the thing but by the signification of the mystery thereof. From
whence, does clearly result and stream forth unto us two especial things; The
one, that in the same manner, that the breaking (or fraction) of bread in the
Lords Supper is the breaking of Christ's body. So in the same manner the Bread
is the body of Christ: but the breaking of bread in the Lords Supper, is the
fraction and crucifying of Christ's body, not by the truth or realitie of the
thing, but by the signification of the mystery, And so likewise, the bread is
the body of Jesus Christ, yet not by the truth or realitie of the thing, but by
the signification of the mystery.

The other branch or point, which results hereof is, That this holy Supper is
the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, not by the truth of the thing, but by the
signification of the mystery, and that it is not a sacrifice, but a
remembrance and commemoration of a Sacrifice; As indeed Christ offered up no
oblation to God, but brake the bread and gave it to his Disciples.

From whence (beloved in the Lord) you plainly see that, to esteem and hold
the Lords Supper, to be a real sacrifice, wherein Jesus Christ has offered
himself up a propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the living and the dead,
Is a humane Invention; opposite and contrary to the Institution of Jesus
Christ, and to the use of this Sacrament, which was ordained to show forth and
proclaim his death and passion: And likewise it is contrary to the only
oblation of the cross; the Apostle Saint Paul affirming to the Hebrews, Heb.
10.10
That we are sanctified by the oblation once made, of the body of Jesus Christ,
and therefore that there is no more oblation for sin.

II Point, or general Head.
Thus much for the sense of Christ's words. And now faithful Christians, (to
whom God has revealed and made known the truth, and purity of these high and
sacred mysteries) come, and meditate on these words of the Son of God, all
which Heaven has of most admirable sweet, and delitious; And you (godly
souls) who justly hunger and thirst for this grace and mercy of the Lord; come
you to feed and refresh your selves with the fat of the house of God, and to
quench your thirst in the River of his delights: But first we here require two
things of you, (that is to say) some Meditations, and then some Functions of
the heart proceeding from these meditations, and both which on these words,
This is my Body, which is broken for you, This is my Blood, which is shed for
you.

This Meditation has three Points and Objects. I. The body and blood of Jesus
Christ, in these words. My Body, My Blood. II. The Oblation of this Body, and
of this Blood, in these words, Which is broken, which is shed. III. The Fruit
of this oblation, intimated in these words, Broken For You, Shed For Many, for
the remission of Sins.


In the first of these, when you hear Jesus Christ proposing his body, and his
blood, the meditation then required of you is, That it being so, that we have
so exposed our selves to the wrath, and so incurred the indignation and revenge
of God, by reason of our sins, and transgressions, that the Justice of God
must be satisfied, and consequently, that either we must bear Gods wrath and
malediction, and so for ever stoop and faint under the heavy burden thereof,
or else that some other thing must be substituted in our steed and place, to
satisfy the Justice of God; But nothing could be found out in the whole world
to be appointed in the place of man, and worthily to satisfy for his sins.
From the beginning of the world, beasts have been offered, and these
Sacrifices of beasts by the sense and feeling, which our conscience has ever
given to men of a sufficient and valable satisfaction for sin, have been
practiced in all the whole world: In the old Law, a man came and put his hands
on the head of the beast which was to be sacrificed, as putting her in his
place and room, with an intent and hope to discharge and transfer his sins
on her: but contrariwise natural reason shows, that that could no way appease
or satisfy God; For Gods Justice being (of it self) most perfect, can no way
content it self, with a payment or satisfaction, so unequal and imperfect to
the Debt, because all the beasts of the Earth, placed and numbered up together,
are not equivalent or to be compared in value to one man; Here then, O here,
is the Sacrifice (or Victime) after which (without knowing it) all the world
sighed and respired, in offering these Sacrifices; and this is the Sacrifice,
which all others ought to reverence and look on; When therefore you hear
Jesus Christ saying, This is my Body, you must figure, and represent him to
you, as proffering and offering up to God his Father, these admirable words and
speeches, recited by the Apostle to the Hebrews; Hebr. 10.
Thou will have no Sacrifice, or offering, but thou have given and appropriated
me a body, Thou have taken no delight in Sacrifices, And then I have said,
here I am, I come; And in the beginning of the Book, it is written of me;
that I do thy will O God.

So here Christ Jesus, coming to present himself in the place and steed of all
these Sacrifices, which had been offered up under the Law, and which were
daily reiterated and continued, because, as the same Apostle said in the same
Chapter, Ibid. v. 4.
That it was impossible, that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take and wash
away Sins; And therefore (my beloved brethren) observe here, the readiness,
and favor, which the providence of God makes and provides for you, of a most
convenient and requisite Victime and Oblation. When Isaac was to be
sacrificed, there was a Ram found tied by the Horns to a bush, to be
sacrificed for him; But here, O Sinners, behold in these words, This is my
body, that great Sacrifice and Oblation, which the wonders of Gods divine
providence have addressed, and sent you: and rejoice that here is the true
Sacrifice (or Victime) which comes to assist and defend you from Gods heavy
wrath and Indignation.

But Jesus Christ, as being simply God, could not present himself in a
Sacrifice for men, for there wanted a humane Sacrifice, because Sin had been
committed, and perpetrated by man, wherefore our Savior Christ tells you, This
is my body, He says not, This I am, but, This is my body, thereby purposely to
conduct and lead you to the mystery of his Incarnation, whereby he is
descended from Heaven, has taken and assumed a carnal body, and is made man
for us, so that conioyntly with these words, you at one time see your great
Sacrifice taken from Earth, and yet descended from heaven; Taken from Earth,
for it is a body, descended from Heaven, for it is, My Body, said our Savior
Jesus Christ; (that is to say) of me true God with the Father; Here therefore
is the wonder which you ought to meditate on, That nothing being found in all
the world, no nor in the infinite multitude and infinity of all Gods Creatures,
which could be capable to be our ransom toward God; Then lo: Jesus Christ
himself, the only Son of God, (descended so low) as he made himself man,
and a creature, to the end, that he might be offered up a Sacrifice for us:
He whose Essence was wholly simple, and spiritual, assumed a body, and being
material, and carnal. He who was invisible to our eyes, has made himself
conspicuous, and visible to us, permitted and suffered himself, to be beaten,
tied and nailed to a Cross, yea to be run through with a Spear, and in a
word, capable to be sacrificed. And here you may know and find, why Jesus
Christ, holding the Bread, said not, This is my Divinity, but, This is my Body,
(That is to say) because not his Divine, but only his Humane nature could be
offered up in Sacrifice: The Divinity is well considered, but still as
offering, not as offered, according as the Apostle said to the Hebrews, Heb.
9.14.
That Jesus Christ offered himself up to God, by the eternal Spirit; By which
means, It is not the eternal Spirit which has been offered (For that which
was offered was to die) But the body has been offered by the eternal Spirit.

And here arises unto us another wonder (to wit) that although Christ's humane
nature be offered, nevertheless it is of as great a price and value, as if his
Divinity it self could have been offered, and the reason hereof is, because
this his humane nature composed not, but one, and the same person with the
divine nature. For this body which was crucified, was personally united to the
eternal Spirit; and this miracle or wonder, is given you for your meditation,
in that Jesus Christ holding the bread, said not indefinitly, This is my Body,
which is broken for you, but This is my Body, as if he said, This is a humane
Body, and yet mine; to the end we might know that this vivifying, or quickening
flesh, that is to say, to be a worthy Ransom for the life of the world. Since
it is the flesh of a man, who is both God and man: In the Leviticall Law Moses
sprinkling of blood, when God contracted Alliance with the Israelites, said,
This is the blood of the Testament, which God has ordained for you; But this
blood was the blood of Beasts; Now here in the Sacrament of his Supper is
proposed and presented to you the blood of God, according as the Apostle says
in the Acts, Acts 20.28.
That God has purchased the Church, by his blood. And behold my brethren to
what a degree of glory of the Gospel caries you in the New Testament above his
faithful Servants of the old: wherefore here revoke to your mind and memory,
these passages of Paul's Epistle to the Galathians, Gal. 4.4,5
God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, and made under the Law, And writing
to the Romans, again likewise said, Romans 8.3.
God sending his own Son in the Similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin,
condemned sin in the flesh.

And before were pass to the Meditation of the ensuing words, I pray observe
here again with me in these, This is my Body, the clear refutation of all
which Superstition, and humane Inventions propose of the intercession and
meditation of Saints, and of their suffering for the expiation of the ^emporall
pain of our sins; which pretended sufferings and satisfactions are partly
the treasure, whereof the Bishop of Rome, draws his Indulgences, and Pardons,
which makes, that the Saints are a piece and part of our Sacrifice; But Jesus
Christ has designed it, and the price of our deliverance in these words, This
is my Body, for he said not, This is a part of my Body, and part of the bodies
of Saints, who shall suffer for you; If our Adversaries consider, that the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper presents and exposes to our eyes, our Price,
and Ransom (as some of the Ancients for that cause and reason term the
Sacrament, our Price, and if they likewise consider, that this Sacrament
proposes not to us the bodies of men, but the body of Christ, they shall find
that there is no other price for our Ransom and Redemption, but this body. And
although these people which say, That this Sacrament of the Lords Supper is the
Abridgement of the mysteries of the Gospel, do they accuse it of Imperfection
not to have proposed or given it all our Price and Ransom, And those who daily
make and create the body of Christ, and who pretend daily to offer him,
wherefore do they not content themselves. But here let them understand, and
hearken to the thundering words of the Apostle writing to the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 1.13.
Is Christ divided, has Paul been crucified for you? I affirm that the Bread
of this holy Supper shows us also a Communion of the faithful with Jesus
Christ; for as the same Apostle writes again to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10.17.
We who are many, are one Bread and one Body; But it is a Communion with Jesus
Christ, To receive, and not To give; To receive (I say) of Jesus Christ the
expiation and remission of our sins, and not to give or confer it to other
men's merits. A Communion to be freed, bought, and vivified (or quickened) by
him, and not to free, buy, and vivifie with him.

The second Object of our Meditation, is the Oblation of this body in these
words, Which is broken; This is my Blood which is shed. In the words, This is
my body; you have seen Christ Jesus made capable to be this Sacrifice, but in
these latter words, you see him actually to be a Sacrifice, and here is given,
you, to meditate and contemplate first the Immolation, and then the Oblation of
the Sacrifice; The Sacrifice is a sovereign honor given and yielded to God,
which consists in an extreme vnmaking and dissolution of the Creature, which
dissolution and vnmaking, is not nor cannot be extreme, except by the
destroying of the thing which is offered; wherefore all things (heretofore)
which were offered up in Sacrifice to God, were first to be destroyed; For it
is one thing to be offered simply, and another thing to be offered up in
Sacrifice; As for example, The Sacrificators, the Levites and the first borne
of Israel, were offered up to God, But how not offered up in Sacrifice, because
they still remained living: All things then offered in Sacrifice ought firs to
be destroyed, if they were liquid, or wet things without life, they were to be
shed; If solid things, without life, they were to be burnt; Or if living
things, they were to be killed, and for witness and Testimony of a true
death, there must needs be an effusion of the Beasts blood, because blood
being the seat of the Beasts life, the separation of blood from the flesh,
showed and figured the separation of life from the body, and consequently an
entire death; And in the expiatory, and propitiatory Sacrifices this was the
more requisite and needful, for that these Sacrifices were satisfactions for
typical and carnal sin; But the absolute satisfaction and expiation for
sin, must consist in the death and destruction of the thing offered; because
the Apostle peremptorily and truly tells us, Romans 6.33
That the wages of Sin, is death, from whence you first see wherefore it was,
that of necessity Christ must die, For the wages of Sin being death, it must
needs follow, that he who placed himself an Undertaker for Sinners, must
undergo the punishment ordained for Sin: Secondly from hence you likewise
see, wherefore it was, that the blood of Christ was shed in his death, and
separated from his body; to wit thereby to express and show the truth of the
death, and expiation of Sin, as the Apostle to the Hebrews proves by legal
figures, that Jesus Christ must die, and shed his blood in Sacrifice, because
says he, Heb. 9.22.
That according to the Law, all things are purged and purified by blood, and
without the effusion of blood there is no remission. So Jesus Christ, by
shedding his blood, has accomplished the figures of the Law, and given us this
Consolation, that the Ransom and expiation of our sins is entire and
perfect. And hence (as it were in passing) you learn two things.

I. That it is impossible, that there is any propitiatory Sacrifice without
blood, and consequently impossible, that the Mass, wherein there is neither
death, nor effusion of blood, be a propitiatory Sacrifice for sins, as our
Adversaries call it.

II In the Lords Supper, It was needful that the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, was represented to us distinctly and severally, for that there were two
signs, (to wit) The Bread broken, and the Wine filld out, which was the Reason
why Jesus Christ did not only say, This is my Body broken, but also takes the
Cup and said, This is my blood which is shed, Because without effusion of blood
there could be no remission of sin, From whence it follows, That the taking
and cutting away of the Cup in the Lords Supper (which shows the blood of
Christ to be separated from his body) takes away from the mystery of that
sacred Supper, it is plenitude, power, and perfection, depriving it of the sign
of the Condition requisite for the expiation of sins, (to wit) the effusion
of blood.

But this is told you but cursorily, and as it were in passing: Now the chief
and principal Meditation, which we require of you in this object, is three
things. I. Of Christ's great debasing, and making himself as it were nothing.
II. Of the horror, and grievousnesse of sin, as the direct opposition of the
perfect sanctity, and absolute holiness of God. III. Of the immense love and
charity of Jesus Christ toward us.


I speak first of Christ's great debasing, and esteeming himself nothing; For,
(if you formerly understand and remember) Jesus Christ abased himself so low,
as to cloth and incorporate himself with our wretched nature, and to make
himself after the simple semblance of men. But here behold him now, he makes
himself less then man, as he says in the Psalms, Psalm. 22.6.
I am a Worm, and no man, the shame of men, and the contempt of the People:
Behold how he makes himself a Sacrifice, and assumes and takes on him the
condition of Beasts, which were slain in the ancient Law for the sins of men;
O Lord Jesus, who can sufficiently comprehend the depth of this thy extreme
humiliation, and making thy self as nothing, who from the heavenly Throne of
thy glory, have been placed, in form of a Victime, upon the Altar of the
Cross; And that thou would die, yea die a shameful and most ignominious
death for us, according as it is written, Gal. 3.13.
Cursed is every one, that hangs on a Tree.

From this, pass we on to the second thing; which is, the Consideration, of
the horror, grieveousnesse, yea and the odiousness of Sin: For I pray you,
how wicked was it in it self, and how execrable in the eyes of God, that the
only Son of God must needs suffer such grievous pains and torments; The Law
did well show the odiousnes and abomination of Sin, by the Sacrifices, and
Aspersions of blood, which it required for the Expiation thereof; But all that
is nothing in Comparison of this which the Gospel shows us, because these
Sacrifices and Aspersions of the Law were of Beasts, and of the blood of
Beasts, but here it is the only begotten Son of God, who has been given to
death, to expiate sin, and to cover the foulness and enormitie thereof.
Behold then, O Sinners, with astonishment, by the greatness of the
satisfaction; the horror of this sin, and thereby to learn to hate and
detest it. Nature, to show how grievous and odious sin was, since the fall of
Adam, became harried over with thorns and briars, and changed many of her
plants into poisons; The air grew thick with storms, and was many times
infected, to punish sinners; The Sea impetuously mounted her angry waves and
surges, and caused infinite shipwrackes; Adams own person, (and his
posterity,) strayed from his temper, and by sickness and diseases had drawn
the Empire of death into his own entrails and bowels; man's wisdom was
obscured with ignorance, and tormented with irregular and extravagant passions;
and all this befell and happened to the world for sin. But now behold, Heaven,
(who against sin, and to the end, and intent to expiate and destroy it,)
delivers up to death, that which it had and held dearest, and to reproach, and
shame, that which it held and possessed of most glorious For here God the Father
of heaven exposes his sweetest delights to the bitter torments of the Cross.
Here Christ Jesus, his only beloved Son, who yields and abandoneth his
life, and who to destroy sin, (so extremely he hates it) does voluntarily
and willingly destroy himself. And here considering, and meditating further,
how odious sin is to God, let us admire how perfect Gods justice and
sanctity is, and let us say, that here it is, where this sanctity manifests
it self at full in her brightest Orient; It is in this mystery, that the
Seraphims cry, Holy, holy, holy, the Eternal of Armies: for if he show forth
his righteousness and sanctity here below, in punishing and ruining some of his
creatures by his judgments; how much more does he manifest it by the death of
his only beloved Son, to whom sin presented it self to be punished.

Come we now to the third mediation which we require of you, wherein we may
behold the exreame debasing and annihilating of the Son of God; to see the
immense Love, both of this heavenly Father and Son toward us, for that the
Son has been so grievously handled and tormented for us. What Abyssus of
affection and mercy is this toward man? Is there any mind or spirit, though
angelical, which cannot be ravished and swallowed up heereat? Profane
Infidells and Atheists, who are incredulous of the mysteries of the Christian
faith. Know ye, that it shows you the highest charity, and perfectest
sanctity, that the heart, or wit of man can possibly comprehe^d or conceive.
And of God be a sovereign sanctity, an immense charity and goodness, (as
his being cannot be but all perfection) know that the new Testament shows
God to men, and reveals them this inexpressible and incomprehensible sanctity
and charity, which is the same that Saint John said, 1. John 4.16.
God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God and God in him
etc. That God is Charity, and in this is manifested his Charity, For that God
has sent his only Son into the world; to the end that we live by him, and
in this again is Charity, not that we have loved God, but because he has
loved us, and has given his Son to be a propitiation for our sins. And
here it is, that the new Testament, has many great advantages and singular
benefits, and prerogatives above the old one of the Law, Seeing that herein God
fully discovers the rich Treasures of his goodness. In nature we see GODS
goodness toward man, for that for a time he entertaines and maintains
himself in life by the death of Beasts, whose flesh serves him for food and
sustenance; But here God gives and purchases to man, an eternal life by the
death of his only Son, Here he gives to man not his Creatures, as in the
creation, but his only well beloved Son himself; yea and to sinful man.
Wherefore it is, that the Apostle affirms to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 3.18.
We all behold, as in a Mirror, the glory of the Lord with open face, and
Jesus Christ tells us, That none having ever seen God, it is he that has
revealed him to us. Faithful brethren in the Lord, open the eyes of your
understandings, and see how God manifests himself, and how he makes himself
palpably visible to you, by this immense Love and Charity, which this Sacrament
of the Eucharist presents and represents to your eyes. If then on these
words, This is my Body, you have meditated on the Love, and Charity of Christ
humbling himself so low, as to cloth himself with our weak body and nature,
then meditate on this greater degree of Charity, which has caused him to
assume the form of a serva^t for us (which was already exceeding much, to him
who was the Creator, and the King of glory) but also to expose himself to
death in this form and shape of a Servant, yea to the shameful death of the
Cross, which is the very meditation of the Apostle to the Philippians, Philip.
2.6,7,8.
Jesus Christ, being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to make
himself equal to God: But he made himself of no Reputation; and took on him
the form of a Servant, and was made like unto man, and found in the shape of a
man, who humbled himself, and became came obedient to death, yea to the death
of the Cross; And the same Apostle, ravished in this meditation, says in
another place, Romans 8.32
Who spared not his own Son for us, but gave him for us all to death; He
says not simply, that he has given him, but that he has not spared him, as
if he should have said, he made no difficulty, to expose him for us to
extreme pain and torments. A degree of Charity, which the Angels themselves
cannot sufficiently comprehe^d, and therefore the Apostle postle requires in
us, the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, to wit, that the eyes of our
understanding be so illuminated, Ephesians. 3.13.
that we may know, what is the length, breadth, height, and depth of this love
of God toward us.

In a word, upon this object, let us briefly collect and consider against our
adversaries of the Church of Rome, That in this holy Supper and Communion, the
body of Jesus Christ is not simply proposed, as understanding it to be a body;
nor the blood, as taking it for blood, but the body, as understanding it to be
broken, and the blood, as taking it to be spilt; Because in that consists
all the merit of our salvation, and all the cause of our life. From whence it
follows, That the action wherewith we receive the body and blood of Christ,
cannot choose but be spiritual, to wit, an action of the soul, and no way of
the body, because the body cannot be taken as understood, broken; nor the
blood, as meant shed, except by Faith: For those forepast, and betided things
on the cross, that is to say, the breaking of the body, and the effusion of
blood, cannot be given or presented to the soul, but by the meditation of
Faith.

The third object of our Meditation, is the fruit and benefit of this
obligation which were received by Christ's body and blood, in these words,
Broken for you, Shed for many, for the remission of sins. And here two
considerations again present them to us: I. Of the persons, for whom Jesus
Christ is offered. II. The profit and benefit which it brings them.


Of the persons; understanding, that he offers himself for wretched and
sinful creatures, who in regard of his excellent being, are nothing but dust
and ashes: and as it were formed but yesterday; but, which is more, for
creatures infected with sin, guilty of rebellion against him, and professed
enemies of his divine majesty, both in their thoughts, and wicked works and
actions, which the consideration of the Apostle to the Colossians thus
expresses; Col. 1.21.
You which in times past, were strangers and enemies; because your minds were
set in evil works; he now also has reconciled, in that body of his flesh, to
make you holy, and unblameable, and without fault in his sight. And also
writing to the Romans, says, Romans 5.6,7,8.
For Christ, when we were yet of no strength, at his time, dyed for the
ungodly, adding again farther, doutblesse one will scarce die for a righteous
man, but yet for a good man, but God sets out his love to us, seeing that
whiles we were yet Sinners, Christ died for.

The other consideration, proceeds from the profit and benefit which it brings
us; and Jesus Christ defines it, when he says, that it is for the remission of
sins: And this is the profit and benefit, which to express the Prophets
aleage, that our sins have been thrown into the bottom of the Sea, and
that God remembers them no more, and that as far distant, as the East is
from the West, so far from him, the Lord has cast away our sins, and the
figures under the Law, to wit, that of the Goat Hazazel, teaching, that our
sins have been carried into a desert and uninhabitable Country, never to
return more in Gods sight and Presence; Which believing, we see all evils, as
they are pains and torments, to have lost their being in the faithful
righteous man; yea and that death it self is swollen up in victory, and the
Law with his curses, (which were as a contrary obligation) is quite rased out
and defaced by the blood of the Son of God, clear abolished, cancelled, and
fastened to his Cross, as the Apostle teaches to the Colosians: Col. 2.14.
Likewise Satan, who performed nothing, but as the Executioner of Gods justice
against Sinners, by this alone death found all his power to be vanquished and
overthrowen, as the Apostle shows us in the same Chapter, of the same Epistle
to the Colossians, in these words, Col. 2.15.
Christ has spoiled the Principalities and Powers, and has made a show of
them openly, and has triumphed over them on the Cross: But besides, that our
enemies and afflictions are taken away and defaced, by this oblation of Jesus
Christ, so likewise all sorts of profits and benefits are put in place thereof;
as many promses as there are; they are so many, Yeas and Amens in Christ Jesus;
life is given, which is a new, spiritual, and divine life by regeneration; and
the new heavenly Sanctuary is opened unto us, Heb. 10.19
for there we have leave and liberty to enter by the blood of Christ: and
therefore it is that the earthly veil of the Templerent in pieces at his
death. The Kingdom of God is given unto us, and we are made children, and
heirs, to possess and enjoy all the goods and treasures of God, as the
Apostle says, Gal. 4.6,7.
That Jesus Christ having been made subject under the Law, has redeemed us
from the Law, to the end, that we should receive the adoption of children: and
that if we are children, we are also heirs of God by Christ, John 17.11.
yea God himself is given to us in his Son, to the end, that we be in him,
and he in us, 1. Cor. 1.
and likewise that one day, he be all things in all.

III. Point, or general Head.
These are the Meditations, which the words of Jesus Christ in his Supper
requires of us; And now come we to see the acts and functions, which these
Meditations ought to produce in our hearts, the which likewise result and
descend from these words of Jesus Christ: These acts and functions are five,
to wit, I. The feeling of our misery, and a godly sorrow for having sinned. II.
The belief and assurance of the remission of our sins. III. The
sanctification of the soul, and particularly, of Love and Charity toward our
neighbor. IIII. Our consolation, and patience in afflictions. V. Our hope of
heavenly felicity.


I begin with the feeling of our misery, and a religious or godly sorrow for
having sinned; that is to say, by considering by the breaking of Christ's body,
which is proposed and intimated to us in the breaking of bread, the pain and
torments which we have deserved. For my beloved Brethren, it is for us, that
Christ's body has been broken with cruel torments on the Cross; and therefore
this sad and woeful spectacle does both show and teach us, that in requital
thereof, we have deserved to be bruised and broken with torments for ever.
Christ's sufferings, and groans under the burden of Gods wrath, is a pourtrait
(or map) of that misery, wherein we all should have perished for our sins.
Behold then, O sinner, the terrible indignation and curse of God, which
violently was coming to alight and fall upon thee. Thou who art insensible of
thy misery, here behold and see thy condition in the estate of Jesus Christ on
the Cross. See, I say, thy torments and misery; and when thou see this Bread
in the Sacrament of his Supper, broken, say: O Lord, here I am, who have
deserved to be bruised, and broken with the rod of thine anger. It was I who
had sinned, and therefore merited to support and suffer thy fierce indignation,
and from thence there must be engendered and borne in our hearts, a holy and a
religious sorrow, for that we have bin the efficient and real cause, that the
Son of God has suffered all these undeserved tortures and afflictions. See
thou, (O Christian) the body of Jesus Christ broken on the Cross? It is
therefore requisite, that thou break thy heart with sorrow, for that thy
sins have produced all this evil, and caused all this calamity. Therefore
behold the drops of blood trickling down the face of Jesus Christ. Thou who
drinkest and suppest up sin as water, lo, thy sins are the sharp thorns,
which have pricked and pierced his head. Thee, to whom thy sin is so sweet
and delicious, behold, they are thy sins which have been the nails and
spear, that have transpierced thy blessed body. Thou who esteemest thy sins to
be but some indifferent or trivial thing; what deep passions of sorrow should
thy heart and soul conceive, to have been the cause of the death of thy
friend, thy brother, thy father, or thy child, by any action or accident of
thine own. But how much more grief and sorrow then ought thou hereto
retain and feel at the remembrance of thy sins, which have caused thy Creator
to be murdered, and thy God to be crucified to death.

The II. Act of our hearts, which ought to stream forth and arise from that
which the Lords blessed Supper exposes and presents to our eyes, is the
faith and assurance of the remission of sins. Thou say to thy self, O
Sinner, I have offended God, and broken and transgressed his Law, therefore who
shall ransom and redeem me from his furious wrath and indignation: But be
cheerful and courageous, for lo here is thy ransom, which Jesus Christ
brings and denounces unto thee in these words, This is my Body which has
been broken for thee, This is my Blood that has been shed for thee, and will thou therefore doubt, when the only Son of God is he who has satisfied for
thee, and that it is not a silly man, but the eternal himself, who is both
thy righteousness and thy Redeemer; say then with the Apostle, who is he, that
will condemn, since it is Christ that is dead: do thou doubt of Gods love,
where his own Son, the only beloved of his Father, is the propitiation for
thy sins. If thou propose to thy self, thine own merits, or the sufferings
of any other creatures or persons, thou should fear, that God will not
receive them for satisfaction, because they are too base money, and of a false
and counterfeit metal, to be approved and received of God: But we must
present him, the body of his only Son broken, and his blood shed, and then
he cannot, but approve thereof as a full and valable satisfaction. God
heretofore knew the blood of the Lamb, upon the posts of the doors, when he
sent his destroying Angel against Egypt; and will he not then know the blood
of his own Son, as of a Lamb without spot, or blemish, whereby you have
besprinckled your consciences. Be therefore bold, and confident, and say with
the Apostle to the Hebrews, Hebr. 10.21,22.
Seeing we have a high Priest, which is over the house of God, let us draw
near, with a true heart in assurance of faith, our hearts being pure, from an
evil conscience, that so we may obtain mercy and find grace in due time: And
here again O faithful Christian, two reasons of thy assurance and confidence
drawn from this Sacrament. The one is, that as in Baptism, it is to thy
self, to thine own body, that the water is applied; that thou may thereby
know, that thou art washed in the blood of Jesus Christ, so in this Sacrament of
his blessed Supper; it is to thee that he gives his body, yea it is into thine
own hands, which he commits and puts this Sacrament, to assure thee, that it
is only to thee, which he gives himself, and not to others whom thou may
hold and esteem to be better then thy self: In which regard, for that this
Sacrament is given to thee, and put into thine own hands, it is because thou
must esteem, and believe, that Christ's body is thine, as a Ransom which is
given into thy hands to present unto God: wherefore doubt not, but it properly
belongs and appertains unto thee, for otherwise thou do annull and
annihilate the Sacrament which Christ gives thee, and thou doubtest that he be
true in giving it to thee.

The other reason is, That although there he a great distance betwixt Jesus
Christ and us, as betwixt the Saint of Saints, and poor and miserable sinners;
nevertheless we learn by this Sacrament, that we are incorporated with
Christ, and into Christ, and that we become his members, his blood, and his
bone, as flesh which we eat becomes our blood and bone. But to the members
and body, rightly belongs the power of the Head, which cannot be denied her.
Thou may then infer, O Christian, that the righteousness of Jesus Christ
is thine own, and that it properly belongs and appertains to thee.

The third Act of our hearts in the participation of this Sacrament, is the
sanctifying of our souls, by the love of God, and the denying and renouncing
of our selves, the which is performed by three things that are seen, and
appear in this Sacrament, that is to say: I. The great Charity, and love of
God toward us. II. The foulenes and odiousnes of sin. III. The example of
our own duty.


I say first, The great charity and love of God: For (my brethren) should not
this infinite love of God, in exposing and delivering up his only begotten Son
to death for us, replenish, inspire, and fill us with a reciprocal love
toward him; should we have such stupid and senseles hearts, that the Lords
great compassion toward us, should nothing move, or stir them up; and such
frozen souls, that the burning charity of Jesus Christ, dying for us, could
not heat and inflame them in his love. Should we wilfully offend so great a
goodness in him, when we see, he has spared nothing for us? Or is it possible,
that so great (yea so extreme) an ingratitude, has possessed our hearts, and
seized our souls, as to displease God, who has loved us so infinitely, as not
to spare his only Son for us.

II. I speak of the foulness and odiousness of sin, which appears in this
Cross: for shall we not hate sin, which is so displeasing, and odious to the
eyes of our heavenly Father, that he would redeem and expiate it with the
death of his Son. Of a truth, if we repute and esteem not Christ's blood, for a
light and trivial thing, needs must sin be very odious and grievous unto us;
and then needs must Jesus Christ crucified, be unto us the powerful motive to
crucify the flesh with the lusts thereof, and to mortify in us all, that
which is of the old man, and of sin.

III. We have the example of our duty. In this Sacrament (O Christian) thou
see the sacrifice of the Son of God, which is a lesson to teach thee to
present thy body unto God, as a living, holy and pleasing sacrifice. The
pattern and model of thy sanctification, consists in breaking, and
chasticing in thee the Old man, as thou see the body of Christ broken on the
Cross, and consequently, to dye unto sin, as thou see him dead. What, will thou now live unto that, for which Jesus Christ dyed, and his flesh which he
crucified on the Cross, shall it again reviue, and assume life, and full and
perfect vigor in thy members? Romans 6 5.
Must thou not be made the very same plant with Jesus Christ, conformably to
his death, to wit, that the body of sin be destroyed in thee, to the end, that
thou no more, nor no longer serve sin.

But amongst the parts of sanctification, Charity and love toward our
neighbors, is particularly requisite and required in this Sacrament, according
to that of the Apostle: John. 4.10,11.
Herein is that love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent
his Son to be a reconciliation for our sins. Adding likewise thereunto;
Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one the other. Will thou
refuse, O Christian, to love and assist thy neighbor, for whom thou see that
Christ Jesus refused not to shed his blood? Will thou refuse to give bread to
him, to whom Jesus Christ refused not his body? See therefore in this
Sacrament, that which thou owe to thy neighbor, to wit, not only to expose
thy goods, but thy life for him; at least, if thou think to have any part in
Jesus Christ, according to that of Saint John: 2. John 3.16,17.
Hereby have we perceived love, that he laid down his life for us,
therefore we ought also, to lay down our lives for our brethren: and
whosoever has the goods of this world, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him; Thou
therefore, who know not what it is, to give unto the poor, and to comfort
the afflicted; art thou not amazed and confounded in thy self, to consider and
behold, that Christ died for those, with whose poverty and misery thou art so
little (or rather nothing at all) moved or touched. Thou also who contemnest
thy neighbor, as thy inferior, and unworthy of thy company: behold how our
Savior Christ places him at the same table with thee, and nourishes him with
the same meat, and gives him his own Cup, as to thy self; and thou who live
in contention and division, with thy neighbors, behold how Christ in this
Sacrament calls thee to the Communion of one and the same body, and will, that
we who are many, be one only bread, and one only body partaking of the same
bread, as the Apostle speaks to the Corinthians, 1. Corint. 10.3.
.

The fourth Act and duty, which must be ingendered and propagated in our
hearts by the meditation of this blessed Sacrament, is patience and consolation
in afflictions. Do thou see Gods Church persecuted; It is the Body of Jesus
Christ, which is again broken, and his blood which is shed, that which was the
condition of this body on the Cross, and which is presented to thee in this
Sacrament, the same is the condition of the mystical body on earth. What my
brethren, do we so often see Christ's body broken by the Sacrament, to be
afterward so strangly affrighted and astonished, to see the Church, which is
the body of Christ, to suffer the like measure and fortune here on earth? Let
us therefore learn by this Sacrament, That Jesus Christ crucified, is our
ensign here on earth, and that we thereby know, that we are asommoned and
called to his Cross, and that we are indeed his true body and members, if we
suffer with him, to the end, that we may likewise be glorified with him; Say
then all ye, who see this Sacrament; Heb. 13.13
Let us go forth therefore to him out of the Camp, bearing his reproach. Col.
1.24.
Let us accomplish and bear the sufferings of Christ in our flesh, for his
bodies sake, which is his Church, yea let us every where, 2. Corint 4.10.
bear about in our bodies, the death of Jesus Christ, and that the life of our
Lord Christ, may be manifested in our mortal bodies: and all in general, let
us comfort our selves in our afflictions; and present and figure this belief
to our hearts and minds, that they come not from God, who punishes our sins
in his wrath and indignation; since this Sacrament testifies, that those
punishments, and revenges have alighted and fallen on Jesus Christ himself,
when his body was broken, and his blood shed and spilt on the Cross; but they
proceed simply from God, chasticing, correcting, approving, and teaching us as
a Father, 1 Cor. 11.32.
that we be not condemned with the world; Hebr. 12.10.
that here below, being made Partakers of his holiness; we may hereafter in
heaven be made Partakers of his felicity and glory.

The fifth Function, which the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper should
produce in us, is, our hope of heavenly felicity, according as Christ Jesus
himself said to his disciples, at the celebration of this Sacrament, Mat. 26.29
I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until that day that I shall
drink it new with you, in my Fathers Kingdom: by which words Jesus Christ
will now raise, and elevate our hearts from the feast, which he makes us here
below in his favor, to that which he will hereafter make us above in his
glory: and whereof he feast (or banquet) which he makes us here on earth, in
his Sacrament gives us the first tastes and relishes, because the peace and joy
of conscience, and the refreshing and replenishing of the soul in God, is a
true beginning, and a shining ray of the delights and felicities of heaven:
wherefore faithful Christian, rejoice thou at these beginnings, in hope of that
happy and heavenly acco^plishment, which is promised thee, and through the eyes
of thy faith, behold cheerfully and joyfully, the tree of eternal life, which
is in the Paradise of God, and the hidden Manna (the bread of Angels) which thy
Lord and Savior prepares for thee: and behold the fullness and satiety, which
is prepared for thee, in the sacred and glorious face of God, whereof David (in
the times of the thickest, and obscurest shadows) said, Psalm. 16.11
In thy presence, O Lord, is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore. And again in another place, Psalm. 65.4.
O how blessed is he whom thou choosest, and causest to come unto thee, he
shall dwell in thy courts, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thine
house and of thine holy Temple: and likewise in another, Psalm 36.8
They shall be satisfied with the fatness of thine house, and thou shall give
them drink out of the River of thy pleasures. Contemn, therefore (O
Christian) all earthly pleasures in Comparison of those heavenly delights which
pass all understanding; because by this blessed Sacrament thou art invited and
called to the wedding banquet of the Lamb, where thou halt sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and where thou shall be satisfied, and ravished with
God.

And these (my belo^ed brethren) are the meditations and functions, which God
requires of us, condignely and worthily to receive the blessed Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, and to entertain us religiously and piously in the expecta^ce of
his coming; as this Sacrament was purposly instituted, to declare and foretell
us his death, and the inestimable benefits which issue and proceed thereof unto
us, until he come. Let us therefore examine and prove our selves, if we are
of this holy disposition, for fear lest eating this Bread, or drinking this
Wine unworthily, we thereby make our selves guilty of the Lords body and
blood, and consequently eat and drink our own damnation: And if we find not
this holy and sanctified disposition in our hearts; let us then effectually
endeavor to produce and enkindle it in us, by the often reading and meditating
of the sacred Bible, (the divine Oracles) and written Word of God; as also by
frequent and incessant Prayer. For this Word of God (I say) is the Looking
glass, wherein openly beholding the glory of the Lord face to face, 1. Cor.
3.18.
we are transformed and changed into the same Image from glory to glory, as
says the Apostle. I say likewise, by Prayer, because the Lord most benignly,
and graciously conferres, and gives wisdom to all those who seek it of him,
and has promised his holy spirit to all those, who with humble and contrit
hearts demand it of him. And let us possess and retain this consolation amidst
the defects and imperfections which we feel in our hearts; that if we are
discontented or sorrowful, if we are afflicted and heavy laden, that yet
notwithstanding, Christ will not reject us, because he says, Come unto me, all
ye that are heavy laden: Or if we hunger and thirst after righteousness,
(for this hunger and thirst is a desire of Gods grace, proceeding from a lively
and sensible feeling of our sins) he promises to replenish and satisfy us.
May it therefore please thee, O our blessed Lord and Savior, to call us to
this sacred Banquet, to send us thy holy Spirit, and give decent and religious
dispositions; and because he now knockes at the door of our hearts by his
holy Word, give us grace, that we may open it unto him in the obedience of our
faith, to the end Revel 3.
that he may sup with us, and we with him; and that he himself may be both
our Host, and our Banquet.

Amen.
A Prayer, to prepare our selves, before we receive the holy Supper of the Lord.
O God, how shall I present my self before thee, being a wretched creature,
defiled and polluted with sin; If the Angels (who have never sinned) overvaile
and cover their faces, when they appear before thy holiness, how much greater
ought my astonishment and confusion be, who am guilty of so many foul faults
and transgressions, and likewise my grief and sorrow, since thy wrath reveals
it self from heaven against sin, and that on every side we see the effects
thereof. Nature is afflicted and troubled, and our bodies are already possessed
of diseases and death, and therefore what greater punishment may our souls
attend and expect; and if in this life thy wrath and indignation be thus
manifested, what will it be when we shall appear before thy Tribunal; and that
thou pronounce a sharp and heavy sentence against us: but O Lord in this
fearful amazement, here arises up to us news of grace, and matter of comfort
and consolation. Thou have had compassion of mankind, thou have sent thine only
Son here below to reconcile and expiate our sins; the earth had nothing for
the salvation of man, the Angels who have no part of righteousness, or of
life, but for themselves could not resist thine anger, but in stooping and
sincking down under the burden thereof. But O Lord thou have opened thine own
bosom, from whence alone could come salvation; and from it thou have sent
thine only Son to cloth himself with our nature, and to suffer therein the
punishment due to our sins, and fully to satisfy thy Justice for all our
transgressions, so that we have redemption by his blood (to wit) remission of
sins, according to the riches and treasure of thy mercy; and we hear this thy
Son to pronounce these sweet and pleasing words in his Gospel, Come to me all
ye that are oppressed and heavy laden, and I will refresh and comfort you.
Overloaden then as I am, with the heavy burden of my sins, I come to
discharge and disburthen them on thy cross, because he has borne our sins
in his body on the wood thereof And wherefore should not I fully believe it, since
this sovereign love, and immense goodness was worthy of thee, and that not
only by thy Testament, but also by this Sacrament of thy blessed Supper, thou
give me this redemption, and placest it (as it were) before mine eyes: For
wherefore serves this great Sacrament, but to represent to my soul, by faith,
this great sacrifice of Christ's body, which he has given and presented thee on
the Cross. So because I see my ransom and redemption, have I not therefore
just cause, O my God, to rejoice and comfort my self in thee, that ransom (I
say) which thine own self have freely given me. A divine ransom, of a most
inestimable price and value, because it is the body of thine only begotten Son,
true God together with thee. Here, here, O my God, it is, where my soul,
(hungring and thirsting after thy favor) finds wherewithal to freed and
refresh her self. This body crucified, is my true restoritie; and this blood
spilt and shed on the cross, is the liquor, wherewith my soul fills her self
with unspeakable joy. And here it is, where thy goodness is so great, so
infinite to all mankind, that thou invitest all those who are hungry and
thirsty; Jesus Christ himself saying, Happy are those who hunger and thirst
after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. O then, let my soul, which
hungreth and thirsts after righteousness, (to wit, that righteousness,
wherewith thou absolvest, and iustifiest Sinners) obtain the fullness and
refreshing of eternal life and salvation. Then depart and fly hence from me,
all my doubts and diffidences, I will confirm and seal it, that God is true,
in believing in his Son. For, shall I offer him this injury, to doubt that he
is good enough to pardon my sins, and merciful enough to have compassion of
my miseries? If I behold, or look up to his Justice, I am sure that is
appeased, and satisfied, because Christ is he, who dyed for me, and I cannot
doubt, that this death shall be objected or approoved against me; because
Jesus Christ became pledge, and defender of all those, who with repentant and
contrite hearts, had recourse to him. To who^ therefore shall I run, or fly,
but to him, and why shall I not repent me, to have offended thee, in that thou
art so gracious and merciful toward us, and that I see sin is so execrable,
that only thine own Son must of necessity die to expiate it; And if my
repentance be defective, and my faith infirm and weak, I will represent and
show thee that which thou thy self have said, That thou will not break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax; and I will say as he did in the
Gospel, I believe, therefore O Lord, help my unbelief. It is not for my
repentance and faith to give, but to receive salvation, the which is already
purchased and deserved by thy Son Christ Jesus. We refuse not a rich gift,
either from a poor person, or a trembling hand: therefore, O Lord, I rejoice
and comfort my self in this, that I am displeased with mine own sins and
transgressions, and am truly sorrowful, and infinitely repentant, that I can
repent them no more. O good God, were I free and exempt of sin, I the^ needed
not this Sacrament which thou give me, for that it is a remedy against sin,
and that thou do continually invite us to think and meditate with our selves
how odious sin is, and ought to be to us, because of the filthy lusts, and
pernicious inclinations, which reside and dwell in our members: for in heaven,
where we shall sin no more, this remedy is needless; Be merciful therefore
unto me, O God, because of thy loving kindness, and according to the
infiniteness of thy compassion, deface and do away my transgressions: for I
know that my sins are ever before me. O God create in me a pure heart, and
reviue and renew in me thy holy spirit; Cleanse and wash me, O Lord, in the
blood of thy blessed Son; feed my soul, which seeks her nourishment and
life in him; and if I am unworthy of thy favors, yet refuse not some crummes
of mercy to him, who humbly presents himself to thy Table; Deny not (O Lord)
the effect of thy mercy to him, who laments and weeps under the heavy burden
of his own sins and misery, and who is religiously and constantly resolved,
for ever to celebrate thy infinite mercy and compassions.

A Prayer of Thanksgiving after our receiving of the blessed Sacrament of the
Lords Supper.
O Eternal God, Illuminate more and more the eyes of my understanding, that I
may conceive and comprehend what is the height, depth, length, and breadth of
thy love toward us in Jesus Christ; what depth, when thou have drawn us from
the bottom of death, by the death of thy Son; what height, when thou have
raised and elevated us for him and with him to Heaven; what length but the
lasting eternity (from age to age) of all felicity, which thou have prepared
for us; what breadth, but as far as the East is distant from the West; so
far thou have banished and separated our sins from us; and that as many
promises and blessings, as thou have pronounced unto us, they are so many, yea,
and Amens in Jesus Christ. O God who causest me to behold this thy so
wonderful a goodness, and who right now co^mest from showing it to the eyes of
my soul, in the receiving of this blessed Sacrament. Give me grace, O Lord, to
meditate and contemplate thereon, till I am ravished in a spiritual ecstasy,
yea, until I am transformed into the Image of this thine own love; and that I
become all love toward thee; that I live no longer to my self, but that thy
Christ may live in me, through the love of thy divine goodness and beauty; and
that I may embrace and retain no other desires, but for thee, and for the
Kingdom of Heaven, which thou have transferd and given me by thy blessed Son
Christ Jesus. O let me behold Sin no more, but with horror and detestation,
because it is contrary to thy essence and being, as also to the work of my
redemption, which thy blessed Sacrament has now proffered and presented unto
me. I see (O God, that thy Son is dead for Sin; and therefore shall I live
who am the vildest of all Sinners. That thy Christ has been crucified to
destroy Sin, and therefore shall I give it strength and vigor, to live and
reign in me. O then (my merciful God) let me no longer live to, or for, the
things of this world, but that I may crucify my flesh with all the sinful
lusts thereof, and that the holy Sacrament, which I came now from receiving,
may be the example and pourtrait of my duty, and my continual lesson,
tending and working to the true mortification of sin in me, and that it may
be bruised and broken, and left without strength or life, as was the blessed
body of my Savior Jesus Christ, who died on the Cross for me; and that also
conformably to his resurrection, I may henceforth live a spiritual and
heavenly life, still seeking those things which are above, and not those which
are below on earth. And indeed, O Lord, by this thy holy Sacrament I see that I
am united and incorporated to thy Son Christ; and that I am thereby made flesh
of his flesh, and bone of his bone, and being thus adjoined with him; must I
not also be conjoined with him in the same functions, and affections. Shall I
dishonor the body of Jesus Christ by my sins and filthiness, and shall I
take away his members, to make them the members of the world, or of Satan. O
how careful ought I to be of my actions and duty, since in this union I reap
this consolation: that the obedience of Christ is imputed to me, as if I my
self had satisfied his justice, to wit, That I am now made one, and the self
same body with Christ, who has fully paid and satisfied for me. How dear
ought this Communion to be unto me, whereby my Soul enjoys peace, and
assurance, seeing the full remission of my sins, and my absolute and free
deliverance from Gods heavy curse, and fierce wrath, and indignation, whereby I
see, that Jesus Christ, esteems, and chearisheth me as his own body;
as well, to preserve me from all evils; as to bestow on me all good things,
which are necessary for me, according as the Apostle says on this same
subject. That no man ever hated his own flesh, but does nourish and cherish
it, as God does his Church. So then let Satan practice all his power, and
exercise all his malice against me, I (notwithstanding) cannot but be more
then a Conqueror over all things in this body of Jesus Christ, and that if this
his Communion oblige and tie me to crosses and afflictions (for here on earth
I must thus bear the death and passion of our Lord Jesus) yet it does assure
me both of victory, and triumph: for the Spirit of God, which conducts and
quickneth this mystical body of Christ in us, is infinitely greater then that
of the world, and the communion which I have with the Cross of my Savior, is
my direct and true way to glory. O my God, who make me to relish these
delights of thy love, and who in this manner feedest and replenishest my soul
at thy holy table; Give me grace, that he^ceforth I may no more trust the
delights and pleasures of sin. Let my desires and delights be to obey and do
thy will, and that all the whole course and progress of my life, may be a
sanctified preparation to this great wedding banquet of the Lamb, whereunto we
are invited and called, and where thy holy and sacred sight will be unto us a
fulness of all joy, and thy right hand an unspeakable delight, and pleasure for
evermore. Let me then (O Lord) at this very instant, clothe my self with the
wedding garment of thy sanctification, therewith to be present at this Feast,
whereof this of the Sacrament, (whereunto thou have now invited me) is an
earnest and pledge; and that separating my self from the people of this world,
(whose only portion is in this present life) I may say with the royal Prophet
David, As for me (O Lord) I shall see thy face in righteousness, and I shall be
filled with thy image and resemblance, when I shall awake.

FINIS.

