An exercise for a Christian FAMILY; Containing a short sum of certain
points of Christian religion, with certain godly Prayers, psalms, and
than^^giuings, both before and after meals.

Very necessary to be used in every Christian Family. By R. M.

AT LONDON Printed by Robert Waldegraue. 1585.

A short SVMME OF THE chief grounds of christian religion, set down in five
special points.
Sanctify the lord God in your hearts, 1. Pet. 3.15.
and be ready always to give an answer to every one that asks you a reason
of your faith, and that with meekness and reverence.

Keep the true pattern of the wholesome words which thou haste heard of me in
faith and love, 2. Tim. 1.13.
which is, Jesus Christ.

I Believe and confess first, Romans 10.10.
that there is * one God only, who * is a spiritual nature, Ioh. 45.5
without any bodily or visible sharp, Ioh. 4.24 1. Tim. 6 16. Exo. 34.6 Psa.
95.4
* of infinite power, wisdom, * goodness and glory, creator and governor of
heaven and earth, and that this one god, is distinct into * three persons, the
father, John. 5.7
the son, and the holy ghost.

Secondly, that the same God did in the beginning * make mankind in an
excellent state of all perfection and happiness, Genesis 1.26
even according to his own * holiness and righteousness. Ephesians 4.24.


Thirdly, that we fell afterward through the disobedience of Adam, into a
cursed kind of al misery, Romans 5.12
even * into the wrath of God and eternal damnation of body and soul.

Fourthly, that the deliverance and redemption from this misery, is fully
wrought by * Jesus Acts. 4.12.
Christ only, both God and man, who has * suffered all the punishments of our
sins, Romans 13 4
that we might not be damned for them, 1. Ioh. 1 7 1. Pet. 2 24.
* and has perfectly kept the * ten commandments for us, which we could not
do, to bring us again to the * love of God, Romans 5.19 21
and to eternal life.

Fifthly, that they only are partakers of Jesus Christ and * this great work
of our redemption, Math. 7.7
which do earnestly and faithfully pray for the grace of his holy * Spirit,
Romans 10 11
that thorough the * preaching of the Word, John. 3.36.
there may be wroughte in their hearts a * steadfast faith, Iam. 2.18 21.
to be saved by his sufferings and holiness only, and that their faith may be
showed and iustyfied by continual repentance, and a Godly life, that is, Deu.
12 12.
by * shunning those things which he forbids, and doing those things
which he commands.

This is life eternal, John. 17.3.
to know thee to be the only true God, and him whom thou haste sent,
Jesus Christ. Ioh. 17.3


Jesus said, take heed and beware of the leaven of the pharisees and saduces,
Mat. 16.6 12.
which is their doctrine.

Cast away profane and old wives fables, 1. Tim. 4.7
and exercise thy self unto godliness.

I will pray unto God, Psalm. 55.16.
and the Lord shall save me, evening and morning, and at noone day will I
pray, and he will hear my voice.

Prayers for the morning, necessary to be used of all householders in their
families.
MATH. 26.41. VVatch and pray, least ye enter into temptation.


O most mighty God our heavenly and merciful father, we most wretched
sinners, humblye confess unto thy majesty, that all good things we have, do
come from thy only mercy, that we are most unworthy of them, and yet
altogether unable heartily to pray for the continuance thereof, yet seeing thy
dear son Jesus Christ, has commanded us in his name, to pray, and that with
assurance to speed and to be heard: we beseech thee for his sake, to prepare
our hearts by thy holy spirit, to put out of our minds all worldly
things and vain fantasies, and to stir us up earnestly to consider what
great need we have of thy continual help both in our souls and bodies. O
Lord we have through our manifold sins, deserved thy wrath, and eternal
damnation of body and soul, yet by the virtue of the great sufferinges of Jesus
Christ, and the shedding of his precious blood, forgive and wash away al our
offenses: we are unworthy of thy favor, either in this life or in the life to
come, yet thorough his holiness, receive us unto mercy, and make us heirs of thy
blessed kingdom and so increase in our hearts every day, unfeigned repentance
for our former wickedness, in that we have neither worshipped thy majesty, nor
lived toward others, according to thy word. Strengthen our faith (O Lord)
in Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of our sins, and for thy tender mercy
sake, power into our hearts the grace of thy holy spirit, which may stir up
in us a more hearty love unto thee and thy blessed word, that by it we may
learn to worship thee aright, and to live faithfullye, and truly toward all
men in our callings, striving continually against all sin, chiefly in our
selves, and then also in others, so that whenever it shall please thee to
call any of us out of this short and sinful life, we may willingly deliver up
our souls into thy blessed kingdom, and may come with joy (as loving
children) to thee our heavenly and merciful Father. O lord make us thankful for
all thy corrections, giving us grace by them to fear thee more carefully, and
to sorrow for our sins more heartily. Make us also thankful for all thy
benefits, namely, for the sweet sleep and quiet rest, whereby thou haste this
night refreshed us, we beseech thee now in like manner (O gracious God) for
Christ's sake, to receive us this day into thy blessed keeping, preserve us from
al perils and dangers, from sin, from the wicked cares of this life, and the
vain desires of the flesh, shinning into our hearts by the grace of thy holy
spirit, and the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, the true light of the world,
that we may guide al ourthoghts words, and deeds, according to the same, and
walk painfully and truly in our callings, to the glory of thy blessed name,
the good example of al others, and the great assurance of our own salvation,
through thy dear Son Jesus Christ our only savior, in whose name we pary
for these, and al other graces, as he has taught us saying, Our father etc.

Another Prayer for the Morning.
ALmighty God, and most merciful Father, Dan. 9
we do not * present our selves here before thy majesty, trusting in our own
merits or worthiness, but in thy manifold mercies, which have promised to
hear our prayers and * grant our requests, John. 16.
which we shall make to thee in the name of thy beloved Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, who has also commanded us to assemble our selves together in his *
name, Math. 18.
with full assurance that he will not only be among us, but also be our
mediator, and * advocate toward thy majesty, 1. Tim. 2.
that we may obtain * all things which shall seem expedient to thy blessed will
for our necessities. 1. Ioh. 3.
Therefore we beseech thee, most merciful father, to turn thy loving
countenance toward us, Psalm. 32.
and * impute not unto us our manifold sins and offenses, whereby we justly
deserve thy wrath and sharp punishment: but rather receive us to thy mercy for
Jesus Christ's sake, accepting his death and passion as a just recompense for
all our offenses, in whom only thou art pleased, and through whom thou can
not be offended with us. And seeing that of thy great mercies we have quietli
passed this night grant, o heavenly father, that we may bestow this day
wholly in thy service, so that all our thoughts, words and deeds may redound
to the glory of thy name, and good example to al men: who seeing our good
works, may glorify thee our heavenly father. And forasmuch as of thy mere
favor and love thou have not only created us to thine own similitude and
likeness, but also haste chosen us to be heirs with thy dear son Jesus
Christ of that immortal kingdom, which thou prepa redst for us before the
beginning of the world, we beseech thee to increas our faith and know ledge,
and to lighten our hearts with thine holy spirit, that we may in the mean
time live in godly conversation and integrity of life, knowing that *
idolaters, Gal. 5
adul terers, covetous men, contentious persons, drunkardes, gluttons and
such like, shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

And because thou haste commanded us to pray one for another we do not only
make request, O Lord, for our selves, and them that thou have already called to
thee true understanding of thine heavenly will, but for all people and *
nations of the world, Acts. 10. 1. tim. 2.
who as they know by thy wonderful works, that thou art God over all, so they
may be instructed by thine holy spirit, to believe in thee their only savior
and Redeemer. But forasmuch as they can not believe except they * hear, Romans 10.
nor cannot hear but by preaching, and none can preach except they be sent,
therefore, O lord raise up faithful distributers of thy mysteries, who setting
aparte all worldly respects, may both in their life and doctrine only seek
thy glory. Contrarily confound * Satan, Romans 16.
Antichrist with all hirelings and papists, who^ thou have already cast of
into a reprobate sense, that they may not by sects, schisms, heresies and
errors disquiet thy little flock. And because, O Lord, we be fallen into
the latter days, 2. tim. 3.
and dangerous times wherein ignorance has gotten the upper hand, and Satan
with his minysters seek by all means to quench the light of thy Gospel, we
beseech thee to maintain thy cause against those * ravenous wolves, Mat. 7
and strengthen all thy servants, whom they keep in prison and bondage. Let
not thy long suffering be an occasion either to increase their tyranny, or to
discourage thy children, neither yet let our sins and wickedness be an
hynderaunce to thy mercyes, but with speed, O Lord, consider the great
myseries, and afflictions of thy poor Church, which in sundry places by the
rage of enemies is grievously tormented: and this we confess, O Lord, to come
most iustlye for our sins which (notwithstanding thy manifold benefits,
whereby thou do daily allure us to love thee: and thy sharp thretnings,
whereby we have occasion to fear thee, and speedily to repent) yet continue in
our own wickedness and feel not our hearts so touched with the displeasure of
our sins as we ought to do. Therefore, O Lord, create in us new hearts,
that with fervent minds we may bewail our manifold sins, and earnestly
repent us for our former wickedness and ungodly behavior toward thee: and
whereas we can not of our selves purchase thy pardon, yet we humblye beseech
thee for Jesus Christ's sake, to show thy mercies upon us, and receive us
again to thy favor. Grant us, dear father, these our requests, and all
other things necessary for us and thy whole Church according to thy promise in
Jesus Christ our Lord: in whose name we beseech thee, as he has taught us,
saying, Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. etc.

A GODLY PRAYER to be said at all times.
Honor and praise be given to thee, O Lord God almighty, most dear Father
of heaven, for all thy mercies and loving kindness showed unto us, in that it
has plesed thy gracious goodness and freely of thine own accord, to elect and
choose us to salvation before the beginning of the world: and eue^ like continual
thanks be given to thee for creating us after thine own image, for redeeming us
with the precious blood of thy dear son, when we were utterly lost, for
sanctifying us with thine holy Spirit in the Revelation and knowledge of
thine holy word, for helping and succouring us in all our needs and
necessities, for saving us from all dangers of body and soul, for comforting
us so fatherly in all our tribulations and persecutions, for sparing us so
long, and giving us so large a time of repentance. These benefits, O most
merciful father, like as we knowledge to have received them of thine only
goodness, even so we beseech thee, for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake to
grant us alwais thine holy spirit, whereby we may continually grow in
thankfulness toward thee, to be led into all truethe, and comforted in all
our adversities. O Lord, strengthen our faith: kindle it more in feruentnes
and love toward thee and our neighbors for thy sake. Suffer us not, most dear
Father, to receive thy word any more in vain, but grant us always the
assistaunce of thy grace and holy spirit, that in heart, word, and deed we
may sanctify and do worship to thy name, help to amplify and increase thy
kingdom, that whatsoever thou sendest, we may be heartily well content with
thy good pleasure and will. Let us not lack the thing, o father, with out the
which we cannot serve thee, but bless thou so all the works of our hands,
that we may have sufficient, and not to be chargeable, but rather helpful
unto others. Be merciful, O Lord, to our offenses: and seeing our debt is
great, which thou haste forgiven us in Jesus Christ, make us to love thee and
our neighbors so much the more. Be thou our Father, our captain and
defender, in all tentations: hold thou us by thy merciful hand, that we may
be delivered from all inconveniences, and end our lives in the sanctifiing and
honor of thy holy name through Jesus christ our Lord, and only Savior, so be
it. Let thy mighty hand and outstretched arm, O Lord, be still our
defense, thy mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear Son, our
salvation, thy true and holy word our instruction, thy grace and holy spirit,
our comfort and consolation, unto the end and in the end, so be it.

O Lord, increase our faith.

A PRAYER TO BE said of the child before he study his lesson.
PSALM. 119. Wherein shall the child address his way? In guiding him self
according to thy Word. Open mine eyes and I shall know the maruails of thy
Law. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law, yea, I shall keep it
with mine whole heart.


Lord, which art the fountain of all wisdom and knowledge, seeing it has
pleased thee to give me the mean to be taught in my youth for to learn to
guide me godly and honestly all the course of my life, it may also please thee
to lighten mine understanding, the which of it self is blind, that it may
comprehend and receive that doctrine and learning which shall be taught me:
it may please thee to strengthen my memory to keep it well: it may please thee
also to dispose my heart willingly to receive it with such desire as
appertains: so that by my ingratitude the occasion which thou give me, be
not lost. That I may thus do, it may please thee to power upon me thine holy
spirit, the spirit I say, of al understanding, truth, judgment, wisdom and
learning, the which may make me able so to profit, that the pains that
shall be taken in teaching me, be not in vain. And to what study soever I
apply my self, make me, O lord, to addres it unto the right end: that is to
know thee in our Lord Jesus Christ, that I may have full trust of salvation in
thy grace, and to serve thee uprightly according to thy pleasure, so that
whatso ever I learn, it may be unto me as an instrument to help me thereunto.
and seeing thou do promise to give wisdom to the little and humble ones, and
to confound the proud in the vanity of their wits, and likewise to make thy
self known to them that be of an upright heart, and also to blind the
ungodly and wicked, I beseech thee to fashion me unto true humility, so that I
may be taught first to be obedient unto thee, and next unto my superiors, that
thou haste appointed over me. Further that it may please thee to dispose mine
heart unfeignedly to seek thee and to forsake all evil and filthye lusts of the
flesh: and that in this sort I may now prepare my self to serve thee once in
that estate which it shalplease thee to appoint for me when I shall come to age.

A PRAYER TO BE said before a man begin his work.
PSALM. 25. The Lord reuealeth his secrets unto them that fear him, and
makes them to know his alliance.


O Lord God most merciful Father and savior, seeing it has pleased thee,
to command us to travail, that we may relieve our need, we beseech thee of
thy grace so to bless our labor that thy blessing may extend unto us, without
the which we are not able to continue: and that this great favor may be a
witness unto us of thy bou^tifulnes and assistance, so that thereby we may know
the fatherlye care that thou have over us.

Moreover, O Lord we beseech thee that thou would strengthen us with thy
holy spirit, that we may faith fullye travail in our estate and vocation
without fraud or deceit: and that we may endeavor our selves to follow thine
holy ordinance, rather the^ to seek to satisfy our greedy affections or desire
to gain. And if it please our labor, give us a mind also to help the^ that
have need according to that ability that thou of thy mercy shall give us: and
knowing that all good things come of thee, grant that we may humble our
selves to our neighbors, and not by any means lift our selves up above them,
which have not received so liberal a portion as of thy mercy thou have given
unto us. And if it please thee to try and exercise us by greter poverty, and
need then our flesh would desire, that thou would: yet O Lord, grant us
grace to know that thou will nourish us continually through thy bountiful
liberality, that we be not so tempted that we fall not into distrust: but
that we may patiently wait till thou fill us, not only with corporal graces
and benefits, but cheefely with thine heavenly and spiritual treasures, to
the intent that we may always have more ample occasion to give thee thanks,
and so wholly to rest upon thy mercyes. Hear us, O Lord of mercy, through
Jesus Christ thy son our Lord. Amen.

APR AIER FOR the Morning.
O Gracious God, and loving Father, according to thy commandment, we do here
present our selves before thy majesty, humblye prostrating our selves before
the throne of mercy, acknowledging and confessing from the bottom of our
hearts that we be miserable sinners, daily breaking thy commandementes, both
in thought, word, and deed, wherein we iustlye deserve everlasting damnation,
and to be utterly thrown from thy presence, yet O lord, we see thy goodness
again toward us, who not suffering us thus to perish in our sins, have sent
thine own dear Son Jesus Christ, to take upon him whatsoever is due to
reconcile and make us at one with thee again: in him therefore, good Lord, and
through him do we com unto thee, beseeching thee for his sake, that we feeling
the greeuosnes of our sins, and groaning under the burden of them, may feel the
release and ease of them, in that we be thorough thy holy spirit assured, and
steadfastly believe, that Christ has borne the burden of them, even for us.
Grant, O Lord, that we being assured hereof in our consciences, may
thorough thy holy spirit be renewed in the inner man, to hate, detest and
abhor sin, and to study to live according to thy blessed will during our
whole life.

We do not only pray for our selves, but also for all thy whole church,
especially such as be persecuted for thy word grant unto them, that whether
it be by death or life, they may glorifye thy name to their lives end. Be
merciful to this Church of England and Irelande, we beseech thee good lord,
and preserve every part and member of the same, especially thy servant
ELIZABETH our Queen: grant her all such gifts as be needeful for so high a
calling, to the advancement of thy glory, and benefit of this common wealth,
to the establishing of a perfect government of thy Church, according to the
prescript rule of thy blessed word, to the rooting out of al superstition and
relics of Antichrist, to the governing of her subjects in all peace and
traquillitie. Defend her, O lord, from all conspiracies, treasons, and
rebellions, and so work in the hearts of all her subjects, that knowing her
authorize does come from thy heavenly majesty, they may with obedient hearts
humbly obey her in thee and for thee. Preserve the whole counsel and the.
Magistrates of the realm, that being lightened through thy holy spirit, they
may defend thy truth, suppress wickedness, and maintain equity. Behold all
the Pastors and Preachers of the word, bless their labors, increase the
number of them, place over every Church a painful watch man, remove all idle
lubbers, and confound the power of Antichrist, and turn the hearts of the
people that they may be obedient to thy truth. Bless the two Universities,
Cambridge and Oxenforde, and all the Students of the same, with all Schools
of learning. Behold all those that be afflicted with any kind of cross, that
they may profit by thy correction in newness of life.

Lastly, for our selves here gathered together, we heartily crave at thy
hands, that it would please thee to make us thankful unto thy majesty, for
all thy loving kindness showed unto us even from our infancy: especially, that
thou haste this present night delivered us from all dangers both of body and
soul, wherinto many have fallen, as we in like manner should have done, if
we had not been stayed with thy merciful hand: that thou have also granted
unto us so sweet and comfortable rest, and haste now presently brought us to
the beginning of this day. For these things, good Lord, we yield unto thee
most hearty thanks, besehcing thee to make us more and more daily thankful
unto thy majesty for the^, and pardon our unthankfulness. And as thou have
safely preserved us unto this presenthowre from all the dangers of this life:
so we beseech thee continue thy favor toward us this day, and the whole
course of our life. Defend us, O lord, that we now entering into the affairs of
this day, be not drawn away with the vain allureme^ts of this world, to
sin and wickedness: that we walk not in the shadows of death, that we be not
entangled in the snares of sin, that we stumble not at the blocks of
iniqnity, that we finallye fall not into the pit of death, and destruction: but
being shadowed vnderthy wings we may cheerfully and constantlye go on forward
to the end of our course. Grant unto us, O Lord our God, that this good time
which thou grantest unto us in this life, be not idly, or vainly of us
consumed, but that every one of us may be diligently exercised in his
calling this day, and all our life long, being assured that thou will once call
us to yield an account of our stewardship. Indue us we beseech thee, with those
gifts and graces, which be needful for us in our calling, and that with a
pure and sincere conscience we may use them to the benefit of our brethren,
and discharge of our own consciences, before thy majesty. We beseech thee, O
Lord, that in all our confultations, words and works this day, and the whole
course of our life, we may always have thee present before our eyes,
knowing that thou see even the very deep thoughts of our hearts, which alwais
may be as a bridle to pull us back, that we neither do, nor yet consent
unto any sin or wickedness, but that always we may be so exercised in the
affairs of this life, that we look still to the end of our course, when it
shall please thee to bring us through the pilgrimage of this life to our
everlasting rest with thy dear Son JESUS CHRIST our Savior. In whole name
for these mercies and what soever thou know to be needful for us, and for
the whole Church, we pray unto thee, as he him self has taught us in his
holy word, saying: Our father. etc.

The Lord bless us and save us, the Lord make his face to shine upon us,
and be merciful unto us, the Lord turn his favorable countenance toward
us, and grant us his peace. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of
God the Father, and the most comfortable fellowshippe of the holy Ghost, be
with us, preserve and keep us this day and evermore. Amen.

A CONFESSION of sins with faith and repentance.
O Merciful and Heavenly Father, we thy servant do humbly prostrate our
selves before thy majesty, acknowledging here in thy sight our heinous
offenses committed against thy majesty, seeing and beholding thy heavy wrath
against them: we feel our selves laden (O Lord our God) with a huge
company of horrible sins, whereof even the very least, being but conceived
in thought, is sufficient in judgment to throw us down to the everlasting
burning lake. Our own consciences, O Lord, do bear witness against us, of
our manyfolde transgressions of thy blessed law, of our security and
senseless blindness running headlong to destruction, committing sin after
sin, although not notorious to the world, yet horrible before thine eye. The
thoughts of our hearts rise up in judgment against us: the vanity of our
talk before thy majesty condemns us: the wickedness of our deeds from thy
sight rejects us: al our wicked thoghts, words and deeds, with the inward
corruption of our nature, do altogether as it were a whole lump and load of
sin, lie heavy upon us, and with their intolerable weight do even press
us down to hell. We do daily groan under the burden of them inwardly
lamenting our own folly so greedily running into them. In Heaven, Earth, or
Hell, we see none able to sustain the weight of them, but eue^ the dearlye
beloved Son Jesus Chrst, who in mercy infinite, and compassion endless, has
sustained and over come that endless punnishement due unto them: in him
therefore in him, most meeifull father and through him we come to thee, being
fully assured according to thy promise, that thou will accept and take that full
recompense which he thy dear Son has made for us, as a just ransom for
all the sins of all those who with a true faith take houlde on him.

In him therefore we see thine anger toward us appeased, thy wrath satisfied,
and our debts paid.

Increase in us, good Lord, we beseech thee, this lively and feeling faith, for
we feel it oftentimes in us very weak, and troubled with many doubts:
increase it in us (O Lord) that we may through thy holy spirit be assured
that the punnishement of our sins is fully in thy son discharged. Make us,
O Lord our God, to feel this same in our souls and consciences, that JESUS
CHRIST is ours, and all that he has done: that we are graffed into his body,
and made one with him, and therefore fellow heirs with him of everlasting life.
Let us not only have these words in our mouths (good Lord) but through thy
holy spirit let us feel the comfort of them in our hearts fully sealed
and settled in us: that we feling our selves inwardly before thy judgment seat,
discharged and our consciences toward thee appeased, may be swallowed up
with an unfeigned love toward thy heavenly Majesty, and toward thy brethren
for thy sake. Make sin to dye in us daily more and more, that we may hate,
detest, and utterly abhor all sin and wickedness in all men, but especially
in our selves: that we may strongly thorough thy holy spirit set our
selves in open war and defiance against all sin and wickedness: that we
please not ourselves in our sins, but straitlye examining sin by the just
rule of thy holy Laws, we may utterly from the bottom of our hearts condemn
even the least sin in our selves, having our whole joy, comfort and
consolation upon those things which be agreeable to thy blessed will,
always being afraid to do any thing contrary to the same: that we may even
from the bottom of our hearts examine and try our thoughts, before thy
presence, that they be upright and unfeigned, not hipocriticall in outward show
only and appearance, but that even all corners of our hearts being opened and
disclosed before thee, we may even as though it were openly before the face of
the whole world bring them in show, knowing that a dubble heart is detestable
in thin eyes: and that we may walk always as before thine eyes, not only
before the eyes of man, being more careful to walk circumspectlye, in this
respect, that we have thee to be a vewer of our doings, a thousand fold
more then the eyes of man: that thus we may walk as becomes thy children,
not only in outward show, but also in sincerity of heart, abhorring even the
least sin in our selves, stryuing, resisting and fighting against sin, not
delighting our selves in sin, nor norishing the same in our breast, but
earnest lie embracing, and studiouslye seeking after those things which be
pleasant in thine eyes: that neither the fear of man, nor loss of goods life,
lands, possessions, or friends draw us away from thee, to do any least thing
contrary to thy will and pleasure: neither the favor or friendship of man,
nor yet the flattering entice mentes of this world, nor the vain promotions
of the same do move us any whit from the true and endless joy, delighte and
pleasure which we ought to have in those things which be agreeable to thy will,
and the constaunt performance of the same: but that always to the end of our
life we may continue in thy paths, growing and increasing from faith to faith,
from strength to strength, till at length we shall come to thy everlasting rest.

A FORM OF MORning prayer necessary for this present time for godly
christians, to use in their houses and families.
WE most humblye thank thee O heavenly Father) for the sweet and quiet rest
that we have had this night, for the loving and favorable deliverance out of
all dangers both of body and Soul, which we justly deserve to be thrown into
for our manyfolde sins: for that thou haste raised us up this morning, we
pray thee to go before us: and for as much as thou see our sluggishnes and
drowsines, it would please thee (good Lord) to pull us after thee, and to
show us those ways, which thou have appointed us to walk in. And as thou
renuest this morning, so renew thy mercies: and as thou causest the Sun
comfortablye to shine to our bodilye eyes, so vouchsafe (we pray thee) to be
Sun unto our bodies and to our souls, by the beams of thy holy Spirit, and
Star of thy blessed Word, shining into the midst of our hearts, to drive
away all the night and darkness of all profaneness: to chase away all want of
true fear of thy good Majesty: and in place thereof, bring in love toward thy
glory, zeal of thy house, love also toward our brethren: especially those
that thou above the rest co^mendest unto us, that we may love them with that
love, wherewithal thou have first loved us: which is pure, vncorrupt,
vehement, and everlasting: and therefore we pray thee to rid our hearts of
all naughtye and corrupt love, and whatsoever is unmeet to be in those
vessels that are to serve such a mighty Prince as thou art: and in those
houses wherein it pleases thy majesty by thy holy Spirit to dwell: and
therefore on the other side (good Lord) chase away from us all* rancor and
malice, all pride, enuiousnesse, disdaynefulnesse, uncharitableness,
unnaturalness, unkindness, and whatsoever is contrary to that love, whereof
thou have given us a liuelye example in our saniour Jesus christ: unto the
which example, grant (good Lord) that we may always have our eyes lifted up,
and therein holden, and caused thereby to profit, until such time as we come
to that perfection, whereunto thou have appointed we shall come. Vouchsafe more
over by the coming of the self same Spirit, to scatter in us all the night
and darkness of ignorance, and forgetfulness, and of all those things which
pertain to the clearer and fuller knowledge of thy truth Take from us all
negligence, all want of judgment and discretion, and deliver us from al those
things, which thou know to be hinderaunces to us, either to walk in that
great calling of Christianitye whereunto thou have called us, or in those
several and particular callinges wherein thou have placed every one of us: that
we may walk so (good Lord) both in the one and in the other, that thy name
may be glorified in both.

We pray not only for our selves (O most merciful Father) but for all those
that thou have appointed to eternal life: beseechinge thee to gather the
number of those that are to be gathered; those that thou haste already
called, thou would always keep: and to this end (good Lord) raise up
faithful ministers both of thy church and common weal, whose hearts thou
would fill with all graces of thy holy spirit meet for their callinges,
meet also for these dangerous times: root out from among thy church, al
ravening and devouring beasts, which to fill their own bellies, distroy thy
flok, ease thy self of all hirelings and idle shepherds, which have no care
nor skill to feed thy flok with the holsom food of thy blessed word, nor to
rule them with that equitye, wherewithal thou will have thy people to be
ruled: those Pastoures that thou haste given, it would please thee to increase
the number of the^: those that are fallen a sleep and carried away with the
corruptions of these times, that thou would awake, letting them understand
the charge that thou haste mitted unto them, the trust that thou have put them
in, and the account that thou will take at their hands. Be gracious (O Lord)
unto this land of ours, and enter not into judgment with the horrible sins
of it, namelye, the contempt and light esteeming of thy holy word, so many
years offered unto us, and we being trusted withal, so many Nations better
then we being passed by, which would have brought forth the fruit thereof
more then weehaue done: and we not only have brought forth no good fruit,
but rotten and unsavory, to provoke thy Majesty withal: notwithstanding all
these our sins, it would please thee in that love, wherewithal thou have
first loved us, when we hated thee, and in that long patience wherein thou
haste hitherto borne with us, and do yet bear and tarriest for
ourrepentance: to grant us hearty and earnestrepentaunce, our hearts being
effectually touched with thy holy Spirit, strikinge theserockye hearts of
ours, that they may be resolved into rivers of tears for our sins, making
them soft and meek to receive the print of thy holy word, and seal of thy
blessed spirire, writing with thy finger thine own laws in the^, so, that thou
may read thine own hand, acknowledge thine own seal, and so pass by us,
when thou shall bring thy judgment upon the face of the earth, for the
iniquities thereof: whereof thou haste given, and still give, from time to
time diverse tokens, which we beseech thee may be profitable unto us, whilste
first of al we acknowledge thy hand striking us, and thy counsel calling us
thereby torepentaunce, that thy heavier judgments do not fall upon us, to
our utter destruction.

Moreover, we thank thee (O Lord) for that it has pleased thee to be the
watch-ma^, and as it were the spy of this Church and common wealth, and haste
foreseen all the storms, and treasons coming against it, and against thine
anointed our Souaraigne, who^e thou in mercy have appointed to rule over it,
and have scattered them and brought the^ to naught, and haste pursued certain
of thine enemies and ours unto death, be seeching thee to continue this
watchful and careful eye over us, still to do us good, and to pursue the
rest of thine enemies and ours unto the grave: giving notwithstanding
repentance unto them, unto whom thou haste left place of repentance. And to
this end, raise up the hearts of our most gracious QVEENE and her honorable
Counsel thy Magistrates, that as they sit in thy seat, and are called by thy
name, so they may execute thy justice, which thou so well approouest of,
whereof also thou will require a straighte account at their hands. We desire
thee also to show these thy graces to all other Churches of thine, namely, thy
Church of England, that it may enjoy that peace that thou have given it: and
grant that the same be referred to that end wherefore thou have given it:
namelye, to the full establishment of the throne of thy dear son our Savior
JESUS CHRIST, and to the building of his Kingdom there. We beseech thee also,
for the churches which thy hand has planted long since, especially those,
from who^ we have received knowledge in time of our ignorance, places of refuge
in time of persecution: that it would please thee to continue thy loving
kindness toward them, and therefore cause them to continue their faith toward
thee, and obedience toward thy holy word. And whenever it shall be thy
pleasure, to try them with any kind of affliction, it would please thee to
grant unto them, that they may put their trust in thee, having regard to
the truth of thy promises, and to the good experience that they have of thy
help in times past, and thereby conceive comfort and hope, (O Lord) even of
life in death, and of salvation in destruction. We pray thee also (good lord)
that we may have the feeling of the miseries of our brethren, as members of the
same body, and those that live by the same spirit. And therefore we pray thee,
that according to the manyfold troubles that thou shall visit them with, it
would be thy good pleasure, to measure out rhy grace in such plentiful
manner, that thy children may patiently bear, and joy fullye attend, for the
good hour wherein thou will pull them out of all their troubles. And especially
we pray thy majesty for our brethren that are afflicted for thy Gospel sake:
namelye, those that suffer imprisonment or otherwise in any nation, for the
clearer testimony of it: that it would please thee to give the^ patience in
all their troubles, wisdom and mouths to defend thy cause, against all those
that rise up against it: that thou woldst bless their travels and sufferings,
for that for which they are taken: which is, to give a freer course of thy
gospel into al places. And therewithal we beeseeche thee for the churches of
France and Flaunders, which are so miserably racked and torn in sunder, and
which are almost consumed with these fiery trials: that it would plese thee to
look upon the sighings and gronings, the tears that fall from their eyes
continually, the blood that is shed in all the parts of the Land, the bodies
that lie unburied, to be meat to the fowls of the air, and Fishes of the
Sea, the lonenes of wives lacking there husbands, children their fathers, and
every friend his friend. And for as much as those things are come upon them for
thy names sake, let it be thy good pleasure to help them considering that they
are forsaken of all their friends round about: and therefore pray thee that
thou would not look upon our sins, nor the sins of our forefathers,
whereby we deserve not only this correction, but utter destruction, as Sodom
and Gomorrha: but rather to look vpthy mercies which were before them: whereby
thou have said, that although we do offend, and thou do correct us, yet
thou will not take away thy mercies from us, but wilt leave a remnant which
thou will multiply, and make as the stars of the heaven, and as the sands of
the sea. Look also (O lord) upon the outragiousnes and cruelty, unfaithfulness,
and blasphemy of the enemies, wherewithal they blaspheme thee, and provoke thee
to thy face, and therefore in thine own cause, and for thine own sake, take
the matter into thine own hands, and pay into the Bosoms of thine enymies
double and treble of that they have given to thee. Notwithstanding, those
amongst them, that belong to thine holy election, hasten their calling, that
afterward thy judgment may hasten upon the earth, and the inhabitants thereof
may learn to know thee by thy judgments; that would not understand and come
to thee, by the loving calling of thy Gospel. We pray thee (O Lord) for our
brethren that are up in arms in both those countries: that thou would go
before them, and come behind them, and on every side of them: cover their
heads in the day of battle, teach their hands to fight, and their fingers
to war: give them wisdom and valiantnes, and good succes in all their
enterprises: strike a dizinesse and maze of spirit into the enemies hearts,
and take away from them al force, and disappoint all their counsels. And upon
our brethren in Fla^ders we beseech thee that thou would comfort them over
all thy troubles that they have received, and breaches that have been made in
upon them: and where there are new forces every day gathered, new sleights
invented to destroy the^, it may please thee, to scatter their forces, and
bring their sleights to nothing. Yea grant also (O lord) that that which they
have devised against thy children, may come upon their own heads. And for
our Brethren in France we beseech thee (O Lord) what straights so ever
they be in, thou would deliver them: and although they be forsaken in the
judgment of all the world, and in their own judgments, notwithdanding thou
that have the issues of death in thine own hands, deliver those that are
appointed to death. And finally we most humbly thank thee, for that it has
pleased thee to keep us this day, and all the days and times of our lives,
beseeching thee, that thou would receive us this night in to thy holy
keeping, that we may have quiet rest, not of bodies alone, but of our souls
also, restinge from all those things that are contrary to thy most holy will,
ate^ding while thou raisest us up in the morning, to do al those things that
thou have appointed us. These things we desire of thee, and all other things
(which thou know to be more needful for us, and thy whole Church, better
then we ourselves do know) for Jesus Christ's sake: saiing the same prayer,
that he him self has taught us. Our father. etc.

A form of evening prayer, necessary to be used of all christians in their
houses and families.
Psalm. 55. verse. 16. I will call unto GOD, and the Lord will save me: Evening
and Morning, and at noone will I pray and make a noise, and he will he are my
voice.


WE mostehumblye beseech thee, O gracious God and heavenly Father, even for
thy son Jesus Christ's sake, to pardon and forgive us all our sins, in
thought, word and deed committed against thy holy laws and commandementes,
to turn away from us gratiouslye all those plagues which we most iustlye have
deserved for them, both in this life and in the life to come, working in our
hearts every day by the holy spirit more true and unfeigned sorrow for the^,
with greater care ever hereafter to know thy blessed will revealed in thy word,
and to order all our opinions and doings according to the same, and so much the
rather, O Lord, because of thy manyfolde blessings, whereby thou do daily
move us hereunto, for the which (O heavenly father) make us more heartily
thankful, specially for our recreation at the first after thine own
holiness and righteousness, for our redemption by JESUS CHRIST, when we were
utterly lost, for that knowledge of our Savior, which by the preaching of thy
blessed Gospel thorough thy holy Spirit thou haste wrought in our hearts,
for true repentance, for faith, hope, and love, for watchfulness in our
dooinges, and all other gifts of thy grace pertayninge to our salvation, all
which graces (O Lord) are very weak in us, because of the great wickedness
of our hearts striving against thy holy spirit, so as in thy wrath thou
might iustlye forsake us utterly: (yet O Lord) let it be thy grations
pleasure to increase them in our hearts every day, even so long as we live
in this world, as of thy goodness thou haste begun, that thereby the
assurance of our salvation may be more certaynelye sealed up unto our
own consciences, that so we may also learn to be more truly thankful
unto thy MAJESTY for the benefits of this life: Namelye, that thou have
hitherto ever since we were borne, given us those things that were needful
for our bodies, as health, food apparel, and such like, that thou have kept
us from many dangers, comfort us in all our troubles, and strengthen us in all
our weakness, and giving us grace this day to labor faithfully and truly
in our callinges, having brought us safelye paste all the dangers thereof,
unto this present hour. O Lord forgive us the sins of this day, and of
our whole life, and specially our great unthankfulness for these thy
manifold blessings, and in JESUS CHRIST thy dear son, continue them toward
us ever hereafter both in souls and bodies, and specially this night receive
us into thy blessed keeping, preserve us from all dangers, from sin, from al
ungodly dreams and fancies, granting unto us comfortable rest, so as we may
be the better strengthened to serve thee faithfully in our calling, and giving
us grace always both sleeping and waking, to be ready when thou shall call
us out of this miserable world. Last of all, because thou have commanded us to
pray for others also, we beseech thee good Lord be merciful to all Nations,
specially to those Churches where thy Gospel is truly preached, continue thy
mercy toward this realm, preserve our Queen, bless her Counsel, and all
in aucthoritye with necessary graces, increase the number of faithful
Preachers, strengthen the Godly, lighten the ignorant, convert the wicked, be
merciful unto al schools and places of learning, to all our friends and
kinsfolks, and others, afflicted in body or in soul, granting to every one
of them, as to our selves, those necessary graces which thou knoweste to be
needful for every one of us in our several estates and callinges, to the
glory of thy name, and the better assurance of our salvation through CHRIST
JESUS, in whose name we ask of thy majesty as he has taught us. Our Father.
etc.

Evening prayer for private houses and families.
O Gracious God, and loving Father, according to thy commandment, we do
here present our selves before thy majesty, humbly prostrating our selves
before the throne of mercy, acknowledging and confessing from the bottom of
our hearts that we be miserable sinners, daily breaking thy commandementes,
both in thought, word, and deed, wherein we justly deserve everlasting
damnation, and to be utterly thrown from thy presence: yet, O Lord, we see thy
goodness again toward us, who not suffering us thus to perish in our sins,
haste sent thine own dear son Jesus Christ, to take upon him whatsoever is
due, to reconcile and make us at own with thee again: In him therefore, good
Lord, and through him do we come unto the, beseching the for his sake, that
we feeling the greeuousnesse of our sins and groaning under the burden of
them, may feel the release and ease of them, in that we be through thy holy
spirit assured, and steadfastly believe, that Christ has born the burden of
them, eaueu for us. Grant O Lord, that we being assured hereof, in our
consciences, may through thy holy Spirit be renuee in the inner man, to hate,
detest and abhor sin, and to study to live according to thy blessed will
duringe our whole life.

We do not only pray for our selves, but also for all thy whole Church,
especially such as be persecuted for thy word: grant unto them, that
whether it be thy death or life, they may glorify thy name to their lives end.
Be merciful to this Church of England and Irelande, we beseech thee good
Lord, to preserve every part and member of the same, especially thy servant
ELIZABETH our queen: grant her all such gifts as be needful for so high a
calling, to the advancement of thy glory, and benefit of this common wealth,
to the establishishing of a perfect government of thy Church, according to the
prescript rule of thy blessed word, to the rooting out of al superstition and
relics of Antichriste, to the governing of her subjects in all peace and
tranquillity. Defend her, O Lord, from all conspiracies, treasons, and
rebellions, and so work in the hearts of all her subjects, that knowing her
authority does come from thy heavenly majesty, they may with obedient
hearts humblye obey her in thee and for thee. Preserve the whole Counsel,
and all the magistrates of the realm, that being lightened through thy holy
spirit, they may defend thy truth, suppress wickedness, and maintain
equity. Behold all the Pastors and Preachers of the word, bless their
labors, increase the number of them, place over every Church a paineful
watchman, remove all idle Lubbers and confound the power of Antichriste, and
turn the hearts of the people that they may be obedient to thy truth Bless
the two Universities, Cambridge and Oxenforde, and all the Students of the
same, with all Schools of lerning. Behold all those that be afflicted with
any kind of cross, that they may profit by thy correction in newness of life.

Lastly, for our selves here gathered, we render most hearty thanks to thy
majesty, O Lord which have hitherto from our infancye, preserved us by thy
mercy from all perils and dangers both of soul and body whereunto frail man
is subject, that thou haste sent vno us all things necessary for this present
life, as health, food, apparel, and such like, which many of thy dear
children do want, being notwithstanding as preciousely boughte with the
precious blod of thy dear Son, as we be, and yet lie in mysery and calamity,
oppressed with pouertye, nakedness, imprisonment and banishment, in which case
also, dear Father, thou might have brought us, save only that thou dealest
herein more favorably with us, then with them. For the which thy loving
kindness, we give thee hearty thanks, desiring thee, that as thou have hitherto
thus fauourablye in mercy preserved us by thy protection, and even presently
this day haste brought us past all the dangers thereof: so we beseech thee
good Lord, in like favor behold us this night, that we taking our natural
rest and quietness, may thorough thy protection be defended, that our bodies
resting, our souls may be occupied in beholding thy favor and mercy toward thy
children, still looking for the coming of Lord and Savior hs IESYS CHRIST
for our full redemption. Grant that our sleep be not immoderate, according
to the lust of our flesh, but as much as is sufficient to refreshe our weak
nature: that being thus refreshed both the body and the mind may be more able
to do their several office and function, in that vocation wherein thou have
placed us.

Grant that we laying our bodies down to rest, may be thereby put in mind
of our long rest of death: that as we do now lai down our bodies in bed, so
we may be thereby admonished, that hereafter they shall be laid down in
grave, to be consumed to Duste, Earth, and Ashes, from whence they were taken.
That we having this before our eyes, may be styrred up in mind warelye to
walk in this our pilgrymage, not knoweing when the time shall be of our
departure, but always to be found ready with our lamps of our pure faith
clearly burning, that we may be accepted to meet the Bridegroom, when our
mortal, earthly, and corruptible bodies shall be made like to the glorious body
of our lord and savior Christ Jesus, there to reign with him in perpetual
joy and consolation together with all the elect children of God, continually
lauding with all the heavenly multitude the glorious majesty of thee our Lord
God and heavenly Father, in our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. For these and
whatsoever else thou know to be needful for us and thy whole Church, we
pray unto thee, as he him self has taught us, saying: Our Father. etc.

The Lord bless us and save us, the Lord make his face to shine upon us, and
be merciful unto us: the Lord turn his favorable countenance unto us, and
grant us his peace. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the
Father, and the most comfortable fellowshippe of the holy Ghost, be with us,
preserve and keep us this day and evermore. Amen.

A form of evening prayer, necessary to be used of all christians in their
houses and families.
O Lord prepare our hearts to pray, bow down thine ears (dear Father) and
hear us, open thine eyes and look upon us for thy dear Son Jesus Christ's
sake, and receive our humble confession that we make to thee against our
selves, which have broken all thy laws, and therefore deserve to hauethy heavy
judgments powered upon our heads to our utter destruction, if thou should
enter into judgment with the least of our sins, whereof we have so great
and infinite thousands: notwithstanding we pray thee to turn away thy face
from our sins, and for JESUS CHRIST'S sake to forgive us all that is past,
and grant that we may have the assurance of the forgiveness of our sins,
sealed up by thy holy spirit in our consciences, whereby we knowing that we
are at one with thee, may have our hearts kindled with thy love so fervently,
as it may waste in us all that is against thy holy will. And for this cause
we beseech thee, good Lord, to go forward with the work of our new birth, that
thou haste begun in us, and never take away thy hand, until such time as
thou have made an end of it: and to this end, we beseech thee to slaye in us
every day, more and more the old man with his concupiscences, nailing them to
the cross of thy dear son Jesus Christ: and causing us to feel the power
of his passion in our bodies and in our souls, that we being partakers
thereof, may come also to the fellowship of thy holy resurrection: not only
in that we shall once appear before thee, having these our base bodies
changed, and made like unto his glorious body, but also that we may in the
mean time rise from the death of sin to all newness of life, and that our good
works may so shine before men, that they seeing them may glorify thee our
heavenly father: not only they that are of the self same Religion with us, but
but those also that are enemies unto thy truth, may rather in the time of their
calling by the voice of thy Gospel, yield themselves to be one sheepfold with
us. And we most humbly thank thee (O Heavenly father) for all thy loving
kyndenesses bestowed upon us from time to time, and especially for that old
and ancient Love, wherewithal thou have loved us before the beginng of the
world: for that also that thou calling us by the voice of thy Holy Gospel in
that good time that thou appoyntedst for us, have given us faith, hope, and
love, and all other graces which thou know to be needful for us: which we
beseech thee to increase in us with mighty increases, according to that thou
see we have need of, having regard to our manifold enemies, that we have
to wrestle with: and that we have not to strive with flesh and blood, but
against the Devils themselves. And therefore considering their strength, and
our weakness, their craft and our simplicitye, their watchfulness and our
sluggishnesse, their long experience and our rawnesse, their preparation and
our nakedness, and that we have not only nothing to help us, but also to
carry about us our own concupiscences, ready to betraye us into the hands of
our enemies, it may please thee to furnish us from above, giving us the
strength of thy holy spirit, in the inner man, reaching unto us the complete
harnes of thy grace, wherewith we being armed on both sides, may be prepared
at all assaies against all assaults of our enemies. And forasmuch as in this
weakness we oftentimes give back, and sometimes run away, we pray thee
(O Lord) that with the hand of faith, we may lay hold on the victory of our
Savior Jesus Christ: that albeit we be not able to overcome in our own
persons, yet notwithstanding we may ouercom in his, who has ouercommed for us
all, and so be partakers of those promises that thou have knit unto that
glorious victory. And we most humblye thank thee also for those graces both of
the body and soul, which pertain to this present life: desiring thee to
increase them upon us, and in us, so far forth as thou see we have need
of to thy glory, the commodity of others, and our own comforts: therefore we
beseech thee, Lord, to teach us with thy holy Spirit the lawful use of the^:
that thou would not suffer our hearts to be rooted in them, but that at all
times we may be willing to part from them. And whenever it shall please thee
to call for us, we may willingly go unto thee, as children to their dear
Fathers, strangers unto their own Country, and members of the body unto their
Head: and so much the gladder, by how much thou Lord art better then all the
men in the world, and the kingdom that thou have prepared, better then all
the kingdoms thereof.

We pray not only for our selves (O most merciful Father) but for all those
that thou have appointed to eternal life: beseechinge thee to gather the
number of those that are to be gathered; those that thou haste already
called, thou would always keep: and to this end (good Lord) raise up
faithful ministers both of thy church and common weal, whose hearts thou
would fill with the graces of thy holy spirit meet for their callinges,
meet also for these dangerous times: root out from among thy church, al
ravening and devouring beasts, which to fill their own bellies, distroy thy
flok, ease thy self of all hirelings and idle shepherds, which have no care
nor skill to feed thy flok with the holsom food of thy blessed word, nor to
rule them with that equitye, wherewithal thou will have thy people to be
ruled: those Pastoures that thou haste given, it would please thee to increase
the number of them, those that are fallen asleep and carried away with the
corruptions of these times, that thou would awake, letting them understand
the charge that thou haste committed unto them, the trust that thou have put
them in, and the account that thou will take at their hands. Be gracious (O
Lord) unto this land of ours, and enter not into judgment with the horrible
sins of it, namely, the contempt and light esteming of thy holy word, so many
years offered unto us, and we being trusted withal, so many nations better
then we being passed by, which would have brought forth the fruit thereof
more the^ we have don: and we not only have brought forth no good fruit, but
rotten unsavory, to provoke rhy Majesty withal: notwithstanding all these our
sins, it would please thee in that love, wherwithall thou haste first loved
us, when we hated thee, and in that long patience wherein thou have hitherto
born with us, and do yet bear, and tarriest for our repentance: to grant us
hearty and earnest repentance, our hearts being effectually touched with thy
holy Spirit, strikinge these rockye hearts of ours, that they may be
resolved into rivers of tears for our sins, making them soft and meek to
receive the print of thy holy word, and seal of thy blessed spirit, writing
with thy finger thine own laws in the^, so, that thou may read thine own
hand, acknowledge thine own seal, and so pass by us, when thou shall bring
thy judgment upon the face of the earth, for the iniquities thereof: whereof
thou haste given, and still give, from time to time diverse tokens, which we
beseech thee may be profitable unto us, whilste first of al we acknowledge thy
hand striking us, and thy counsel calling us thereby to repentance, that
thy heavier judgments do not fall upon us, to our utter destruction.

Moreover, we thank thee (O Lord) for that it has pleased thee to be the
watchman, and as it were the spy of this Church and common wealth, and haste
foreseen all the storms, and treasons coming against it, and against ^hine
anointed our SOVEREIGN, whom thou in mercy have appointed to rule over it,
and haste scattered them and brought them to naught, and haste pursued
certain of thine Enemies, and ours unto death, be seeching thee to continue
this watchful and careful eye over us, still to do us good, and to pursue
the rest of thine enemies and ours unto the grave: giving notwithstanding
repentance unto them, unto whom thou haste left place of repentance. And to
this end, raise up the hearts of our most gracious QVEENE, and her honorable
Counsel thy Magistrates, that as they sit in thy seat, and are called by thy
name, so they may execute thy justice, which thou so well approouest of,
whereof also thou will require a straighte account at their hands. We desire
thee also, to show these thy graces to all other Churches of thine, namely,
thy Church of England, that it may enjoy that peace that thou have given it:
and grant that the same be referred to that end wherefore thou have given it:
namelye, to the full establishment of the throne of thy dear son our Savior
JESUS CHRIST, and to the building of his Kingdom there. We beseech thee also,
for the churches which thy hand has planted long since, especially those,
from who^ we have received knowledge in time of our ignorance, places of refuge
in time of persecution: that it would please thee to continue thy loving
kindness toward them, and therefore cause them to continue their faith toward
thee, and obedience toward thy holy word. And whenever it shall be thy
pleasure, to try them with any kind of affliction, it would please thee to
grant unto them, that they may put their trust in thee, having regard to
the truth of thy promises, and to the good experience that they have of thy
help in times paste, and thereby conceive comfort and hope, (O Lord) even of
life in death, and of salvation in destruction. We pray thee also (good lord)
that we may have the feeling of the miseries of our brerhren, as members of the
same body, and those that live by the same spirit. And therefore we pray thee,
that according to the manifold troubles that thou shall visit them with, it
would be thy good pleasure, to measure out thy grace in such plentiful manner,
that thy children may patiently bear, and ioyfullye attend, for the good
hour wherein thou will pull them out of all their troubles. And specially we
pray thy majesty for our brethren, that are afflicted for thy Gospel sake:
namely, those that suffer imprisonment or otherwise in any nation, for the
clearer testimony of it: that it would please thee to give the^ patience in
all their troubles, wisdom and mouths to defend thy cause, against all those
that rise up against it: that thou woldst bless their travels and sufferings,
for that for which they are taken: which is, to give a freer course of thy
gospel into al places And therewithal we beeseeche thee for the churches of
France and Flaunders, which are so miserably racked and torn in sunder, and
which are almost consumed with these fiery trials: that it would plese thee to
lock upon the sighings and gronings, the tears that fall from their eyes
continually, the blood that is shed in all parts of the Land, the bodies that
lie unburied, to be meat to the fowls of the air, and Fishes of the Sea,
the lonenes of wives lacking there husbands, children their fathers, and every
friend his friend. And for as much as those things are come upon them for thy
names sake, let it be thy good pleasure to hepe them considering that they are
forsaken of al their friends round about: and therefore pray thee that thou
would not look upon our sins, nor the sins of our forefathers, whereby we
deserve not only this correction, but utter destruction, as Sodom and
Gomorrha: but rather to look upon thy mercies which were before them: whereby
thou have said, that although we do offend, and thou do correct us, yet
thou will not take away thy mercyes from us, but wilt leave a remnant which
thou will multiply, and make as the stars of the heaven, and as the sands of
the Sea. Look also (O Lord) upon the outragiousnes and cruelty, unfaithfulness,
and blasphemy of the enemies, wherewithal they blaspheme thee, and provoke
thee to thy face, and therefore in thine own cause, and for thine own sake,
take the matter into thine own hands, and pay unto the Bosoms of thine
enymies double and treble of that they have given to thee. Notwithstanding,
those amongst them, that belong to thine holy election, hasten their calling,
that afterward thy judgment may hasten upon the earth, and the inhabitants
thereof may learn to know thee by thy judgments; that would not understand
and come to thee, by the loving calling of thy Gospel. We pray thee (O
Lord) for our brethren that are up in arms in both those countries: that thou
would go before them, and come behind them, and on every side of them:
cover their heads in the day of battle, teach their hands to fight, and
their fingers to war: give them wisdom and valiantnes, and good succes in all
their enterprises: strike a dizinesse and maze of spirit into the enemies
hearts, and take away from them al force, and disappointall their counsels. And
upon our brethren in Fla^ders we beseech thee that thou would comfort them
over al their troubles, that they have received, and breaches that have been
made in upon them: and where there are new forces every day gathered, new
sleights invented to destroy the^, it may please thee, to scatter their
forces, and bring their sleights to nothing. Yea grant also (O lord) that that
which they have devised against thy children, may come upon their own heads.
And for our Brethren in France we beseech thee (O Lord) what straights
soever they be in, thou would deliver them: and although they be forsaken in
the judgment of all the world, and in their own judgments, notwithstanding
thou that have the issues of death in thine own hands, deliver those that are
appointed to death. And finally we most humbly thank thee, for that it has
pleased thee to keep us this day, and all the days and times of our lives,
beseeching thee, that thou would receive us this night into thy holy
keeping, that we may have quiet rest, not of bodies alone, but of our souls
also, restinge from all those things that are contrary to thy most holy will,
attending while thou raisest us up in the morning, to do al those things that
thou haste appointed us. These things we desire of thee, and all other things
(which thou know to be more needful for us, and thy whole church, better
then we our selves do know) for Jesus Christ's sake: saying the same prayer,
that he him self has taught us. Our father. etc.

A PRAYER FOR the Evening.
O Lord God, Father everlasting and full of pity, we acknowledge and confess
that we be not worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, much less to present
our selves before thy majesty, with confidence that thou will hear our
prayers and grant our requests, if we consider our own deseruinges, for our
consciences do accuse us, and our sins do witness against us, and we know that
thou art an upright Judge, which do not justify the sinners and wicked men,
but punni shest the falts of al such as transgress thy commandments: yet most
merciful Father, since it has pleased thee, to Command us to call upon thee
in all our troubles and aduersityes promising even then to help us when we
feel our selves (as it were) swallowed up of death and desperation. We utterly
renounce al worldly confidence, and fly to thy Sovereign bounty, as our only
stae and refuge: beseeching thee not to call to remembrance our manifold
sins and wickedness: whereby we continuallye provoke thy wrath and indignation
against us: neither our negligence and unkindness, which have neither worthily
esteemed, nor in our lives sufficiently expressed the sweet comfort of thy
Gospel revealed unto us: but rather to accept the obedience, and death of thy
son Jesus Christ, who by offering up his body in sacrifice once for all, has
made a sufficient recompense for all our sins. Have mercy therefore upon us
(O Lord) and forgive us our offenses. Teach us by thy holy spirte, that we
may rightly weigh them, and earnestly repent for the same. And so much the
rather (O Lord) because that the reprobate and such as thou have forsaken
cannot praise thee nor call upon thy name: but the repenting heart, the
sorrowful mind, the conscience oppressed, hungring and thirsting for thy
grace, shall ever set forth thy praise and glory. And albeit we be but worms
and duste, yet thou art our Creator, and we be the work of thy hands: yea thou
art our Father, and we thy children: thou art our she p-heard, and we thy
flock: thou art our redeemer, and we thy people who^ thou have bought: thou art
our God, and we thine inhertiance. Correct us not therefore in thine anger (O
lord) neither according to our deserts punish us, but mercifullye chastise us
with a fatherly affection, that all the world may know, that at what time
soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the botto^ of his heart, thou will put away his wickedness out of thy remembrance.

Finally for as much as it has pleased thee to make the night for man to rest
in, as thou haste ordained him the day to travail, grant O dear Father that
we may so take our bodily rest, that our souls may continuallly watch for the
time that our Lord Jesus Christ shall appear for our deliverance out of this
mortal life, and in the mean season that we not overcome by any fantasies,
dreams or other temptations, may fully set our minds upon thee, love thee,
fear thee, and rest in thee. Furthermore that our sleep be not excessive or
over much after the insatiable desires of the flesh, but only sufficient to
content our weak nature, that we may be the better disposed in all godly
conversation, to the glory of thy holy name, and profit of our brethren. So be
it.

A Prayer for all times.
O Lord God, Father of mercy and God of al consolation, without whom we have
neither hope nor comfort, we pore wretches and miserable sinners, beseech thee
of thy fatherly goodness to look upon us, and so make us partakers of thy
gracious goodness, that we may still increase in all goodness, so that evermore
we may set forth thine honor and glory: let our conversation be such, that a
great mani beholding our good works, may glorify thee our heavenly father:
and so direct our ways, that we may hold forth the profession of thy gospel, as
a lanthorn to lighten the steps of a great many that they may turn to thee,
and praise thy name in their visitation. Thus (O Lord) we beseech thee to
deal with us, that in deed we may be vessels of honor unto thee, now to set
forth the praise of thy name, and after this transitory life, to behold thy
glory, who haste immortality alone, and dwell in light, that no man has
approached unto: remove far from us our sins and iniquities, that they may not
separate between us and thee: blot out all our offenses, and make our prayers
righteous, that thou may favorably grant our requests: look upon us with
thy favorable mercy, that thou may have pity upon us, and behold in the
righteousness of thy beloved Son Christ Jesus, and that we may be presented
faultlesse in thy sight: and thou accepting us as only, we may find the Grace
evermore to set forth thy honor and glory, and to speak of thy praises in
the mids of all thy people. Let us love (O Lord) the things that thee good,
and hate the things that are evil: let us delight in all things that may
please thee, and let us be grieved with whatsoever is displeasant in thy
sight. And to the intent we may have true understanding and be able to
discern between things, what is good or evil, we beseech thee let thy word
dwell plentifully in us, which may guide our understandings so, that we may
abound in all knowledge, and do according to that which is righteous. And in
this estate of the true Christianity, being instructed in mind, and ready in
body to all holy obedience, we beseech thee make us to grow and increase
from grace to grace, from faith to faith, until we come unto the fullness of
age to be perfect members of the body of Christ, waiting for the blessed hope
of thine elect, and sighing in spirit until that thy children shall be
revealed. In the mean season, let us sigh withal those that have received the
first fruits of thy spirit, that these days of sin may cease, that satan be
trode^ down under feet, that Antichrist may be revealed, yet to many thousands
that be in ignorance, that the number of thine elect may be full, the body of
thy saints made perfect, all tears wiped from our eyes, even then when thy
son shall appear again the second time, to judge the quick and the dead,
which time (O Lord) send quickly, according to thy good will, and teach us to
pray with all thy Saints, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: grant this (O Father)
for thy Sons sake, in whose name we pray unto thee. And although we be but
Earth and Ashes, yet are we bold to say unto thee, (the GOD of all glory) even
as he has taught us. Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name.
etc.

A Prayer for the estate of the whole church.
O Lord our God and heavenly Father, forasmuch as by thy holy word we are
commanded in our prayprayers, not only to be mindful of our selves, but also
of al others thy children, yea, even of our enemies: we commend unto thy
Majesty all thy whole true and Catholic Church, and every member thereof:
that as it has pleased thy goodness by the bright beams of thy holy word, to
shine over the whole world, wherbi thou have expelled, driven away, and caused
to vanish, the dark and misty clouds of ignorance and superstition, so thou
would vouchesafe by thy holy spirit to touch the hearts of men, that they may
ioyfullye embrace that, thine so high treasure sent amongst us, that thorough
our unthankfulness we provoke not thy majesty in anger to take it from us.
Crush, bruise, and destroy with the breath of thy mouth, the mighty power of
that man of sin, which so proudly exalts him self above all that is called
God. Let not thy simple flock (dear father) in whose consciences he of long
time has, and yet does sit as God, be any longer poisoned with his sweet
enticing poisons: but so lighte^ their hearts that they may perceive his
iuglinges, and embrace the sweet and comfortable doctrine of life everlasting,
revealed in thy glorious Gospel.

And for as much as it has pleased thee in mercy above all nations in the
earth, to power down the sweet showers of thy Heavenly Graces, upon this our
English nation abundantly, in more plentiful wise watering the same with the
gifts of the holy spirit, in promoting thy Gospel, and overthrowing
Idolatri, we beseech thee continue thy favor toward the same, and utterly root
out al remnants, relics, and Monumentes of Idolatry, that thy glorious name
may be throughlye exalted, in sincere, pure, and holy worship. And as thou
haste in mercy from amongst us in this thy Church, utterly banished all false,
venomous and poysonfull doctrine, wherewith the souls of thy Children
heretofore have been wounded to death, and in place thereof, have placed the
true and comfortable doctrine of life everlasting, wherewith the souls of thy
Children be fed and nourished to everlasting joy: so in like mercy and
favor we beseech thee dear father, establishe in the same thy church, a true,
perfect, and sincere regiment thereof, according to the prescript rule of thy
blessed word, all fantasies of man's brain, and Dreams of humane policy
utterly abolished: that thy glorious Majesty only may be exalted in the
light of thy glorious gospel: and that thy Church flourishe and increase,
being thorough thy protection aided, supported, maintained and defended: we
beseech thee by thy holy Spirit, guide and rule every part and member
thereof, especially thy servant ELIZABETH our Queen, whom thy gracious
favor and providence has appointed a chief member in the same: under whose
wings next unto thy protection it has a chief succor and support. Grant
unto her, O LORD, a pure and perfect zeal above all things to promote thy
Glory: first and chiefly in laboring and endeavoring of her self earnestly, in
wiping away and purging out of thy Church all blots and deformityes, to reduce
the same to a pure and sincere form of worship, agreing to thy blessed word,
utterly to move all stumblinge blocks, which stay and hinder the course of
thy gospel: give her in like manner O Lord, the spirit of wisdom, discretion,
and government, that with equitye and justice she may see this whole Realm,
which thou have committed to her charge, peaceablye and quietly governed: that
she may studiously labor, that as well thorough the whole realm virtue be
exalted, and vice abandoned: as specially in her own house and Court, that all
wicked vanities of this world, all licentious and inordinate life, all
flattering and dissimulation being utterly banished, the fear of thy glorious
Majesty may so reign in the hearts of all within her palace and Court,
that their lives and conversation may be agreeable to thy blessed will, in
sincerity and true holiness and integrity of life, that from them, as from the
head, may shine puretye of life and conversation, as an example and pattern
of true Godliness to the whole Realm. Preserve her, we beseech thee good Lord,
from all conspyracies and treasons, that if it be thy good will, she may have
a long and quiet reign over us, to the benefit of thy Church, and the
advancement of thy glory. Indue the whole counsel, good lord with the true and
perfect wisdom, that in all their consultatio^s and counsels, having thee
present before their eyes, thy may consult of those things, which principally
and cheefely may be for the advancement of thy glory, and the commodity of thy
church, and next for the quiet peace and gracious gouernmente of this realm. So
lighte^ al inferior magistrates of this realm, good Lord, with the brightness
of thy holy Spirit, that understanding thy will, they may zealously defend,
maintain and further the course of the Gospel with the sword of justice, cut
off the wicked, and cherish the godly. Defend and govern by the holy spirit,
the Pastors of thy church, and laborers in thy vine yard, that they may
zealously, earnestly and diligently feed thy flock committed unto them, with
the food of life thy blessed word, wherewith their souls may be nourished to
life everlasting. Increase the number of them, dear Father, place over every
flock a godly, learned and painful Pastor, who may painfully and carefully
trauail, every one in his charge, to bring thy people (which now alas in most
parts do wander and go astray like lost sheep) to the true knowledge of
thee their lord and God, and of their dear Son Christ Jesus their Savior. And
for thy mercy we beseech thee, to take pity upon thy poor and and simple
flock, root out al ravening wolves, which have craftilye crept into thy
sheepefolde and do make havoc of the souls of thy simple flock. Cast out
all hirelinges, timeseruers, and dumb Dogs, which to fill their bellyes
only, have thrust them selves among the sheep, and do pitifully suffer the
flock of Christ thy son, to be devoured and scattered of the wolf. Stir up,
good Lord, and place in their rooms faithful shepherds, which diligently,
paynfully, carefully and earnestly may labor in thy vineyard, seek to win the
souls of thy people, out of the tyranny and power of Satan, to the freedom of
thy dear son Christ Jesus our Lord.

And that thy Church may be furnished with Godly learned pastors, we beseech
thee prosper and increase in all Godly knowledge, all Schools of learning,
especially the two vnyuersities, CAMBRIDGE and OXFORD: grant deer father unto
all the students of the same, that the cheef end of all their studyes may be
to the furtheraunce of thy Church, and maintenance of the common wealth. Bless
their studies, dear Father, that all vain studies set a side, they may so
fructify and profit in all profitable and godly sciences, that hereafter they
may become profitable members in thy Church, and godly vpholders of the common
wealth.

Grant, good Lord, to all the whole Commons of this realm, that their hearts
being touched with a sincere fear and reverence of thy heavenly majesty,
acknowledging thy mercy in placing over them a godly Princess, they may every
one in their callinges, walk in all true and humble obedience unto her, in
thee and for thee, without resistaunce, tumultes, insurrections, conspiracies,
or rebellions: knowing that to resist the higher powers, is to rebel against
thy majesty. Finally we beseech thy goodness, so guide and govern the hearts of
all the whole realm of every degree, that every one in his calling, being by
thy grace supported, may so occupy his Talent, that thy glory in all things may
be advanced, thy Church enlarged, and this whole realm into sincere godliness
virtuously reduced.

Moreover we beseech the (O Lord our God) in mercy behold all those which
suffer persecution for thy glorious words sake, whether it be imprisonment,
death, or banishment, or whatsoever else: strengthen then them good Lord, that
they having thee alwais before their eyes, and the glory laid up for them in
the life to come, may continue constaunt in defending thy truth, with out fear
of man or vain allureme^ts of the world, that whether it come by life or death,
they may glorify thy holy name in continuing in the truth to the end.
Preserve in like manner we beseech thee, all others thy children, whom it has
pleased thee with any other kind of Cross to chasten for their amendment,
whether by pestilence, famine, war, poverty, imprisonment, sickness or
banishment, trouble of conscience, vexation of spirit, disquietnes of mind,
want of spiritual comfort, or what soever kind of affliction of body or
minds, thou do try them with: that by thy holy spirit being fully assured,
that thou by this thy correction mindest to call them back to a feeling of
their sin, and due consideration of their life and conversation, that they may
patiently abide thy Fatherly trial, looking for aid, help and comfort from
thee, when it seems most convenient to thy godly wisdom: and being by thy
merciful hand once delivered, may acknowledge thy singular power and work,
giving all laud and praise to thy glorious Name: and afterward, all the
days of their life, study to live before thee in sincerity and perfect
holiness, even to their lives end. Amen.

A PRAYER FOR all estates.
O Lord God Father of light, with who^e is no change, neither yet shadow of
change, but haste established thine appointed counsels, which shall not be
changed for ever: thou (O God) haste made among us this diversity of estates
and degrees, according as every common wealth requires, keep us all, we
beseech thee, that we may walk obedientlye in our calling, and follow the
steps that thou haste set before us, even from the highest to the lowest, let
us accomplish that duty unto which thou have appointed us, and with a
faithful remembrance of thy promise made of old to our father ABRAHAM, that
thou art his exceeding great reward, we may likewise depend on thy
providence, and seek not any shameful ways to get our living, wandringe from
the righteousness of our vocation, into the manifold errors of sin and
iniquity: look upon us (O Lord) and enrich us with thy grace, make us
obedient to our inferiors, meek toward our enemies, faithful to our
friends, true and just toward all men, that we may dwell steadfastly rooted
in the hope of thine elect, until thou shall make an end of all our labors:
look upon our most Excellent Queen, and her honorable Counsel, and as thou
haste called them to the highest room, so give unto the^ the greatest measures
of grace, that they faithfully dispense the talents committed unto them: lead
them with the good King DAVID into thy sanctuary, that they may see thy loving
kindness which is better the^ life, and say with the Prophet: All flesh is
grass, and the glory of man is as the flower of the field, and so consecrate
them selves to do thy will, offer up their bodies to be holy, lively and
reasonable sacrifices unto thee, that they may be Nurses and nurs-fathers unto
the Church: look also we beseech thee upon thy ministers whom thou haste
appointed to the preaching of thy Gospel, make the^ (O God) faithful
dispensers of thy mysteries, without respect of persons to do the work unto
the which thou haste appointed them, that they may convert Sinners, and have
their glory perfect in the day of christ: and knitte us together in peace and
love, that we may be full of compassion one toward an other, to rejoice
with them that rejoice, and mourn with them that mourn, especially to
instruct one an other in the ways of righteousness, that by our mutual help
we may the better withstand our enemy, and dwell, safe in hope of thine
elect, till our days shall be full, and we shall walk the ways of all the
world, which time we beseech thee bring us happelye unto, even for thy Sons
sake we beseech thee, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, three persons
and one God, be all honor and glory now and for evermore. Amen, Amen.

A PRAYER FOR the Queen.
O Gracious Lord, and most merciful Father, we acknowledge thee the Lord of
lords, and the King of Kings, creating at the beginning, and ruling al things
evermore in heaven and in earth, according to thy wonderful wisdom and power:
and our selves to be thy poor servants, the work of thy hands, and the
sheep of thy pasture, subjected to thy high majesty, and depending upon thy
fatherly providence for all things. Nevertheless, seeing thou in thy wisdom
annoyntest kings and Queens, appoynting them to rule over thy people, to sit
as Lieuetenauntes in thy seat, to minister justice, and most of all, as
Fathers and Nurses to maintain and cherishe thy Church: commanding us not
only to obey and honor them, but moreover to pray for them, as watching over
us for our good: we therefore beseech thee for thy great names sake, and for
JESUS CHRIST'S sake, to show thy mercy to all Kings and Princes, that mayntaine
thy glorious gospel: but especially we pray thee to bless our gracious
Queen, in all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, and in all temporal
blessings, according to thy good pleasure, that in the great measures of thy
effectual love, she may more and more find great increases of verttue, and
wisdom, and strength in Christ Jesus to the faithful and happy discharge of
her duty: that her holiness, and joy, and zeal of thy house may be multiplied
and enerlasting. And, seeing it has pleased thee of thy singular mercy, to
give her this especial honor, first to suffer for thy glorious truth, and
afterward miraculousli delivering her out of the hands of all Her enemies,
and to set up a crown upon her head, and to make her the instrumente to
advance thy glory and gospel for which she suffered, and to bring it out of
darkness into light, out of persecution into this great and long peace: as we
give thee most hearty thanks for this singular benefit, so we beseech thee to
make her and us evermore tha^k full for it, and in thy good pleasure still to
preserve her, for the continuance of these blessings toward us, with all
increase from time to time, to thy glory, the benefit of thy Church, and her
infinite peace in Christ Jesus, the Prince of peace. And furthermore we pray
thee for her, and the estate, that such as be enemies of the Gospel, and her
enemies also, for the defense thereof, may not despise the peace offered them to
repentance, but that they may account thy long suffering, and her peaceable
and vnblouddy government an occasion of salvation to their souls, and
unfeigned love to the truth, and their merciful souerain. Otherwise if they
still remain disobedient to the truth, disobedient to her hihgnesse, and
dangerous to the state, then (O God of our salvation) as thou have discovered
them, so discover them still, as thou have prevented them, so prevent them
still, and let their eyes wax weary with looking, and their hearts faint with
waiting for the coming of that, which yet comes not, neither let it come (O
Lord) we beseech thee, but a blessed, and a long reign to her, and peace
to SION for evermore.

Also (dear Father) so bless, so love, so in thy spirit sanctify and keep
her, that she may in the spirit of counsel and fortitude, so rule that other
Sister also, namelye, this her common wealth, that they may flourishe
together, and grow up together as Palm trees, in beauty, and in strength,
giving aid and help one to an other, that in the Church the glory of God
may appear, as the sun in his brightness, and that the land may flow with
milk and honey, and true peace abound therein, as in the tryumphant reign of
DEBORA.

These graces (O lord) are great, and we miserable sinners, unworthy of the
least of them: therefore look not to us but to thy self, not to our
iniquityes but to thy great mercies, accepting the death and passion of thy
son, as a full ransom for all our offenses: throwing the^ into the bottom
of the sea, and making his cross and resurrection effectual in us to all
obedience and godliness, as becomes thy saints, that to all other thy good
blessings toward our gracious soueraign, this may be added, that she governs
blessedlye, over a blessed people, a people blassed of the Lord, and beloved
of the Lord, and that thy graces may abound as the waters of the sea, in the
Prince and in the people, in the Church and in the Common wealth, from day to
day till the day of our translation into the kingdom, where justice inhabiteth,
where we also shall inhabit and reign with thee, according to thy promise, for
ever. Grant us these things (O merciful Father) for thy dear son our Lord
Jesus Christ his sake, in whose name we crave them at thy merciful hand,
praying furthermore for them, as he has taught us to pray. Our father which
art in heaven. etc.

A PRAYER TO be said in visiting of the sick.
O Our good GOD, Lord and Father, the Creator and conseruer of all things, the
fountain of all goodness and benignitye, like as (among other thine infinite
benefits, which thou of thy great goodness and grace do distribute
ordinarilye unto all men (thou give them health of body, to the end that they
should the better know thy great liberalitye, so that they might be the more
ready to serve and glorifye thee with the same: so contrariwise, when we have
ill behaved our selves in offending thy majesty, thou have accustomed to
admonish us, and call us unto thee by diverse and sundry chastisementes,
thorough the which it has pleased thy goodness, to subdue and tame our frail
flesh, but especially by thy grievous plagues of sickness and diseases, using
the same, as a mean, to awake and stir up the great dulnes and negligence that
is in us all, and aduertising us of our evil life by such infirmities and
dangers, especially when as they threaten the very death, which (as assured
messengers of the same) are all to the flesh full of extreme anguishe and
torments, although they be notwithstanding to the spirit of the elect as
medicines both good and wholesome. For by the^ thou do move us to return
unto thee for our salvation, and to call upon thee in our afflictions to have
thine help, which art our dear and loving father. In consideration whereof we
most earnestlye pray unto thee our good God, that it would please thine
infinite goodness to have pity on this thy poor creature whom thou have, as
it were, bound and tied to the bed by most grievous sickness, and brought to
great extremity by the heaviness of thine hand.

O Lord, enter not into a count with him, to render the reward due unto his
works, but through thine infinite mercy remitte all his faults, for the which
thou have chastised him so gently, and behold rather the obedience which thy
dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord has rendered unto thee, to wit, the
sacrifice which it has pleased thee to accept as a full recompense for all the
iniquities of the^ that receive him for their justice and sanctification, yea
for their only savior.

Let it please thee, O GOD, to give him a true zeal and affection to receive
and acknowledge him for his only redeemer: to the end also, that thou may
receive this sick person to thy mercy, qualifiyng all the troubles, which his
sins, the horror of death, and dreadful fear of the same may bring to his
weak conscience: neither suffer thou, O Lord, the assaults of the mighty
adversary to prevail, or to take from him the comfortable hope of salvation,
which thou give to thy dearly beloved children.

And for as much as we are all subject to the like state and condition, and to
be visited with like battle, when it shall please thee to call us un to the
same: we beseech thee most humblye, O Lord, with this thy poor Creature,
whom thou now presently chastisest, that thou will not extend thy rigorous
judgment against him, but that thou would vouchsafe to show him thy mercy
for the love of thy dear son Jesus Christ our Lord, who, having suffered
the most shameful, and extreme death of the Cross, bare willinglye the fault
of this poor patient to the end that thou might acknowledge him, as one
redeemed with his precious blood, and received into the communion of his body,
to be participant of eternal felicity in the company of thy blessed Angels:
wherefore, O Lord, dispose, and move his heart to recieu by thy grace with all
meekness this gentle and fatherly correction, which thou haste laid upon
him, that he may endure it patientlye and with willing obedience, submitting
himself with heart and mind to thy blessed will and favorable mercy, wherein
thou now visitest him after this sort for his profit and salvation. It may
please thy goodness, O Lord, to assist him in all his anguishes and troubles.
And although the tongue and voice be not able to execute their office in this
behalf to set forth thy glory, that yet at the least thou will stir up his
heart to aspire unto thee only, which art the only fountain of goodness, and
thou will root and settle in his heart the sweet promises which thou have made
unto us in Christ Jesus thy son our Savior, to the intent he may remain
constant against all the assaults and tumult, which the enemy of our salvation
may raise up to trouble his conscience.

And seeing it has pleased thee, that by the death of thy dear Son, life
eternal should be communicated unto us: and by the shedding of his blood, the
washing of our sins should be declared, and that by his resurredio^ also,
both justice and immortality should be given us, it may please thee to apply
this holy and wholesome medicine to this thy poor Creature in such extremity,
taking from him all trembling and dreadful fear, and to give him a stout
courage in the mids of all his present aduersityes.

And for as much as all things, O heavenly father, be known unto thee, and
thou can according to thy good pleasure, minister unto him all such things
as shall be necessary and expedient, let it please thee, O Lord, so to
satisfy him by thy grace, as may seem most meet unto thy divine majesty

Receive him, Lord, into thy protection: for he has his recourse and access
to thee alone, and make him constant and firm in thy commandments and
promises, and also pardon all his sins both secreat, and those which are
manifest: by the which he has most grieuouslye provoked thy wrath and severe
judgments against him, so as in place of death (the which both he and al we
have iustlye merited) thou will grant unto him that blessed life, which we
also attend and look for, by thy grace and mercy.

Nevertheless, O heavenly Father, if thy good pleasure be that he shall yet
live longer in this world, it may then please thee to augment in him thy
graces, so as the same may serve unto thy glory: yea, Lord, to the intent he
may conform himself the more diligently and with more carefulnes, to the
example of thy son Christ Jesus: and that in renouncing him self he may
cleave fullye unto him, who, to give consolation and hope unto all sinners, to
obtain remission of all their sins and offenses, has carried with him into
the Heavens, the Thief which was crucified with him upon the cross.

But if the time by thee appointed be come, that he shall depart from us unto
thee, make him to feel in his conscience, O Lord, the fruit and strength of
thy grace, that thereby he may have a new taste of thy Fatherly care, over him
from the beginning of his life, unto the end of the same, for the love of thy
dear son Jesus Christ our Lord.

Give him thy grace, that with a good heart, and full assurance of faith he
may receive to his consolation so great and excellent a treasure, to wit, the
remission of his sins in CHRIST JESUS thy Son, who now presents him to
this pore person in distress, by the virtue of thy promises revealed unto
him by thy word, which he has exercised with us in thy Church and
congregation, and also in using the sacraments, which thou have established
for confirmation of al their faith that trust in thee unfeignedly.

Let true faith, O lord, be unto him as a most sure buckler thereby to avoid
the assaults of death and more boldly walk for the advancement of eternal
life, to the end that he having a most lively apprehension thereof, may rejoice
with thee in the heavens eternally.

Let him be under thy protection and gouerna^ce, O heavenly father, and although
he be sick, yet can thou heal him: he is cast down, but thou can lift him
up: he is sore troubled, but thou can send redres: he is weak, thou can
send strength: he acknowledges his uncleanness, his spots, his filthiness and
iniquityes, but thou can wash him, and make him clean: he is wounded, but
thou can minister most souerain salues: he is fearful and trembling, but
thou can give him good courage and boldness. To be short, he is, as it were
utterly lost, and as a strayed sheep, but thou canste call him hoame to thee
again. Wherefore, O Lord, seeing that this poor creature (thine own
workmanship) resigneth him wholly into thine hands, receive him into thy
merciful protection. Also we poor miserable creatures, which are, as it were,
in the field ready to fight til thou with draw us from the same, vouchsafe so
to strengthen us by thine holy spirit, that we may obtain the victory in
thy name, against our deadly and mortal enemy. And furthermore, that the
affliction and combat of this thy pore creature in most grievous torments,
may move us to humble our selves with all reverent fear and trembling under
thy mighty hand, knowing that we must appear before thy judgment seat, when
it shall please thee to appoint. But O lord, the coruption of our frail nature
is such that we are utterly destitute of any mean to appear before thee,
except it pease the to make us such as thou thy self requirest us to be: and
further, that thou give us the spirit of meekness and humility, to rest and
stay wholye on those things which thou only commaundest.

But for as much as we be all together unworthy, to inioye such benefits, we
beseech thee to receive us in the name of thy dear Son our Lord, and master,
in whose death and sanctification stands wholly the hope of our salvation It
may also please thee, O Father of comfort and consolation, to strengthen with
thy grace, those which imploye their travel and diligence to the ayding of
this sick person, that they faint not by overmuch and continual labor, but
rather to go heartily and cheerfully forward in doing their endeavors toward
him: and if thou take him from them, the^ of thy goodness to comfort them so,
as they may patiently bear such departing, and praise thy name in all things.
Also, O heavenly father, vouchsafe to have pition al other sick persons, and
such as be by any ways or means afflicted, and also on those who as yet are
ignorant of thy truth, and appertain nevertheless unto thy kingdom.

In like manner on those that suffer persecution, tormented in prisons, or
otherwise troubled by the enemies of thy veritye, for bearing Testimonye to the
same: finally, on all the necessityes of thy people, and upon all the ruins or
decays, which satan has brought upon thy church. O father of mercy, spread
forth thy goodness upon all those that be thine, that we forsaking our selves,
may be the more inflamed and confirmed to rest only upon thee alone. Grant
these our requests, O our dear Father, for the love of thy dear son our
Savior Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee in unity of the holy
Ghost, true God, for evermore,

PRAYERS AND thankesgiuinges to be said before and after meat.
A Prayer before meat.
O Lord our God and heavenly Father, in thy beloved son Jesus Christ, work
in our hearts true repentance, with increase of a true and liuelye faith: make
us thankful unto thy Majesty for all thy benefits which we continually do
receive at thy merciful hand: Grant us the grace, that we may at this
present with thankful hearts as from thy hands receive meat and drink for the
sustenaunce of our bodies, with moderation use them to thy glory, and through
thy blessing, receive by the^ perfect nourishment: and above all, we crave at
thy hands, good Lord, the heavenly food of our souls, which never perishes:
that through thy gracious goodness, we may be nourished and strengthened both
in soul and body to eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

A THANKESGIVING after meat.
Eternal God, and merciful father, we yield unto thee most hearty thanks,
for all thy benefits so plentifully bestowed upon us: especially that thou
have at this present, fed and nourished our mortal bodies with meat and
drinck: we beseech thee in like manner let our souls feel the sweet taste
of thy heavenly food, that we being fed and nourished at thy hands, both in
soul and body, may in this life walk as it becomes thy children, and in
the life to come, be received to thine eternal kingdom of glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord and savior. Amen.

A PRAYER BEfore meat.
O Merciful and heavenly Father, who give food to every living creature,
and with out whom nothing can live, bless and sanctify our meats and
drinckes, which we are now about to receive, that they may turn to the
nourishment of our bodies, whereunto thou have appointed the^: that we
acknowledging thy gracious goodness in providing so liberallye for our bodies,
may with cheerful hearts be lifted up earnestly to long after the food of our
souls whereby we may be fed eternally, through Jesus Christ our savior. Ame^.

A THANKESGIVING after meat.
O Heavenly Father, for these thy benefits wherewith thou haste now
sufficiently fed our bodies, we beseech thee make us thankful: and as we
feel the sweetness of them pleasant to our bodies: so we beseech thee, good
Lord, that the food of our souls, may be as pleasant and comfortable unto our
souls, and that we may with as careful hearts, provide for the nourishment
of our souls, as we are care full for the nourishment of our bodies, till it
shall shall please thy majesty to bring us to the place where we shall never
hunger nor thirst more, but live eternally, thorough Christ our Savior. Amen.

A PRAYER BEFORE meat.
O Lord our God and heavenly Father, which haste provided meat and drink for
the nourishment of our bodies, give us grace to use them reuerentlye, as from
thine hands with thankful hearts. And as we do greatly hunger and thirste
for this food of our bodies, so we beseech thee good Lord, that our souls
may earnestlye hunger after the like food and nourishment, that with earnest
minds we may seek to have our souls fed and refreshed eternallye, thorough
our only Lord and savior Jesus christ. So be it.

A THANKESGIVING after meat.
Wonderful is thy providence, O Lord, in preserving all living creatures.
Grant us grace we beseech thee that with thankful hearts we may acknowledge thy
bountiful goodness, so liberally giving unto us all things needful:
especially feedingvs so ple^tifully at this present with thy manyfold
blessings, whereof agreat many of our brethren are destitute, as in like manner
we should be, if thou did not deal more liberalitye with us: grant us
therefore, gracious Lord, that we may be thankful for this thy goodness,
and to be mindful of them, which have not such abundance to relieve them: that
being all members of one body, we may at length reign with our head Christ,
to whom be al honor and glory, world with out end. Amen.

A GODLY PRAYER FOR the Morning.
And may be sung to the tune of the third Psalm.
O God which art my part and lot, my comfort and my stay:
I have decreed and promised, thy law to keep alvvay.
Mine earnest heart did humbly sue, in presence of thy face:
As thou therefore have promised,
Lord grant me of thy grace,
My life I have examined, and tried my secret heart:
Which to thy statutes caused me, my feet straight to convert.
I did not stay nor linger long, as they that flouthfull are:
But hastily thy laws to keep,
I did my selffe prepare.
The cruel hands of wicked men,
have made of me their pray:
Yet vvoulde I not thy law forget, not from thee go astray.
Thy righteous judgment shewde toward me, so great is and so high:
That even at midnight will I rise, thy name to magnify.
Companion am I to all them, which fear thee in their heart:
And neither will for love not dread, from thy commandment start.
Thy mercyes (lord) most plenteously, do all the world fulfill:
Oh teach me how I may obey, thy statutes and thy will.
All laud and praise be to the Lord,
Oh that of might art most:
To God the father and the son, and to the holy ghost.
As it in the beginning was, for ever heretofore:
And is now at this present time,
And shall be evermore.
A GODLY PRAYER FOR the Evening.
And may be sung to the tune of the third Psalm.
ACcording to thy promise Lord, so have thou with me dealt:
For of thy grace in sundry sorts, have I thy servant felt.
Teach me to judge alvvaies aright, and give me knowledge sure:
For certainly believe I do, that thy precepts are pure.
Yet thou did touch me with thy rod I erred and went astray:
But I will keep thy holy word, and make it all my stay.
Thou art both good and gracious, and give most liberally:
Thy ordinauces how to keep, therefore (O Lord) teach me.
The proud and wicked men have forgde, against me many a lie:
Yet thy commandments still observe, with all my heart will I.
Their hearts are svvoln with worldly wealth, as grease so are they fat:
But in thy law do I delight, and nothing seek but that.
Who so with reverence does thee sear, to me let them retire:
And such as do they couenats knevv and them alone desire.
My heart without all wavering, let on thy laws be bent:
That no confusion come to me, wherein I should be shent.
All laud and praise be to the Lord,
Oh that of might art most:
To God the father and the son, and to the holy ghost.
As it in the beginning was, for ever heretofore:
And is now at this present time,
And shall be evermore.
FINIS.

