THE TRVE AND perfect order to distill oils out of al manner of spices seeds,
roots, and gummes with their perfect taste, smell, and savor: where unto is
added some of their virtues gathered out of sundry aucthors.

As Gualterius, Riffius, Guinthery Andernaty, Phillipus, Hermanus, Leonardo,
Phirauante, Phallopius, Cardanus.

Here begins the true order to make oiles of all manner of spises, Seades,
Roots and Gumes with their virtues gathered out of diverse and sundry auth^rs.
To make oil of scinamond.
TAke Scinamond as much as ye will and stamp, it grosely, than put it into a
glass with pure Aquauite and so let it stand v. or vi. days, than distill it
with a small fire and there will come forth both oil and water, the which ye
shall separate one from another for the oil will sink to the bottom, some use
to distill it with wine and some with Rose water, ye shall understand that this
oil is of a marvelous nature for it perceth through flesh and bones and is
very hot and dry. and therefore it is good against all cold and moist
deseases, and in specially for the heart, and head in so much that if a man did
lie specheles and could scant draw his wind it would presently recover him
again, so that his time be not yet come, most miracolous to see, and to be
short this oil is of such operation and virtue that if a man drink never so
little thereof he shall feel the working thereof in his fingers and tooes, with
great marvel and therefore to shut up the some of his virtues it perceth
through the whole body and helps al diseases, that are come through cold and
flegmatike matter, this oil is hot and sharp, it disgesteth and makes thine
and drives down wemens terremes, it helps women that have great pain and
smart in their travel, and bringing forth their fruit, if ye give the pacient
a little of this oil with oil of Myrre in wine to drink and anoint the parts
therewith, the face and hands being anointed with this oil it drives away the
messells and spotes, it warmeth the breast and helps the cold cough, it
consumes all cold flixes, that proceeds from the brain and head, the
tempels and nostrelles anointed therewith, takes away pains of the head and
causes quiet sleep, this oil may be occupied in stead of the natural balm
for many diseases, ye shall note that this water is also good against the
aforesaid diseases, but yet nothing of such force and strength for one drop of
oil will do more than vi. spone fulles of the water, Gaulterus riffius and
Philippus Hermanus:

To make oil of Cloves.
THis oil is made in the same order as ye did make the oil of Scinamond and
sinketh also to the bottom of the wytter the which ye shall separate and keep
close, and his virtues are these. It strenghteneth the brain, head and heart
and reuiueth the spirits, it serves against all cold diseases it takes away
all evil fleames being outwardly aplyed, it has great virtue in healing and
may be occupied in stead of natural balm for wounds, one or two dropes taken
in the morning with wine helps a stinking breath, this oil makes the heart
merry and cleanses the fylthines thereof and opens the liver that is stopped,
being put into the eye it clereth the sight, it comfort a cold stomach and
causes good disgestion, it purges melancoly, Riffius.

To make oil of Nutmeges.
THis oil is made in the same order as ye made the oil of Scinamond, but it
will swime upon the top of the water and is very clear and pure and with very
little heat or with the heat of the sun it will fly away, therefore keep
it close in a glase, if ye will distill this oil again in baleno, ye may
keep it an hundred years in his perfect strength and virtue, and his virtues
are these, it drives down wemens terms and also the quick and the dead
fruit and therefore women with child shall not occupy this oil, until such
time as they be in travel with child, and than it causes the^ to be fair
delivered without pain and danger, being drunk with wine it takes away all
pains of the head coming of cold it comfort the maw, and opens the
liver mylte and kydnes, and such like: it is excellent against beating of the
heart and faintness and sounding being drunk and anointed with this oil
under the left breast, on the Region of the heart, it makes good blood, and
expels Flegmatike and melancolicke humors, and makes a man merry: being
used at night it takes away all fances and dreams: if any had a wou^d or had
broken a rybbe within him with a fall, let him drink this oil with any slight
wound drink and it will help him, although he were almost dead: it is good
in all fylthie soores which be called incurable it is also precious for all
cold diseases of the joints, and sinowes. It makes a sweet breath, if the
spleen do swell ye shall anoint therewith the left side and it will ease it.
Philippus Hermanus.

To make oil of Peper.
THis oil is distilled in manner as is aforesaid and will swym upon the water
and is very clear, and his virtues are these, this oil has more virtue then
the Peper had in percing and specially in the collike and other weak places
filled with Fleme, if ye take thereof. iii. or. iiii. dropes with one scruppell
of the Iuyse of Quinces two hours before the fyte, after that the body is well
purged and let blood, it stays also the shaking at the first time or else at
the second, and takes away the fyt, ye shall understand that this oil is only
the ayrye part separated from the other elements. Euonimus.

To make oil of Saffron.
THis oil is distilled as the other are, and has these virtues, if it be
drunk with wine it makes a man merry and to have a fair color, if ye
anoint ye tempells of a man that is overcome with drink with this oil it will
help him, this being anointed on sante Antonis fire it quinceth it, and
preserves the place, this oil mixed with woman's milk it stops the running
of the eyes, being anointed on the heart it makes it merry, the head anointed
therewith, it provoke sleep, by reason whereof the ancient Doctors of
Physic heretofore did use it to such as were mad anointing their nostrels
therewith, it cleanses also old sores. etc. Riffius.

To make oil of Anysead.
THis oil is made as is aforesaid, and his virtues are these, being drunk in
the morning with a littell wine, it makes a sweet breath if ye put a little
into the nostrels when ye go to bed, and anoynte the temples therewith, it
takes away al pains coming of cold and causes the pacient to sleep
quietly. It is good against wind in the gutes and stomach and causes the
pain to sease, if ye drink. iii. or, iiii. dropes, and anoint the stomach
therewith, it will break Fleame and cause it to come forth at the mouth, it
provoke venerus acts, and drives forth poison by sweat: it is most
excellent for those that are short wynded and cannot fetch their breathe but
with great pain: It comfort the breast and lunges It breaks the stone in
the Raines, and is good against the bluddy flix and pylles, if ye anoint any
cheste therewith it will suffer no mothes to breed therein. Philippus Hermanus.

To make oil of Fenelsede.
THis is made as is aforesaid, and his virtues are these, it is most excellent
against all pains of the eyes in so much yt if a man were almost blind it would
recover his sight again if he drink thereof once a day, and drope one drope
into the eye morning and evening: it makes a sweet brethe and comfort the
head of cold humors: it comfort the mawe and opens the Liver and mylte
that is stopped: it helps the dropsy and yellow Ianders of what cause so
ever they be: In whote diseases ye shall use it with cold waters, and in
cold diseases with wine. Philippus Hermanus.

To make oil of Common seed.
THis oil is made as the aforesaid oils are made, and these are his virtues,
this oil is good against wounds that pearse to the spleen, and against the
wyndy collycke, the which causes the urine sometime to stay. Ye may use this
with some licour convenient, or make it in Manus Christi, with Sugar Euonimus.

To make oil of the seed of Rewe, or herb Grace.
THis oil is also made in the aforesaid order, and his virtues are these.
Cardanus writes, that this oil being perfectly made, is of great virtue
against poison being drunk with wine: for it causes the pacient to avoid it
by vomit, at the first time that he takes it, and at the second time it
expels the other evil humors that were infected therewith: and at the
third time it cures the pacient, and makes him hole: and this is done in
three or four days. It helps also all diseases of the eyes, of what cause
so ever it be, in so much that the apple of the eye be not perished, the use of
this oil to the eye, is to annoint it therewith twyse a day, or wash the eye
with the water of Rewe distilled, and drop two drops into the eye. This
oil being drunk, suffers no poison to remain in a man that day, if a man
drink thereof fasting which is sore wounded and that the other cure be had
accordingly he shall easly escape, this oil being drunk, puts away the
gout or dropsy spronge of a cold cause: It restores all nummed members
taken with the palsy if ye annoint them therewith. Cardanus also affermeth in
his second Book de subtilitate that there are certain poisons the which slay
with the only touching, against which poison says he, the best remedy is not
to tarry in any place till thy hand wax hot, but often bathe the parts with
warm water, and anointing them with the oil of Rewe, not with the common oil
made by expression, but of the seed of Rewe distilled.

The virtues of oil of Juniper beres.
THis oil is made as is aforesaid, but if it be rectifyed again it will be an
hundred times more purer and more percing for I have seen those that could not
make their water in three or four days and after they had drunk. iii. or.
iiii. drops of this oil and anoynte there with the Region of the blather
presentlye they made water without any tarying. This oil is so excellent
against the pestilence that if any drink thereof, oftentimes he shall not be
infected although he were in the house where the Pestilence is: but if any
have the Plague upon him, let him drink thereof. iii. or. iiii. drops with a
little wine and lay him down to sweat and the next day he shall be well
again, this oil is also excellent against poison so that if any use to
drink thereof it will not suffer any poison to remain within his body. It
strengthens ye maw and all inward parts and principally it warmeth the
heart: It stops the bluddie Flyx: It is also good against all diseases of
the Kydnes and Blather if ye drink it with wine: It stops women's terms:
this oil being anointed from the Navel of a woman to the privy parts and
Raynes of the back it strengthens the Matryx or mother, it dries up ye
moisture therein and prepares it to conception. Phillippus Hermanus. In the
aforesaid order ye may make oils of all manner of sweet herbs, roots and
seeds.

To make oil of all manner of Gumes and first how to make oil of Mastike.
THis Gum Mastike ye shall beat in powder and tha^ dissolve him in burnt
wine and so distill it with an easy fire and than separate the oil from the
water. Some use to myx a little fair sand clean washed and dried with this
Gume and so distill it with a soft fire, some use to distill it alone in a
Retorte of glass, with a gentle fire, and then Rectify it again and so it
will become very fair and clear, and his virtues are these it is excellent
against all could diseases of the maw: It comfort also the Liver, and the
Mylte, and all other inward parts of the body, being drunk it helps those
that vomit or spyt blood: It consumes and breaks all inward sores, this
being anointed on the belly, it stops the Flux: It stops women's terms:
It is also good for the mother that is fallen down if ye annoint it therewith,
and also the under part of the belly: It is also good for young children howes
arse gutte comes forth, if ye anoint it therewith and put it up again: it is
also good for those that are burst if ye anoint them therewith and let them
wear a trusse fytte for that purpose: It helps fresh wounds marvelous
quickly if ye anoint them therewith: It fasteneth the teeth if ye anoint the
gumes therewith: It comfort the stomach if ye anoynte it therewith, to be
short this oil has all the virtues of the Mastike, but yet it is an hundred
times of more force that it was before. Phillippus Hermanus.

To make oil of Myrra.
TAke pure Rectified Aqua vite without Fleame. xii. ounces and put therein six
ounces of fine Myrra that is not falcifyed and so let them stand vi. days in
horse dunge to digest, then distill away the Aquauite in Balneo and the oil
that remains in the bottom thou shall strain through a fine clothe and
keep it to thy use. This oil by his natural virtue preserves all things
from putrefaction that is anointed therewith: Likewise the face being anointed
with this oil it preserves it fair and youthfully a long time. It helps
wounds quickly and also diverse inward diseases if ye drink thereof two
drammes: It helps pains of the ears, It preserves the sight of the eyes,
if ye put therein a drope or two, it helps all pains of the mother, if it be
anointed therewyth* being anointed on the head it stays the hear from
falling, if any be troubled with a great fever let him anoynte all his body
over with this oil leaving no part vnanoynted: and lay him down to sweat and
he shall be help, this oil dries and consumes all accidence after birth
three or four drops being drunk it helps the coffe and causes a sweet
brethe. It is good for those that are short wynded: It takes away the stytche
in the side, it stops the Flux of the belly: It makes a clear voice, the
Arm pyttes being anointed therewith it takes away the stynch from those parts
being mixed with wine and the mouth washed therewith it strengthens ye gums
and teeth it is good for wounds in the head: if thou will use this oil to
preserve any part of the body ye shall use it in this manner first ye shall
make a bathe of some odoriferous herbs and sit or bold that part the which ye
will preserve over the feume of that bathe so that the powers may open, than
with a fair lynnen clothe dry that part and than anoint it with this oil and
rube or chafe it in that being done if there remain any yellownes of the oil
ye may lightly wash it way with white wine and so it will preserve thee a long
time in youthful state and without diseases: ye may use these oils very well
when ye are in a dry stowe or hot house if ye use it as is aforesaid Leonardo,
Phirauante, et Gualterius Rifius.

To make oil of Galbanum*
FIrst ye shall choose the purest Galbanu^ that ye can find the which is not
falsified and dissolve it in pure wine, than distill it in a gowrde with a head
and a receiver and their will come forth both oil and water the which ye shall
separate one from another: and his virtues are these, the navel of a woman's
belly being anointed therewith it drives forth the fruit: the face and
hands being anointed therewith it takes away all spots in them: being drunk
with wine it helps ye cough yt has continued long: It is also good against
stifenes of the joints: being mingled with a little oil of Myrra and drunk
with wine it is most excellent against poison: the nostrelles being anointed
with this oil prevails much against the falling sickness with the fewme of
this oil women may be help that are troubled with risyng of the mother.
Riffius.

To make oil of Bengimyne.
TAke the best Bengimyne yt thou can get and beat it to powder tha^ put there
to the purest Aquauite that ye can get with out Fleame and so let it stand.
vi. or vii. days than distill it and thou shall have both oil and water ye
which are very pleasant either to make wasshing water or to perfeume gloves.
Phirauante.

To make oil of Storax Liquida.
TAke as much as ye shall think good of Storax Liquida the which is pure and
clean without any filthe and and put it into a gord of glass with a head and
a receauer and so distill it with a soft fire, and there will come forth both
oil and water, the which ye shall separate, and keep to thy use Riffius.

To make oil of Storax Calamite.
THis oil is made as ye made the oil of Bengimyne but in steed of Aquauite
take Rose water, and than distill it according to art and at the latter end
there will assende a certain matter like Manna the which is very pleasant and
his virtues are these, three or four dropes of this oil being drunk
comfort the breast and lunges and all inward parts. It helps pains of
the mother if it be dronk and also anointed therewith. It stops the rewme
that falls down to the breast and neck: this being drunk makes a man
merry and of light courage: but beware that ye take not to much thereof two or
three drops put into the ears it taking away the singing in them. Rifius.

To make oil of Serapinum.
FIrst choose that which is pure and clean and dissolve it in wine, than
distill it in sand with a small fire* This oil is good for the stitche in the
side: It takes away the cough that has continued a long time, it helps the
swelling of the breast whereby the brethe is stopped it is very good for the
crampe and warmeth the joints and helps pains in the hype and al such like
diseases, coming of cold. It is good for women that have great pain in their
child birth, if ye anoint her nostrelles therewith for it drives forth both
the quick and ye dead fruit speedely, this oil drunk with wine helps
against poison and is specially good against the bytting of an Adder: being put
in the eye it takes away the spots and cleereth the sight, ye shall note
that women with child must take great heed of this oil. Rifius.

To make oil of Opoponax.
THis oil is made in the aforesaid manner and his virtues are these, if ye
drink three or four dropes with wine it helps the cofe and all impedimentes
of the mylt It helps also all impedimentes in the blather* it helps the
stytche in the side, It cleanses the blather of all scabes and sores, It
causes speedy delivery in women with child: It helps against wynd in the
Matryx and dissolueth the hardness of those parts, and causes the pain to
sease. Rifius.

To make oil of Euphorbinum.
THis is made as is before said, and his virtues are these first ye shall note
that this oil is not to be ministered inwardly by reason of his great heat,
except it be myred with some other thing as if it be mingled with honny it
purges the belly maruellously, It helps those that are troubled with
obliuiousnes if ye annoynte the parts therewith: It draws forth thorns
and such like out of the flesh: It helps the biting of an Adder: It is also
good for stifenes of the Joints coming of cold if ye anoint it therewith*
Rifius.

To make oil of Succinum or Amber.
TAke yellow Amber and beat it to powder and put it into a vessel of glass
well luted with a head and a receauer and give it gentle fire according unto
art and there will come for the both oil and water and salt the which ye
shall separate one from another. This oil being well distilled is good against
pains of the head and resolution of scinowes and against swymming in the head
and falling sickness if ye drink thereof three or four dropes in the morning
with water, it preserves a man from all poisons and pestiferous airs if ye
anoint the nostrelles therewith, or put into some medicyne fytte for that
purpose: It is excellent against diseases of the Blather and Raynes and
dryueth forth the stone and provoke urine if ye drink it with malmesye or
percele water or such like: It helps the collicke and choking of the matryx,
if ye anoint those parts therewith: It dryueth forth the fruit and causes a
woman to be fair delivered if ye drink three or four dropes with water of
envy, it is good against all Fluxes of the head, etc. Guintherus Andernaci.

To make oil of Frankensence.
TAke Frankensence as much as ye will and put it in a Retorte of glass and put
thereunto for every pound of stufe four ounces of sand and than distill it
according to arie and you shall have both a fair oil and water the which ye
shall separate, this water is good against chopes in the hands and feet if ye
wash them therewith and anoint them over with the oil against the fire and
strayte ways put on a pair of gloves and so doing three or four days they
shall be help, this helps simple wounds in three or four days if ye
anoynte them therewith and lay thereon a clothe weat in the same, it preserves
flesh from putrefying and alteracion and takes away the pain, It helps all
aches and brusses if ye anoint them therewith ye shall note that ye must tent no
wound wherein ye occupy this oil for it will heal it presently. Leonardo
Phirauante.

To make oil of Turpentine
TAke pure clear Turpentine as much as ye shall think good and put it into a
glass so that three parts be empty and put therein a certain quantity of
sand as much as ye shall think good, than give it a gentell fire and there
will come forth a clear oil like water with the which oil there will also
come forth a yellow oil, and after that there will come forth a red oil,
the first oil is hot the second botter the third hottest of all and not so
good to occupy inwardly as the first Phallopius in his Book of secrets
writes that this oil heals fresh wounds in. 24. hours if ye anoint them
therewith: It is also good against contraction of scinowes coming of cold: it
provoke drine if ye drink one dram of the first oil in white wine, it
breaks also wind in the body and dissolueth the plewresye and also a
pestelent Fever, it provoke an appetyte if ye annoint the stomach therewith.
Phillipus Hermanus writes that this oil being drunk is good against all
cold causes and fylthines of the maw and dryueth away a stinking brethe, It
helps the coffe, ye shall note that the white oil may be occupied inwardly
but not the second nor third.

To make oil of Wax.
TAke new yellow Wax as much as ye will and melt it on the fire, then cast it
into good sweet wine then wring it hard with your hands and melt it again
and than cast it again into fresh wine and this do v. or vi. times than put
it into a glass well luted with his head and receauer and distill it according
to art and thou shalt have a goodly yellow oil like gold, but it will
congeale like pappe until it comes to the fire and than it will be fair and
liquid, but ye shall understand that for every pound of wax ye must put
thereunto four ounces of the powder of brykes when ye put them in your glass
to distill, the virtues of this oil are these, Ramend Lull, greatly commends
this oil aprouing it rather to be a celestial or divine medicyne than
human, for because this in wounds works most myracolously, which for his
marvelous commodity not so well to bevsed of the common Chirurgians because
this precious oil heals a wound be the same never so bygge or wide being
before wide stitched up in the space of a leue^ days or twelve at the most, but
those that are small this oil heals in three or four days by anointing
only the wound therewith and laying thereon a clothe weate in the same. Also
for inward diseases this oil works miracles, for if ye give thereof one
dram at a time to drink with white wine, it stays also shedding of the
hear either on the head or beard by anointing the place therewith, moreover it
is myracolous in provoking of vryne which is mightily stopped: It helps also
stytches and pains in the Loins if ye drink the before said quantity with
white wine It helps a cold gout and sciatica and all other greefes coming
of cold, ye shall understand that if this oil be rectifyed it will congele no
more, but it will be so hot and percing yt it will be scarce possible to
drink it down but being once distilled ye may safely use it inwardly*

To make oil of Lignum vite or Guacum.
THou shalt take the freshest wood that thou can get and make it in fine
powder then put it in a vessel of glass and lute it very close than set it in
horse doong or in balneo to digest than take it forth and distill it in sand
according to art and thou shalt have a clear water and a fair oil that at
the last change thy receyuer and augment thy fire until the forth degree
until the stuff be burnte into ashes, than take that ashes and make thereof
a strong lie with feumetory water and when thou see that the ashes will make
the lycor no more sharp than take that lycor the which ye have and let it
settell till it be clear than distill it with a fyller three or four times,
than put it into a great body or some other vessel of glass and set it on a
small fire until all the lycor be consumed and than thou shall find a salt in
the bottom, the which salt ye shall dissolve and congele so long till it be
very fair and white as salt geme than keep it to thy use, this is good
against the gout, Pox, and palsy as ye may plainlye read in the Surgery of
Paraselsis where he entreats of this wood.

To make the oil or licor of Honny.
YE shall understand that there is a certain quintaessence to be made of
honey the which is myracolous and of wonderful virtues and the order to make it
is thus, take pure honnye that is without any fylthe or evil savor and that is
gathered on a pleasant ground and put it into a great vessel of glass so
that four parts of the glass may remain empty, and look that the glass
be well luted than set thereto a head and receyuer and give it fire until
there appear certain white fewmes, the which will turn into a read water,
if ye keep the head and receauer cold with weat clothes and when all the
substance is come forth ye shall put it into a glass and so keep it close
until it be come very clear and to the coullour of a Rubine, than rectify it
by Balneo and distill it at the least vi. or vii. times, so it will come to the
color of gold and will have a marvelous pleasant savor and then this
quintaessence will dissolve gold and make it potable and likewise all other
sorts of Iuelles that is put therein, and therefore this is a blessed licour,
for if ye give any that were at the point of death two drams or three of this
licour, presently it will recover them, as well as with the quintaessence of
wine, if ye wash any wound or sore with this presently it takes away the
pain: it is also good against the coffe and cattare and pain of the mylt and
many other diseases the which I will not write of for if I should write those
things that I have seen done with this lycor: they would not be deleeued: if ye
distill this lycor twenty times with pure silver in balneo it will restore
sight unto those that were almost blind: moreover I gave it forty six days
unto one that had the Palsy and he was help: it helps also the falling
sickness and preserves the body from putryfaction and therefore by this we
may see that this is a heavenly remedy sent from God above, and therefore I
would wish every virtuous man to take a little pains to be expert in making
of this lycour as I have done and he shall do miracles therewith for I have
given it many times that few did perceive it and afterward they thought that
I had wrought by inchantement for his working was so strange and myraculous, It
comfort the stomach and extinguisheth all Fevers, It helps the colic,
It breaks the stone in the raines and provoke vryne, there is nothing in
the world that preserves the hear of the head and causes it to be as fair
as the angel gold more than this lycor does if ye wash the hear therewith
four or five times and let it dry in the same. Leonardo Phirauante.

To make oil of Butter.
TAke new fresh Butter as much as ye will and put it into a retorte of Glass
well luted and give it fire according to art and there will come forth three
lycores the which ye shall separate, this oil does penetrate maruellously, it
takes away the pains of the gout if ye anoint therewith, if ye anoint the
face or hands therewith it makes them very fair, It is also good for those
that are troubled with a cattare if ye give them one ounce thereof fasting for
presently it aryueth to the stomach and mollifyeth the cattar in such order
that he shall spit it forth at ye mouth. Leonar* Phiraua^te.

To make oil of Eggs.
THis oil being well made of the yolks of Eggs is a lycor of great virtue
in diverse and sundry causes, and it will never consume, it serves also in
Alcimia to fyx there medicens that are volatill and the order to make it is
thus, take Eggs and sethe them hard than take out the yolks and stamp them
in a mortar, than put them in a vessel of copper and set it over the fire and
continually stir it, until such time as it turns all to oil, and when thou
see it turn into oil, presently press it through a canuas and keep it to
thy use. This oil helps wounds with great speed: It makes the hear of
the beard or head black. It takes away the scicatrise of wounds: It takes
away pains of the emerods.

The order to make oil of briks otherwise called oleum philosophorum
delateribus vell aleum benedictum.
THis oil has the virtues of the natural balm against all cold diseases,
and may be occupied in stead of balm, if it be well distilled, and the order
to make it is thus take the newest brykes that thou can get that never
touched water and put them in the fire until they be redhotte, than quinch
the^ in sweet sallet oil or oil of roses, and when they are quinched take
them forth and put them in the fire again and let them lie until they be red
hot than quinch them in that oil again, and let them lie until they will
drink no more, than put them in the fire again and quinch them again and this
ye shall do at the least vi. or vii. times and at the last time take them out
of the oil and stamp them to powder and put them into a retort of glass well
luted and distill it according unto art and thou shall have a precious oil,
ye shall note that some for luker of gain do put in the oil on the brykes in
the retorte and some other do stepe them but once and also put on the oil the
which they ought not to do, but to take only the dry brikes after they have been
quinched vi. times, some write that the older this oil is the better it is and
it has these virtues, It helps al cold aches if ye anoint the place
therewith, it helps fresh wounds mightily if ye put therein these herbs
which are a propriate for ye purpose, it helps chops in ye hands or feet
coming of cold or wind, it is good against pains of the seinows and gout,
it helps the stone in the blather and raines if ye use to drink it
oftentimes and anoint the parts therewith, it provoke urine, it helps
pains in the ears coming of cold, it helps also against worms in the
ears it rypeneth al impostumes if ye put thereto the root of a white lylle, it
helps against the falling sickness if ye anoint ye nostrels therewith, it
helps against al pains of the head coming of cold if ye anoint the parts
therewith, it drives forth the dead fruit, it helps a cold coffe if ye
drink thereof. It helps against the biting of any venimus serpent if ye
anoint the place therewith, if fyshers anoint their nets with this oil it
will cause the fyshes to follow the net, it is good for those that have drunk
opium or henbane, it is good for those that spit blud or pis blud, it
dissolueth blood congealed in bruses, with this oil ye may make a candell that
neither wind nor water can put it forth, ye shall take weke or cotton and wet
it in this oil and than with wax or tallow make a candell, the which will
burn in water, if ye mix this oil with pigeons dunge and anoint a stick
therewith and lay it in the sun it will kindel fire of it self: Also if ye
take calkex vyfe and brimstone and of this oil of each a like, and mix them
together and make thereof balls and cast them into water and straight ways it
will kindle on fire. Diodorius Vchinius. This oil says Phirauante being
anointed on the rupture in short time it cures the same, it dissolueth all
pains and hardness, the fesese the which remains in the bottom, if they be
laid on an ulcer presently it does consolidate. etc.

To make oil of Tartar.
TAke Tartar of white wine and set it to calcine in a furnes of calcinacione,
till it be as white as snow, than lay it on a marbell stone in the air and it
will turn into oil the which ye shall keep close shut in a glass for this
is perfect oil, some use to burn this but black and then mix it with vinegar
to falsify it, and othersome burn it with common salt, but those two ways are
not profitable this oil is very sharp and corosiue and when ye will occupy
it to take away spots in the face ye shall mix it with some other kind of
water: this oil also takes away all spots in clothe if ye wash them
therewith, It mundifyeth ulcers if ye wash them therewith: It helps against
all evil dispositions of the stomach if ye drink one scurpell with two
ounces of mell Rosarum and three ounces of Rose water in the morning fasting.
Phallopius.

To make oil of vinegar.
YE shall take Vinegar that is made of pure wine and distill it according unto
art and than take the fesses that remain in the bottom and dry them, than
burn them tell it become white than take that ashes and lay it in a moist
place and it will dissolve into oil the which is of such a marvelous virtue
for man's body that it is not to be credited, for if ye drink thereof a little
quantity it breaks gravel in the raynes and blather: this secret was never
found til this time of no man, also Vinegar being distilled with a little oil
of Tartar and Aquauite, makes the face fair. Leonardo Phirauante.

FINIS.
These oils with a number of others are to be sold at the sign of the
furneseies adjoining to Powles wharfe at the dwelling house of John Hester,
practissioner in the art of distillacions.

1575.

