News from Breast. A Diurnal of all that Sir John Norreis has done since his
last ariuall in Britain

Also of the taking in of the forte by Croyzon, and the names of such Captains
gentlemen and others that were slain and hurt in this Service. 1594.

ET US VEA^ BE^ VERITAS TVA



Imprinted at London by Peter Short, for Thomas Millington, and are to be sold
at his shop under S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1594.

To my especial and very good friend L. T.
SIr if virtue and valor were as sure to be commended and magnified of many,
as it is spited and maligned of most, I needed not too have troubled my self
with the writing unto you the true report of our General S. John Norries his
late honorable service in Britain, wherein he has especially done
acceptable service too the french King and greatly honored her royal Majesty
and revived in those parts the reputation of our nation and country, in
performing many and sundry valient exploytes there: but chiefly with that
lately atempted against the impregnable forte by Croyzon, which the Spainardes
made of purpose too countermaund the Castle of Breast, and to make them selves
masters of that great haven, and to the end you may aparently see how little
time he spent in vain, and with what difficulty it was atchiued, I send you a
Iurnall of all that Sir Ihon Norris did, sense his last ariuall at Penpole in
Britain to this time which I can assure you to be most true: Being my self an
eye witness and noting daily every days actio^. Pardon me if you find me not so
eloquent in writing as the discourse requiereth, and the worthenes of the
victory does merit. A soldior has small retoricke, for whosouer follows
Mars takes little aquantance of the Muses, yet being loath deserved honor
should be obscured and cast in dark oblivion I have bluntly presumed to write
y^^ the naked truth, hoping you will take my goodwill in good part, and yield
honor his due desert, though rudely deciphered. And thus wishing your welfare
I end.

News from Breast.
Sir John Norreis, landing with new forces out of England at Penpole received
letters presently from Mareshall D'Aumond and Sir Thomas Baskeruil, who
commanded in his absence the english troops being then before the castle of
Morlayx, in what terms they stood expecting every day to be fought with all
by the enemy Duke Mercury who was advanced for the same purpose within three
leagues of them, and did but only attend the coming of Mounser Boifdolphin,
with some french horse to join with them, but this their temporizinges in the
end cost them the castle, for immediately the very next day after she
generals landing with great expedition, Morlayx,

His coming was generally ioyed at by all the Britons but especially by the
inhabitants of Morlaix whose good, or ill estate depended on his coming, for
both the castle a cruel neighbor held against them, and the Duke Mercury was
at hand to reskew the defendants who in assurance of relief from him
acquitted themselves manfully. Namely the governor himself Monser Rochempoul,
she Count Magnion, and Monser Rostin, with diverse other gallants: but the
general so amated the enemy that the Duke Mercury not only stayed from
marching nearer unto us, Sir John Norris nothing but blows, presence without
the hazard of any of her Majesty's subjects, both enforced the Duke to retire,
and the castle to yealde.

Marshall wanted money for the satisfying of his people, whereof at the last he
was fournished by those of the town of Morlaix. Then Monsiur de Lyscot a
wonderful brave man and the barron of Molac were sent before with some
harquebuziers, to the end they might block up the fort of Croyzon by Breast,
and preserve the quarters about, who were further assisted with 400 men out of
our ships by sir Martin Fourbyssher who commanded the English shippings. Iuez
thence too a village called La Fou, Chastrau-lyn the next day to Lacornan a
village three leagues from Quinper-Corentin which was held by the enemy.

The same night the Marshall with 400 french and Sir Ihon Norris with as many
English marched to Quinpar-Corantin, and on a sudden surprised the suburbs
and poscessed them with small resistance. The town was willing to yield but
that the garrison would not suffer them. Ihon Norries whose mind was still to
do some exploit against the Spagniardes at the forte of Croyzon, leaving this
town invested by the Marshall and three of our English regiments, ^^^maunded
by his brother sir Henry Norris our Lieutena^^ General, himself only with
his own regiment, and his own company of horse, marched toward the fort,and
lodged that night at Croyzon. Marshall furnished but 2 culueringes) and in
making of approches, which was greatly hindered by the want of Gabions Pioners,
and other provisions for the making of platformes, which we hoped by promise
to have had in a redines sent us from the gouerner of Breast but our General
could procure almost nothing from thence but with many difficulties by reason
of the weather,

Marshall and sir Henry Noreis had Quimper yielded unto them.

Anthony wingfield our Sergeant Mayor general being shot with a Cannon out of
the fort, as he stood by the gabions with his rapier drawn the which with
the shot was beaten through his bowels. This man with great reputation had long
time served her Majesty both in the wars of the low Countries, Portugal, and
France: and at his last going into Britain, so disposed of his estate as if he
were never to return; and the same day or the day before his death, took
such order for his debtes as if he had a presage of his end.

Marshall D'Aumonde and sir Henry Norries with our English regiments, came to
us from Quimper and were quartered at Croyzon and thereabouts.

Having now all things reddie for the battery, I will as well as I can
describe unto you the forte.

You shall understand that more then 2 parts of the fort was defended by the
water, the rest was made so exceeding strong as either by art or charge could
be don.

On the south front thereof on each corner were too exceeding strong bastions
that on the west side was 17 passes in the front, that on the east 10 passes:
the courtaine between both was 37 foot thick at the top; and within these
they had made a very large intrenchmente, and the bastions were exceeding well
flanked from the rock by the water side planting both on the flankers and
bastion some great ordinance. We lay entrenched within three or four paces of
their counterscarp: the french men on the East side and we on the west side,
the battery lay in ye midst between the trenches. Marshall and our
General; on the 23 our artilerie began to play, and continued some 700
cannonodos but did so little harm by reason of the strength of the place as
scarce any show of a breach appeared, only we did beat away their parrapete
and some of their flankers whereupon some hundred men commanded by Captain
Lyster, were sent to vewe and see it they could hold the counterscarp. Then
many of our brave men and gallants thirsting after honor: desirous to do
somewhat farther having possessed themselves of the ennimies counterscarp,
which onelb they were commanded to attempt undertook the breech which they
performed so well as that notwithstanding the vnaccessablenes of the place, and
the gerat resistance the ennimie made. Yet the most part of them attained to
the very top thereof which they held for a while but were afterward
repulsed. This enterprise was with wonderful great resolution and valor
seconded by sir Thomas Basqueruille, who likewise got so far as the point of
the breach.

There were lost in this attempt many brave men namely, Slain in the assault.
Captain Barker. Captain Prudder. Captain Iackson, Serieant Mayor of Ostend.
who had no charge there. Haynes. Ensign to sir Henry Noreys. Corporal Essix,
M. Throgmorton, and some 16 or 18 sodiors.
Hurt in the assalte.
Captain Audley. Captain Bartley. Captain Coutch. Captain Goodwins
Lieutenant. Captain Williams Lieutenant. Captain Buckes. Lieutenant, And
other private men.
Burned with powder.
Sir Thomas Knowles. Captain Ashendon. Captain Bishop. Lieutenant Larkeley.
Captain Lopeley. Master Waineman, and diverse others.


You are to understand that this attempt was only made by the Englishmen on
the bastion of the west side, for the French men never attempted any thing
against their Bastion, aleaging that it was not Assaltable.

Mareshall and our General seeing the little effect that our artillery
wrought, devised to make a mine on one of the bulwarks, namely on the east
bastion toward the french trenches in perfecting thereof some 17 or 18 days
were spente.

Monsieur Lyscot a very brave gentleman one of the Marshalls of the Camp, who
was abandoned by the french and their trenches wholly possessed by the
ennimie, but our English men did presently repossesse them of their trenches
and killed seem of the Spagniardes. Our nation lost an exceeding great friend
of this Monsiear Lyscot he exceedingly loved our General as if he had been
his own father, and generally favored all english men and gave us the
reputation to be very brave soldiors.

By the 7 of Noueember our mine was reasonable well perfected and a
determination held again to begin the battery with a resolution that so soon
as the mine should be blown up which was made toward the bulwark by the
French trenches, that the frenchmen should assail that part and the english
men their Bastion, and that others with scaling ladders should make attemptes
in every corner so that the defendents should be on every part assailed. But
the Mareshall being that day sick sent in the morning for our General and
showed him his letters from the Gouournor of Rennes and from diverse others by
which he was advertised that Don Joan de l'Auquilar general of the Spagniards
was marching toward Croyzon with all his spanish forces to reskew the fort and
was already advanced to La-cornan a village within five leagues of us, and
there fore advised our general to desloge to Croyzon thinking it not fit to
hazard any men having so strong an enemy at hand ready to join battle with
them. But sir I. Norreis having his courage nothing daunted with the approach of
the ennemie, his heart serving him both to win the forte by assault and to
encounter his ennemie in the field, showing what a dishonor and disreputation
it were to habandon the seege, and also what little cause the ennemie should
have to advance himself farther if the forte were gotten, his coming being
only to reskewe it. He so much importuned the Mareschall that he gave him
wholly the ordering of that days service. Immediately our Gennerall gave order
to the Cannoniers for the battery and caused the artillery to play. Every
man was assigned his charge, some to the assault, other with scalodos to
attempt, to enter, and by 12 of the clock he caused fire to be set to the
mine, which albeit it did not so much as was looked for, yet it made the
access so easy unto the French as that a man might have ridden up upon
horseback, and our men namely: Captain Latham, Captain Smith, and Captain
John Norreis, with diverse other gallant gentlemen gave upon the other bulwark,
and continued the assault without loosing onepase of the highth until half an
hour past four, and in the end first entered the same, and seized upon three
ensigns that were there, and put every man they found in the fort saving one
alferez to the sword, some of the Spaniards lept from the rock to the water,
but our Mariners with their small boales met with them and slew them: some
three or four others being taken escaped with their lives, no man was found,
slain Au sang Froyd.

Sir Thomas Baskeruill served this day with great valor and industry to the
admiration of all men. Our sea men and Mariners this day acquitted themselves
wonderful bravely: and were exceeding forward in all attemptes, as may well
appear by that valiant Knight Sir Martin Fourbisher, who in the assault
receiving a hurt, is thereof now dead.

The chiefest of the French men, namely such gentilmen as serving a horseback,
did put themselves that day a foot, did exceeding gallantly, namely Mounser
Roumege, Un Maistre du Camp, a man of great courage, and who most entirely
loved our general was slain, upon the rampear, and his ensign by him, who if
they had bin well seconded undoubtedly they had carried it first, and had got
the reputation of the first entry. As for the rest I hold them nothing worthy
of comendations in this action.

Slane in the assault.
Captain Edge once Captain of our generals guard. Lieutenant Flud. Captain
Smiths Lieutenant. Ensign to Captain Brett. VIII. Gent. of our generals own
company. Many other gentlemen and between 20. or 30. private men
Hurt in the assalt.
Sir Thomas Baskeruille. Sir Martin Fourbisher who is now dead. Captain John
Norreis Captain Brett. Captain Smith.
The victory being thus gotten by the great virtue and admirable industery of
our general, the forte being appointed to be raised, we disloged the next day
to Croyzon, to join with she rest of our troops,

Thus have I finished I assure you truly, although not largely: all that was
most remarcable in this days service.

It may be I give not namely to every man the honor he deserved, but therein
I excuse my self with my shortness in writing, and also my self being herein
an actor, my eye was not at leisure to note every man's desert. There was found
in the fort 29. barrels of powder, some match, and very few small shot: and of
meat, biscuit, wine and beef reasonable good stoare. I must a little commend
the defendants for an enemy, deserves his just praise, especially the chief
ommander. He never in all these attempts showed himself daunted, he made
sundry sallies, but most upon the French, to his great advantage and
reputation. He lost before this last days service 60. men, some at his salies,
some with our cannon, and some at our first attempt upon the breach, also
this very last day our cannon playing incessantly upon the main courtaine,
between the two bastions flew fifty of his men. This last assault
continewed almost five hours without intermission, they never quailed until
he was slain, which was a small time before the entry, and then the greater
part being slain the rest ouertired and hurt, wear forced by our gallantes
to retire, and so there were slain of Spagniards in this forte almost 400. I
note another sign of his great resolution, for if he found any willing
only to speak of yealding, he would cause him to be bound to some stake or
post, and exposed him to the breach, leaving his arms at liberty to fight for
his defense. I hope no man will mislike if I commend the valor of the enemy
which was conquered, for the greater is the honor of them that were the
conquerors. This their vain resolution might well have served their turns, if
they had not dealte with our general who was as resolute as they, and there in
ouermacht them. For the next day, Don Joan de l'Aquilar sending a trumpet for
the redeeming of prisoners, our general sent him answer that their ransomes
were paid, and that he was now as ready and at leisure to fight with him.
This victory achiued, he sent the three Spanish ensigns into England, and
presented them to her Majesty, who as a most sacred and grasious prince, most
highly esteemed, and lovingly accepted them. God of his infinite mercy send her
daily so to triumph over her enemies, and that it will please him to protect
our general for her greater services.

FINIS.

