THE POPE'S PARLIAMENT, CONTAINING A PLEASANT AND DELIGHTFVL HISTORY, WHEREIN
are thoroughly delivered and brightly blazed out, the paltry trash and
trumperies of him and his pelting Prelates, their mutinies, discord, and
dissentions, their stomach and malice at Pope Ioane, their f^^fting and
foisting of matters for defense of her, and their Antichristian practices, for
maintenance of (...) pomp and avarice.

Whereunto is annexed an Anatomy of Pope Ioane, more apparently opening her
whole life and story.

Written by JOHN MAYO.

Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes? printer's or publisher's device
ANCHORA SPEI

Imprinted at London by Richard Field dwelling in the Black Friars near
Ludgate. 1591.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL SIR GEORGE TRENCHARD KNIGHT, CAPTAIN OF Weymouth
Castle, and one of the Deputy Lieutenants of the County of Dorset, John Mayo
wishes all increase of worship and honorable virtues, and at last a crown of
eternal glory.
NO heart can sufficiently conceive, much less any tongue is able with words
to express, the singular comfort, joy and utility, that a Christian has in
this most dangerous pilgrimage, Psalm. 27.4.
in beholding the fair beauty of the Lord, in visiting his holy Temple, and
in learning his duty toward God, his Prince, and neighbors, according to the
mind of the holy Ghost expressed in the Scriptures. This is of such great
weight and importance, that it does deliver us from every evil work, 2. Tim.
4.18.
quenches all the fiery darts of the wicked, checketh and choketh all fickle
and transitory vanities, and makes glad, cheereth and cherishes the
conscience of man in all changes and chances of this mortal life whatsoever.
This is of such singular force and operation, Heb. 4.12.
that it enters through (as the Apostle says) even unto the dividing asunder
of the soul, and of the spirit, and of the joints, and the marrow, purifying
our hearts through faith in Christ Jesus, and instilling the heavenly drops of
his grace into our hard and stony hearts, to souple and soften the same. This
is such a precious balm, and sovereign antidote, that it heals all our
maladies and infirmities, and such a lantern to our feet and light to our
paths, that it does deliver us from the power of darkness, Ephesians. 6.
and translateth us to the kingdom of Christ, putting upon us, vniuersam illam
(...), that same complete armor of a godly man, that we may stand against all
the assaults of the devil. O how dear and sweet was this to that blessed
king David: how beloved of Saba Queen of Aethiopia: how precious to Eunuchus,
2. (...). 1.5.
Cornelius, Eunice Timothies mother, and Lois his grandmother, with many
others: and how comfortable and delectable to the Apostles, martyrs, and
confessors. Vanity is vain, and all things in the world are but vanity,
besides the love of God, and his only service.

Seeing then, that the word of God is of such efficacy and excellency, and
has in it such a secret and hidden Manna: necessary it is that Man which is
borne of a woman, and has but a short time to live, should with all
humbleness and sobriety, read, learn, and inwardly digest the same, and with
diligent study and contemplation, employ the course of his warrefare therein.
God made living creatures (says Chrysostom) for man: but he made man for
himself. How for himself? only to glorify his name, to serve him with
fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence. He made him after his own
similitude and likeness: he gave him his laws and commandments: and
therefore he only ought to give attendance to them, and to continue in
learning of them, that through patience and comfort of them he might have hope,
faith, and immortality in Jesus Christ. Every one must further (as far
forth as he can) the building of Gods Temple. If he can not bring gold,
silver, or precious stones, he must bring minima quaeque, pelles, and caprarum
pilos, the least things he has, skins, and the hairs of Goats. We must not
be idle in Gods great harvest, neither secure in these perilous times: we must
never cease to labor and learn, try out and discern God from Belial, Christ
from Antichrist, godly and sincere doctrine, belonging to the true worshipping
of God, from erroneous and damnable tending to superstition and idolatry, 1.
John. 4 1.
according to that blessed saying of Saint John: Believe not every spirit, but
try the spirits whether they be of God.

These reasons (right Worshipful) being weighed and thoroughly considered by
me, I was not a little spurred and pricked forward something to take in hand,
that might testify and show my zeal and fervent affection to the same. And by
chance taking Platina (though a shameful parasite for the Popes, yet in many
places truly painting and publishing their filthiness and abominations) I
lighted upon Pope Ioane, of whom he writes and craftily, cloaketh, in the life
of John the eight. Noting the history, and perceiving what a miraculous token
it was sent of the Lord, to the subversion of popery, and to the utter
confusion of that purple whore: I framed thereupon a Parliament, though but a
fiction, yet plainly declaring the great choler and indignation that the Pope
and his Prelates have at the name of Pope Ioane, their palpable blindness, and
malcontent stomachs, their greedy and insaciable hunger for money, their
mutinous dissension and antichristian practices that be among them, and their
spiteful envy and enimitie against the true professors of the Gospel:
whereunto I annexed an anatomy of Pope Ioane, more manifestly opening their
clouted shifts, and excuses for her, and more apparently revealing her whole
life and story.

This (right Worshipful) I boldly offer unto you, although it may import small
manners and little modesty in me: assuming so upon your courtesy, as I assure
my self you will vouchsafe of my good will and accept of the matter. The
matter indeed (I confess) is such, as deserves to be handeled of a grave and
learned divine, and can not by reason of my ignorance and small knowledge, be
so cunningly and clearkely described, as it ought: yet I doubt not, but it is
so handled, as you shall see Pope Ioane painted out in her colors, and behold
(as it were) in a glass, the loathsome corruption and perverseness of the
Roman synagogues: howsoever it be, I am to crave pardon of skillesse attempt,
shrowding my self wholly and solie under your courteous protection: promising,
that if hereafter either my wit or skill shall be able to yield any better
fruit, I will offer it at your Worships shrine. For you are the Saint to whom
in heart I owe most dutiful devotion, being such a lamp and light of justice
and good government in this our County of Dorset, such a fautor and friend of
virtue and good literature, such a furtherer and favorer of true Christian
religion, and of the preachers and ministers thereof, and so wise, well
affected, and given every kind of ways, that I should rather embeazle, then
illustrate your condign praise. What godly and Christian orders be observed in
your house? How fervent and forward are you always in her Majesty's service,
in defense of the realm against foreign invasions, and in detecting and
punishing those, that wilfully disturb, and seek to subvert our happy state
and government? Grafton in the 21. year of the reign of king Henry the 7.
1505.
Rightly do you advance the great worship and credit of your house, and truly
tread the steps of your famous ancestors. For as that noble knight sir
Thomas Trenchard your grandfather, in the time of king Henry the seventh, was
commended and renowned, and greatly thanked of the king his master, for
receiving with all humanity and reverence, Philip king of Castile and Lion,
Archduke of Austrich and Burgoine, and Earl of Flaunders, who was the kings
loving and faithful friend, and of old familiarity and acquaintance together,
being driven by force of weather to the port of Weymouth: so your worship
within these few years have been not a little commended and renowned, and
greatly thanked of her gracious Majesty, for nobly entertaining Lewys of
Burbon, prince of Condee, being driven to land at the same place. I could use
further discourses to this effect, but fearing the censure of smoothing, and
hoping you will deine as well of the poor man's mite, as the rich man's
treasure, and shadow this my slender labor under the wings of your tuition, I
surcease any longer to interrupt your serious affairs, suppliantly craving of
the Almighty, to augment his graces and virtues in you, that after your short
pilgrimage here ended, you may rest with the Israel of God, in endless bliss
and felicity.

Your Worships at commandment, JOHN MAYO.

To the Christian Reader.
Doubtless, thou may marvel, and much mislike (good courteous Reader) that
I, who am but a tender suckling, and nouice in good letters, should presume so
far, as to take in hand and publish that, which I have rawly and rashly
contrived, being a matter meet and requisite for a grave and perfect divine.
Certes I cannot altogether excuse my self in this behalf: for I am not so
blind, as not to see, nor so impudent, as not to confess my knowledge to be
such, as is fitter to be concealed then revealed, and deserves rather silence
and reiection, then any affection or commendation. Howbeit, I am of the mind of
learned Seneca: Male mihi esse malo, quam molliter. Seneca. 33. Epist.
I had rather be counted foolish and impudent, by offering such simple stuff
as mine insufficiency can afford, then slouthfully to sit still in the market
place, and to be neither idle nor well occupied: especially in that matter that
might show the dastardly cowardnes, and bastardly causes of our adversaries,
who are suffered (by reason of a few currish and cursed schismatikes of our
own breeding that have disturbed our quiet state and government, and troubled
not a little many godly and learned men) too much to wallow and welter in their
own loathsome security, and to sleep (as they say) in vtramuis aurem,
soundly and roundly with little or no contradiction. What? Credimus auectos
hosts, do we think that they are gone? Do we believe that they are clean
extinct, and extirpate? and that all their treacheries, treasons, and
massacres, are dead and buried? No, no, this our silence toward them does
breed the more violence in them, and will (I fear) heap greater firebrands of
troubles upon us. Our own dangerous and gnawing Vipers (God be thanked) are
well tamed and sufficiently curbed, so that they dare not once so much as to
peep up their heads. Now let us have a vigilant eye, and diligent care to these
arch-enimies, least they being better armed with fire and sword, then with the
scriptures and Doctors, do work our woe, and make us buy repentance at too hie
a rate. The times were never so dangerous, as they be now. Sine pace,
Criminatores, Proterui.
Men were never such (...), as they be now: and never greater perils were
hanging over our heads. The Pope never bestirred himself more then he does:
the Cardinals, priests, monks, friars, and all the rabblement of them, did
never intend more mischief against us, then they do now. For the same
Proclamation is practiced now in Rome among them, that was sometime in the
counsel house of Ephesus: Nemo nostrum frugi esto. Let no good man be among us.
Therefore let us look unto them in time, and beware of their leaven and
maliciousnes, and let me not be too hardly censured, because I have adventured
to offer unto thee this simple Treatise called, The Popes Parliament, wherein
thou may see a whole pack of Romish trumperies, and Antichristian
illusions. Construe well my meaning, and accept my good will: willing by the
one, to do thee the best good I could, and declaring by the other, my hearty
zeal and affection, for the advancement of Gods true religion, and for the
suppression of impious superstition: howsoever thou deem of it, I am comforted
with this. Tantum emit vidua duobus minutis, quantum emit Petrus, relinquens
retia, and quantum ^^chaeus dando dimidium patrimonij sui. And so farewell.

Thine in the Lord JOHN MAYO.

Candido Lectori. I. O.
VIsne Antichristi vestigia cernere? visne
Romanam praxim cernere? Lector ades.
Vis Papae Synodum conflatam mordicus oestro,
Bile, supercilijs cernere? Lector ades.
Visne Papistarum discrimina, praelia, rixas,
Iurgia, praestigias cernere? Lector ades.
Vin' tu foemineae contagia dira Iohannae
Papae olim Romae cernere? Lector ades.
Vin' mores, vitamque suam quam turpiter actam,
Vin' mortem horrendam cernere? Lector ades.
Lector ades, librum hunc eme, perlege, protinus ipse
Haec plane and plene suppeditata feres.
Sum ergo placide, iucundo sumito vultu,
Authori grates pectore read tuo.
Floridus Mayi est, redoletque mensis.
Floridus Mayo est, redoletque noster.
Praebet halantes niueosque flores,
Alter and alter,
Huius ast flores remanent, vigentque:
Illius flores pereunt, caduntque:
Fulgidos veros, rutilosque flores
Collige lector.
In commendation of the Author.
Sweet May is come, that winters frost oppressed,
Whereat the birds their silver notes displaies,
(As if that Bore as blastes had reau'd their rest,
And Phoebus rousde from den with golden rays,
Comes with his shining beams, bringing them news
Of weather fair, which as they would ensewes.)
The May is come that makes the shrubs to sing,
Whose rubie streams descries the slow-worms watchs,
And Philomela sits and fears no sting
Of wrath, but quiet naps in rest she catchs.
Each bird on top of tree with mirth resounds,
Welcome sweet May, by whom our bliss rebounds.
Our May, fair knowledge is, error the frost
That nipt truths Laurel boughs and flowers fair,
The Protestants the birds that sorrow lost
To see undoubted truth to them repair:
The Philomela shows our noble Queen,
The blindfold Pope, the slow-worme clothed with teene.
May brings green buds, blooming with blossoms bright,
Flora yields Poesies, May yields flowers divine,
Surpassing May dimming her glittering light:
As Sol does cause sweet Cynthias beams to pine.
No labor does his reaching mind forgo,
Whereby (O Reader good) thy good may grow.
Sitting in harbors green with virtues grace,
Not in the chambers of fond Venus lust:
He means to make his pen journey apace,
To show the truth, and rub off errors rust.
Then hither youth repair with Echoes laud,
Give May due thanks, his praise deserved applaud.
Robert Foord.

THE ARGUMENT OF THIS TREATISE.
THe Pope goes in his solemn procession: by the advice of Cardinal Allen he
passed through that street, where the Marble image of the woman Pope Ioane was
erected, and yet stands, representing her filthiness and abomination: he
looks upon it, and with the sight thereof is so strangly afrighted, that he
ran back again like a mad man, to the great admiration of the people. The
next day he called his Cardinals, and held a Parliament in his Consistory:
where three questions were propounded and agreed upon. The hollow chair of
Porphirie stone, used for the proof of the Popes humanity, was torn in
pieces. The Marble image of the woman Pope Ioane was broken down, and all the
English catholics were exiled and commanded to pack out of Rome the next day.
They seeing the Popes holy displeasure against them, concluded together to give
him a thousand Florens, and every year after so much, if so be that they
might have his blessed favor and permission to abide in Rome: whereupon the
Pope absolueth and recalleth them, and takes them into his gracious liking
again.

THE POPES PARLIAMENT.
Gregory the fourteenth, now Pope of Rome, Franciscus Zarabella. Papa facit
quicquid libet, etiam illicita: and est plus quam Deus.
no mere natural man, but Lord of Lords, and king of kings, and more then
God, as his adherents are blindly persuaded: after he had sat in the chair of
Porphirie stone, of some called the chair of ease, or hollow stool of
easement, for proof of his humanity: mounted up aloft in his gaudie
Pontificalibus, and passing in his solemn procession, from S. Peter's church to
Laterane, by the means of Cardinal Allen an English fugitive, a man much
favored and fancied of the Pope and his prelates, he took his way straight
forth, and did not pass indirectly by other streets (making his way somewhat
the longer) as his predecessors have used to do, for the space of 500. years
and more: where by the way he saw the marble image of the woman Pope Ioane,
lying in travel, who going that way, streined with pains, between Colosseo,
and S. Clemens church brought forth and died, and (as they say) was there
buried. Looking upon the image, and noting the fashion, proportion, and
prodigy of the same, A strange thing, in such an earthly God, surely.
he was upon the sudden astonished, and as one bereft of his wits: in so much,
that in a great chafe and fury, throwing off his Myter, casting away his Pixe,
regarding neither his pontificals, nor procession, he shook up his old crooked
joints, and ran back again, as fast as his heels could fling, to his
Palace, leaving behind him the Cardinals, bishops, priests, and all the rest
of the people.

Strange was the sight, and rare was the accident, that he which is equal with
the Patriarks, This is the blind opinion of his parasites.
above kings and Emperors, and one that is al, and above all, that cannot err
by any means possible, should have such a foul blot to his holiness, as not
to remember himself, as though he had drank of the river Lethe in hell, Quae
praeteritarum rerum fertur obliuionem inducere: and so to run and rage, as
though the water of the lakes in Ethiope had been in his belly: Ovid.
Metamorp. 15. 197.
Quos si quis faucibus hausit, Aut furit, aut patitur mirum grauitate soporem.
Yea, it was such a supernatural event and aspect, as the beholders thereof,
and all they that heard of it, did descant diversely upon it, and were stricken
into no small admiration therewith. Some said, he had a celestial motion in
him, and feared, lest he should be taken up into heaven, Plut. in vita Romuli.
as Romulus was. Some said, he was very ill at ease, and doubted lest dirges
should be sung for his soul the next day. Ben. Cardinalis.
Some said, he had the spirit of Hildebrand, who being but Cardinal, did
beat Pope Alexander with his fist, and kept him prisoner. Some said, the
marble image was the cause thereof, and wished it had never been there
erected. Some laid all the blame upon Cardinal Allen, the Popes sweet
dearling, and said, that he was worthy to have sharp and severe punishment for
it. Some also led with a better spirit then the rest, said, that the Pope
surely was Antichrist that man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
sitting in the church of God, and showing himself above all that is worshipped
or called God, and that this was a most lively and manifest toke^ thereof,
showed of God, to the confusion and overthrowing of that beast. But Cardinal
Allen (good man) was more the^ all the rest, Cardinal Allen, not a little
grieved with the Popes misfortune.
not a little terrified and tottered with this chance, yea, he was so nipt in
the pate, and stricken with such a paralyticall passion, that his Cardinals hat
would scarce abide upon his shaven crown. Wherefore he withdrew himself from
the company, and with all speed he could, went to his lodging, and there
locking himself fast into his study, he mused and ruminated upon the matter,
and at last fell into these speeches with himself. Romans 8.
Now must I needs believe, that all things work unto good, unto them that be
in Christ Jesus: and that truth will conquer falsehood, though it be never so
finely or freshly colored. Now must I perforce confess, though never so
unwillingly, that the truth of God is mighty, and shall prevail: that if the
God of Israel come into the Temple, 1. Reg. 5.
the idol of Dagon must needs fall down: that darkness shall fly before the
light: and the more fiercely man's wisdom shall withstand, the more glorious
shall God be in his victory. Now alas must I affirm that, which erst I have
vehemently and vauntingly denied, that Rome is the great city of Babylon, that
the Pope is Antichrist, that son of perdition, and that the Roman Church is
the very synagogue of Satan. For what marvelous miracles has God showed,
that he is highly displeased and offended at us? What strange signs and
tokens, that he abhors and abandoneth our religion, and the professors
thereof? Esaias. 30.
What lively and plain demonstrations, that we are children of untruth,
children that will not hear the law of God? Is Peter's successor, Christ's
vicar, the shepherd of the universal Church, now an Apostata, and an enemy
to God? Is our Catholic, Apostolic, autentique, and mother Church, become
an harlot, corrupt and putrified? Are all our ornaments, orders, and
ceremonies, but toies, trash, and trumperies? all our Saints and pictures, but
dumb stocks and foolerie? all our pomp, pride, and prodigality,
contemptible and odious? Is our antiquity, our universality, and unity,
whereupon we have bragged and boasted so exceedingly, now vilified, detestable,
and nothing worth? And are our images heathenish, but silver and gold, Psalm.
135.
the works of men's hands? Have they mouths, and speak not, eyes and see not,
ears, and hear not? And are all we like unto them, that put our trust in
them? Why then, vicisti Galilaee; take all, and pay the Baker. Thou know
thine own, and no power can pull them out of thine hand.

But soft and fair man, Sic notus Ulysses? Condemn not so hastily, for,
(...); temeritie is dangerous in all matters. Consulta quae sunt agenda,
cuncta^ter. Take aduiseme^t in those things which thou do. Think with thy
self, Rome is (...), Rome is Rome, strength, power and health, the
Metropolitan of all Europe, the rock of Christ, the spouse of Christ, the
light of the whole world, and cannot with one small earthquake be shaken and
overthrown. Our Pope is Christ's vicegerent, the head of all Churches, the
prince of Pastors, and as far above kings, as God is above man. He has the
keys of heaven, the triple crown, both swords, authority over heaven and
hell, to let and set, bind and loose, and do what please him, and cannot with
one bare mischance be harmed or discredited. Note the brave and lusty speeches
of a stout papist.
Nay, he has wealth and riches, treasure and jewels, and what not: and is
far happier and better then Peter was, who said, Aurum and argentum non est
mihi, Silver and gold I have none. What is there then that can diminish his
glory, crack his credit, or impair his holiness? An semper feriet
quodcunque minabitur arcus? Will every bow that is bent strike the mark? And
every little blast subvert the Roman faith? No, no, it is far otherwise.
Remember that the Popes heretofere have had as badde, or rather worse chances
then this, and yet there was no contradiction to them, nor any derogation to
their religion. Remember the actions of Pope Hildebrand, of Clement the eight,
of Innocentius the third. Remember the opinions of John 22. of Liberius, and
many others. I channe Baleus de illustr. scrip. Br^an.
Remember the madge Howlet, that sat upon the middle beam of saint Martins
Temple, two days together: where the Pope called Balthazar, with his prelates,
sat in council, flickering about with his shreeching noise, and casting his
broad eyes directly upon Balthazar, Acts and Monuments, T^m 1. fol. 705. and
706.
who would not be beaten away with libets, or clubbes, or crying noise, till
with much cudgelling at him, being sore beaten, he fell down dead before them
all. Remember also the strange sights, the monstrous births, and the signs in
the elements, that have been in Rome. and in other Countries, where the Roman
faith is professed. What for all this? Is our Pope prejudiced, or his holiness
abhorred? Is our religion changed, our pomp diminished, our orders dissolved,
or any one jot of our ceremonies abrogated? O worthy proctour for the pope.
No, no, the Pope is too mighty to have repulse of earthly creatures: and Rome
is too strong to be blown down with so light a blast: Hic Petrus, haec Petra:
Here is the faith: here is the way. And if an Angel come from heaven, and tell
the contrary, Anathema, we will not believe him. Well, well: but consilium
domi: take counsel and aduisement with thy self, and catch not so foolishly
at the Moone-shine in the water. Consider yet further of the matter, and thou
shall not so lightly slip it over. The Pope was straungely afrighted. No
small matter. Where? in his solemn procession. A shrewed piece of work. How
came it to pass? by beholding the marble image of Pope Ioane. O this is gall
to me, The Cardinal caused the Pope to pass through the forbidden street.
and wormwood to English Catholics. But how did it chance, that he had not
refrained that way, as the Popes manner has a long whiles been? O it was by
my means, conscientia mill testes. I cannot, nor may not deny it. I never
thought any such thing would have happened unto him: yea I thought, the
refraining of the Popes that way to have beeae causeless, and but mere
vanity. How shall I pacify this tumult? How shall I pull my neck out of this
collar? With what face shall I look upon the reverend holiness of Gregory?
What opinion will he now conceive of me, that has loved me tenderly, favored
me especially, and honorably promoted me to the dignity of a Cardinal? And
what will he think also of my good countrymen, whom he harbors, succoureth,
and maintains at his great charges? Veh misero mihi, quanta de spe decidi. I
was never in this extremity, and I never kindled such firebrandes of troubles
before. Shall I fly? that would be a most horrible discredit. Shall I hide
away? that is dastardly Shall I confess the fault? that savors of base
simplicity. See the spirit of a Romish champion.
Shall I recant, and hasten back again to my native Country? what? think
not of that: be rather thine own butcher. Shall I bear a bold face, and
manly resolution, and fear no colors? Oh this is the way: Hic labor, hoc
opus, est: here goes the hare away. Proceed and fear not. Thou art a
Cardinal: O noble courage in a cardinal, and worthy actions for him.
thou have cunning to smooth, Logic to reason, eloquence to persuade, yea and
Magic too, if need be, to work greater miracles then these.

Flectere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta mouebo. Therefore proface, and stint
not: Audentes fortuna iuuat: Eneid. 7.
fortune favors them that be resolute.

Having thus spoken, he left his closet, and went toward Laterane the Popes
palace, following the counsel of Aeneas: Curis ingentibus aeger.

Spem vultu sineulat, premit altum cord dolorem, Eneid. 1.
bearing a fair face outwardly, but inwardly pinched with many bitter
passions, and millions of griefs: and coming into the Popes court, as he had
been accustomed, was noted and maligned at by many, yea very heardly and
heavily taken: yet he went forward, not forgetting Didoes lesson: Ineid. 4.
Degeneres animos timor arguit: And hied to the sweet side of his good Lord and
master the Pope: fully determining to try the uttermost of the chauece, and
what would befall unto him. He found the Pope (as his good luck was) in
reasonable good temper, and recovered of his former agony: The great study of
the Pope that he uses.
yet neither occupied in the pulpit (I warrant you) nor in the study of
Theology, nor feeding his sheep, as Christ commanded Peter. But how? he was
with some of his Cardinals and other his especial friends at dinner, where all
things were laute and opipare, fine and curious: where no dainty cates and
delicates were wanting, both dear bought, and far brought, and good for
ladies. Another great mischance that the pope had.
The Pope he so glutted and greased himself with good cheer, that his
holiness was somewhat pleasant, and in the same mood that the Poet Ennius was
when he could best versifie: insomuch, that seeing Cardinal Allen doing his
ghostly duty unto him, he spoke after this manner. What Cardinal Allen? you
are welcome, come sit down with us, Qui e assai con che. Here is good cheer.
These words did not please a little the Cardinal: they were honey to his
mouth, Nectar to his heart, and heavenly harmony to his ears: so that without
further entreaty, he sat down with them, and fed as hardly and hungerly, For
all their boasting of their unity they quarrel one with another, and differ in
opinions.
as such a passionate man could do. The rest of the company, not forgetting the
late strange event, did lowre and looked sour upon the Cardinal, murmuring
and muttering at him not a little: yet fearing the Popes deity, and respecting
the high dignity of his triple crown, they cloaked and colored some
humanity toward him, and used the best affability they could. After they had
well taken their repast, and talked somewhat merrily of pretty pastimes and
daliances: The table talk of the Papists, of daliance.
the Pope rouzed from a sweet lullabie, eleuating his head with a higher
Catholic aspect then before, began to fix and cast his eyes upon Cardinal
Allen: and after he had rubbed a little with his hallowed hands, he fell into
some memory with himself, and gave to the Cardinal an other welcome, after
this manner.

Cardinale, voi non mangiate, vi vergognate? Cardinal, you eat nothing, are
you ashamed? If you are, it is a sign of some alteration, and unacquainted
passion in you: this was not wont to be your fashion. The Cardinal with all
reverence and submission unto him, thus replied. Io ho beue mangiato, I thank
your holiness, I was never yet ashamed to take my meat: and it shall be a
great alteration and passion that shall make me leave and loath it. Well, well
(said the Pope) I know what I know, and you know who I am. Nimia familiaritas
parit contemptum, I have loved you too well, The Pope repents of the great
favor that he showed to the Cardinal.
yea I would I had not loved you so well, for then I had not been loved so
ill. The Cardinal answered, Your holiness may deem of me as you please, and
speak of me what you list, I may not, nor ought not gainesay you, sub poena
mortalis peccati: under pain of mortal sin. But if once I should be found
not loving you, or any kind of ways misconstruing of your excellency: well
may I think that I breathed, but never that I lived. Decipimar specie (quoth
the Pope) there is knauerie in your budget, and I see now which way she wind
blows, I have followed your humor too much, and I have had too great trust
and confidence to you English aliants: for you have brought more discredit to
my Sea, more troubles to my synagogues, and more charges to my holiness, then
any other nation whatsoever: and this you shall shortly know more at large, to
your bad digestion. The Cardinal would have spoken unto him again, but the
company would not permit him: insomuch, that he departed away with a buzzing
fly in his ear, more troubling him then before. The Cardinal being departed,
the Pope prosecuted the matter. The Pope exclaimeth against the Cardinal and
his countrymen.
Sure I am (most noble Cardinals) that you marvel not a little wherefore I
reprehended and accused Cardinal Allen so openly, and dealt so roundly and
soundly with him, as plainly to tell him of his offense, and duly and truly to
convince him of his treachery. Assure your selves, cause I have to do it, yea
and such cause, as grieueth and girdeth me to the quick. For I have found him
such a peevish parasite, and cousoning quondam to me his Lord, and high Bishop,
such a poisoned stain and blemish to you his fellow Cardinals, and such an
eclipse and downfall to our Catholic Church, that he is worthy, not only
presently to be banished from our Court, but also to be afflicted with a far
greater punishment. Now I know the scuruie sycophant, and the paltrie peasant,
tanquam Corui pullos suos. Fit words for a Pope.
Now the beggarly route and rabblement of English miscreants, have cast off
their maskes and visardes, and shown themselves to be flatterers,
picke-thankes, and cogging clawbackes. Wherefore I protest and swear unto you
by my holiness, that they are eyesores and ulcers unto me, and shall not from
henceforth come into my sacred favor and acceptance. Yea I tell you (my
Cardinals) that I will have them clean extirpate and exiled out of all my
territories, dominions and provinces, or else I will lose my triple Diadem and
scepter. The Pope comma^deth a parliament
I command you therefore upon your oath, and obedience to our holy mother the
Church, and to me your high Lord, and supreme pastor, that you, and all the
rest of the Cardinals, appear to morrow in my consistory, by nine of the
clock in the forenoone, and especially Cardinal Allen that English
runne-away, there to answer such things as shall be objected against him. The
Cardinals hearing the holy fathers commandment, forthwith did execute the
same, sending word to the rest of the Cardinals, and principally to Cardinal
Allen, Cardinal Allen hardly dealt withal.
causing his lodging to be watched all that night for fear, least he should
privily escape away. Cardinal Allen now percyuing how much the fire was
kindled, and what a many of stinging hornets he had stirred up about him, was
so perplexed and pestered, that he rested, a la mort, fit for nothing but for a
dumb shadow: yet scanning the matter more indifferently, and weighing also his
own worthiness and vocation more exactly, he did somewhat mittigate his
grief, and confirm his heart: so that with care-away and chance what may, he
was this pleasant with himself.

Tush man, all is well enough, if thou can be content: The Cardinal
courageous, fearing no colors.
let care be the least though of a thousand. Can one petie misfortune, or one
little fleabiting disgrace thy holiness, embeazle thy fame, and sack thy
credit, illustrate to all Catholics in Europe? No, no: if thou think so,
thou art far besides the cushion, and do show thy self to be a boy, and a
milkesoppe, unworthy of thy name and dignity. For maugre the holy father
Gregory himself, maugre the Cardinals, and maugre all the potentates of the
court of Rome, thou can not be once cloyed, or annoyed, or so much as driven
to a non plus in the matter. Thou can smooth and sooth, These be the fruits
of Papists.
thou can with the Satyr out of one mouth blow both whotte and cold: thou
know well enough the fashion and frailty of this Court, Omnia Roma cum
precio.
thou have vnguentum rubrum to grease them withal if need be: thou have
enough, and enough, to pacify this fray, and to save thy self harmless.
Therefore be not dismayde: sat superque habes: and say with Niobe: tutum me
copia fecit.

Having thus spoken, he went up and down with a pleasant and merry
countenance, covering as well as he could, all his griping griefs and
patheticall affections, with an outward color of great courage, spirit and
security. Yet by no means he could drive away the cogitation out of his
heart, but ever he hammered and hacked upon it, and especially how he should
the next day answer the matter brought in question. Therefore he disputed pro
and con, with himself: and armed his head so strongly, and bombasted his
brains so egregiously, that his force seemed impregnable, and he thought
himself able, in disputation to encounter with the best doctor, and
profoundest Coriphaeus in all Italy.

Well, the day and hour was come, wherein he should draw near toward the
Consistory, wherefore he got all his tackling and furniture about him, and
went his way. As soon as he, and the rest of the Cardinals were sat, the
mighty Majesty of the high potentate Gregory came in, glittering and
glistering in his pontifical and princely robes, fortified with no small
company of men and palfraies, Plain and evident tokens of Antichrist.
and sat down in a stately and imperial chair there erected and prepared for
him: after that he had well settled himself, he began this solemn oration.

(Reverend Cardinals) my own dear and first begotten children, The Popes
oration.
fit and worthy pastors of my Catholic and Apostolic Church: may it
please you, to the health and security of my authority to the praise and
honor of God, See his pride and ambition: he puts himself before God.
and to the increase and advancement of our Roman faith and religion, to
consider with me, and to judge uprightly of these three points following.

First, whether the Porphyrie chair, used for the trial and proof of our
virility, The points to be decided in the Parliament.
is to be preserved as hitherto it has been, or else to be destroyed and
abolished.

Secondly, whether the marble image near Colosseo, that shows Pope Ioane
lying in her travel, is to be kept as an ancient monument, or to be defaced
and broken in pieces, as a ridiculous and odious spectacle.

Thirdly, whether the English fugitives are to be retained, and further
maintained at our great charges, or else without any longer delay, to be
utterly expelled, and exiled.

They all answered, it pleases us. The Pope then went forward on this manner.

The popes judgment in the first point.
(Most noble Cardinals) I will first of all relate unto you my sacred and
Apostolical censure, concerning these questions, and then I will permit you
franckly and freely to propose your judgments also. My censure concerning the
hollow chair of Porphirie stone, is affirmative, and this: that it is no
longer to be kept and preserved, as proper to the Roman chair of blessed
Peter, prince of the Apostles, but forthwith to be defaced and destryed, as a
thing too base and contemptible, far unworthy of our high calling, and
reverend jurisdiction. The reasons that move me are these.

First, it is no small defamation and disgrace to Christ his chief vicar and
pastor, to him whose power is divine and emperious, far above any mortal
man, to yield himself to so unseemly and vile athing, Sabellicus, Enneadis.
9. lib. 1. ab vltimo Diacono attrectantur.
as to suffer another man attrectare genitalia at his creation.

Secondly, it is a renouation, and continual demonstration of the memory of
Pope Ioane, who has brought more infamy, contempt, and detestation, to our
sanctified chair and religion, then now can, or ever (I fear me) will be well
wiped, or taken away. Thirdly, the defacing and abolishing of it, will
restrain heretical and contumelious tongues, aswage the calamities of these
our times, quiet the controversies of religion, and restore a more true and
Ecclesiastical peace unto us. Now let me hear what your opinion is.
Conuenimus omnes, said the Cardinals: your holiness has spoken nothing, but
that which is for the glory of the blessed chair of Peter, for the benefit
of the ancient and Catholic faith, and for the assurance of our safeties and
dignities. And what say you Cardinal Allen, quoth the Pope? Vox tua raucescit?
are you mute and silent? How like you these suppositions? The Cardinal with
all mildness and modesty, thus answered.

Conuenimus omnes. We agree altogether, they are pure and Catholic, fit and
famous decrees and canons, for your Apostolical seat, and for the ancient,
absolute, and full perfect faith of the high city of Rome. Perge, perge, go
on, go on, quoth the Pope, you have more to say I am sure.

Since it so pleases your sanctimonie (said the Cardinal) Libentissime
pergam, I will go forward with all my heart. Right well, may I use the words of
the learned father S. Hierome, In Epist.
Haec est fides (beatissime Papa) quam in catholica discimus Ecclesia, in qua
si minus perite aut parum caute, forte aliquid positum est, emendari cupimus a
te, qui Petri fidem and sedem tenes. This is the faith (o most blessed father)
which we learn in the catholic Church: wherein if any thing peradventure be
put not skilfully nor advisedly, we desire to be reformed of you, who usurp
the seat and faith of Peter. For if the holy mother church of Rome, False and
ungodly opinions.
be so founded, built, and grounded upon Peter, Prince of the Apostles, that
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it: and if Peter's successor and
Christ's chief steward, has the keys of heaven given him, to bind and loose,
to add and subtract, to multiply and divide at his celestial will and
pleasure: then who may under pain of damnation gainesay his heavenly sentence
and opinion, and without his great curse and thundering bull, derogate any one
jot from his faith and religion. A notable Parasite.
If your omnipotent authority (most gracious father) be as far above Princes
and Emperors, as the sun is above the moon, and above the Angels of God,
without whom there is no salvation: then how may we, or dare we once spurn or
malign at you, and reject your divine and infallible sentence, in any matter
whatsoever? You are the spiritual man that judges all things, and you your
self are judged of none: and although you be found unprofitable, and remiss
in your works, having no regard to your own salvation, This was the
detestable doctrine of Pope Boniface, an English man.
nor to the salvation of your brethren, so that you lead with your self
innumerable heaps of people, unto the chiefest bondslaue of hell, there ever
to be beaten with many stripes: yet your faults no mortal man presumes to
reprove here, because you shall judge all men, and be judged of no man your
self. Then your good and sacred censure of the Porphirie stone, (my most high
Lord, and reverend father) is of us all to be adored and honored, especially,
since it is grounded upon most weighty and substantial reasons, tending not a
little to the health and illustration of the holy church of Rome, and to the
advancement and propagation of your splendent light and prehemence. For certes,
in every indifferent man's judgment, the preservation thereof is in no kind of
way a glory and furtherance, but every kind of way a scandale and ignomie, to
the Catholic religion, and to the principal tower thereof the city of Rome.
What doubt can there be in the humanity of the high bishop that is to be
created? Can he be Hermophroditus, a man and a woman, It is possible: for
Semyramis being a woman, was a long time taken for a man.
both in one? Is it possible that a woman being not capeable of holy orders,
can aspire unto that dignity, and be found worthy of that high calling and
function, in wisdom, gravity, learning, wit, and authority? or is it
possible that a woman can so long conceal her sex, and not be known and
espied? Surely, surely, the keeping of the hollow chair of Porphirie stone,
and the sitting therein of our Lord and high bishop, is of all other things
most vain, foolish, and ridiculous, sauouring of little wit, and less
wisdom. Notwithstanding some there be, A foolish shadowing and frivolous.
that shadow the matter, and affirm that the stool of natural easement, does
serve for this purpose to the Pope, least the sovereignty of honor exhibited
unto him, should in his own conceit lift him higher, then for the degree of
human condition: but this is to little or no purpose: therefore Dirue,
confunde, down with it, and tear it in pieces: Conuenimus omnes, We all agree
to it: let not so vile an object remain in your court, and such a pestiferous
custom of disgrace and rascalitie be any longer used of Peter's successors.

Gregory, seeing the Cardinal so vehement and valiant in the cause, brake off
his speech, and said, Satis loquentiae, you have spoken enough: the matter is
more clearer then the noone day, and need no farther disputation. The Popes
commandment concerning the Porphirie chair.

The Porphirie chair is broken in the Consistory.


Wherefore my pleasure and commandment is this: that the Porphirie chair be
presently brought hither into the Consistory before us, and be in our sight
broken, defaced, and utterly abolished. The Cardinals hearing these words, sent
immediately for it, and soon it was brought into the Consistory, and before
the face of the Pope and his Cardinals, all hewed and shiuered into pieces:
when this was done, the Pope proceeded after this manner.

(Most worthy Cardinals) seeing that we have fully and absolutely considered
and decided the first point, and brought it to that effect, as is lawful and
expedient for us: let us come likewise to the second, which is: whether the
marble image by the Colosseo, representing the woman Pope Ioane in child
bearing, is to be kept, and let stand, as heretofore it has been, or else
utterly to be defaced and destroyed. My censure is in like manner as it was of
the former, The Popes censure concerning the marble image.
that it is wholly and principally to be subverted and abolished: for it is
more to be feared then the Basiliske, and more to be avoided then the
Cockatrice: and it is a greater stain, hurt, and reproach to our seat
Apostolic, a more manifest president and picture of the woman Pope, and a more
grievous eyesore to a Catholic, The Popes weighty reasons for suppressing of
it
then the other: this is public and openly to be seen, whereas the other is
secret and closely kept: this is easily to be perceived of every one that
sees it, the use of the other is hardly to be understood of any: yea, this is
the body and very heart of Pope Ioane, but the other is but a little part and
member thereof. I marvel much, what he meant that first caused it to be
erected, and what my predecessors meant to let it stand in that place as it
does. What say you to it renowned Cardinals?

Cardinal Medices, a man of the greatest wealth and riches, though not of the
greatest wit and learning, made this answer.

Nothing is or has been (most sovereign Lord, and supreme Pastor) that more
impaireth the excellency of your sacred scepter, more eclipseth the orient
beams of your dignity, and more abrogateth the rites and canons of the
ancient and catholic Roman religion, then that fond and foolish fable of
Pope Ioane, which our adversaries believe as an infallible truth, and most
usually cast us in the teeth withal, above all other things. What means have
heretofore been used for the remedy thereof, you are not ignorant: the whole
story has been stoutly and stiffly denied, and yet it avails not. Her name
has been left out of the Calender of the Popes, and yet nothing the better.
Onuphrius Pamuinius of set purpose has been hired to face out this matter,
Truth it is, he wrote worthily for his hire, winning some credit, by
aduenturing his wits in a desperate cause.
and yet it is never the near. But this way proposed by your highness, is of
far greater force and excellency, and of such singular weight and importance,
that needs it must slack and qualify the slander, and very shortly bury
the memory thereof in perpetual oblivion. For the hollow Porphirie stone, and
that vain and vile image being gone, what remains to continue the
remembrance thereof? Who can mislike this enterprise? Who ought to reprehend
this prouiso? Nay who dare resist such a worthy and apostolical action? A
parls page for the Pope.
Then let it forthwith be executed, (most holy Lord) and let not the matter,
that will be such a light and lamp to the Catholic faith, be any longer stayed
or delaied. Are you al of this mind (said the Pope?) The Cardinals with one
consent answered. Verum est, saluberrimum est, nemo nostrum refragatur. It is
true, The Popes judgment concerning the marble image.

The marble image is brought into the Consistory.

It is broken into pieces, and thrown into Tyber, together with the Porphirie
stone.


it is good and wholesome counsel, none of us do withstand it. Then (quoth the
Pope) let it forthwith be set upon: let the image be broken down, and no one
piece thereof left behind. Let it be brought hither before us into the
Consistory that we may see it defaced, and not be deceived in the doing of it.
When the Pope had thus spoken, men were presently sent to break it down, and
to bring it unto them in the Consistory, which they quickly dispatched, and
did accordingly. When the Pope saw it, he said: strike it, batter it, break it
in pieces like a potters vessel, and cast it into Tyber together with the
Porphirie stone: which was immediately done, according to his gracious will and
commandment.

This being done the Pope said to the Cardinals: it follows now, that we come
unto the third and last point: but the time is past, and therefore we will omit
it till the afternoon: I command you therefore upon your fealty and
obedience to Peter's chair, to our mother church, and to the catholic and
Apostolic faith, that you fail not to appear here again in the afternoon
by two of the clock, that we may finish and absolve the third point, as we
have done the two former. Thus the Pope departed with a great and pompous
train toward his Palace, the Cardinals followed him, and the most part of
them dined with him: but Cardinal Allen went home to his own lodging, having
some attendant upon him, to watch and see to him.

After they had well fed and filled their bodies with many dainty cates and
dishes, the Pope and all the Cardinals came again into the Consistory, and
took their places as they had done before, when they were sat, the Pope thus
Orator-like debated with them.

In the forenoone (my lovely Cardinals) we discussed and contrived fully and
effectually two points which I proposed unto you: The third point concerning
the English Catholics.
Now it rests that we proceed likewise to the third and last, which is,
whether the English Catholics are to be maintained and farther retained, or
else without longer delay, to be expelled and banished. I say, and say again,
and maugre the stoutest champion that lives I will defend, that they are
justly to be banished, and I will produce for it such evident demonstrations,
and allege such apparent reasons, that you likewise shall both say it, and
swear it: what think you of it courageous Cardinals?

Needs must we (said they) say and swear, as your holiness does: especially
since you are led thereto with many weighty and great reasons. I deny it
(said Cardinal Allen:) if they be exiled, they shall not justly be exiled: I
will never agree to it, Dum spiritus hos regit artus: while I live.

Probo, probo, I will prove it (quoth the Pope:) yea, I will prove it so
evidently, and show it so expressly that thou shall not deny it, and therefore
mark what I tell thee. Did not thou persuade me in my last procession, to
take my journey straight forth, and to pass by the marble image of Dame Ioane?
I deny it not (said the Cardinal.) Note that (good Cardinals) quoth the Pope:
you know what followed, and what a perilous agony I was driven into thereby:
does that deserve naught I pray? Nay farther, have not thou detained monny that
I allowed unto thy countrymen? It is false, said the Cardinal. Be not so
obstinate (quoth the Pope:) thine own countrymen have spoken and affirmed it.
I doubt it, said the Cardinal. Thou shall find it true (thou runnagate) quoth
the Pope. A proper kind of disputation.
Do thou reprove me of a lie? O thou noisome baggage: Do thou snufe and
scorn my power and authority, and disdain my words, that be of force to
throw thee down to the bottomless pit of hell? Have I deserved this at thine
hands (thou banished brat?) well, well, thou shall repent it, and that
bitterly, for thou (thou cursed caterpiller) and thy cancred countrymen, have
brought more charges to me, then any other nation: have caused more troubles
and hurleburlies to me, then any other nation, and have deceived and cosoned me
more then any other Nation whatsoever. Trouble not your sanctity overmuch
(said the Cardinal,) you cannot prove this you have spoken. I will prove it
(thou scald beggar) quoth the Pope, and I will rightly prove it, and therefore
hear me (good faithful Cardinals.) If there were no other thing that were of
force lawful and reasonable, to make us reject and root out the English
fugitives, yet the strange and noisome accident of the woman Pope Ioane, were
sufficient both to accuse them of injury and infidelity toward the holy
city of Rome, and also to expel them our of our regions and dominions for
ever. Untruth, she was a Dutch woman.
for she was an English woman borne: and she it is, and none but she, that
has decayed and ruinated our high jurisdiction, and brought such a pestilent
downfall to our Apostolic regiment, that I fear me, with all our art,
cunning, and policy, it will not be amended. Shall we favor the stock and
genealogy of them that have been such crackes and discredites to our power and
authority? Shall we keep and maintain them, that have brought great
persecution, horrible confusion and bloody massacres to our trusty and
faithful servants? And shall not we eradicate and cut off those Iudases, which
cleave to us, and to our faith, only for their own gain and refuge, and
never do such homage, service and obedience to our worthiness, as is requisite
and expedient for them? O most worthy Cardinals, look from the beginning that
ever our religion was professed in England, and you shall see what small zeal,
love, and affection it has there received. And first look upon their kings
and rulers, and you shall find them to be the very maules of the Roman
bishops.

Cambra the daughter of Belin, that married the Almaine prince, made long and
sharp war against this sacred city, and was like to spoil and sack it. So
did Brennus the brother of Belin and others more, as we find it recorded. King
William the Conqueror, Matthias Parisiensis. Anno. 1094.
upon displeasure conceived against the high bishop of Rome, said, that no
archbishop or bishop of his realm, from thenceforth should have regard, either
to the court of Rome, or to the bishop thereof. King William Rufus,
Prohibition of going to Rome by king William Rufus. Anno 1098.
in his time would not suffer any of his subjects to go to Rome. What shall I
speak of king Henry the third, who stayed the attempts of the Popes Legate,
and made open complaint by his Ambassador in the Council of Lions in France,
of him and his exactions: of king Henry the eight, who first renounced this
See, and the supreme pastor hereof: of king Edward the sixth, who was the first
that utterly abolished all our superstition, and of the royal majesty of
queen Elizabeth that now is, God long preserve her, and confou^d all her
enemies.

A famous learned man, who wrote diverse books and sundry inuectiues against
the Pope, and reproved manifold abuses in the church of Rome.

Laurence proved the Pope Antichrist, and Rome Babylon. An. 1290 Wickliffe a
very learned man, living in the reign of king Edward the 3.

Anno. 1371. who first manifestly discovered the Pope, and maintained open
disputation against him.

Anno. 1581. Vide the Abridgment of the Acts and Monuments, page 285.


the illustrate lamp and Phoenix of all the world, the mother of Christian
Princes, and the very Maul of me, and all my ceremonies? Look upon their
bishops and doctors, and you shall find them to be blocks in our way, and the
only subuerters of our faith and dominion. What shall I tell you of Grosted,
sometime bishop of Lincoln, who wrote diverse inuectiues against the high
bishop Innocentius the fourth, and reproved manifold abuses in the church of
Rome, yea and said, that this old verse may be truly verified upon it.

Eius auaritiae, totus vix sufficit orbis,
Eius luxuriae, meretrix non sufficit vna.
The whole world does scarce satisfy his covetousness, neither does one
harlot suffice for his leacherie. I omit to tell you of Laurence, Wickliffe,
and an hundred other such, who proudly withstood the bishop of Rome, made open
disputation against him, called him Antichrist, and Rome great Babylon. And as
they have earnestly and eagerly withstood and oppugned us and our faith: so
have they evil entreated, and cruelly handled the professors thereof. Here I
might tell you of Becket, Moore, Roffensis, and many others, how bitterly they
have been used by them, and what torments and tortures they have suffered for
the profession of our faith. I will come to men of later and fresher memory,
and to those which with a false cloak and counterfeit show, have deceived our
holiness, and brought our religion into miserable contempt and obloquie. Who
knows not the lewd pranckes and knauerie that Stukely that arrant vagabound,
played of late with us? Who knows not the bold presumption, and devilish
attempts of that mad and harebraind Sacramentarie, Richard Atkins, who rebuked
the disorder of our lives, proudly and heretically with spleen and rancour,
scorned, vpbraided, and vilified this grounded rock of Peter, caught at the
holy sacrament, as the priest was carrying it, to have thrown it down, and
here in S. Peter's church, threw down the Chalice with the wine, and striued
to have pulled the cake out of the priests hands. I could recite others unto
you, as Nichols, Monday, with many more, who like perverse hypocrites
dissembled to be constant Catholics, and made external show thereof, but
afterward returning to their own country, revolted, and wrote most cursed
scandales and satyricall inuectiues against us, and our Catholic faith, but
for breuities sake I will omit them.

Moreover, consider (I pray) this exactly, how long has that land rejected and
disallowed the Apostolic Roman religion, and the sincere professors thereof:
and how vehemently does it now root and ransacke it, and the zealous favorers
thereof? What land so much hinders my proceedings, battereth down my title
and supremacy, and overthrows the glorious fame and benediction of the
Roman Church? What land so much vexes and annoyeth my sweet and sugared son,
Philip king of Spain? What land so much helps and succoureth the king of
Nauerre fighting now for the crown of France, God give him victory over his
enemies, and quietly stablish him in his kingdom
against the holy leaguers, my well-beloved children, and devoted servants? What
land every kind of ways, stands so stoutly and strongly against us, and
all our loving friends? Shall we harbor any inhabitants of that land? Shall we
holder and succor such viperous broodes, and maintain such rascal heretics
and libertines? No, no, Ferro and flamma perdamus, Note the stomach and spleen
of the Pope.
let us rather with fire and sword destroy them: let us no longer affect and
fancy that rebellious nation: yea (noble Cardinals) let us go upon these
adders and lions, and tread and trample them under our feet: let us curb and
chastise them, and lay their honor in the dust: and in so doing, saluus erit
Petrus: salua erit ecclesia catholica.

Cardinal Allen seeing the Pope so malcontent, and in such extreme envy and
enimitie against him, and his countrymen, could no longer be silent, but this
roundly unlaced his mind.

Now do I find that true, which I counted but for a fable, that the greatest
clearkes be not commonly the wisest men. Now I see that to be an oracle,
Polycraticon Iohannis Salisburiensis. lib. 6. cap. 26.
which heretofore I thought but a mere cavil, that Roma non tam matrem
exhibet, quam nouercam: Rome shows herself not so much a natural mother, as
a stepmother, spoiling and devouring her children, when they think she most
likes and loves them. Now do I know by experience, those words to be
infallible verity, which that famous and learned doctor Erasmus used,
speaking of the answer of Pope Innocentius unto the council of Carthage.
Inter Epist. August. Epist. 91. Eras.
In hac Epistola, and dictionem, and ingenium, and eruditionem, tali Praesule
dignam, cogimur desyderare. In this Epistle, we miss both eloquence and wit,
and learning, meet for such a Prelate. (...). O misery of mankind, I would my
head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears. Is justice now
turned to wormwood, good unto evil, sweet unto sour, and light into
darkness? Are Catholics become cynickes, Prelates become Pilates,
Philosophers become (...), and religious men become irreligious? Are small
thieves (according to Socrates) led of great thieves to the gallows? and are
the very heads and pillars of the church themselves drowned in corruption, and
infected with many pestilent diseases? Why then, Nec Petrus, nec Paulus, quid
ergo restat? Neither Peter nor Paul will help, what shall we do? And must the
English Catholics be banished, They are justly served if they be so.
that have forsaken their country, their goods, and friends, for the Roman
faith? Must they be expelled, who have been as faithful, loving, and trusty
servants to the sea of Rome, as any other nation whatsoever? And must they be
exiled that have adventured their lives, If you had been good subjects, you
might have lived at home.
and hazarded themselves into millions of dangers for their zeal to their
mother church, and to the professors thereof? Then let the Spanish, the
French, the Irish, and the Scottish Catholics be likewise exiled and pact out
of Rome: for they are as justly to be thus used as we, and as lawfully to be
banished as we are, and this I will prove. But Quidlibet est quodlibet in suo
genere (as the Logicians say:) therefore I will first of all answer the
reasons that have been objected against us by my high Lord and bishop, least
in saying nothing I should seem to consent, and so be convicted.

The Cardinal does bestir himself to defend himself, and his countrymen.
The principal and chiefest thing that is laid against us, is the woman Pope,
Dame Ioane, who makes no more against us, then Laterane church does when it
has one English man, or two in it. What though she was an English woman? (and
yet it is doubtful whether she was so or no.) What though she was brought up
in man's apparel? What though she was Pope of Rome, with child, and delivered
thereof in procession? What spot and crime is this to us? What cause of
banishment (I pray you heartely?) can we heal the sore or quiet the slander?
Has it been in our power to remedy the evil and assuage the mischief? Was
not she five hundred years and more before this our time? Then truly, truly,
we are for that no more to be banished then the French are, because their
ancetours were sometime like to spoil and sack the Capitol: or the Italians
are, because Petrus the head Captain of the city of Rome, with two Consuls
and twelve Aldermen, and diverse other nobles, gathering their powers together,
laid hands upon Pope John the fourteenth, in the church of Laterane, and clapped
him in prison eleven months.

Whereas it is farther objected, that our kings, Magistrates, and rulers, have
contemned and vilified the holy sea of Rome, and have very ill entreated the
Popes themselves, with their Legates and faithful servants, and that none of
our country have done such service, fealty, and obedience to this blessed
chair of Peter, as it was meet and requisite for them: I will prove the
contrary, and that by such clear and evident testimonies, that you shall see
the objections against us, fly away as the night clouds before the sun. What
one of all our kings, before the time of king Henry the eight, but did favor
and fortify the holy Sea of Rome, did homage and duetifull obedience to it,
and princely and honorably fought in defense of it, against the Turks and
Infidels, and all other adversaries whatsoever? What a famous and singular king
was Edgar? What a worthy maintainer of the catholic faith and doctrine? He
builded for religious monks 48, monasteries, or (as some report) as many as be
sundays in the year. Did not king Iua after he had ruled the West Saxons 37.
years go to Rome, and become a Monk, resigning his kingdom to Ethelardus his
Nephew? These kings became Monks.
Did not the Queen also Ethelburga become an Abbess, led thereto with great
and pure devotion? Did not Ethereldus of Mercia, Kemedus of Mercia, Offa of
East Saxons, Selly of East Saxons, and Sigebertus king of East Angles, do the
like? Have not many Queens, and kings daughters with other noble women become
Nuns, for the zeal and love they had to the Apostolic faith of Rome? as
Hilda, Ercheirgoda with her sister Ermenilda, These Queens became nu^nes.
Edelberga, Werburga, Kinreda, and Kinswida her sister, Elfleda, with many
others. What shall I tell you of king Canutus, who went to this holy city on
pilgrimage, and founded here an hospital for English pilgrims, and had such
love and hearty affection to it, that he gave to the Pope many precious gifts,
and burdened his land with a yearly tribute, called the Romeshot. I could
tell you of many mo, but for brevity I will ouerslip them. What shall I speak
of many other excellent men which England has nourished and fostered, who have
refused no pains, and forsaken no perils for the glory and advancement of
the Sea Apostolic of Rome? He wrote a book against him, called Opus
scintillaerum.

Weakly and simply God knows, as is to be seen. Traitors and conspirators.


Shall I tell you of Lanfrancus bishop of Canterbury, that confuted the
Sacramentarie heresy of Berengarius: of the learned Abbot Petrus Cluniacensis,
that convicted the doctrine of the Peterbrusians: of Thomas Walden, a most
learned man, that wrote against Wickliffe: of the holy Bishop Fisher, that
learnedly refuted Luther, and Oecolampadius? Shall I tell you of Cardinal Poole,
Gardener, Martin, and of others of later memory, as Saunders, Cope, Bristow,
Dorman, Parsons, Morton, and of an hundred more, all which have been such
worthy proctours, and singular champions for the Catholic religion, that no
other Country has yielded and brought forth the like? For as that nation
first received the faith from Rome, so those which are not fallen into the
damnable beresies of the Hugonetes, and other secrataries, do reverence and
obey the same, and for their conscience will abide any cross and tribulation
whatsoever. Saint Eleutherius Pope and Martyr, the first Apostle of Brytaine,
preached in that land by Damianus and Fugatius, within little more then 100.
years after Christ's death. Gregory the great, that holy Pope, caused to be
preached to the English nation, by Augustinus, Melitus, and other holy
priests: although the gospellers that be there now deny this, and say, that
as well the report of Eleutherius, as also of Augustine, that the one was the
first Apostle of the Britains, the other of the English is untrue: and
blindly hold, that ye faith was not first preached there by them, the Gospel
came into England from the East, and not from Rome.
but either by Joseph of Arimathaea, or by S. Paul the Apostle passing that way
into Spain, or by Simon Zelotes, or by the Greeks, or some others.

But the English only you say, and none but they do hinder and annoy your
sacred and ghostly proceedings, and also subvert the good and gracious attempts
of all your friends and most loyal children. What is this to us? They are gone
from us, they are not of us, they are none of our fold, they are given over to
Satan: we have forsaken them, we have no society with them, we defy,
damnifie and detest them: we revolt not, nor once so much as waver: we stick
wholly and solely, A very hot and earnest proctor.
firmly and freely to the ancient Roman doctrine, and so we will do, come
life, come death, come heaven, come hell, come fire, come sword, come any
cross or loss whatsoever. Shall we be for this our love and tender affection
rejected? shall we be lopped off from this fruteful vine, as unprofitable and
unsavory branches? shall we be banished, and yet justly convicted of no crime
or offense that deserves it? If we be, we must take it patiently: but truly we
will say and say again, iniusta nouerca: summum ius summa iniuria, an
unnatural mother: great right, great injury. The Pope perceiving his vehement
allegations, and his tediousness therein, interrupted him with this chat.
Cease thy babbling (Cardinal:) leave off thy ands and ifs, and tittle tattles I
know not what: iwis, all not worth a blue point: much a do and little help, fat
feeding and lean cattle.

Hei misero pingui macer est tibi taurus in aruo. Thou kickest against the
prick, and castest water into the sea, and show thy self not a Cardinal
but a caitife, not a catholic but a schismaticke, not an obedient child, A
grave and discreet reasoning of a Pope.
but a bastardly and beggarly brat, so much to canuasse and cancel my words,
to spurn at my celestial and lawful proceedings, and to go about to repel
and obliterate my good purpose and determination. Have thou forgotten nosce
teipsum, know thy self? Have thou clean abiured my majesty and authority,
my bell, book and candle? Can I err or be deceived, or utter any thing that
is not legitimate and hallowed? What shall I say to him, reverend Cardinals?
nay what shall I not say to him? But I see his infirmity, therefore I will say
no more to him, but do the deed. What say you to it? speak shortly together:
are not the English lawfully to be banished? The Cardinals forthwith replied:
what more lawful and right? That which pleases your holiness is autentique,
and not to be any longer urged or denied: your will be done here in earth, as it
is in heaven and Purgatory. The English banished from Rome. Sarcinas colligite
Angli.
The^ quoth the Pope, Sic volo, sic iubeo, I will and command it so, but after
this manner. Let proclamation now presently be made in all parts of this city,
that al English Catholics of what state or calling soever they be, whether
they be men, women, or children, do come to morrow to S. Peter's church, by nine
of the clock in the forenoone, there to hear solemn mass, and afterward to
depart away with bag and baggage, and such goods as they have, into such
countries as they shall think best: but not to inhabit or remain within
Italy, or any province thereof, upon pain of my curse and farther displeasure.
Notable pillars of the Pope indeed
The Cardinals answered, Blessed are your words, and supernatural be your
cogitations: your divine commandment with all reverence shall be executed. So the
Pope arose, and went to his Palace, but the Cardinals tarried somewhat longer
behind, taking order for the proclamation: which being done, they went to their
lodgings, and Cardinal Allen with his accustomed guard went to his, where we
will leave him maruellously distempered, yet somewhat busily occupied in making
ready his trunkes, his Mules, and other necessaries for ye next day. The
Proclamation being published, good God how ye English Catholics marvelled and
muttered at it, not knowing what should be the cause thereof. The English
greatly grieved with their banishment.
Some wept for sorrow, some raged and rored like men at their wits end, some
fell sick for sorrow, and every one was not a little dismayed, taking it both
hardly and heavily. Great was their grief, strange was their cry, and
wonderful their complaint: and one above the rest, contemning the Pope, and
not brooking the injury, took his pen in hand, and wrote these verses, and
cast them that night into the Popes Palace.

Pape, proh papa perut pax, palma pudorque:
Praepinguis perstat princeps, pastorque peculi.
Pseudopapa procul properato, pontificales
Putres pessunda, prospecta, ponito pyris.
Protomysta pedes premito, pampilla, paletum,
Pausa paulisper, panchrestaque prouida phraende.
Proijce prosedas, pressuras, proditiones,
Praelia praesertim, praerancida pragmata passim.
Posterga (praesul) phantasmata, pulpita, pupas,
Picturas, pedicas, putorem, praestigiasque,
Pellito praesignem pompam, popasque, popinas,
Pestiferam petram, peltam, patinasque phalernum,
Pro praedis prauis, plenas persoluito poenas.
Proh, pestes, praxim, pugnas piceasque propulsa,
Posce preces puras, pietatem porrige puram.
Plebeis populis praesis, prosisque potenter.
Pensicula plagas Papatus, proluuiumque:
Pasce pecus plane, plene pete praedia petri.
Portentosa patris postmitte piacula Pluti.
Propitio placido pro pneumaete, pace precare.
An other also being as malecontent as the former, wrote these Sapphickes
following Sancte Gregori potius sceleste,
Turges Gregori (malesane papa,)
Perperam tanta rabie, furore,
Bile, Britannis?
Quod scelus (quaeso) facinus quod illis?
Non tui Serui fuerint fideles?
Exulant ergo sine lege Roma
Pignora chara?
Tun' fidem Petri retines beatam?
Tun' tenes petram cathedramque Petri?
Vanitas. sellam Sathanae superbi
Iure capessis.
Iure tu Demon, Deus ipse nullo
Iure: pessundas, violasque iura:
Iura quae toto Dominus colenda
Tradidit orb.
Roma Gregori fugiemus? Esto.
An tuos Anglos relegabis? Esto.
Tunc vale scortum Babilonis, (excors Papa) valeto.
When the next day was come wherein they should appear in Saint Peter's church,
they (according to their holy fathers commandment) resorted thereto, and there
heard divine mass, offering to our Lady and to Saint George, Babble a good,
or else neither S. George nor our Lady will hear you. Cardinal Alle^s oration
to his countrymen.
and praying them, that they would change and convert the mind of the Pope,
that they might continue in their College and places as they had done tofore.
When they had so done, Cardinal Allen called them together and spoke thus: I
need not tell you (my dear and loving countrymen) what the cause is, that we
are commanded hither. You know I am sure by the proclamation yesterdaie, that
we are this day to be banished, according to the edict and decree of our holy
Lord, Gregory the xiiij. and his Cardinals: the cause why (I promise you
faithfully) I know not, neither any of you do know, as I conjecture: which is
no small grief and dolor unto us: what shall we do (good countrymen?) Can you
invent no way to remedy the matter, or at least to pacify it for a while
until farther deliberation? They answered, we know none. Then (quoth the
Cardinal) what say you to this? Some of the grauest and most substantial of
you shall go with a Supplication to our holy father. We are content, said
they, if it may any whit further us. You shall (quoth the Cardinal) carry
with you a thousand Florens, A Florene is an Italian crown, of the value of
iiij. s. vj. d. ste. Roma dat omnia, omnia dantibus.
and bestow it upon his holiness: three hundred of the which I my self will
give, and the rest shall be collected among you. This much we will not only
now, but yearly hereafter give unto him, so that we may have license and
security here to inhabit, and this (no doubt) will do the deed, and
accomplish our desire. Iacta est alea (said they) we like it well, let it be
performed. Then they gathered the money, and did put it together, and went with
it to the Pope, and gave him their supplication, the tenor whereof was after
this manner.

The English men's supplication to the Pope.
In most humble and obedient wise complain unto your holiness, your poor
afflicted and desolate servants the English Catholics. VVheras it has
pleased your Highness, together with your reverend Cardinals for to renounce
us, to pronounce us exiles and banished, and to cause a proclamation thereof
yesterday to be published, that we should all this day appear at S. Peter's
church by nine of the clock, and from thence directly to take our passage: we
have accomplished (as we are most bounden) your good and gracious commandment,
and we are all there present to attend your pleasure and authority. May it
please you to have some fatherly pity and compassion upon us, that are far
from our native country, and to tender our cases so much, that we may continue
as we have done heretofore, or else have some longer abode within your holy
city of Rome. We offer our selves prostrate under the feet of your holiness
with all that we are, Wonderful submission in the English.
and that we have. Save us, kill us, call us, recall us, approve us, reprove
us, as you shall please: your voice (the voice of Christ in you speaking) we
will acknowledge and reverence: if we have deserved exile, we are contented: if
death shall be laid upon us, it shall be most sweet and welcome: whatsoever
your pleasure and arbitrament is or shall be of us, we reckon it an heavenly
felicity. We have brought with us a thousand Florens to bestow upon your
holiness: and we have all agreed, consented and concluded together, to pay so
much yearly unto you, if so be we may have your sacred license and permission
to remain within this City. Accept therefore we beseech you, this our
petition: weigh and ponder our estate in an equal balance: let not the
sentence of banishment go against us: and in so doing, you shall find us as
true and faithful unto you, and as loving and trusty children, as any nation in
Europe.

When the Pope had seen this supplication, and perceived the thousand
Florens, that they would then presently and yearly after give unto him: Bos in
lingua, The Florens pacified the Popes anger.
his anger was somewhat mitigated, and the sound and profound father was wholly
satisfied. For the Florens were the fragrant flowers that he desired, the
Saints that he honored, the fishes that he angled for, and ye texts of
scripture that he studied upon: yet to color and cloak the matter he spoke
this roundly unto them.

My friends, your suit is cold, and your petition in vain. Note the hypocrisy
of the Pope.
That which has been ratified, confirmed, and concluded by me and my
Cardinals, cannot eftsoons be interdicted, or dissolved, Sic Petrus, sic iubet
Ecclesia: there is now no remedy. Facta transacta omnia: The tide is past, and
the market ended: yet because you shall know that I am your sovereign Lord and
governor, and one that would gather his children together, as the hen does her
chicke^s, stay here a while, and I will send with you one of my Secretaries to
the rest of your company, and he shall declare unto you more amply and fully my
will, pleasure, and determination. So he caused one of his Secretaries to come
unto him, and taking him aside, he showed him his intent and purpose concerning
the English Catholics, willing and commanding him to go with them to S. Peter's
church, to receive their money, and to give them a quietus est, a full pardon
and remission of their sins, and permission to return again to their houses
and mansions. The Secretary went with them, and uttered this solemn Oration
unto them.

The Secretaries oration to the English men.
My dear friends and good brethren, comfort your selves, and be of good cheer:
for the case I can tell you is altered, and you are again received into favor
and benedictio^. How highly is God to be praised for that he has provided for
his flock so good a shepherd, and for his Church so wise and prudent a Pastor
as Gregory is. How greatly are you bound to him, who being Christ's vicar and
chief deputy, Peter's successor, A worthy substitute, and clawback for the
Pope.
the Doctor of all Doctors, the father of al fathers, and the master and
teacher of all the world, so graciously provides for the health and welfare of
his servants, and carefully seeks to advance and promote the Catholic
Roman religion. O how lovely and lovingly does he tender the cases of you
English Catholics, and how mercifully has he dealt with you? He has pardoned
your offenses, and forgiven your transgressions, he has sent me unto you with
his quietus est, with his Indulgence, and full absolution of your sins, yea,
and with his sacred favor and tolleration to remain in your former places and
habitations.

Therefore Alleluya, praise ye our Lord: return back again, and do your
duties accordingly. Having ended this speech, the Englishmen thinking to have
an explodite, gave a great plaudite, and said, The English return to their
vomit and to their wallowing in the mire.
Viuat Gregorius, Dominus Deus noster. The secretary received the Florens, and
took his leave of them, returning to the sweet side of blessed Gregory: the
English fugitives returned back again with no small joy and contentation,
being very shortly afterward sworn again to the Roman faith, and commanded
to fast twice a week in remembrance thereof, for the space of seven years.

FINIS.
THE ANATOMY OF POPE IOANE, WHEREIN HER LIFE, MANNERS and death is lively laid
abroad and opened, and the forged cauils and allegations, that our adversaries
use for her, thoroughly unripped and confuted: Necessary for all those that are
not fully acquainted with the story, and not unfruitful to all them that
love and embrace the true religion of Christ, and abhor the sottish illusions
of Romish Antichrist.

printer's or publisher's device ANCHORA SPEI

Imprinted at London by Richard Field dwelling in the Blacke-friers near
Ludgate. 1591.

TO THE REASONABLE READER.
THou have here mine Anatomy of Pope Ioane briefly comprised: if not cunningly
as it ought, blame mine insufficiency: if not as an expert Chirurgian, impute
the fault to want of skill, and not of good will. Howbeit, errare fortassis
possim, haereticus esse non possum. The matter hereof is so manifest, that
cornu copiae were needless to polish it, and the truth so evident, that the
Pumi-stone of exquisit and superficial eloquence would not have been requisite
to flourish and smooth it. Read therefore willingly, judge indifferently, and
correct friendly. Let reason rule thee, authority move thee, and truth enforce
thee. And let us both pray together, that the truth may be maintained, all
errors confounded, and Gods name glorified. Farewell.

THE ANATOMY OF POPE IOANE.
CHAP. I. How our adversaries the Papists are ashamed of Pope Ioane, and how
some of them do peremptorily deny the story thereof.
AS the scriptures are plain to prove, the doctors and learned fathers
plentiful to testify: so many and great are the signs and tokens which the
Lord from time to time has shown, that Rome is Babylon, the Pope Antichrist,
the abomination of desolation, the archenimy of Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
and that man of sin, which lifts himself above all that is called God.
Among which none surely is more lively and evident, and more to be weighed and
considered, then that of Pope Ioane, which is such a notable president and
singular demonstration thereof, that no man (unless wholly possessed of
satan, and a verier beast then ever was Nabuchadnezar) will doubt or put any
diffidence therein. This is that which is the only eyesore, and biting
corasiue to our adversaries, which pulls down their proud peacocks feathers,
and battereth their paper walls clean to the ground. This is that which
grieueth them to the gauls, and pricketh them to the quick, which
ouerwhelmeth them with horror, and drowneth them top and tail in shame and
dishonor. Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 14. Superati pudore, and adoperti co^fusione
discedunt.
For as the shameful and detestable end of Arrius, was such a terror and
cooling card to his adherents, that they went away hushed, overcome with shame,
and covered with confusion: so the strange event of Pope Ioane and her
opprobrious death, is such a torment and torture unto them, that in their own
consciences they are stinged and accused, and compelled to cry: Esaias. 1.21.
Quomodo facta est meretrix vrbs fidelis? How is that faithful City become a
strumpet? Anton. Par 2. Tit. 16. cap. 1.7
Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence, when he had opened this whole story of
Pope Ioane, was so astonished with the strangeness and admiration of the
matter, that he cried out: O altitudo Sapientiae, and Scientiae Dei: quam
incredibilia sunt iudicia eius? O the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of
God, how incredible be his judgments?

A story writer, living in the time of king Edward the son of Egelred, and
Emma.

See Marianus printed at Basil, colluma. 407. Sub anno dom. 854. The author
corrupted. Psalm. 145.17.


Marianus Scotus, perceiving what a deep downfall and ruin this brought to
the Sea of Rome, and that God would have such a matter openly known, to the
everlasting detestation both of the person and place, writes thus: Propter
turpitudinem rei, and muliebrem sexum, Authors Pontificij huius Iohannae nomen
non ponunt. Both for the shame of the matter, and also for the woman kind, the
Popish Chronicles leave out the name of Pope Ioane. Can there be a more
manifest toke^ then this, both of great corruption of manners, and of
dissolution of life? Can there be a more infallible argument of open horror and
filthiness, in that only Sea above all others? Surely, surely, the Lord is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, and all his judgments
are done in truth and equity. But our adversaries have a figgeleafe to cover
this shame, and think by that, to shift and face out the matter, and to pass
away invisible in a cloud. They flatly deny that there was ever any Pope Ioane
in Rome, A proper figleafe of our adversaries to cover Dame Ioane
yea they stoutly and sturdily defend it, and say, that it is a fond and vain
fable, a lie, and a tale invented of malice and stomach against them. Soft,
and fair, my Masters: your figgeleafe is dry and withered, and not worth a
rotten fig, for it does uncover your shame, show your nakedness, and bewray
your treachery, and dastardnes in the cause. You can not bridle the flowing
Seas, nor blind the Sunne-beames, you have as great an advantage by the denying
of it, Eusebius. lib. 3.21
as the Ebionites had by denying S. Paul's Epistles, and calling him an Apostata
of the law. But can you prove it so? Alas you can not: for your own Doctors
and Proctors, have written and related it so plainly and pithily, that you
must needs (unless you clippe their credites, and deface them) confess it.
Johan. 8. mulier vt fertur. Testimonies for the proof of Pope Joan vt dicitur.
Martinus Polonus the Popes Penitentiarie, and a Monk of the order of
Cisterce, who lived about the year of our Lord 1320. has written and reported
it: So has Platyna in Iohanne 8. Sabellicus, Enneadis 9. lib. 1. Marianus
Scotus. Rauisius Textor in Officina. Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence.
Supplementum Chronicorum. Chronica Chronicorum. Fasciculus temporum, and others
mo. Are all these liars and tale tellers? Are the writings of all these men
fabulous and untrue? I trust you will not say so. Then give place unto the
truth, and kick not still against the spur: for the truth is great, 3.
Esdr. 4.
and will prevail, and will ye, nill ye, it will conquer. Deny not such a
miraculous token, showing as it were in a glass, the corruption and
abomination of the Roman Church, and of the Pope thereof, the open
adversary of God, and the abomination standing in the holy place. Acknowledge
and confess it, and let the remembrance thereof work such repentance and
remorse in you, that you may renounce your errors, abjure your heresies,
forsake the kingdom of darkness, and serve the Lord in true holiness and
righteousness.

CHAP. II. How some of our adversaries go about to excuse and shift the
matter, by possibility of nature, saying, that Pope Ioane might be
Hermaphroditus, that is, a man and woman both in one.
THe Lion is known by his claws, the Leoparde by his spots, and our
adversaries by their perverse and corrupt dealing to defend Pope Ioane, and to
color her filthiness and abomination withal: wherein as many of them have
toyled and moyled not a little, so especially has one Cope our Countreyman, an
earnest Proctor for the Pope and his Prelates, who writing of this matter,
says thus:

Neque hic ego quicquam dico de Hermaphroditis and (...), Dialogo. 1. Page 47.
de quibus veterum libri pleni sunt. I will here say nothing of such persons,
as be called Hermaphroditi, and are both man and woman all in one, whereof in
old writers we find much mention.

Meaning thus in effect, that ye Pope might be Hermaphoditus, an Herkinalson,
that is to say, a man and a woman both in one: and thinking by this means
somewhat handsomely to excuse and shift the matter. Gentle stuff for the nonce;
and worthy divinity for such a Roman courtier. What toy is there so vain
and ridiculous, and what excuse so childish and frivolous, which they will not
force to serve their turn? Ovid. Meta. 4. Salmacis fons semiuiros facit.
The Pope may be a man and a woman both in one very likely, for he might
peradventure wash himself in the fountain Salmacis in Caria, and be made
half a man: or he might perchance embrace a woman as the Nymph did, Metam.
4.49.
finding Hermaphroditus the son of Mercurius and Venus naked, and desire of
the gods as she did, that of them two might be made one body. Is not this
Catholic Theology, and apostolic discipline meet for a Roman champion? Is
not this credible and to be justified? Yes no doubt, for the Pope that is a God
and above Angels, may transform himself if it please him, Cor. Agrippade
Occul. Philosophia. lib. 1. cap. 45.
as well as Proteus, Periclimenus, Achelous, and Metra the daughter of
Erisichtho, and may and can do greater miracles then these: for in his hands is
heaven, hell, and purgatory, he has all the earth at his commandment, all
the saints at his commandment, yea, and all the devils too if need be.
Therefore a small matter it was for him, and the least miracle of a thousand,
to make himself a man and a woman both in one. What cursed doctrine is this?
alas what a childish and silly excuse is this, to cover Dame Ioanes infamy,
and to bring her to some credit in the world? O miserable and fantastical
imaginations, of very heathen Atheists and Apistes not allowed nor maintained.
(...)
For shame, for very conscience sake, for the regard of the world, and for
fear of Gods heavy wrath, reject such foolish dreams and ceremonies, and
uphold no longer such blind and vain excuses, in defense of that which is so
well and perfectly known to the world, and which is such a clear light, and
plain signification of sacrilege, superstition and idolatry in the Roman
sea. Let not Antichrist any longer deceive you, nor the Romish Babylon infect
you with her poisoned cups. Ierem. 2.13.
Damn not up the springs of the water of life, nor break up puddles of your
own, such as are able to hold no water, but serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice unto him with reverence; embrace his word, love him, and put your whole
trust in him: then you shall be his people, and sheep of his pasture, then
your leaf shall not wither, yea and then look whatsoever you shall do, it
shall prosper.

CHAP. III. How some say, that the Pope being a man, may afterward be
changed into a woman.
GReat is the subtlety, and merueilous is the craft that Satan uses to
drown men in heresy, to thrust them headlong into sin and perdition, and to
make them obstinately wallow and welter therein. He will provide for them such
fine excuses: he will get for them such starting holes and defenses, that they
shall think themselves secure, to be in the right way, and to stand upon good
and firm ground, when it is far otherwise: yea he will leave no means
unassayed to keep them in his subjection, and to make them drunken with their
own erroneous opinions. This may be perceived in none more perspicuously then
in the Papists, and in no one thing more apparently, then in their defense of
Pope Ioane, whom the devil has so bewitched, so blinded, and so wedded to
their own selfewilles, that to cover her deformity, and to paint it out with
some color to the world, they have spredde themselves again as the heavens,
and left no way unattempted. Wherefore let us go further, and see more of
their dealing, and more of their fetches in the matter: and let us come again
to Cope, and see what a good and ghostly Master he is for his Dame Ioane. After
he had said, that the Pope might be an Hermaphroditus; he rests not there,
but going further, he forces Ouids Metamorphosis to serve his turn, and
says, that the Pope being a man, may be changed into a woman: for these be
his words. Et ne a nostri temporis memoria longius abeam, non ignoro
monumentis literarumesse traditum. Mulierem quandam nomine Aemyliam Antonio
Spensae, Civi Eubulano nuptam, post duodecimum a nuptijs annum in virum
transijsse. Legi etiam alteram multerem, vbi puerum peperisset, in marem fuisse
mutatam.

But not to go farther then the remembrance of our own time: I know that it is
written that a certain woman named Emylia, married unto one Antonius spensa a
Citizen of Eubulum, ten years after she had been married, was turned into a
man. I have likewise read of another woman, that when she had been brought a
bed, afterward became a man. Certes this is strange for a man to be turned
into a woman: but all things well considered, it is nothing strange at all. For
the Pope has all laws and knowledge within his breast, and whatsoever he be,
he is holy, and immaculate, and can work no small wonders. May not he change
himself into sundry shapes, as well as Jupiter, Mercury, Apollo, and other of
the Gods? May not he be changed into a woman as well as Tiresias was: Metam.
lib. 3. Pontanus.
or as well as Caietana and Aemilia into men? Yes doubtless, for he is far
above them, and can do much more then ever they could. Therefore master Copes
surmise, that the Pope may be changed into a woman, is very Catholic and
substantial, and fit for such a pregnant and illuminate doctor. But fie for
shame, what a sottish excuse is this? What a vain illusion and Maygaine? Is
there no better shift nor surer refuge then this? Is there no thicker cloud to
spread over the matter with more likelihood? Then who sees not the bondage of
Egypt: who sees not the spiritual Babylon, and the madness of them that
commit spiritual fornication with her? Better it had been, and the safer way
by a great deal, simply and plainly to have confessed it, then by a miracle
to turn the Pope from a man into a woman, and that which is worst of all,
obstinately to defend it. For now every one does see, that you had leifer be
filthy still, then leave off your filthiness, and had rather (because you
love your vices) Excusare, quam excutere, Excuse them, then forsake them: and
as many as in spirit and truth do love the Lord, do mourn for grief, to see
men carried so headlong with such godless and retchlesse imaginations.

CHAP. IIII. How they have left out Pope Ioanes name out of their Calendar: and
how they have hired Onuphrius Pamuinius of set purpose to face out the matter.
SOme of our adversaries take this Enthememe for an infallible argument: An
Enthememe of our adversaries to deny Pope Ioane.
Dame Ioane is not registered in ye Cale^dar among the Popes: Ergo it is but a
vain fable that ever dame Ioane was Pope in Rome. The consequent is very
simple, and not to be granted, because it is well known, that the bishops
names as well in Rome, as in other places, have upon sundry occasions been
oftentimes quite stricken out of the Calendar. But dame Ioanes name (they say)
is not in their Calendar. It may be so: and wherefore I pray? Martinus Polonus,
one of their own sworn brothers, does tell us. Iohanna (says he) non ponitur
in Catalogo Pontificum ta^ propter muliebre^ sexum, quam propter deformitate^
facti. Pope Ioane is not reckoned in the Calendar of the holy Popes, as well for
that she was a woman, as also for very shame of the matter.

The like does Sabellicus set down. Ennead. 9. lib. 1 Page 469.
Nullus defunctae honor habitus: fama tenet, ob tam foedae rei memoriam. There
was no honor bestowed at her burial: the report is, for the remembrance of
her filthy act. By this we see, that the name of Pope Ioane was not put into
the Calendar of the Popes, partly because she was a woman, and specially,
because she was a woman of such a filthy life, and vicious behavior. In
Scholijs in Platynam.
Therefore this reason of our adversaries is a blind conjecture, and of no
force. But (they say) Onuphrius Pamuinius upon Platina, has truly and
learnedly written hereof: and he that list to read that discourse of his, shall
easily believe the whole matter to be fabulous. Truth it is, that such a one
indeed has of late written thereof, and beaten his brains not a little to
help out this matter, but all in vain: for he was one of the Popes Parasites,
hired and procured by him only for that business. His book was printed in
Venice, and plausiblie accepted of his friends and welwillers: but the stuff
that he has brought in there, to make the world believe, that there was never
any Pope Ioane in Rome, is such trash and so ridiculous, that it will grieve a
good Christian in his heart, to read and see it.

Quid non mentiri, vel quid non protinus audet
Fingere mortale ingenium, vt sibi mayor eundi
In praeceps pateat via, liberiorque potestas
Peccandi detur, minus and peccata pudoris
In se contineant?
This is the craft and policy of the Pope, to hire and procure men to smooth
and sooth his matters, and to face and grace out his impieties, with many
forged lies and false suppositions: thinking by that means, to dazel men's
eyes, and to make them believe they be true, godly, and apostolical. This have
many popish Pages of late done, Most impudent and notorious railers and liers
and especially Amphilochius, Onuphrius, Surius, and Hieronimus Bolsecus, one
that has used most shameless railing, most vile, spiteful, and horrible lies
and cauils, with an immoderate and uncivil bitterness, proceeding from the
unsavory and unquiet humor of his heart, against the godly and reverend
ministers of the gospel, Calvin, Beza, with others more. God of his mercy
grant, that they may repent and amend their lives, renounce their damnable
errors, forsake their cursed slanders, and not adventure their wits in such
desperate causes. For, Nemo periculosius peccat, quam qui peccata defendit. No
man sins with more danger, then he that stands in defense of sin.

CHAP. V. What year of the Lord Pope Ioane lived in Rome. How long she was
Pope: and between what Popes she was.
Herodotus.
XErxes the great king of Persia, when he brought over his huge army into
Grecia, sent out his letters of defiance, unto the great mount Athos that is in
Macedonia, and commanded him to stand still, and not to stir a foot, nor to
work any displeasure, either to himself, or to his army. Even by like
authority, and with as good discretion, the Pope and his hyrelinges, have done
with dame Ioane, who being able no kind of way, to color or cloak her
sufficiently, have sent out their letters and defiance to all Countries and
Regions that perfectly know her, commanding them not once to spurn or kick
against her, nor so much as to make any record or mention of her. But let them
wrestle and wrangle so much as they will, let them curse and defy while they
list, and let Onuphrius, and all the rabble rout of them do what they can, the
truth thereof will never be forgotten: it is and will be absolutely known, to
the utter confusion of proud Antichrist, and to the everlasting execration of
all the popish and peevish synagogues. For although they have left the name of
Pope Ioane out of the Calendar of the bishops of Rome, only for shame, What
the cause was, that they have left Pope Ioane out of their Calendar.
least it should appear in records that a woman, and such a woman had been
bishop of Rome, or that the bishop of Rome had been with child: and although
they never cease to bolster and bungle up the matter, sometime with this shift,
sometime with that, sometime affirmatively, sometime negatiuely: yet so many
Chronicles would not have recorded it, nor so many me^ would have written it,
nor ye world would so universally have believed these things of yt Pope, more
then of any other, had it not been true, credible, and verity. For where I
pray began the history of her first? In Rome. From what place was it first
published abroad into the world? From Rome. What be they that have written and
declared it? The trusty friends of Rome: yea the great autenticall doctors
and commissioners of the Pope, have described and avouched it, some living
four hundred years ago, some five hundred, who have ever been counted
famous fathers in Rome, and worthy of no small authority and reverence. What
year of our Lord was dame Ioane Pope in Rome? As they have written, 853. How
long was she in the Popedom? As they have written, two years, one month, and
four days. Betwixt what Popes was she? As they themselves have written,
between Leo the fourth, and Benedict the third. Seeing then that our
adversaries own friends and Proctours have written and related it, and so
plainly and expressly shown it, I marvel much with what faces any of them can
deny it, or go about to excuse it.

CHAP. VI. What Pope Ioanes name was, how she was not borne in England, but at
Mentz in Germany, and how she came to Rome, and to the Popedom.
MAny there be (I know) and those our own countrymen, who think and believe
dame Ioane to be an English woman borne. I can conjecture no other thing to be
the cause hereof but report only, being for the most part more common then
true, The cause why Pope Ioane is thought to be an English woman borne.
and especially because in many authors entreating of this matter, is found,
Johannes Anglicus, or Johannes de Anglia, which seems unto them to be
translated, John an English man, or John of England. Because I would have all
those that be not as yet truly certified and resolved herein, to agree
together and rightly to believe this point, I will declare unto them the truth
of the matter, Why she was called Ioane English.
according to the opinions of the best and most approved writers. She was
called Ioane English by the surname of her father, and borne at Mentz in
Germany. Martinus Polonus the Popes ghostly Penitentiarie, discoursing at large
of this matter affirms the same, for thus he writes. Johannes Anglicus,
natione Maguntinus, sedit annos duos, mensem vnum, dies quatuor, etc. John
English (so surnamed) borne at Mentz, sat in the Roman Sea two years, one
month, and four days. Theodoricus Niemus also, sometime the Popes
Secretary, and therefore had good cause to know the truth hereof, does lively
paint out the whole matter, and expressly shows the same. Et fuit mulier de
Maguntia nata, quae studuit Athenis sub virili habitu: and in tantum profecit
in artibus, vt tandem veniens Romam per biennium in schola Arts liberales
legerit: and adeo sufficiens fuit, vt etiam Maiores and Nobiles vrbis eius
lectiones frequenter audiuerint. Et postea eligitur in Papam etc.

And there was Ioane a woman, borne at Mentz, and had studied at Athens in the
apparel of a man, and had so profited in the Arts, that at last coming to
Rome, two years together she professed the liberal Sciences in a School. And
her gift in teaching was such, that the Elders and Nobles of the City resorted
often to hear her read. Afterward she was chosen Pope, etc. We need not cite
any more testimonies for farther proof hereof: Pope Ioane a Dutchwoman borne.
these two do manifestly show, that she was a Dutchwoman borne, and not
called Ioane English by the name of the Country, for that she was an English
woman borne in England (as many imagine) but only by the surname of her father.
For who knows nor that there are many at this day called by ye names of Scot,
Irish, French, Welsh, Norman, Gascoyne Holland, and yet not borne in any of
these Countries, but only in England. Therefore it is true, and without all
doubt, that Pope Ioane was not borne in England but in Germany. Notwithstanding
some there be (whose authority is very credible and sufficient) that say her
name was Gilberta, Her right name was Gilberta, but called Ioane the eight.
Pope Ioane was a stude^t at Athens.
and called Joan the eight: who likewise affirm, that she was a Dutch-woman of
Mentz, and went with an English Monk, out of the Abbey of Fulda to Athens, in
man's apparel. Well, truth it is, that she was in the young years of a girl
brought to Athens, by one that was her lover in man's apparel. There she
studied, and profited so much in diverse sciences, that none were found to be
compared with her. This is not strange, Women brought up in men's apparel, and
taken for men.
nor much to be marueiled at: For Rauisius Textor in Officina, writes the like
of one Marina, that dissembling what she was, lived many years in an Abbey as a
Monk: and of Lasthenia, Axiothea, and others, that being women, came into the
School in man's apparel to hear Plato. The like does many others write of
Euphrosyna that holy maid, that dwelt 36. Pope Ioane came to Rome. She was
created Pope of Rome. Her behavior in that high office. A most lively
president of the whorish Sea.
years in Monks apparel among Monks, and was never otherwise taken then for
a Monk.

From Athens she came to Rome, and there professed learning openly, and had
great Doctors to her Scholars, and for opinion of learning and good life by
one consent of all, was made Pope: being in this high and glorious seat, she
behaved her self so orderly, and discharged that supernall office so
absolutely, that she was with child, and as she went in Procession delivered
thereof, and so dyed. Thus was the Pope of Rome, who is such a parls fellow
that he can not err, a woman with child, delivered in procession, dead openly
in the streets, and buried without any honor or solemnity. God give all
Christians grace by this example to beware of the Antichristian and
Babylonicall Pope, to renounce him, and all his errors, to reject him and all
his Parasites, and to see the truth and that blessed hope whereunto they have
been called, so as they may glorify him alone, who is the true God, and also
that same Jesus Christ whom he sent down to us from heaven, to whom with the
Father, and the holy Ghost be given all honor and glory everlastingly, Amen.

FINIS.

