This is the glass of health. A great Treasure for pore men, necessary and
needful for every person to look in, yt will keep their body from syckenesses,
and dyseases: and it shows how the planettes reygne every hour of the day
and the night, with the natures and exposicions of the.xii. signs, divided by
the.xii. Months of the year. And after follows of all the evil and
dangerous days of the year. And shows the remedies, for diverse infyrmyties
and dyseases, that hurts the body of man.



These ben the.iii. Peryllous mondayes in the year to let blood or to take any
medicin or purgacion, yt is for to say. The first Mondaye of August, ye second
is the last Monday of Apryll, and the third is the last Mondaye of Decembre.

The Prologue of the Auctour.
I Do you well to wit, that this Book profyteth greatly to every Surgyon, for
to know in what sign, or what degree of the sign the son and the Moon
sytteth every day / In any of the.xii. signs / And not only it is
profitable to Surgyons, but also to Phesycyons, and Barboures, and to all that
use to give medycynes, or Laxatyues, or to use any Passions, or cuttynge, or
Lettynge of Blood / For as the son passes thoroughe all the.xii. signs, by
the space of a year, abiding in a sign.xxx. days / right so does the Moon
pass thoroughe all the.xii signs, that in.xxx. days abiding in a sign.lx.
hours, and as the Moon among all planettes is next the Earth in course. So
he has most effect of workynge, in these earthly things, after the
dysposycion of the Nature of the signs that he has his course in? And
therefore it is full good and necessary truly to know the state, the course,
and the nature of the Moon. For thereby a man may know, when it is good to
begin many diverse things, and when it is not good / And also what wether most
lykely is to fall, after the nature of the signs, whether dry, or moist,
hot, or cold there shall follow after the Nature of the sign that he is in /
In diverse conjunctions of Planettes, that is joined therewith / And therefore
naturally in order, I purpose me to declare, shortly in the third Chapter,
the nature and the state of every sign that he passes by.

Thus ends the Porlogue.

And here follows the Table.
THe first chapter of this Book, shows of the.xii. days of the weke, with
their Planettes. Capitulum. primum. And how the Planettes reygne, in every
hour of the day and of the night. And the first is the hours of the Sunday
Capi. 2. The natures and exposycyons of the.xii. Signs, divided by the.xii.
months of the year Capitulum. 3. And after follows the evil and peryllous
days of the year Cap, 4, And first y^ remedy for the pestilence. ca. 5. For
to spourge the head Cap, 6, Also for to spo^tge the head Cap, 7, For the
head ache Cap, 8, For the akynge of the head Cap, 9. For the toth ache Cap,
10, For the ache of a holowe toth Ca, 11, Also for the toth ache, Cap, xii,
Also for the toth ache, Cap, xiii, Also yet for the toth ache, Cap. xiiii, For
stenche in the mouth, Ca, xv, For a stynkynge breath, Cap, xvi, For ache and
worms in the ears, ca, xvii. A precious water for poison, and specyallye
against the pestylence, Cap, xviii, For runnynge eyes, Cap, xix, For red Blered
eyes, Cap, xx, For eyes that be dasuited or dryke, Ca, xxi, A precious water
for the sight of the eyes, Cap. xxii. For the pynne, and the web in the eyes,
Cap. xxiii. For all euylles in the eyes, Ca, xxiiii, For boylynge in the eyes,
Cap, xxv, For a stynkynge breath, Cap, xxvi, For a hot swollen stomach, Cap,
xxvii, For the stomach that aketh, that comes of cold, Cap, xxviii, For to
forse the stomach, cap, xxix, For the Stomach, and the Belly that a^keth,
cap, xxx, For a man that is sick, in the stomach or in the belly, or at the
heart, or head, or were bytten with any venomus be, or poisoned. ca. xxxi.
For rysyng under the stomach. ca. xxxii. A good plaster for the rysynge under
the stomach, Cap, xxxiii, For he^e in the stomach, cap, xxxiiii, For
bren^ynge in the stomach, ca, xxxv, For to avoid flewe out of the stomach
and also out of the head cap, xxxvi. Fo all euylles in the stomach ca,
xxxvii. For a disease at the heart cap, xxxviii, For weakness of the heart cap,
xxxix. For fayntnes of the heart Cap, xl. For the breest that is incombred ca.
xli For a man woman or child that is broken in the belly cap, xlii. A plaster
to knyt him Cap. xliii. For the plaster in May Cap. xliiii. For to break wind
in the belly Ca. xlv. For a swollen womb Cap. xlvi. For akynge of the womb
Cap xlvii For the heart brennynge Cap xlviii, For sore sides within forth cap.
xlix, Eontra telan^ and maculam in oculo ca, 50, For a woman's pap that is sore
cap, 51. For the liver that is corrupted and wasted Capitulum, 52, For heat in
the liver Cap, 53, Also for heat in the liver of a man that his Color is
yelowe Cap, 54, For a man's breest that is encombred Ca, 55. For a man that has
worms in his belly and his body be lene, cap, lvi, For the breast and the
lunges, cap, lvii, For to avoid and destroy flewme, ca, lviii, For the stone,
cap, lix, Another for the stone, capi, lx, For the colyke, strangury and the
stone ca, lxi, For a man that is lepre, and it take in his legs, and go
upward, cap, lxii, For a dertre in a man's flesh, cap, lxiii, For a sauce
flew^^e vysage, cap, lxiiii, For him y^ can not hold his water, ca, lxv,
Another for the same, cap, lxvi, For to destroy flewme, cap, lxvii, For a womb
that is hard, ca, lxviii, For the blody mention, cap, lxix, For a man's stones
that be swollen, ca, lxx, For to make one sklender, cap, lxxi, For him that
lacks wind, ca, lxxii, For him that is costyfe. cap. lxxiii. For a wicked
blast in the vyfage, ca, lxxiiii, For the shyngles, capi, lxxv. For the kowghe,
cap, lxxvi. For the pe^yll^us kowghe, cap, lxxvii Also for the chynke kowghe,
cap, lxxviii, For the Itche, capi, lxxix, For to draw a Byle, from one place
to another. capitul. lxxx. For him that pysseth blood, ca. lxxxi. For him that
has lost his mind, ca. lxxxii. Another for the same, cap. lxxxiii. For him
that has the f^ensy, ca. lxxxiiii. if one vomysshe to much, cap. lxxxv. For a
disease in the ears, cap. lxxxvi. For a man that has his ears sown within,
capitul. lxxxvii. For synewes that shrynke after that they have ^en hurt, and
heled again, cap. lxxxviii. For to staunche blood, cap. lxxxix. Also to
staunche blood, cap. lxxxx. For an impostume, cap. lxxxxi. For spyttyng of
blod^, cap. lxxxxii. For wild fire, that is called the fire of hell, capitul.
lxxxxiii. For bytynge of a mad dog, ca. lxxxxiiii. For to do away a wen, cap.
lxxxxv. To break a felon in a night, cap. lxxxxvi. For the Meg^ym, cap.
lxxxxvii. For the morfewe, cap. lxxxxviii. For to stop the flyxe, cap. lxxxxix.
For the Canker, wild fire, and Ignis sancti Antonii, capi. c. For to make
hear grow, cap. c. i. For to do away hear, cap. c. ii. For a scalde head,
cap. c. iii. For the yelowe Iaundes, cap. c. iiii. For the black Iaundes
capitul. c. v. for worms and hete in the hands ca. c. vi. for the Gowte, cap.
c. vii. for sore knees that does swel and ache ca. c. viii. for the fallyn^e
evil, cap. c. ix. Also for brennynge or scaldynge, ca. c. x. Also for
brennynge with fire, ca. c. xi. To hele hurtes and wounds, cap. c. xii. To
make a salve to draw and to hele ca. c. xiii. for styngyng of Edders and
snakes. ca. c. xiiii. for him that can not sleep, cap. c. xv. for the Palsy,
cap. c. xvi. A good drink for the pox, ca. c. xviii. For the gowte or the
swellyng of Joints, knobbes, and knorres, that comes of Ache of the pox,
capitul. c. xix. for the crampe, cap. c. xx. for spots of the morfewe, cap.
c. xxi. To put away the morfewe, ca. c. xxii. For a Child that is Iowe fall,
or Molde fall, or Rose fall, cap. c. xxiii. for the Mother, cap. c. xxiiii. for
all fever Agues, and for young children suckynge the breest, cap. c. xxv. for
to destroy poison, cap. c. xxvi. For the Ague infected with the Pestilence,
Capitulum. c. xxvii.
Finis Tabula.
And hereafter follows the.vii. days of the weke, with the Planettes.
Capitulo. Pri.
IN these.vii. Planettes you ought to know y^ the So^day has his doings under
y^ Son.

The Monday under y^ Moon.

Tuesday under Mars.

The wednysdaye under Mercury.

The Thursdaye under Jupiter.

The Frydaye under Venus.

The Saterdaye under Saturn.

Note well, that all the true act and operacyon ought to be made under his
Planette, and is best and it be made on his propre day of the Planette, and
the hour propre exempte.

Under Saturn is the life edyfyce, doctrine and mutacyon comprynse.

Under Jupiter obtain honor, richesse, and gay costly garments.

Under Mars, battle, prison, marriage, and enmyte.

Under the Son, esperaunce, gain, fortune, and heritage.

Under Venus, love, socyete, life loving, and walking abroad.

Under Mercury, syckenesse, myserye, debt, and fearefulnes.

Under the Moon, slouthe, evil thoughts and theft.

Here follows how the Planettes reygne in every hour of the day, and of the
night. And the first is the hours of the Sunday. Cap^.ii.
The hours of the Sunday.

THe first hour of the sunday reygneth Sol, the second Venus, the third
Mercury, the fourth Luna, the fyfth Saturn, the syxt Jupiter, the seventh
Mars, the eight Sol the nynthe Venus, the tenthe Mercury, the leuenth Luna, the
twelfeth Saturn.

The hours of the Sunday night.

The first hour is jupiter, the.ii. mars, the.iii. sol, the.iiii. venus,
the.v. mercury, the.vi. luna, the.vii. faturne, the.viii. jupiter, the.ix. mars
the.x. sol, the.xi. venus, the.xii. mercury.

The hours of the Monday.

The first hour luna, the.ii. saturn, the.iii. jupiter, the.iiii. mars,
the.v. sol, the.vi. venus, the.vii. mercury, the.viii. luna, the.ix. saturn,
the.x. jupiter, the.xi. mars, the.xii. sol.

The hours of the monday night.

The first venus, the.ii. mercury, the.iii. luna, the.iiii. saturn, the.v.
jupiter, the.vi. mars, the.vii. sol, the.viii. venus, the.ix. mercury, the.x.
luna, the.xi. saturn, the.xii. jupiter.

The hours of the tuesday.

The first mars, the.ii. sol, the.iii. venus, the.iiii. mercury, the.v. luna,
the.vi. saturn, the.vii. jupiter, the.viii. mars. the.ix. sol, the.x. venus,
the.xi. mercury, the.xii. luna.

The hours of the tuesday night.

The first saturn, the.ii. jupiter, y^.iii. mars. the.iiii. sol. the.v. venus,
the.vi. mercury, the.vii. luna. the.viii. saturn, the.ix. jupiter, y^.x. mars,
the.xi. sol, the.xii. venus.

The hours of the wednysday.

The first mercury, the.ii. luna, the.iii. saturn, the.iiii. jupiter, the.v.
mars, the.vi. sol, the.vii. venus, the.viii. mercury, the.ix. luna, the.x.
saturn, the.xi. jupiter, the.xii. mars.

The hours of the wednysday night.

The first sol, the.ii. venus, the.iii. mercury, the.iiii. luna, the.v.
saturn, the.vi. jupiter, the.vii. mars, the.viii. sol, the.ix. venus, the.x.
mercury, the.xi. luna, the.xii. saturn.

The hours of the thursday.

The first jupiter, the.ii. mars, the.iii. sol. the iiii. venus, the.v.
mercury, the.vi. luna, the.vii. saturn, the.viii. jupiter, the.ix. mars,
the.x. sol, the.xi. venus, the.xii. mercury.

The hours of the thursday night.

The first luna, the.ii. saturn, the.iii. jupiter, the.iiii. mars, the.v.
sol, the.vi. venus, the.vii. mercury, the.viii. luna, the.ix. saturn, the x.
jupiter, the.xi. mars, the.xii. sol.

The hours of the friday.

The first venus, the.ii. mercury, the.iii. luna, the.iiii. saturn, the.v.
jupiter, the.vi. mars, the.vii. sol, the.viii. venus, the.ix. mercury, the.x
luna, the.xi. saturn, the.xii. jupiter.

The hours of the friday night.

The first mars, the.ii. sol, the.iii. venus, the.iiii. mercury, the.v. luna,
the.vi saturn, the.vii. iupiret, the.viii. mars, the.ix. sol, the.x. venus,
the.xi. mercury, the.xii. luna.

The hours of the saturday.

The first saturn, ye.ii. jupiter, the.iii. mars the.iiii. sol, the.v. venus,
the.vi. mercury, the.vii. luna, the.viii* saturn, the.ix. jupiter, y^.x. mars,
the.xi. sol, the.xii. venus.

The hours of the saturday night.

The first mercury, the.ii. luna, the.iii. saturn, the.iiii. jupiter, ye.v.
mars, the.vi. sol, the.vii. venus, the.viii. mercury, the.ix. luna, the.x.
saturn, the.xi. jupiter, the.xii. mars.

Note well.

Note that Jupiter and Venus ben good, Saturn and Mars evil, Sol and Luna
indyfferent, Mercury is good with them that be good, and evil with them that
be evil.

Also note well that the hours of the Planettes ben dyfferent to them of the
Clockes, for the hours of the Clockes be egall always of.lx. mynutes, but
they of the planettes when the day and the night ben egall, that the Son is
in one of the Equinocces they be egall, but as soon the days longs or
shorteth, so does the natural hours, by this it is conuenyent always, for the
day to have.xii. temporal hours and the night.xii. temporal hours? And when
the days ben long, and the hours long, and the days short, and the hours
short, in like wise is the night. And nevertheless an hour of the day, and
an hour of the night, both together have.xl. mynutes, as for two hours
Artyfycyales, that the one leuyth, the other takes. And than take we our
Planettes from the Son rysyng, and not before unto the son going down,
and than all the remenaunt is night. And so about the month of Decembre the
days have but.viii. hours Artyfycyales of the Clockes, and they have.xii.
temporales, than let the.viii. hours Artyfycyalles be divided in egall
parties, and it shall be.xii. times.lx. mynutes, and every party shall be a
temporal hour, that shall be of.xl. mynutes and no mo. Thus in Decembre the
temporal hours of the day, have but.xl. mynutes, but the hours of the
night have.lxxx. mynutes.

For in that time the nyghtes have.xvi. hours Arty^ycyalles, if they ben
divided in.xii. parties ben.lxxx. mynutes, For every temporal hour of the
night in Decembre have.lxxx. mynutes and.xl. For an hour of the day ben.vi.
score mynutes in two temporal hours, as many in two hours Artyfycyalles,
that been each of.xl. mynutes. In the month of June is the contrary. In March
and in Septembre all hours ben egall: as is the days in other months by
egall porcyon.

Thus ends the.vii. Planettes, upon the.vii. days in the weke.
And hereafter follows the natures, and exposycions of the.xii. signs divided
by the.xii. Months of the year. Capitulo.iii.
March has the sign of the Ra^. And is indyfferent for taking of purgacyon.
And is very good to let blood.
ARies is a sign mouable hot and dry, coleryke, nature of the fire, and
has lordshyp in man's head and the face, and the parties longing to the
head, when the Moon is in that sign, beware of cuttynge in the head or in
the face, or in any vain that longs to the head. Also it is peryllous in
the beginning of Aries to take any head ache, or any hurtynge in the head,
for it were token of long during or else of death, but it is not so peryllous
in the end of it, and this sign is mouable oryentall and of masculyne kind,
than is good to work all things that is wroughte with fire, and it is good to
take vyages toward the Eest, and it is good to let blood on the arm, and to
bathe the, and to sow seeds, and to make matrymonyes, and to begin all good
works that thou would soon end, and is evil to do things, which thou
would have long last, for asmoche as the Ram is a be that roungeth, and
casts up again the meat that he eats tofore. Therefore than there should
no medycyne, nor no passion be taken inward, while the moon is in that sign,
for all natural medycynes, and passions received in that time, men should
cast them up again, and so it falls in all the signs that been roungynge,
as Aryes, and Taurus, and Caprycorne, and the last part of Sagittarye. In all
these there should no passyone be given for dread of casting up again, for
this sign aryseth out of the Oryent, and causes the time to be hot and dry.

The man that is borne under the sygue of Aries, by kind of complexyon is
Coleryke, and shall be wytty and wylye, slye and dysceyuable, small of bones,
yelowe of color, and kind of heart. The son enters in the sign of Aries:
the.xv. Kalen^. of March, and dwells therein unto the.xvi. kalendas of Apryll.

And in this month of March i^.iii. peryllous days to take any syckenesse
upon, that is to say, the.xv. xvi. and.xix.

Apryll has the sign of the Bulle, And is evil for to take purgacyon, And
also is evil to let blood.
THe Moon being in Taurus, that is the sign of the Bulle, the which Sign
reygneth in the neck and the throat, it is than peryllous to be ventused in
the neck, or to catch or take syckenes in the throat, and much more
peryllous in the beginning than is in the end, this sign is steadfast
Meridyonall is of the Southe party, he is cold and dry erthly, and of
femynyne kind / and melancoly of complexion, it is than good to sow seeds, to
plant trees and vynes: for they shall rede^y grow and it is good to build
howsonge, and to w^d a wife, and every thing to do that thou would have
long to endure, and stably to abide It is evil to begin battle or to fight.
For it causes the time to be cold and dry, and the wind to have his course
nygh^ the earth, and the skies to fly abroad by the earth.

The man that is borne under this sign, is by kind of complexion Melancoly
unstable and vnttewe, white lyuered, and scarce of his purse.

The son enters in ye sign of Taurus, the.xv. Kalen^. of Apryll, and
dwells therein till the.xvi. Kalen^. of May.

And in this monthe of Apryll, is.ii. peryllous days to take any manner of
syckenes on, that is to say the.xvi. and the.xxi.

May has the sign of two Twynnes. And is indyfferent to take purgacyon. And
is evil to let blood.
When the moon is in Gemyny, that is the sign of.ii. Twynnes / or.ii.
Children of one birth, the which sign reygneth in the arms and hands of
man. This sign is dowble bodyed and Occidentall, that is of ye west party,
and is Sanguyne of complexion, hot and moist after the air. In that time
beware of cuttynge in the shulders, arms, and hands, nor in that time open no
vain in tho places. It is good that time to treat of frendshyp, and when the
moon is in the sign of Gemyny, beware of lettyng of blood, for it is evil and
specially in the blumes, for Gemyny governs them, And if one take the
syckenes in a house and dye, all the other be in great danger to dye of the
same.

The man tha^ is borne while the moon is under the lordshyp of this sign, he
shall by way of kind be very wise, preuy, and true, he shall have three wives:
and he shall travail mighty fast to purchase worshype. The son^e enters in the
sign of Gemyny, the.xv. kalen^. of May, and dwells therein till the.xvi.
kalen^. of June.

And in the monthe of May is.iii. dangerous days, that is to say ye.vii.
the.xv. and the.xx.

June has the sign of the Creuy^, And is good for to take purgacyon. And is
indyfferent to let blood.
CAncer is a sign mouable, cold moist flumatyke, and watery, and has of
man's body the breast, and the stomach, the splen, and the tybbes, when the
moon is in this sign, it is good to begin away by water, and is metely good
to take medycynes? but beware to wedde any maid, when the sign is in Cancer.
And if any man take syckenes in any time while the moon is in the sign of
Cancer, it is great fortune if he dye not. For it is peryllous both in the
beginning and in the end, this sign is Septemtryonall, that is of the North
party. Also it is evil to build howsynge, or to set trees, or to begin any
work that shall last and endure long.

The man that is borne while that ye moon enters in this sign, he shall be
Femynyne of face, melancolyous, feynt herted and white of skin, and he shall
love a woman which shall grieve him, and his destenye shall be hard in his
youth, but when he is paste.xxx. year, he shall have a maladye in the raynes,
and he escape, he shall live by kind.C. year. The son enters in the sign
of Cancer, the.xv. Kalenda^ of June, and dwells therein till the.xvi. Calendar
of July.

And in this monthe of June is.ii. dangerous days to take syckenesse upon,
that is to say, th^^ iii. and the.vii.

July has the sign of the Lion. And is evil to take purgacyon. And very
evil to let blood.
Or Leo is a sign steadfast Oryentall hot and dry Coloryke, nature of fire,
and of masculyne kind, and has of man's body the sides, and the back,
sen^wes, bones, and grystels, beware while the moon reygneth there, of
ven^usyng, or cuttynge, or harm catchange in tho places, for it is very
dangerous in the end of Leo to take syckenes, more than in ye behynnynge, for
than he may releue by good governance, and it is evil to give medycyne to
the heart, or stomach, and the veins to touch with iron.

A man that is borne while ye moon enters in this sign of Leo, by kind he
shall be holden easy, he shall take a wife a heady strong woman, he shall be
loved as the Lion among beasts, and he shall have great power among strong
men. The son enters in this sign the.xv. Kalen^. of July, and dwells
therein till the.xvi. Kalen^. of August.

And in this monthe of July is. ii. dangerous days to take any syckenes upon,
that is to say, the. ^^. and the.xx.

August has the sign of a Virgyn. And is evil for to take purgacion. And is
indyfferent to let blood.
VIrgo is a Sign dowble bodyed Merydyonall, that is of ye South party cold
and dry, Melancoly of complexion, nature of the earth and of Femynyne kind,
and has of man's body the womb, medryfe, and guts the liver galle, and
mylte. But chefelye in the lym^es byneth the medryfe, than beware of breaking,
or cuttynge on the belie, or preuye places withinforth. Also it is peryllous
for a man to take any syckenes in the beginning thereof, but not so peryllous in
the end, but rather token of health, it is not good to wedde a maid for she
shall be barayne, but it is good to wedde a wydowe. The man that is borne under
this sign, he shall be well loved, and a man of great pytie and wise, and live
much in ease, he shall be of good name among all manner of men, he shall have
worship in his age, he shall have a sign in the head. The son^e enters in
the sign of Virgo the.xv. Kalen^. of August, and dwells therein unto the.xvi.
Kalen^. of Septembre.

And in this monthe of August is.ii. peryllous days to take any manner of
syckenes on, that is to say the.xix. and the.xx.

Septembre has the sign of the Balaunce And is good for to take purgacyon.
And is very good to let blood.
LIbra is a Sign mouable hot and moist Sanguinariu^, and has the ouerparte
of a man: and the neder end of a woman, that is to say the nauyll, the raynes,
and the low parties of the womb, and the share, when the moon is in Libra,
it is good to let blood, and is best to make medycynes for the nauyll, and to
do all thing that thou would have brought to the end, and this sign is
Occidentall sanguyne of complexion, and of masculyne kind and is good to begin
that y^ shall long last, and know well from the degree of Libra, to the degree
of Scorpio, it is evil to begin diverse things, for ye moon is y^ time in the
worste.

The man that is borne under this sign, he shall be well beloved, and good
shall never fail him, he shall have a sign in the neck or in the shoulder
bone, he shall be in great peril till y^ he be.xxx year old, and than shall he
come to great worship. The son enters in the sign of Libra the.xv. Kalen^.
of Septembre, and dwells therein till the.xvi. Kalen^. of Octobre.

And in this monthe of Septembre is. ii. peryllous days to take any manner of
syckenesse on, that is to say the.vi. and the.vii.

Octobre has the sign of a Scorpyon. And is good for to take purgacyon. And
is indyfferent to let blood.
SCorpio is a sign of a Serpent cold and moist, Flumatyke nature of water
Septemtryonall, that is of the North party, and has of man's body the
preuye me^bres and the bladder, and when the moon is in this sign, it is good
to give medycynes to ye members of man and woman, and to take laxatyues, and to
make all thing that shall last long, and it is good make a way by water.

The man that is borne under this sign, he shall love well the company of
women, and have other men's herytages, he shall be melancolyous, his words
shall turn well in age, he shall be in travail, and in the head he shall have
a token or in the face, he may live by kind.xl. years. The son enters in
the sign of Scorpio the.xv. Kalen^. of Octobre, and dwells therein till
the.xvi. Kalen^. of Nouembre.

And in the monthe of Octobre is one peryllous day, that is to say the.vi.
day.

Nouembre has the sign of the Archer. And is good for to take purgacyon. And
also is good to let blood.
I Do you to wit that Sagittarius is a sign of an Archer, and is dowble bodyed
hot and dry nature of the fire, and is coloryke of complexion, and of
mas^ulyne kind Oryentall, that is of the Eest party, and this sign reygneth
in the thyes and laddoges of a man, and beware of cuttyng of tho places, and
than is good to let blood and to treat of peace, and to wedde a wife, and to
make all medycynes that is made with fire.

The man that is borne under this Sign, shall be hasty and bold to do folly,
and he shall have a sign in the cheke, or in the shoulders, he shall be bytten
of a dog, he shall have troble, and sore iyen, he shall have two wives, and
ye last shall begyle him, and he shall wexe sick at.xl. winter, and he escape
he shall live by way of kind C. year. The son enters in this sign of
Sagittarius the.xv. kalen^. of Nouembre, and dwells therein, till the.xvi.
kalen^. of Dece^bre.

And in the monthe of Nouembre, is.ii. peryllous days to take any manner of
syckenes on, that is to say the.xv. and the.xix.

Decembre has the sign of the Got. And is evil to take purgacyon. And is
evil to let blood.
CApricornus is a sign mouable and unsteadfast of the South party endely cold
and dry, melancoly nature of the erath, and of femynyne kind, and has of
man's body y^ knees, when the Moon is in this sign, it is good to make
medycynes to the knees, but beware of cuttynge or hurtynge thereof, for dread
of towchinge the senowes and veins: for it is peryllous while the moon
reygneth there, and much more greatter peril in the end, than is in the
beginning.

The man that is borne under this sign shall be wise, fair, and hasty, and he
shall have a token in the head or in the kne, he shall be melancoly, and he
shall live by kind. C. year, as Astronomyers says. The son^e enters in the
sign of Capricornus, the.xv. Kalen^. of Decembre, and dwells therein till
the.xvi. Kalen^. of the month of January.

And in the month of Decembre is.vi. peryllous days to take syckenes, or any
disease on, that is the.iii. vi. vii. ix. xv. and.xvi.

Ianuarye has the sign of a man shedynge water. And is good to take
purgacyon. And is indyfferent to let blood.
AQuarius is a Sign steadfast Occydentall, that is of the west party, hot and
moist after the kind of y^ air, and Sanguyne of complexion, and has of
man's body the shankes unto the end of the ancles, and when the moon is in
that sign, it is good to set trees, and to build, and to wed, and is evil to
take sickness in all the times while ye moon reygneth there.

The man that is borne in ye sign of Aquarius shall be worshypped, he shall be
good and true, and shall be well-beloved, and have often hedache he shall have a
fall from riches, but he shall be happy in the west conutree, and he shall be
in peril of water. The son enters in the sign of Aquarius the.xv. Kalen^.
of January, and dwells therein till the.xvi. Kalen^. of February.

And in the month of Ianuarye, is.viii. peryllous days to take syckenes, that
is to say the.i. ii. iiii. v. x. xv. xvii. and the.xix.

Februarye has the sign of three Fysshes And is good for to take purgacyon.
And is indyfferent to let blood.
PIsces is a sign common dowble bodyed Septemtryonall, cold, moist, and
watery, flumatyke of complexion: and of femynyne kind, and has of man's body
the feet, than is peryllous to let blood, or open any vain in that place, and
if a man take syckenes in any time of that sign, it is not of right great
peril, but it is good to go to counseyll to accord, and to make all thing
that may go by water, and to make a thing that shall last long.

The man that is borne under this sign of Pisces, shall be a great lechour,
and go far in traueylynge, he shall have an evil hurt in his head, in his
youth he shall have many maladyes, he shall fall in water and escape, well he
may live by kind. C. year, and ye he will have good he must dwell in the
North. The son enters in this sign of Pisces the.xv. Kalen^. of Februarye,
and dwells therein till the.xvi. Kalen^. of the month of March.

And in the month of Februarye is.iii. peryllous days to take any manner of
syckenes on, that is to say the.viii. the.x. and the.xvii.

Here follows the evil and peryllous days in the year. Cap^. iiii.
Masters of Physycke that this Craft first found, tells the first
peryllous days, and the most dangerous days in the year. In which if any
man or woman be let blood of wound or vain, they shall dye within.xxi. days
following. Or who so falls in any syckenes in any of these days, they shall
never escape till they be deed. And who so take any great journey in any of
these days to go far from home, he shall be in danger or dye, or he come
home again. And who so weddeth a wife in any of these days hastily they shall
be departed, or else they shall live together with much sorrow. And who so
begins in any of these days any great warke, it shall never come to good
end. And these ben the days following, that is to say.

In Ianuarye are.vii. days, that is to say the first, the.ii. the.iiii.
the.v. the.x. the.xv. the.xvii. and the.xix.

In Februarye are.iii. days, the.viii. the.x. and the.xvii.

In March are.iii. days, the.xv. the.xvi. and the.xix.

In Apryll are.ii. days, the.xvi. and the.xxi.

In May are.iii. days, the.vii. xv. and.xx.

In June are.ii. days, the.iiii. and the.vii.

In July are.ii. days, the.xv. and the.xx.

In August are.ii. days, the.xix. and the.xx.

In Septembre are.ii. days, the.vi. and. the.vii.

In Octobre is one, the.vi. day.

In Nouembre are.ii. day, the.xv. and y^.xix.

In Decembre are.iii. days, the.vi. and the.vii. and the.ix. Et alii
dicunt.xv. and.xvi.

Also there are.iii. days in the year, as saint Bid tells, in the which if
any man let him blood, or take any drink to medycyne, within the.vi. day or
the.xiii. day of the month he shall dye, that is for to say, the first day of
the month of August, the last day of Decembre, and the.viii. day of ye
Kalen^. of Apryll.. Or who so eat of a goose in any of these.ii. days within
xl. days after he shall be sick and in peril to dy^.

Also there is three peryllous Mondayes, that if any man or woman eat of any
gose flesh on any of these.iii. days, they shall have the falling evil, and
no bodily work shall come to good end that is begone in any of these.iii.
days, that is to say, the first monday February, The second the last mondan
of May, And ye third, the last monday of Septembre.

Who so will learn of the.iii. peryllous mondayes as clerks sayen, in the
which no man should be letten blood of wound nor vain.

For who so be let blood in any of these days, soon after he shall dye, and
that within.iii. days And who so that than takes any medycyne, he shall be in
great danger to dye. And who so be borne in any of these days, he shall be
acombred thorughe strong death, that is for to say, The first mondaye of
August. The second is the last mondaye of the same month. And the third is
the last mondaye of Decembre.

And for this encheason many men dread and fere each mondaye.

who so will learn the Canyculer days, the which be days of great danger
and peril, as Clerks say, and they begin the.xv. Kalen^. of August, and
endures to the fourth Nonas of Septembre, in which season is very peryllous
to take syckenes, and it is also peryllous to take drynkes, or medycynes, or to
let blood, but if it be for great need, and that must be after the mids of
the day.

Thus ends the natures, and exposycions, of the.xii. Signs, divided by
the.xii. Months of the year upon blood lettynge, with the most dangerous
days for to do any manner thing towchynge Physycke and any other.
And here follows the Remedies for many diverse Infyrmyties and dyseases that
greueth and hurts the body of man. And first for the Pestylence, and the
remedy therefore.
Or the most needful thing of all, if so be that this appear in any wise
foresaid, is for to draw the botche by craft away from the clensynge place a
great space from y^ heart. And that shall I tell the how, and in all my
practysynge in Physycke this.xviii. year, I wyste it never fail but twyse,
and that was not long of the Medycyne, And none other time but of other
defautes: the which I will not write at this time, though it will expel it
and void it. Also look in the time of Pestylence, that thy Codwares be always
fresshely wasshen, and after the washing, look that they be dypped in fine
water of roses: and on the same wise the kerchyefe that thou lappest thy head
in on nyghtes, and let it dry by the fire, and not by the Pestylence air. And
when thou lie ye down to sleep, lay under thy head, and under the end of
thy pyllowe that is toward thy vysage Rosemary, Isope, soueraygne, Myntes,
Penyalryall, Lorey leaves, put in thy mouth macys, and clowes, or else Nutmyges,
look every day that thou take of fine tryacle proved ye quantyte of a bean
and a half. Also bear in thy purse these manner of spyces, Macys, Clowes,
Quibibes, Canell, or else Cynamon: and chewe thereof, and eat thereof, all the
times of the day.

And if thou be a poor man and may not attend to the costs of these
things. Take than every day fasting. ix. soppes in fine vynegre of white
wine, or else of red wine, and drink to them a saucerfull of vynegee, or thou
pass out of thy chamber, house, or place.

Also one of the best governance of all is in blood lettynge, for thou shalt
understand that a man is in spyrytuall members pryncypall, that is to say,
the heart, the liver, and the brain, and every one of these has his place
given him by kind, by the which he may avoid all superfluytes, and cleanse
him self.

The heart has his clensynge place in the arm hole. The clensynge place of
the lyuet is betwyxte the thyghe and the body. The clensynge place of the
brain, is under the ear, at the rotes, and in the throat.

Than this syckenesse of Pestylence comes thus, when the pores of a man are
open, than first enters the venomus and the corrupt air, that as soon as
it has maystrye, and is mynged with man's blood, than tonneth it to the heart
that is rote and ground of man's life, for to enfecte and dystroye all lively
spyrytes in a man, and so finally for to kylle and slay him, but ye heart and
the clean blood flies all that is ^oyous and contraryous unto kind. And in
asmoche as in him is expelled all such manner of corrupcyon and venomus, from
him to his clensyng place to the arm hoole. But than for that place is sometime
stopped, that it may not out, and it passes than to the pryncypall member
next, that is the liver for to enfecte and for to dystroye it. And than it
does as the heart does in his kind, and explleth it from him to his clensyng
place bytwyxte the thyghe and the body for it is also sparred in case and
stopped, that it may not out, but passes the meats and the veins unto the
third pryncypall membre that is the Brain, but than he would expelle it to
his clensynge place, that is under the erys and it may not in case out,
therefore the stoppynge and the sparryng of the meats and porys, and for
thyckenes of the foul and corrupt blood, and the venomous matter is mouynge
that is myngled therewith, and thus long time the matter is mouynge or it
rests in any place, sometime. xii. hours, and sometime. xxiiii. hours, and
sometime more, and sometime less after the degree and the gentylnes and the
greatness of the sycknes corrupcyons and venoms that be gendred. But than at the
last, sometime within. xiiii. hours it pass not out at the clensynge place,
nor at none other place through bledynge, tha^ it fystures in some place, and
cast a man in to an ague, and makes a botche in some of the three clensynge
places, or else nere to them on some vain, for ye shall well were that a
botche groundeth him evermore, and sets him on a vain and lets the blood
than, that it may not have his kyndelye course by the vain as he should have,
but it is infecte thereby. And so all the pryncypall and spyrytuall members are
infecte and thus sleeth man.

Finis.
Thus ends the third party of this pestylence treatise.
For to spourge the head. Cap^. vi.
TAke the seed of Stauysacre, and beat it small to powdre, and when it is
beaten small, take a fine lynen clothe, and put the powder therein, and make
thereof a little ball the quantyte of a great hasell nutte, and put in thy
mouth and roll it to and fro betwyxte thy tethe chawynge holdyng down thy
head, the space of an hour and it will spourge thy head and thy gu^mes, and keep
thy tethe from akynge.

Also for to spourge the head. Cap^. vii.
Take the rote of Pelater of Spain, and chawe it betwyxte thy tethe to and fro
a good while, and it will spourge well thy head, and also fasten thy tethe,
and spourge thy gu^mes.

For the head ache. Cap^. viii.
Take hemleckes and sees them till they be soft as pappe, than lay them to
the heed there the pain is, and let them lie al night* and on the morning
lay another hot plaster of the same and do so.ii. or.iii. times, and he
shall be hole.

For akynge of the head.Ca. ix.
Take and make lie of Veruayne, or else of Betayne, or of wormewode, and
therewith wasshe thy head thryse in the weke, and it shall do the much good,
and take away the ache.

For the to the ache.Cap^. x.
Take Betayne and wild gourdes, and sethe them in wine or else in vynegre, and
than put it in thy mouth as hot as thou may suffer and hold it a good
while in thy mouth, and it will take away the pain.

For the ache of a holowe to the.Ca. xi.
Take Assafettda and put it in thy to the that is holowe, and it will appease
and take away the ache.

Also for the tothe ache. Ca. xii.
Take Henbane and bruise it, and hold it between thy teth^ a good while, and
lay it upon the tothe ye aketh, and it will swage ye pain anon.

Also for the tothe ache. Ca. xiii.
Take the sede of Henbane and cast it upon a chaffynge dysshe of charcole fire,
and hold thy mouth over the fire, that the smoke may enter in to thy mouth,
and also than hold thy mouth over a basen of fair clean water, and thou shalt
se upon the water as it were small worms, that shall come droppynge out of thy
mouth. Also take the seed of henbane and beat it to small powder, and meddle it
with wax, and make a little pellet that it may be full of powdre without
forth, and put it in the hole of the holowe toth that aketh, and it will
lyghtely slay the ache of the tothe.

Also for the toth ache. Ca. xiiii.
Take the root of Henbane, and sethe it in vynegre to the third party be
sodden away, and with the same wassh^ thy mouth, and hold thy mouth full a
good while / and it will slethe to the ache, Also take the root of Henbane, and
hold it between thy akynge tethe, and it will do away the pain.

For the stenche in the mouth. Ca. xv.
Take the Joyce of Veruayne and bruise it and put it in thy mouth, and hold it
a good while close in thy mouth, and it will take away the stenche.

For a stynkynge brethe. Ca. xvi.
Take oil Dorret, Turpentyne, honey, oil olyue, vyrgyn wax, as much of one
as of an other, and boil them all together and make an oyntemente thereof, and
use it every day in the pacyentes nosethrylles, and let it be put in to the
nose every day in the morning with two tents made of lynte scraped of fine
lynnen clothe, and he shall be hole.

For ache and worms in the ears. Ca. xvii.
Take the joyce of Henbane and put it in to thine ears, and it will take away
the ache and sle the worms in them.

A precyouse water for poison, and specially against the pestylence, Cap^.
xviii.
Take Turmentyl, scabyous, goldes, detayne, and pympernell, of eueryche a like
much and dystyll thereof a water, and drink it fasting every day in the
morning, first next your heart, for it shall do you much good.

For ronnynge iyen. Cap^. xix.
Take black snayles and sees them in fair water, than take the greece that is
on the water, and therewith anoynte the iyen that be watery and ronneth,

For red blered iyen. Cap^. xx.
Take the joyce of Rue, and powdre of Co^myn, meddle them together, than take
cotton and deep it well therein, and lay it thereto, and anoynte the temples,
the brows, and the lyddes of the iyen therewith, and they shall be hole.

For iyen ye be dasuned or dyrke. Ca. xxi.
Take the rote of red fenell in winter, and in so^mer the leaves, or else both
rotes and leaves and stamp them and wrynge out the iuce, and tempre thy iuce
with fine claryfyed honny, and make thereof an ointment, and anoint the iyen
therewith, and it shall put away the derkenes, and shall clear the syghte.

A precious water for the sight of the iyen. Cap^. xxii.
Take smaleche, red fenell, rue, veruayne, Betayne, Egrymonye, pympernell,
e^frage* sauge, salendyne, of eueryche a like much of quantyte, and wasshe
them well and clean and stamp them, and put them in to a fair brazen pan,
and take the powdre of. xv. peper corns, fair sarcyd in to a pynt of good
white wine, and put it unto the herbs, with. iii. sponefull of life ho^ny,
and. v. sponefull of the water of a man chylyde that is an Innocent, and meddle
them all together and boil them over the fire, and when it is sodde strain
it through a clean lynnen clothe, and put it in a glass and stop it well
and close / till you will occupye it, and when need is do thereof in to the sore
iyen with a fether, and if it be waxen dry tempre it with good white wine, for
it is very good for the sight of the iyen.

For a pynne and the web in the iyen. Cap^. xxiii.
Take a curtesye of clean claryfyed ho^nye, and as much of woman's milk, that
noryssheth a maid child, and for the woman the man child, and sethe them
together, and when it is cold put it in a glass, and close it from the
air, and thus do. ii. or. iii. days. ii. or. iii. times every day, and he
shall be hole.

For all euyls in the iyen. Cap^. xxiiii.
Take clean claryfyed ho^nye one part, and more than of half the ho^ny of the
gall of an Hare, meddle them together in a vessel over the fire, but make it
but luke warm, and keep it in a Glass, but beware that thou take not to much
thereof in thine iyen, for the quantyte of a small pynnes head is enough at
ones when thou ghost to bed, and that is sufficyent for. vii. years if a man
have a perle, or a web in his iye and it be not dry, put thereto some dele more
of the gall than of ho^nye.

For boylynge in the iye. Cap^. xxv.
Take may butter and powdre of commyn / and stamp them together / and lay it
on a lynnen clothe to the iyen, and often times renew it, and when the
boylynge is swaged, take saffron, and woman's my^ke, and grynde them together,
and drop thereof in the sore iyen, and than thou shall be hole.

For a stynkynge brethe. Capi. xxvi.
Take.ii. handful of powdre of co^myn and sithe it in good white wine, from a
quarte till a pynte, and drink this first and last always hot, and he
shall be hole within.ix. daaes drinking.

For the stomach that is hot and swollen. Cap^. xxvii.
For the stomach that is hot and swollen, take the rote of Smaleche and
stamp it / and put it in sweet wine, or in other good wine all a day and
anyghte, and than let it be passed through a fair lynnen clothe, and put it
in a clean vessel, and use to drink a quantyte thereof every day
fasting.viii. or.ix. days during and he shall be hole.

For the stomach that aketh, that comes of cold. Cap^. xxviii.
For the stomach that aketh, that comes of cold, take an herb that is
called Poleo, and dry benes, and an handefull of syngryge and as much of this
Poleo, and put it in a vessel with fair water, and let it sethe there on
the fire, till y^ third part of the water, be soden away, and put thereto
sugre of stone and a curtesye of honny, and drink it.vi. days fasting, and
he shall be hole.

For to force the stomach. Cap^. xxix.
To force the stomach take, canell.iii. poy^ and.i. poys of mastyke, and.i.
poys of the parings of Pomegarnades, and half a poys of galyngale, and stamp
all these together / and tempre it with honnye that has been boiled on the
fire, and well scummed, and use of this as much as a nut every day,
during.ix. days fasting, and he shall be hole.

For the stomach and the belly that aketh. Cap^. xxx.
For the stomach and the belly that aketh, take the flower of an herb that is
named Nemaham, that is like to mynte, and it has a good savor, take.iiii.
poys of Cosmer, and.vii. poys of water, and sethe all together to the.iii. poys
of water, and sethe all together to the.iii. part and with sugre drink
this.v. days fasting in the morning, and he shall be hole.

And a man be Sick at the stomach, or in the belie, or at the heart, or heed,
or were bytten with any evil venomus be, or poisoned. Cap^. xxxi.
And a man were by the way trauaylynge, or in his house, and he had all these
syckenes, and he had with him a Lectuarye, that is made of.v. things, and he
eat thereof, or drunk thereof in water.iii. poys, or.iiii. he should be hole
and he use it.xv. days fasting, when he goth to bed last, he should be hole
of all the syckenes in his body, and he drunk every time two poys, and these
things they be, Scorlogio, Morre, Genciana, Grandorer, and zaraont, as much
of one as another, and stamp them and strain them, and meddle them with honny
that has been well boiled on the fire, and well scummed fair and clean. For
this is called the Lecutuarye of life.

A good medycyne for rysynge under the stomach. Cap^. xxxii.
Take peper, long peper, graynes, saffron gynger, anneys, lycores, and sugre,
sethe all these in good ale till it be thycke, and give it the sick to drink,
and he shall be hole.

Also a good playste for the rysynge under the stomach. Cap^. xxxiii.
Take yarowe, otherwise called mylfoyle, ^ed fenell, red myntes, borage, rue,
fetherfoy, clote leaves, perytory, egrymonye, of eueryche a like mothe, and the
greece of a barowe hog, for a man, and for a woman of a yelke hog, that is
of a sow kind, and sethe them all together in good ale, and make a plaster
thereof, and lay it to the stomach as hot as it may be suffered.ii. or.iii.
times, and he shall be hole.

For to dystroye the hete in the stomach. Capit. xxxiiii.
Take fair clear water and boil it well, and scu^me it, and put therein
sheuers of brown bread, and let them lie therein an hour, till the water be
almost cold, and than drink thereof.ii. or.iii. days by diverse times, and he
shall amend in short time.

For brennynge in the stomach. Capitu. xxxv.
Take and eat grene percely and galyngale without any other manner of thing.

For to avoid flewme out of the stomach, and also the head. Cap^. xxxvi.
Take powder of Pelater of Spain, and powdre of Co^myn, powder of long peper,
powder of gynger, mustarde, vynegre, and meddle them together, and chafe them
on the fire until they wax thycke, and than as hot as ye may suffer, put
part thereof in your mouth galkyng in your throat up and down but let none
enter in to your stomach, and do this diverse times, spyttynge out be the space
of an hour, and this is a gargarysme.

For all euylles in the stomach. Capitulum. xxxvii.
Take asshe sede, lynne sede, and Co^myn, of eueryche a like much, and give it
to the sick body to drink with hot worte, or else with fair hot water.

For a disease at y^ heart. Cap^. xxxviii.
Take Sentuarye and sethe it in stale ale, when it is well soden stamp it in a
mortar and sethe it again with the same lycoure, and than cleanse it through a
clothe, and proporcyon the iuce, to.ii. sponefull of the iuce, put thereto.iii.
sponefull of claryfyed ho^ny, and than boil it well together again, and put
it in a box and give it to the pacyent euerydaye.iii. sponefull fasting, till
he be hole, and this shall do away y^ glut from his heart, and make him to have
talent to meat.

For wekenes of the heart. Cap^. xxxix.
Take Rose water, and Perles betyn small to powdre, and meddle it with sugre,
and drink it.ii. or.iii. days, and it shall do the good.

For fayntnes of the heart. Cap^* xl.
Take the fylynge of gold, and the powdre of the bone of a hearts heart, meddle
with the iuce of borage and sugre made in syrope, for that is very good for
swonynge.

For the breast that is enco^bred. Cap^. xl^.
Take Isope and sethe it in a pottell of wine ^yll that it come to a quarte,
and let the sick use thereof first in the morning, and last at even hot, and
at morrow cold till he be hole.

For a man, woman, or child, that is broken in the belly. Cap^. xlii.
Take in May the tender croppes of herb Osmunde, and dry them with the
wind, and not in the son, and make powdre thereof, and sarce it and keep it
dry in a bladder, and let the pacyent drink of that powdre with white wine
even and morrow, winter and so^mer, save in May. In May drink of the
tendrynges of the said Osmunde, for this drink will make the broken belie
grene as it were new broken, and the pacyent must be well and ease^y trussed,
that he or she may go with it all day, and lie with it all night till he be
hose, and that will be within.xiiii. days, if he be well ruled, for he must
lie up right as much he may both day and night, and not strain his belie,
but as little as he can. And he must keep him la^e as long as he is sick and
lie in his bed.ii. hours in the morning after he has drunk this medycyne,
and must eat no white meat till he be hole, nor walk but easily for
straynynge.

The plaster to knyt him. Cap^. xliii.
Take Polypody that grows on an oak, the roots thereof and pare them clean,
and the roots of Elena ca^pona, and pare them clean, and than beat them in a
mortar, as small as thou ca^ste, and tempre it with oil of baye and make a
thycke plaster, and lay it on a thycke clothe a good quantyte, and lay it
there the sick is grieved under the trusse from the even until the morrow, and
on the morrow change it again, this is for all the year save in May, than
the leaves be better.

For the plaster in May. Cap^. xliiii.
Take Polypodye leaves, and the leaves of Elena campana, and Daysye leaves, and
beat them small, and tempre them with oil of Baye as thou semest best to make
a palyster, and lay it there the sore is even and morrow, and he shall by the
grace of God be hole.

For to break wind in ^ belly. Cap^. xlv.
Take co^myn, fenell sede, and anneys sede beatyn to powdre, than sethe it in
wine and drink it first and last.

For a swollen womb. Cap^. xlvi.
Take the iuce of Kue, and let the pacyent drink it with wine or ale, and he
shall be hole on warantyse.

For akynge of the womb. Cap^. xlvii.
Take tansay, rue, sothernewode, and eat them with salt, and he shall be hole.

For the heart brennynge. Cap^. xlviii.
Take the croppe of Fenell, and chewe it in thy mouth, and suck the iuce
thereof, and spette out the other part, and he shall be hole.

For sore sides within forth. Cap^. xlix.
Take Alysaundres, persely, louage, red fe^ell, smalege, burnet, and gromell,
and sethe them in white wine, till half be consumed than strain it and let
the sick drink it first and last, at even hot, and at morrow cold,

Co^tra telam et macula^ in oculo. Cap^. l.
Take fenell, unset goldes, veruayne, and betayne An^. and stamp them and
tempre them with ale or white wine, and strain it, and than stamped.ix. lowpes,
otherwise called Chesiockes, and put them in to the said lycoure, and give it
to the pacyeunt to drink. ix. days following, and he shall be hole.

For a woman's pappe y^ is sore. Cap^. li.
Take the rote of ^ryan, y^ is to say, wild Neppe, and make bare all the over
part of the said root, that is to say, the top of the root, and make an
hole therein, and cover it with a tyle stone and put it in the earth, and lay
earth upon it, and let it stand so.iiii. or.v. days, than open it and take
the iuce, that ye find in the hole and keep it in a glass, and therewith
anoynte the breast and it shall be hole.

For the liver that is corrupt and wasted. Cap^.lii.
Take a good quantyte of liver worte, and bruise it a little, and than sethe it
in good strong worte with a quantyte of Rubarbe, and use this medycyne and
thou shall be hole.

For the hete in the liver. Cap^.liii.
Take the iuce of sour apples, and sweet apples of each a pound or more, as
much as you think vest, and.ii. pound of sugre and meddle these things
together, and let them boil on a simple fire till it be thycke as a syrope,
and use this a curtesye thereof every day fasting with luke warm water.

For the hete in the liver of a man that his color is yelowe. Cap^.liiii.
Take the water of Sycore, and water of Letuse, and the water of the leaves and
small branches of a wild moryer tree, or else take the herbs and stamp all
these together, and as much of one as of another, and take the iuce of these
things, and as much as all this of sugre, and boil all together until it be
as thycke as syrope, and than put thereto a poyse and a half of Rubarbe, and
use a quantyte of this syrope in cold water every day fasting and last at
night, and he shall be hole.

For the breast that is enco^bred. Cap^. lvi
Take and drink.viii. days, or.ix. of the Fumer, the comes of sylke worms,
every day a poys in syrope of Isope, and if a man may not have this drink,
take the pure heart Do^lignam also in syrope of Isope.x. days, and he shall be
hole.

For a man that has worms in his belly and his body be lene. Cap^.lvi.
Take the galle of a Row, and flower of Lupius a curtesye and meddle them
together, and make a playste^ of wolle, and lay it on his help where the grefe
is, and do this.iiii. or.v. days, and he shall be hole.

For the breast and the lunges. Cap^.lvii.
Take a qua^tyte of claryfyed ho^ny and boil it, and when it is boled put
thereto half a pound of pere wardyns mynsed, and boil them well together,
and than put thereto an ounce of powdre, made of the rotes of Elena campana, and
an ounce of powdre of lycores / and let them boil till it be somewhat styffe,
than take it from the fire, and when it is nyghe cold put thereto an ounce
powdre of gynger, and stir it well together, use this first and last.

For to avoid and distroy flume. Ca.lviii.
Take percely rotes, fenell rotes, perytory, and Isope, and sethe them in good
ale (...) lycores, and a quantyte of claryfyed honnye, and use to drink it,
and thou shall be hole.

For the stone. Cap^.lix.
Take the roundes of thornebacke and dry them fair, and make powdre thereof,
and than take thereof.ii. d. weight, and put thereto two sponefull of water of
Ramsyne, and drink it every day, and every night, and than thou shalt be
hole. And if it be a great stone take a sponefull of water of stone croppe.ii.
sponefull of water of Ramsyns, and.ii. penny weight of the foresaid powdre
meddled together, and use this medycyne.iii. times, and thou shalt be help, be
the stone never so great.

Also for the stone. Cap^.lx.
Take the blood of a male Kyd, and dry it in an oven and make powdre of it,
than take gromell sede, ground Iue beryes, stanmarche sede, the rote or the
sede of Saxyfrage, rotes of Turmentyll, and of phylypendula, by even poicyon,
and beat all to small powdre, than take as much as the powdre of kyddes blood,
and of the seeds and rotes abouesayde, and use this powdre when need is in
sauce or in potage, a penny weight at ones and no more.

For the Collycke, strangury, and the stone. Cap^. ^^^
Take Careawey, fenell sede, spyckenared annes, co^myn, cynamum, and galyngale,
of eueryche half an ounce, gromell sede, and lycores, of eueryche of them an
ounce, and se the weight of all them, and beat the^ all to powdre, and put
half a sponefull of the same powdre in ale luke warm and drink it, and walk
thereafter an hour, or thou eat or drink any manner of thing.

For a man that is lepre, and it take in his legs and go upward. Cap^.lxii.
For a man that is lepre, and it take first in his legs and go upward in to
his body he may be soon hole, and if he will take a Charabot, that is to
say, a Bettyll and bren it to ashes, and beat it all to powdre small, and
than take old barowes greece, and melt it well on the fire, and tempre it
together, and as much as half that of Blanchet, and make an oyntement thereof,
and use it on the sore, and upon the oyntement, look that ye put a plate of
led, full of small holes in many places, and change it both in the morning
and at night the oyntement, but not the led, and he shall be soon hole of
that syckenes.

For a dertre in a man's flesh. Ca.lxiii.
Take a worm that is called a Pi^achar, that is as great as a been, and is
clean blewe or sendre, and it has many small feet and white under the belly.
And when a man touches it he waxes round as a boton, take that worm and
rub it well against the derte, so that it be all broken, and do this every
day.iii. or.iiii. times, and at every time rub.iii. worms, or.iiii. and
anon it shall be hole.

For a sauce flume vysage. Cap^. lxiiii.
Take Elena campana and sethe it in a pot with vynegre till it be soden in,
than sta^pe it small, and than put thereto quyckesyluer, and brymstone, and
gyltes greece, and bray it together and make thereof a plaster, and lay it to
the vysage all night, and upon the morrow wass^e it of.

For him that may not hold his water Capitulum. lxv.
Take gotes talowe and bren it, and make thereof powdre, and put it in to the
pac^entes potage, and let him use this and he shall pysse mesurably enough.

Another for the same. Cap^. lxvi.
Take Synshone and shepes talowe, and sethe them well together, and as hot as
it may be suffered lay it to the membre, and he shall make water anon.

For to dystroye flume. Cap^. lxvii.
Take betayne and dry it, and make thereof powdre, and keep it till thou have
need, and when thou wylt occupye thereof take a quantyte of honnye and of the
powdre, and make thereof.ii. or.iii. pellettes, and swolowe them down all hole
last when thou go to bed, and that shall do the much good.

For a womb that is hard. Cap^. lxviii.
Drink the iuce of waybrede with old wine and he shall be eased.

Also another for the same, take Cynkfoyle, that is to say, five leued grass,
and stamp it and drink it with hot milk, and he shall be eased.

For the blody Menyson. Cap^. lxix.
Take mylfoyle and plantayne of eueryche alyke much, stamp them all together,
and keep it, and when thou will take thereof tempre it with wine, and let the
pacyent drink it, and he shall be hole.

For a man's stones that be swollen. Capitulum. lxx.
Take an Herb that is called Marcellee in French, and frye it well in oil
Olyue, and lay it to the stones that is swollen, as hot as it may be
suffered.viii. days or more and need be, for this will hele the swellynge.

For to make one sklendre. Cap^. lxxi.
Take and sethe Fenell in water and drink the water last at even, and first
at morrow, and it shall swage him or her shortly.

For him that lacks wind. Cap^. lxxii.
Take malowes, mercuree, and borage and seth them together with a peace of
porke, and make thereof potage and eat it, and drink the broth with white
wine, or with whey made of milk

For him that is costyfe. Cap^. lxxiii.
Take the iuce of walworte, and meddle it with ho^ny, and give it the pacyent to
drink.

For a wicked blaste, and wind in the vysage. Cap^. lxxiiii.
Take an hen egg and roste it hard, than take the white thereof, and an
ounce of Coperas, and beat it together small in a brazen mortar till it be like
an ointment, and therewith anoynte the face that is blasted, and when it is
hole, them anoint it with Populyon, and that will souple the skin, and make
it hole.

For the Shyngles. Cap^. lxxv.
Take Doves donge and Barley meele, and stamp them together, and tempre them
with aysell, and lay it thereto.

For the Kowgh. Cap^. lxxvi.
Take netles that be gathered between saint Mary days in Harvest, of them
that bears sede, and dry them in the son, and rub out the sede, and
grynde it to powder, and drink it with me, and thou shall be hole.

For him that has the peryllous Kowghe. Cap^. lxxvii.
Take Sauge, Rue. Common, and powdre of peper, and sethe them in ho^ny, and make
thereof a Lectuary, and use thereof a sponefull at even and another in the
morning.

For the Kowghe, that is called the Chynke knowghe. Cap^. lxxviii.
Take the rotes of Horsehele, and Comfery as much of one as of another, and
stamp them small in a mortar, sethe them in fair water, till the half dele
be wasted, and than take the third part of ho^ny boiled and scummed, and put
them to gyther, and make thereof a Lectuarye, and do it in a box, and let the
sick use thereof.v. days or.vi. a good quantyte at ones, first and last, and
he shall be hole.

For the Iche. Cap^. lxxix.
Take frankensence, and braye it small, and meddle it with oil of Baye, and
than anoynte there as it Icheth. etc.

For to draw a byle from one place to another. Cap^. lxxx.
Take an herke that is called Oeulus christi, and ^eruayne and make a plaster
of it, and lay it from the byle.ii. fyngers broad, and when it has lain a good
while remeue it, and do so still, till it be there that thou would have it, and
there let it break.

For him that pysseth blood. Cap^. lxxxi.
Take percely, ambrose, and bursa pastoris, of euery^he a like much, and
stamp them and tempre them with a quantyte of gotes milk, and strain it, and
let him drink it.iii. days even and at morrow, and this will staunche him
shortly.

For a man that has lost his mind. Cap^. lxxxii.
Take the iuce of Goldes, of Sauge, and of wormwood, of eueryche of them a
sponefull, and take as much of white wine, and put thereto and let him drink
it at even, and as much a^ morrow cold, and serve him thus fy^e days
during, and he shall be hole.

Another for the same. Cap^. lxxxiii.
Take and sha^e of the here of the molde of his heed, than take Archaungell and
stamp it, and bind it to his heed, where it is shaven, and let him take a
sleep therwithall, and when he waketh he shall be right weyke, and sobre enough.

For him that has the frenesye. Capitulum. lxxxiiii.
Take oil of roses, oil of ^yolettes, and of eueryche of them.xx. poys, and
as much of water of Locorde, and put it in a new vessel of earth, and boil
it till all the water be failed, than put out that, and put in other in the
same vessel asmoche of that water, and boil it thus seven times, and than put
thereto half of the.iiii. part of a poys of Ca^fere and meddle it well
together, and use it on his heed when it is new shaven.

For a person that vomyssheth to much. Cap^. lxxxv.
Take Roses and boil them well in good strong vynegre, and makt a plaster
thereof, and lay it to the persons stomach.

For a man that has disease in his ears. Cap^. lxxxvi.
Take fair oil Olyfe, and let it be blown out of a man's mouth, that is
clean and fasting in to the ears of the sick man, and let this be done.iii.
or.iiii. times, and let that side of the heed be turned downewarde, that the
ordure of the heed may run out, and use this.viii. or ix. days, and he
shall be amended.

For a man that his ears sown within. Cap^. lxxxvii.
Take Amondes, and the Carnelles of Peches, and let them be clean pylled in
hot water, and make oil of them, and let that oil be put in to the ears of
y^ sick body with tents made of fine lynnen clothe, and use this.viii. or.ix.
days, and he shall be hole.

For synewes that shrynke after they have been hurt and healed. Ca. lxxxxviii.
Take ensenee, calasome, mastyke, hantit, turpentyne, galbenon, visque, the
mary of an ass shepes suet, old swynes greece, and butter, and of eueryche of
them half an ounce, than take an ounce and an half of wax, and an ounce of
oil olyue, and stamp them and boil all these things together, and make it
in manner of an ointment hard to make playsters, and than make thereof a
plaster and lay it on the hurt senewes, and let this lie.xv. days or
more, and they shall stretche out well.

For to staunche blood. Cap^. lxxxix.
Take an herb that is called Lune ma^a^^e and stamp it, and lay it on the
wound, or take the grene leaves thereof, and lay upon the wound, and it shall
staunche, and if a man may not have this hethe, let him bren the Feathers of a
cocks neck, and take the ashes of them, and lay the ashes on the wound,
and the blood shall soon be staunched.

Also to staunche blood. Cap^. lxxxx.
Take a pease of salt beef that is well salted or else a pease of salt beef
that hangs in the rofe, and cover it in hot embres till it be through hot,
and take asmoche as will stop the hole, and bind it fast to, as hot as the
pacye^^ may suffer it, and it ^^all staunche anon, but let the beef be fat
and lene together.

For an empostume. Cap^. lxxxxi.
Take barlye and dry beans, and lycores, and let boil them with fair water
al together, of eueryche a like much, and drink thereof with sugre every day
fasting, and at night when he goes to bed, and use this.vi. days or more,
and he shall cast out the postume.

For spettynge of blood. Cap^. lxxxxii.
Take ache, myntes, rue, and betayne and sethe them together well in good
milk, and give it him to drink first in the morenynge, and last at night,
and he shall be hole.

For wild fire, that is called the fire of hell. Cap^. lxxxxiii,
Take red worms of the earth, and the rote of valeryon, and stamp them
together, and lay it thereto, and take valeryon the rote and the leaves and
stamp it, and tempre it with water and give him to drink, and he shall be
hole.

For the bytynge of a mad dog. Capitulum. lxxxxiiii.
Take the sede of box and stamp it, and tempre it with holy water, and give
it him to drink. etc.

For to do away a wenne. Cap^. lxxxxv.
Take and bind fast the wenne, than take verdygrece, sulphur, soap, oil of
eggs alom and honny, and tempre them together, and lay it thereto, and it
shall do away the wenne, and heal it without any doubt.

For to break a felon i^ a night. Ca. lxxxxvi.
Take powdre made of Cantarydes, and tempre it with clean shepes ^alowe, and
make a plaster thereof and lay it thereto, and it shall break.

For the mygrym. Cap^. lxxxxvii.
Take.iiii. handefull of red Rose flowers fresshe in so^mer, and in winter
welked, and.iii. handefull of camamell, and as much of veruayne and break them
small with thy hands and boil them in a pottell of white wine of gascoyne if
it may be had, or else in tochell wine until it come to a quarte, and put
them in.iii. bags broched flat like a plaster, and lay there the ache is, as
hot as the sick may suffer. and change them hot and hot, during a day and
a night, and longer if need be.

For the morfewe. Cap^. lxxxxviii.
Take water of elder and drink it.iii. sponefull in ye morning.ii. or.iii.
times, and when ye reccyue it, walk after and catch a good hete. And than
take a pynte of white vynegre and.ix. oak aples, and cut them and layne them.
iii. days, and.iii. nyghtes in the same vynegre and after take a fair lynnen
clothe and put the aples in the same cloth, and strain them, and with the
lycoure thereof and anoint thy body.iiii. days, and it will do away the morfewe.

For to stop the flyxe. Cap^. lxxxxix.
Sake an onyon and roste it till it be tender than bruise it and lap it in a
lynen clothe, and put it betwyxt the clyfte of the buttockes even ioynynge to
the foundement, and set him down thereupon, as hot as he may suffer a long
time, and take an other onyon and pluck out the core, and fill the hole full
of frankensence, and english saffron, and take the covering of the onyon and
cover the hole, and put it in the embres, and let it boil till it be somewhat
tender, and than put away the covering, and lay y^ onyon as hot as it may be
suffered upon his navel hole, and bind it fast that it fall not away, and he
shall be hole.

For the Canker, wild fire, and ignis sancti Aathonii. Cap^. C.
Take and roste Sorell in a wete lynnen clothe the space of half an hour,
under the hot embres, and than stamp it with fine claryfyed honnye and lay
that to the sore, and without doubt, it will do away the brennynge blackenes,
and styncke, and heal it perfytely.

For to make here to grow. Cap^. C.i.
Take and sethe malowes rotes and all, and wasshe the place there as the here
lacks, and it shall grow. etc.

For to do away here. Cap^. C.ii.
Take horse leches and bren them to powdre, and mynge it with eysell, and
towche the place there the here grows, and it shall grow no more there.
etc.

For a scalde heed. Cap^. C.iii.
Take a penny worth of lamp oil, and half a pynte of fair water, and boil
it well together, and when it is cold put thereto an half penny worth of
quycke silver, and tempre it well together, and anoynte the heed.

For the yelowe Iaundes. Cap^. C.iiii.
Take a quantite of turmeryke, and asmoche of yuorye beten to powdre, and
asmoche of the inner bark of barbery tree, and a quantyte of English saffron
in powdre, and modle them all together, and drink it with milk.iii. or.iiii.
days fasting in the morning.

For the black Iaundes. Cap^. C.v.
Take genciana, long peper, calamus aromaticus, auencis, lycores, reysyns of
coraunce white soap of spain, of eueryche. i. 3. and two sponefull of
mustarde, and boil all these in a quarte of wine till the third part be
wasted, and let the pacyent drink it.

For worms and heat in the hands. Cap^. C.vi.
Take Chykenwyde and bruise it a little, and than sethe it in ronnynge water,
till the water be half wasted away, than take and wasshe the sore hands
therein, as hot as the pacyent, may suffer it, and do thus.iii. or.iiii. days
during and he shall be hole.

For the gowte. Cap^. C.vii.
Take red myntes, and cressons, and unset lekes, and let these herbs sethe
well together and wasshe there as the syckenes is every day two times a day,
and if ye can not have these herbs, let the sick body be washed with hot
water, and anoynte him before the fire or in the son with this onyntme^t, and
rob him well therewith. Take virgyn wax, turpentyne, saffton, the yolke of an
egg, oil olyue, oil of Almondes, May butter, oil of nuttes, oil doret,
the greece of a barowe hog, oil of Camamell, and sheep suet, with good
clarifyed ho^ny, and set all these be meddled together, and boiled fair and
easily by the fire.

For sore knees that does swell and ache. Cap^. C.viii.
Take rue, louage, and stamp them together and put thereto honny, and make
thereof a plaster, and lay it to the sore knees, and that shall fet away the
swellynge and the ache.

For the falling evil. Cap^. C.ix.
Take the blood of his little finger that is sick, and write these. iii. ^erses
following, and hang it about his neck.

Jasper fert Myrram / thus Melchior /

Balthazer aurum.

Hec quicu^^^ secum portat / tria no^a ^egum.

Soluitur a morbo / domini pietate caduco.

For brennynge and scaldynge. Capitulum. C. x
Take fresshe gees Donge, and frye it with fresshe butter, and shepes talowe,
and strain it through a clothe, and lay it on the sore, and it will hele
anon.

For brennynge with fire. Cap^. C. xi.
Take the rynde of an elm tree, and sethe it half a day in fair water, and
let it kele, and gather of the thycke that thou fyndest upon the water with a
fether, and every day anoynte it with the fether even and morrow.

For to hele hurtes and wounds. Ca. C. xii.
Take malowes and sethe them well, and when they be wel^ soden, take and stamp
them, and than take old barowes greece, and clean barley mele, and mynge the
iuce, the mele and the greece all together, and make a salve thereof, for it is a
ready heler.

Also to make a salve to draw and to hele. Cap^. C. xiii.
Take a quartron of a pound of virgyn wax and two ounces of shepes suet, and
melte them together a little, and than take them from the fire, and put thereto
an ounce of frankensence and stere it well together, and do it in a box, and
this will both draw and hele.

For styngynge of Edders and snakes. Cap^. C. xiiii.
Take dragons and drink it, and also stamp dragons and lay it to the place
there the styngynge is, and that shall suck out the venym and sease the
smertynge.

For him that can not ^lepe. Cap^. C. xv.
Take pety morell and stamp it, and wrynge out the iuce, than take. iiii.
sponefull of the iuce, and.iiii. sponefull of woman's milk, and a sponefull of
vynegre and hete it, and therewith anoynte his temples and his forheed, and as
it dries anoynte it again, and than wete a clothe therein, and lay it upon
his forheed, and use this oftentimes, and this shall make him sleep

For the palsy. Cap^. C. xvi.
Take the galle of an ox, or of a bulle of one color, if it may be gotten,
and.iii. or.iiii. red onyons, and roste them till they be tender, and than
stamp them well in a bole dysshe, and mynge the gall and them together, and
look there be.iiii. times asmoche of the galle as of ye onyons and therewith
anoynte well the place that is grieved till it be drunk in, and than take a
soft shete new whaste, and warm it against the fire, and wrappe the sick
body therein, and this must be used at night to bedwarde, and within.ix.
nyghtes it will amend and make the flesh grow though it be much away,
and if the skin be waxen thycke by vanysshynge away of the flesh, take red
nettell croppes and rub well the s^ynne, and the oyntmente will better drink
in, and this oyntmente is good for all manner aches, for every body.

A very good drink for the Poxes. Capitulum. C. xvii.
Take Salendyne, and English saffron, the weyghte of an half penny, and a
farthynge worth of graynes, a quarter of long peper, a penny weight of mase,
and stale ale, stamp your herb, and powdre your saffron, and meddle them all
together, and than dyrnke it.

A salve for the poxes. Cap^. C. xviii,
Take white led.i. quartron. ob. verdegrece. i. ^. ob. mastyke. i. 8. comfere.
i. 8. rosen.ii. ounces seryouse. i. ^. mercurye. ob. turpentyne, breke^all
these in a mortar, and meddle your turpentyne with ^yle olyue, and than mynge
them all together, and make thereof a salve and anoint the sick body therewith
and let him lie and sweet. etc.

For the gowte, or swellynge of joints and knobbes, that comes of the ache
of the Poxes. Cap^. C. xix.
Take May butter, and half a pound of co^myn, and a quarter of a pound of
black soap, and a handful of rue, and a little of sheep stwet and stamp all
these in a mortar, than take the gall of an ox, and a sponefull of baye salt
and seye all together in a fryenge pan till it be thycke, than lay it on a
woollen clothe and lay it to the ache as hot as it may be suffered, during.iii.
wekes, and every weke a new plaster, and it shall take away the ache and the
swellynge without doubt.

For the Crampe. Cap^. C. xx.
Say Bero, Barto, Bertora, these must be said three times, make a cross upon
it with your hand, when the Crampe comes upon a man or a woman.

For the spots of ye morfewe. Ca. C, xxi.

Take and roste.iiii. eggs hard, and put them broken all hot in to a pynte
pot with a pynte of vy^egre, and let it stand so.iii. days, and.iii.
nyghtes, during well stopped, and than cleanse it through a lynnen clothe, and
wasshe the spots therewith till they be away.

To put away the rote of the morfewe. Cap^. C. xxii.
Take Fumytarye.viii. handful, borage, scabyous, of each.iiii. handful, and
braye them together in a mortar, and put thereto a pottell of clean whaye, than
strain them together, and set it over the fire till it have a hatte of scu^me,
than set it down and strain it clean, and set it over the fire again, and
put thereto claryfyed ho^ny, and boil them together clean, that is to say,
boil them easily as long as any scu^me will arise, or else ye may claryfye it
with eggs, who so claryfyeth whay, and take thereof.viii. sponeful or a good
draughte or two, as ye think best, for it shall do you much good.

For a child that is Iowefall, or molde fall, or rofe fall. Cap^. C.xxiii.
Take a handefull of Chycke wede, and lap it in a red Cole lef^, or else in a
lynnen clothe and roste it in hot embres in the fire, and it will be a grene
salve, and than lay the said salve to the bone in the neck as hot as it may
be suffered.

Also take sour leuyn of white bread, and cro^me it on the molde of the
childs heed as a plaster and it shall reyse up the bone or molde by the grace
of god, within.ix. days.

For the mother. Cap^. C.xxiiii.
Take moderworte, called ye mother of all herbs, that is to say shortly
mugwort, herb Symynde, sauarye, and read mynte, and drink this iuce with
good red wine.

For all fever agues, and for young children suckyng the breast. Cap^. C.xxv.
Take powdre of Crystal / and lay it to sooke in wine / and give it to
drink to the noryse of the child / and the suckynge child shall be hole. Also
take the rote of morsus diaboli with the herb / and hang it about the neck
of the child.

For to dystroye poison. Ca. C.xxvi.
Take a quantyte of dragons / and a quantyte of betayne / and a quantyte of
plantayne and make hereof wortes / and use them.iii. days and this shall
dystroye poison and venym / but the most part must be dragons.

For the ague. Cap^. C.xxvii.
Take Endyue, sowthystyll / daundelyon / letuse / sorell / of eueryche a like
much / and stylle these all together / and the water will be passing good for
the agewe.

For the hot ague infected with pystylence taken betymes. Cap^. C.xxviii.
Take the Iuce of syngrene / and the white of four eggs / and fair flower of
whete / and meddle it well together / and make thereof a fair plaster / and lay
it to the pacyentes sides / and than take the water of betayne / and the water
of pympernell / and the water of scabyous, and the water of turmentyll, and
water of radeys, of eueryche a like much meddled together / and give the pacynt
the drink.

For the gowte. Cap^. C.xxix.
Take tansey^ and wormewode of each a like much / temperatlye enough of
shepes sewet, according to your herbs / and frye them in a pan over the
fire till it be grene / but beware it be not burnt / and when ye well occupye
it / cast a sponefull of lynesede therein and if it be the cold gowte / lay it
to hot / and if it be the hot gowte lay it to cold winter and somer.

To draw out ache. Cap^. C.xxx.
Take cantarydes / and take of their heddes and stepe them.iiii. or.v. hours
in good vynegre / and than lay them upon a plaster of diaculum / and above
upon them a fine lynnen clothe / or else fine double of lawne next the skin
/ and sow in your c^ntarydes in manner of a quylte / and lay it to the ache /
and it will make it to blyster / than prycke it out with a nedle / and than
take this medycyne fololowynge / and it will dry it.

To dry the same. Cap^. C.xxxi.
Take ground yuye a quantyte and stamp it in a mortar / than take shepes
sewet / and put them both in a pan and frye them well together / till it be
grene / and than ye shall strain it, and make of it a cake, and when it is
cold, make thereof a plaster brother than your Cantarydes was, and within three
days after all shall be paste and dry.

For the swellynge in a man's knee or leg that aketh. Cap^. C.xxxii.
Take a blewe or a blunket woollen clothe, as much as will lap about the
knee or leg, and than take the white of two or three hen eggs and beat them
well in a treen dysshe and sprede it upon the clothe, so done / than take the
yolks and beat them in the same dysshe, and put thereto black soap as much or
more, and beat them both well together, and when they be well beten together it
will be a fair salve, and than spreke it thycke upon the same cloth, on the
white of the eggs, meately thycke, and lap it about the sore knee or leg
and roll it, and let it lie three day and three nyghtes, and it will fetch
away the swellynge and the ache.

For the yche or scabbes. Cap^. C.xxxiii.
Take the seed or the herb called stauysacre and stamp these with portulake
and with oil of baye, and anoynte the pacyentes body therewith, this is hot
and dry.

FINIS.
Imprynted by me Robert Wyer, dwelling in saint Martyns parysshe, at charynge
Cross.
Ad imprimendum solum.

ROBERT WYER.

printer's device of Robert Wyer


