A meruaylous strange deformed Swyne.


HEre Good Reader shall thou behold a strange and deformed Swyne, farowed and
brought forth in Denmark, and there bought and brought over by an Englishman,
which has it at this present, and is to be seen a live, the proportion whereof
is wondrous strange to behold and view: the forepart thereof from the Snoute
beneath the fore shoulders are in all points like unto a Swine, except the
Ears only, which resemble ye ears of a Lion, the hinder part (contrary to
kind) is proportioned in all points like unto a Ram, having soft wool both
white and black mixed monge the hard Hear, and so grows from the shoulders
down ward, all the body over, and it is a Boar Pyg, how beit, there does
nothing appear outward, but only the Pysell under his Belly, but if a man
list to feel and gripe it in the Grindes, there ye may feel his Coddes within
his belly: and the most straungest thing of all, is the misshapen and deformed
Feet, whereon grow certain Tallents and very hard Claws, doubling under his
Feet, every Claw so byg as a man's Finger, and black of color, and the length
of every of them are full. x. inches, very strange and wonderful to behold,
it feeds and eats diverse and sundry things, as well Hay and Grass, as
Bread and Apples, with such other things as sheep and Swyne do feed on.

An exhortacion or warning to all men, for amendment of life.
COme near good Christians all,
behold a Monster rare:
Whose monstrous shape (no doubt) fortels
Gods wrath we should beware.
His wondrous works we ought not judge,
as toys and trifles vain:
Whither it be Child or brutish Beast,
for warnings they are plain.
As now, this mingled brutish Beast,
Gods creature is we see:
Although as strange of shape and form
as possyblie may be.
For if you do way well each point,
his nature and his shape
I fear resembles some of those,
as on the same do gape.
For why most Swinish are our lives,
and monstrous (that is sure:)
Though we resemble simple Sheep,
or Lambs that be most pure.
But every Tree it self will try,
at last by his own Fruit:
Though on our Backs we carry Woll,
our conscience is pollute,
Though smilingly with flattering face,
we seem Gods word to love:
Contrary wise some hate the same,
as well their deeds did prove.
Who meant the ruin of our Realm,
as Traitors to our Queen:
Some white fast La^bs have sought to do
(nay, monstrous Swine) I ween.
I mean not here at large to show
offenses as they be:
In whom they reign, in hie or low,
I name here no degree.
But generally, I say to all,
repent amend your life:
The greedy rich, the needy poor,
yea, yongman, Maid, and Wife.
The Protestant, the Papist eke,
what sect so that ye be,
Gripe your own conscience, learn to do
as God commands ye.
For all are sinners David says,
Yea, do the best we may,
Unprofitable servant still we be,
we can it not denay.
Judge ye therefore how far amiss,
all those their lives do frame:
That outwardly profess Gods truth,
and inward hate the same.
Judge ye again that hate your Prince,
and seek the Realm to spoil:
What monstrous Swine you prove at length,
for all your covert coil.
Experience late by Felton false,
and Nortons two I ween:
Their Treason known were wo^dred at
as they had Monsters been.
And surely I can judge no less,
but that they Monsters were:
Quite changed from true subjects shape,
their deeds did so appear.
Then let their deeds example be,
to us that Subjects are:
For treason ends by shamfull death,
therefore by them beware.
I speak not here of monstrous Pride,
in Man, in Maid, and Wife:
Nor Whoordom which is daily used,
in England rank and rife.
Of Covetousness, what should I say,
or Vsery daily don:
It booteth not to speak thereof,
so much thereby is won.
But if they well do count their Cards,
how God they do offend:
I wis their sweet ill gotten gains,
has sour and bitter end,
From the which end deliver us Lord,
and grant both hie and low,
To become thy servant just and true
and then our end we know.
God grant our gracious souerain Queen
long over us may reign:
And this life past, with Christ our Lord,
Heavens joys she may attain.
I. P.

FINIS
Imprinted at London by William How, for Richard Iohnes: and are to be sold
at his Shop joining to the Southwest door of Paul's Church.


