A DEFENSE and true declaration of the things lately done in the low
country, whereby may easily be seen to whom all the beginning and cause of the
late troubles and calamities is to be imputed.

And therewith also the sclaunders wherewith the adversaries do burden the
Churches of the low country are plainly confuted.

Psalm. XLIII. Give sentence with me (O God) and defend my cause against the
ungodly people: O deliver me from the deceitful and wicked man. For thou art
the God of my strength.

AT LONDON. Printed by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regio Maiestatie

To the right honorable and my singular good Lord and patron the Lord Cheyne.
MY singular good Lord. The doings of Papists standing wholly, as their
religion does, upon falshed and cruelty, and taking to themselves by use a
license of untrue speaking and workyng, plainly shows what faith is to be
given to such as think them selves bound to keep no faith. Such has ever
been their manner, not only in dissimulation and practisyng before things be
brought to pass, but al so in shameless lyeng and misreporting them after they
be ended. For what else is to be looked for of that unfaithful faith that is
grounded wholly upon falshead and blasphemy, is pursued wholly with malice and
treason, is auaunced wholly by cruelty and tyranny, and having no respect of
prosperity beyond this life, has by confidence in man destroyed the fear of
God?

What marvel is it then if such kind of men, Monks, Friars, and other
Parasites, having been writers of hystories heretofore, have filled the world
with feigned miracles and with intolerable absurdities, to flatter Popes and
deceive the people have sclandered Emperors Kings and Princes, and as
ordinarely laid up in their Libraries false treatises and Chronicles to beguile
posterity, as in their cofers forged evidences which they daily made to rob
true owners of their inheritance. In these falsities they so far proceeded,
that their impudency falling with want of shame by use of lyeng into so great
imprudence as that manifest contradictions and inconveniences convinced them,
they then resorted to justify their untruths and seducyng the world with
pretense of a profitable deceiuyng men with godly error. Surely whoes
conscience can serve them to do murders, to tumble up kingdoms, and raise all
kind of horrible and tragical examples, will not much stick to tell lies in
excusing or reportyng the doings of them selves, and their adversaries. For Ex
ijsdem sunt and nutriuntur mixta, a sect patched up of lies must be fed and
mainteyned with the same. Much like it is to the doing of king Richard and
Catesbie to bleare the worlds eyes with the proclamation of treason supposed
to have been intended by the Lord Hastings and Shores wife, and showing out his
own withered arm, after the example of Antoninus Caracalla concerning his
brother Geta, and such like. So did that honest man Boner immediately upon the
death of the excellent Martyr the Archebyshop of Caunterbury openly cause to be
published in Print a report of the Archbyshops death and his words before his
death, directly contrary to that which was spoken, and all in favor of
Papistrie. Thence came it that all foreine hystories are at this day so stuffed
with sclanders against our estates people and Princes, specially sins that king
Henry the viij. resumed his lawful jurisdiction from vsurpyng Popes. Our
kings be villanously termed tyrauntes, virtuous Queens and Ladies defamed,
Nobility disgraced, Parlamentes despised, the people reprochfully taunted,
thieves, whoremongers, sodomites, murderers, and traitors sainted, victories
pinched, factes and successes falsely uttered, and that so plainly even while
living witnesses present and parties to the matters them selves are hable truly
to disprove them. And all this they do upon trust that though it be some shame
a while, yet their books shall ouerlyue men's persons, and so at length deceive
posterity: and so think they it reason now that other papists hereafter
should enjoy the fruit of their falshed at this time, as they have the fruit
of other Papists false head heretofore. So does fabulous Iouius, So does
pratyng Paradine, so does the whole heap of Popish Pamphleters, without
reverence of Princes estates or of other men's ears, of their own outworne
honesties. This has made common liars to show aduises of news from beyond
seas so freshly arrived that ye very ink blotted when the letters were showed
in Paul's, men surely worthy of their card cousin to hang on their backs to
warn them, and F. cudgel better to advise them. This doing of theirs has of
late years continually enforced noble Princes and good men to publish
Apologies and set forth books to yield true account of their factes against
this poisonous kind of Parasites and rumor spreaders. This, my Lord, has
caused the noble men and other of base Germany to publish in Supplication by
them exhibited to the Emperor the Electors and other Princes assembled at
Spires, the report of their doings and sufferynges, with request of good
interpretation and charitable aid. Because the same contains a great deal
of matter of good hystoricall knowledge, and because the daily rumors of Papists
do amplify evils to kyndle uncharitableness against poor men, I have thought
good to turn the same into English, and to set it out to the world to behold,
without preiudicing the credit of any, but leauyng every man to believe so far
with them or against them as evident truth and apparent proves shall lead
them. Only this by the way remembered, that the public ministers, ambassadors,
messe^gers and agentes for those against whom these do complain, have not
sticked against common faith to be certifiers and auouchers of untruths and
parteners of treasons against our noble Queen, as in public arrainementes
and other open places and doings, beside secret knowledges, has lately
appeared.

Having performed this work of translation for credit of truth, and for
raising of good affections in just and indifferent persons, and for a good
monument of knowledge to such as lack help of the Latin tongue, wherein and in
the Dutche tongue it has been before printed, I thought it my duty to offer the
same to your good Lordshyp. Whereunto many reasonable respects has moved me.
First your zeal to true Religion, your virtuous governance of your household
therein, your noble and sincere administration of justice, without vsyng the
Queen service to private malice and affections, and your severe lookyng to
dangerous cariers of untrue rumors and seditious speeches in your country,
all which virtues become a personage fit to receive a work intended for
declaration of truth and confutation of sclanders. Beside that I being
sustained in study by your Lordshyps liberality, do owe you that duty that
under your name should pass to the worlds commodity such fruits of learning
as I have been hable to yield, humbly praying your Lordshyp to accept the same,
and most humbly besechyng God long to bless your Lordshyp and my good Lady,
long in honor and prosperity to serve our most gracious Queen, who^ God long
defend to his honor and the succor of his Church, and comfort of her own
conscience in not omittyng any thing to the help of Gods flock, and sure
remouyng of Gods enemies dangerous practisers, that as her present government
ministers abundance of good fruits, so the times imminent and posterity may
find no lack, but for her good provisions yield her eternal thankful
memory, when God shall have received her as his faithful servant to eternal
blessed kingdom.

Your L. most humble Elias Newcomen.

THe same tempest, most victorious Emperor and most noble Princes, which now
almost a whole hundred years has troubled sundry parts of Europe, has now
also at this time by most cruel tyranny enforced us being spoiled of our
goods, chased out of our native contreyes, oppressed with sclanders of our
adversaries, and tossed with all kind of calamities, to flee as most humble
suitors to your clemency for succor.

For we suppose there is no man ignorant, that long ago Spain, and since also
by little and little a great part of all Europe not only has flamed with inward
contentions and tumultes, but also has in manner ben overwhelmed with most
grievous storm of persecutions and tyranny. Whereby certain idle men which in
only name and outward gesture professed a solitary life severed from all
governance of commonweals, and only addicted to the preaching of the word
of God or quiet study of holy scriptures, have begone to creep into courts
of Kings and Princes, and covering their greedy affections with cloak of
religion, to minister such counsels whereby they might by their new devised
mean of Inquisition against heresy, draw to themselves from the civil
magistrate the hearing and judgment of the controversies of greatest weight
and importance. And so by little and little they have atteined not only by
searching and inquiring to become Lords of every private persons goods,
possessions, houses and most secret places, yea and their wives and children,
but also to bring the magistrates and Princes themselves in subjection to their
authority. In what places they perceived their desires to be hindered either by
the ancient liberty of the people, or by the discretion of the Rulers and
Princes, straightway they charged such with forged sclander of heresy and
rebellion, and so grievously enflamed the hearts of Kings and Emperors against
their subjects. And by this crafty mean they have stirred up civil
dissentions, tumultes of commonalties, and oftentimes grievous wars, whereby
they have brought most flourishing contreyes into great displeasure and hatred
of all kings, princes, and nations, and so drawn them to extreme calamity.

This, if any province in Europe has ever felt, surely our country, namely
that part of base Germany that is subject to the most mighty king of Spain,
has and specially at this time to their great destruction most miserably
suffered. For since that by the most false sclanders and other corrupt craftye
means of the Spanishe Inquisitors, this country has under pretense of
heresy and impiety, been brought in grievous displeasure with the Emperor
Charles the fifth of happy memory, and his son Philippe King of Spain and
Lord of base Germany, and oppressed with most heinous Edictes about religion
procured by guile and sclanderous report, and so has of their great truth and
obedience to their sovereign Lords now more than fifty years with
incredible patience borne the Inquisitors most cruel yoke, and now at length
after matters in other countries adjoining well settled to peace and
quietness, and the truth of the cause commonly disclosed, hoped to find some
release of so great calamity: it is now come to pass that the adversaries
being grieved to see them aspire to such liberty of religion as by this time
flourished not only in Germany but also in France and many other places, have
in strange manner and with most earnest endeavor travailed, not only to
frustrate the hope of the inhabitants, but also by bringing in a far more
grievous tyranny, to pull from them all the residue of their right and liberty
that they had remaining: and so to spoil such wealthy ones of their goods, and
such noble and mighty ones of their lives as they saw to be of ability to
withstand their attemptes.

Therefore adjoining to them the Bishop of Rome, and having obtained his Bull,
they did by sundry sclanders and with extreme importunacie wreste from the King
an Edicte against all the Privileges of the country, against their laws,
ordinances, and ancient liberties, namely, for the precise observing of the
decrees of the Counsel of Trent, and for bringing in of new Bishops, that
should put in execution throughout the whole land a new form of Inquisition,
far more cruel than the very Spanishe Inquisition which was first invented
against Jews and Mahometane Apostataes, and so in short time should openly
bring a most flourishing and free Province into the most dishonorable seruage
of strangers, and those most villainous and abominable persons, to torment at
their pleasure the honestest and best men upon suborning of any infamous
informer, or most corrupt witness, with bonds, with rack, with gallows and
with fire, to thrust the wealthy out of their possessions, to subdue the
magistrates them selves to their jurisdiction, and to make themselves Lords of
all, and specially to destroy utterly and with most exquisite torments to
murder and root up all those that refused to obey the Bishop of Romes power,
and would have their consciences subject to the only word of God contained
in the books of the old and new Testament.

This matter giving just occasion to the Nobility that they exhibited
supplication for stay thereof to the Duchess of Parma Regent there for the
King, and in the same declared what calamity would thereof undoubtedly ensue:
and likewise when the commonaltie having heretofore used their religion within
their private houses, and seeing the same thereby subject to sclanders and
envy, did now by laying it open in public preachinges and assemblies to the
indifferent judgment and examination of all good men, deliver it from false
and cauillous reports: it came to pass that the adversaries hereupon took
occasion by raising of sundry tumultes most hatefully to incense the King
against the whole people, as guilty of the most heinous crimes of heresy,
rebellion, sedition, and treason against God and the King. And where his
majesty was fully determined to come into the low conteyr and him self in
person to hear the cause, and to end the whole matter according to right and
equity, they partly by subtle crafty means and very traitorous practices
purposely devised for the destruction of the people of that country, and partly
by the importunate labor and impudent gredy endeavor of certain persons, and
partly also by aduises and threatninges procured from forene parts, even in
manner against his will brought him to this that being grievously incensed
against his subjects, sodeinly altering his former purpose, he sent thither in
his stead with most large Commission to hear the cause and dispose of the
state of the common weal, the Duke of Alua a man both a most assured minister
of their Inquisition, and for old grudges a most bitter enemy to the Princes
and state of the low country.

He coloring his own malicious affections with the glorious pretense of zele
to restore the Romish religion and to chastise Rebels, it is incredible to
tell how great and how outrageous cruelty he has echewhere executed upon the
poor inhabitants of the low country, without respect or difference: by how
many and how strange devises he has robbed all men's goods: how he has spoiled
the whole Province of all their ornaments, disarmed them of their defenses,
deprived them of their liberties, and stripped them out of their laws and
privileges: how every honest man he has condemned by private warrant without
judicial order, every the most innocent man's blood he has shed, every most
virtuous person he has put to most vile shame, all laws of God and man he
has violated, the bands of marriage he has broken, the Sacrament of Baptism
he has polluted, all order of charity and friendly society he has
overthrown; finally no part of most extreme cruelty and such as never was
heard of before has he omitted. And yet in the mean time he cease not to
throw upon us the blame of his heinous factes, and by proclamations published
and by infamous libels printed openly to all princes and states to accuse us of
most grievous crimes, for this only cause forsooth that in fleeing we gave
place to his fury, and by the help of Gods protection have escaped his sword
most thirsty of our bloudes.

All which things, forasmuch as almighty God has so determined that we
should for a time be here afflicted by the tyranny of the wicked, we would
have thought it best for us to pass over in silence and in patience, and to
wait for the time which the great Judge has appointed, either for bringing
our innocence to knowledge, or for opening the eyes and ears of our King to
understand our unjust misery and just complaint, were it not that we do
plainly see that such our silence, specially in this so sacred and so full
assembly of your majesty most victorious Emperor, and of your highnesses
most noble Princes, might hereafter bring no small prejudice to us and our
innocence before such to whom the truth shall not be sufficiently known. For
by such mean the son of God Jesus Christ him self, and his doctrine which
we profess according to his word, should become subject to the most heinous
sclanders of the adversaries, as if the professors thereof before this so
reverend judgment seat of Christendom, before so upright and vncorrupt
judges, before this theater so furnished with so great assembly of sundry
nations, were by silent confession found gilty, not only of heresy and
pestilent ungodly error, but also of shameful rebellion, of wicked sedition
and disturbance of common peace.

Wherefore we have utterly determined, that we can not with good peace of
conscience longer keep silence. But for as much as we know that the order of
these usual assemblies of the states of the sacred Empire have their chief
respect to this end, that such as be oppressed by force and injury may hear
present their compleintes as to the chief throne of Justice in Christendom:
we thought it our duty to declare our whole estate to your majesty most
mighty Emperor and to your highnesses most noble Princes, and to open unto
you the very original fountains of this our most grievous calamity, that if
the mercy of God have decreed to make an end of our so great miseries we may
by your goodness and liberality begin to take breath again after this most
heavy weight of oppression: If not, yet the cause being more thoroughly heard,
we shall before indifferent judges deliver our innocence from the most unjust
sclanders of our adversaries. Whereby, if nothing else, yet this we shall
obtain that from henceforth our religion and the profession of the Gospel
shall not bear the infamy of so grievous crimes with them that heretofore
being filled with the accusations of the adversaries have not understood the
truth: and that Jesus Christ the son of God whose name we profess shall not
be wounded through us, and finally that we shall not as enemies of public
peace and quietness be expelled from common society by forrene Princes and
peoples which is the chief things that our enemies do seek, but that the
whole truth being thoroughly understood, the whole original of the mischiefs
shall be justly laid upon them that inflamed with their own gredy malices do
tumble up all things, and such good and innocent men as they have by wrong and
tyranny spoiled of their goods and can not yet bereue of their lives, they
labor to oppress with most vile sclaunderous reports to your majesty O
Emperor, and your highnesses O noble Princes, that so they may draw you into
the fellowship of their cruelty, and by your help they may either satisfy
their insatiable thirst with our blood, or glutt their most bitter hatred that
they have conceived against us with our destruction.

Which thing that they shall not obtain, your equity, truth, and
uprightness, and our innocence, do assure us. In confidence whereof we
prostrate us at your feet, we flee to your protection and mercy, and crave
help of your religiousnesse justice and uprightness: and we most humbly
beseech you, that preserving ye justice of law, ye will vouchsafe most
mercifully to defend our miserable and afflicted innocence aganist the
outrageous power and unbridled boldness of our enemies.

That ye may understand how justly ye may do it, and that ye may clearly
perceive in whom the fault of the whole mischief rests, we beseech your
majesty most invincible Emperor, and your highnesses most noble Princes, that
at leisure ye will gently and diligently read this book annexed to this our
supplication, wherein with the truth of the whole history, we declare our
innocence to all men: and that with the same patience and equity of mind
that you use to receive the complaints of all miserable and innocent persons,
it may please you also to understand our cause, and to your power deliver us
out of these calamities. So shall ye show your selves worthy ministers to the
sovereign king of kings and supreme judge, and shall stir up our hearts to
be continual suitors to his grace and mercy for you.

IT is now nere a hundred years ago sins the most noble Ferdinand and Isabell
King and Queen of Castile, The beginning of the Spanish Inquisition, and of the
Inquisitors power in Spain.
having ended their great and long war against the Mahumetanes which had
invaded inhabited and trobled the kingdom of Spain by the space of almost
viij. hundred years, and having chaced the said enemies out of all Spain and
recovered the kingdom of Granada, gave their mind to stablish relligion, and
to root out all the remnantes of the wicked Mahumetane and Jewish sects. The
charge hereof was committed to the Freres of Dominikes sect, who had wholly
possessed the Kings and Queen's heart, and ears with a great estimation of
holiness and wisdom: and therewith was also given them full authority in
all things that might seem requisite to so great a matter. They supposing them
selves to have so obtained a most commodious occasion to advance their own
power and dignity, persuaded the King and Queen that for atcheuyng thereof a
most extreme and immovable seneritie was necessary. And as though the dealing
with religion perteined not to the civil magistrate, but properly belonged to
Friars who as it were by a peculiar name called them selves religious men and
to prestes, they said it was necessary that a new court of Inquisitors should
be erected, to whom not only the hearing and determinyng of such matters, but
also the whole judgment of all religion whatsoever it were, should with full
power be committed. The well meaning Princes, which only directed their
intention, by any way howsoever it were, to auance the Christian faith lightly
gave credit to those whom they thought to excel other men in pureness of life
and holiness, and therewith committed to those them selves that were the
inuenters thereof the whole power of the Inquisitors office to use according to
their own discretion. Thereto was added the confirmacion of pope Sixtus the
fowerth then bishop of Rome. For he labored with all his endeavor and earnest
affection not only to stablish but also to advance and magnify the four
orders of Freres then lately sprung up.

To which his purpose he saw the zele of the King and Queen of Spain to be a
very fit mean. Wherefore by his authority, which then was at the greatest
that ever it was sins the world began, and by his Bull he confirmed and
ratified this new judicial throne, and new kingdom of Inquisitors. So this
power vpholden both by the Royal and papal authority, in short time
maruellously increased. And sith there is no man whom the right order of
religion concerns not, by this pretense they easily got to them selves the
jurisdiction and judgment over all men of all estates and degrees And by this
mean within short while after, they began to be Lords over all men's goods,
possessions, lives and consciences, till of unmeasurable power arose in them
pride and covetousness, and consequently thereof grew the hatred of all men
against them, so as now woman thought them any longer tolerable. Therefore by
the counsel and means of certain bishops and other of the clergy that were
in great estimation and credit in Spain, which repined to be subject to the
dominion of the Freres, it was procured that by the kings authority the power
of Inquisition was taken from the Dominicanes and given to the clergy, and it
was ordered that out of the bishops and other prestes should be chosen the
masters of the Inquisition, which should in deed use the travail and advise of
the Dominicanes, but yet should still reserve to them selves the sovereign
power of the Inquisitors office. These, either for that they had some fervent
zele of religion, or for that they cunnyngly cloked their ambitious pride,
partly with wonderful opinion of holiness, partly by the favor and power of
Princes and men of great authority to whom they were joined in frendshyp,
kin or alliance, partly also by corrupt and secret devises, in short time
auaunced this their new raised empire to so great a height, that now they not
only used dominion at their pleasure over the commonaltie, but also brought
into subjection to the holy Inquisition all the liberty of all the people, and
estates of the realm, they brake privileges and immunities, they abated the
dignity of the Nobility whom they call The grand counsel with out whoes
authority in time past nothing was decreed in Spain: finally under pretense
of religion and service of God they usurped to them selves sovereign power
over the king him self, and over the majesty of the royal scepter: all noble
men and persons of any credit whom they thought in any wise able to hinder
their enterprises, they caused to be accused of heresy and cruelly killed
them, or defaced them with most reprochefull note of open shame, such as should
remain upon al their posterity, and so made them infamous and of odious
memory for ever.

These devises though to many men they seemed strange and intolerable, yet both
because they were principally provided against the most hateful enemies of
Spain and of Christian religion, namely the Mores, Mahumetanes and Jews, and
also for that they bleared most men's eyes with the pretense of Gods service and
opinion of holiness, and finally for that they not a little auailed to the
enrichyng of the kings treasury now greatly wasted with many wars, to whoes
use the one moitie of the goods of all persons condemned was employed, they
were daily more and more stablished by the earnest favors, authority and power
of the most part of the mightiest persons and specially of the King and Queen
them selves, until the Arragonoyes who are the principal province of Spain
both in right of ancient liberty, in nobility, and largeness of dominion,
openly resisted. They, when they nothing prevailed with king Ferdinand by
humble and lowly petition, attempted by force and arms to keep out this
pestilence from their country, for that they plainly saw that their liberty
which they had received most large and incredible from their auncesters, and
hitherto kept inuiolate should by this mean be destroyed, and that themselves
and all theirs should be made subject to the most dishonorable tyranny of the
clergy. But they prevailed not. For after many trobles, much destruction and
bloodshed, they were compelled mawgre their wills and perforce, as the residue
of Spain did, to yield their necks to stoop under this yoke of Inquisition so
that the same province, than which in time past there was none of more
freedom, is now in such case as at this day there is none to be found in more
servitude and subjection. By terror of which example, and by great opinion of
holiness which the Inquisitors had gotten by the good success in this case,
it came to pass that they subdued all Spain unto them without any further
resistance.

But as the gredy desires of men are naturally unmeasurable and insatiable, The
enlargyng of the Inquisitors dominion.
this lust of dominion could not long be contained within the bounds of Spain
though they be full large, but, still forsooth with the same plausible pretense
of stablishyng religion they bent their mind to enlarge their empire, and
promised them selves the rule of the whole world. For there is scarcely any
country which in short space following they attempted not to make subject to
them, even by the same subtle means whereby they had daunted Spain. For they
compelled both the chief part of Italy and many islandes both of the Middland
and Oceane seas, and England it self (though not for long time to yield their
necks to this halter of Inquisition. Yea they not only ranged over to the
uttermost Indians, and to the far distantes lands severed from us by the
huge stream of the Ocean but also under pretense of orderyng religion they
spoiled the poor and simple inhabitants of those contreyes of all their goods
and possessions, and of their wives, children and lives, yea and cruelly like
butchers tearyng them with all kind of torments they slew them by heaps, and
brought them to such misery and wretched plight, that a great number of them
chose rather to slay them selves, than to come under such cruel subjection of
unnatural men. Yea not long ago they employed all their counselles and all
their practices, and left no way unassayed, to bring whole Germany in slavery
under the same yoke. And so far with the authority and threateninges of the
bishops of Rome did they drive on the Emperor Charles the fifth of famous
memory even in a manner against his will and long witholding himself, that the
best and most noble princes he proclaimed traitors, and made most deadly war
upon them as upon sworn enemies, and under the pretended cloak of rebellion
armed the protestant princes the one against the other, he brought the free
cities into most dishonorable slavery of the Spanish soldiar, and made the
majesty of the most noble and sacred empire, subject to the lust and
intolerable desires of most villainous persons. Which most cruel yoke, if
partly the valeancie of the German princes, and partly the equity and gentle
favor of the Emperor him self at length perceiving the matter as truth was,
had not shaken of or taken away, whole Germany might long ago have been in such
case as now is that parcel thereof from whense are now most unjustly banished
and forced to sue for and plead, the cause of our afflicted country, oppressed
not only with most grievous tyranny, but also with most unworthy sclanders: and
to protest before almighty God and all mankind, that there is no other cause
of our calamity but even the same which had nere overwhelmed whole Germany,
namely the gredy ambition of these men that under pretense of stablishyng
religion, labor to enlarge their dominion throughout the whole by right or
wrong. And so much the more earnestly they endeavor to bring it into the low
country of Germany, because it is by alliance of the princes, by the
community of one king, and by ancient intercourse of merchandise and
conversation somewhat nerely conjoined unto them, and therefore of long time
they think that they may lawfully enforce upon us the Spanish laws and
ordinances, Spanish manners and the Spanish yoke of Inquisition, abrogatyng all
our country laws, abolishing all memory of the Germane name, destroyeng our
privileges and oppressing our liberty.

The subtle means and devises of the Inquisitors.
When they long sins espied, that the country though it be not great, yet
florisheth in wealth and power, and is so fensed against foreine force not
only with strong towns and castelles, but also with good laws and
ordinances, and with large privileges prerogatives immunities and other
liberties, that so long as it has her own princes favor, it is easily able to
defend her ancient freedom: they have these many years evidently purposed and
practiced diverse ways to bring the inhabitants into suspicion and
displeasure both with the Emperor Charles the fifth and with king Philip his
son, to accuse them for heretics and rebels, and so to persuade to have
them esteemed as enemies and traitors: that by this mean, the country which for
many respects they accounted most commodious for their purpose, might be
spoiled of all right of liberty, subdued, and added to their dominion.

Sometime they pretended this color, that the seignories were to many and too
several, sometime that in respect of the number of seignories, the laws,
customs, and ordinances were too diverse: sometime they alleged that the
people were to wild and proud by reason of their privileges immunities and
liberties, sometime they brought the king in ialousie of the too great wealth
and power of his subjects: sometime they informed that the intercourse and
trafiques of foreine nations were suspicious. Finally, they left nothing
untried that might any way seem to serve to agreue his mind toward them.
Principally they urged this one thing that the ancient liberty of assembly
of the estates in parlamentes that has continued in all ages greatly abateth
the power of the prince, for that their both by most ancient usage of their
forefathers it was so provided, and by the promises and couenantes of the
princes them selves confirmed with their oaths it was so ordained, that the
princes should not decree or do any thing to the prejudice of the peoples
liberty or of the authority of their laws without the will and assent of the
estates of the whole country: and that therefore they more regarded the acts
of the Estates than the kings proclamations that they esteemed the king not as a
king but as some common Duke or Earl, or rather guardian of their right and
laws, to govern the common weal not by his own authority but after a
prescribed form of laws and the ordinances of the estates: moreover that as
it is in most free commonweals, so they yearly create of them selves
magistrates, Burrow-maisters.
and burrowmasters with sovereign power of negative voice: that strangers are
deharred from bearyng office in the common weal: and ecclesiastical men by
the laws and statutes of the land are excluded from power of jurisdiction, and
so the way stopped up for the princes nerest and faithfullest servants to
atteine any government. These and such like things (say they) in times past
have often even occasion to the commonaltie proudely to disobey the
commandment of their princes, yea and to burden their Lords and princes to
laws and conditions, yea and if their Princes attempted any thing against the
usage and will of the estates, they have presumed to chasten them some time
with penalties, sometime with emprisonment, and sometime with deposing them.
This appears by the Spaniardes own history, written by Alfo^s. Vloa, and
printed in Dutch at Dilling. For there they confess that this was their
purpose to reduce the whole country to a kingdom like Sicile and Naples.
These things (said they) are not to be suffered of Princes. Therefore they long
most earnestly travailed with Charles the Emperor, and with Philip his son,
that the whole country might be reduced into one body, and made subject to one
form of laws and jurisdiction, and brought to the name and title of a
kingdom, and that, abrogating the power of popular magistrates and laws, it
might be governed with new laws by discretion as the kingdoms of Sicile and
Naples be, that have been atcheued by conquest. Wherein when they saw that they
labored in vain, both because the states of all the towns most strifly
withstode it, and perhaps also for that the Emperor him self began to
smell their sinister purposes and untrue meaning, they differed that matter to a
more commodious season, and this yet by the way with their importunate
sclanderous cauillynges they obtained, that afterward he would never in any wise
suffer the solemn parlamentes, or general assemblies of the estates of all
the provinces to be kept as it had been used in his progenitors times, and that
he placed in governance Ecclesiastical men and such as not only by the law of
God, the civil and canon laws, but also by the ancient custom of the
country and by sundry decrees of the Dukes of Burgundy were excluded from
judicial offices and from bearyng civil rule in the common weal.

The occasion and manner of the Inquisitio^ and the edictes in the low country.
Finally to make them selves in easier way to that dominion that they had
conceived, under pretense of stablishyng religion, they with importunacie
procured such rigorousnesse of edictes against those that professed the
doctrine of the Gospel, as never any country, never any city, never any
common weal had seen before. For they had fully persuaded him, The very words
of the Edict, dated at worms the 8. of May. 1521
as is also contained in the express words of the edict that Luther, whoes
doctrine those did follow, professed the Pelagian error, set naught by all the
holy fathers and doctors of the Church abolished all Magistrates, overthrew all
civil governance and politic order, stirred up the people to take armure,
made them apt to murder, steal, wast and destroy with fire, and finally gave
every one leave to live as he lysted.

In the which Peter a Soto a Spaniard his confessor, and one of the masters of
the Spanishe Inquisition not of the meanest sort did further them very much.
By the which persuasion they easily enforced the Emperor Charles a prince
otherwise by nature gentle and merciful, to decree, and That the assent of the
estates was not taken, it is manifest by the very words of the Edictes, by the
which the estates, gouerners, and magistrates of the provinces were commanded
with most grievous punishments to establish those Edictes, and to see them
executed, and it is declared that in the behalf of the bishop of Rome they were
made only by the artrement of the king.
without the assent of the estates to publishe, and from time to time to renew
most cruel Edictes, and such as seem rather to be written with blood, then
with ink, not that he meant to have them executed with extremity, but that he
hoped by the terror of this unaccustomed cruelty to call the peoples minds
from the study of of that religion, which he in conscience accounted wicked of
the which his hope and meaning he gave no small proof in that That exposicion
was made and sealed in the year 1550. the month of September.
exposition of the Edictes, which he afterward set out, wherein it was
appoincted, that the Magistrates should by all means possible somewhat
mitigate the extreme and immoderate cruelty of the former edictes, but the
good masters of the Spanish Inquisition did sone by their craft and subtlety
suppress that exposition, and it came at length to that tyranie that they did
not only execute the full rigor of the Edictes, but they observed also a new
kind of Inquisition, not much unlike to the Inquisition of Spain, that
thereby they might atteyne unto the full authority of that office and
function, which they had long before obtained of the bishops of Rome. Therefore
in the year of our Lord God. 1550. when the king of Spain was auctorised in
Belgie, with great and importunate suits they obtained an Edict as concerning
their Inquisition, whereby they did usurp and take upon them so much
authority, and power of the Citizens, and inhabitans of the whole province, as
they thought sufficient for the subuertyng of the ancient liberties, and for
the disanullyng of all their accustomed privileges, but the senators and the
estates of Brabant with long and ernest suit first stopped this their wicked
enterprise, and afterward the most noble princes Marie of famous memory Queen
of Hungary with great faith, singular piety, and with no less wisdom
suppessed it. For both when the Emperor Charles was at the counsels holden at
Augusta, she went unto him, and obtained that the cruelty of the Edictes
should be somewhat mitigated, and that the whole name and purpose of the
Inquisition should be omitted, and also many times after she stoutly set her
self against the deceytfull dealings, and rash attemptes of the Inquisitors
and divines, in so much that at the length by their letters sent into Spain
she was accused of heresy before the Emperor. But she always bent her whole
intent, and purpose to keep the people of Belgie in the Emperors good grace
and favor, and to her power to take away all the envy and hatred wherewith
they were oppressed of their adversaries. With the which her most merciful and
wise dealyng she so faithfully joined the hearts of the subjects toward
their prince, that they for her sake thought no burden to be refused, in so
much that in many things they did most willingly prefer her gracious favor
and good will before the right of their ancient liberties granted by the laws
and statutes of their progenitors. For in all restraintes, taskes, tributes, or
leuies they showed them selves at the first commandment so obedient, that the
princes could desire nothing, which was not delivered them with full consent of
al their good wills, and that with speed. So that almost for the space of ten
years, they did gladly mainteyne that great, doubtful, and most dangerous
war, which was made against the most mighty kings of France, and they most
willingly bestowed the greatest part of the charges thereof, the which by
common books of account may be proved to surmount the sum of xl. thousand
millions of Florence: neither did they give at any time so much, as a small
suspicion of rebellion.

Although in the mean time nevertheless these good masters of the
Inquisition (while Charles reigned by the coulered show of the foresaid
Edictes, and In the year 1555. 1. of December.
in the beginning of king Philips reign by the grant of a new Edict bearyng
with it the kings authority, which they purchased by their subtell wiles, and
crafty persuasions) raiged most furiously in the most part of Belgie, but
especially in Flaunders, Hannonie, Artesia, Turnete, and Insule, and in many
places of Holland, robbyng spoiling, and most butcherly murderyng, the people
with furious violence and extreme tyranny. In the year 1556. 17. Ianua.
From the which they absteyned, least that their deceypt, and subtiltye being
detected, this foresaid commandment wrested out by craft, should by the
kings new letters pattentes be called in again. Neither yet were they without
their friends in the Court, which being daily conversant with the king did
always cloak and cover their cruelty and insatiable avarice with the veil
of godly Religion. At the length the king having ended his war against the
French men, and preparyng to take his journey into Spain, his subjects for
their singular obedience, and their most faithful redynes in all affairs,
thought they might justly hope for some relesse from their other burdens, but
cheflie and especially they persuaded them selves, that they should have the
yoke of the Inquisition taken from their shoulders. But the king was so far
from satisfiyng their expectation, that he did not only not remit, or
mitigate the cruelty used to them before, but also increased, and augmented
the tyranny, even as though their peace and other matters had been for none
other cause concluded, but that they might the frelyer spoil poor men of
their goods, and most cruelly torment their consciences, This may be proved
by the letters and patentes sent to the Cities, in the year. 1559 in August.
For at that time especially the Inquisitors by their old accustomed
deceyptes, and by the feigned show of setting forward religion, obtained of the
king new letters patentes to all princes, and magistrates of every City, by
the which the rigouresnes of the former Edictes was not only openly
confirmed, but also by the grant of many things contrary to the right, and
privileges of their ancient liberties very much increased. With these letters
the Inquisitors being armed after the kings departure, spoiled the poor
people being clean beggered before of the remnaunt of their riches, they
deprived cities and towns of their privileges, they most cruelly murdered the
chief of the Citizens, having first spoiled them of their goods destroying
some with the burden of rheynes, and long emprisonment, some by most cruel
torments, some by the gallows, some by sword, some by fire, burying some
quick, and drownyng other: ye and that before their cause was pleaded, and
many times at midnight contrary to the accustomed manner of executing justice.

A new creation of bishops.
And that nothing should be wantyng unto them whereby they might bring in this
their holy Inquisition, too the utter abandonyng, and subuertyng the liberties
and privileges of the whole provinces, and commit the chief authority to
strangers, yea to those only which were Priests and church men, contrary
to all the orders and decrees of the former princes, and contrary to the kings
covenant confirmed by oath: and whereby they might challenge unto them selves
not only full power and jurisdiction of all matters, but also the sovereign
authority over all men's goods, riches, wives, children, yea over their lives
also, and might captiuate and make subject unto them selves the full power of
all magistrates, and set the same forth to open sale at their pleasure, they
begin with a new policy the old web of their Inquisition, which they had
compassed in their minds, but not as yet thoroughly finished. Not long before
the kings departure, only Granduellanus and Viglius, and three or iiij. more
only knowing thereof.
For when all the kings nobles and counselors were departed from him, they
persuaded him that it was necessary for the maintenance of the catholic
religion to appoinct new bishops, which should be the Inquisitors of faith. The
charge hereof was committed to Somnus a divine of Louine, he going to Rome with
great diligence brought his matter to pass in short space as he desired, he
divided the provinces as he was commanded by Granduellanus, in the which he
left not the power and jurisdiction of the As the bishops of Leodia,
Monasteria, Cameracensia, and Traiectia.
princes of the empire untouched, so far was he from lettyng the other
bishops, and nobles to escape, he As Granuellanus Viglius, Cancellarius Niger.
made certain men bishops, which had spent their whole study and travail all
their life time in the administration of civil affairs, whereof These may be
proved by the public testimony of the province, and by the bishops sermons,
and by all their doings.
some of them for their wit and learning were accounted as fools, and others
for their unchaste life and odious crimes were famous with most notable infamy.
He assigned unto Granduellanus the Archbyshopricke of Meclenia with the Abbacie
of Afflegamensia, the richest and most wealthyest of all Belgie, that is to
say, he gave him the sovereign authority of all things, he appoincted to
Viglius the Byshopricke of Gandauia, but to him self he reserved the
byshopricke of Buscoducia, and adjoined thereunto many of the most wealthyest
Abbayes, the which were evident signs and tokens of the emynent calamities and
public bondage, he imparted to the rest as their office and chardge required,
This is proved by the Cardinals decree made at Rome by the Popes commandment.
but to every one he obtained license to appoint new prebendes in his cathedral
Church, they which should be bound always to serve and help the bishop in
his Inquisition throughout his Diocese, whereof two of them were always
Inquisitors by office, the rest should seize upon the goods confiscate, and
serve for proctures to accuse the guilty, and every magistrate was bound to
aid every one of these with his full power and force. It was lawful for
strangers to attain to these byshoprickes, under which pretense the whole
province might easelie, and in short time be made subject to the Spanyardes
inuenters and masters of this Inquisition.

And thus this stranger and up starte Granduellanus borne of a base degree,
and most obscure parentage, with that slauishe sect of the Spanishe
Inquisitors does For by all the laws and privileges of Brabant and their
other provinces all ecclesiastical persons were excluded from all function of
judgments, and jurisdiction, and all strangers are removed from taking of
offices, and authority, and the divisions of byshoprickes, and Abbayes are
before appointed, and the accustomed manner of geuyng judgment for ever
ratified, and all power is denied to the princes to change any thing therein
without the assent of the estates.
contrary to the whole liberty of the people, contrary to the laws of the
City, contrary to the privileges of the province granted and confirmed by the
kings oath, contrary to all former promises, contrary to all rightes and
customs of our progenitors, contrary to the making of laws, the foundations
of old Abbayes, the jurisdiction of byshoprickes, the privileges and
immunities of towns, by force thrust upon the provinces of Belgie this new
creation of bishops. He goes about partly with flatteryng promises, partly
with fearful threatenings to induce many cities and magistrates to apply
them selves to his censure and judgment, and to some Cities he causes bishops
to be given them will they nill they. The rest of the Cities a great many in
number do openly resist, and think that the innovation of all these things so
manifest contrary to the laws of all antiquities, and to their old and
accustomed privileges is not to be suffered. Likewise many Abbayes, but
especially in Brabant, because their Abbates being dead none was appointed to
succeed, do resist, and grievously complain to the rest of the bishops, and
estates of Brabant, of so great, and so manifest injury. But when they saw
their doings to be in vain, because Granduellanus did with great force
withstand them, they taking unto them the rest of the estates, put up a
Supplication unto their gouernesse for the abrogatyng of this disordered order
of bishops. She denies her authority to reach so far, and refers the
matter to the king. Therefore by and by they send their Ambassadors to the king
into Spain, which with humble petition should require, that his majesty would
not suffer their state and condition to be altered, contrary to their old and
accustomed privileges, and to the laws of their progenitors. But with 1562.
27. Februa.
open denial they have the repulse. Not long after do the estates of Brabant
urge the gouernesse again, and crave that their cause might be heard, and
judgment given with equity, 1562. 5. Maij.
but there suite was all in vain for she answered that it did nothing belong
unto her. The Magistrate of Antwarpe with One bill was put up and subscribed
unto, in the year. 1562. 23. Ianua. an other. 1562. 18. of March. And an
other. 1562. 23. March.
many bills, and diverse peticions did go about to stay this innovation of
things. He openly refuses the bishops, and besides that 1562. In June they put
up many Supplications.
sends Ambassadors into Spain to the king. They after much ado, and long
sollicityng of the matter, obtained at the length 1562. 20. of December, and 3.
August. 1563.
license to be exempted from the bondage of the new Bishops.

In the mean time Granduellanus never ceased by most subtle and craftye
means, and that openly to atchieue and win unto him self the full power of
gouernyng the common wealth, and covertly to This is known by the testimony
of the gouernesse given in the assembly of the nobles.
remove from all authority the gouernesse of Parmenia, as one not expert
enough in the Belgians affairs, to The deed it self proves it.
ordeine, and appointe Magistrates in every City at his pleasure, This is
proved by the nobles complaints given to the king.
to break of and disturb the great Senate, not long before appointed by the
king, and was called the noble counsel, being the solemn assembly of the
princes and governors of the whole province (which That was Gra^duellanus his
study.
he a little before, had with false persuasions unto the king very much
blemished, and made subject to to the counsel and Senate house of Spain, as
it were to their guide) to cut in pieces all their decrees, All Belgie can
testify this.
and to rule and appoynte all things alone, according to his own will and
pleasure, and by a new form of indulgences, (as they term them) to bring in
the Spanishe manner of distributyng of benefices, and offices, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical the which he abused according to his pleasure, he challenged
the whole power of indulgences to him self, leaving notwithstanding some of
them to Viglius, by this means, when offices or benefices were vacant, he some
times stayed the gift of them for a long space, and some times again upon the
first day of their vacation set them out to open sail, and sometimes he twice
sold them. The price he divided openly with his brokers, and proctours, he
accounted himself the Archbishop of Meclynia, and Metropolitan not only of
Brabant, but also of the whole province of Belgie. And when he had received
from the Pope his Cardinals batte, he disdayned all princes in respect of him
self. He mightily threatened those Cities, which refused to submit them
selves to the Bishops bondage, he openly did bost and say, that the king could
not mainteyne his honor, and authority in Belgie, without the Spanishe power,
and foreine aid. He said it was altogether necessary, that the king should be
released by the bishop of Rome from his oath, wherewith he bound himself by
covenant, to maintain the privileges of his subjects, and that he should
convert this his lawful inheritance into a province, making it captive which
before was free, as if it had been won by force of arms, or conquered by
battle, and not enjoyed by succession of ancient patrimony, and briefly that
he should make them new laws, and invent some new kind of regiment for them
like captives taken in war. This his saying was heard of many and signified
to the nobles, and confirmed by the kings legates letters.
He said moreover that it was necessary for the performaunce hereof, that 4. or
5. of the noble men should lose their heads, in whose authority and careful
prudence, the health and safety of the people, and the only hope of their
liberties was thought to consiste. To conclude he openly contemnyng the whole
company of the primates and nobles, and the gouernesse of Permenia her self,
behauing him self both as King and Bishop, by force and violence, makes his
friends and clyentes, some of them Bishops, and some of them Inquisitors.

The resistance of the noble men.
When as the Princes and noble men of the province saw no end of his madness,
they thought it most expedient for themselves, and for the state of the whole
common weal, wholly to withstand his rashness, perceiving indeed manifestly,
that if by some means or other he were not stayed or repressed, the people
(though most pacient and loving subjects toward the king) could not long be
retained in their duetye of obedience: neither yet did they attempt then any
thing by force or violence, or by any crafty and wicked enterprise, but they
withstoode him only by making humble supplication to the King, fully
certifying his Majesty, that if those rigorous judgments were executed still
with such cruelty, and that worthy Citezens were oppressed with such great
tyranny, in so great a corruption and common pollution of all estates, it was
impossible to retain the people any longer in their accustomed duty, and
faithful obedience, but that doubtless the public slaughter and common
destruction of the whole province, was with speed to be looked for, unless his
prudence, forseeing the mischief did seek some remedy for it with all
expedition. 1562. the month of August.
Baron of Montignie one of the order of the golden fleece was sent ambassador
for the performance hereof. But not long after he returned, not speeding of his
purpose. And no marvel why, for in Spain all things were no less governed
by the Inquisitors authority, then they were ruled in Belgye by the Cardinals
will and pleasure.

But in the mean space whilst the liberty of religion was appointed in
France, and published with full consent, the Cities of Belgie, bordering upon
the Frenchmen, began openly in public assemblies, and common preachings to
profes the religion of the Gospel, which for the space of forty years
before, they kept close in their private houses. Which thing they did partly,
because otherwise they see they could not avoid the slanders and reproachful
opprobries, wherewith their private meetinges and secret conference were openly
and commonly defamed amongst the people: and partly because they saw the daily
increase of those which professed the gospel to be so great, that private
houses could not longer contain them: So that it was necessary either to let
the citezens leaving their cities void of men, fly to their old enemies the
Frenchmen, or else to satisfy the earnest desire of the people in that one
point, which in all other things was most obedient. But by and by the extreme
tyranny of the Inquisition, and the barbarous cruelty of the punishments,
somewhat repressed them, though (God be praised) it could not altogether
extinguish them. The more openly they professed their faith, the more
vehemently did Granduellanus seek to increase the number of the new bishops,
insomuch that contrary to the will of the nobles, he attempted to deprive the
citizens of Antwerpe of the kings benevolence toward them, whereby they
obtained their liberty, and were made free from that extreme bondage. He
styrred so long in this matter, that there had been like to have been a great
sedition, if Armenter the Spayniard had not been sent again to the king, by
the consent and counsel of the gouernesse and nobles, who plainly should
certefie the king that the people could not any longer be kept in subjection,
and that the princes themselves would renounce their authority, and leave of
the ruling of the common wealth, unless it would please the kings majesty to
pluck in the raynes of this untamed Cardynall, to repress and withstand his
unbridled madness, to deliver his poor subjects from the yoke of his
tyranny, to make frustrate his purpose of new alterations, and finally indeed
to confirm and establishe his liberalitye and benefit bestowed and granted
to the Citezens of Antwarpe.

This pytifull complaynt so moved the king, that he showed himself very angry,
The departure of Granduellanus. 1564.
and heauely displeased with Granduellanus, and thereupon depryuing him of all
his authority, called him home presently from Belgye. By whose departure all the whole province of low Germany breathed upon, as it were with a more
pleasant and fresh air, did seem somewhat to rest and comfort it self,
until such time as those good bishops of Spain did put the king in
remembrance, and caused him (according to their pleasure) to lay the heavy
yoke of the Inquisition upon the provinces of Belgye again: and to will the
bishops to execute the crueltye of the Edictes: and that they should morouer
diligently urge again the due reverence of the counsel of Trydent. The
Cardinals ministers (which as his chief friends and succourers Granuellanus
had left in great authority at his departure) do set this matter abroch to the
uttermost of their power, and therwythall (according to that state of
gouernemente which he left when he departed) they easily wrong into their own
hands the whole rule and authority of the common weal. They do govern three
courts of the counselors at their pleasure: they spoil the noble men of all
their authority: finally they determine and appoint all things according to
their lewd appetite even as though Granuellanus himself were there present
among them in authority: nothing less seeking to set up their Inquisition, and
to establish their bishops, then they did before. They exercised all kind of
cruelty against those that professed Christ's Gospel, seeking to extirpate and
root them out with the gallows, fire, and sword, in such sort, that at the
same time at Antwarpe, which is an Erldome of the holy Empire, besides an
infinite number whom they did destroy some by day, and some by night, most
cruelly, openly, and in the midst of the marketstead, they stroke one to the
heart with a dagger as they were a burning of him under a Iubbet, because they
saw that both the cruelty of the punishment, and the honesty and godliness of
the man being well known unto all men did stir up the people to pitiful
complaynt and bewayling of his case. There was also an other man taken with
him, whose pardone the noble prince Elector of Palentine (because for his
honesty he loved him, and because he was teacher and master of the schole at
Hedelberge) did most earnestly sue for. But they wicked tyrauntes would not
dismiss him, before he was almost consumed to death with a sickness taken with
long imprisonment and by the filthy smell and savor thereof.

But to what purpose should I recyte their extreme tyranny, wherewith they
oppressed those cities in the which they might do what they list, with more
authority and less danger? seeing their boldness was so notable, that in
Cameracis a City, by all ancient and undoubted right of the Emperors,
without controversy, obeying his laws and statutes, they were not afeard to
apprehend an honest and godly man, because he preferred up unto the
Magistrates a bill of supplication in the name of no less then a M. Citizens,
by whom he was chosen and appointed to execute that charge, whose request was
nothing else, but that they might freely, and with the good leave of the
Magistrate reteyne the confession made at Augusta, which they confess them
selves to follow, yet notwithstanding they I say, were bold to apprehend him,
and within less then 4. hours after, to behead him, though he did appeal
from them to the Emperors Majesty, infinite is the number of such things,
which the committed contrary to all order of law, equity, or right, they
caused every wise man with fear to look for some open rebellion of the
people, or rather the utter subversion of the province, if there were not with
speed some remedy taken. Therefore at the length in the name of the gouernesse,
and the nobles 1565.
Egmundanus was sent unto the king with commission to declare unto his
Majesty, that unless it would please him, to stay the rash enterprises of
certain men, to mitigate the severity of the Edictes, and utterly to abolishe
the Inquisition, he should look for the emynent destruction of the whole
province, the king answered him very gently, and promised to pleasure his
province of Belgie, in any thing, they could reasonably request so that in
short space, they should have all things well ordered, according to their
hearts desire, he likewise gave them in charge, that they should take counsel
together, and devise some means whereby they might, without any hynderaunce to
the Catholic Religion, prevent and withstand such emynent dangers, promising
faithfully to allow, and confirm that which they should lawfully devise. For
the spedie performaunce hereof, at the return of Egmundanus to Belgie, there
was appointed a counsel of three Bishops, three Divines, three Canonical
Lawyers, and three Ciuilians, to whom the whole charge of findyng this good
order was committed.

Not long after being moved thereto by the importunate suyte of the Spanish
Inquisitors and Bishops, and by the letters of Gra^duellanus, but especially
compelled by the fearful threatninges of the Popes Legates, thunderyng out
not only excommunication, but also eternal damnation, except he did by all
manner of means, yea though it were to the utter subuertion of the whole
province of Belgie, establish, and set up the Inquisition, and clean root out
the leaft relics of the new religion, he changed his mind, and utterly
refused the order of government devised in Belgie, not because it did not
appointe most grievous torments for the Gospellers, or because it was far
different from the rigorousnes of the former Edictes, but because it seemed
somewhat more remiss and merciful in certain points, The kings decree, by
the which ye tumultes of Belgye began. 1565. December.
lastly by his letters he straightly commands that the Inquisition should be
established and set up, thoroughout all Belgie, and that to the Inquisitors of
every province, and the chief counselors thereof, should adioyne them selves,
and aid, and help them, with their counsel and force to the uttermost of
their power, that all old Edictes should be executed in every point, the
Bishops should be admitted and installed in every City, the decrees of the
council of Trident should be published every where. And briefly that nothing
should be omitted which serves to the rootyng out of those, which profess
the Gospel. Moreover he very much blamed the Judges and Magistrates of every
province that they did not with more severity execute the popes edicts and his
decrees, attributing the cause of all heresies to their dissolute negligence
and foolish pity.

When these letters were received contrary to all men's expectation, and were
sent to the Magistrates of every province, and that the kings last will was
openly known and published, great heauynes, great trouble of mind, finally
great fear and terror came upon them all. The estates of Brabantie put a bill
to the gouernesse, declaryng that it neither could, nor ought to be brought to
pass in that wise, in their province, yet they could get no certain answer,
but one very dark and doubtful, and that a great while after, the same was
done of the Flaundrians, the Namurcensians, the Geldrians, and of the other
provinces next adioynyng, yea and that the Church men and Abbottes, to be brief
there was so great amase and terror amongst all men, that they all of what
degree or estate so ever they were of, feared their own safety: they see all
their hope and confidence, which they were wont to put in their innocence and
honest life, clean taken away. They see it impossible for any man to escape
the rash attemptes, the troublesome cauils, and malicious sclaunders of the
wicked. For by this means, any man might convey into every good man's house,
chamber, or chests, some of the forbidden books, of the which there was an
innumerable company. And so cause them to be suspected, and accused of heresy:
they did see also that no man could escape or a void the tyranny of the
Edictes, because by them not only they which were found gilty, but all their
neighbors friends kinsmen, and acquaintance were likewise punished by most
horrible death, unless they of them selves would betray their most dear and
familiar friends. To conclude they did likewise see, that if they should cease
and leave of from their purpose, all hope of forgeuenes to be taken away, and
that for their great benefits, and good will, they should be rewarded not
only with great and infamous ignominy with bondage and troubles of
conscience, but also with most extreme and cruel death. The which truly the
barbarous cruelty of the Spanishe Inquisition could never abide for they thus
thought, and persuaded them selves, that if they, when for want of favor and
authority they could scarce execute their office of Inquisition, did not
omit any kind of cruelty, would now become intolerable free men seeing as
that they have for their defense and safeguard the manifest and immovable will
of the king, the authority of the public Edites, the help, and industry of
counselors a great increase of new bishops, the glorious title of the council
of Trident, the power of Magistrates, the violence, and force of Sergeauntes
and soldiers ready to defend them in the executyng of their tyranny, and
therefore every man was in most desperate fear. Neither did any persuade him
self (except he were of the number of those Catchepoles and thieves, to avoid
or put from his goods and substance, his wife and children, yea from his own
head, so great calamity. If there were any, who for the great favor they were
in, or for their great power and authority, might in this point have persuaded
them selves security, as there were very few, yet because they did plainly
foresee, that this tyranny continued would cause some tumultes or open
rebellion, they feared no less, then the rest did, the spoil of their goods
and possessions, with loss of their lives. In this great astonishment of all
men, and heaviness of the whole province? Many of the chiefest and wealthyest
merchants, who persuaded them selves that their matter was in handlyng, and
that the wicked did seek for their throtes, or rather, by their throtes their
golden coffers, bags and jewels, preparyng to fly, It came to pass that
many of the nobility being moved with the public danger, and their own
peril, both because the continual complaints, and murmurynges of the people
were daily brought unto them, and because their houses, and gorgeous palaces,
being in the fields, were subject to the pray and spoil of every seditious
tumulte, thought it necessary with one consent to go unto the gouernesse, and
to make plain and open unto her, the miserable destruction and calamities
which are incident and like to ensue to the king him self, to his loving
subjects, to his Cities, and to his whole province, if this his Edict should
have his full force and power, therefore when they had made a league or
agreement amongst them selves as concerning this matter, and had promised that
every one of them, (keeping their faith and loyalty to their king unviolated,
should seek to the uttermost of their power the subversion, and overthrow of
this Inquisition, and to cause the severity of the Edictes to be mitigated,
1566. A coming together of the nobles. A supplication.
came together at Bruxels the v. of April very near three hundredth nobles,
and Brederodes being their captain. They put up unto the gouernesse, a bill of
supplication in the which they required no liberty for them selves, or the
people, no alteration of Religion, neither did they by their authority take
upon them to prescribe any thing to the kings Majesty, but briefly rehearsing
the dangerous perils and miserable calamities, which did then hang over their
heads, they most humbly desired that the office of the Inquisitors, so
manifestly against the kings honor, and the safety of the country might be
taken away and abrogated. And that it would please the king and his counsel to
devise some other Edict for the mainteynaunce of Religion, to the which all the
inhabiters of Belgie, of what state or condition so ever they were of, should
be bound to obey, and that the execution of the Edictes might be so long
stayed, til such time as that the nobles and estates of the country, after the
manner of their auncetours, and according to the custom of all well ruled
common wealths, might come together to the establishyng of them by the kings
authority. Moreover they protested that if by the contempt and neglectyng of
this their request, the common weal hereafter should fall into any danger,
they them selves were by any right, not to be accused for it, seeing they had
satisfied their duty in forwarnyng the same, this humble suit of the nobility
was accounted just and godly, not only, of the rest of nobles, but also of the
gouernesse her self, of all the Senate, and of the whole concourse of people,
so that by their common consent and open suffragies the Gouernesse agreed, and
promised to the uttermost of her power to get their request satisfied, and that
she would send her Ambassadors to the king, who should declare the whole
matter unto him, and bring to pass, (if it were possible) that their request
should be granted, and there withal they appointed the Baron of Montygay, and
Marquis Bergye to perform that legasie, and in the mean time, she promised,
that their should be a vacation and respite from the execution of the cruel
Edictes, and from the blouddy butchery of the Inquisition, which she would
faithfully perform, commaundyng the same by her authority, set forth by
writing. This changed all their sorrow and heavy chere into an inspeakeable
gladness, and made them all to hope well, In so much that not only they which
had determined to fly before, did not only change their minds, but they
which were gone all ready, took counsel how to come home again.

These matters sore troubled the Cardinals substitutes, the masters of the
Spaynish inquisition, and the whole company of the bishops, and catchpoles,
which had in their minds already devoured and swalowed up the goods and blood
of the noblest and richest men in the country. And therefore they tried all
manner of ways, how they might recover so rich a spoil, and so fat a pray,
which was by this means by force plucked out from between their greedy jaws,
they accused with most slanderous cauilles, the force of the noble men, they
go about to prove that it should be taken for a manifest sign of a rebellion
toward, they affirm that the noble men seek only to raise a tumult, that
thereby they might rushe in by force upon other men's goods, that they might
pay their debtes with other men's riches, so craftily attained, yea that they
did seek the death of all priests and sacrificers, and the subversion of
churches, and the overthrow of cities: They feigned much more, the which they so
cunningly persuaded the Gouernesse, that she leaving Bruxill the most ancient
demean and mansion of the Duke of Brabant, never determined to fly to any
defected city, the which truly she would have done, if being persuaded by the
noble men which they well knew the state of the country, she had not comforted
her self, and plucked up her courage. But when they see their manifold and
shameful slanders disproued by the deed it self, Slanders of the adversaries
and by the modest behavior of the noble men to take no place, they
merueylously did cry out, and inuey before the Gouernesse against the solemn
and great assembly of the nobles, against their league and society which they
had made, and when they did see that all this could little prevail against them,
they beat most upon this one point, and they made this the chief cause of
their accusation, that they did manifestly show them selves seditious rebels,
when they required a free and lawful assembly of noble men, or graund
parliament to be sommoned, affirming that nothing does more diminish the power
and authority of a prince, then the solemn metyng of the estates, wherewith
most mighty kings and princes have been compelled to yield to their order. And
truly all men do know, that Granuellanus and Viglius were wont oftentimes to
say that the king above all things had need to take heed, least the estates
of the province be lycensed to make assemblies and general metinges according
to the accustomed manner of their Auncytors, the which kind of government
Charles the fifte did dyligently observe, contrary to the custom of the former
princes and dukes, whereby he determined all things according to his will and
pleasure: and therefore he clean put down the general meetinges and lawful
assemblies of all the estates holden at their grau^d counsels, and appointed
all things to be done and determined after his and their arbitriment whom he
would vouchsafe to take unto him. They said the king should take the same
order, if he would have his dignity maytayned safely without appayring, and
that he should hate nothing so much as the very mention of those free
assemblyes. But when they perceived them selves to profit nothing by this
means, because all of them with one voice did desire to have a parliament, and
every man (unless he were without sense or reason) did easily perceive, the
royal dignity could be mayntayned by nothing so well, as by these general and
free assemblies: and they all knew that their care was for themselves and for
their riches, and not for the defense of the kings honor: for at the time of
the parliament, they should render up their accomptes of the common treasurye,
what they had received and spent since the time they have been in their office:
and then were the actions of extortions and of the robberies of the common
treasurye to be pleaded: they thought it therefore best covertly by guile and
crafty means to work some slight, whereby they might undermine the godly
endeavor of the nobles and chief citizens whatsoever, and clear keep back
the appointment of these solemn counsels, therefore subtelly they persuaded the
Gouernesse that she should call the estates of every province severally, and
that she should suffer none to be of the counsel, but such as she should choose
and call thereunto. And therefore as they gave her counsel, In the year 1566. in
the month of May.
she caused most hasty and troublesome assemblies to be made of every province
severally by themselves: unto the which were sommoned to appear only they
which were chosen: but they whom to have been there it had been most requisite,
and they which by ancient right, and of a long continuance were wont to be
present, were now clean omitted. Many were commanded openly to depart, and
many to keep silence: the time of deliberating the matter, and taking counsel
with their friends, and with the rest of the estates of the province and
governors of the people (as the most ancient and certain custom of such
assemblyes has ever before granted, is now from all of them indifferently
taken away. Moreover the chiefest provinces of all Belgie, whose cause
especially was then in handlyng, as Brabantia, Hollandia, Phrisia, Geldria,
Zelandia, and the countries of Lymburgye, being made unlawful for any of them
to come thither, and thus the manner of mitigatyng these Edictes was referred to
a very small company. Whereof it is manifest that the most part were suborned,
and hired for that purpose, whose determination in outward show seemed to be
much ge^tler, but in the right meaning and true understanding of it was
crueller a great deal then the former Edictes, In this one point, it seemed
to be more merciful, because instead of burning of them, it appointed them to
be trust up upon a gibbet or gallows, tormented with a rack and chains. And
for the Inquisition substituted a visitatio^, it did not confiscat the goods
of these which were fled, but it so fetched the^, so circumuented them, that a
very fool might easily perceive, they sought nothing else, but a more privy
entrance to their old prescriptions and accustomed cruelty, especially seeing
the gouernesse did manifestly write unto the governors, and chief Justices of
every province, that as concerning the kings Edictes for religion they should
well understand, that they ought nothing to remitte or mitigate the severity
of them, no not although she her self should command to the contrary. And
seeing the fury and madness of the Inquisitors did no less outragiouslye rob
and spoil, then they were wont to do, and that without punishment or
prohibition, and seeing as that the Monks and preaching Friars did not only
with most bytyng tauntes and spiteful reproaches defame the chief and noble
estates, This was openly heard in the churches at Antwerpe and in many other
places.
anymatyng and harnising the rude people against those Princes which put up the
bill of supplication and also out of their pulpites did by name openly accuse
them of disobedience, disloyalty, and seditious treason, and threaten them
that the king would utterly destroy them, and put them to death. And to
conclude seeing every man did by most evident tokens perceive, and seeing they
had it proved by many men's letters, and talk, that they sought nothing else,
but by some means to delude and deceive the people, that from them gettyng
aid, they might execute their tyranny not only upon the comminaltie, but
even also upon the chiefest of the Princes whosoever, as if they were their
deadly enemies. At the length notwithstanding when they had determined what
should be done, they offer up to the estates of Brabant, the manner of their
government, but in all the have, not lookyng for any answer, they caused it
to be published. But whilst those things were a doing, the professors of the
Gospel, which had hitherto kept them selves in their private houses, upon
hope, that at length their muse being heard, and the slanderous cauilles,
wherewith they were defamed, fully answered, they should have liberty for
their religion, which they were ready to defend, with the word of God, in as
ample sort granted them, as it was to the frenchmen by their king and the
whole assent of his noble estates, perceiving their hope and expectation
frustrate, and themselves to be daily more and more slaundred, and that there
was no more hope left, either in the kings clemency, or in the expectation for
the parliament, of having their cause heard, much less of equal judgment. And
yet notwithstanding all of them every where did not cease to call for the
preaching of the gospel, insomuch that the multitude could not be contained in
any private houses. Many of them began in the uttermost borders of Flaunders,
where the tyranny of the Inquisition had most extremely persecuted them, and by
and by in Brabant, in Holland, and also the rest of the provinces, to come
together into the fields to the preaching of Gods word, and openly to set forth
their doctrine, that at the length they might clear themselves from the
slanderous cauils of their own adversaries, being their Judges, and that all
men might know who they were, what kind of men they were, what number was of
them, and of what estimation or worship they were of, first they came to all
assemblies without weapons.

The adversaries practices to oppress the Gospellers.
But when their adversaries began openly to threaten unto them most extreme
cruelty, many of them got their wepons, some a sword, some a spear, some a
club, as men use them, when they prepare to take armor, but a very few brought
dagges: but within a while after their number began to increase to many
thousands of people. When the Cardinals Vicegerentes perceived they could
not be oppressed without open violence, because by reason of their great
number, of their favor and power, of the equity of their cause, of the
honesty of their life, of the integrity of their actions, they were become
maruelously strong. But especialy when they saw the most part of the nobility
openly favoring their cause (whose desire of public peace which they of late
had showed forth in their bill of supplication, and all their actions were
slaundered very much with sundry slanderous cauils) they fly unto their
crafts and guiles. They by sundry and many ways deceived the nobility, which
came together in a solemn assembly at Sainttrudo to take counsel for the
sauegard of themselves, and for the aunswering of the most reproachful cauils,
and the avoiding of their violent rashness. First, they go about to persuade
them to become the open enemies of the public preaching, and to dispatch them
by force of arms. But perceiving themselves to labor therein in vain, because
many of the nobles did resist them, which were professors of that religion,
they compassed their matter about an other way, fayning themselves to require
their help for to pacify the tumults of the people. Therefore propounding
many commandments, they obtained that Embassitors should be sent from among
them unto the Gouernesse of Permence, the which should determine upon all
matters according to equity and right, as best should be thought for ye
profit of the common wealth: The Ambassadors mening simply, This composition,
or determination began first at Bruxels the 24. 25. and 26. of August. an. 1566.
went with them unto Bruxell. The gouernesse desires the^ the tumultes of the
people with all their power, and to obey the king and his magistrates with all
obedience, not once minding to take upon the^ armor, but leaving all fond and
sinister suspicions, and to persuade themselves that the king would very well
allow of their doings, and account it a full satisfaction of their duties: she
likewise grants at their request, that it shall be lawful for the^ to keep
their public sermons in their accustomed places as they have done heretofore.
It was solemply also decreed on both parties, that by the auctority of the
magistrates there should be appointed common places in every city and town,
wherein they might make their sermons, and freely without all fear exercise
their preachings, and that the professing of religion should be hurtful to
none, so that he observed his duty in all other matters without inuading of
churches, or moving any tumults herafter: they promised faithfully on both
parties, but the Cardinals men bound themselves by oath, and by their holy
devotion, to be faithful in performing their promise. The gouernesse for her
part, to make it more sure calls a counsel of ye nobles, who likewise
promised their fidelity in performing the same and she gives forth letters
patents auctorised with the kings broad seal. Not long after she sendyng these
letters to the governors and The prove hereof appears both by the copy of
ye letters pate^tes, and by the Edicte of the Magistrates first proclaimed, and
after published in Print.

The Edictes for ceasing from raylyng was proclaimed at Antwerpe, ye last of
August. an. 1566. at Bruxelles. 24. of Aug. ye Earl of Ma^sfeld being present.
Free liberty of preaching came from the gouernesse. 25. of Aug.


Magistrates of every province gives in commandment that this agreement
should be promulgated, and that the whole common wealth should be governed
according to the come^tes thereof, and afterward by An other public Edict
concerning raylyng and reuilyng on both parts to cease was proclaimed at
Antwerpe 3. September. at Bruxels, 6. Septe^b. And so afterward in other Cities.
public Edicts she forbids that any man should revile or speak evil of
others, for religion sake, seeing she did pronounce that all men of both
religions were in the kings safe government and good protection.

It happened in the mean time, whiles those things were a doing at Bruxels,
it first in the Weast parts of The 11. 12. 13. of August. 1566.
Fraunders, and afterward in many other At Antwerpe. 20. August. At Bread, at
Buscodice. 22. 23. In Holland and Zeland. 25. 26. etc.
Cities almost at the same time Images, pictures, and aulters were overthrown
in the Churches, whether by craft of the adversaries, which even now did seek
all occasions to accuse the people, that having some fair show, they might
gather an army, or by the fond zeal of many, which thought they could not
earnestly repent them of their sins, unless they had overthrown the
instruments of idolatry, it is as yet uncertain. But this is most apparaunt
that in many As in Antwerpe, is Bread, in Brabant, and in many places of
Holland.
Cities the sacrifising Priests them selves began first to carry out of their
Churches, their most precious relics and vessels, and that then boys, and
rascal people followyng them, did overthrow the rest, and in many Cities. It
is known also that the bishops them selves, and they which were the greatest
adversaries of the Gospel, did by public At Gaunt, in Flaunders: At Hago, in
Holla^d. At Lire in Brabant: Also at Meklyne this was done most certeinely by
the commandment of the magistrates. 5. 25. 28. of Aug. and other days
following.
authothoritie overthrow the Images, pictures, and the rest of the ceremonies,
and that by their authority and example, many good and godly Citizens did the
same likewise, supposing this their doing, to be commanded by the authority
of the Magistrate.

But how soever it came to pass, the Cardinals officers and Inquisitors took
a very fit occasion hereby to execute their purpose, for by and by they in
all have gatheryng soldiers together, apprehended many of those, which
overthrew the Images, and cast them into prison, and hanged them, neither could
they by any questions, or kind of torments, enforce them to confess, (the
which thing they most greedely desired) that any of the Ministers of the
Churches, or any of the confederate princes, which were at the foresaid
assembly, or any of the professors of the Gospel, were authors of this
enterprise. But rather they did all with one voice confess that (as it was
most manifest by their preachynges and endeavors, wherewith they did disalow
that enterprise) it was done contrary to all their wills, and not without
their great grief and sorrow. Therefore the gouernesse did not As appears by
the form of ye latter Edictes made and set forth touching ye stay of reuilyng
words and of Churches granted, upon the former promise and conuention between
the gouernes and the people.
cease to see the former contract of gouernyng the common wealth executed, in
so much that she gave by public authority unto many of the nobles and of the
confederate princes charge over cities, in the which they should set all
things in order, according to the due prescript of the former decree, that
they should assign places out for the buildyng of Churches, and for the
peoples assembly to hear Sermons, and that they should with open protestation
will all men to be secure and void from all fear and danger, and certainly
to persuade them selves, that the garrisons of soldiers should nothing
endammage them. With the which thing, all the people began excedyngly to
rejoice, and to lay a part all fear, as though out of a most boisterous
tempeste they were already arrived in a most quiet haven, and stayeng them
selves upon the public promise thus made and taken and confirmed by writing.
They began to build their Churches, and freely and quietly to set forth their
religion. But yet notwithstanding the furious madness of their adversaries was
not pacified, although they had already punished the ouerthrowers of their
Images with grievous punishementes, and did see the innocence of these Churches
most manifestly witnessed by their open confessions. But rather most proudly
auauntyng them selves, as though they had gotten a just occasion to punish the
rebels, and that they should nothing fear hereafter the nobility, the
which did manifestly show them selves to be heauely displeased with the
insolency of of the Imagebreakers, they began by little and little but openly to
increase the number of their garrisons, and to set them in their Cities, with
this pretense only to withstand the insolency of the Imagebreakers, and thus
they armed them selves, with all things necessary, until such time, that they
had brought their matters to as good effect, as they desired perceiuyng the
people quietly to rest them selves upon the faithful promise of the nobility
and gouernesse, set forth in the kings name under his seal and letters
patentes, and that the noble men also were quiet, not once mysdoubting that
they should have been so wickedly and unfaithfully deceived, they began openly
to show forth what their meaning was: for in such places where as they might
be most bold, and in the which the magistrate was appliable unto their desire,
first with new commandments, obscure and doubtful edictes, and with
scoffing interpretation, they began to disanull the auctority of the published
commandment as concerning the late contract, and in many places to delay from
day to day, the sealing of the writings of the public promise, and with sundry
cauils to deceive the miserable citizens, and in many places to put those
magistrates whose dealing they knew would be always with justice, out of their
offices, and contrary to the orders of the cities, in their rooms to
substitute most wicked men prompt and ready to all kind of impiety: and then
at the length (as though all hindraunces had been taken away) they began with
great insolency by force of arms to disturb the companies assembled at
sermons tauntingly to revile the ministers and citizens, to worn them with
wepons, and lastly, with open tyranny to oppress them, imprisoning many,
hanging many, banyshing many, and appointing new kind of oaths, whereby men
should bind them to the popish religion, contrary to the former decree,
couenaunted and established before, and to account those which denied to obey,
for enemies and traitors to the kings majesty. Morouer they did rebaptize
infantes which were baptized before: they spoiled all the professors of the
Gospel, of their weapons and armor: they armed and stirred up the rest of the
comminaltie against them, as against the enemies of the common wealth. Neither
only did the sacrificing priests or preachers out of their pulpits, as it
were with an open outcry stir up the people to take armor against them, but
also in many places the Magistrates themselves, which were appointed by the
Cardinals officers and Inquisitors, sounding allarum, gave open license unto
the sedition and tumultes of the people against the miserable Gospellers, the
which were then lately called Gwesians, that is to say, Beggars and rascals.
And hereupon began the most doleful and late calamity of the noble province.
For even then first of all was that famous city of the Valentians beseeged in
enemies wise of his own familiar friends and citizens, because forsooth they
refused upon the sudden to receive within their walls the cruel soldiers
in that number that was commanded them, that is to say, four bands of
horsemen and five ensigns of footmen, but took unto them a day to deliberate,
in alleging many causes that it would not be commodious unto them to receive
them, seeing they had as yet before their eyes amongs their neighbors a most
cruel and doleful president of the soldiers rashness, for not long before in
the country and town of Sancto Amandus next adjoining unto them, the very
same (which were thrust in contrary to their laws and privileges, and
contrary to the fidelity of the promise before given) violently robbed and
spoiled the poor miserable people that professed the Gospel, of all they had,
in so much that from the very young infantes they pulled their hose from their
legs, they defloured by course one after an other (after the most horrible
example of the Beniauntes) the chaste matrones and virgins, and at length in
most cruel wise, set them to open sale, at the sound of the drome, they put
to death many, burning them by little and little with small flames, and with
their swords opened the wombes of matrones great with child. The remembrance
of which horrible things, justly terrifieng the Valentenentians, they humbly
desired that they should not be compelled to receive within their walls and
houses such kind of soldiers, unto whose avarice, lust, and cruelty, they
perceived them selves, their lives, wives, children, and consciences, should be
at length in most servile bondage, seeing that for four years space before,
they had paid of their own proper costs and charges, unto the garrisons of
soldiers, their wages, upon this condition, that they should never hereafter
be vexed or burdened any more with soldiers. Neither yet did they so
manifestly refuse it, but that they did openly in most humble wise signify
unto the gouernesse, and to the rest of the primates, and rulers of the
province, that they were ready to receive the soldiers of what number soever,
if they had a captain appointed the^, for that they should not hinder the
liberty of Religion, which they had granted and confirmed unto them, not
long before, by the Edict of the gouernesse, by the authority of the kings
letters patentes, by the nobilities constant confirmation, and with assent of
all the Magistrates. But they nothing at all prevailed, by this their modesty
and equity of their cause, but forthwith they were openly proclaimed as
traitors and rebels, the City was besieged, until that at the length when
they (being persuaded thereto by the letters of the gouernesse promising all
kind of clemency) had yielded them selves unto the fidelity of the Norcarmyans,
which did besiege them, many were stricken with the sword, many were hanged,
many were burned, and an infinite number of them by the insolency of the
soldiers shot through with dagges, neither was there any thing pretermitted
against them, the which the furious rage of the soldiers use to execute in
the sackyng and subuertyng of Cities. Many being terrified with these horrible
examples of cruelty, and perceiuyng them selves so deceived to be defended
from the fury and rashness of the soldiers, neither by the public promise,
agreements couenauntes or oaths, nor by the kings majesty Edictes or
patentes, and perceauyng their adversaries to attempt and put in practice all
kind of hostility against them, with great power and warlyke force, and that
all the hope of remedy or help was clean taken away, for their adversaries
did now account them not only as heretics, but also as seditious rebels, as
perturbers of the common of the quiet, ouerthrowers of churches and traitors
to the kings majesty, and although they by most manifest proves, and by the
open confessions of those, which were guilty, had proved their innocence, and
had of their own accord offered them selves to be tried by the censures of
equal judges, they did understand nevertheless that they were accused unto
the king of these most horrible crimes, they thought it best therefore to betake
them selves to prayer, to vows, to tears and supplications, hopyng by their
humble suyte and just purgation to pacify the anger of the king, vehemently
builded against them, by the false cauils of their adversaries. They therefore
put up a bill of supplication whereby they might request the kings clemency
testifieng their own innocence and the sclaunderous accusations, of their
adversaries, and especially clear them selves of the destroying of the
Churches, prouyng them selves to be in no fault, and that no suspicion of
rebellion ca^ justly be gathered upon them, most humbly protestyng also their
fidelity, obedience, and due reverence, to be always ready unto the kings
majesty, in what things soever? thus much only crauyng at the kings hands
that they may have free liberty granted them, to profess their religion,
which they make subject only to the trial of the word of God, and that they
may not have their consciences grieved, or burdened with any kind of
authority, for the which benefit in token of their thankefulnes, and for due
proof of their faithful obedience to his majesty, besides their ordinary
gifts, their accustomed tributes, and all their other burdens, they promise to
pay unto the kings Exchecker iij. hundredth thousand Florences within a certain
time, and that they will disturb or destroy no churches, but they will put in
good sureties for the same, that they will diligently and carefully show forth
their obedience, fidelity, and due reverence in all points.

All the Cities well near do give up to their Magistrates a bill of
supplication, November. 1566.
most humbly desiryng to show forth their diligence and fidelity toward
their poor and miserable Citizens in the furtheryng thereof. December.
They do moreover earnestly request the same thing of the gouernesse and
nobles, and because they would try all manner of means, whereby they might
make manifest to all the world their true fidelity, toward their king, they
sent also their letters, and Ambassadors to many of the princes of Germany,
whom they judged altogether not to abhor from their religion, most earnestly
desiryng them, that they would vouchsafe to entreat the king to be merciful
to their innocence, and if there were any place free from the false
accusations of their adversaries, and left unto the kings majesty for equity
and mercy, that they would with their humble suyte deliver them from their
heavy calamity, hangyng over their heads. But when they perceived that all
these things did little prevail, and that their adversaries were more kyndled
and cruel against them, interpretyng all things into the worst part, as
though by the great sum of money offered, they had bostyngly auaunted their
riches and power, and that they went about to threaten the kings majesty,
myndyng to abuse the princes of Germany, for to disturb and withstand his will
and pleasure, and seeing also no place to be left for their purgation or humble
supplication before their Magistrates, that their ears, their eyes, thoughts,
and cogitatio^s were made subject to the accusations of their adversaries, they
did at the length with most doleful lamentation complain unto Brederodius and
other of the nobles (the which by the commandment of the Gouernesse had
promised their faith and fidelity to the perfourmance of the former contract)
that they were so iniustly and unfaithfully dealt withal, contrary to their
public promise, to their couenaunts granted and performed by oath, and they
entreat them to perform that which they so faithfully promised by the
commandment of the Gouernesse, and also the nobles. Brederodius in the name
of the other princes, Februar. 8. 1567.
sending his letters to the gouernesse desires license to speak with her: but
having the repulse, he sent unto her the complaints of the people, adding
therewyth a byll of supplication of the nobles, whereby they did complain of
so great and open iniurye, and requested therewyth, that they might perform
their promise of defending the late agreement which they had so solemnly vowed
unto the people, that no man be endamaged or hurt for his religion, or for the
administration thereof, that the promised liberty of religion be granted, that
the soldiers ours gathered contrary to their former promise and oath, should
be discharged and dismissed: and lastly, that the common wealth should be
governed according to equity and right, and to the couenauntes whereunto they
were sworn. She in her answer makes many doubts, Febru. 16.
and seeks the fallacy of words, saying that there was nothing granted as
concerning the administration of religion, but only license given for their
preachinges and sermons, but as for baptizing of children, and the Lords
supper, there was no mention made: adding therefore that the people had first
broken their couenauntes. Briefly she manifestly declares, that she would no
longer be bound unto these couenaunts: but (for she perceived her self to be
of greater force) that she would govern all things after her own arbitriment:
and therwithall signified, that Brederodius, and the rest of the nobles (which
put up that bill of supplication) were the auctors of the sedition, and
therefore, that she did account them as rebels and traitors to the kings
majesty, and as enemies of the country: and that the king would execute just
and condign punishment upon them as guilty of those heinous crimes: and in the
mean time she would use her authority, according as it should best please
her.

These letters sent to Brederodius, and the other confederate princes, it can
not be told how greatly they were astonished, for they saw themselves most
openly mocked and deceived: their fidelity promised by oath to the people,
nothing esteemed: themselves on the one part to be taken for rebellious
traitors to the kings majesty: and on the other side for perjured persons,
which with their vain promises had brought the people into a fools paradise,
and made them subject to the slaughter, and butcherly fury of their
adversaries: their confirmed couenauntes, the kings name, seal, and letters
patentes, to be of no force: their former agreement (by the which as by a bayte
they were drawn into the net) to be most manifestly deluded: and that they
were so far from having license to clear and purge them selves, that they
might not be suffered once to entreat, or to make supplication for mercy: and
that they were openly taken for enemies, environed about with soldiers, so
that there was no place for them left whereby they might escape by flying.
They being thus at their wits end, not knowing which way to take, were
compelled at the length in all have to muster their soldiers, not that they
meant to attempt any thing as enemies, but that they might so long defend
themselves from the violence and injuries of their adversaries, until that
they might either get equity for their cause, or opportunity to fly. For if
they would otherwise have invaded the kings Cities, there is no man so great a
stranger, or ignorant of the matters done in Belgie, which does not know that
many cities sending their Ambassadors, did require their aid, and desired that
it might be lawful only by the grant and authority of Brederodius, which was
the captain of the confederate princes, to defend themselves by force of arms
against the insolency and violence of their adversaries. The Valencenentians
required to have one of the nobility for their captain. Many other cities
also being the chief amongst all the rest, both for their power and
authority, and also for the number of their Citizens, made the same request:
and many other also, if they had so desired, would have submitted themselves to
their auctority. And yet notwithstanding they granted not to any of them, so
much as by their word to yield to that they required, except unto the
Buscoducentians there was one granted the which should defend the City in
the kings name, and of the confederate princes against the insolency of the
forreyne soldiers, and should make the nobility a way if it fortuned to be
shut up, all the rest were refused, not because it was a hard matter for them to
keep those cities being already furnished with munition of war, especially
if the prince of Aurice (whom now the adversaries do most shamefully be lie,
calling him the auctor of the whole sedition) would but once but have imagined
so great an enterprise contrary to the will of the King and Gouernesse, seeing
that at his feet almost the whole province did cast themselves down, with
tears beseeching him to aid the^ against these violent thieves and murderers,
and most perjured tyraunts, and that they might commit themselves, and all
theyres into his power and jurisdiction, He also might with a beck easily have
retained in his power, not only Hollande, Zelande, and the country of
Truceland, all which places he had in his government being of themselves (as
all men knows) of hability to conquer the whole province, but also Antwarpe,
Machlym, Bustoduse, and many other of the cheifest cities. But that most godly
Prince would not desire any thing that should seem to impeache the Kings
authority: but he gave such godly counsels to the Gouernesse, and to the other
Cities, the which if they might have taken place, would have somewhat brideled
the furious rage and covetous tyranny of the Spanish substitutes, and would
have retained the whole province quietly and peaceably in their loyalty
toward the king: but he could never be persuaded to take armor himself, or
to give license to the citizens to do the same. The other confederate princes,
as near as they could did obey his auctority, and follow his modesty, but that
they were compelled many times by violence and necessity to take arms, not to
invade or set upon any cities, or to do any violence, but only to withstand
the violence, and to defend themselves from the insolency of their adversaries,
and to make themselves a way to escape by force, The things done before the
Duke of Alua his coming declare who were the authors of these tumults in
Belgye.
if need should require.

And these things truly which we have reported, were only done, before the
duke of Aluaye his coming, the which truly we have thought it necessary more
largely to express, that all men may know how unjustly our adversaries do
deal with us. Although at their lust and pleasure, they have governed all
things and oppressed us full xl. years, with most extreme tyranny, and the
which at length by their crafty and subtle devises, have styrred up such
grievous tempests, that thereby, they not only mancypated and made bond our
selves, our wives, and children, but have brought also the most florishyng
province of Belgie, into most doulfull calamities and beastly servitude. They
do not yet for all this cease to accuse us every where unto all Princes and
people of Europe of most horrible crimes, and to lay the fault and occasions
of all their covetous and mischievous doings upon our necks, complainyng
belyke, because we would not with open bodies, and stretched out throats,
submit our selves to their glaues and swoordes. They are grieved that we are
safely escaped their hands, and that we have lost only our riches and
possessions to be devoured of their greedy avarice, and that we have not
committed our lives, our wives, and children, our souls and consciences, Of
the confederacy of the nobles and of the supplication.
to their lust tyranny and impiety. Otherwise what is there that they can most
especially lay against us, can they object unto us the confederate society of
the princes? let therefore the writings of the conspiracy be read, they truly
(though we should hold our peace) would declare, that they attempted nothing,
did nothing, nor once thought upon any other thing but only, whereby they
might show forth their loyalty, fidelity and due obedience to their king, and
only that they might by the power and authority of the king withstand, and
suppress the cruelty, avarice, and outrageous covetousness of many of the
wicked. But if their letters sealed and confirmed with their own hands and
seals be of no credit, yet let the effect of their doings be believed, for
whilst all things were as yet in safety, what was it, which they went about?
did they not by supplication desire the king to disanull the unbridled power of
the Inquisition? to mitigate the cruelty of the Edictes? and other Edictes for
the orderyng of Religion to be established by the kings authority, and decree
of the estates. But verily here is the chief point of our adversaries
accusatio^s, because forsooth they being free men, nobles, lovers of their
country, and desirous of peace, faithfully addicted to the kings majesty,
durst be so bold by humbled supplication to require, that the Edictes, which
were contrary to all equity, much impeachyng the kings dignity, and
disturbyng the common wealth brought in by error and by false persuasion
should be made void, and that there might be some lawful assembly of the
estates or Parliament holden for the good government of the common wealth.
Hear we appeal to you, (you most mighty Emperor of the Romans, and to ye
all the famous Princes of the Christian Religion) and by that only and
immortal God, and by his son Jesus Christ in whose name we plead our cause
we humbly desire you, to give judgment in this point, whether we in this
point so grievously offended, or rather whether they do not account our just
and wholly obedience of duty instead of great impiety. Truly when the king
was authorized Duke of Brabant, he by solemn oath and faithful covenant
promised that he would patiently suffer and most willyngly hear all their
complaints, requests or demaundes what soever the which should be put up of
the Bishops, Barons, Nobles, Cities, or Towns, subject unto him, either
severally by them selves, or jointly of them altogether, and as often as they
would show forth their burdens or great oppressions, that it should be lawful
for them to do it, without any danger or offense, and without doubting that he
would be angry therewith, and that he would never suffer any to be troubled for
so doing, the which if it should chance to happen he promised to punish
severely all those which may be found guilty of that offense, and at length
after many other things he concludes that if he shall do or suffer to be
done any thing contrary to this oath and promise, he desired forthwith his
subjects to be free from their oath and loyalty, until such time that he
shall fully make them satisfaction in that point and in all other matters
according to this his promise. Judge ye therefore (ye most renoumed and puysaunt
Princes whether the nobles by puttyng up of this their supplication have justly
deserved to have the kings so great and heavy displeasure against them and
their poor Citizens and friends. Although who is so void of all sense and
reason and so ignorant of the affairs of Princes, which does not know, that
it is most profitable for kings and princes that their subjects should move
them by humble supplication to provide for the weal public, and the some
ready and fit way should be taken for the good appointement and safe preseruyng
of the common tranquillity.

Who also is ignorant that these free and solemn assemblyes be not used in
all provinces, and amongst all people, Of the nobles request
but also accounted as the only stay and remedy of all mischiefs and public
calamities, and that no man has at any time heretofore gone about, to hinder
such solemn meetings, but they which would rob and spoil the poor people
of the right of their liberties of all their ancient laws and customs and
freedom of their privileges and did desire to rule all alone, according to
their lewd lust and appetite, and by right or by wrong to execute tyranny upon
their poor subjects souls and bodies. This truly is most manifest that in
Germany all the whole majesty and honor of their Empire is mainteyned by the
due orderyng of their solemn parliamentes. Niether has there any wise man
doubted but that in all the other provinces of all Europe all the safety of the
people and the dignity of the prince, has only been preserved by these
general assemblyes? But in especially in low Germany. It is most manifest, that
the case so stands, for in it the princes have in all ages from time to time
been subject to the power of the general Parliamentes, have been elected by
them, and confirmed of them, without whose assent and authority they never
would decree any thing, and it is manifestly provided and established by the
privileges of Brabant and customs of Flanders, that they never have
authority to do it hereafter. But seeing by their mutual assent and contract,
they be in force of couenauntes agreed upon, and hereafter to be taken for
their common law of the country, It is of undoubted credit that the king
cannot violate or break them without the assent and consent of the other
parties. Admit it be so, the nobles have offended in this one point, let it be
accounted as wickedness unto them by humble supplication to show the way how
the common destruction of their country might easily have been avoided. Wherein
I pray you did the poor comminaltie offended, or without crime have they
deserved such great and accustomed cruelty? unless you will say it was,
because they gave credit to the public Edictes published in the kings name,
confirmed with his broad seal, and did think they might safely without all
fraud or deceit (having for their defense this license granted by public
promise) having recourse to the hearing of the Gospel preached: for whereas
they do accuse the people of taking arms, against their king, of ouerthrowyng
of the images of Churches, of bryngyng a new Religion, their accusation is most
vain and slanderous?

For as concerning their taking of armore, Of taking of armor.
there was no man which did abuse them against the king or his dignity, but
truly before the public promise and oath was neglected, before the kings
Edictes (whereby the liberty of religion was granted) where violated, before
the couenauntes agreed upon, and the leage of their common tranquillity was
broken, there was no man went armed, except it were for defense of him self
against the impudent violence of thieves and murderers, and the open
threatenings of most wicked persons, and that also was when they went out of
the Cities to the sermons some of them took a sword, some a staff, some a
spear, very few caryng dagges, even as one taking his journey into a far
country armeth him self to withstand the invasions of thieves and cutthrotes.
But afterward when in this point they were commanded to be secure, and that
the gouernesse had given in charge that should hurt or indammage them, as long
as they kept them selves quiet, by and by, they at the commandment of their
Magistrates laid aside their weapons most willyngly, committyng the^ selves
into their to the laws of God and man, and to all their tuition and safeguard.
But at length when contrary to the promised made, and contrary both privileges,
they perceived them selves to be overcome of the soldiers, the which had
obtained full license to destroy them (although they had committed them selves
to the public faith) and with robberyes, murders, wastings, rapes,
adulteries, and all kind of wickedness, to rage against them, as if they were
enemies and traitors, then at the length many of them began to defend them
selves with gates and walls from the violent fury of their adversaries. Last
of all when they perceived neither public liberty, nor their wives chastity,
nor their consciences tranquillity, nor their own lives safely defended, from
their violence, by their gates and walls. Many we confess took upon them
armore, not against the kings majesty, or any Magistrates, but rather that
they might defend their liberty granted them by the kings Edict from the
rashness of thieves and wicked soldiers, neither was this done of all men, but
of a very few, the which when they perceived no there hope to escape, but
only exile, and seeing the same also by the wickedness of their adversaries to
be shut up from them, they thought it best by force of arms to make them
selves some way to escape by, the which truly if they had not done, and also if
that the terror of Brerodius soldiers had not made their adversaries a little
doubtful, doubtless not one of them from so great a slaughter had escaped
safe from the gredy jaws of their adversaries. They can never prove that any
other, or that these for any other cause did take upon them armore before the
coming of the Duke of Alba: although they had many and sundry oportunities and
occasions offered them, both to possess many much and well fenced Cities and
also to invade and spoil the kings treasure and Excheker. But they would
commit nothing whereof they might not with a safe conscience make rehearsal
before God, and all good men. But if any in solent persons either have gone
about or done any other thing, or for some other purpose, seeing their doings
were neither commanded nor allowed by those which were the chief of the
congregation, let not so great a multitude of innocent persons be punished for
the insolency of a few, for it does nothing apperteine unto us, what a few
private men have committed for to revenge their injuries taken before either of
the Inquisitors, or of the sacrificyng priests or of any other person. Of the
ouerthrowyng of Images.
Much less does the ouerthrowyng of Images and Idols apperteyne unto us, for
we will easily prove that it was done without the commandment or consent of
our Minister Elders or congregations, unless a few of ours (perceyuyng the
Magistrate to agree thereunto) did think it likewise lawful for them to do the
same, although truly who soever they were that committed it, they have been
more then sufficiently punished for their offense, for in place of one dead and
blockish Image, their has been above xxx. lively Images of God (for whom the
son of God did shed his blood) murdered destroyed and burnt and instead of
one rotten block, more then ten lively bodies, and yet the Images restored and
renewed by their common charges. As concerning the new Religion whereof they
accuse us to be authors every man knows how far our religion which we
profess is from that kind of newnes. Of new religion.
For besides that this religion was delivered unto us by Christ, the antiquity
of all things, the eternal son of God, by his profits Apostles and Martyrs
from many ages, it is manifest that above whole fifty years it has flourished
in Belgie, and been set forth in private meetings and Sermons. Neither was it
at any time, either by any lawful judgment or Edict rightly made condemned.
For what so ever judgments has been given against the professors of this
Religion, the judges them selves and Magistrates were compelled by the
severity of the Edictes to confess against their will and with great strife
of conscience to pronounce the same. Yea they which were found gilty, were not
suffered lawfully to defend them selves, but they had their mouths stopped with
a ball, and their tounges cut out of their heads contrary to the true order of
Justice. It is manifest also that all the Edictes which were made by Charles
the Emperor and king Phillip are void and of none effect, because they were
made contrary to the laws and statutes of the country, without the counsel
and consent of the estates of the province required in solemn assembly (as
they were bound by oath thereunto) without whose assent nothing according unto
the custom and manner of their ancestors could be established, and were also
thrust upon many of the Magistrates against their will, staiyng them selves
upon most vain fou^dations, full of frivolous cauils by false understanding,
as we have before declared by the evident plain words of ye Edictes. Therefore
this religion can not by any manner of means be counted a new religion, nor
they the professors of the same, seeing they were vnco^demned as yet by any
lawful judgment accused of any crime, much less should they be esteemed as
the authors of sedition and tumultes of the people, and causers of this great
and grievous calamity.

But what need we in so plain a matter to use so many words? seeing the case
does evidently show it self, and every man perceyueth who ought to be accused
as auctors of these turmoyles and calamities. We have hertofore declared what
was the meaning and intent of the spanish Inquisitors, and priests, what
counsel they have taken, what help and ministers they have used, by what
means they have espyred unto this tyrannical government, and sovereign
authority in Belgye without any law, Of things done after the Duke of Albas
coming.
or prescript. Though these things peradventure (because of their great
modesty and equity, which they use in other provinces) may seem to some not
probable (although truly they be daily song in every childs mouth) yet if he
way these present times, if he see the effects of matters, these their doings
and affairs, and note this the incredible tyranny of the Duke of Alba, all
which are most apparent to all me^, he shall nothing doubt therein.

All they whom they did call rebels, have forsaken they country, and although
they might have had good occasions and opportunities to keep some stir, yet
they chose rather voluntary exile, banishment, and most extreme poverty, then
that they would vex their country with most doleful war. But what? have
they any thing for all this mitigated their cruelty? Have they not after all
these things brought to pass in Spain by their devises, that the king (which
in a solemn assembly at Madride had sworn, that he would in his own person
revenge the injury, which he thought himself to have taken of his subjects at
Belgye, and for that cause made all things ready for his journey, and had fully
determined to take his son, and the Queen his wife with him) should alter
his purpose against his will, and (because they knew him by nature to be a
Prince prone to all kind of mercy and gentleness) to continue still in Spain?
Have they not substituted or sent an Ambassador in his stead (the kings son,
and many of the nobles were unwilling thereunto) the Duke of Alba, whom by his
nature and manners they well knew to be very fit for their purpose, both by
those things which he did in Germany, by the order of his whose life, but
especially also by the deadly hatred, and rancored grudge which he had of long
time laid up in his stomach against the Princes of Belgye, for their valiant
acts achieved in the wars of France against his will and meaning. Have
they not committed unto him the full power and authority, yea have they no
caused the kings only son, lawful heir and Lord of the province of
Belgye, to end his life shut up in a most horrible prison, because he was
against the sending of the Albane, and did abhor from the cruelty of the
edictes set out against the religion, bearing singular favor and grace
toward the lower Germans, bruting abroad most vain and diverse rumors of the
cause of his death. What they have done unto the Queen, I had rather other men
should imagine, then that we should report.

This truly all men do behold, how this their faithful champion the duke of
Alba does behave himself. He comes into a quiet province, all those being
thrown out or volu^taryly gone into exile, whom he looked to have had as his
adversaries. He is received most honorably of all men, neither was there any
one found, which with his most ready obedience to the kings legate, did not
testify his faithful heart toward the king. The Duke of Albas doings since
his coming to Belgye.
But he out of hand orders them not as the kings loving subjects, but as
enemies and traitors, equally raging and extending his cruelty both upon the
professors of the Gospel, and papists, compelling, he constrained the cheef
Princes contrary to the aucthoritye of the laws, to the liberty of their
privileges, and chiefly contrary to the decrees and appointmentes of the
sacred and famous order of the golden fleece, of the brotherhoode of Burgundye,
to plead their cause in chains, and when they refused that kind of judgment
as unmeet and to be suspected, profering themselves ready to stand before
equal Judges he chopped of their heads: the rest which by their godly and
wholesome counsels had defended the peace of their country, and by their
wisdom stayed the tumultes of the people, and effusion of blood, he
pronounces as enemies and traitors to their king and their country, and so
compels them (will they, nill they) by taking upon them armor, to try
themselves unguilty of so great treason. The which their taking of armor (done
by them for necessities sake, as godly men may judge) he has since that time
not only made as a just occasion of slaundring us with his cauils, but also as
a goodly title of Justice in executing his tyranny: and thereupon forthwith he
puts in practice that which he had before determined. Therefore he first put
all the magistrates (which were thought once to favor justice) out of their
auctority and place, with great ignominy and reproach: he substituted in their
rooms, contrary to their laws and orders, naughty packes abounding in all
sin and wickedness: and he appointed as be thought good, a new senate house of
Spaniardes, before whom matters of life and death should be pleaded, the which
for that cause should be called the bloody senate, and by that means he did
deprived all the lawful and ordinary magistrates of their jurisdiction and
hearing of matters granted to them by the laws: he filled the gallows and
the Iubbits full of the poor people convicted of no other crime, but of giving
credit to the kings letters patentes, to the gouernesse edicte, and their
granted licenses, and to the magistrates consenting thereunto: and thereupon of
hearing of sermons: he destroyed many with the sword, he burned many alive
with a small fire, he beheaded many before their causes we pleaded, many he
spoiled of all their goods and possessions, poisoned to death with the filthye
stincke of the continual prison. But the ungodly persons, whose whole life had
been stained with infamy, being before (as it is manifest) bought out with
money, have gave them license to plead with their witnesses, he cut out many of
their tongues (whom he put to death after) least they should testify of so
great injustice, he burnt many of their tongues with a whot pair of tongues,
and to some he tied their lips together through with an iron, sharp on both
sides: others having their mouths most beastly set awry with terror and
anguish, the matter and blood dropping down together, he cruelly drew to most
pytifull slaughter. He pretermitted nothing of Phalaris his tyranny, neither
did he only with torments thus vex the professors of the gospel, but those
also which most favored the popish religion, and they which had endeavored with
all their power, that nothing should be moved against the king. As for those
which could not behold the calamity of their country, but had for the
avoiding of the present danger conveyed themselves away, he appointed them a
day of appearaunce, and therwithall scarce staying for the day appointed, he
rushed in upon their goods, adiudging them confiscate to the kings Exchequer:
not only spoiling poor widows, innocent orphauntes, and very papists of
their dowry and patrimony, but also deceyuing the creditors of all their just
debtes and lawful titles. He converted the inheritance of innocents from
their kinsmen and alians (to whom for the beheding or civil death of the right
and next heirs they by law and right did appertain) most wickedly to his own
use and commodity. He took from cities and towns, all their liberties,
laws, statutes, and privileges, he overthrew all order of humanity, he
clearly took away all duties of Christian charity, chiefly commanded by the
laws of God. For by edict he forbad that no kind of man, whether he were
their father, son kinsman, or whatsoever, should show any kind of charity
to those that professed the Gospel, or were banished for default of
appearaunce at the day appointed: and thus he alienated and withdrew the minds
of children from their parents, of parents from their children, and of wives
from their husbands.

In the town of Traciet of Mosa, he put a father to death, because he had for
one night lodged in his house his own son, which had been for a space absent
before. And likewise, he murdered an other well known citizen, because he gave
the sixth part of a bz. of corn unto a poor widow, burdened with the keeping
of iiij. children, whose husband was before put to death for religions sake. He
bereaved also an other of his life, because he sent his friend a little money
over into England. He compelled honest and chaste matrones borne of worshipful
stocks, by flight and voluntary exile to save themselves, and by begging to
provide meat for themselves and their children, only because they received
their husbands into their houses. He threw down many men's houses, because they
had received letters from their friends of their health and welfare. But what?
did spare the dead? By his Edict he straightly charged, that whosoever dyed
without shrift and auricular confession, his goods should be confiscate, and
his body hanged on a Iubbit, then the which what can be thought or invented
more cruel, more contrary to all humanity and Justice? seeing it hapeneth
daily that many suddenly that have no time to bethink them of their former
sins. He placed over cities not soldiers, but enemies and thieves, which
might violently abuse the riches, wives, children, and lives of the citizens
according to their evil lust: and he granted them license to do what should
please them freely without punishment: for was there any wickedness so heinous,
the which the fury of the spanish soldiers has not committed in Belgye, and
does daily commit unpunished. In Iperis a famous town in Flaunders, when a
minister of Gods word was suffering death, the soldiers without any other
occasion turned their weapons upon the miserable and unarmed people standing
about them, and besides an infinite number whom they wounded unto death, there
were xiij. citizens shot through with pellettes of lead, which they left dead
in the streates.

At Turnace a dissension happenyng between the Spanish soldiers, and those
other soldiers which were there for the defense of the Castle, and two of the
Spanyardes being slain, the rest cried out, Spain, Spain, at the which
voice, the other Spanish soldiers being called did run most furiously like
mad men through the City, and killed all whom they met in number about xv.
of godly and honest Citizens. In the same night some of the Spanishe soldiers,
being persuaded that a certain widow called by the name of her husband, widow
Potier had a great sum of money in her house, brake into her house openly by
violence at noone days, and most cruelly murtheryng her, her daughter and
niece, they carried out of her house all things they could find. At Insull one
of the chiefest cities of all Flaunders, which has been always most addicted
to the popish religion, when a Spanyard going about by violence to ravish an
honest citizens wife, was let of his purpose by her husband and ij. of his
neighbors, he cried out Spain, (a common by word amongst the^ for the
auoydyng of present danger in their wicked enterprises,) the other soldiers
warned with that outcry, came runnyng and by force and violence, apprehended
the Citizen and his two neighbors, and delivered them unto the Magistrate to
be punished like rebels and seditious persons, with his threatnyng, that
unless they did execute their commandment spedely they would set the whole
City on fire, wherewith the Judges being terrified, caused two of them to be
hanged, and the third to be whipped. But what avails it to reckon up
particularly all the wickedness which the Spanishe soldiers have committed,
seeing their can not be imagined any offense so heinous, the which they do not
day by day commit freely, without any punishment, and yet the Duke of Alba
compels them to maintain these soldiers at their own proper costs and
charges. Belyke that they might spoil and rob their coffers, ravish their
wives, kill their children and families at their pleasure, and leauyng nothing
free from their cruelty, avarice and horrible wickedness, then the which what
can be imagined more unjust? although truly there is no injustice so great,
from the which the Alba Duke does abhor, for least he should leave any thing
holy and vnpoluted, with his beastly boldness he dares profane the most holy
rightes of matrimony: he has dissolved (under the vain pretense of heresy)
the lawful marriages of many, and made their children be gotten in just
marriage, to be taken for bastardes and as illegittimate, to be excluded from
the succession of their patrimony: he joined other men's wives, (which were
married before in the open assembly of the Church) to other men by a new
marriage, or rather, by most infamous adultery, because they had omitted a
mass, of that the Priest was not courteously enterteyned at his coming to
them: and therewith by his public Edictes he made manifest adultery and open
bigamy to be accounted lawful. He has compelled widows against their wills
and openly denyeng and withsta^dyng the same, by force and violence to be
married unto his soldiers and cutthrotes, in so much that many of the^ chose
rather to forsake their countries, with the loss of all their riches, then
once to consent unto such heinous villainy. But what? has he left the most holy
Religion of Baptism unviolated? he has commanded with great impiety,
contrary to all the Popes decretals, that all they, which were baptized after
the manner of the Apostles in the primitive Church and according to the just
prescript of the word of God should be baptized again. For what avails it
to speak of the most reverent order and religious keepyng of the sepulchers
and graves of those which be buried, the which from the beginning of the world
has been amongst the most barbarous and fierce people most religiously kept,
seeing he has nothing feared with most brutish cruelty to break up the graves
of those godly and honest Citizens, which had been buried in the ground above
xiiij. days before, and to take out their bodies scarce cleauyng to the bones,
hangyng some on gybbets and burning the rest with fire, neither suffered he the
cities of the noble Empire to escape free from this his odious kind of
cruelty, for who does not know that even at Harderuicke in Geldria, (which is
the Emperors lawful inheritance) there was the body of an honest Citizen
which had been buried long before, drawn out of his grave, and cruelly plucked
in pieces under a gybbet with great and bitter triumphyng before the door, and
even in the very sight of the miserable widow. But what is there holy amongst
the living, or religious amongst the dead, the which he has feared openly to
violate and polute, the which after his own lust and appetite has made
profane things holy, and holy things profane, has made and abrogated
laws, has spoiled the wealthiest of all their substance, has reprochfully
slaundered the chiefest of the nobility, has put to death those which were
most innocent, has destroyed feeble old men, young men, and tender virgins
with most horrible torments, has oppressed the Cities and the whole province
with incredible exactions and unaccustomed tributes, which has wrong into his
hands with his threatenings an infinite mass of gold and silver, and now
exacteth over all marchaundizes and vsuryes the x. penny, and by that means
has diminished the trade of Merchants and taken away all lice^ces of
trafique with other nations. Was there ever any tyranny since the first age of
man so cruel and so covetous as this is? The wicked extorcions, new and
unaccustomed tributes wherewith Caligula did oppress his subjects are
recorded in hystoryes, yet notwithstanding he appointed a mean and measure of
his covetousness, for he assigned to every kind of man by name their several
tributes, but his fellow, least any thing should escape him be it never so
little, besides the hundredes, which he has already taken away, and the new
hundredes which he has of late commanded to be leuyed of all their lands,
farms, and other immoueables, he does exact the x. in all kind of faculties,
and besides all this, he requires xx. hundredth thousand crowns of gold, to be
paid him yearly of the whole province. What need we any more, is there any
man so cruelly wood or outrageous of mind, that he does not tremble and quake
at the foden remembrance of this unaccustomed cruelty, avarice,
unfaithfulness, and impiety? or can there any man be found so void of sense
and reason, whose understanding is so blinded, that he believes that these good
and well disposed persons, does seek nothing else, but to keep the province of
Belgie under the kings authority, to defend religion, and mainteyne laws?
seeing all their actions and doings do openly pretend and show, that they have
no other king, no law, or religion, but their only avarice, and most beastly
covetousness, they make a glorious pretense, as though all the Belgians were
Lutherans, rebels, and traitors to the kings majesty, because forsooth, they
would not submit their necks to the yocke of the Inquisition, that is to say
they would not willyngly and of their own accord yield up them selves, to the
beastly lust, and unjust tyranny of most pernicious persons. But truly if they
had their king for their enemy, they would never have so faithfully observed
their loyalty toward him, neither would they so carefully have retained all
their cities, towns, and castles in his fidelity and tuitio^: neither would
they so faithfully have given credit to the kings edictes, the kings name,
the kings broad seal, and to the Gouernesse, and in so doing should never
have run into so many and so great calamities by their so light credulity:
neither should the Duke of Alba once have set foot into these countries: for
they had infinite occasions and oportunities offered them of dissanulling the
kings authority, of alienating his cities, of striking league with other
nations adjoining unto them, and of keeping back the Alban duke from the
borders of their province: And yet for all this dare not the adversaries
affirm (unless they be most impudent) that this was once mentioned amongst
them or spoken of. But let it be so that they were rebels, is it lawful
therefore for the King to violate his faithful promise, to pervert the laws
both of God and man, and to pollute all things both holy, and profane, with
this unaccustomed tyranny?

We read that in the time of our auncitors, many of the cities of Flaunders did
rebel against Maximilian the most mighty king of the Romans, and the citizens
did not only openly refuse his government, and deteyned with them for the
space of eight years his son Philippe against his will, but also did most
co^tumeliously throw Maximilian himself into prison, but afterward being
overcome by the help of Frederike the Emperor, and other the princes of
Germany, they yielded themselves again to his authority: then this good prince
Maximilian in this so odious rebellion, and having been so injuriously handled,
was so far from doing any thing like unto the Albane Duke, that he not only
with great gentleness received his subjects again into his graces favor, but
also with great clemency worthy of so great a prince restored unto them again
all their privileges and ancient immunities. By the which his incredible
lenitye, he made the hole province most obedient in all points to him, and his
posterity for ever. But these men never remitted any tribute, any subsedy, or
burden, laid upon the kings most faithful subjects, whose loyalty toward
the King, could never with any crime be attained, being always obedient to
the kings commandment, who had offered up by humble supplication all their
riches and substance unto the kings good will and pleasure, desiring to have
nothing free from the Kings commandment, but only a clear conscience in
religion, the which they ought to keep unpolluted unto God alone. And they
humbly desired to redeem the liberty of religion with an extraordinary and
far more grievous tribute, then the Christians redeem their religion of the
Turk, or the Jews obtain theyrs of the pope. Yet notwithstanding these men
(I say) spoiling those faithful subjects of all their riches, forbid them the
use of fire and water, air and land, as if they were the most deadly enemies
of all mankind: and yet have they (God knows) committed no offense, but only
given to light credit to the kings edicts, which in manner were established as
firm laws, and never to be revoked, and so they simply believing the kings
letters and name, kept diligently their sermons, in the which there was nothing
preached but the pure word of God, and they daily admonished to show their
obedience to the prince and his magistrates. Yet these tyrants does with most
horrible cruelty oppress the hole province without respect either of the
innocent or offenders, and with most insatiable avarice spoiling them, torment
them with most barbarous tyranny.

Can any man now doubt, what it is that these men have hertofore labored to
bring to pass, or whereunto they have bended their minds, set their eyes, and
applied their most reuening hands? Or is there any man so blind that can not
see what has been the cause and original of these foresaid tumultes in
Belgye, or so blockish that he can not perceive that these honest men, I mean
the good masters and bishops of the spanish inquisition, have from the
beginning, only gone about to alienate the kings mind from his subjects,
and by every small or none occasion to accuse them of rebellion, that as they
have most furiously executed their tyranny in the kingdom of Naples, Cycell,
and the country of Millen, in new India, and in the chiefest parts of Spain:
so they might by some manner of means furiouslye rage in the low Germany, and
by little and little when occasion shall be offered, in high Germany: and that
under the color of defending the Popes religion, they might oppress the hole
liberty of the citizens in Belgie, take away their magistrates authority, and
violate the hole power of their laws, bring the kings majesty subject to
their authority, and that they themselves might without law or order at their
pleasure command what they will, take what they list, kill whatsoever should
offend them, empty the rich men's coffers, and make themselves lords and
governors of all things.

But if any man shall think that these things, because they be present, Of
things done in Germany and in other places heretofore.
and not yet thoroughly finished, can not easily be judged upon, let him
conjecture, and take judgment of things already past. In the which we appeal
unto your majesty's, most mighty Emperor, and ye renowned princes of Germany,
call to remembrance, what they have heretofore done in Germany, what with what
fetches and counselles they have wrought, you shall perceive truly their old
arts, you shall know these old Spaniardes you shall know these old
Inquisitors, for eue^ these be they which with their grievous cauils and
sclaunders, and with the terror of the Popes name have oppressed the most
famous princes of Germany before Charles the v. which kyndled a most doleful
firebrand of civil dissension in the very bowels of high Germany, and under
the cloak of rebellion, did set the Protestant Princes together by the ears,
being altogether ignorant of their treachery, the which have defiled all things
in Germany with their wicked and flagitious acts, the which have gone about
to overthrow the liberties of Germany and laws of the Empire, and even these
be they at this day which do vex and trouble the inhabiters of low Germany
with the very same cauils, before the foresaid Charles his son king of
Spain, they have deceived them with the same arts and subtilties, and
oppressed with the same enterprises, these be the authors and inuentors of so
great unfaithfulness, these also be guilty of their cruelty and avarice, these
were the ministers and workers of all their mischievous boldness. For to who^ is
Granduellanus the Cardinal of the Germaynes unknown, or who knows not the
Duke of Alba? both the which have emprisoned the most noble princes of Germany,
ouercommyng them partly by violence, and partly by their fraud and deceyte,
and have slaundered them with most reprochful contumelyes. These be the
firebrandes of the whole world, with the which the greatest part of Europe,
will most dolefully be set a fire, unless your authority wisdom and power,
do with speed foresee so great a mischief, these men therefore are only to be
accounted as the authors of all the tempestuous broils seditions tumultes and
miserable calamities which have happened in Belgye. But if there be any man
that does not as yet understand, let him remember the saying of Cassianus (to
whom these things shall profit) and let him diligently consider not only to
whom this public calamity of Belgy is now profitable, but also if there be
any hope, that these things will be profitable to him hereafter. Seeing we could
not but perceive that this danger was iminent either by loss of our religion
or by woundyng of our conscience, or by the grievous anger of our king, or by
the doleful destruction of our country, which way soever it would have
happened. For they have long ago hunted after their triumphs, their ruledome
and Empire by any these occasions. So that they never have ceased by their
subtle devises to cause the subjects to hate their king, and the king
likewise to hate his subjects, and with greedy mouths and stretched out ears
they have taken the lest suspicion of tumults and rebellion, and have filled
the kings ears and mind with their false tales, odiously amplifying their
received news, the which though it be so manifestly to all men that it need
no longer proof yet it is most manifestly confirmed by the kings Ambassadors
which was sent into France, A copye of this Epistle word for word is to be
seen in the end of the duke of Au^^ces Apologye confirmed with all their hands
for he in his letters sent to the governors writes on this wise, their will
arise unto the king great fruit and commodity by the incommodious tumultes of
Belgy, because by this occasion, the king will bring them to full obedience and
subjection, and reduce the state into that form and order of government unto
the which his auncetors could never atteyne, the which to bring to pass, the
king has vehemently desired of long time, and therein has always hitherto
spent his whole study and endeavor, and that there was no man, (fauouryng the
kings majesty,) would counsel him to let pass so noble occasion of the
performau^ce of this his worthy enterprise, etc. By the which words it is
manifestly declared that the Spanishe Inquisitors (which in the name of the
king do cloak and cover all their desires) have sought and gone about
heretofore to get any occasion, whereby they might invade Belgy spoil it of
all his riches and goods, and rule all things as should best be thought to
their lust and pleasure. So that no man can longer doubt from whence these have
had their beginning, seeing it is manifest who they are that have long ago
desired to reap the fruits of these our troubles, and it is also manifest that
the Cardinal him self in a great assembly of many men, when it was objected
unto him that it was to be feared lest if the people should be any more
oppressed they would make some sedition, was not ashamed to answer, that the
king had no cause to fear, But rather to wish for the seditious tumultes of
his subjects: for by them the kings power and majesty was much increased,
and the privileges of the Cities and liberties of the people very much
restrained and diminished. Otherwise, what is it that they should seek for by
so many examples of such unaccustomed avarice and rare cruelty: would they
make the people subject to the kings authority? every wise man sees, that
then they take not the just and right way to obtain they purpose. For the
subjects hearts are won and reconciled to their prince by gentilnes,
humanity, and Justice, not by terror, fear, or tyranny: and every man
knows, that the prince of Egmonde and an infinite number of others which have
been always and ever were most earnest favorers of the kings name and
authority, and they which never spared the sweat of their brows or blood of
their bodies for to keep the whole province safe in the kings subjection, and
whom the king for this cause has always very much regarded, were
notwithstanding destroyed of them for an old hatred conceived thorough an old
envy of their noble acts so worthily atchiued in their wars: But
peradventure they seek by this means utterly to root out the religion of the
gospel, which they (though the most part of them be of no religion) feign them
selves so utterly to deteste and abhor. Truly they mean nothing less, for
then what cause had they with such infamy and reproach cruelly to put to death
the foresaid Prince of Egmonde, the Earl Hornam, and many others, which were
both ignorant of this Religion, and have been always adversaries of the same:
why do they still execute such tyranny, upon those which be altogether of the
Popes religion: but (most noble Princes) they desire nothing less: their only
fetch is to establishe their kingdom in Belgy, that they may rule therein all
things according to their lewd lust and pleasure, and contrary to all equity
and right, as they have done, heretofore in Cicell and in the kingdom of
Naples, that they being laden with the rich spoils of so wealthy a province,
may return home, and send others in their stead, they which should draw them
dry of all their juice and blood, there is one only way to attain to this
purpose, and that is their holy Inquisition, the which by good right is termed
after the name of Inquisitio^, for by this they do daily inquyre and make
search in the cheestes, bags and coffers of the rich men, in the bewty and
bosoms of the virgynes and matrones, in the throtes, bowels and blood, and
lastly in the souls and consciences of all men, by this they make them selves
Lords and Monarchs of all things they make all the princes and the king him
self subject and obedient vnot them, they have used this means first in
Spain, in the which by this art of Inquisition they have disanulled all
privileges and libertyes, the which where before very great in Spain, they
have made subject unto them selves, all the authority of laws and the
majesty of the regal scepter, they have left only a bare name and title to
the King with part of the taskes and subsides, they challenge unto them selves
sovereign rule and authority, and in causes capital they appoint unto the
guilty either life or death at their own arbitrament, whom they determine to
destroy, no man is able to save, no not the king him self though he most
earnestly desire it, whom they take upon them to defend, neither the severity
of the laws, nor Judgment sincerely given nor the kings commandment is
hable once to hurt his little finger, therefore it is no maruayle, if all
estates, yea and the kings them selves be very much afraid of them;
Afterward they followed the same way in Naples, Cicell, Myllen, and in the
great country of Indya, and they openly (but in vain) put the same practice
for to make subject to them selves all Germany, for they were withstode and
prevented by your wisdom (most mighty princes) and by the wisdom power, and
virtue of your auncetors: but yet they cease not at this time by their craftye
wiles and deceites, to peforme that which they have so long desired.

For that I may pretermit the Gronyngans, the wise Phrisians, the
Transisellians, Geldrians, Remanicensians, and many other of the empire, the
which always have obayed to the jurisdiction of the Roman Emperor, have used
his laws and statutes, and have appealed to the court of the Emperor, and
submitted themselves into the government of the Duke of Brabant, only upon
this condition, that they might retain their laws, customs, and statutes
fastly without any appearing of the same, all which the Duke of Alba has
deprived of all their liberties and privileges, and (as though they had been
ouercomme by battle) appointed them new laws, created new magistrates
contrary to their ancient manner and constitution, has exacted unaccustomed
tributes, has built castelles in their cities, has banished the chief of
their citiezens, seized up their goods: that I may (I say) pretermit all these
things, and infinite more of like sort, in the which although he has no right
or title, yet he pretends to have some kind of interest. For what end (I
pray you) does he seek openly to enlarge the bonds of his government without
any just or shadowed title thereunto, even into the very midst of the empire?
What causes him to seek, or rather by force to take upon him the government
of the country of Cleueland, and threatningly to command them to banish out
of their country, all the Belgians? What causes him by prescript to command
Collyn, and the other free cities of the Empier, what they should do unto the
low Germaynes? It is impossible that it should not be revealed unto you (most
worthy princes) what cruelty he has committed, what fields he has
destroyed, what droues of beasts he has carried away, what matrones and virgins
he has defloured, how many inhabitauntes he has murdered in the East country
of Phrisia, and the country of Emdon? What should we think moreover, seeing he
doubts not by his edicte to call home all the students of low Germany, which
were gone abroad to foreign universities, whatsoever (only Rome excepted:) and
all the young men which were departed to other places for the learning of some
art or manuell occupation, threatening perpetual banishment and loss of all
their goods if they do not return, insomuch that he has spoiled the poor
young men traveling abroad for the knowledge of tongues, and getting of
wisdom, of the fruit of all their studies and laborers, making them unfit
hereafter to take office upon them in the common wealth, and has utterly
beggered and undone many which trauayled abroad to get their living by their
art and occupation. In the which he shows himself utterly to denounce all
humanity: for if all humanity be maintained by the mutual society and
company of men, must he not needs be the enemy thereof, which by violence
seeks to take away that one gift, whereby man only shows himself to differ
from the brute beasts. For the knowledge of tonuges, and use of reason,
althought it be peculiarly given unto man, yet the fruit thereof is not fully
reaped, but in the company and society of me^, and especially in our affairs
which we have with other nations. Therefore seeing he goes about to bereue us
thereof, what seeks he else but to destroy the tongue, and the whole use of
reason: the which truly (so great is his inhumanity) he would do, if he could
bring it by any means to pass. For what other thing does he seek by this his
Inquisition? Why does he forbid the people the use of holy Scripture? Why does
he refuse only the knowledge of Gods holy will and Testament to the deuines,
that is forsooth, to his Inquisitors and bishops? Why does he forbid the
people to pray in a known tongue? but that he desires rather to rule brutish
beasts, then reasonable men. For he fears, lest if they should understand
any thing, they would at the length detest so great and unaccustomed
barbarousnes, and therefore he will have no cities or countries gone unto, but
those unto whom he prescribes laws and ordinances. It has been very well by
the wise judgment and doyngs of our au^cetors brought to pass, that young men
studious in good literature, and liberal arts, should travel unto other
universities to see their cities and manners, and to learn their toungues, and
for this cause, by the liberality and costs of kings and Princes, free
Universities were founded, and great libertyes and privileges granted to
them, that thither the young men of other countries might more often resort,
and that by this means the faith, friendship, and society of men among
themselves might the better be retained: the which truly is no new custom,
but has been used hertofore in all ages. For we read that Platoe, and the
other philosphers did with long and diverse trauellinges learn their wisdoms,
whereof we all stand now in admiration, and from strange peoples and far
nations carry the knowledge thereof into Greece. The Romans before times used to
send their children into Greece and Asia for learnings sake, and that I may
not only stay in those old examples, not much before the immanitie of the
Turk had ouerrun all Greece, the Germaynes, Frenchmen, Italians, and the
Spanyardes them selves were wont earnestly to go to Athenes for study sake. The
which liberty or custom who soever takes away, he takes truly away all
humanity and professes him self the deadly enemy of all other nations. For
it is wont to be forbidden that any Citizen should inhabit or dwell amongst
those, against who^ our Haroldes have denounced war, the which for this
cause is done, because we think it not lawful for our Citizens and young men
to resort to those people, who^ we account as enemies, seeing therefore (right
noble Princes) that he does forbid his Citizens and free young men to be brought
up amongst you, and all other nations, only Rome excepted, what ca^ otherwise
be gathered, but that he misdoubteth your faith, and suspecteth your meaning,
and desires to deal with you, as with his open enemies. Let therefore all
meetings of merchants and change of marchaundises be taken away, let all your
Universities be destroyed, abrogate all their privileges, suffer no
hosopitalitie to be kept, let every man sit idle at home, in his own house,
take heed lest any thing be brought in from far countries, lest likewise ye
bring in somewhat which may at length hinder the barbarous trade of the Duke of
Alba.

But we hope (most worthy princes) that you plainly see what me^ are chiefly to
be accused of this our injury, the Spanyard will not suffer our young men to
come unto your Universities, your solemn martes or fayres, or to any of your
provinces, least peradventure they should return infected of some spot of
heresy. By the which his judgment he openly condemns you and all your
people of heresy, and impiety. Although in this his doing, he has besides
this an other fetch and purpose: for this is a new invention for to spoil the
poor people of their substance, for when he sees the^ to have escaped the
greedy jaws of his Inquisition, and it is not easy for him to accuse them,
being absent, although many of them, in his judgment, woorthely be accused of
such heinous crimes, and had deserved to have their goods confiscate, because
they were very rich and wealthy, he thought best to devise some way whereby he
mgyht likewise draw them into his net. And there fore he stretches out the vale
of his Religion, the which he abuses to the full satisfieng of all his
appetites, as Gigas did his ryng. By this he drives some out of their
country, and makes some return home against their wills. By this he takes
from some all their liberties, riches, and life, to others he gives full
license to pray upon other men's goods, and with all wickedness to shed the
innocent blood, to be brefe, under this pretense of Religion, he does what
soever pleases him, though it be contrary to the laws of God and man. By this
also, with most extreme and unaccustomed tyranny, he goes about to establish
and to give all sovereign power in low Germany unto the Bishops of the Spanish
Inquisitio^, that from thence, if it be possible: they might stretch the same,
by their deceytes and privy practices, throughout all Europe.

Do not you think, These things pertain as well to the Germans as to ye
Belgia^s.
(most noble Princes) that these things nothing perteine unto you: for they do
most especially bend their force against you, and your Germany. For their
remains as yet, yea there is norished (I say) in the Spanyardes hearts and
bowels the great grief, which they of late conceived, when they saw the
government of Germany, (whereof they thought them selves in full possession) to
be plucked out from between their jaws. They do as yet try their old
counselles, whereby they may make subject all the world to their holy
Inquisition, and retain unto the^ selves the full superiority of all things,
they have not as yet buried their old arts and crafty policies, they have
not as yet abolished their leages, societyes, and conspiracies: whereby they
bound them selves utterly to subuerte all those, whom they thought would
withstand the increase of their tyranny. Who does not know the conditions of
peace between the kings of France and Spain? Who knows not the
confederacy made with the Bayoniandes? who knows not what firebrandes has
from thence been brought into France, low Germany, Italye, England, Scotland,
and into the furthest country of all the land Thule. Truly that long and
deadly civil war in France was first moved and made by these authors
contrary to the Edictes made by the estates of the whole Realm, and contrary
to the will of the King and Queen, and by these also, the peace being broken,
the leages violated, and the fidelity of their oaths and agreementes being
trodden under feet. It was begone again the second and the third time, and by
these men it has been continued almost ten years, to the great calamity of
that noble province, and the great slaughter of worthy men and noble princes.
Neither do they now at this time cease with their pestiferous counsels and
most wicked practices by all their power to break and make void the peace
appointed and concluded with the full good will of the king and all good men.
It is more manifest then that it needs rehearsal what persecutions they have
done in Italy, what conspiracies they made in England, what seditious tumultes
and murders they have caused in Scotland, and what rebellions they have raised
in Ireland, for what, have they doubted even in England, setting up their Popes
bulls conuiciously to call the most noble gracious and virtuous Queen of
England, the servant of all wickedness, the mainteyner of most wicked persons
an heretic and favorer of all heretics, and do pronounce her cursed by the
Popes curse, to deprive her of the right of her kingdom, and jurisdiction to
absolve her subjects and people from the bond of their loyalty and oath
toward her, and generally to forbid that any man should obey her authority,
by the which their judgment they have openly and plainly declared what other
kings and princes, professyng the Gospel should look for at their hands. But
what, has this seditious flame contained it self within the bounds and
limits of Europe. Has it not burst out and over retched the pillars of
Hercules, has it not filled the shores of Aphricke with the dead men's bodies:
has it not styrred up the Mores to armor, and the Turk to battle: has it
not shaken the scaffold of the whole world with a most terrible tempest and
does it not also now (most noble Princes) prepare it self to burst out
amongst you, to arm your selves against your own bowelles if ye take not
head: notwithstanding we do not doubt, but that the Lord for his mercy sake will
indue your honors with such wisdom and courage that you shall stand and
withstand their mischievous practices.

But we (most mighty Caesar, and ye renowned princes of Germany) beseech your
your honors not to neglect us the most miserable of all men, An earnest
petition to the Emperor, and to the princes of germany
banished our country, spoiled of our riches, sclau^dered with ignomy,
oppressed with poverty, through their great and unspeakable tyranny. Remember
that Belgy is a part of Germany, whereof a great part is contained within the
river of Rhene, and a great part also by most ancient right obeyng to the
Emperors laws, and statutes. Remember that Brabant has been always in most
ancient inheritaunces of the Empire, and the Dukes thereof has in all ages
heretofore bound them selves to the Emperors, to be in their retinue and
protection. And that Antwerpe is accounted the chief: Marquesdome of the
Empire, and that Gueldria, Phrisia, and the country Gormingen, Transiselan,
and Cameracensis, are all under the jurisdiction of the Empire: and that
Hollande, Zelande, Hannony, and other Towns of Belgy have apperteyned to the
dukes of Barrey, as their auncetors goods and inheritance. Do not you despise
the frendshyppe that is between us, by name, tongue, and continual society,
and that we let pass all ambiguyties. Remember most (mighty Caesar) that
Charles the fifth your fathers brother was lately chose^ out of the mids of
Flanders to the government of the Empire, as though he had been by nation a
Germane, and that Maximilian also your great graundfather, did join in
alyaunce by marriage all the country of Belgy, to the most noble and ancient
house of Austrice. And that Charles the Emperor not long before caused that
whole province to be accounted as one of the estates and limits of the Empire
in the Parliament holden at Auguste, all the estates and princes of Germany
assentyng thereunto, 1548.
and that they might be in the sauegarde and defense of the Empire against all
violence and injuries. And that they by name have been sent as Ambassadors to
all the assemblyes of the Empire from the province of Belgye, and that they
have paid tribute required of them for the repeilyng of the great Turk, and
that it is until this day controversy whether the Duke of Brabant or the
Bishop of Magdeburge should sit in higher rooms at the assemblyes, so that
without all doubt the province of low Germany should not be accounted as
Athenes from the Empire. Do not you therefore conte^ne (most mighty Emperor,
and ye noble Princes of Germany) the humble suyte of us your friends requestyng
your trust and aid against the outrageous cruelty of those most proud and
abominable men. We do not deny to be obedient to our king, to obey his
commandments pay our tributes, taskes, and subsidies, whatsoever to show
our faith and loyalty toward him in all points. But in we most humble wise
do desire that we may have our conscience and Religion left us freely, lest in
that last judgment we be found guilty of violatyng the faith of Jesus Christ
with an ungodly conscience, and that we may by the good license of the king
defend and keep the health of our souls.

And we by the Immortal God, and by his only son Jesus Christ, whose name
we profess in our public religion, pray, and beseech your Majesty's
highnesses, that we may defend our selves, our wives, children and riches, but
above all our conscience from the pride of the Inquisitors, from the avarice of
the new bishops, and from the outrageous lust of the most mischeuous ministers
of the inquisition, and rascal soldiers. And if the friendly name of the
Gorgnames can nothing move you, yet let that most straight bond wherewith we are
knit together in Jesus Christ whose members we boast our selves to be, move
you: let the duty you owe to all mankind, move you: let the doubtful and
incertayne condition of man's estate, move you: let crooked old men now wrapped in
sorrow, move you: let miserable wydowes, unfortunate orphans, mournyng
virgins, let so great and so huge a company of miserable men, move you: who
altogether driven out of their houses, thrown from their possessions, deprived
of the commodities of their country, spoiled of al estimation, violently
plucked from the bosoms of their just careful parents, loving wives, and
tender children, wandering and scattred abroad in strange countries, not
knowing what shall become of them, do seek wast resting places, small cheer,
and liberty of their conscience. But if no occasion shall be offered you, to
restore us unto our country again, yet give no ear to our adversaries
accusations, nor place to their insatiable cruelty.

We know for a certainty, that they will never cease to urge you to deprive us
of all the humanity and gentleness, wherewith you entertained and cherished us
in your countries: so that there be neither air left to the living, nor earth
to the dead, nor refuge to poor exiles. But we pray you most noble Princes, to
regard more the commandment of God (who commands you to receive
strangers and poor banished men, not only within your gates or walls but
even in your houses, and to cherish them with all humanity:) then the
commandments of a few spanish priests, which with the duke of Alba, contend
and labor to have us the thrown out of your Empire. Suffer not the fear and
terror of the spanish name to be of more force with you, then the name and
friendship of the Germane. For what should we speak of the agreement of our
religion? the which truly should move you not to suffer us which be joined
with you in the body of Christ, in one profession of faith, in one baptism, to
be by the lust of a few (which have no religion but their greedy avarice)
banished like strangers and enemies, lest that Christ the King of all kings
in that last day of judgment, take that done unto himself, which is cruelly
exercised against us, being by his free grace and mercy united to his body and
made his members: for though they do pretend the difference of our religion,
there is no cause (most noble princes) why you should be moved. For we which do
with you acknowledge one God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, true God and
very man, one holy Ghost: and we which do rest our selves in the only
satisfaction of Jesus Christ, and for his sake are banish^^ (...) ^ar country,
spoiled of our goods, a^^ appointed as sheep unto the slaughter: which
acknowledge one church, one word of God, for the foundation of our health:
and lastly, with you do look for one resurrection from the dead, and life
everlasting, given by the free grace and mercy of God, do not you think that
we profess any other religion then that which you do. But if we shall by the
exposition of some words seem to differ, remember that the Apostles
themselves, and their disciples did never so fully agree, but there was in some
things a little dissension. Remenber that even the ancient fathers of the
primitive church have not only left in their writings errors, but also in
many places open contrarieties: the which truly by the deep providence and
wisdom of God, is not without great profit appointed: that we knowing the
infirmity of our own wit may learn to forsake the judgment of man, and
cleave only to the authority of the word of God: and not to peefer the
auctority of man, and our own judgment, before the auctority of the word of
God: but to bear one an others burdens, and with christian charity to cover
and wisely to bear one an others errors, and infirmities. And yet
notwithstanding what discord of Religion can there be amonst us, which do not
only embrace the only word of God, but also out of that word take the form
of our faith, and all things which we use in our religion. For we truly do
with most joyful hearts receive and embrace the confession which our Auncytors
delivered up to Charles the Emperor at Augusta. And if we may give our
judgment in any thing, we subscribe in all points to the doctrine of those
Divines, by whose labor that form of their faith was drawn out: we account
them not only as our brethren, but even for the most divine and excellent
prophets of God. And they likewise do embrace us with great and incredible
charity, and with all brotherly love and piety. It is therefore ye Princes a
more cauell feigned of our adversaries, which say, that we profess a religion,
diverse from the Germans: for they study nothing else, but that when they have
set us together by the ears, they might tear the members of Christ in
pieces, and so oppress us separated and disseuered, whom they were not able
to overthrow, fast joined in amity.

But ye men and Princes, which have known long ago their crafts and
subtelties, be ye not therewith moved, neither suffer ye the false cauels of
our adversaries to have more power, to tear and dismember the members of the
body of Christ, then the word and commandment of the same Jesus Christ, then
the sincere judgment of your Princes and Divines has power and force to unite
and knitte up the same. Neither let the diverse interpretation of one word
prevail more with you, then the most sure and undoubted consent of the whole
Scripture and faith. By the which faith and by the most holy body of the son
Jesus Christ, into the which he has joined us to him self with a knot
indissoluble, We ones again in most humble wise beseech and entreat you, that
your charitable mercy, which has been always pressed and ready to help all
poor and oppressed innocents, benyngly to receive us also with some tuition
and safeguard, which for the name Jesus Christ do not only suffer all cruel
torments, but also are overwhelmed with most false and unjust reproaches, and
that you would only as long as it shall please God to chasten us thus with
exile being spoiled of all our goods and commodities of our country, with
your gentleness somewhat to ease us, whom Gods correction does keep low and
in poverty, so shall you do an acceptable work unto God him self the just
judge of all things, and stir us up diligently to call upon his mercy and
gracious favor for you and your people. Amen.


