A profitable book declaring diverse approved remedies, to take out spots and
stains, in Silks, Veluets, Linnnen and Woollen clothes.

With diverse colors how to die Velvets and Silks, Linen and Woollen, Fustian
and Threade.

Also to dress Leather, and to color Felles. How to Gylde, Grave, Sowder, and
Vernishe. And to harden and make soft Iron and Steel.

Very necessary for all men, specially for those which has or shall have any
doings therein: with a perfect table hereunto, to find all things ready,
not the like reuealde in English heretofore.

TAKEN OVT OF DVTCHE, and englished by L. M.

Jmprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, and William Pounsonbie. 1583

To make Cloth which has lost his color, to return unto his first estate
again.
TAKE OF VNQVENched lyme two ounces, of Oak ashes two ounces, of clear water
two pound. Then meddle the^ well all together, and so let them rest one quarter
of an hour, and then do clarify that water, and therewith wash your cloth,
and it will return unto his first color, and wax fair again as before.

To wash a scarlet which is greasy.
Take of white tarter well and finely beaten, four ounces: then boil it in two
pound of fair water, till the third part be consumed: then take it from the
fire, and let it cool, and then strain it through a linen cloth, and when ye
will use thereof, make it then milk warm, and wash therewith your cloth. Then
hang it to dry, and you shall see it fair, and return to his first estate
and color again.

To make all colors of silks which be staynde, to come to their first color
again.
First take one ounce of unquenched lyme, and of the ashes of a vine one ounce,
also of ashes of an Oak one ounce and a half. Put all these into a basen of
clear water, and meddle them all well together, then heat them a little over
the fire, and when it is warm, take it of the fire, and let it clarify a
while, so done, then take a sponge and wash your staynie spots therewith, and
see that ye weat no other place, but the spotty places only, and so they will be
well again.

To make a soap to take forth grease or other spoties whatsoever they be.
Take one pound of roche Alum burnd and made into a fine poulder. Also take of
the roots called flames of Florence (so calde in Dutche) half a pound: then
beat it in to a powder. Then take a new laid egg, and of white soap two
pound and a half, then blend your powder, and your egg and soap altogether
well, and thereof make pellots or bals, and if one egg be not sufficient, then
take ii. or so much as shall suffice to make your said paste withal, and when
ye shall have occasion to take forth any spotte, take first of commen water
and wash your spots on both sides withal warm, then take of the said pellots,
and rub al over the spots in the cloth, so done: then wash out the filth
with fair clear water, and if there remain some part and be not all clean,
wash it again as before is mentioned, till it be all clean, and so shall ye
have it as fair as before.

Another good way to take forth spots of grease out of any woollen or linen.
Take first a little fair water, all to weate and rub therewith the said
grease spots. Then take a quantity of walkars claye, called Fullars earth,
and rub a little therewith your spots all over. Then rub and chafe your
cloth one upon another, so done, take a silver spone or such like thing, and
scrape out the said filthy water and grease, and if then it be not all
clean forth, do so again as before is mentioned, and then take a little
warm water, and all to weate the said place therewith, so done, Then wring and
scrape it forth as the other before. Being then clean, let it be dryde and it
will be well.

To take away all spots on coulered Clothes, be they linen or woollen
If there chance by fortune, to fall a drop of ynke, or any other stayne,
upon any cloth dyed or colored, or being clean white, woollen or linen. Ye
shall do as hereafter follows, that is: take of the juice of raw Lemmons,
or the juice of a great Orange Apple, which has a hard pill or skin, which
the Italions call Pommes Dadam. Or if ye will take only the egar or sharp
juice which is in the pouncitron, and strain it forth thereof, and with the
juice ye shall all to rub and chaufe the said spottye places, and then wash
it with luke warm water, and so then scrape out all the filth thereof, with
some spoone as aforesaid, or wring it clean forth with your hands. If at
the first time peradventure it be not clean, use it likewise again the
second time, as before, and so your cloth will come unto as good estate as at
the first, nor this shall not hurt any color thereof.

Another good way to make clean spots of grease, out of all woollen clothes.
Take an herb called wood sorrel, or stubwort, which is green, and grows in
woods, in bushes and stubs of old trees, and has three small leaves like a
heart, it tastes sharp like other sorrel. Which herb ye shall distill in a
lymbee, and so reserve the distild water in a glass very close, and when you
need to take forth any spotte of grease, then take of the distylde water, and
rub therewith all over the said spots. Then chafe your cloth one upon
another: so done, take a spoone, or some other like thing, and take away the
said filthy water therewith. Then if it be not all clean, do it likewise
again as before, with the distilde water warmed, and then ye shall see it
will do well, and show fair and clear as it was at the first.

Another good way to take out spots out of clothes with a lie.
Take three pintes of water, and put therein half a pound of pot ashes, and
stir it well altogether. Let it so stand the space of four days, but ye
must in every day stir it three or four times. So done, pour forth the
clear water from the ashes, and put of galls therein, then it will wax a
green: but if ye will have it a black, then put a little soote to soke in
fair water, and put that black water therein. With this warmed, ye may wash
your spottie places in any place of your clothes, and it will take it forth
fair and clean.

To perfume clothes.
Take a violl of Rose Water, in the which ye shall put eyghteene or twenty
graynes of Musk, and Ciuet, with a little of Ambergreace, then set all on the
fire, and when it begins to wax warm, take it from the fire, and let it
cool, and stop it close the space of two days, and when ye will perfume
your clothes therewith. Set it on the fire again, and being warm, hold your
clothes over it, and so it shall receive the fume.

To take out spots out of gowns and clothes.
Take the roots of Limonio^, called in Latin, in English I take it to be the
wild Beat. Take the roots, and sees them in water, and with the same water,
wash the spotty places in your gowns or other garments, and it will be clean.

To make a soap to take out spots of oil and of grease.
Take of good scowring soap, and mix it finely with the syfted ashes of a
vine, of each in like portion, the^ put thereunto a quantity of the powder of
burnt alum, and also of the lies of wine, beaten into a fine powder, and put
it thereunto, then mix and incorporate all these well together, then make
thereof square brickes, or round bals, and when ye shall have need to occupye
thereof, then take of warm water, and rub and chafe all over your spottye
places, and then rub thereon with your soap ball, if then it be not all
clean, then must ye take your warm water again, and rub and chafe it, as
ye did before, and then your soap, and so at length ye shall have it clean
forth.

A very good way to take out spots of oil out of clothes.
First ye shall take of the oil of tartar, and rub therewith on the spotty
places, and then scrape it away incontinent again, then ye shall wash it well
with luke warm water, and three or four times with cold water, so then wring
it forth, and see if all the spots be clean out, if not, wash it again, so
long as you did before, and so the cloth shall be as fair as it was when it was
new, or before any spots came on it. There is also another way, for to take
forth spots with this cyle of Tartar, but because I have not the true knowledge
thereof, I will not here express it.

A soap water to take out all spots.
Also, some do use to take the water wherein strawberries had been sodde, and
with that water ye shall wete and soke the spottye places, then take fair
water, and wash out all the filth thereof, so done: take and hang it in the
son to dry, and it will be so clean as before it was.

A way to take out iron moles, out of all linen cloth.
Take and wring forth so much of the juice of the sowrest Orange, or Limon that
ye can get, then take of the same juice, and rub the place of the iron moll
therewith so let it dry, and ever as it dries in, rub it over again, thus do
often, and ever as you have wet it, let it rest and dry in the sun, and at
the length ye shall see it will be all forth and clean.

A way to take out spots in scarlet or velvet, of what color or sort soever
it be, not changing the colors.
Take a herb (called of the surgeons) Saponaria, in french called Foullons,
in English Sopewort, beat them often, and take out the juice, and put thereof on
the spots, then let it so rest the space of one hour if it be in summer, but
if it be in winter let it rest four hours, then wash those spotty places
with fair clean water, so shall it be clean to seem too, but put once
again the said juice thereon. Also if the scarlet be not did in the clear
grain then ye may put thereunto half of black soap, with so much of the said
juice, so mingle it together, and then frote it thereon, then let it be washte
in luke warm water, and then ye shall see the spots clean forth. For this way
is proouded by experience to be true.

Another way to take out iron moles out of linen.
Make a chafer sees full of water, then take your cloth and wet it with the
juice of Limons, or sower Oranges, or crabbes, or sower wildinges, and then
hold it hard to the side of the chafer, and ever as it dries in, weat it
still again, till ye see the moll go forth: for all these things aforesaid
are good, but the juice of Limons and Orenges are the best. So ever as ye have
weate your spots with the said juice, hold it then hard unto the side of the
chafer, as is aforesaid, thus do until it wear away, for this way has been
proved true often. Or take the boiling juice of Sorrel, and lay it therein, and
rub it with the back of a spoone till it be out.

How to take out oily spots out of parchement or writing paper.
Take a mutton bone and burn it to poulder, then let it be fine beaten, then
put of this poulder on both sides of your spots, and let it be pressed between
two hard boordes, the space of two days, then take it out, and ye shall see the
oil to be clean gone, be it either parchment or paper.

Another way to take out spots of paper.
Ye shall take off the water willow boughs, and make ashes thereof, or ashes of
the buds of the vine, with ye husks of green beans, steep them in water a
day and a night, then put of the same water on the spots, then press it; and
let it so remain for a day and a night, or as ye shall see cause, and ye
shall see it will do well.

A very good way to take out spots of clothes.
Take of the roots of the herb called Gentian, in english brom, take and
burn of it, and make ashes thereof, and with the ashes make a lie, and with
the said lie, ye shall wash your spotty clothes, and in a short space it will
take away all the spots thereof. Well proved.

A good way to take out spots out of woollen.
Take ash water, and the powder of Alum together, then take of the ashes
thereof, and lay it upon the spottye places on the cloth, and when it is dry:
do sponge it off, and ye shall see it clean.

Another against stains in linen cloth.
First take your cloth and rub it well all over with baye salt, then take
an Orange and cut it in two, and wring the juice thereon, and lay the said
Orange upon the spots also: and so let it rest an hour or two, then lay
them in a bucke and wash them, and they will be fair and clean. Or else ye may
lay thereon the juice of sorrel and salt, and so put them into the buck as is
before said.

A way to keep silk from stayning in the washing.
Take fair water and sees it, and being all seething hot, put thereunto of
soap and let it so melt therein, then take it from the fire, and let it cool
til it be almost cold, and then at your pleasure ye may wash therewith your
clothes, and it will scour well, and not stayne your silk, and after ye have
washed them, do not let them lie weat long together, but lay dry clothes
between, or else they he in danger to stayne: and this way you may save both
Sylke and Gold without changing of their color.

Another very good way to keep Gold from stayning.
First take your Gold and annoynte it all over with good Honye, then set it
in the Sun, and let it rest the space of half an hour, and now and then
let it be turnde in the Sun. Then after take and wash it in the foresaid
sopie water, and this way it shall never change nor stayne, but keep color
long.

How to bucke linen clothes, and to scour out all spots of grease.
First ye shall lay all your foul clothes to soke in cold water, then
drive them as ye do a bucke of clothes, and when they are well driven: then
shall ye take them all forth of the bucking tubbe, then lay them again
abroad in the said tubbe, without any lie, and ever as ye lay them betwixt
every cloth: scrape of chalk thin all over, thus when ye have all laid
them: then put of your lie unto them, and so change your lie twice or thrice
after, then take and wash them forth, and they will be fair and clean without
grease and very white withal.

A good way to keep linen fair 20 years without removing, and will not wax
moulye nor rotte.
First take your linen in march (so much as you intend to keep unremoved)
and wash them, and then dry them fair again. So lay them up in your
cheastes until May next following: then shall ye take them out and wash them
again, when ye have so washte them, look that ye do then dry them thoroughly
and well, and then fold them fair up, and lay them in your chestes or press,
and ye shall not need for to remove them in twentye years after, yet they
shall continue dry and well.

How to sponge woollen clothes.
Take a quart of fair water, and let it be heat luke warm on the fire, then
take a quantity of walkers clay and al to crush it therein, then let it stand
until it be clear, then pour that water into another pot, and set it on the
fire again, till it begin to seethe: then take of Venice soap, or other good
soap, and put thereof into the said water, in stirring it well all about, then
take it of the fire, and all hot, sponge or occupye therewith at your
pleasure, in making it always warm, ever when ye will occupye thereof.

How to make crane color Fustian to be as fair canuas as at the first.
First for the proof thereof, take a piece of crane color Fustian, and take
also as much of the juice of Orenges, or Limons as will weat the said piece
through, then let it rest and dry in, and the said Fustian will be as fair
canuas as it was before it was colored, thus if ye can get so much juice of
Oranges or Limons for to serve your purpose, ye may return the color
again, what quantity ye shall think good, for this has been well proved.

Things to keep moughths from clothes, very good in summer and other times.
The flying moughths will be in the beginning of June, and continue till
August, but they are chieflye from mid July to mid August. The running moughth
he will continue in your cheasts all the year long, winter and summer, which
are great spoylers of gear and other things. For the flying moughth. Take
the powder made of dry Orange Pills, and the powder of Elecompane roots mixed
together, and so cast it among your cloths, also perfume in a chafingdish of
coals your clothes therewith. Thus you may use quarterly, and it will save
the^. Or ye may take the powder of Arras, with the powder of Ginoper, also the
powder of sitrinum, cast among clothes saues them from moughths. Wormwood or
Lauendar small preuayleth. Some uses oil of spyke to annoynte their cheasts,
and hang it in bladders therein. Some lays the herb called Flewort, in Latin
pulicaris, which if ye lay it in your chamber, no flea will breed, some takes
brimstone, and perfumes therewith, but for the running mougth I know nothing
but strong perfuming, and remoouing your gear.

A way for to take out spots of woollen clothes.
Take and sees of common ashes in fair water, and the powder of Alum
together, and then take of the said ashes and lay thereof on the spots and so
rub it in, then let it dry, and when it is thoroughly dryde, then take a
sponge and sponge it away, as it is declared of the other before.

A good way to help all staynes in thin silks and woollen clothe.
Take of good strong vinegar, and make it luke warm, then dip a black cloth
therein, and then rub therewith your stainie spots al over: so done, the^
take away so much of the said fylth as ye can with a spoone, as for the rest,
ye must have all ready a tailors iron hot, and lay a piece of black cloth on
the spots betwixt the iron and the cloth, and so dry out all the rest of
the said filth with the hot iron, and then ye shall see it will do well and
be fair.

A pleasant water to preserve linen, or any other thing, yielding a pleasant
savor a long time after.
Take 2 pound of spike flowers, as much of rose leaves, one pound of cost mary,
with half a pound of marioram, as much of Balnea, two great handful of Organy
or peniryall, four ounces of mace, a quarter of a pound of Arras poulder, let
all these well seek together in red wine, then put it all into a pot close
stopte that the air do not pass. Let it stand so the space of four and
twenty hours, then let it be put into a distillitorie, and see that it be
well stopte, (round about) with flower, eggs, and water, mixte well
together, and see that no air do come nor go out, but at the spoute only.
Upon the end thereof ye shall hang a fine linen cloth with a grain of musk
or Ambergreace, within it, upon the which ye shall always let the spoute
drop on, and ye shall see it will be a pure water for that purpose, ye shall
also take to the distilling of the foresaid things, half a pound of baye
leaves, so shall this water be good for the purpose as is before mentioned.

A good way to wash a shirte, and save the Gold or Silk thereon, from
staining.
Take a new shirte first of all before it be ever weat, and lay the collar and
ruffes or silk in piss somewhat warm half an hour space, then take it
forth, and then wash him in hot schalding licar, or sees him, and it shall
never stayne the silk. If ye have not piss, ye may take grounds of strong
bear or ale, and let the silk lie therein, the night before ye do wash it.
And this has been often proved very true. But always ye must foresee, that ye
hang not your clothes in the hot sun, after they be washte, but lay
another cloth thereon betwixt the Sun and it, or else the Sun will change
both Gold, Silver and Silk. Therefore it is better to hang them in some place
of shade after their washing, if ye can. Also to soap your water to much, or
your clothes is an occasion to stain both gold and silks. A very good way
is: first to melt your soap in the lycour, and then let it cool, and so to
wash your clothes therein.

Against clothes staynde with wine or vinegar.
Take of warm Cow milk and wash your cloth therein, or wash it in whay and
salt, other else as soon as your clothes are so staynde by mischaunce of wine
or other things, do cast of salt thereon incontinent, so then it will
preserve it from stayning, whether it be woollen or linen.

A very good way to take forth wax or rosin dropte on silk, woollen or linen.
Whereas ye shall have any such occasion to take forth wax or Rosine dropped on
any silks, or other clothes. First ye shall make a pressing iron hot, or some
silver spoone, with a cole of fire therein, take either of them when they he
hot, and first whereas any Rosin or wax is dropped, ye shall first rub on
the said drops of wax or rosin al over: with the end of a tallow candle,
the^ take either your iron or spoone aforesaid, and hold it thereon, laying a
piece of broune paper betwixt your iron and your wax, then after ye have a
little so touched it with the heat, (the wax and tallow will mingle together,
and soke into the broune paper) then take it off, and annoint it with the said
tallow again, and then hold your hot iron, or spoone, as before, and thus ye
must do, as aften as ye shall see cause, until it be all clean forth. If the
wax be dropped through on both sides, use the one side like the other, and so ye
shall get it clean: and look ever that ye shifte your brown paper to a
cleaner place, from the place it was before touched with wax, and this order
keeping, it shall be al well and clean. Often proved.

A soap to take out all spots in woollen cloth.
Take of Venice soap a quarter of a pound, the yolks of three eggs, of salt
finely beaten half a spoonefull, of the juice of Betes, half a spoonefull, or
as much as will make it thick like a paste, then make them into pretye balls,
and let them dry out of the heat of the sun, in some shadow place, and
whenever ye will occupy thereof, first wet your spots through with fair
clear water, and then take your ball and rub it thereon, and wash it then
clean forth as is before mentioned of the other, thus do, and ye shall see
that they shall be clean forth, as before.

Another for the same.
First ye shall take of white soap half a pound, and shread it very small,
then take of the gall of an Ox, or of a he Goat, with some Alum, of either
of them an ounce, take the yolks of two eggs, with a quantity of fine sifted
ashes, put them altogether in a mortar, and beat them, and when they be well
mixed, make them into balls, and whenever ye shall need thereof, take of
fair warm water, and rub the place all over therewith, and then strike with
your ball thereon, and then shall ye rub cloth upon cloth, and wash it then
forth, as aforesaid, and it will be clean.

Another way good to help spots or staynes.
Ye shall first take half a gall of an Ox, the older the better, of feny
greek made in fine poulder half a pound, a quarter of a pound of white soap,
a gallon of strong common lie, mix altogether therein, and set them on the
fire, and sees them softly till they be half wasted, and whenever ye will
occupye thereof, heat it warm, and wash your spots therewith, in mixing it
often with fair cold water, and it shall do well.

How to take out spots of white silks, or other colors.
Take of the best and strongest Aquavite, three pintes, with the which you
shall wete your spots, and take a new laid egg and beat it, and rub
thereon your said spots, and so set in the son and let it dry in: this done,
wash it then with a fresh and clear water, and then wring or press the said
water forth, or press it betwixt your hands, and so they shall be clean, as
for cloth in grain, ye may wash the spots well with Alum water, then rub
cloth unto cloth, and so wash it forth with clear water again, and it will be
well. If it be not at the first all clean out: do so likewise again, so
long as ye shall see cause of any spots remain, and so they shall be well.

A proved way how to take out oily spots out of cloth.
Take of the oil of Tartar, so much as will cover your other staynes, and put
it thereon, and straighte way take it off again, and wash it then well with
fair warm water. Then take cold water also and wash it iii or four times
over, after that, in changing it still with new water, this done, you shall see
it will be as fair as the rest, and as it was before.

Another way to take out all wax, Rosin or pitche, on Silks or other clothes.
First take of tallow or other grease (be it salt or fresh) and melte it, and
being seething hot, put thereof on your said spots of wax, Rosine, or
Pitche, then take of hot licor, and hold your said spots therein, and then
rub cloth upon cloth, betwixt your hands. So done, then wring forth the said
greazie water, and if ye then see it will not be al clean forth, serve it so
again, annoynting your said spots with tallowe or grease, and then do
cleanse forth the greasye water as before is mentioned. For this way has been
well and often proved, and does help.

To take forth gteace out of Silk, Velvet, Moccado or others.
Take and heat water and put a handful of clean feathers therein, and then let
it cool til ye may suffer your hand therein, and lay your silk abroad, and
take your feathers and rub al over the spot, then rub therouer with Castile
soap, and then with your feathers again al up and down, weting them twice or
thrice, and so rub it up and down, the^ wring it a little and dry it in the
sun or wind: but if it be Velvet, after ye have so rubde it: the velvet will
lie, then must ye take a cloth of woollen, and heat it, the^ annoint it light
over with butter, and chafe your cloth together, to rub in ye butter, the^ heat
it a little, and rub your velvet up and down therewith, and it will then rise
again, and be as fair as before.

To take out spots of cloth.
They take the straight bones in sheep feet that are sodde, and dry them
and make them into poulder, with the which you shall lay on the spotted cloth,
laid in the Sun, and rub this poulder thereon till it go all forth.

To dye wool red.
Ye shall put too four pound of woollen yearne, ten ounces of Alum, and
sees it with branne water so much as ye shall think good, then take your
yearne out, and put that water out of that Kettle, and put therein again
three parts of fresh branne water, and one part of fair clear water, then
warm it a little on the fire, then put therein two pound of grening weed, and
let it so warm a while, then put therein your wool, and styr it well with a
stick the space of three hours, but let it not sees in any wise, so done,
then take out your wool again, and put it again into your Kettle, and put
thereto half a glassefull of vnsleakte lime, with as much of common ashes, and
thereto put your wool again, and stir it with a staff six or seven
Paternoster whiles, than take forth your wool, and ye shall have a fair
color. But if ye will have it yet a more sanguine color, then must you
put into your Kettle half a little glass full of more lime, and a little
glass full of common ashes, and thereto put your wool again, and stir it
well still four or five Paternoster whiles, then take forth your wool and
wash it, and so ye shall have a very fair color.

Another way to make wool a fair red.
When as your wool is made red after the first manner then shall ye cast away
that licour that is in the Kettle, and put into it fair water, and put thereto
the cruse full of fair made lie of common ashes, and therein put also an ounce
of Alum, then as soon as it begins to sees, put therein your wool, and
stir it well therein four or five paternoster whiles, then take it forth
and wash it, and so ye shall have your wool a fair color. This manner of
dying is after the order of Dorneke in Flaunders.

To dye a fair yealowe.
If ye will dye yealow with wood, take off the wood leaves, and cut off the
roots, then cut them in pieces, and lay them to soke in lie of common ashes
three hours, then sees it a quarter of an hour, till ye think it be meetely
well sodde. Then put therein two quartes of water, and as much stale Urine of
six days old at the least, so let them sees together a little, then cleanse
it through a sieve, and then put unto the same again, of lie and Urine as
aforesaid. Then strain it through a fair cloth and sees it, and to two pound
of wood take two pound of Verdegreace, with the lie that ye have sod, your
woad and all putting them in your said color, which must be meddled and well
stirred all together. Then shall ye boil it all a little, and it shall be well.

Another color to dye a yealow with wood.
Take and set a pot with water on the fire, and make it warm, then take ashes
made of Oken woade, and cast thereof into the pot with water, and being warm
take it from the fire, and fiyre it well. Then cover it close til the next
day. Then poor the clearest lie thereof through a cloth softly into another
vessel or pan, then take of good wood, and break the roots off, and then cut
them small, then wash and rince them in cold water, and then put the^ into the
lie, and there let them soke a night, then take and seethe it, til the half be
consumed, and when it is well sod, then all hot, cleanse it through a fair
cloth, then must ye have of verdegreace well and finely beaten into powder, and
blend thereof with a spoone amongst your other stuff, this must be done
incontinent thereupon, and also your lie thereunto must be very strong made.

How to dye linen or thread red.
As when ye will dye any Linen or threade red, ye shall take one pound of
samfleure, and let it soke half a day and a night in water milk warm, then
put it into a thick bag or sack, and therein wash and rynce it in the
river till the bag be therewith red, then wring the water well forth, and
so take out your Samfloure, and spread it upon a fair boorde or Table and
make (as it were) a little thin bed thereof, then strewe thereon of white
ashes, in making beds of your Samfleure, and when ye have strewde them with
ashes, ye shall take to one pound of Samfleure, a guarter of a pound of ashes,
which ashes must be burnt and made of the lies of white Wine, and it must be
well chafte betwixt your hands, the one against the other, then make thereof
a small heap, and so let it rest the space of five hours. Then shall ye rub
it again till it wax warm, then have ready a fair basen, and set it
under your stuff, that it may run therein, and also wring out the juice
thereof into the said Basin. Then cast therein a pynte of wine vyneger that is
very good, then ye may put therein a pound of yearne, and it shall do
well. But to dye your Linen cloth, ye shall put it in before your yearne or
Fustian. Then lay it therein a day and a night, then take forth your linen or
yearne, and then put therein a gallon of ashes of the Ash tree, and thereunto
your linen, yearne, or fustian, and so let it lie therein half an hour,
then take it out and wring it as well as you can, then by and by hang it in
the sun, then take that water that ye soked first your Samfleure in, and
strain it (as aforesaid) into the basin unto the other color, then put
therein a glassefull of Vinegar, and then you may put therein your yearne,
fustion, or linen cloth, and do thereunto as is aforesaid.

Another way to dye Linen in a fair rose red color.
To dye a fair red rose color of Linen, ye shall take to every iiii.
yardes and a half of Linen, half a li. of good gall nots, and sees them in
fair water al whole, the space of ii hours, then take it from the fire, and
pour that water into another vessel or fat, then put your linen into the
said water, and let it soke therein the space of four hours, then take it
forth and wring the lycoure well forth. Then take fair water in a kettle, and
set it on the fire, and put therein a quarter of a pound of Alum, and when it
is ready to sees, take it from the fire, and put your cloth therein as soon
as ye have wrong and straynde out your gals aforesaid, but let it dry a
night before first, and then turn it well therein the space of a quarter of
an hour. So take it forth and wring it well, and then sees two ounces of
Brasill in fair water, the space of two hours, then take that from the fire,
and hang another kettle over the fire, and put therein gruys water, so warm
it a little, and cast therein two li. of grening wede, then put your linen
cloth therein, and look that no Alum have been in that water. Then let it lie
therein half an hour, and stir it well with a staff and then take out
thereof the said linen, ye may then cast away the same liquor, and wash your
kettle clean, and put therein of the clearest brasill water and let it well
color therein. Then take your Linen and wash it well in fair water, then take
of fair water in a pan, with a little Alum and so sees them both together:
and therein sees your Linen cloth five or six paternoster whiles. Then take
out the said cloth and wring it well, and after that put the said cloth into the
kettle of brasill water, and therein ye shall turn and wind it well, the space
of a quarter of an hour, then take it forth and wring it a little, and
likewise you shall do with the dying of the Fustian, but unto your Fustian you
must have two parts more of Verdigreace and Alum, and that your Fustian must
lie therein half a day and a night, then wring it forth, and let it dry, then
after ye may raise his cotton with cards meet for that purpose, if ye will
have your Linen more fayrer, cast in the Kettle with your said brasill, some
lie made of white Lime, then put your cloth therein, then turn and wind it
therein the space of four pater nosters, and then take it forth thereof and
wring it well, and so hang it up to dry.

How to make your branne water, wherewithal you shall use to dye red.
Ye shall take a hat full of wheat branne, and take so much water as will go
into the small kettles, so let it have a welling or two on the fire. Then pour
it into a fat. then take two other kettle fuls of water and warm it, and put
it therein also, but first stir it well, and so cover it well. The first day
you must styre it often, and then it will be the better, then shall ye let it
stand four or five days till it wax the riper, and which will be the better
for your purpose, and then ye may occupye as you shall see cause.

For an iron moll in Linen.
To take forth any iron moll in linen cloth, take a chafing dish with coals,
then cover the coals with a pewter dishe so let it be hot. Then lay your
linen thereon where the moll is, and with a Limon, or an Oringe, but the Limon
is better, to rub your moll therewith, and still as it dries in, lay the
juice thereon, and still rub it so, till it be all clean, and this way will
have it all out. Often proved.

To dye silk quoyues in a red.
Ye shall first lay your silk in Alum water, and let it sees therein, and
with branne water also half an hour long both together, then take a little
grening weed, and the like of branne water, and let it be made hot, and put
the silk therein, but let it not sees, but take it out and rince it in lie,
and then in water, and then it will be fair and well.

To dye silk in a sanguine color.
Ye shall dye silk in a sanguine, as ye must in all sorts take Alum as ye do
grening weed, then must ye take a little fair water, with a little brasill,
and sees them together. Then take part thereof, and sees the silk therein,
and as that is taken out, so take an other, and then the third time, then put
it in lie, and so cleanse it, as is aforesaid.

To dye Silk blue.
If ye will dye blue silk, that silk must then be white, which ye must first
soke in water, and then wring it forth then ye shall put it in your blue dye,
and there ye may make it with a light color or dark as ye please.

A fair green to dye.
If ye will have a fair green, take a little branne water, and a little
alum, and sees them together, and when the Alum is molton, put your silk
therein, and let it sees the fourth part of an hour. Then take again a
little branne water, and a little wood, and put it therein also, till that it
wax a fair dark yealow. If ye will have it more yealower, then put it in the
blue dye, wherein ye may make it light or dark as ye please.

To dye black silk.
Take to one pound of silk, xii. gall nots, and beat them to powder, then sees
the silk with the gals in fair water, a good half hour long, then take of
the black dye, and therein sees it another half hour, then take it forth and
let it be cold, and then put it again into the black dye, and let it there
sees another half hour, if then it be not fair: let it sees therein so
long till it wax a fair black, then sponge it in the water, and so let it
dry.

A purple silk to dye.
When ye will die a purple silk, ye shall take to one pound of silk, 4 ounces
of Alum, and sees the Alum in common water, and lay the silk therein, and
let it so lie four hours. Then take to every pound of silk, two pound of
purple color, and sees it together as hereafter is written, which is, ye shall
take half piss, and half water together, and sees it therein till it wax
clear and fair, and the^ spo^ge it in fair water. Also to each pound of
silk it behooves to have four ounces of Alum. Also for red silk to dye
with crap dye, so calde in dutche, which ye shall dye with four pound of
Alum, and also ye shall dye sanguine silk with alum, and also yelow ye shall
dye with alum.

To make a good black dye.
Take a pound of galls, and fourth part of coperas, and sees these
together, then put the cloth therein, and stir it well about, then hang it to
dry, then prepare your dye as thus, take a good great fat, and put therein a
fourth part of Rye meal, and half so much of swarfe (of the grindstone, and
so much of elder bark, and in like of old iron, and the scales of iron, as it
comes of by the hammer beating, stir this all well together, and so let it
stand three days or ever ye put your cloth therein, and at each time let your
linen dry before ye put it therein.

To dye a green.
Take a light blue color and put it into Alum water two hours long, then
hang it to the time, there as the wind may dry it, and then put it into the
foresaid wood and so use it as it is before declared.

To dye a carnasion.
Take purper that is dry, and say it to soke a night in piss, then take your
cloth that is allomde, and dry and put it therein, but ye shall sees the
purper twice in fair water, then set another fat by the fire, and let it
sees, and therein ye shall first put your cloth, and then all weate, put it
in to your dye, till it be fair enough.

To make a red carnation.
To make a redd carnation dye, ye must dye your white cloth, linen or woollen,
or silk yearne, to do it well, ye shall gall and Allome it well. Ye must
take an herb called Foli in dutche, that shall ye find by ditches and banks,
take a pound thereof that is dry, this is in tuftes, and it is hot like we
ashes, and carnation in sight, therewith men do make a red carnation woollen
cloth, with the green or white, or of silk, and if any carnation have lost
his color, or if any carnation have lost his dye, with that ye shall dye it
again, that it shall not leese his color, and to four else of cloth, ye
shall take a pound gruis, or of that herb before named, which ye shall beat
to powder, Then shall ye take lie made of Oak ashes, mix a part therewith,
and another part of clear piss clear and old, of each like much. If ye will
have a light dye, take piss new made, and of the foresaid lie, in like much
and therewith ye shall dye, with the foresaid poulder put therein, and as it is
sod, put in that which ye would dye, and seethe it two hours long, and then
let it dry.

To dye Linen.
Ye shall first take to one stone of flocks five pound of soap ashes (which
are calde in Dutche We Asseen) of the best, with sixteen gallons of water,
sees it together an hour long, and then let it clear one night, then
gentlye pour of the uppermost thereof, and sees your flocks therein one
hour long, and then prove if your flocks or silk be enough sod, also take a
little of your Flocks in your hand, and thrust it hard to a red cloth, also
put it in your mouth, and if it go by and by aparte like a ripe apple, then it
is enough sod. The^ spo^ge it in fair water, and then put it in branne
water, according to the quantity of the woollen cloth, and sees your Flocks
therein, then take it out thereof, and take brasill and put it in water
according to the quantitye of the linen, that is to each elle of cloth four
ounces of Brasill, and as the brasil has sod a while, then strain the brasil
through a cloth, and put it again into your Kettle, and your Flocks also, and
let them sees, then take a Ladle full of lie and put it therein, thus shall ye
make it as hye as you will, and if ye will have it more higher, then put more
lie therein, also for three pound of Flocks, take four ounces of Alum, and
sees them together, and if ye will sees did Flocks, take lie of Soap
ashes, as before it is written, which ye shall sees with Soap ashes, then
scour it, and let it dry.

To dye cloth with facet Wood.
As ye will dye cloth with faucet Wood, ye must make your lie with soap ashes
of Denmark, and rain water, which ye shall let stand three hours long, then
sees it, but the Woad must be first sod in the lie, and when it is sodde, let
it be cooled with other colder and sharper lie, with the last lie ye shall put
too one pound of yearne, a great piece of Alum, and put it therein. Then shall
ye put that dye into a fair Kettle or fat, then take two ounces of spanishe
green, which ye shall soke therein two or three hours long, then toss and
push it up and down twice or thrice, and wring it, and with colder lie put
therein, and tesse it with a dishe too and froe. Also another manner is, take a
dishe full of vnflect lyme, and quench it with water, then take too dishe full
of wood ashes, and mix it with the chalk all together well, and there of ye
shall make a good strong lie, and let it three or four times run through the
tubbe, then take the faucet woad, and hew or cut it in small pieces, and cast
it into the lie, and let it sees therein half an hour long. Then put therein
soap ashes, and let it sees another good half hour, take it then off, and
put thereto spanish green, and let it boil twice, or thrice, and then sponge
it, also with three pound of faucet woad, it behooves to have two ounces of
spanish green, and as the cloth have been in the first licor, if then it be too
broune or too yealow, then put thereto of wine ashes, and a little allu^.

To dye woollen cloth sanguine.
To dye woollen cloth fair, ye shall first seethe good rye meal in fair
water, and then put it in a fair tubbe or pan. Then cast fair water thereon,
and let it so stand three days to clear, then take of that water, and put
therein two ounces of alum, to an elle of cloth, and let it seethe two hours
long, then let it hang and cool without wringing. Then put that water forth of
the vessel with the meal, and put therein a pound of the best grening wede,
and heat that also, but let it not sees, the^ put your cloth therein, and
toss it well with your hands without seething, and take it forth and put it in
a pan with fair lie, and let it lie therein, and so let it dry, and it will
be a red. If ye will make fayrer, you must have of brasill, take an ounce of
Alum and alum it as aforesaid in another water, then sees two ounces of
alum with that brasill, in branne water made, and as the brasill have sod a
while therein, so put therein of cold water, then take so much thereof out as
will weat your cloth in, and stir it well therein, then shall ye take of
other dye, until the time that it has sufficient enough, if ye will have the
same a sanguine, lay it in fair lie of Soap ashes, and there it will have a
fair sanguine dye.

To dye woollen yearne, or cloth.
To make this dye, put too four pound of woollen yarne, or cloth, two pound
of woad. Put this woad in a Kettle, and cast therein of fair water, then cast
again half a tin dishe full of ashes out of the fire, and as soon as it
seethes, put your woollen yarne therein, then let it sees eight or nine pater
noster whiles long, then put your yarne forth, and put a little water in, out
of the kettle, and then a few ashes out of the harth, and put your woollen
yarne again therein: and so let it sees a good while, if it be a broune blue,
it shall be a dark green, and if it be white woollen yearne, so it shall be a
yealow color

Again to dye woollen yearne.
As ye will dye woollen yarne that is green, your yearne ye shall first sees
in branne water, which is to understand, to four pound of yarne, ten ounces
of Alum, and let it sees two hours, then wring that out, and put it in the
dye thus made. To four pound of wool yearne take two pound of woad, and sees
the woad well with hearth ashes, in lie made a day before, so let it seethe the
fourth part of an hour, then put the clear into a clean fat or vessel,
then take the fourth part of an ounce of spanish green, calde Verdigreace,
poulder it well and cast it therein, and stir it with a stick or staff, then
put in your yearne, so turn and toss it therein the fourth part of an
hour, and then let it dry. If it be not fair enough, then put it in again,
and do as before, also as ye would dye blue woollen yearne, yet shall put it
first in warm water, then wring it forth and dye it blue, as it is aforesaid.

To dye with brasill as red as a rose.
Take six else of linen, and thereto half a pound of beaten galls, of the
best: then put it in fair water, and let it sees about two hours, but the
galls should rather be all whole, and when they are sodde, set it from the
fire, and put it gently in another Kettle or fat, and then put your linen
therein, as hot as you may handle it, and stir it therein four hours
long, that done, then wring it well forth, and hang it to dry. Then take four
ounces of Alum, and sees it with water, and when it is sod, take it from the
fire, and put your galled cloth therein, as hot as ye may suffer it, the space
of a quarter of an hour, then take your branne water and put thereof in a
Kettle, and as it is warm, put therein two pound of grening weed, let it the
first time soke well therein, and let it be well and hot, but not sees, and
then put your cloth therein, and stir and handle it well at the first with
your hands, nigh half an hour with a staff tossed well al about, and well
handled in the dye, and then ye shall take your cloth and sponge it in water
and wash it clean. Then take a little alum, and sees it with water, then
shall ye have two ounces of brasill sodde in light water, and put your cloth
therein five paternosters long. Then shall ye have two ounces of brasill sodde
in light water, and put your cloth therein, then handle and stir it well
therein and stir it well about the space of a quarter of an hour and wring
it not to sore, then dry it. Then if it be not dry enough, then weate it as
before said.

How to make a green water.
Take ny half an ounce of Verdigreace, and crushe it well in a wooden dishe,
then put thereto the yolke of an egg and too blades of saffron, then take of
the leaves of spurge, half a handful, and beat them in a mortar, and thereto
cast a good glassefull of Vinegar, and strain it through a cloth. Then take of
this stuff, and put thereof in a dishe with the Verdigreace, and stir it
well together and make it thin, that it may be the better to dye, or to
work with a pensill, or as ye shall seem best.

To dye fair Linen with brasill.
Ye shall take fair water, and heat it over the fire, then shall ye have the
poulder of galls, and put thereof into the Kettle over the fire, and so let it
sees a quarter of an hour: then take it from the fire, and take another
vessel and put therein so much cold water, as of the other in the Kettle, and
put that hot in the Kettle thereunto. Then put your cloth therein, and stir
it well up and down therein, and as ye have done so a while, then let it lie
therein four hours long in that gall water, then take your Kettle again with
other fair water, and set it over the fire and make it hot, then put of Allu^
therein to the kettle over the fire, and as that water is hot, and the Alum
melted, ye must then have another vessel or fat with cold water, as much
as of the other hot water, and put the Alum water therein, then put your
cloth therein, and stir it as aforesaid, and so let it then lie therein
four hours long, so done then ye shall wring it out and hang it to dry, or
to dry in the air, but let it not be too dry. Then shall ye take your
brasill made in poulder, and put it in the pan, and so let it sees therein,
the quarter of an hour, and before that brasill do sees, ye shall take wheat
flower, and put therein, and mix it altogether well in a dish, and put it into
the Kettle before it do sees: thus done, let it sees, and as it has sod,
then take forth so much of the brasil, as ye may put in your cloth, and stir
it well about, as is before declared, thus done, let your cloth rest therein a
good while, then wring it forth, and hang it to dry, and as it is dry, ye shall
take that lycor that it has layn in, and put that away, the^ take again so
much brasill as before, and put that cloth therein again, and then hang it to
dry, and as it is dry, then put it in another lycor, and hang it again to dry,
and then it is full done. And to know the quantity of weight, which is, to
every elle of linen cloth, ye shall take a loot of gall powder so calde in
dutch, and as much of alum, and to each elle of cloth one ounce of brasill.

To make a fair yealow.
To make a yelow, that ye may work with oil, or water ye shall take woad, so
much as ye shall please, and let it stand to soke a night and a day in lie made
with soap ashes, and when it is thus soked, then shall ye sees it, and cover it
close so long as it sees, thus done, then set it from the fire, and put that
lycor into another pan, and so strain it through a clea^ cloth, then take the
pan and pour the thinnest above off, so long til ye see the dye vndercome with all, then take ye fore said cloth, and strain it again through it, into another
pan so long as ye think the substance of the woad do tarry in the cloth, til
ye think that that water is thin enough to strain, and then ye may use it.

A fair Linen cloth to dye blue.
For to dye a fair blue, ye shall take a pan of fair water, and hang it over
the fire, and let it be seething hot, then must ye have a vessel of half an
Ame, so called in dutch, or thereabout, and as your lycor is hot, put thereto 3
pound of wheat bran, and 3 pound of ashes, and a pound of grening wede, stir all this in the pan, and let it sees iii. or iiii. paternosters long, the^ take of
floray under half a pound, and soke it in fair water, and let it there rest a
quarter of an hour covered, the^ take your clean vessel or Ame, and therein put
your soked floray, then take the hot lycor over the fire, but let it cool or
ye put it into the fat, then put it in and stir it well, and so cover it
well and close, and let it so rest six hours long, then uncover it and stir
it well about a good while then cover it close again, and let rest other vi
hours, then uncover it and stir it as before, and so stop it again, then
uncover it within two or three hours, and look if the die begin to come, or
begin to wax green, if they do not, let it rest longer and stop it close, if
ye see it be come, put therein some of your cloth that ye would dye, and turn
it well therein, then wring it out, and let it rest 2 or 3 hours: the^ put in
again your cloth, and use it as aforesaid, and so stop it well again, and let
it rest so, two or three hours, til ye shall see the dye begin to come, and
the flower to lie above, and to every going ye ye go thereto, see if the color
be green enough, or wax green, and when ye shall see it so, ye shall scom of
the flower with a dish, and then put your cloth again therein, stir it well, and
wring it forth, then stop it again well, and thus ye must color three or
four times a day, Then must ye take the dye in the dessell, and hang it over
the fire again, and there let it be hot, and put therein two pound and a
half of ashes. Then put it in the Fat, and so let it rest, but stop it
well and close, so let it rest a night, but stir it once in the night with a
staff, and see in the morning if the dye be come, as aforesaid, and so put in
your cloth again, but let it not lie therein too long, that it cool not the
dye, and as ye have thus dyed it four times. The^ shall ye make it hot again
over the fire, putting therein two pound of pot ashes, and so let rest all a
might, and stir one in the night as aforesaid, and stop it close, and
when ye go thereto, see if the dye be come, if it be come, ye may dye, as
before, that ye think good, and when your color wax a fair green, then is
your dye good and ripe, and the flowers will lie fair above, but as it
begins to wax yelowe, then it is too ripe. Then must ye put in more cloth.

How to dye a fair Linen with brasill.
Ye shall take so much linen as ye will, and to every elle of linen, take
two ounces of gall nottes, or xii. nots, these nots ye shall break in two or
three pieces, then put them in a kettle with water, and let them sees
together, and as they have sod a quarter of an hour or less, take it of the
fire, and take your cloth forth thereof, and let it a little soke by, but let
it not dry. As ye have thus sod it, ye shall take another Kettle with fair
water, and put it over the fire, and make it seething hot, Then shall ye to
every elle of cloth, take two ounces of Alum, which ye shall put in the said
water, and as it is melted, ye shall take the foresaid cloth, and put it into
the said kettle to the Alum, and let it sees together, a quarter of an
hour, then take forth of the kettle, and wring it a little, then hang it to
dry a little, but not too much. Then must ye have your sod brasill as thus:
ye shall take lie made of wood ashes, but see it be not too strong. And
thereof so much in your pan as will make your cloth weat, then put your
brasill in the pan with the lie, and so let it sees a quarter of an hour,
then set it from the fire, and have ready an earthen pan, and by and by, put
your lycor and brasiil therein, then shall ye put your foresaid cloth therein,
stir and turn it well therein, but see that it be not too dry of the said
Alum that it has been sod with. Also to four gallons of lie, ye shall put
less then half a pound of brasill poulder small beaten.

To make a fair brasill color, to work on cloth or paper.
Ye shall take a fair pot, and put therein a pound of chalk small broken,
and put thereto a pottle of good Vinegar, and stir it well together. Then let
it stand a day and a night, then pour the clearest into a fair pan, and
see that no chalk go therein, then take two parts of the said lie, and put it
in a fair pot, and set it over the fire, and sees it five pater noster long,
then take it from the fire, and put the lycor in to fair a pan, and ye shall
put thereto xiiii. ounces of allu^, and stir it well with a staff, then take
the other part, and put it to the said brasill wood, the which ye have changed,
and let it there sees, as before said, and put that licor into another pan,
and put thereto xiii ounces of Alum, which ye shall stir so well as
aforesaid, and when ye have tossed it long, put it then to the other, and stir
it well, as ye will have it dry take a pan and fill it full and set it in the
wind eight days or more, and there let it dry, and as it is fair, ye may
work therewith.

Blue Buckeram to dye.
Take three pound of gruis of Turwin, so calde in dutche, and a pound of Mede,
a pound of Floray, and to three pound of Soap ashes, take lx. quartes of water,
first ye shall put your Floray into a fair fat, and put thereto ten
quartes of water, and stir it well altogether, this must be so hot that ye
cannot suffer your hand therein, in the other water ye shall put the gruis,
with the ashes and Mede, and that put together, and so stand, which ye shall
stir xii. hours long, and waxing a blue, so ye may work with it. If it be not
blue enough, so let it stand couerd, xx. hours long.

A red to dye with Crampmede.
Take a pound of crampmede, to three else of linen, and take a fair pot with
water, and set it by the fire till it be ready to sees, and put therein two
ounces of gals, and let them so sees together, and then put your linen
therein, and take it sometimes out and in, and at each time wring it well out.
Then take a fair pot with fair water, and make it seething hot, then put
therein an ounce of Allu^, and so let it sees well, then put your cloth in as
aforesaid. Then take another pot of water, and let it sees therein til it be
red, then take that cloth out, and cleanse it al about with a cloth. If ye will
have it more darker then must yt have a lie of unquenched chalk, with the like
dye: men with woad ashes do make a red dye or color, without vnque^ched lime,
in having woad ashes instead of vnque^ched lime.

To dye black Velvet or linen.
Take of galls and coperas, and sees them together, and put your linen
therein, if it be gray silk, then take of elder barks, and old iron, and put
all in a hearing barrel or vessel. Then take gruis or swarfe, this shall be a
thurden dele of the fat, the other two parts shall be fair water so let it
stand three weeks long, and so stir it often well about, and put your gray
silk therein, and as this is done, so shall ye hang it to dry, and so put it
in again, so often til that it be black enough. In steed of galls ye may
take harkes of Oak, and shoemakers black.

To make gray flore.
Take flore and lay it to soke 24 hours, then wring it out through a cloth,
then take lie of wine ashes, and spread it 2 hours long on a fair table, then
take the said lie, and put it in three vessels, and take the Flore and put it
into one of the vessels, Then put it well forth, then put that Flore in the
least vessel, then so in the midst, and in the first, but ear ye put the
linen therein, put in vinegar and wring it out.

To dye silk red.
Take of good wood ashes, and make a good lie thereof, and put therein of willow
or facet woad, and barbary wood or yelow wood, and soke them therein an hour,
then sees a quarter of an hour, then put your cloth therein, and put in a
little spanish green, but that cloth ye must first alum it.

To make a black water to dye with.
A black water to dye all manner of silk clothes, ye shall take half a pound
of gall nots, and put thereto somewhat less then a pottle of water, and an
ounce of swarfe of the grindstone, and a good deal of the fylings of iron,
make it sees, and put thereto a quarter of a pound of coperas, and sees all
to the half, and put therein a pound of gu^me arabic, then sees it till all the gum be melted. Then set it from the fire, the older it is the better it
will be.

To make a thick water to work on yealow silk.
Take a pottle of the best vernice ye can, and put in an ounce of brimstone in
fine poulder, and half an ounce of Camphyer, then sees it a while, and let it
cool, then strain it through a cloth, also with this ye shall work thin, and
this must be sod with the fourth part of gum Arabic.

To work on yealow silk, white, gray or azure color.
Take a pottle of Conduite water, and a fourth part of Arsenicke in poulder,
and two ladle full of woad, cut the woad in small pieces, and make it sees as
hering, that is softly, then set it from the fire, and put therein so much of
graynes, as ye put in porrage, and herein also ye shall put in of gum of
Arraby, so much as you shall seem good.

To make a red water.
Take a pottle of fair water, and a fourth part of gum, and half a pot of
faucet woad (so called in dutche) and then sees it together till three pintes be
consumed, then set it from the fire, and herein ye shall put half an ounce of
spanish green, and then put in also of graynes, so much as ye do in seasoning
your pottage.

To make a red with brasill.
Take your Linen to one pound, take a fourth part of Alum, but first seeeth
alum, then lay your linen therein the space of two hours, then take of
beaten galls, and put water thereto, then lay your linen therein, and put in
a quarter of a pound of brasill, and an ounce of gum of Arabie. Then let it
sees a fourth part in, and then put in your Linen. If you will have it a red, then put in no galls.

To make a red water for white silk or woollen, green, yealow, violet or
azure.
Take a pottle of running water, and an ounce of brasill, sees these till the
half be consumed. Then take it from the fire, and put in so many graynes, as
ye put unto a pot of porage, and a fourth part of gum. But if ye will make it
a light red, put it into another fat, whereas there is a quarter of a pound of
Alum made in poulder, and so let it rest all a night and it will do well.

To make a blew.
Take three parts of Soap ashes, and one part of unquenched lyme, and make a
lie thereof, and then let it clear, then strain it through a thick cloth,
and ye shall take xv. quartes of the said lie, and put thereto a pound of
Bloemen (so calde in dutche) then stir it all well together with a staff,
and warm it over the fire, so that ye may not scant suffer your hand therein,
but first your cloth must be sod in Alum, and also dried, then put it in the
warm dye, two or three times, then after, if ye will have it black or light
color, so ye may use it, but before all things your dye must be warmed, ere ye
dye or color therewith.

To make a fair sanguine dye.
Take upon each elle of linen, six galls beaten into poulder, and then take
three gallons of water put into a tubbe, and put the poulder of the galls
thereto, and stir them well together, then lay your linen therein, and
turn and wend it well. Then take and wring it dry out, then let it lie
therein again two hours long, but at each hour ye must wring it, as before,
and lay it therein again in the tubbe, and as it has layne two hours, and so
wrong out, then take one ounce of Alum, of the best, and three gallons of
water in a Kettle, and make it well and hot ready to sees, till all be well
molten, then set it from the fire, and put your linen therein, and do it as ye
have done before again two hours long, then after that take a pan, and put
therein two gallons of water, and warm that like the other, then take three
ounces of brasil and cast it therein, again let it sees a quarter of an
hour, then take a good quart of water, and cast it therein seething, and take
a quart of that dye, and lay your linen therein six or vii. pater nosters
long, so that the dye be drunk all in ye said cloth, then wring it forth and
handle it well, then lay the cloth again in that dye, toss it, and turn it
and wend it well therein, and let it lie so long therein as aforesaid, and so
wring it out, then take the third color and lay it therein, and let it lie
therein a quarter of an hour, and so it will be well.

A light red dye for skins.
To dye a fair light red, take xiiii. dry skins as they come from Antwerp,
and put them in the river, or in water two days, and two nights, then take
them out of the said water, and put into a fat, a Kettle full of unquenched
lyme or chalk, and put so much water thereto, as the felles may well be
covered therein, then stir them well with a staff altogether, and put your
felles therein, then turn and toss them well, if it be in the summer, it
shall be enough to lie therein viii. days, and ye must each ii. days see unto
them, if it be in the winter, they must lie therein a month, then take your
felles out, and hang them again in the foresaid rivers or water three days, and
three nights, then after wash them well in a tubbe with luke warm water, and
stamp them with your feet, then after wash them again in the river water as
aforesaid, and hang a Kettle over the fire with fair water, and therein put
iiii. pound of Alum, and when it is molten in the water, seething hot, putting
in so much water that it may be no hoter but your hand may suffer therein
without scalding, then set it from the fire and put your felles therein, and
stir them well with your hand, so let it rest a day and a night, but as ye go
to bed you shall stir them once well, then after take your felles forth, and
wring the water well out, and as your felles do wax somewhat dry, ye must
weat them again: then take four pottles of piss, that is stale, hang it over
the fire in a pan, let it sees well, and scum it clean so long as any scum
will rise, then put in a pot full of beaten lack, and let it therein sees a
little, and put therein so much Alum as a hasel nutte, and give it therewith a
boiling, then set it from the fire, and let it so rest till it be cold to
suffer your hand therein, then put a glass full thereof in your felles which be
ready sowd like a sack, and hold it too above, and with your other hand hold
under, and shake it up and down as ye would bolt meal, do thus so long til the
color has well taken the leather, then turn your fels about, but if it be
fair enough let it so be, if it be not fair enough, put of your said
substance again another half glass therein, and stir it about as before,
and then rippe your felles, and hang them to dry in some hye lofte. And as
they be dry, so take and lay them a night in a fat with water, and next day
taw them on a sharp tawing iron, until they be all workemanly done, then they
are well.

To make leather red.
Take an ounce of Alum and melt it in a gallon of water, the^ take a calves
fell and spread it on a rame, so it must be rubbed al over with alum water
first, then incontinent ye shall strike it all over with brasill water, and let
it so dry in, and then strike it all over again, and so let it dry in like,
but the color or dye must be made warm always, when ye rub thereon. But
first ye must make it weat with cold water, and wring it again out, and then
stretche it forth on a board, and so ye may use it.

The foresaid brasill water, ye shall make thus. Take three gallons of rain
water, and put therein four ounces of brasill woad made in poulder, and half
an ounce of Wey ashes, calde soap ashes, with a little saffron. Then sees it
so long till the third part be wasted. Then cleanse that out, and the pot with
rain water again, and let the half sees away. Then is the strength all out,
and with this last water ye shall color first, and with the first water ye
shall dye or color last.

To dye red felles.
To dye red Leather, ye shall sees Lack in been straw, and a cursy piss, as
aforesaid is. Then put therein so much as two great beans, and then take an
ounce of brasil water, and so let them sees together.

To dress Felles with gold.
To dress Felles with gold, take broune red, and grind it on a stone, with
water mixed with chalk, and lyme water, and therewith you shall strike your
felles twice over, then lay your silver or gold thereon, and let it dry, then
shall ye smoothe it with a tooth, and so strike it over, and then dry it in
the sun.

To color green Felles.
To color green felles, take spanish green, and grind it upon a stone with
wine Vinegar, and some saffron temper this with gum water and lyme, and so
strike your skins therewith.

To gylde on leather.
Ye shall ouerstrike your leather thrice with whites of eggs, and gum water,
then lay your gold thereon, and lick it well and fair, or the yolks of hard
roasted eggs, mixed with gum water and ground, the red and the graye skins ye
may vernish them, take a flat basin, and put fire under, and spread the felles
thereon, and strike varnishe also over the skins, where it is colored, but
before you strike your felles strike it warm on the Basin, and then let it
dry, then smooth the color all over even, and when it is dry; then lick it,
or burnish it with a tooth, and as ye will have it fair, so take an end of a
tallowe candle, and rub it on your arm from the hand to the elbowe, then
strike it all over with that part of your arm, and it is done.

Again to color leather red.
Take the dye for a red leather, and take an ounce of brasill, in a nealed pot,
and sees it till the third part be wasted, but first wash your leather in
Alum water, or in other water, but let it not lie long therein, so let it
dry, and put it therein, and let it rest two days and two nights on a tack,
and then hang that leather in the air to dry.

If ye will have it sanguine, take of vine branches ashes, and make lie
thereof, and with this lie, sees your brasill woad, and so ye may color red
therewith.

To color leather green.
Take an ounce of Equisetam, in English horsetayle, it is an herb growing in
low places or meadows, put there to of old standing water, with a quantity of
Alum powder, with a little coperose beat in poulder, so use it.

To culler a blue leather.
First you shall take an ounce of Endix, so calde in duche, with one ounce of
chalk, and a pottle of Vinegar, or good sharp lie, then put all into a basin,
and there slyrre it all well together, first your felles must be made ready
thereto, as before is declared, then put your stuff thereon, and so use it as
the other, and it will show a fair blue element color.

To make a fair red color.
Take your leather which is allumde before, then take of old piss, of such as
use to drink much wine, and let it stand til it stink, then take the clearest
thereof, and sees it til the half be wasted, then take two ounce of lack, with
one part of brasill, a part of Alum, and a part of Salarmoniacum, beat them
altogether, and put them into a pot, and set it over the fire, and stir it well
with a white stick, until the stick wax red as blood, then take it off, and
color therewith luke warm.

Another fine red color.
Take half an ounce of brasill poulder, and half a pottle of old water, sees
them together, and scum it well, then take a little allu^, which must be first
killed in clay, first take it from the fire, and then put in your said alum, so
reserve it, and use it as the other.

To make a light blue color.
Take the flowers of the blue bottles among corn, and pick them off, then
grynde them on a stone or mortar, and put thereunto a little viniger, then
temper it with alum as aforesaid, so shall ye have a fair blue color, so may
ye use it incontinent for it will not last long but change color.

To make a white leather blue.
Take hengarten besien, so calde in dutche, which I take to be the low elder,
calde Dane worte, sees the said berries in water, then with your hand stir
them well about, and also break them, so done, then sees it again a while,
and so let it cool, and being warm, strike all over your leather once or
twyse, or as often as ye shall see cause, then take of Endir, so calde in duche,
and strewe of that powder thereon, and rub it in, and so it will do well.

Another way for red leather.
To make your red, take a pound of Mosherumps with a little of unquenched lyme,
then put thereto a pottle of water, and let it stand a night, then take two
parts of other fair water, and a third part of chalk water, with a
quantity of brasill, then put all the said stuff into a leaden pot, and let
it sees till the half be consumed, then it will be well, and ye may use it as
the other.

To make a green color.
Take the leaves of an herb calde night shade, then stamp or beat it in a
mortar of stone, so temper it with Alum, and so color your skins therewith,
also ye may take of the green berries of the green bery tree (which the
paynters use) stamp them and so let them rest ten or twelve days, then
strain them, and put Alum water thereto, and strike your skin therewith, but
first make it warm, and so use it.

Another good green.
Take one part of the foresaid low elder berryes, and sees them in sufficient
water, then put therein two ounces of brasill poulder, and an ounce of walkers
claye, with a pottle of old water, let al these sees a good while together,
then put in your beaten alum, but not before, so shall it be a fair color as
the other.

If ye will have it a more darker color: ye must therewith strike twice all
over your skins: to have it a lighter color, then ye shall mingle it with
old rain water, and so use it.

To color black Leather after the order in Germanye.
To color leather black, take a herring barrel, and lay it three fingers
thick in the bottom with elder barks, then take the filinges of iron, and
straw it all over the said barks, then take as much bark of elder again,
and lay it therein, and so likewise your filings thereon as before. Do thus,
till the said barrel be three quarters filde, and has taken to the quantity
of four pottels, or more of the fylinges, then take so much of rain water as
will fill it up to cover it all over, so let it stand a month or that ye do
color therewith, and ever as it waxes emptye, fill it up again with
filinges, and rain water as before, in letting it stand (so filde) a month
after, and always let the last cover be the fillings above, and when ye list
to color therewith, unto three pottles of color, ye must have iiii. ounces of
beaten galls, and two ounces of coperas water, then let it sees together
before ye dye, that ye may color the better therewith: thus ye may use it
at your pleasure.

To color a white leather.
First take your skins and hang them in lyme water, till they wax supple, or
in chalk water, and when they be well soked, if ye will make have of them,
first take of the here, and cleanse it out of the said water, so that all the
substance aforesaid be taken forth of the felles, and being cleansed then a day
or more, then wring the said water all clean forth, and let them dry, and to
vi. felles put not above two ounces of Alum, and let your felles lie therein
a night and a day, then wring them and draw them well until they be all
clean, and then use them.

Another fair red color.
Take a fell or felles, and weate them in Alum water and salt mingled
together, and to iiii. ounces of salt, take viii. ounce of Alum to the weating
of your said felles, and also two ounces of lyme, then sees all in two
pottles of rain water, then strain it through a linen cloth, and wash
therewith what fell ye will, then spread it abroad on the earth, and take a
woollen cloth, and with the same lycor, strike the said felles all over, and so
let them dry. Then they will be ready for to receive your color, then after
that take at the least four ounces of the lycor of the last end of a brewing,
with two ounces of brasill poulder, then sees all these in two pottles of the
lie of soap ashes, with one ounce of Alum, and when it is well sod, take it of
the fire, and all to strike your felles therewith, and the^ let it dry, and so
they shall be ready and soft withal, and here ye must understand with what
colors ye shall strike your felles withal, which is, with the red, and with
blue, and also green, for these shall chieflye abide and not go off, also to
weat your felles, where linen yearne has been soked in, it will be likewise
very good.

To color a black spanish leather.
Take of Pomplemelc, so calde in dutche, and make it warm, then wash your
felles therewith till the white come no more off, neither forth thereof, and to
a small fell ye shall take four ounces of Venis tot appelen, so calde in
dutche, then beat it a little into pieces, and cast of fair water thereon,
and sees it till it wax soft, so that ye may wring it betwixt your hands,
then strain out the water thereof, if it be too hot, take a broad earthen
pan, and put the said licor therein, then spread your skin abroad and dip
your fell therein till it be well weat, do it so iii. or iiii. times, then
take good shoemakers color, or black, so much as ye shall think good, the which
ye shall make the fell through moist withal, and put thereto a little vitrial
coporas, then wring it well forth, and lay it together, and let it dry softly,
then take it or it be through dry, and wring it between your hands, for so it
will be soft, do so often times and when it is dry, take of Goose grease, or
hogs grease in a woollen cloth, and rub it therewith too and fro a good space
before a fire, or by a hot oven, so rub and chafe it well in with your hands,
that the grease be not seen, Of both, Goose grease is the better, then
Linseede oil, or shoemakers train.

Another way for black leather.
To make a black leather, be it sheep or other. First take your leather and
stretche it, then sprinckle it well out of your mouth with water, then take
your tawing stock, and taw it well therewith, also rub and chafe it together
with your hands as shomakers do, and draw it well with your paring iron, the^
put it on your dressing board, and strike it with a woollen cloth til it be al
even, and then ye may color it, and when it is well colored, then wring the
said color out of your skins, so put it in again into the said color,
and so do as ye did before, at the first time it must be always twice
colored, then hang it in the sun and let it dry, then ye shall take it
again, not being through dry, rub it, and so color it again, as before. If
ye have it very soft: rub and chafe it betwixt your hands, ever before ye
color it, so being well dyed and colored, which at the least must be v. or
vi. times over. Thus ye must do for sheep skins, which also must be dressed
with alum, and when ye lay your color on them, then take lynseede oil, and
with a woollen cloth, strike your dressing iron therewith, and when your
skins be thereon well tawde, then take of your slight color or dye out of
your fat al cold, and color your skin therewith once after your said
linseede oil. Then put it together, and wring forth the oil and grease
therein, and the color also, and being well wrong out, lay it together, and
color it once again, and being thus colored three times over, then take and
dry it, and so it is done.

To gilde on Leather.
First ye must work it well, and ouerstrike it with the whytes of eggs, and
gum water beaten together, then lay your gold thereon, and strike it well, ye
may temper therewith hard yeolks of eggs beaten with gum water. The red and
green skins ye may vernish, as to take a basin with a smoothe bottom, and
put coals under, and then lay, and spread your skin thereon, so strike your
skin all over with vernish, but before ye strike it over (on the bottom of
the basin or pan) ye shall first rub and warm your skin all over on the
basins bottom, then strike your color all over thereon, and so let it dry,
and being dry, smooth it with a sleke stone, and so ye shall make it fair.

To make a lie to dye a blue.
When ye will dye a blue, ye must make a strong lie, and ye must take twice so
many ashes with a third part of chalk, then make it sees four paternoster
whiles, then cast thereto of clean wax, which will make it clarifye the
better, then set it over the fire, and let it there soke two hours or
thereabouts, then put into a pan five pound of woad, and put it to the said
lie, then hang it over the fire, and warm it well without seething, and then
put it in some hearing vessel, let it remain there half an hour, then cast
therein half a pint of Zemes, so calde in dutche, and stir it well with a
staff, then cover it well the space of a quarter of an hour, and then it will
be good and ready to dye with, then take of linen yearne, or woollen cloth,
other fustian or Oyer: to have it a light blue, put it but once in, and to have
it a little brouner, put it in twyse, and to have it more browner, put it
thrice in, or so long till ye see it broune enough, and when ye have did what
ye please, let the vessel rest till another day. If then ye will dye more
yearne, linen or woollen, then must the dye be taken out of the vessel, and
put into a kettle, and put thereto four quartes of lie, as is aforesaid, so
cover it well and let it stand one hour, then put thereto half a pound of
grening weed, and hang it over the fire again, and let it color well
without seething, then cast it into the vessel with a pint of Zemes, and cover
it well, and let it rest a quarter of an hour, and then put therein again to
dye what ye think good, and color it as is aforesaid, also when ye do set
and prepare your fat, ye must have to every ounce of greening weed, one
quart of good lie.

To color or dye a black.
Take a vessel, and put in cold gall water, then lay your fustian therein,
stir it and handle it well therein, and then put it into the black dye, and
toss it and handle it well therein also, and then again in the gall water, and
again in the dye, do thus so often till it be dyed enough.

To dye a fair yealow color as Gold.
Lay first your linen in alum water four hours long, then take one part of
chalk, and two parts of wood ashes, then make a lie thereof, and sees your dye
therewith, also the best lie to dye with is, to take two parts of wood ashes,
and one part of chalk, work and use it as ye shall perceive best.

To dye Fustian gray.
Take of hay ashes, and vine ashes by themselves, and make a lie thereof, then
put your fustian there in the hay lie, and then in the other lie, do it thus so
long till ye see it all colored enough, with these and such like ye may dye
linen gray, but ye must put thereto a little more of calls.

To dye black silk or velvet.
Ye shall first soke your silk in gall water an hour long, and then let it
dry, then shall ye lay it in the lie of saeche meal, (so calde in dutche)
and with ashes of vynes, and lay it therein xii. hours or more, then let it
dry well, and after ye must sees it in black dye two or three times, til that
ye think it be fair enough.

To dye a silk that has lost his color.
Take Satin or Damask that must be made black, sees it first in the dye of
Oken barks, then dry it in the wind, then sees it again in your black dye,
and so let it dry always again. And if then it be not black enough, sees
it in gall water and black dye, til it be fair enough, so let it dry, then
rub all over with butter, or other grease, and wring it well between your
hands, then strike it over with a fair woolen cloth, and it so will be well.

To make a gray Fustian.
First lay your Fustian to soke the space of iii. hours, then to viii. else
of Fustian, take two ounces of broken galls, and put them into warm water,
then put your gal water into another fat, with eight quartes of fresh water,
then lay your fustian therein, and stir it well with your hands therein,
toss it well, and wring it forth well, and lay it therein again one hour, and
so wring it well forth, then put it into the black dye, and lay it therein
another hour, so wring it well, then scour it in the fair river water, and
then hang it to dry if then it be not gray enough, soke it again in fair
water, and then put into your gall water, and then the black dye, then scour
it and dry it, so burle it and dress it up, and so it is done.

Black silk to dye.
To one pound of silk, take xii. gall nots beaten into a fine poulder, then
sees that silk with the galls in commen water, half an hour long, then
take of your black dye, and sees it therein another half hour, then take it
forth, and let it cool, and then put it again into the dye, and let it sees
therein another half hour, if then it be not fair enough, sees it therein,
til it be fair, then take and wash it out of that color and hang it to dry,
and so it is done.

To color curried skins green, or felles to cover Books.
Take the buds of white and black thorn, which ye must gather in the month of
August, when they begin to wax ripe and black, put them in a well leaded
pot, the space of ten days, then put thereto four ounces of Alum, and
boil them together well, then put it into a poudring vessel of Beef or
Porke, and close it well that it take no wynd, then set it a little in the
sun, and when ye would color therewith, take a little of the said color,
and myxe it with some lie, and warm it, and then strike it on the skins, and
ye shall see a fair color. Also take Lincaile, or canker of Latin, honey, and
mix them together in like, and put thereto piss, so much that it may take
color, and also stayne the skin, and then dry it in the shade.

To make a yealow color on skins.
Take the ripe seeds of Nerprun, so called in french, dry them in the sun, and
when ye will work therewith, temper it with lie, and with a little alum of
the Rock, and let it rest till it be molten, the which will make it to take a
yealow color, but the lie must first be heat a little.

To dye thread black.
Take a quantity of broken or bruised galls, and boil them in water in a
small pot, and when they have a little boylde, take out all the galls, and
put into the same pot so much Coperose as ye have had of galls, and put
therewith a little gum of Arabye, and then give it again another boiling, so
let it boil a little, and with the said dye, ye shall color therein your
thread, then take it forth, and ye shall see it a fair shining black.

To dye thread gray.
Take of the said black dye, so much as ye list, and put thereunto half so
much water, more or less as ye will have your color deep or light. Then
boil your threade therein, and you shall have it gray as ye list, other brown
or lighter, other after a mouse dunne.

To dye thread in sad purple color.
Take the barks of Pomgranads, and the pills of dryde Oranges, then boil
them in water with a little Alum, as great as a small nutte, then let it
cool, and when it is cold, put your thread therein, and boil it again, and
ye shall have a fair color.

For to currie a raw Goteskinne.
Take a gotes skin raw, and put it in warm water, and let it rest there a
day, then scrape and cleanse it very clean, and take away all the fylth
thereof, and to finishe it, take water, and set it over the fire, and put
therein a handful of fat, and four ounces of roche Alum, then stir all
together til it begin to boil, then set it from the fire, and let it rest til
it be cold, then take an egg, and beat it with a little Oil olive, this done
put your gotes fell in the said water, and stir it well al about with your
hands three or four times, and so it shall be in good case and well curried.

To dye skins in a blue like azure.
The wool being clean taken off, and the fell washed clean in fair water,
so wring it al out, then take the beries of the greening tree, as paynters use,
and the berries of elder, sees them together in water of Alum, then strain
that water, so let it rest, then pour away the uppermost, and strain the rest
again, then let it dry, and wash with that clear water, but see that your
fell be clean: then take your color, and strike your fell al over
therewith being warm, and so let it dry, so it will be a good blue.

To dye skins with Madder, called Kubea tinctorum in Latin.
First see that your skins be ready washed and wrong clean, and so laid
abroad, then shall ye weat it all over with the lies of white Wine, wherein
baye Salt have been boiled, and so wring forth that again, then take the
ashes of the shelles of Creuis, or Sea crabbes, and temper it with the
foresaid water and salt, and therewith rub your skins and wash them well
then with clear water, and wring him, take ruddle and te^per it with the said
lies, and rub it al over therewith, and so with ye said ashes, thus wash and
wring it three times, if it be not then well, ye shall give him a coloring with
brasill, and your Madder mixed together with the said water or lies, or that
some tartar have been sod in, which must be made warm, when ye lay your ruddle,
so leave it a night, then put on your Madder, mixed with alum or lies, or
alum cativum stieped in water, also you may add unto it, the shering of
scarlet taken out of the boiling lie, which is also good.

A good green to greeneskinnes.
Take first and cleanse your skins, annoint and soke them well in cold water,
then take the berries of the sap greening tree, and being ripe about
Michaelmas, take and stamp them, and so let them rest iii. or iiii. days,
then put thereto of rayn water a little, and then boil them with a soft fire,
in styrring them still, then if ye will have it light green, put to but a
little alum, and the sadder green put too the more alum in the boiling and
boil it but a little, the^ ye may fold your skins in the midst, and rub
him on both sides therewith, and then with a little poulder of alum, then take
ashes burnt of sheep dung, and all over rub your said felles therewith on both
sides, then rub him with the said color again all over, so wash him with
fair water and let him so dry, but finely wring him out, then spread him, and
cast of the foresaid thin color, all over the fell, and so let him dry, and
it will be a fine color.

A sleighter green with the sap berrie.
Let your skins be first anointed, and well washed, and so wrong forth, and
then stretch them as the order is, then take of the same sap berries aforesaid,
let them be stamped with roche alum and water, and a little boyld, and therewith
give your skin a stroke or two al over, and then let it dry, then give him a
coloring with yealow, made of the said berries, sod with alum water, and
again of saffron, then let it dry, and ye shall see a fair color.

Another green for skins.
Your skins being anointed, washed and spread, ye color him with the
foresaid sap green, and put unto it a few weat ashes, and rub the fell al
over therewith, and being washed and wiped again, strike him over with Indian
color, sod with roch alum, then let it dry, the^ strike him over with the
foresaid yealow, and so ye shall have a fair excellent green color.

To dye a crimosine color.
Scrape hard soap, and so melt it in commen water, and put your silk in a
linen or thin canuas bag, and so put it into the Kettle to the soped water,
and let it boil softly half an hour space, but stur it often for burning,
then wash it in salt water first, and after in fresh water, for each pound of
silk, take a pound or more of alum, laid sufficyente in cold water, and
therein put your silk without the bag, and let it rest therein viii. hours,
then take and wash it in fresh water, then wring it, and put it in the pan to
ye crimsine color, being well stamped and clean, take iiii. ounce, and boil it
with so much water as will cover your silk four fingers above in water, and to
each pound of crimosine color, put too three ounces of galls in fine pounder,
or in steed thereof ye may put in half an ounce of Arsenic, which is not
very wholesome because of the fume, nor the water thereof, and when it boyleth
put in your silk as before prepared, and there let it boil a quarter of an
hour, then wring it a little, and dry it in the shade, and so it will be fair.

To die a black after the common sort of the country women.
They take so much water as will cover the hose, or other cloth, but first they
al to strike their hose or cloth, with swart of the grindstone, then they lay
alder pills first in the bottom of the vessel, and thereon lay your cloth or
hose, and then pills thereon again, then lay your hose thereon, and pills
thereon again, and then cover al with water, so let them boil softly two
haures space, and turn your cloth often therein, then see if it be black
enough, if not, take new swart, and pills, and use them as ye did at the
first, and so boil them again til they be black, then scour and wash them
out, and it is done. Some women do take (in steed of alder) plumtree pills,
some black thorn, and some young oken pills, and oak apples green, and so
dies with them in like case, or the tender shewts of brachryers, or green
walnut husks, al these are good in summer to dye with.

How to harden Jron and Steel, and also to soften, to sowder, and to gylde.
To make Iron or steel as fofte as copper.
TAke a chalk stone vnslect, with as much alum, first stamp the Alum very
fine in a mortar, then take your chalk and mingle therewith, then spread it
half a finger, or a finger thick, on a linen cloute, and wrap your iron
therein, which ye would have soft, and lay it in the midst of a fire, and
there let it lie an hour or more, till the fire is out and be all cold of
himself without any other thing done to it. Then shall ye take out your iron
or steel, and it will be as soft as it were right copper in his hardness.

Another way to soften.
Another way for the same, take only a white fire turffe, and lay your iron or
steel in the midst thereof, and lay it in the fire, and let it lie there so
long, til the fire do go forth, and wax cold of it self, then take it out,
and it shall be as soft as need shall require.

To make Iron soft.
Take the water, or the juice of Rafany, which I take to be the Rape, then
heat your iron hoce, and quench it therein, and it shall become soft again.

Another way to make iron soft.
Take of Soap ashes, and vnslect lyme, of either alyke, then make a lie
thereof, which lie ye shall strain nine times through a strayner, then take
other iron or steel, and lay it therein one night, and it will be so soft ye
may easilye cut it, will ye then have it hard again, so quench it in
cold water, and it shall wax hard again.

Another way to make iron or steel soft.
Take the yelow flowers of Marigoldes, with the stele and blossom, stamp the
flowers, and strain it through a cloth, and put that juice into a pot, then
take the iron or steel that ye will make soft, and as red hot as ye can
do sleke it in that juice, and it will be as soft as Copper.

Another way to soften.
Also take slecken and long worms out of the earth, of each alike, and a third
part of falte, then take an earthen pot, and make it full of holes in the
bottom like to a sieve, then take the salt, and salt the worms into the pot.
Then take another pot, and set it under that pot, then will that salt melt
with the worms, and run into the other pot, and that in the under pot
ye shall keep, then lay a stone on that pot, and make it to sees well, and
scumme it so long as any scumme will rise, then take it from the fire that it
may cool, then scumme that off above, then make your steel red hot as fire,
and so quench therein, which iron or steel a man may bow like as it were
copper: then to make it hard, heat it red hot, and quench it in cold water,
and ye shall think it were fine steel.

To make iron soft.
Take an herb calde in Latin, Vngula cabellina, it is a clote, called in
English of some Colts foot, or Bulls foot, take and make a water thereof, and
make your iron read hot, which ye will have soft, then quench it in the
said water, and it shall become soft, that ye may use it for your purpose,
and so harden it again as the other.

Another way to soften.
Take Slecken so calde in duche, and stamp it with strong wine Vinegar, then
make your iron or steel red hot, that ye will have soft, and quench it in
the said juice, and then it shall be soft like the other, and to make it
hard again, wherein to quench with cold water as before.

To make Steel or Crystal soft.
Take of unquenched lyme, with as much of soap ashes, and thereof ye shall make
a lie after this manner, which is, ye shall strain it through a strainer ix.
times, then take your steel or cristall, and lay it a night therein and a
day, so it shall be very soft, if ye will have it hard again, so quench it in
cold water as the other aforesaid.

Another way to soften iron.
Take your iron red hot, then quench it in Linseede Oil, do this so often
till ye shall perceive it to be soft enough, and another is, take the blood of
Eeles, and make your iron hot, and quench therein.

Again to make iron soft.
Take of clay, and lap it round about your iron with a weat cloth, then lay
it in a hot fire of coals, or in a fire of white turffes, so let it lie till
he cool by himself.

Another to soften iron.
Take the juice of an herb calde in latin Marubium, in English Horehound,
with the juice of gherwe, so calde in duche, which I take to be Henbane, and
also the juice of Radish, and mix them with Aquauite, then quench therein:
and when ye will have it hard again, then make it red hot as before, and
quench it in cold water.

To make iron as soft as lead.
Take and make black flintes into a fine powder, and grynde it well upon a
paynters stone, the^ put it in an iron pan, and make it red hot, then cast
it on a marble stone, till it be nigh cold, and then again make it red hot,
then let it cool, and grynde it so long till it cleave to the stone and
grynder like clay, then put that in a glass, and set it under the eaues of a
house, where the sun comes not nigh in the day, then the night after take
out the water, that ye shall find in the glass above thereon, then take that
powder, and grind it with the water, and put it in a stillatory, and let it
stille out the half, then reuerse the water again upon the poulder, and still
it again with a soft fire, then take and sees that water till the half be
wasted, so done: then take some iron blade that is new broke in two, and put
it together and hold it so a little while, then take of the water which was
sod to the half, and with a fether lay it first on the one side of the blade,
and when that water is cold, then lay it on the other side, and it will sowder
fast with that water.

And with this water ye may make steel as soft as lead, or butter, and to make
thereof with tools, as in wax what ye list. Also this water is a sovereign
thing to help the gout, if therewith it be anointed where the grief is, and
it will soon remedy it. With this water ye may make letters on iron or steel,
to write with a water thereon with your pen. Then after take of the vnsodden
water, and put thereto some saffron, and grynde it together, and then draw
thereon what ye will with other water, and so let it dry, which shall seem a
fair color like gold, thus ye may mix and grynde any color ye please with
your sodden water, and it will show in like fair.

To make Steel or iron soft.
Take the juice of Hemloc, stamp and strain it, then put unto it of neates
Oil, and so warm it, and being warm, make your iron or steel red hot, and
quench therein, and then heat your iron again three or four times, and so
quench therein, til ye see your iron become soft, and bow like lead, also ye
may take oil, and drop into it molten lead three or four times, and therein
quench your iron or steel also.

To make iron or steel so soft that ye may easily wreath it.
Take the gall of a Bull, or of an Ox, and mix it with Vernice and piss,
with the juice of Nettles, each of like quantity, then make your Steel or
iron red hot, and so quench therein, and ye shall see experience.

To make iron soft another way.
Take Saluiter, Vitrioll, in poulder made and well beaten together: then ye
shall distill them in a Lymbec of glass. Then take the said distylde water,
and your iron which ye would have soft, lay it therein a day and a night, then
take out your iron, and cover it in hot horse dongue, the space of fifteen
days, then work therewith and ye shall see experience. Also in making your
iron red hot, ye may quench it in Ox dongue, or Cow dongue mirt with honye,
and Oil olyue. Then heat it and so often, quench therein, and ye shall see
it will be so soft, that ye may make or work with it at your pleasure.

Another good way to soften iron.
Take honey and scymme it clean, and then take of fresh new gotes piss, a
quantity of roche Alum, as much of Burras, also of Oil olyue, and salt in
like portion, then mix them all well together, and make your iron red hot, and
so quench therein.

Again, when ye would soften any iron or steel, first hold it over the
flame of the fire til it be hot, the^ stryke it over with suet or other
grease, then hold it over ye fire, and let it dry in, do so twice or thrice
and it will be soft.

Also take of horn and scrape it upon leather, and put thereto Salarmoniac,
and piss thereon, then turn your iron thereon being hot, til it has consumed
your leather and stuff, and so it will be soft.

Likewise take of Salarmoniac, of vnsseet lyme, of each like, of Venis soap
more then both the other, stur all well together, and lay your steel therein,
and make it moist with Vinegar, so let it rest therein, four days, and work
therewith, ye may use final pieces so, but for greater, take cow dongue, whites
of eggs, and clay, temper it with vinegar, and lay your steel therein.

Another, take salt, wine stone, of each in like portion, temper it with clay
altogether, and so lay your steel therein, and so lay it in the fire, the space
of two hours, then take it forth, and let it cool of it self, and it will be
soft.

Again, take of soap and vnsleked lyme, of each in like portion, and of
Salarmoniac somewhat less, and work and make a paste thereof, then lay your
iron or steel therein, and so lap it round with clay, and lay it in the fire,
and heat it red hot, and then take it forth and let it cool of it self, as
the other aforesaid, and then ye may work thereof at your pleasure.

A poulder to soften metals.
Take iiii. parts of looking glass, of galls, of other glass, of salt, of
each one part, beat and myx them all well together, and iii. parts of yt same
powder, and i. part of your metal, and melt them together, and so use it as ye
please.

To make iron hard.
To make iron hard, ye shall take the distilde water of Varuen, and heat your
iron red hot, and quench it therein, do thus viii. or ix. times, and ye shall
see it very hard: also another, which is, take the green juice of Marubium,
called in English horehound, with the juice of radish, mixed with some Aquauite,
and your iron being red hot, quench therein or take the said horehound, and
dry or burn it, and then make poulder thereof, and mix it with much salt, and
harden therewith.

Another way to harden iron.
Take of Antimonia, Callamint and Coperose, beat each by himself to poulder,
and then strew thereof on your gloing iron, and so heat it again, and all to
smeare it with these poulders again, then temper it with this juice following.
Take the juice of Celondine, as much of ye roots as blades, till x pound
waighte, and stamp the^m, and sees the juice to six pound, and when ye
will season any metal, quench in the said juice of Celidon, and it shall be
hard.

To harden hammers and knyues.
To harden all manner of edge tools, ye shall take horse dongue, and then make
your Knives or other tools read hot, and so quench it therein, also to take
the filinges of iron or steel, and they will harden also, or take shoes and
burn them till they be black, and make a powder thereof, and take of that
poulder, with the like quantity of salt, then straw it under and above your
fyles, which shall be laid in a square iron, covered with a lid of iron, ye
shall straw your powder thick thereon, and then shut it. This ye shall make red
hot altogether in a hot fire, and quicklye quench it in cold water, and so
let it cool therein, and it will be good and hard.

To harden another way all kind of tools.
Take the juice of Pentasilon, that grows in heathes, which is a five leaued
grass, calde of some synke foil, with so much of the juice of Wormwood,
keep this in a vessel of glass. Then take Pieren (so calde in dutche) and
stamp it and strain it through a cloth, and al too strike over with this, your
iron being red hot, and as it dries in, strike it so again, and it will make
it hard.

Another good to harden iron or steel.
Take the juice of an herb, called Nigil Romana, in Latin it is calde
Melanthia, and make your iron red hot, and quench therein. Again, to make
iron so hard that it will cut all other tools, make it red hot, and quench
it in the juice of Mouse ear, which is called in Latin Pilocella.

To harden iron so hard as steel.
Take Snayles, and the first drawn water of a red die of the which water being
taken in the two first months of harvest, when it raynes, then still it, or
taken in the end of May, then heat your iron red hot, and quench it therein,
and it shall be as hard as steel.

Also take Fimus humanus, the dongue of men, still it in a Lymbec, so that no
water come thereunto it, and that it may be somewhat dry when ye stille it,
and take ye heed of his savor, the water ye shall distill twice in a new
glass, in Balneo mary, that is, one glass within another in a pot of water.

Ye may do the like, still men's blood of a man of xxx. years and of sanguine
complexion, warm and moist, and being of a merry nature, and pleasant, and
whole and sound of body, such a man to be let blood in the midst of his age,
and that has plenty of blood, distill of his in the middst of may or in May.
And thus by proof, and also the water of man's dong, if it be well and rightly
stild, heat your iron glowing hot, and quench in that water, so it will make
it as hard as steel. But if that water be not rightly stilde, the iron will not
harden therewith, but be as soft as it was before.

To make iron or steel hard.
Take the juice of Varuen, called in Latin var bena, and strain it into a
glass, and ye will quench any iron, take thereof, and put to of men's piss,
and the distilde water of worms, so mix altogether, and quench therein so
far as ye will have it hard, but take heed it be not too hard, therefore
take it forth soon after, and let it cool of it self, for when it is well
seasoned ye shall see golden spots on your iron.

Also the common hardening of iron or steel, is in cold water, and snow water,
so when the edge shall seem blue after his hardening, signifies a good sign,
and a right hardening.

To make steel hard, and to cut well.
Take an herb calde ox tongue, or langdebefe, sees it in water, both the
roots and leaves, then make your iron or steel red hot, and quench therein and
ye shall see experience. Also take the yelo flagge, called in Latin spatula
faetida, some do call it spurge wort, take with it Varuayne, of either like
quantity, then sees them together in fair water a good space, and then let
them stand and clear til it be cold, then heat your iron or steel red hot,
and quench therein.

Ye may make mustard, and put vinegar unto it, and quench your metals
therein. Also ye may take the juice of earth worms, with the juice of
housleeke, beat them together, then strain them, and quench therein, or take
of men's hear, and hear of beasts, and sees them in water til the water wax
reddish color, the^ let it cool, strayn it, and quench therein.

Also some do quench in the juice of radish, and the juice of smallage, mixed
together, and the fine poulder of rosin, put therein, and therein quench your
metals. Again: they take the juice of Veruin, and the juice of an herb
calde Dragons blood, and of scraped horn, with half so much salt, the juice
of earth worms, and the juice of radish, put al these together aforesaid, and
therein quench your metals, this way aforesaid are very good to make your
metals so hard as ye would desire, and make them whole, fair, and bright
withal.

To make iron hard without any crackes, clefts, or warpinges.
Take first suet or tallow of a beast, and melt it, then put it in some pot, or
some other vessel, whereas cold water is, and this molten suet must be a
finger thick upon the said water, and when ye will harden any thing, ye must
put it down softly through the suet, into the said water, and the quenching
first in the suet, and then in the Water, it does save it without crack,
clefte, or warping.

Another way to harden iron.
Take the juice of Varuin, and take of land worms in the field, after the
plough, or a nights in gardens, and put a pint of those worms into a leaded
pot, then put unto a good handful of salt, then stur them well, and so there
will come a water of them, and that water straynde unto the water or juice of
varuin, and when they be together, ye shall quench therein. This way is good
for all weapons.

A way to harden Pikeaxes, Fyles, or other tools.
Take the juice of Radish, the juice of Cadloc, the juice of great worms, a
quantity of gotes blood, mix altogether, and your weapons being ground,
quench therein, and likewise your iron, to make it hard. But to harden,
Mayles, Ares, Knyues, and such, is to quench in the juice of radish, also men
often times to make files hard, do quench in Linseede oil, or with scrapt
horn, or with gotes blood.

To harden tools to hew all other.
Ye shall gather of field snayles, or house snayles, with their shelles, then
stamp them a little, and distill them in a Lymbec, and in that distild water,
harden your steel or iron, but if ye will have it very hard, ye shall take
sand, and brymstone, and grind them together, and so strewe it on your iron
or steel being red hot, and then quench it in the said water, and they will
be very hard.

A way of hardening of Augars, Persars, and such like.
Ye shall take of men's urine old and cold, with the juice of varuen, and the
juice of worms, of each like quantity, then stur it well altogether, and so
quench your metals therein, so far as ye will have it hard, then let it cool
softly of it self, till ye see spots like gold rise thereon, then take it out
of the said water, and they will be well.

To set a color or Vernish on iron.
To vernish iron or steel, take the gall of a Calfe (and your iron or steel
being clean vernished,) take and stryke with a cloth your gall thereon, and
then let it dry in the sun, and it will show like a gold color.

To color tin, or copper, or to color the buckles of gyrdles, and such.
Take of Linseede oil so much as ye list, set it on the fire, and scymme it
clean, then put therein of Amber, and of Alopaticum, in like portion, then
beat and stir it well altogether, with the oil over the fire, till it wax
thick, then take it from the fire and cover it close, then set it in the earth
three days, and when ye list to occupy thereof, stryke your metal al over
therewith, and so let it dry as aforesaid in the Sun, and so ye shall have
a golden color.

How to gylde upon iron or steel.
Take a quantity of wine stone, with as much Salarmoniac, and like of
Verdegrece, and some salt, then seethe altogether in white wine, then stryke
all over your burnished iron or Steel, and let it burn in the sun as
before, and ye may gyld thereon with commen gold as the order is: and so it will
be fair and good.

To gyld iron with a water.
Take of water or running water, for iii. pound of water, take two pound of
roche alum, and an ounce of vitriol Romayne, and a penny weight of verdegreace,
of salge^ma three ounces, one ounce of Orpement, then boil al these together,
and when it begins to boil, put in some lies of tartre, and bay salt, of every
half an ounce, make it sees, and being so a pretty while, take it from the
fire, and the^ strike your iron therewith, then let it dry against the fire,
and being dry, burnish it, and it will be fair.

To gylde gn iron another way.
Take iiii. ounces of oil line, of Tartre or wine lies two ounces, and two
ounces of the yeolkes of hard roasted eggs stamped, of Alio Cicotrinum one
ounce, a quarter of a dragm of saffron, then boil all these in an earthen pot
a good space, and if the oil of linseed cover not al yt substance, put thereto
sufficient of water, then anoint your burnished iron therewith, and it will
show as the color of gold.

To cast a silver color on copper for buckles of harnes and such.
Take of wine stone, of alum, and of salt of each like quantity, then grynd
them altogether on a paynters stone, and put thereto a leaf or two of silver,
and so grynde it well with the rest of your stuff, so done, then put it in a
leaded pot of earth, and therein put your copper a little while, so done, then
scrape it with your wyar brush, then ye shall see if it be well, if not, let it
remain therein long, and so will it be fair.

To gylde iron as Goldsmiths do, with quick silver, and gold foil.
Take vitriol i. ounce, alum ii. ounce, salarmoniac i. ounce, then beat these
into poulder, and boil it in commen water, the^ take your burnished iron, and
all to weat it with the said water, so then lay your goldfoyle thereon, and dry
it against the fire, then burnish it as men do, and so it will look fair, but
if ye will gylt with gold mixed with quicku^luer, as goldsmiths do, ye shall put
in a dragme of verdigreace, with half ounce of Sublimatum, so boil them
together, and let your iron boil in the same water, but being so great ye
cannot, then rub it therewith, and heat it to receive better the color, with
quick silver and gold, and when ye have so heated your iron, ye may gyld with
the same gold so mixed and then fume it with a fire lamp, or brimstone, or wax.

A good way to burnish iron.
Take an ounce of Alopaticum citrinum, an ounce of Amber, then mix and beat
them together into a poulder, then set it over the fire of coals in a earthen
pot, and make it not to hot at the first, but when it is molten, put thereto a
quantity of seething oil, and stur it al well together with a stick, then let
it rest, take it from the fire and cool, and so keep it, and with this ye may
vernish at pleasure, as ye do other metals.

To sowder on cold iron.
Take two ounces of Salarmoniac, two ounces of salt, two ounce of wynestone
made in poulder, ii. ounce of clock spyce, so calde in dutche, vi. ounces of
looking glass, beat all these, and mingle them well together, then put them
in a linne^ cloth, and lay it round, a finger thick with good clay, which clay
must be well tempered. Then put them in a leaded pot of earth, and cover it with
another like pot of earth, then set it softly on glowing coals, so let it
softly warm, and by little and little increase your heat, till the said stuff
be al glowing hot and run, so done, then let it cool from the fire, then take
it forth and break it small, and so grynde it to a fine poulder, and when ye
will sowder any iron, ye must make it fast on a board, and see that the
joints be set close together as ye can, and first lay a paper under your
iron, and put of the said poulder a little betwixt the said joints, and also
upon all the joints, then wrappe it all round with claye, saving above, which
ye shall leave open to sowder at, then take of the poulder of Burras, and put
it in wine luke warm, or Aquauite, and so let it melt therein, so done, take
of the same wine, and with a feather strike on the joints above which ve
uncovered, then it will begin to sees, so when it leaves sething, it is then
whole sowdred and sound, then being so, take of your clay, and such roughness
as does remain on the joints, which ye shall not fyle of, but grynd it of,
and thus it shall be well.

Another way to sowder warm on iron or steel.
Take of gu^me water, and beat therewith some herbs, which herbs, it shall
not skill what, and make it thick as a past, and when ye will sowder any place,
strike thereon, or lay it on the ioynte, then rub it thereon with soap, and
then hold thereto a fire cole, and it will run. Then wash of the said
dough, from the sowdred place, and so it will be fair.

To sowder on Copper.
Take an ounce of Coperas, half an ounce of white Arsenic, which is calde
white Orpemente, then make your Coper to run, and divide your Arsenicke in
two parts, then cast one part into your copper, and stir it well all together,
and then cast in the other part of your Arsenic to your copper, and stir it
well altogether, so done, cast it on a stone, and spread it thin, and when it is
cold, beat it into a fine poulder, and use it likewise, as the other before
mentioned.

To sowder on Latin.
Ye must fyle your lattine clean al over, then put the joints close together,
and thereon scrape quicklye your burras, so ye shall see it well and sure
sowdred.

Another sowder to sowder on iron.
Ye shall set your joints of iron as close as ye may, the one unto the other,
then lay them so in glowing coals, and then take of Venis glass, made in fine
poulder, and your iron being red hot in the fire, cast the poulder of your
glass thereon, and so it shall sowder of himself, and be very strong
withal. And if ye clap it in clay as aforesaid ye shall not do amiss.

Another good way to gylde on iron or Steel.
Take one ounce of Orgall, or Orgyrs, in dutch so named, with a third part of
Vermillion, and a fourth part of Bolearmoniac, with as much of Aquauite, then
work and grind them altogether on a stone with lynseede oil, so done: put
thereunto some of the stone calde Lapis Calaminaris, the bigness of a hazel
nutte, and grynd therewith in the end, three or four drops of Vernish, so
take it off the stone, and strain it through a linen cloth into a stone pot,
for it must be as thick as honey, so keep it, and strike it whereon ye list,
and so let it dry, and then ye may lay your gold, or silver thereon, as
aforesaid.

A Varnish like gold, for tin, Silver, or buckles of copper.
Ye shall have small pots well leaded, then put therein vi. ounces of Linseede
oil, one ounce of Mastick, an ounce of Aloepatieum citrium then make them
altogether in fine poulder, and then put them into your said oil, and cover it
with such another pot, which pot above ye shall make a small hole in the
bottom thereof, wherein ye shall put through a small stick, with a broad end
beneath, to stur the other pot withal, and when the pots are set just
together, one to the other, ye shall close the^ al about with good clay, and
cover them al over also, in leaving but the hole open above, with the stick to
stir the other pot, so done, set them over the fire, in stirring it often, as it
does sees, like painters vernish and when ye will gylde therewith, poollishe
your metal first all over, and then strike the vernish all over thereon, and
then let it dry in the sun, if it lie too thin, strike it over again so
often as ye shall think good, and so let it dry betwixt your striking and then
ye shall see it will do well.

A way to grave on iron or steel, or other kind of weapons.
Take cole of a will or sallo, two parts of Vitriol or Copares, two parts of
Salarmoniac, work and beat all these together well with Vinegar, and make it
thick like broth, and when ye will eat or grave any thing withal, draw first
thereon with this thing following. Take Vermilion, and linseede oil mixed all
together, then dry it, and late it over with your past a finger thick or more,
and the warmer it is, the sooner it will grave and eat, but see too it, it
burn not, and when it is dryde well, do off the said poulder, and cleanse
the casting out, then take two parts of spanish green, calde verdigreace and
a part of salt, the^ beat them together in a mortar, and put unto it strong
vinegar, and do as it is abouesayde, or take Vitriol, Alum, salt, Lapis
calamynaris, viniger, and sallo cole, and make it as the other aforesaid, or
take two parts of vitriol, and a third part of salarmoniac, and grind them well
al together on a stone with urine or piss, then lay it on as it is
aforesaid, but ye must lay it cold on, and set it then four or five hours in
a seller, or low cool place, for it will be the better.

A water to eat or grave on iron or steel.
Take of verdigreace, of Mercury sublyme, of vitriol, and of Alum, of each a
like, then beat them small, and so put it into a glass, so let it stand half a
day, and styr it often, then strike it al over with wax, or yealow lead, mixed
with lynseed oil, or liisen smout, so called in dutche, and strike thereon with
ye water in ye glass, and let it stand half a day, but if ye write or lay thin
that the water may eat it the sooner, which ye shall cover all the iron or
steel thin with wax, and to draw thereon what ye list with a pensil in the wax,
unto ye ground, then strike your water al over, and so it shall eat on your
graven places, or lay thereon Mercury sublimatu^ in your graven places, and put
thereunto vinegar, and so let it rest half an hour after, and it will do well.

Another water to eat on iron or steeele more stronger.
Take an ounce of Verdigreace, half an ounce of Alum Plumosum, and half an
ounce of Salarmoniac, as much of wynestone, and half an ounce of Vitriol, and
as much of common salt, let al be small beaten, and so put together, and put
thereto of sharp viniger, and so let it stand an hour, and when to grave or
eat any thing therewith, it must be first graue^, and ye shall write with Liifen
smout, or yelow color, then let it dry, and then make your foresaid water
hot in a leaded pan, and let it stand over the fire, and hold your iron and
steel over the pan, and pour of that hot water thereon with a ladle, that
the rest may fall again into the foresaid pan, thus must ye do still a
good quarter of an hour, and this doing, the take ashes or vnssect lyme and
rub it, and look, of that ye would have eaten, if it be clean or not, if not,
draw it again with your yelo matter, and then pour on your said water, and so
ye shall have it well.

To lay gold upon iron or other metal.
Take of liquid varnish i. li. of Turpentine and oil of linseed, of each i.
ounce, then mix the^ well altogether, and so reserve it, on this ground ye may
gild upon any metal.

Another way to gild on iron.
Take of bolearmoniac, and white gu^me, of each one ounce, the^ put it into a
pot of earth well leaded, and let it sees therein softly with a fire of coals,
and put therein two ounces of linseed oil, and when it does rope like a thread,
it is then a sign it is enough sod, with which ye may use to gylde as is
before declared, by these and such practices in metals, ye may find out the
like of other hereafter.

A water to eat on metals.
Take an ounce of Saltpeter, an ounce of coperose, beat them together, and put
them into a double glass, and distill a water thereof, then take yelow or red
wax, and spread it thin as paper on what mettell ye will, or weapon, then
draw thereon to the ground with a pensil of steel or other, then all to strike
it over the drawn places with the said water distyld, so let it remain
xxiiii. hours, which water will eat on your iron or steel sufficiently. The
like way ye may do with other sort of metals.

Finis.
The table of all the principal things in this Book.
A.
AZure color to work on. 39 Azure another to work with. 39
B.
Black dye after the country manner. 58 Black silk to dye fair. 24 Black
silk or Velvet to dye. 53 Black water to dye withal. 37 Black spanish
leather to dye. 48 Black silk to dye. 53 Black thread to dye. 54 Blue color
to make. 39 Blue linen to dye. 33 Branne water to make, 22 Brazil to dye a
red. 30 Brazill color to work on cloth. 35 Buckeram to dye blue. 35 Buccking
of linen clothes to scour well. 9
C.
Carnation dye to make. 26 Cloth staynde to help. 1 Crampmede to make red. 36
Crane color Fustian to dye. 11 Crimosine color to make. 57 Currying of raw
Gotes skins. 55 Coloring of Tin, Copper, and such. 71
D.
Dying a fair yealow. 32 Dying linen red. 21 Dying with facet woad or willow
woad. 27 Dying after the country sort. 58
F.
Fels how to dye read. 43 Fels how to dress with gold. 42 Fels to color
green. 44 Fels how to curry and color raw. 55 Fels how to dye blue. 55 Fels
how to dye with Madder. 56 Fels how to dye a fair green. 56 Fustian to dye in
a graye. 57 Fels how to dye green with sap berries. 52
G.
Gowns spotty to help. 5 Gold kept from stayning. 9 Gylding on Leather. 50
Gyld on iron or steel. 71 Gylding another way Gylding on iron with
quicksiluer. 72 Gilding another way on iron or steeele. 75 Grauing on iron,
steel, or other weapons. 76 Grauing with a water on iron or steel. 77 Gilding
another way on iron. 78 Gold laying on iron or steel. 78 Graye Florey how to
make. 37 Grease to take out of Veluets or silks. 17 Gray thread how to dye. 54
Green to dye fair. 24 Green another color to make. 25 Green water how to
make. 31 Green a good color to make. 46 Green another to make. Green with
sap berries to make. 57
H.
Hard iron to make. 65 Hardening of iron another way. Hammers and Knives and
other tools to harden. 66 Hardening of all tools of iron. 66 Hardening of
steel or iron. Hardening of iron as hard as steel. 67 Hardening of iron another
way. Hardening of steel to cut well. 68 Hardening of iron without crack or
warpe. 69 Hardening another good way. Hardening of axes, files, and other edge
tools 69 Hardening of tools to hew all other. 70 Hardening of awgars, persars,
and such. 70
I.
Iron moules to take forth of linen. 6 Iron moules out of Linen another way.
7 Iron or steel to soften. 59 Iron another way to soften. 59 Iron to soften
with a water. 59 Iron to soften another way. 60 Iron or steel to soften. 60
Another way to soften iron. 60 Another way for the same. 61 Another softning of
iron. 61 Iron, steel, or Crystal to soften. 61 Another way to soften iron.
61 Another way for the same. 62 Iron to make soft as lead. 62 Iron or steel
to soften. 62 To soften Iron, easily to cut it. 63 Iron to soften another way.
63 Another good way to soften iron. 64 Iron how to vernish and color. 64
K.
Keeping of Linen long and good. 1^
L.
Leather how to gyld on. 43 Leather how to dye red. 42 Leather to dye red
another. 42 Leather how to color green. 44 Lether how to color a blue. 44
Leather another fair blue. 55 Leather to dress after the manner of germany 46
Leather felles all white to make. 47 Lie to make to dye a blue. 50 Lie to make
to take out spots. 4 Linen to dye in a fair red. 20 Linen to preserve with a
sweet water. 12 Linen how to dye with brasill. Another fair dye with
brasill. 31 Linneu to dye with brasill another way. 34
M.
Mougths to keep from clothes. 11 Moles of iron to take forth of linen. 6
O.
Oil spots to take out of clothes. 6 Oil spots another way to take out of
cloths
P.
Parfumes to make for clothes. 4 Parchment spotty to help. 7 Paper spotty to
cleanse. 8 Powder to make to soften metals. 65 Purple silk to dye. 24 Purple
sad color to dye. 55
Q.
Quoyes of silk to color red. 23
R.
Red silk how to dye. 37 Red water how to make. 38 Red to dye with Brasill. 38
Red light dye for skins. 40 Red color fair to make. 44 Another fine red to
make. 44 Red leather how to color. 45 Red to dye a fair color. 47 Red thread
to dye. 20
S.
Scarlet greazie to help. 1 Scarlet with spots to help. 6 Sanguine dye fair
to make. 39 Shirts to wash for stayning. 13 Silk leesing color to help. 52
Silk how to dye a fair black. 53 Silk how to dye in a sanguine. 23 Silk
staynde how to help. 1 Soap to take forth grease spots. 2 Soap against spotty
woollen to help. 15 Soap another for the same. 15 Soap to take out oil and
grease. 5 Soap water to help all spots. 6 Spots or staynes in clothes to
help. 16 Spots in white silk or other color to help. 16 Spots in colored
clothes or others. 2 Spots of grease to take forth. 3 Spots to take out of
clothes. 8 Spots in woollen to take forth. 8 Sponging of woollen cloth fair.
10 Spots in woollen a ready help. 12 Silver color on copper for buckles. 72
Sowdering cold on iron. 73 Sowdering iron another way, 75 Sowdering on warm
iron or steel. 74 sowdering on copper. 74 Soudering on Latin. 74 Staynes in
linen to remedy. 8 Staynes on silk or woollen to help. 12 Stained clothes with
wine or viniger to help. 14
T.
To color Leather black after the order of Germany. 46
V.
Vernish like gold, for silver, tin, or Copper. 75 Vernish on iron to make.
73 Velvet being spotty to help. 6 Velvet to dye in a black. 36 Velvet how to
dye black or silk. 52
W.
Water to work on yelowe or other colors. 38 Water to eat on iron or steel.
77 Water another to eat on metals. 77 War to take from clothes. 14 Woollen to
dye in a sanguine. 28 Woollen cloth to dye in colors. 29 Woollen green yearne
to dye. 29
Y.
Yealow to dye fair. 32 Yealow to dye it fair. 19 Yealow a golden color to
dye. 51 Yealow fels how to color. 54 Yealow dye to dye with woad. 19 Yealow to
work on with red water. 38
FINIS.

