The Married Man's Lesson: OR, Adisswasion from Jealousy.
To the tune of, All you that will wore a wench.


YOu men who are married come hearken to me,
I Will teach you a Lesson if wise you will be,
Then take my advice that is intended for good,
and so it is if it be but well understood:
'T will cause you to shun all contention and spleen,
that daily betwixt man and woman are seen,
I speak against jealousy that monster fierce.
and wish I could conquer the Fiend with my verse,
O Be not thou jealous I prithee dear Lad,
for jelousie makes many good women bad.
If thou have a good wife then I she advise
to cherish her well for she is a rare prize,
If she be indifferent between good and bad,
good means to reform her may easily be had:
If she vee so evil that there is few worse,
imagine thy sins have deserved that curse,
Then bear with true patience thy cross as it is fit,
and thou to a blessing thereby may turn it.
But be not, etc.
Between these 3. winds the good, bad, and the mean,
I ground the whole argument of this my Theme,
For in them a man's humane bliss, or his woe,
does chiefly consist as experience does show:
Thus is it not counsel that is worthy regard,
which teaches to soften a thing that is hard,
And what I intend is in every man's will,
to turn to a virtue what seems most ill.
Then be, etc.
A wife that is good being beautiful, may
perhapps raise suspicion that she will go astray,
O note the fond humors that most men possess,
they are neither content with the more nor the less,
For if she be homely, then her he will slight,
to such neither fair, nor foul, can yield delight,
If once heel be jealous the other he scorns,
there is no greater plagues then imagined horns.
Then be not, etc.
A wife that is indifferent between good and ill,
is she that in huswifery shows her good will,
Yet sometimes her voice she too much elevates,
is that the occasion for which her he hates:
A sovereign remedy for this disease,
is to hold thy tongue let her say what she please:
Judge, is not this better then to fight and scratch,
for silence will soonest a Shrew over match.
However I pray thee shun jealousy Lad,
for jealousy makes many good women bad.
A wife that is all bad if thy luck be to have,
seek not to reclaim her by making her slave,
If she be as bad as ever frod one ground,
not fighting nor jealousy will heal that wound:
For mark when a River is stopped in its course,
it oreflowes the banks then the danger is worse.
Thy own good example and patience with all,
may her from her vices much rather recall.
Then be not, etc.
The second part.
To the same tune.


A Wife that is virtuous in every respect,
who does her vowed duty at no time neglect,
Shaes not free from censure, for fools their bolts shoot
as often at the head as they do at the foot:
A kiss, or a smile, or a Jest, or a dance,
familior discourse or an amarous glance,
All these as her witness envy does bring,
the credit of innocent women to sting.
But be not thou jealous I pray thee dear Lad,
for jealousy makes many good women bad.
A wife that is indifferent if curbed over much,
will grow worse and worse for their nature is such,
The more thou with rigor do seek her to mend,
the more they will persist and grow desperate in the end,
And thus from indifferency wanting good means,
Some well meaning women turn impudie^t queans,
if goodness by beating thou seek'st to infuse,
For breaking her flesh thou all goodness do bruise.
Then be not, etc.
A wife at the worst (as I told you before)
a drunkard, a swearer, a scold, thief, or whore,
By gentle persuasions, reclaimed may be,
my self by experience, but lately did see:
A man that with jealousy plagued had been,
when he the last labor and trouble had seen,
He cast off his care, and referd all to's wife,
who soon left her vices and led a new life.
Then be not, etc.
I also have known a wife handsome and neat,
of whom her fond husband did take a conceate,
That other men loved her because she was fair,
though on the contrary, to him she did swear:
He watched her, he eyed her, he noted her ways,
and once he in's drink, he a scandal would raise,
This usage irregular set her on fire,
and so from thence foreward she proud him no liar,
Then be not, etc.
Consider each circumstance with good regard,
how often cause less jelousie wins due reward,
And likewise I wish thee to bear in thy breast,
that patience and quietness still is the best.
For if she benought she will grow worse with restraint
but patience may make of a harlot, a Saint,
If fair means prevail not, thou wilt never do it by foul
for meekness (if any thing) must win a soul
Then be not, etc.
Now lastly to both men and women I speak,
from this foolish fancy their humors to break,
Be loving and tractable each unto other,
and what is amiss let affection still smother:
So shall man and wife in a simpathy sweet,
at boorde, and at bed (as they ought to do) meet,
All fighting and scratching, and scolding shall cease,
where jelousies harbord there can be no peace.
Then be not thou jaelous I pray thee dear Lad,
for jealousy makes many good women bad.
FINIS.
M. P.

Printed at LONDON for John Wright, the younger, dwelling at the Sign of the
Sun, at the lower end of Snow-hill, near unto Holborne Conduit.


