A TREATISE DECLARING, AND confirming against all objections the just title and
right of the most excellent and worthy Prince, JAMES the sixth, King of
Scotland, to the succession of the croun of England.

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED A DISCOVRSE Showing how necessary it is for the Realm of
England, that he be in due time acknowledged and admitted to the succession of
the Kingdom.

The Preface.
SEEING the great diversity of opinions, which is found in men of all Estates
throughout this Realm, concerning the Royal succession, and fore-seing the
manifest danger of civil and foreign wars which thence are like to ensue,
to the notable hurt and damage, if not to the utter ruin of this noble
Kingdom; except the subjects thereof be in due time rightly informed to whom
by right the croun falls, next after her Majesty: I thought it my duty,
being a member of one body with them truly to inform so many of them, as I
might, concerning this matter, by publishing this treatise; wherein the right
of the next lawful successor is declared, and confirmed against all
objections. And for that I know it to be the opinion of sundry men, that in
this present controversy it is not only to be considered, to whom by right
the croune appertains; but also whether his admission may be auailable or
hurtful to the common wealth: I thought good to add to the said declaration,
and defense of his right, a discourse showing how necessary and expedient it
is for the common wealth, that he be in due time acknowledged and admitted to
the succession of this Kingdom. Both which parts I have briefly handled,
thinking it enough to prove and confirm them with a competent number of
weighty and forceable arguments, the rather for that the former part has been
more at length declared and confirmed by others in treatises already
published: and the other point is of it self so clear and manifest, as fewer
reasons than I allege may be sufficient for the certain proof and euidencie
thereof. I hope, that you (my dear countrie-men) for whose instruction and
behoof I have published this little pamphlet, will thankfully accept this my
good meaning and honest endeavor, making your profit thereof by embtacing and
furthering so just and honorable a cause, as is here recommended unto you,
and procuring thereby (together with your own safety and advantage) the
peace, honor, and prosperity of this your native country. With which happy
foresight beseeching God to indue you, I heartily bid you farewell.

IRENICVS PHILODIKAIOS.

The right of the King of Scotland by descent of kindred is declared.
BEing to declare who by all right is next to our sovereign Lady, Queen
Elizabeth, in the succession of the kingdom, I thought it needeles to draw the
descent of such, as with any reason or probability may after her Majesty's
decease lay claim to the croun, further of, than from the union of the houses
of Lancaster, and York, in the persons of the most renowned King Henry the
seventh, and of Elizabeth, eldest daughter to King Edward the fourth, right
and lawful heirs of both the Royal families.

For, as for the Earl of Huntington, and others descended from George Duke of
Clarence, youngest brother to King Edward the fourth, they may not justly be
grieved, if they be placed in rank after such as are lawfully descended from
the heir of their own house of York, joined in marriage to the head of the
family of Lancaster.

And as for the king of Spain, and his sister the Infanta, for whom far
sought titles have been forged by some fugitive Persons of our own nation,
desiring for the alteration of Religion, to make this flourishing common wealth
a pray to the enemies thereof; I am persuaded there is none, that has the heart
of a true subject, or natural Englishman, how soever he be affected in
Religion, that will not utterly abhor and detest the defending, or
approouing of any such titles, tending to the great dishonor and utter
subversion of this Realm, and to the notable disgrace of so many worthy
Princes, as since the time of King Henry the sixth hitherto therein have
reigned. But desisting from the mention of titles no les false, than odious, I
come to the orderly descent of Henry the seuenths progeny.

King Henry, the seventh of that name, had issue by Queen Elizabeth, besides
Prince Arthur, and an other, who deceased without succession, Prince Henry,
Lady Margaret, and Lady Marie.

King Henry the eight, who succeeded to his father, had issue King Edward,
Queen Marie, and Queen Elizabeth now reigning.

Lady Margaret, eldest daughter to King Henry the seventh, was married to
James the fourth, King of Scotland, who begat on her James the fifth, father to
Marie Queen of Scotland, and Douagier of France: whose only son and heir is
King James the sixth, who at this present reigns, and has already issue
Prince Henry, Lady Elizabeth, and another daughter. The said Queen Margaret,
after the death of King James the fourth, was married to Archibald Earl of
Angus, and by him had a daughter called the Lady Margaret Dowglasse, which was
wife to Matthew Stewart Earl of Lenox: by whom she had two sons, Henry
Lord Darlie, and Charles: whereof Henry being the elder was joined in marriage
to Marie Queen of Scotland, and of her begat the king that now is: And Charles,
the younger brother, married Elizabeth, the daughter of Sir William Candish; by
whom he had one only daughter yet living, named the Lady Arbella.

Marie, the younger daughter of King Henry the seventh, after the decease of
her first husband, Jews the twelth, King of France, by whom she had no
issue, was married to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, by whom she had two
daughters, Lady Frances, and Lady Eleonor.

The Lady Frances was married to Henry Gray, Marquis of Dorcester, afterward
Duke of Suffolk: who begat of her three daughters, Jane, Katherine, and Marie.

The eldest of them, Lady Jane, was married to Gilford Duldey, the son of
John Duke of Northumberland, of whom she had no issue, being sone after her
marriage put to death by Queen Marie, for taking on her the croun. Lady
Catherine first espoused to Henry Harbert, eldest son of William Earl of
Pembroke, this contract being dissolved, had by the Earl of Hartford, after a
privy contract made betwixt them, as they both alleged, the Lord Beauchamp,
and his brother, who are yet living. Lady Marie the youngest, who was
betrouthed to Arthur Lord Gray of Wilton, died without issue.

Lady Eleonor, the second daughter of Lady Marie Duchess of Suffolk, was
married to Henry Clifford, Earl of Cumberland: who had by her a daughter named
Margaret, that was married to Henry Stanley, Earl of Darbie: by whom she had
issue Fernande, William, and Frances.

This is the orderly succession of such as are descended from the union of
both the Royal families of York, and Lancaster: whereby it is evident, that
the issue of King Henry the eight failing in our sovereign Lady, Queen
Elizabeth, the right of the croune by descent of blood falls upon JAMES the
sixth, King of Scotland, by lineall succession heir to the Lady Margaret,
eldest daughter of King Henry the seventh, as well of his fathers side, as of
his mothers. The truth whereof being so manifest, as it can not be denied, some
favorers of the house of Suffolk, and others allege certain impediments to
debar him from his right. If I would follow the example of others, and
especially of such as maintain the false titles of the King of Spain, and
his sister, I might allege impediments of no little importance against the
titlers of the foresaid house of Suffolk. But the King of Scotlands right
needs no furtherance by stayning of any others birth or honor, by reason that
the objections which are made against him being disprooued, as easily they
may be, his right by descent of blood can not with any reason or probability
be brought in question.

The impediments objected against him are in number three; which (God willing)
I will sufficiently disprooue, eschewing, so far as I may, all tediousnes. The
first is foreign birth: the second a pretended testament of King Henry the
eight: the third an act of association, alleged to have been made in
Parliament the 27. year of her Majesty's reign.

THE OBJECTION OF FOREIGN birth is clearlie avoided.
THE first by such as object the same is grounded upon an alleged maxim or
general assertion of the common law: which is, that who soever is borne out of
England, and of father and mother not being under the obedience of the King of
England, can not be capable of any inheritance in England.

Heereunto I answer that this maxim is untrue in that general sense: as it
appears expreslie by that which is set down by law in the seventh and ninth
years of King Edward the fowrth, and in the eleventh and fourteenth of King
Henry the fowrth: That a stranger may purchase land in England, as also that
he may inherit by his wife, if he marie an inheretrix.

But the true maxim or rule against the inheritance of strangers is grounded
only upon a statute, made in the 25. year of King Edward the third, and is
to be restrained unto proper inheritances only: to wit, that no person borne
out of the allegiance of the King of England, whose father and mother were not
of the same allegiance at the time of his birth, shall be able to have, or
demand any heritage within the same allegiance, as heir to any person.

Which rule for sundry reasons can not be prejudicial to the King of
Scotlands right.

First, for that it is a common and general rule of the Law of England, that
no rule or maxim of the law, be it never so general, can touch or be
understood of matters concerning the croun; except express mention be made
thereof: and that the croun is privileged in many points above private
heritages.

The second reason is, for that the demand and title of a croun can not be
comprehended under the words of the foresaid statute against aliens; and that
for two respects. First, for that the croun can not properly be called an
inheritance of allegiance, or within allegiance (as the words of the said
statute do stand) for that it is not holden of any superior, nor with
allegiance, but immediately of God: and secondly for that the statute means
plainly of inheritance by descent; for otherwise, as is said, an alien may
hold by purchase. But the croun is a thing incorporate, and descends not
according to the course of other private inheritances, but rather goes by
succession, as other incorporations do. In sign whereof no King can by law
avoid his letters patents by reason of his none-age, as other common heirs
under age do. But he is ever presumed to be of full age in respect of his
croun. And as a Parson, Deane, or other head incorporate, though he be an
alien, might inherit or demand lands in England for his incorporation,
notwithstanding the former statute: so much more the inheritour to the croun,
though he be borne out of the dominion of England, may (notwithstanding the
said statute) succeed justly to the kingdom.

The third reason is, that in the statute itself there is express exception of
Infants du Roy: by which words (according to the use of them in the french
language wherein this statute is written, as also of the word Liberi in latin)
is understood not only the Kings issue of the first degree, but also his
offspring in other degrees following. For otherwise this exception would be to
no purpose; considering that according to the words of the statute, Subjects
children in the first degree, borne out of the Kings allegiance, may have or
demand heritages as heirs to their parents, or others.

Also, the Kings children in the first degree needed no such exception, because
the words of the statute debarring those that should be borne of parents not
being of the Kings allegiance, could no wise be prejudicial to them, but
rather to those of the Kings offspring, who in degrees farther removed might
be borne in foreign dominions: as sundry of king Edward the thirds offspring
were, coming of his sonns married in diverse countries: for whose behoof
especially it seems that this exception was added by him to the former
statute.

And if this exception of infants du Roy be understood only in respect of
private heritages, that may fall to them, (in which only sense it seems to
have relation to the words of the statute, making mention of heritages within
the kings allegiance) how much more is the privilege contained therein due to
the inheritour of the croun, who by all right and equity may claim a greater
praerogatiue in his succession to the kingdom, than any other of the kings
offspring in his private inheritance?

The fourth reason is, that sundry borne out of the Realm, and of parents
that were not of the allegiance of England, when they were born, as namely king
Steven, and king Henry the second, were admitted to the croune, without
contradiction in respect of their foreign birth. Which argues that by the
common course of our old common laws there was no such stop against aliens,
and that if the statute made in King Edward the thirds days, would have
derogated or abridged this ancient liberty, it would have made special
mention thereof, which it does not.

The fifth reason is the judgment of King Henry the seventh, and of his
counsel concerning this matter. POLID. VERG. hist lib. 26.
For, they being in consultation together about the marriage of Margaret, the
kings eldest daughter, with James the fowrth at that time King of Scotland,
some of them moved a doubt, to wit, what should ensue, if by chance the Kings
issue male should fail, and the succession descend to the said Margaret, as it
now does. Whereunto that most wise and prudent Prince made answer; That if so
it chanced, England, being the cheef and principal part of the Island, should
thereby receive no damage, but rather great advantage; for that it would draw
to it self the kingdom of Scotland, as before it had done Normandy, and
Aquitaine, with other provinces: the which answer gave full satisfaction and
contentment to the counsel.

The same answer also, both in respect of the truth thereof, and of the person
that made it, may justly persuade us, that the admission of the King of
Scotland to the croun is no wise unlawful, or prejudicial to the public
weal.

But besides all these reasons showing manifestly, that neither by any maxim
of the common Law, nor by the words of the alleged statute, nor yet by the
practice and custom of our Realm, an alien may be repelled from succession
to the kingdom, when by right of blood it falls to him; there are other two
reasons, which in particular make for the King of Scotland.

The one reason is, that Scottishmen are in our Chronicles accounted as
subjectes by way of homage, howsoever they deny it: In respect whereof it
seems that the ancient records, making mention of service to be done within
this Island, contain the french words, Dens les quatre mers, or the latin,
Infra quatuor maria, within the four seas: in which bounds Scotland being
within the North sea is comprised.

The other reason is, that the former statute of king Edward the third is
entitled, Of them that are borne beyond the seas: and that in the body of the
same statute the doubt is moved of children borne out of the allegiance of
England beyond the seas: whereby can not be understood Scotland, it being a
part of the same Island.

By all which reasons the objection of foreign birth is clearlie and
sufficiently avoided. Wherefore I go on forward to the confutation of the
pretended Testament of king Henry the eight.

THE OBJECTION OF KING Henry's pretended testament is confuted.
IN the 28, and 35. years of King Henry's reign, upon some doubt, which then
he himself seemed to have about the order of succession in his own children,
and for taking away all occasion of controversy which after his death might
arise thereupon, the Parliament gave authority to the king to debate and
determine that matter himself, wirh his learned counsel, who best knew the
laws of the Realm, and titles that any might have to the croun: and what
succession he should declare as right and lawful, under his letters patents
sealed, or by his last will and testament lawfully made and signed with his
own hand, that the same should be received for good and lawful. Upon pretense
whereof soon after the kings death there was showed a will with the kings
stamp at the same, and the names of diverse witnesses, wherein the succession of
the croun, after his own children, was assigned to Lady Frances, and Lady
Eleonors successors, who were neeces to the King by his youngest sister. Which
assignation being, as it were a mere gift made to Frances, and Eleonor in
prejudice of his eldest sisters right, was found to be against all law,
reason, and nature; and therefore not thought to proceed from so wise a Prince
as king Henry was; but rather forged, and the kings stamp set to by others,
either when he was past understanding, or after his death. And hereof there
want not most evident reasons, and proofs:

First it is not credible that King Henry would against law and justice
disherite the line of his eldest sister, and so give occasion of civil and
foreign wars, especially seeing in such a case of so apparent wrong in so great
a matter, he might well foresee, that the authority of a Parliament would
take little effect against the true and lawful inheritour, as appeared not
long before in Henry the sixth, Edward the fourth, and Richard the third. In
whose reigns diverse and contrary Parliaments made against the next
inheritour held no longer with any of them, than while he was able to make his
own part good.

Secondly, there be many incongruities and indignities in the said pretended
will, to proceed from such a Prince, as King Henry was. For, what can be more
ridiculous, than to give the croune to Frances and Eleonors heirs, and not to
themselves? And yet by this Testament the son of Abraham Stokes (who married
the same Frances after the death of her first husband the Marquis of Dorset,
being but her own servant) should have claimed before her, if he had had any
by her. Of like absurdity is it, that in the same Will the King is said to
bind his own daughters to marie by direction of his counsel, or otherwise to
loose the benefit of succession: whereas the daughters of his neeces Frances,
and Eleonor, were not bound thereby to any such conditioun.

Thirdly, there be diverse arguments alleged in law, why this Will is not
authentical. First, for that it is not aggreable to the mind and meaning of
the Parliament, which intended only to give authority for declaration of the
true title, and not for donation or intricating thereof. Also, for that there
is no lawful or authentical copy extant of the same, but only a bare
inrolment in the Chancerie; which is not sufficient in so weighty an affair:
no witness of the privy counsel, or of the nobility to the same, which
could not have wanted in so great a cause (for the best of the witnesses
therein named was Sir John Gates, whose miserable death is well known:) No
public notarie, nor probation of the will before any Bishop, or any lawful
court appointed for that purpose: no examination of the witnesses, or other
things ordinarily done for lawful confirming of such a matter. But of all
other things this is of most importance, that the King never set his own hand
to the foresaid Will: but his stamp was set thereto by others, either after his
death, or when he was past remembrance: which is confirmed by witnesses far
more worthy credit, in respect of their degree and reputation, than Sir John
Gates, and the others whose names were subscribed. For first the Lord Paget in
the beginning of Queen Mary's days, being of her privy counsel, discovered
the same of his own accord, and upon mere motion of conscience, confessing
before the whole counsel, and after before the whole Parliament, how that
himself was privy thereunto, and partly also culpable, being drawn thereto
through the instigation and forcible authority of others. Also Sir Edward
Montague, Lord chief justice, that had been present and privy to the same
doings, and one William Clerk, that put the stamp to the paper, confessed the
whole premises to be true. Upon which discovery Queen Marie, and her counsel
caused presently the said inrolment lying in the Chancerie to be cancelled,
defaced, and abolished.

And since that time in her Majesty's days that now lives, about the 11. or
12. year of her reign, by occasion of a certain book spread abroad at the same
time very secretly, for advancing of the house of Suffolk by pretense of
this Testament, the Duke of Norfolk, the Marquis of Winchester (which then was
Treasurer) the Earls of Arundel, and Pembroke, together with his son, and my
Lord of Lecester, with others met together upon that matter. And after long
conference about the foresaid pretended Will, and many proofs laid down why
it could not be true; the old Earl of Pembrok protesting, that he was with
the King in his chamber from the first day of his sickness to the last hour,
and that thereby he could assure them this pretended will to be false, and
counterfeit; at length by some of them it was moved, that from that place they
should go with the rest of the Nobility, and proclaim the Scottish Queen
heir apparent in Cheapside.

And albeit, for some causes to themselves best known, they proceeded not in
publishing of the same: yet my Lord of Pembrok now living can bear witness,
that this much is true, and that his father the old Earl told him openly at
that time before the noble men, that he had brought him to that assembly, to
instruct him in the truth, and charged him to witness the same, and to defend
it also with his sword, if need required, after his death. The remembrance and
due regard of which admonition as yet, no doubt, remains in the mind of that
noble man.

All these reasons and proofs being more than sufficient to disprove this
pretended Testament, I proceed forward to the confutation of the third and last
objection.

THE ALLEGED ACT OF ASSOciation is disprooued; and upon occasion offered
thereby is declared the great force and prerogative of right by inheritance to
the succession of a Kingdom.
THE third objection, which is an alleged act of association, is urged by a
fugitive and seditious traitor, disguising himself under the name of Dolman,
in a conference which he has published touching the Royal succession: wherein
going about to disprooue the right and titles of all such as are extract of the
blood Royal, since King Henry the sixth, and to currie favor with the King of
Spain, and the Infanta, by forging them titles and interest to the croun of
England, he shows himself most malicious against the King of Scotland above
all others, moving doubts and surmises, though full of notorious vanity and
falsehood, to bring his right in question, and to disgrace his person: for that
he is assured nothing will so much overthwart the desire, and purpose, that
he, and his like have of betraying their native country to the enemies
thereof; as the acknowledging and accepting of the King of Scotland for right
and lawful inheritour to the croun.

But the only objection which he avouches (how shameless soever he be) to be
such, as can not be answered, is an act of association, alleged by him to
have been made in Parliament the 27. year of her Majesty's reign, containing
these words: That whosoever shall be convinced to conspire, attempt, or procure
the death of the Queen, or to be privy, or accessarie to the same, shall loose
all right, claim, or actio^ that the same parties, or their heirs have, or
may have to the croun of England. Whereunto he adds, that upon this statute
the late Queen of Scotland being condemned, and executed by authority of the
said Parliament, it seems evident that this King, who pretends al his
right to the croun of England by his said mother, can have none at all.

This is the sum of Dolmans objection: which is clearlie disprooued by the
manifest untruth of that which he alleges. For neither any such act of
Parliament has ever been made, neither also is it true that the king has no
other right to the croun of England, than by his mother: for that he may
likewise justly claim the same by his father, as appears manifestly by the
descent of kindred set down in the beginning of this treatise.

The ground, whereon Dolman has devised his forged act of Parliament, was an
act or Instrument of association made by some Lords of the counsel not long
before the Scottish Queens arraignement: wherein were contained certain promises
to be made for the preservation of the Queens Majesty's person, by such, as
should subscribe thereunto. Among which promises one is, That they shall never
desist from all manner of forcible pursuit, to the uttermost extermination of
all such persons, or their abettors, that shall by any act, counsel, or
consent do any thing, that shall tend to the harm of her Majesty's Royal
person. And if any such wicked attempt shall be taken in hand, or procured,
whereby any that have, may, or shall pretend title to come to the croune by
the untimely death of her Majesty, so wickedlie procured, may be advanced:
they bind themselves jointly, and severally never to accept, allow, or favor
any such pretended successor, by whom, or for whom, any such detestable act
shall be committed, or attempted: or any that may any way claim by, or from
such a person, or pretended successor.

This act of association being sent throughout the Realm to be with oath
ratified and subscribed, was by sundry men of honorable degree, and good
conscience thought so hard and wrongful, by reason of the clause concerning
such as might claim by, or from any person culpable of any attempt against
her Majesty's person, as they refused their oaths and subscription thereunto.

Whereupon the next Parliament following an act was made, limiting and
restraining this penalty and exclusion only to those pretenders, By whom, or
by whose means, assent, or priuitie any inuasio^, or rebellion shall be had,
or made into, or within any of her Majesty's Realms or dominions, or any act
attempted tending to the hurt of her Majesty's Royal person, the same being
first denounced by such a number of persons, of such estate, and in such
manner, as is expressed in the said act. Whereunto is also added, That if any
such detestable act should be executed against her Majesty's person, whereby
her life should be taken away, that then every such person, by, or for whom
any such act should be executed, and their issues being in any wise
assenting, or privy to the same, should by virtue of this act be excluded, and
dishabled for ever to have, or claim, or to pretend to have, or claim the
croun of this Realm, or any other her Majesty's Dominions.

This act of Parliament, whereby the former act of counsel is limited and
restrained, no wise debarreth the King of Scotland from the croun (as
evidently appears by that part thereof, which I have rehearsed, and by the
rest of the same act published among the other acts of that Parliament) seeing
he is free, as the world knows, from all suspicion of any wicked attempt
against her Majesty's person, and from al consent, or priuitie thereunto.

And truly it is not credible that her Majesty, or the Parliament would go
about to debar him by any such act, as is alleged by Dolman: seeing they may
with reason persuade themselves, that no such act would stay him from claiming,
and pursuing his right, nor such as are in England well affected toward him,
(whereof there wants not a great number of the most honorable and best
sort) from assisting and furthering him to the Kingdom.

The example heerof has been seen not many ages past in some of our own
Kings, as namely in Edward the fowrth, and Henry the seventh. For albeit
Richard Duke of York, HOLING. an. 38. HEN, 6.
and Edward his son were attainted by act of Parliament, and both they, and
their posterity to the ninth degree thereby excluded from succeeding to any
heritage: yet Edward the fowrth, esteeming himself (as also he was accounted by
a great part of the realm,) next to the crown by right of succession, wanted
neither courage, nor assistance to pursue, and win the same.

HOLING. an. 2. RICH. 3.
Also, though Henry the seventh was attainted by Parliament in King Richards
days: yet at such time as remaining banished in France, he had made a solemn
oath and promise to espouse Lady Elizabeth, daughter and heir to King Edward
the fowrth, offered him in marriage by her Mother the Queen (having then with
his own claim to the croune joined also the right of the house of York) he
was in a manner at the same time saluted and honored as King by the Earl of
Oxford, and other noblemen, who were there present: and coming sone after
into England wanted not assistance to deprive the usurper, king Richard, both
of life, and kingdom.

By which examples it is manifest, of how little force is the authority of
Parliament to exclude a Prince from the right due to him by inheritance, or to
withdraw such as favor him from giving him assistance, or the people from the
duty and allegiance which they owe him. Yea, this right of succession by
blood is accounted among al nations, subject to this kind of Monarchy, a
thing sacred, and in no wise to be violated. In confirmation whereof I might
allege many examples of sundry foreign kingdoms. But, for avoiding
tediousnes, I will only set down here two examples of the french nation; the
one very ancient, the other of our time.

At such time as the croun of France fell by inheritance to Charles, for his
dullness of wit and want of judgment surnamed the simple; Odo, his kinsman,
PAVL AEMIL. hist. FR, in regno CAR. SIMPL.
was declared King, and ruled over the greatest part of the Kingdom by
consent almost of all the Peers, and principal nobility thereof, except the
Earl of Flanders, and the Archbishop of Rhemes, who did homage to Charles.
But Odo, near the time of his death, approouing the right of his cosen
Charles, spoke these words to the nobility then present, as PAVL. AEMYL.
rehearses them in Latin. CAROLVS Balbi filius (id quod jus aequumque
postulat) Rex vocitetur: a quo amouere jus regni vniuersus terrarum orbis, si
conspiret, non valeat: etiamsi sceptra manu extorqueat. That is to say, Let
CRARLES the son of Balbus, according right and equity, be called King: from
whom all the world, if it should conspire against him, can not remove the
right of the kingdom, though it should wrest the scepter out of his hand. And
as then Odo did acknowledge Charles to be only lawful king: so both then, and
in all ages following was he accounted by the french nation: whereas Odo is not
so much as reckoned in the register of the french kings.

Lately also it has been seen, that the French king, who now reigns, albeit
after the death of the last King his religion was different from the Roman
religion, publicly professed in France: yet was he followed and assisted not
only by the professors of his own religion, but also by all the cheef
nobility, gentlemen, and best part of the people, called Catholics;
notwithstanding that the Cardinal of Bourbon, one of the blood Royal, and of
their own Religion, was called King by the seditious followers of he League.
And at this time he is by all French-me^, of whatsoever Religion, ackowledged
for their only lawful King.

But in this point our own people has never been inferior to the French
nation, or any other: which is made evident by their faithful and dutiful
acknowledgement of the next lawful blood so many ages past; but especially
by a most notable proof, which not long since they have given of the same.
For when Lady Jane was by the devise and procurement of some noblemen, and
Lords of the counsel proclaimed Queen in London, and other where, the tower
being surprised, and sundry other politic means used for her establishing,
and for drawing of the people to her obedience: yet was not Queen Marie, the
lawful inheretrix of the Kingdom, abandoned therefore by the good and
faithful subjects thereof, but assisted and furthered by them to the winning
and possession of the croune: which Lady Jane lost together with her head: as
also her father, the Duke of Suffolk; her father in law the Duke of
Northumberland, the author and principal actour of this Tragedy; her husband
son to the said Duke, and sundry other of her friends, were partakers of her
miserable end, as they had been of her unlawful advancement.

By this example may be evidently seen, how great is the force of right by
inheritance, and how hard it is to draw away the hearts of the people from the
lawful heir, to the acknowledging of any other. Which being understood by
some of our kings, who deposing, or excluding the lawful successors took the
croun on themselves, judged not any authority of Parliament sufficient to
justify their usurping, and approve it to the people; except they had made
some pretense of a title by right and lawful inheritance.

King Henry the fowrth (who at the hour of his death, speaking to his son,
HOLING. an. 14. HENR. 4.
seemed to acknowledge his wrongful usurping) at such time as he took on the
croun, albeit he was sure not to want the authority of Parliaments to establish
him, yet thought not that sufficient, except he had laid claim to the crown,
as being by right of inheritance next to the same: and that not as heir to his
father, John of Gant, or to his grandfather, King Edward the third (for he
knew that both king Richard, whom he had deposed, and Roger Mortimer, Earl
of March, declared already by Parliament heir apparent, were nearer than
himself to the croun, they being heirs to his fathers two elder brethren) but
as right and lawful heir to Henry the third: as the very words of the
claim, HOLING. an. 22. RICH. 2. Anno 1, HEN. 4.
that he made before a great assembly of the nobility, and people do plainly
testify.

The cause hereof was a report made by some of his favorers; to wit, that
Edmond, son to Henry the third, of whom he was descended by his mother
Blanch, was elder brother to Edward the first, but defrauded of his right by
the said Edward, by reason of the deformity of his crooked back. But this was
nothing else, but a fable devised to conueigh to him a title by inheritance.
Whereby it appears of how great account was the right of inheritance in his
judgment, and in the judgment of the people at that time.

Also Richard the third, who after a far more wicked manner usurped the croun,
Sir THO. MOORE in his hist. of RICH. the 3.
judged not that any approbation which he might have by Parliament could
serve his turn; except he did forge himself a title, by devising and
publishing an untruth, to his own mothers infamy: which was, that his brother
King Edward was unlawfully begotten, and that therefore his children could
not lawfully succeed to the croun: so much did even that wicked usurper
attribute to the nighnesse of the right and lawful blood in his own
conscience.

And not only the example of these two Kings, but also of all the Princes
which we have had from King Edward the third hitherto (whereof many are
renowned for their rare wisdom, and justice) shows us plainly, in how great
regard we ought justly to have the right of succession by the next lawful
blood, in that sundry of them have with arms pursued and maintained their
title to the crown of France, whereof once they had possession by right of
blood: and none of them hitherto has forgone their said title, notwithstanding
whatsoever french Laws, and acts of Parliament to the contrary.

The like also has been the judgment of our Parliaments concerning this
matter of succession, as it has always appeared by their consent in approving
the title of our Kings to the crown of France, and by their own statutes
approouing the right of the next lawful blood to the crown of England, so often
as the over great power and authority of such as usurped the Kingdom did not
restrain their liberty.

By all these examples alleged by me appears the great prerogative, which
is due to the next lawful inheritour of the croune. Wherefore I am persuaded,
that as her Majesty, and the Parliament have not hitherto made any such act,
as is alleged by Dolman, or any other that might be prejudicial to the King
of Scotlands title: so they will hereafter rather further him, by declaring him
publicly right and lawful inheritour of the Kingdom, than any wise go about
to stop or hinder him, not only in respect of his undoubted right, and of the
prerogative and favor due to the same: but also for the manifold and great
benefits which the Realm shall receive by his admission, as by the discourse
following shall be made manifest.

A discourse shevving how expedient and necessary it is for the Realm of
England, that the King of Scotland be in due time acknowledged, and admitted
for lawfulll successor to her Majesty.
Having hitherto sufficiently declared the King of Scotlands just title to the
croune of England, and disprooued such objections as are made against the same,
I thought good briefly to show, how expedient and necessary it is for the
weal public of this Realm, that he be in due time acknowledged, and received
for lawful successor to her Majesty.

To begin therefore with the consideration of his right, there is no doubt but
in respect thereof his admission will procure greater peace and quietness to
the common wealth, than the unlawful intrusion of any other. For all the
honest and faithful subjects of this Kingdom will in conscience, and duty
submit themselves more willingly to the next lawful heir, succeeding
according to the ancient laws, and custom of this country, than to another
coming to the croune by unlawful usurpation. And such as for their own
private advantage, or other respects would wish, and go about to procure the
disturbance of the common wealth, will have the less pretense, occasion and
means to effect their wicked desires and intentions, the next lawful heir
being advanced. Yea, even they, who pretend any title to the croun, would be
rather persuaded and content to yield to him, than to any other of their
competitors having less right.

Also the preferment of the next lawful heir, in that he is already a King,
will procure the greater peace and quietness to the common wealth. For the
titlers themselves, and the rest of our noblemen (whose example and authority
draws commonly the people after them in matters belonging to the Royal
succession) will rather submit themselves to the next lawful heir, being
already a sovereign Prince, than to another not having so just a title, and
being but of their own rank and degree. And truly it behooves them so to do:
for that if any of themselves be preferred before the rest, they may have the
juster occasion to fear the jealousy and suspicion of one advanced from the
degree of a subject to the dignity of a King. The advancement of which kind of
persons has many times (as both our own histories, and others testify)
procured the destruction not only of such as resisted them; but also of those
who assisted and furthered them to the croun; yea, and of such of their own
blood as they suspected might have any wise disturbed, or endangered their
estate.

The truth hereof is manifest by the example of King Edward the fowrth, and
Richard the third: who both not only destroyed, and bannished their enemies of
the house of Lancaster, with their adherents; but also the former of them put
to death his own brother, George Duke of Clarence, and the other murdered his
young nephues, Edward the fifth, and his brother: yea the principal men, who of
subjects made them Kings, were by them destroyed, to wit, the Earl of Warwick
by King Edward, and the Duke of Buckinghame with others by King Richard.

As the like inconvenience might be justly feared, if any of our own titlers
should be preferred before the rest: so there is no means so effectual to
make such as are of the blood Royal, and the rest of our nobility free from
all such dangers, and from all suspicion and fear thereof, as the preferring of
a Prince, whose pre-eminence in dignity far above them, joined with the
certainty of his manifest right, and the confidence which he may justly put
in so many means and helps as he shall have to assure his estate, will make
him to stand the less in jealousy and mistrust of others, and consequently
not to use those wicked practices, which inferior persons, raised from the
degree of subjects to the dignity of Princes, and that by no just title,
would by all likliehood use for their establishment. Which inconvenience is so
much the less to be feared in the advancement of the present King of
Scotland; as he has already given sufficient proof of his tender affection
and bounty toward such as are of his kindred, and of his favor and
clemency toward such of his Nobility, as have not showed themselves over
malicious and obstinate in offending him. How much more then is it justly to
be looked for, that he will show himself thankful and bountiful toward all
such of our Nobility, and other good subjects, as will highly deserve his
favor, in furthering and advancing him to his right?

But considering, besides his right, his Royal dignity and honorable
disposition, that he is also King of a country bordering upon ours, and
enclosed within the same Island, we must judge his admission altogether
necessary; if we desire our present quiet estate to be free from danger both
inward, and outward. For if any means be used to debar him from his right,
that will no doubt breed civil dissension, and sundry factions throughout the
Realm, among which he will not want his adherents of the best and wisest
number: besides whom, being fortified with the power of his own subjects,
together with the assistance of his friends and confederates in France,
Germany, Denmark, and other parts, he will by all likeliehood prevail against
his enemies.

But God forbid this occasion should be given of making this flourishing
Realm a pray to foreign nations, especially in so dangerous a time, when
as, besides the diseases which lurk in the entrals thereof, it is also troubled
with the rebellion of the Irishry in Ireland, and with the fear of the king of
Spain fostring the said rebellion with his assistance, and preparing a mighty
Armada to invade us: being emboldned thereto by hope of finding here
assistance, by reason of the present controversy concerning the Royal
succession, and by the encouragement of some unnatural and seditious traitors
of our own nation; who desiring the violent alteration of Religion, and
overthrow of the present estate, have not been ashamed to forge him a title to
the croun of England, and to publish the same to the world (as I have already
declared) to egg him on thereby to the invasion of their native country.

It behooves therefore all honest and faithful subjects of this Kingdom to
bewar, that by resisting the right and lawful successor, or by not
acknowledging him in due time, they put not themselves in danger of falling
under the yoke and tyranny of merciless Spaniards: who if they have used
extreme cruelty against the poor silly Indians, and others, who never
offended them, will no doubt use far more outrageous cruelty against our
nation, by whom they account themselves notably dishonored, and disgraced.

Neither ought such as among us profess the Roman Religion (to whom only the
prosperous success of Spaniards might seem to be least prejudicial) feed
themselves with any vain hope of finding favor at their hands. For
notwithstanding their pleasant allurements, and the fair promises which they
make them for the present, in hope of their favor and assistance; yet if in
the end (which God forbid) they should prevail, and become conquerours of this
realm, after the utter destruction and rooting out of al others professing the
Gospel, they would use them nothing the more favorably for betraying their
country. Yea, they would despise, and handle them the wors therefore: as they
did Sir William Stanley; whom, for betraying to them the town of Dauenter,
they thrust shamefullie out of the same: and would not after give him the
credit of any other town, but caused him, and his regiment in a slavish manner
to trudge up and down the low countries, and to lie both summer, and winter in
poor and bare Villages, as unworthy to be placed in any town. So would they
also use the betrayers of their own native country as slaves and drudges, and
upon any occasion of displeasure, or mistrust which they should conceive
against them, deal with the^, as before they had done with the rest.

And truly the best might be looked for would be, the using them as servants,
the abusing filthilie of their wives, and daughters, the thrusting of them into
Cornwall, and to the most barreine parts of the Realm, and the holding of them
always under the yoke of miserable bondage. Which hard usage they might
justly fear, taking example by the miseries and calamities, that other
nations of their Religion have suffered under the tyranny of Spaniards.

The nobility, and people of the low countries professing the Roman
Religion, as well as others of a different profession, have had over great
proof of their intolerable pride and tyranny, especially at their first
ariual, when as they made their account to be masters there without controlment
or resistance. The truth heerof is testified by the beheading against al
equity and justice of their chief nobility, yea of such as did most notable
service to the King of Spain, as namely of the Countes of Egmond, and Horn; by
the powling and pilling of the people by violence and extorsion, by the filthy
abusing of their wives and daughters, by misusing of themselves in a slavish
manner, and by other such their tirannical oppressions.

Their pride and tyranny is also cause, why the stats of Naples, Sicily, and
Millain, who sigh and sob under their hard yoke, would shake off the same, if
they could: and why also all other states and Princes of Italy, yea even the
Pope himself, stand in so great fear, and suspicion of them, as they do.

But I may not pass under silence the example yet freshlie bleeding of their
extreme cruelty against the people of Cleueland, a state of the Empire, whom
having been hitherto their friends and for the most part of their own Religion,
they have used, as if they had been their deadly enemies, and like Turks rather
than Christians; for that continuing in their obedience toward the Empire, and
their own lawful Prince, they would not become slaves to the ambitious house
of Austria.

If they have thus used these, and sundry other nations, their subjects, and
friends, being of their own Religion, what better usage can our professors of
the Roman Religion look for at their hands, who can not but be odious to them
above others, in that they are of a nation above all others by them hated and
redoubted? And how might English hearts abide the extreme pride, and
insolency of Spaniards, being conquerours; who, before the setting forth of
the last Armada to inuad this land, behaved themselves most proudly and
scornfullie toward our English noblemen of their own Religion, who were their
Pensioners, and as desirous to conquer England to them as themselves?

For at that time the Lord Paget offering to Don Bernardino de Mendoza, (who
had been some time Ambassador in the Court of England) the means of procuring
service and assistance in England to the King of Spain; the said D. Bernardino
answered him, that the King his Master needed not the service of Englishmen in
that enterprise, and that he did of charity whatsoever he had done for the
said Lord Paget, and other banished Englishmen.

Also T. Throckmorton in Brussels conferring with Iuan de Lasture, the Kings
Treasurer general, and saying, that he wondered why the King, having such
prete^ces for England, made no more reckoning of such Englishmen as followed
him, who in regard of their parentage and intelligence might be able to do him
great service, if they were hartned with better usage, whereas now by reason of
their poverty and drouping, they were much discouraged: the Treasurer
answered, that he was not ignorant of the estate and condition of all such
Englishmen as followed the king, but for his part (swearing a spanish oath or
two) he knew not any of them, in regard of ability to do the King service,
worth the straw that lay under his feet.

Moreover at the very time that the Duke of Parma lay at Bruges, attending the
Spanish fleet, and making his preparations for England, when our English
pensioners expected (as by all liklihood they might) to be above others honored
and advanced; they were so far deceived of their expectation, that they were the
only rejected and contemned sort of all those that followed the court: all
other nations, besides them, being favored and relieved with some months
pay.

And (which is more) whereas they moved the Duke sundry times to know his
pleasure, how he would dispose of them in that enterprise, telling him that
upon the well using of them depe^ded much matter of importance, as the winning
of others of their kindred, acquaintance, and religion, who upon hope of like
good usage would be able to do great service at their landing: whereas
contrariwise seeing them come over so poor in show, without credit, money, or
arms, like lackies (for so were the words of their request) it would be a
cause to discourage and withdraw their minds from the Kings service; they were
by the Duke scornfullie and with derision rejected: neither did he vouchsafe to
give them any other answer, than only that he would think upon it. But on
the night, in which upon the hurly burly and rumor of the approaching of the
Spanish navy they thought to imbark, he departed toward Dunkerk, leaving the^
all behind, as unworthy to be called upon, or taken with him.

Whereupon the Earl of Westmerland, my Lord Paget, and sundry of the better
sort made their complaint to the Duke of Pastrana, the King of Spaines base
son, by whom they were as baselie and scornfullie handled as by the other.
Which evil entreaty wroght so great an apprehension in my Lord Paget, that he
retired himself to Brussels: where, what with the conceit of this grief, and
what with other accidents he shortly ended his life.

The truth of all this have I learned of men of good credit and reputation
professing the Roman religion, together with much more concerning this
purpose; which (for avoiding tediousness) I omit, the rather, for that I am
persuaded many of themselves are already acquainted therewith. Whereby the
professors of that religion may perceive, what favor they ought to look for
at the Spaniards hands, if they should conquer the land: seeing that they,
being but in a vain hope and conceat of prosperous success, did so despise
the principal English noblemen and others that were in their company.

They have therefore just cause, as well as al other Englishmen, to fear the
tyranny of Spaniards, and to acknowledge rather the King of Scotland for right
and lawful successor to the croun (as no doubt but they know him to be) than
the King of Spain, whom they know to have but a late forged and far sought
title. Let them call to mind how the most honorable and best sort of
Frenchemen of their own Religion, after the last Kings death, would not
acknowledge any other then the King now reigning: albeit at that time he
professed a Religion different from theirs, and that there wanted not many
Princes of the house of Bourbon, and of the Roman religion, whom they might
have acknowledged. How much more than should Englishmen (howsoever they be
affected in religion) acknowledge rather the King of Scotland, who has the
right of both the Royal families of York, and Lancaster, being a friend to all
our nation, and a Prince, at whose hands, through their faithful and dutiful
behavior, they may look for grace and favor, than submit themselves in a
slanish manner to the King of Spain, betraying their country to the most
cruel enemies thereof, with apparent and manifest danger of incurring so many
and grievous calamities, as I have already rehearsed?

I need not exhort our own professors of the gospel not to trust the
Spaniards mercy. I only warn and wish them to use the right remedy of
preventing the great mischief, which they have just cause to fear if the
Spaniards should prevail. And that is no other, than to acknowledge and
receive in due time the King of Scotland for next lawful successor to her
Majesty. For he being thus acknowledged, the quarrel which the King of Spain
pursues against us, partly for revenge of supposed injuries, and partly for
his pretended title, will be either wholly removed, or at least wise greatly
weakened. For with what pretense of justice can he go about to dispossess the
King of Scotland of his known right, whom he may not challenge for any injury
done hitherto by him to his father, or to himself? It is very likly also that
his courage and desire of inuading us will be much quailed by this conjunction,
whereby he shall perceive that our power and means to defend our selves, and
offend him, will be redoubled.

But if proudly and obstinatly he will persist in the prosecution of his unjust
quarrel, the vniustnesse thereof will become more notorious to the world. And
not only England, and Scotland, but also the King of Scotlands confederats
and friends will with all their power and might join together, to withstand
his malice and ambition, and to be avenged of so manifest an injury.

Besides these commodities, which I have hitherto rehearsed, our common wealth
shall receive sundry other great benefits by the due acknowledgement, and
timely admission of the King of Scotland. The first whereof is, that the
dominion and power of the crown of England will be greatly increased by the
ioining thereunto of his Kingdom: which diverse of our Kings have endeauored to
bring to pass as well by marriage with the heirs of the Kingdom of Scotland,
as by other means. Neither is it to be feared that the honor and dignity of
this realm will be thereby any wise empaired, as was well considered and
for-seene by the most noble and wise king, Henry the seventh. For when his
eldest daughter Lady Margaret was to be married to James the fourth King of
Scotland, some of his counsel fore-casting that which might fall out, and
saying that if his issue male failed, the croun might be deuolued to the said
Lady Margaret; he most wisely answered, that incace any such deuolution should
happen, it would be nothing prejudicial to England: for that it being the
principal and more worthy part of the Island, would draw Scotland to it, as it
did Normandy and Aquitain, with other provinces, from the time of the
conquest. This was the judgment of that most worthy and prudent Prince
concerning the conjunction of both countries: wherein without doubt al wise
men, and such as love the honor, and publik weal of this Realm will aggree
with him. And truly by all natural reason it seems most meet, that since
both countries are but one Island, they should be also under one dominion.
Which being brought to pass, we shall not need to fear the malice and power
of any enemies, be they never so mighty.

Another commodity is the reduction and keeping of the Irishry under the
obedience of the croun of England. For either willingly they will submit
themselves to the King of Scotlands authority, in respect of their ancient
friendship and often alliance with the Scottish nation, and of the said Kings
descent by blood from their ancient Kings (especially seeing the offenses
they have committed hitherto have not been made against him) or else if
vvilfullie and obstinatlie they shall persist in their rebellion, they may
being of the one side assaulted with our forces, and of the other by the
Scottish nation (hardened no less than they are to all kind of travail, and
suffering) within short time be utterly subdued.

Moreover it will be no small advantage to us, that the Princes, nobility, and
people of France, Germany, Denmark, and other Christian nations, among whom
the King of Scotlands right to the crown of England is not unknown, will
approve our uprightness and justice in this point, and be the more willing and
ready to maintain friendship, intercourse, and traffic with us: whereas
refusing the King of Scotland his right, we should procure their hatred and
enemitie against us, with the danger of foreign invasion, and of being made a
pray to strangers, as before I have declared.

It is also a singular benefit offered us by God, that the Prince, who is to
succeed in the Kingdom, has issue likewise to succeed him: so as we need not
fear new disturbance of the common wealth for the uncertainty of succession
after his reign. For he has already three children, whereof the Prince,
which is the eldest, being past five years, is of such towardness, as great
expectation may be justly had of him.

Since therefore the willing admission of the King of Scotland in due time,
will procure so many and great commodities to this realm; as also the
withstanding him in his just cause so great inconveniences and dangers, as I
have hitherto declared: truly they are to be condemned of extreme folly and
madness, who being carried away with vain conceits, and with the remmbrance of
old quarrels, which have been betwixt both countries, will repine and grudge at
the advancement of the King of Scotland, so just, and necessary for our common
wealth. As these men remember old quarrels; so would I wish them to remember
that there has been also ancient friendship betwixt both nations, and
especially betwixt their kings, as the often alliance made between them does
witness.

For besides alliances made before the conquest, Jane, King John's daughter, was
married to Alexander, King of Scotland; Margaret, the daughter of his next
successor Henry the third, to an other Alexander; Jane, daughter of Edward the
second, to King David, Jane, daughter to John Duke of Somerset, grandfather to
Henry the seventh, was married to James the first: and lastly Margaret, eldest
daughter of King Henry the seventh, to King James the fowrth. This often
alliance shows that there has been old friendship betuixt the Kings of
both nations, though interrupted from time to time with quarrels and wars:
the principal cause whereof having been the division of this Island into diverse
kingdoms, the uniting thereof under one dominion, will (out of all doubt) be
the only means to procure peace and concord betwixt all the inhabitants
thereof.

Which union as it has been sought heretofore, though in vain, by sundry of
our own Kings with no small endeavor, and travail, as namely by Edward the
first, Edward the second, and not long since by Edward the sixth: so now a fit
occasion is offered of bringing the same to pass, at such time as both
nations, by the continuance of peace and amity, which has remained betwixt
them these fifty years past, and by their agreement in Religion, may be
easily linked in perpetual unity and concord.

Neither is it any such inconvenience as some me^ imagine, that the Prince,
who is to reign over both nations, is not born in England, considering that he
is so many ways extract, and that by father, as well as by mother, of the
blood Royal of England, and that he has been always, and continues yet a
sure and faithful friend to our estate, as his behavior toward the same does
well declare. For having been invited by sundry fair promises, and large
offers made him by our most hateful and mighty enemies, and solicited by
some of his own subjects, upon injuries, as they alleged, done him, to break
of friendship with us, yet his constant affection toward our common wealth
could never be altered.

What desire he has always had of keeping our frontiers from all annoiance,
no less than his own, it is well enough known by his continual carfulness
concerning this point, and especially by his sending not long since into our
country, for pledges of good order to be kept on his part, the LL. of
Bacleuch, and Cesford, Wardens of the Scottish marches.

His patience also in waiting for the time appointed by God, and not attempting
ought, which might be any wise prejudicial to the person or estate of our
sovereign Lady (a rare example of patience and moderation in such as are to
succeed to a kingdom) may be to us a sufficient warrant of his honorable
disposition, and constant affection toward her Majesty, and the common
wealth. Wherewith are joined many other virtues, and princely qualities, that
may justly move us not only to admit him, but also to inuit him to the
succession of the Kingdom: as his piety and sincerity in Religion; his
magnanimity void of ambition; his good inclination to justice, tempered with
clemency; his temperate mind and behavior, not stained with any spot of
filthy lust or sensuality; his princely liberality, and yet no powling or
pilling of his subjects for entertainment thereof; his extraordinary
painfulnesse, and great dexterity in reforming the disorders of his realm,
notwithstanding sundry difficulties and impediments which are in this
reformation.

Besides which, and other princely virtues wherewith he is endued, when he
shall have the manifold and great advantages, that the Monarche of this
Kingdom has above other Princes (as the assistance of his obedient and
dutiful Nobility, the sage advise of most wise and expert Counselors, the
godly exhortations of the learned Clergy, procuring obedience to the Prince
and his Laws, the help and furtherance of faithful Judges, careful Officers,
and other good subjects to the execution of his Laws and commandments, and
finally the dutiful and reverent affection of the people toward their
Prince) there is no doubt but by his means this Kingdom shall flourish in
continual peace, with all increase of honor and prosperity.

To conclude therefore, since by the providence of God this worthy Prince is
offered to us, whose title is so just, whose admission is so expedient and
necessary, whose person ought to be so acceptable to us for his good deserts,
and Princely virtues: I hope that all good and faithful subjects of all
estates within this Realm will in due time willingly admit and receive him to
the succession of the kingdom.

FINIS.

