THE MEAN IN MOVRNING.

A Sermon preached at Saint Maryes Spittle in London on Tuesday in Easter
week. 1595.

By THOMAS PLAYFERE Doctor of Divinity.

AT LONDON, Printed by the Widow Orwin for Andrew Wise, dwelling in Paul's
Church yeard, at the sign of the Angel. 1596.

TO THE HONORABLE AND MOST VIRTVOVS LADY, the Lady Elizabeth Carey, wife to the
thrise-noble, Sir George Carey, Knight Marshall, etc. all prosperity and
happiness.
MAdam, it is reported that Demonax having his head broken with a stone, and
being advised to complain to the Proconsull of that injury, answered that he
had more need go to a surgeon to heal his head, then to a Magistrate to
redress his wrong. I must also confess, I had rather have had my head broken,
then my sermon so mangled. For this sermon has been twice printed already
without my procurement or priuitie any manner of way. Yea to my very great
grief and trouble. Nevertheless I have thought good to complain of no man. For
in whom the fault rests I cannot learn certainly. This I am sure, not any
whi^^ in my self. Clinius a Historiographer, having written the story of
Virginius, and meeting with him upon a time said, If you find any thing amiss
in your story, I pray you pardon it. To whom Virginius answered, What Clinius,
do thou not know I have done as I did, that such fellows as thou art, might
write as you would? And so, it was my part, to take such pains as conveniently
I could, is furnishing and providing this sermon against the appointed time.
But afterward what others, either by reporting or printing would make of it,
that was not my fault, that was not in me either to help or hinder. Therefore
I have not gone unto any Magistrate to complain, but though it be one of the
greatest injuries that ever was offered me, yet because I know not what
secret purpose the Lord had in laying this affliction upon me, I do most
willingly pardon it. Yea, even as Moses, when the first tables were broken,
was content to make new: in like manner, finding in the first editions so many
broken-ended sentences, I have as it were gone to a surgeon, or rather in deed
I have played the surgeon my self, and by setting out the sermon a new, have
salued the matter as well as I could. Diogenes seeing the city of Myndus very
little and poor, but the gate thereof very large and stately, said, You of
Myndus, shut your gate, and keep in your city, that it run not away. After
the same sort, the gate (as I may say) and the first entrance into this
Sermon, was before very lofty and stately, the Sermon it self very simple and
poor. Such a stir they kept, in terming it very vainly and most fondly, A
most excellent Sermon, as if they would have cast the house out of the window,
or the city out of the gate. Wherefore I have made the gate lesser, and the
city greater. The gate lesser, by entitling it, The mean in Mourning, which
is the very drift in deed, and the right scope of the whole Sermon. And the
city greater, by adding diverse notes, in sundry places of the Sermon, as I
have since thought best. So that if any which heard it preached be disposed to
read it, he shall not, I hope, altogether lose his labor. For though he have
all here which he heard then, yet he heard not all then, which he has here.
But how it will please God to affect others I know not. This I wot well, that
many a time and often I have been much moved my self with the meditation of
some points in this Sermon. And now of late, next to God and to his holy word,
I could take comfort in nothing so much, as in reading that which I have
written in the seventh part, the first section thereof. Occasioned thereto, by
the certain report of the death of my most dear father, who was well known,
for his place and calling, to be as good a man, and as sincere a christian, as
any has lived in this age. But for conclusion, I humbly desire your Ladyship,
that as I have dedicated the Pathway to Perfection to my very Honorable good
patron, Sir George Carey: so it would please your Ladyship, to let this Sermon
pass under the countenance and credit of your name. For if your Ladyship will
deigne to read it over, then I doubt not but diverse other Ladies and
Gentlewomen, which have virtuous and noble minds, will vouchsafe also to
learn thereby, how they ought with the daughters of Jerusalem, not to weep
for Christ, but to weep for themselves. Especially, having such a singular
ensample before their eyes as your Ladyship is, whom God has endued with all
ornaments and gifts, both of nature and grace.

From Saint John's College in Cambridge the first day of February. 1595. Your
Ladyships ever to be commanded, Thomas Playfere.

Faults in all the Copies.
p. 24. l. 19. for licked read licked up p. 62. l. 23. for setler read setter
p. 67. l. 28. for too to read too p. 71. l. 23. for Noah read Noah's p. 80. l.
28. for says. read says, p. 99. l. 25. for man read men p. 107. l. 14 for
Lord: read Lord.
Faults in some of the Copies.
p. 6. l. 17. for those read these p. 7. l. 12. for rogy read rogly p. 33. l.
8. for ran read run p. 39. l. 24. for holy read hot p. 53. l. 21. for Christ.
read Christ, p. 63. l. 16. for bands read hands p. 92. l. 2. for age read age,
and
THE MEAN IN MOVRNING.
The Text.
Weep not for me, but weep for your selves.

Luke 23.28.
RIght Honorable, right Worshipful, and most Christian and blessed brethren;
four sorts of people were about Christ, when Christ was about his passion. Of
the first sort were executioners, which tormented him. Of the second sort
were Jews which mocked him. Of the third sort were lookers-on, which marked
him. Of the fourth sort were wel-willers, which lamented him. Now although it
be very likely, that among these his wel-willers, diverse godly men wept for
him, as Saint John the Evangelist, Joseph of Arimathia, Gamaliell, Nicodemus,
and such like; yet it is certain, both that more women wept then men, and that
the women more wept then the men. More women: more weeping. More women wept
then men, partly by the permission of men, who thought that the women's weeping
came rather from weakness in themselves, then from kindness toward Christ.
Partly by the providence of God, who suffered more women to weep then men,
that the women, which bewailed Christ's death, might condemn the men, which
procured it. Now the women also more wept then the men, either of a natural
affection, or else of a voluntary disposition. Naturally says S. Peter, the
woman is the weaker vessel, (...). Theophylact. in Johan. ca. 20. page 571.
soon moved to weep, and subject to many, either affectionate passions or else
passionate affections. But touching these women, that which was otherwise
natural to them, was here voluntary in them. For the sin of a woman, was the
ruin of man. Therefore these women willingly wept the more. That though a
woman did most in the second death of the first Adam; yet these might do least
in the first death of the second Adam. For it was Eve a woman which betrayed
the first Adam with an apple, and caused him to sin; but it was Judas a man
which betrayed the second Adam with a kiss, and caused him to die. And indeed
you shall generally observe, that notwithstanding at the first, the woman went
before the man in transgression and disobedience, nevertheless since to make
amends for that fault, the blessed Virgin Mary, and diverse other women have
far excelled all men, or at the least wise, most men, in true devotion and
godliness. Wherefore principally Christ here speaks to the women, because both
more women wept then men; and the women also more wept then the men; more
women; more weeping; but yet in them he speaks (as well as to them)
indifferently to al his dear friends, both men and women, WEEP NOT FOR ME,
BUT WEEP FOR YOUR SELVES.

In which sentence we may observe, as many words so many parts. Eight words:
eight parts. The first, WEEP NOT: the second, BUT WEEP: the third, WEEP
NOT, BUT WEEP: the fourth, FOR ME: the fifth, FOR YOUR SELVES: the sixth, FOR
ME, FOR YOUR SELVES. The seventh, WEEP NOT FOR ME; the eight, BUT WEEP FOR
YOUR SELVES. God grant all our hearts may be so affected with the consideration
of these excellent matters, as may make most for the increase of our comfort in
him, and his glory in us. And I humbly beseech you also most christian
brethren, to do God this honor, and me this favor. First that you would not
prescribe me any method, or order, how I should handle this text, but that
you would give me leave to follow mine own method, and order, wherein I
persuade my self, and I hope also truly, I have bin directed by ye spirit of
God. Secondly, that you would not run before me, in your swift conceit, and
earnest expectation, but that it would please you to go on along easily all
the way with me, till happily at the length, by Gods gracious assistance, and
your gentle acceptance, I come to the end of my Sermon. And then if I have
omitted any thing, which you would have had me said, spare me not, but blame
me hardly for it, as you shall think best. WEEP NOT FOR ME, BUT VVEEP FOR
YOUR SELVES.

THe first part is, WEEP NOT. When lairus the ruler of the sinagogue wept
bitterly for the death of his daughter; Christ said unto him, Luke c. 8.52.
weep not. When Rachel wept, and would not be comforted, seeing neither her
son Benjamin, nor almost any true Beniamite left alive; God said unto her,
Ier. c. 31.16.
weep not. When a poor widow wept sore for the death of her only son,
Christ said unto her, Luke 7.15.
weep not, And so here, Christ seeing many Iairusses, many Rachels, many
widows, weep for the death of the only son of God, says unto them, weep
not. Forbidding thereby immoderate weeping, which is condemned, in nature; in
reason; in religion. In nature, the earth when it rejoices, as in the summer
time then it is covered with corn, Psalm. 65.12.
but when it has to too forlorn, and sorrowful a countenance, as in the
winter time, then it is fruitless, and barren. The water when it is quiet, and
calm, brings in all manner of merchandise, but when the sea storms, and
roares too much, then the very ships do houle and cry Esaias. 23.1.
The air looking clearly, and cheerfully refreshes all things, but weeping
too much, that is, rayning too much, as in Noah's floude, it drownes the whole
world. The fire being but a little spri^kled with water burns more brightly,
but being too much overwhelmed, it gives neither heat, nor light. The eye it
self (as Anatomists write) Vide Vesalium. lib. 7. c. 14 and Toletum in lib.
secund. Aristotelis de anima.
has twice as many dry skins, like sluices, to dam up the course of the
tears, as it has moist humors, like channels, to let them flow forth. For it
has six of them, and but three of those. If all the body were an eye, and
there were no ears in it: where were then the hearing? If all the eye were a
moist humor, and there were no dry skins in it, where were then the seeing?
Seeing then too much weeping is; in the earth barrennes; in the water ship
wrack; in the air an inundation; in the fire coldness; in the eye blindness;
certainly if, the earth, the water, the air, the fire, the eye, could speak,
they would altogether with one concent sing a joyful song of five parts, and
every one severally say unto us, That we must not weep too much.

Now reason sees yet more, Ne quid nimit.
That too much of a thing is naught. Etia^mel, si nimiu^ ingratu^. Which is
translated thus, Prouer. 25.27
It is not good to eat too much honey. If it be not good eating too much
honey; then sure it is not good eating too much wormwood. The Egyptians when
they would describe tears, they paint those gems, which we call unions,
whereupon Suidas says, (...).
Unions hierogyphically do signify the shedding of tears. For as unions have
their name in latin, because they are found one by one, and never more at
once: so tears must be shed easily one by one, and never be powered out all at
once. Seneca says, that which we must do daily, we must do moderately.
Therefore though we can not quite stop the bloody issue of our tears, at the
leastwise we must be sparing, and weep so to day, as we may weep to morrow,
and keep some tears awaies in store, reserving Si non finire lachrymas, at
certe reseruare debemus. l. de consolatio. ad Polybiu^ c. 23.
them to another occasion afterward. For we read that Heraclitus when he had
sook't and sowst himself in sorrow all his lise long, at length dyed of a
dropsy, and so (as I may say) drowned himself in his own tears. Yea Niobe
by overmuch weeping was turnde into a stone; even as Lots wife by turning
back, was turnde into salt. It was one of Pythagoras poesies, (...).
not to eat ye heart; which is expounded thus, Prou. 25.20.
As a moath freateth the garment, and a worm eats the wood: so heaviness
hurts ma^s heart. Now if we may not tear the heart of any otherthing with our
teeth, then much less may we tear our own heart, with our tears. So that
eue^ blind reason, such as the heathen have had, does yet plainly see this,
That we must not weep too much.

But religion goes yet further. For when God at the first placed man in the
garden of Eden, which is the garden of pleasure, he did indeed there provide
all things for him, which might pleasure him. His wife which was equal to
him: all other creatures that were inferior to him: the herbs which he did
eat: the flowers that he did smell: the pearls which he did look upon: the
gold that he did tread upon: all these serude for his delight and joy.
Afterward when sentence had proceeded against the man, that he should have
sorrow about the fruit of the earth, against the woman, that she should have
sorrow about the fruit of the womb, yet it pleased God to assuage and
sweeten these our sorrows with diverse singular comforts. As first, we have
the holy spirit, who is the only comforter. Next a good conscience, which is a
continual feast. Then the holy scripture, which is (as it were) an other
paradise. Lastly, an unfeigned faith by which we have peace with GOD. Therefore
Athenagoras (...). l. de resur. mor.
says well, I count that they have no spirit, no conscience, no scripture, no
faith in them which yield to too much grief. And Hierome yet more vehemently,
Detest andae sunt istae lachrymae quae no^ habent modu^.
I do from my heart detest al excessive sorrow, seeing it is a very hell upon
earth, and an entrance even in this life into that woeful place where there is
nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth. Wherefore immoderate weeping is
condemned, in nature, which teaches al things: in reason, which teaches all
men: in religion, which teaches al christians, That we must not weep too
much. Thus much of weeping too much, which is the first part, WEEP NOT. WEEP
NOT FOR ME, BUT WEEP FOR YOUR SELVES.

Now a little of weeping too little which is the second part, BUT WEEP.
They to whom Christ here speaks, offended in the excess. Therefore he
begins thus, weep not. But I may well shift the words, and begin thus, But
weep. For we offend, commonly in the want of weeping, seldom in th'xecesse.
The reason is, because we lack love, which being three fold; toward our
selves: toward our neighbor: toward God; the greatest work of love; toward
our selves is repentance: toward our neighbor is preaching: toward God is
prayer. And al these require some tears. So that if we weep so little as that
we weep not at all, we weep too little. Which we must not do. For first,
touching repentance one says truly, Hoc ipso sunt maiores tumores, quo
minoris dolores.
The lesser our sorrows are, the greater are our sins. But on the other
side, the heads of dragons are broken in the waters Psalm. 74.13.
that is, very strong and vile sins are weakened and washed away with tears.
That obligation which was against us Collos. 2.14.
before it had been fastened to the croste of Christ was engrossed in
parchme^t. Now it is but scribled in paper. So that if we blur it daily with
weeping upon it, our tears will be like aqua fortis, to take out the
handwriting quite and clean, that God shall neither read nor see our sins.
When Alexander had read a long and tedious Epistle written to him by
Antipater, wherein were diverse accusations against his mother Olympias, What,
says he, me thinks Antipater knows not, that one little tear of a mother
will easily blot out many Epistles. Ignorare videtur Antipater quod vna matris
lachryma multas delebit epistolas.
And certainly the tears not only of Gods mother, but even of every child of
God will much more easily blot out the memory of many sins, though they were
before, like the sins of Judah, written with a pen of iron, and graven with
the point of a diamond Iere. 17.1.
Therefore says Alcuinus, Lauandum est cor poenitentiae lachrymis.
we must wash our hearts in the troubled poole of Bethesda John. 5.2.
in the troubled tears of repentance. For as in a well, except there be some
water in it we can not easily see the baggage that lies in the bottom: so in
the depth of the heart without tears we can not see our sins. Tears make
our sins not seen, and seen. Not seen to God, and seen to us. God not
seeing them forgiues them, and we seeing them amend them. Pliny writes that
the tears of vinebranches do cure the leprosy. l. 23. initio.
And so the tears of those vine branches which are grafted into the true vine,
do cure the leprosy of sin. S. Austin witnesses that the Eagle feeling his
wings heavy, plungeth the^ in a fountain, and so renews his strength
Commen. in Psalm. 103.
: After the same sort, a Christian feeling the heavy burden of his sins,
batheth himself in a fountain of tears, and so washing of the old man,
which is the body of sin, is made young again, and lusty as an eagle. That
sinful woman Luke 7.44.
because she loved much, therefore she washed Christ's feet with her tears. A
strange sight. I have oftentimes seen the heaven wash the earth. But I never
before saw the earth wash the heaven: yet here I see it. An earthly and a
sinful woman washes the heavenly feet of Christ. But because she washed
Christ's feet with her tears, therefore Christ crowned her head with his
mercies. The prodigal child had no sooner returned home by weeping cross (as
we say) and cried peccaui, but straightwaies he was received. Lo ye whatforce
there is in three sillables. Quantum valent tres sillabae? Ambrosius.
For God hearing a sinner in true contrition utter but this one word of three
sillables, peccaui, I have sinned, (...) etc. Chrysostom. Hom. (...).
is so in a manner charmed and inchaunted with it, that he has no power over
himself, he cannot but grant remission. Saint Peter likewise though he were an
old man in years, yet he was a very child, and a prodigal child in weeping.
And as his faith was so great that he lept into a sea of waters to come to
Christ: so his repentance was so great that he lept into a sea of tears when
he went from Christ. He wept so bitterly (as Clemens Romanus testifies) that
there were gutters and furrows in his face, made with those tears which
trickled down his cheeks. And therefore says Cyril, Locum flendo recepit
quem negando perdiderat. In Leuiticum. lib. 16.
he recovered that place by bewayling his offense which he had lost by
denying his master. For says Nazianzen, (...).
God is more merciful, then man can be sinful, if he will be sorrowful.
Wherefore we may see by these examples, of the sinful woman: of the prodigal
child: of Saint Peter, that weeping does especially recommend our repentance,
that we may purchase our pardon.

Touching preaching, the voice of a preacher ought to be the voice of a crier,
which should not pype to make the people dance, but mourn to make them weep.
Hence it is, that in the old law Leuit. 21.20.
none that was blind or had any blemish in his eye might serve at the altar.
There are many reasons of this law. Among many this may be one, because for
that impediment in his eye he could not well show his inward sorrowing by his
outward weeping. And when they offered up to the Lord their first borne, who
was ordinarily in every family their priest or their preacher, they offered
also with him a pair of turtle doves or two young pigeons. That pair of turtle
doves did signify a pair of mournful eyes. These two young pigeons did
signify likewise two weeping eyes. And at that offering they prayed for their
first born, that afterward he might have such eyes himself. For as pigeons
fly to their windows Esaias 60.8.
: so the sincere preacher has no other refuge to fly unto, but only to his
windows, that is to his eyes, which are glazed with tears, when they weep
for the sins of the people. Christ Jesus is much delighted in such kind of
eyes, saying so often to his spouse, Thine eyes are pigeons eyes. The holy
Ghost also, descending himself in the form of dove. And the Prophets like
doves upon the waters which are washed with milk and remain by the full vessels
Cant. 5.12.
usually received their prophecies beside rivers. As Ezechiel beside the river
Cobar: Daniel beside the river Tigris: the Baptist beside the river lordane.
Yea also they preached their prophecies, not so much with words as with rivers
of tears. The prophet David was so valiant, that he overcame a mighty huge
giant, and tare a Bear in pieces as easily as if it had been a Kyd, and slew
a fierce lion with no other weapon, but only with his naked hands, and
diverse other times like a violent whirlewinde bare down all before him. Yet
when he came to preach, he was so soft-hearted, and so tender-ey'd, that he
said, Mine eyes gush out rivers of water, because men keep not thy law. O that
my head were full of water, says Jeremy, and mine eyes a fountain of tears.
I protest, says Paul, that for these three years I have not ceased to warn
every one of you with tears day and night. For indeed, as Austin witnesses,
there is more good to be done with sighing then with speaking, with weeping
then with words Plus gemitibus, quam sermonibus, plus fletu quam affatu.
. And Prosper says, that a preacher must seek not his own praise, but the
peoples profit in sorrowing for their sins Non plausum sed planctum.
. And Jerome says, that the preacher is most highly commended, not when the
people Sint eorum lachrymae, tuae lauds.
clap their hands, but when they knock their breasts. Wherefore as it is an
Idol and no God which has eyes and sees not: So he is rather an Idol
shepherd then a godly pastor, which has eyes and weepeth not more or less,
one time or other in preaching to the people.

Touching prayer, Saint James says, the prayer of a just man prevails much,
if it be fervent. For a fervent prayer comes from a fervent spirit, which is
wholly inspired with that holy spirit, who makes request in us and for us, with
sighs and groans, which cannot be expressed. As it is in one of the Psalms,
Psalm. 147.18.
He sends forth his word and melts them, he bretheth forth his spirit,
and the waters flow. He sends forth his word, and breaths forth his
spirit, when the holy Ghost moves us to pray. he melts them and the waters
flow, when tears trickle down from our eyes. For as a seething pot runs
over: so says a holy heart, seething (as it were) like a pot, and boiling in
fervent prayer Psalm. 42.4.
, I power over my soul within me. According to that of Austin Quo quisque
sanctior, eo eius in orando fletus vberior.
The more holy and devout a man is, the more will he be sure to weep in his
prayer. And no marvel that he does weep in praying, which does pray for
weeping. Grant, O Lord, says the same father, that I may have a fountain of
tears, then especially when I offer up to thee my prayers and supplications Da
mihi lachrymarum fontem, tum praecipue, cum preces and orationes tibi offero.
Manualis cap. 11.
. For the olive tree is most abundant in fruit when it distilleth. And so a
Christian is most plentiful and powrefull in prayer when he weepeth. Hereupon
King David says, I am as a green olive tree, in the house of the Lord. And
our Savior himself whent often to the mount of Olives, where he offered up
prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears. And therefore he
wills us also, to have faith as a grayme of mustard seed. Now mustard seed
has his name in Greek, (...).
because it makes the eyes weep. So that he which in prayer has faith, as a
grain of mustard seed, has such a faith, as makes his eyes weep. And then
Christ says to him, Thou have wounded my heart with one of thine eyes. If with
one, then much more with both. For, as Synesius testifies, weeping is more
pearcing, and more forcible to persuade God, and even to wound his heart, then
all the eloquence, then all the rhetoric in the world (...).
. And Cpyrian says, when the spirit of man sends out sighs in prayer, then
the spirit of God gives grace Cum spiritus hominis suspirat, spiritus Dei
aspirat.
. And Ambrose, God looks when we pray, that we should power out our
tears, that he might pour out his mercies Expectat lachrymas nostras, vt
profundat pietatem suam. De paenit. l. c. 4.
. As for example, Anna Samuels mother, in the bitterness of her soul wept sore
when she prayed. Look how salt vapors arise out of the sea, which afterward
are turned into a pleasant shower: so out of the sea of her sorrowful soul
did arise sobs and sighs like salt vapors, which immediately were turned into
asweet shower of tears. Therefore God heard her prayer, and sent her a son.
The rather, because this weeping, the more bitter it was to her, the more
sweet it was to God. So Jacob wrestled with God, and prevailed against God
Genesis 32.28.
. But the Prophet Osee shows, that his wrestling was by weeping, and his
prevailing was by praying Ose. c. 12. v. 4.
. So Ezechias being sick prayed, praying turned him toward the wall and wept*
And then with weeping as with gunshot he battered down that partition wall of
his sins, which kept Gods loving countenance from him. Therefore says the
Lord to him, I have heard thy prayers and thy tears. A strange speech. I have
heard thy prayers. That I understand well enough. But J have heard thy tears.
What should be the meaning of this, trow you? Have tears tongues, I marvel,
or can they speak, that they may be heard? yea surely I dare be bold to say
it. The cloud-cleauing thunder of the almighty can not make such a rattling
sound, and such a roaring noise in the ears of man, as our tears do in the
ears of God. Therefore David both before he had prayed, Psalm. 141.1.
desires God to hear the voice of his crying, and also after he had prayed,
Psalm. 192.10.
thanketh God because he had heard the voice of his weeping. For indeed he
himself also says of himself, Psalm. 192.10.
I mingled my drink with weeping. And where was this drink of his, but in that
cup of which he says in an other place, Psalm. 1^6.13
I will take the cup of salvation, (or of prayer, and thanksgiving) and call
upon the name of the Lord. So that David mingling his drink with weeping,
mingled his prayer with weeping. Wherefore as Elizeus did cast salt into the
waters of Jericho, to make them sweet: so must we salt and season our prayers
with tears, to make them sauorie and delightsome to God. A man can never love
himself aright, that does not sometimes weep in repentance: nor his neighbor
(if he be a preacher) that does not sometimes weep in preaching: nor God, that
does not sometimes weep in prayer. So that we must not be like the Stoikes
which were never at all moved. Then we shall weep too little. As is proved in
this second part, BUT WEEP. VVEEP NOT FOR ME, BUT WEEP FOR YOUR SELVES.

THe third part is next, WEEP NOT, BUT WEEP. Which notes, seeing both the
excess and the want are to be eschewed, that therefore the true mean, which
we must keep in weeping, consists in an equal entermingling of these two
extremities, WEEP NOT BUT WEEP both together. WEEP NOT, says he, Too
much is contrary to nature. BUT WEEP, too little is contrary to repentance.
WEEP NOT, too much is contrary to reason. BUT WEEP, too little is contrary
to preaching. WEEP NOT, too much is contrary to religion. BUT WEEP, too
little is contrary to prayer. S. Paul charge Timothy to be instant, in
season, and out of season. First in season, then out of season. Teaching
thereby that unseasonable opportunity, is better then seasonable importunity.
Yet to keep a mean in exhorting, that we must as well use importunity
sometimes, so it be in season, as take an opportunity always, though it be
out of season. Even so, says our Savior here, WEEP NOT, BUT WEEP. First
weep not, then but weep. Teaching thereby that not to weep is better then to
weep, yet to keep a mean in weeping, that we must, as well sometimes in not
weeping weep, as always in weeping not weep. For the apostle says, That they
which rejoice must be as though they rejoiced not, and they which weep must
be as though they wept not. They which rejoice must be as though they rejoiced
not, because, says Gregory, Gaudium huius vitae, vua acerba. In c. 28. Iobi.
All the joy the godly have in this life is as a sower grape gathered out of
time. And Ambrose, Non solum dolor, sed et laetitia habet suas lachrymas.
The children of God not only in sorrow, but even in joy also sometimes shed
tears. They rejoice as though they rejoiced not. And they which weep must be
as though they wept not, because, says Macarius, (...). Homil. 15.
Even tears are a comfort to the righteous. And Ambrose again, Est pijs
affectib quaedam c^^am flendi voluptas. De obitu Valentiani. (...). 449.
To them that are well affected, weeping is a very great delight. They weep as
though they wept not. Wherefore as certain leaven apples have a sowrish
sweetness, and some old wines have a sweetish sowrenes; so both our sorrow must
be joyful, and our joy must be sorrowful. Our sorrow must be joyful; as
Christ did weep upon Palm sunday. Christ did weep. There is sorrow. Upon
Palm sunday. There is joy. And our joy must be sorrowful; as the Israelites did
eat the sweet Easter lamb with sower herbs. The sweet Easter lamb. There is
joy. WEEP NOT. With sower herbs. There is sorrow. BUT VVEEP. VVEEP NOT. This
is a fiery speech, as when S. John says, ye Christ's eyes are as a flame of
fire Revel. 19.12.
, that is, subject now to no weeping. BUT WEEP. This is a watery speech, as
when David says, I water my couch with my tears. So that if we would
reco^cile these speeches together, we must reconcile fire and water together.
Gregory observes, that in the rainbow there are two colors, red which
resembles fire, and blew which resembles water In arcu eodem color ignis and
aquae simul ostenditur: quia exparte est caeruleus, ex part rubicundus: vt
vtriusque iudicij testis sit, vnius videlicet faciendi, and alterius sacti.
Homil. 8. in Ezec.
. Red, that we might not weep, beholding the fire which shall burn when Christ
shall judge the world: and blewe that we might weep, beholding the water
which did flow when God did drown the world. Therefore as there be two
colors, red and blew in one raine-bowe: So there must be two affections, joy
and sorrow in one heart. This the wisdom of our ancestors seems to
insinuate, even in the apparel which they have appointed to be worn at this
solemnity. For ye chief magistrates of the city, this day wear scarlet
gowns which is a kind of red like fire, but to morrow they wear violet
gowns which is a kind of blew like water. Wherefore the colors of the
rainebow, which we see in your attire, do admonish you and us all, that joy
and sorrow have such an intercourse in this life, that though this day we
WEEP NOT, yet to morrow perhaps we can not BUT WEEP. This day we read
Salomons songs, to morrow peradventure we may read Ieremies lamentations. Now
in Elias his sacrifice, there were not only the colors of fire and water, but
even fire and water indeed. 1. Reg. 18.38
In so much as the fire of the Lord consumed and licked the water of the
altar. And assuredly our sorrowful soul will be a most acceptable sacrifice
to God, as Elias his sacrifice was, if we have both the fire of Aetna, and the
water of Nilus, so as the ardent fire of faith, well nie consume and almost
burn up, the flowing stream of love. In Epiro sacer fons est frigidus vltra
onmes aquas, and spectatae diuer sitatis. Nam si in eum ardentem demergas
facem, extinguit, si procul ac sine igne admoueas suopte ingenio inflammat,
Solinus. Poly. cap.
Austin reports, that there is a fountain in Epirus, which not only puts
out torches that are lighted, but also lights torches that are put out De
ciuitate Dei lib 25. c. 3.
. Fulgosus likewise reports, Mirum sontem dicere debemus, apud Gratianopolin
Gallicam vr^ens. Nam quamuis cale^tes aquas non hab^at, tamen simul cum ipsis
aquis, flammas persaepe emittit. Fulgosus lib. 1. non long a fine.
that there is an other fountain near Grenoble a city in France, which
although it have not hot waters as a bath, yet oftentimes together with
bubbles of water it casts up flames of fire. The fountain of tears that is
in our eyes must be like these two fountains. As the Psalmist witnesses, When
my sorrow was stirred (says he) my heart was hot within me, and while I was
musing the fire kindled Psalm. 30. v. 3.
. When my sorrow was stirred. There is the first fountain. My heart was hot
within me. There is the torch lighted. And while I was musing. There is the
other fountain. The fire kindled. There is the flame burning. Whereupon one
says fitly, Our eyes must neither be drowned, nor dry Nec fluant oculi, nec
sicci sint. Seneca.
. If they want fire, they will be drowned. If they want water, they will be
dry. Wherefore, both WEEP NOT, and BUT WEEP: both fire, and water, must go
together, that our eyes be neither drowned, nor dry. And this is the right
moderation we must keep in weeping, as appears in this third part, WEEP
NOT, BUT WEEP both together. WEEP NOT FOR ME, BUT WEEP FOR YOUR SELVES.

THe fourth part follows, FOR ME. Weep not too much for my death: For the
death of Christ; is the death of death: the death of the devil: the life of
himself: the life of man. The reason of all this, is his innocence and
righteousness, which makes first that as the life of Christ is the life of life:
so the death of Christ is the death of death. Put the case how you please, this
is a most certain truth, that the gate of life had never bin opened unto us,
if Christ who is the death of death had not by his death overcome death Mors
mortis morti mortem nisi morte dedisset, Caelestis vitae ianna clausa foret.
. Therefore both before his death he threatens and chalengeth death saying,
Ose 13.14.
O death I will be thy death: and also after his death he derideth and
scorneth death, saying, 1. Cor. 15.55.
O death thou art but a drone, where is now thy sting sic Johannes Pistorius
Erasms Roterodami affinis, igni cremandus dixit, O mors vbiest tua victoria?
? Ask death any of you (I pray) and say, death how have thou lost thy sting?
how have thou lost thy strength? What is the matter that virgins and very
children do now contemn thee, whereas kings and even tyrants did before fear
thee? Death (I warrant) will answer you, that the only cause of this is the
death of Christ. Even as a be stinging a dead body takes no hurt, but stinging
a live body many times loses both sting and life together; in like manner
death, so long as it stung mortal men only which were dead in sin was never a
whit the worse, but when it stunge Christ once, who is life it self, by and by
it lost both stinge and strength. Therefore as the brazen serpent was so far
from hurting the Israelites that contratiwise it healed them: after the same
sort death is now so far from hutting any true Israelite, that on the other
side, if affliction as a fiery serpent sting us, or if any thing else hurt us,
presently it is helped and redressed by death. Those which will needs play the
hobgoblins or the nightewalkinge spirits (as we call them) all the while they
speak under a hollow vault, or leap forth with an ugly vizard upon their
faces, they are so terrible that he which thinks himself nosmall man may
perhaps be affrighted with them. But if some lusty fellow chance to step
into one of these and cudgle him well fauoredly, and pull the vizarde from his
face, then every boy laughes him to scorn. So is it in this matter. Death was
a terrible bulbegger, and made every man afraid of him a great while, but
Christ dying buckled with this bulbegger, and coniured him (as I may say) out
of his hollow vault, when as the dead coming out of the graves were seen in
lerusalem: and pulled the vizard from his face, when as he himself risinge, left
the linne^ clothes which were the vizard of death behind him. Therefore as
that ass called Cumanus asinus ietting up and down in a lions skin did for
a time terrify his master, but afterward being discried did benefit him very
much: semblably death stands now like a silly ass, having his lions skin
pulled over his ears, and is so far from terrifying any, that it benefits all
true christians, because by it they rest from their labors, and if they be
oppressed with troubles or cares, when they come to death they are discharged;
death as an ass does bear these burdens for them. Oblessed, blessed be our
lord, which has so disarmed death that it can not do us any hurt, no more
then a be can which has no sting; nay rather it does us much good, as the
brazen serpent did the Israelites: which has so dismasked death that it can
not make us afraid, no more then a scarbug can which has novizard, nay rather
as an ass bears his masters burdens, so death eases and refreshes us. This
has Christ done by his death. He that felleth a tree upon which the sun
shines, may well cut the tree, but can not hurt the sun He that poweeth
water upon iron which is red botte, may well quench the heat, but he cannot
hurt the iron. And so Christ the sun of righteousness did drive away the
shadow of death: and as glowinge yon was too hot and too hard a morsel for
death to digest. All the while Adam did eat any other fruit which God gave him
leave to eat, he was nourished by it* but when he had tasted of the forbidden
tree he perished. Right so death had free leave to devour any other man,
Christ only excepted, but when it went about to destroy Christ, then it was
destroyed it self. Those barbarous people called Cannibals which feed only
upon raw flesh, especially of men, if they happen to eat a piece of roasted
meat, commonly they surset of it and die Even so the right Canniball the only
deuourer of all mankind, death I mean, tasting of Christ's flesh, and
finding it not to be raw (such as it was used to eat) but wholesome and
heavenly meat indeed, presently took a surfeit of it, and within three days
dyed. For even as when Judas had received a sop at Christ's hand, anon after his
bowels gushed out: in like sort death being so saucie as to snatch a sop (as
it were) of Christ's flesh, and a little bit of his body, was by and by like
Judas choked and strangled with it, and feign to yield it up again, when
Christ on Easter day revived. Death I wisse, had not bin brought up so daintily
before, nor used to such manner of meat, but always had rauened either with
Mithridates daughters upon the poison of sin, or else with Noah's crow upon
the carrion of corruption. Wherefore now says Fulgentius, Mors Christum
gustauit, sed non deglutiuit.
death did indeed taste of Christ, but could not swallow him up, nor digest
him. Contrariwise Christ as soon as ever he had but a little tasted of death
Hebr. cap. 2. ver. 9.
eftsoon he did devour death, he did swallowe up death in victory. And so
the death of Christ by reason of his righteousness is the death of death.

It is also the death of the devil. As the Apostle says that by his death he
did overcome not only death, but him also which had the power of death, the
devil. It is reported that the Libard uses a shaunge kind of policy to kill
the ape. He lies down upon the ground as though he were stark dead: which
the apes seeing come all together, and in despite skip up upon him. This the
Libard bears patiently till he thinks they have wearied themselves with their
sporting. Then suddenly he likewise leaps up and catches one in his mouth, and
in each foot one, which immediately he kills and deuoureth Concul^ant
insultantes ludibrij causae donec pardalis sentiens illas iam saltando
defatigatas de repent reuiuiscens aliam dentib. aliam vnguib. corripit. Eras.
Prou. Pardi mortem adsimulat.
. This was Christ's policy. He was laid in the dust for dead. The devil then
insulted over him and trampled upon him. But he like a lively Lybard startinge
up on Easter day astonisheth the soldiers set to keep him which were the
devils apes, and made them lie like dead men Math. cap. 28. ver. 7.
. Even as he told them before by his prophet, saying. I will be to them as a
very Lion, and as a Lybard in the way of Ashur Ose. cap. 13. ver. 7.
. For as blind Samson by his death killed the Philistines, when they were
playinge the apes in mocking and mowinge at him Iudicum 10. ver. 25.
: so Christ by his death destroyed the devil. Scaliger writes that the
Chameleon when he espies a serpent taking shade under a tree, climes up into
that tree and lets down a thread, breathed out of his mouth as small as a
spiders thread, at the end whereof there is a little drop as clear as any
pearl, which fallinge upon the serpe^ts head kills him Ex ore filum demittit
araneorum more: in cuius fili extremo guttula est margarttae splendore, ea
tactus in vertice serpens moritur. Ex. 190.
. Christ is this Chameleon. He climes up into the tree of his cross and lets
down a thread of blood, issuing out of his side, like Rahabs red thread
hanging out of her window Signa fidei atque vexilla dominicae passionis
attollens coccum in fenestra ligauit. Ambro. de fide libro 5. cap. 5. and
Paulinus Natali. 8. Puniceo proprium signauit vellere tectum.
, the least drop whereof being so precious and so peereles falling upon the
serpents head kills him. The wild bull of al things can not abide any red
color. Therefore the hunter for the nonce standinge before a tree, puts on a red garment. Whom when the bull sees, he runs at him as hard as he can
drive. But the hunter slipping a side the bulls horns stick fast in the tree.
As when David slipped aside Saul's spear stuck fast in the wall 1. Sam. 19.10.
Such a hunter is Christ. Christ standing before the tree of his cross, puts
on a red garment dipped and died in his own blood, as one that comes with
read garments from Bozra Esa. cap. 63.1.
. Therefore the devil and his angels like wild bulls of Bazan Psalm. 22.12.
ran at him. But he shifting for himself, their horns stick fast in his
cross. As Abraham's ram by his horns stuck fast in the briers Genesis. 22.13.
. Thus is the devil caught and killed. A Dragon indeed kills an Elephant: yet
so as the Elephant falling down kills the dragon hith him. An Elephant kills
Elezar: yet so as Eleazar falling down kills the Elepha^t with him 1. Match. 6.46.
. And accordingly to this, the devil killing Christ was killed by Christ. Yea
as an Elephant is stronger then the Dragon, and Eleazar is stronger then the
Elephant: so Christ is stronger then them both. For the Elephant does not live
after he has killed the Dragon, neither does Eleazar live after he has
killed the Elephant: but Christ lives after he has destroyed the devil.
Leaving the devil dead, he is now risen himself from the dead. Wherefore as a
Lybard kills the ape: and a Chameleon the serpent: and a hunter the bull: and
an Elephant the dragon: and Eleazar the Elepha^t himself: so Christ the true
Eleazar, which signifies the help of God, has by his death killed, that
mischeeuous ape the devil: that old serpent the devil: that wild bull the
devil: that great dragon the devil: that raginge elephant the devil. When
Mahomet, the second of that name, beseeged Belgrade in Seruia, one of his
captains at length got up upon the wall of the city with banner displayed. A
noble Bohemian espying this ran to the captain, and clasping him fast about
the middle, asked one Capistranus standing beneath, whether it would be any
danger of damnation to his soul, if he should cast himself down headlong
with that dog (so he termed the turk,) to be slain with him? Capistranus
answering that it was no danger at all to his soul, the Bohemian forthwith
tumbled himself down with the Turk in his arms, and so by his own death
only saved the life of all the city Zieglerus. de illustribus viris ^erma^^tae
cap. 98.
. Such an exploit was this of Christ. The devil like the great Turk besieging
not only one city, but even all mankind, Christ alone like this noble Bohemian
encountered with him. And seeing the case was so, that this dog the devil, could
not be killed stark dead except Christ died also; therefore he made no
reckoninge of his life, but gave himself to death for us, that he only dying
for all the people, by his death our deadly enemy might for ever be destroyed.
For so Origin testifies that there were two crucified upon the cross of
Christ. Christ himself, visibly: with his will: and for a time. The devil,
inuisibly: against his will: and for ever Homi. 8. in Joshua.
. Therefore the cross is that victorious chariot in the upper part whereof
Christ sits as a triumpha^t conqueror, and in the lower part of it the
devil is drawn as a captive, and is made an open spectacle of ignominy and
reproach. Diverse ancient fathers note the virgin Mary was married that the
devil might be deceived. For he knew well enough Christ should be borne of a
virgin. But he never suspected blessed Mary was a virgin, considering she was
wedded to Joseph. Therefore he did not lie in wait to destroy the seed of the
woman so circumspectly as otherwise he would if he had bin aware or wist any
such thing. So that the birth of Christ did cosen the devil. But the death of
Christ did conquer the devil. And that much more gloriously when the temple of
his body was upon the pinnacle of the cross, then when the body of his cross
was upon the pinnacle of the temple. For when he was upon the temple his breath
spoke better things then Satan: but when he was upon the cross his blood
spoke better things then Abell: and there his breath came from his lunges out
of his mouth, but here his blood came from his heart out of his side: and there
he fought standing stoutly to it, and withstanding Satan he would not in any
wise throw down himself, but here he skirmished yielding and humbling
himself to the death of the cross: and there the diuill ascended up to him
unto the top of an high mountain, and so (as I may say) bad him base at his
own goal, but here he himself descended down to the devil into the
neathermost hell, and so spoiled principalities and powers, and slew the great
Leuiathan in the very bottom of his own bottomless pit. For the devil like a
greedy ravenous fish snatching at the bait of Christ's body (as Damascene
speaks) was pierced through and twicht up with the hook of his Deity (...).
. Therefore both before Christ's passion, Peter took money out of a fishes
mouth to pay his tribute: and also after Christ's passion, the disciples
broyled a fish for him to feed upon. Whereby we see, that Christ, who made a
fish pay tribute to Caesar for him, made the devil also pay tribute to death
for him: and on the other side that the devil while he went about to catch
this good fish, which is Jesus Christ Gods son the savior (as Methodius and
Sybilla prove the letters of (...), (...).
severally signify) was himself caught, yea also killed by Christ. So that
all the while Christ was buried in the grave, the devil was broyled in hell.
Wherefore as it was booteles for Golias to brandishe his spear against David:
so it little auailed the devil to shake his spear likewise in the hand of the
soldier against the heart of Christ. For as David having heard Golias prate
and talk his pleasure, when they came to the point at the first stroke
overthrew him: so Christ with that very self same spear which gave him a
little venny in comparison, or (if it be lawful for me so to speak) but a
phillip on the side, which was soon after recured, gave the devil a deadly
wound in the forehead, which with all his paws he shall never be able to claw
off. And again, as David only with his sling wrought this feate: so Christ
only by his death, and by the power of his cross, which is the sling of David
Sane crux ipsa funda est, qua David Goliath horrendum armis and formidabilem
visu prostrauit hunet. Cyr. Ioh. l. 8.17.
did conquer and subdue the devil. And so the death of Christ by reason of his
righteousness is the death of the devil.

It is on the other side the life of himself. That which was prophesied in the
Psalm is here fulfilled in christ. Psalm. 92.12.
The just shall flourish as the palm tree. In the hebrew it is Tamar, which
signifies only a palm tree. But in the greek it is Phoinix which signifies not
only a palm tree, but also a Phoenix. Which translation proves two things.
First, that Jesus the just one did most flourish when he was most afflicted. For
the just shall flourish as the palm tree Chattamar.
. Now the palm tree, though it have many waights at the top, and many snakes
at the root, yet still it says, I am neither oppressed with the waights, nor
distressed with the snakes Nec premor, nec perimor.
. And so Christ the true palm tree, though all the judgments of God, and all
the sins of the world, like unsupportable waightes were laid upon him, yea
though the cursed Jews stood beneath like venomous snakes hissing and biting
at him, yet he was, neither so oppressed with them, nor so distressed with
these, but that even upon his cross he did most flourish, when he was most
afflicted. As penny royal being hung up in the larder house, yet buds his
yellow flower: and Noah's olive tree being drownde under the water, yet keeps
his green branch: and Aarons rod being clunge and dry, yet brings forth ripe
almonds: and Moses bramble bush being set on fire, yet shines and is not
consumed. Secondly, that Jesus the just one did most live, when he seem'de
most to be dead. For the just shall flourish as the phoenix (...).
. Now the phoenix though sitting in his nest among the holy spices of Arabia he
be burnt to ashes, yet still he says, I die not but old age dies in me
Moritur me non moriente senectus.
. And so Christ the true phoenix, though lying in his grave among the hot spices
wherewith with Nichodemus embalmde him, he was never like to rise from death to
life again, yet he dyed not but mortality died in him, and immortality so
lived in him, that even in his sepulcher he did most live, when he seemde
most to be dead. As the Laurel is greenest in the foulest winter: and the
lime is hottest in the coldest water: and the glow-worme shines brightest when
the night is darkest: and the swan sings sweetest when his death is nearest
Cantator cygnus funeris ipse sui. Mart^ alis lib. 13. Epigr.
. Epaminondas being sore wounded in fight, demanded of his soldiers standing
by, whether his enemies were overthrown or no? They answered yea. Then whether
his buckler were whole or no? They answered also I. Nay then (says he) all is
well. This is not the end of my life, but the beginning of my glory. For now
your dear Epaminondas dying thus gloriously shall rather be borne again then
buried Nunc enim vester Epaminondas nascitur, quia sic moritur.
Christ likewise was sore wounded. But his enemies death and the devil were
overthrown and spoiled. His buckler, which was his Godhead, was whole and
untouched. Therefore there was no harm done. His death was no death, but an
exaltation unto greater glory Ego si exaltatus suero. Ioh. 12.32.
. That noble Eunuch riding in his cooch read in Esaias, that Christ was silent
before his death, as a lamb before the shearer. He says not, before the
butcher, but, before the shearer. Insinuating that death did not kill Christ,
but only sheare him a little. Neither yet had death Christ's fleece when he
was shorn. For Christ taking to himself a spoungefull of vinegar Ioh. ca.
19.29
, that is, full of our sharp and sower sins, did give us for it purple wool
full of blood, Heb. c. 9.19.
that is, full of his pure and perfect justice. And indeed the only livery
which Christ our Lord and master gives all us that are his faithful
servants, is a coat made of this purple wool. The Psalm mist says, that God
gives his snow like wool. But here we may turn the sentence, and say, that
Christ gives his wool like snow. For as snow covers the ground when it is
ragged and deformed: so Christ's wool which is his coat without seame,
covers our sins, and though they were as crimson, yet makes them white as
snow. And as Gedeons fleece when it was moist, the earth was dry, but when it
was dry the earth was moist: So when Christ's fleece was moist as a green
tree, then were all we dry like rotten sticks, but when his fleece was dry,
all the blood and water being wrung out of his precious side, then were we
moist'ned with his grace. Wherefore seeing death had not Christ's fleece when
he was shorn, but we have it which believe in him, it follows that neither
death was the better nor christ the worse. But as a lamb is much more nimble
and lively for shearing: so this shearing of death was a kind of quickening to
the lamb of God, and only a trimming to him before he ascended to his father,
as Joseph was trimmed and poul'd before he appeared to Pharaoh. For look how
Adam slept: so Christ died Dormit Adam, moritur Christus. Prosper.
. When Adam slept, his side was opened: when Christ died, his side was opened.
Adams side being opened, flesh and bone were taken out: Christ's side being
opened, water and blood were taken out. Of Adams flesh and bone the woman was
built: of Christ's water and blood the Church is built. So that the death of
Christ is nothing else but the sleep of Adam. For as he says of the damsels
death, The damsel is not dead but sleeps; so he says of his own death, I
laid me down and slept, and rose up again for the Lord sustained me. And in
an other place, when God the father says to his son, Awake my glory, awake
my lute and harp: God the son answers to his father, I will awake right
early. That vessel which Peter saw in a trance, which came down from heaven
to the earth, and was knit at the four corners, and had all manner of beasts
in it, did betoken Christ. Christ came down from heaven to the earth: and his
story is knit up by the four Evangelists: and he has made Jews and
Gentiles, yea all nations, though they were as bad as beasts before, yet he
has made them all, I say, one in himself. Now says Cassianus, it is worth
the noting, that the holy Ghost says not, this vessel was a sheet, but was
like a sheet Pulchre ait, Non linteum sed, Quasi linteum.
. A sheet may signify either sleep or death. Because there is both a sleeping
sheet, and a winding sheet. But neither was Peter's vessel a sleep, though
it were like a sheet: neither was Christ's body dead, though it were lapt in a
sheet. For we our selves can not so properly be said to live in our first
birth, as in our second birth: and Christ's life when he lay in that new womb,
in which never any other was conceived, is nothing to his life, when he lay
in that new tomb, in which never any other was buried. Wherefore as Jacob
travailing toward Haram, when he had laid an heap of stones under his head,
and taken a nap by the way, was much revived with it after his tedious journey:
so Christ travailing toward heaven, when he had slept a little in that stony
sepulcher which was hewn out of a rock, lived then most princely after his
painful passion. Tell me when did Jonas live? in the hatches of the ship, or
in the belly of the whale? In the hatches of the ship? why? I am sure you
will not say so. That was nothing. But to live in the belly of the whale when
the mariners were in extreme ieopardie and danger upon the water, and yet
Jonas most safe and secure under the water, this indeed was somewhat. Who ever
saw such a wonder? The waves were one while hoisted up to the highest clouds,
an other while hurled down to the nethermost depth, Jonas self being all this
while in the very gulf of destruction, and yet not one hair the worse.
Christ's case was the same. As Jonas was in the belly of the whale three days
and three nights: so and so long was the son of man in the bowels of the
earth. Yet he had no more hurt then Jonas had. But lived better under the earth
then we can upon the earth, better in death then we can in life. Tell me when
did Daniell live? In the kings court? or in the lions den? In the kings
court? why? there is no great reason for that. Any man might have lived there.
But to live in the lions den, when the mouth of the den was shut, and the
mouths of the lions open, this indeed was the life of an angel and no man. What
king could ever make lions attend, and wait upon him? Yet here you might have
seen worthy Daniel sitting in the midst of many hungry lions, when as the
lions lay down at his feet couching and crouching before him, and adored
their own pray cast unto them, which otherwise they would have werried, and
being beasts became men in humanity toward this saint, seeing men became
beasts in cruelty against him. The same reason was in Christ. His sepulcher
was sealed as well as Daniels den. And he says also of himself in the Psalm,
My soul is among lions. These lions were the terrors of death, and the
horrors of hell. Yet he took no more hurt the^ Daniel did. But brake the
chains of death into fitters, and the gates of hell into shiuers, and then
most gloriously triumphed. And so the death of Christ by reason of his
righteousness is the life of himself.

It is lastly the life of man. When Christ's spear had opened that way of life
which the Cherubins sword had stopped up, then says our Savior to the thief,
This day shall thou be with me in paradise. Adam and Eve both in one day were
expelled out of paradise. Christ and the thief both in one day were received
into paradise. Yea both in one hour of the day. For about noone when the wind
blewe Adam and Eve were expelled. And so about the sixth hour, that is about
twelve a clock in the day time, Christ and the thief were received. Christ
saying to the thief while he did draw him up into paradise Ose cap. 11.
I do draw thee with the cords of a man even with bands of love. But the
septuaginte translate the hebrewe words Bechauele adam.
which signify, with the cords of a man, into those greek words (...).
which signify with the destruction of a man. As if Christ should say thus to
the thief. I do so dearly love thee that I am content, my self to be
destroyed that thou may be saved, my self to dye that thou may live. I
do draw thee with the destruction of a man, even with bands of love. So that
the thief who saw his own wounds and death in Christ's body, did see also
Christ's saving health and life in his own body. As Alcuinus says writing
upon the sixth of John Assumpsit vita mortem, vt mors acciperet vitam,
; when the living Lord dyed, then the dyinge thief lived. Notably says the
prophet Lamen. 4. ver. 21.
, The breath of our nostrels, Christ the Lord is taken in our sins, to whom we
said we shall live in thy shadow. If Christ be the breath of our nostrels,
then he is our life. And again, if we live in his shadow, then we live in his
death. For where there is breath in a shadow, there there is life in death.
Now as the ouershadowing of the holy Ghost was the life of Christ; so the
ouershadowing of Christ, is the life of man. And as Peter's shadow gave health
to the sick: so Christ's shadow gives life to the dead. yea a thousand times
rather Christ's then Peter's. For as Elias his spirit was doubled upon Elizeus,
because Elias being alive restored some to life, but Elizeus, as Ierom says,
being dead raised up one from the dead Mortuus mortuum suscitauit.
so Peter's spirit was doubled upon Christ, because Peter being alive was a
physician to the living, but Christ as Chrysostom says, being dead was a
physician to the dead (...).
Or rather indeed in this comparison there is no comparison. But as Peter's
spirit was a shadow to Christ's spirit: so Peter's shadow was nothing to
Christ's death. Ezechias seeing the shadow of the sun go ten degrees back in
the dial, was assured by this sign, that he should recover of his sickness
Esaias. cap. 38.8.
Sick Ezechias may signify all mankind which is sick by reason of sin. But
this is an infallible sign we shall recover, because the sun has gone ten
degrees back in the dyal. The sun of righteousness Jesus Christ has for our
sake made himself lower by many degrees in the earth. My father is greater
then I. There he is gone back ten degrees below his father. Thou have made
him lower then the angels. There he is gone back ten degrees below the
angels. I am a worm and no man. There he is gone back ten degrees below men.
A live dog is better then a dead lion Eccles. 9. ver. 4.
There he is gone back ten degrees below worms. For he was not counted so
good as a live worm, but was buried in the earth as a dead lion to be meat
for the worms, if it had bin possible for this holy one to see corruption. But
blessed, O blessed be our Lord! Christ beeinge in the form of God was buried
in the grave, and so was made lower then his father; nay lower then angels; nay
lower then men; nay lower then worms: that we being now no better then worms
might be crowned in heaven, and so might be made higher then worms; yea
higher then men; yea higher then angels; yea partakers of the same life and
kingdom with Christ. Pliny reports L. 36. cap. 10.
that there was a dial set in Campus martius to note the shadows of the sun
which agreeing very well at the first, afterward for thirty years together did
not agree with the sun. All the time of those thirty yea three and thirty
years that Christ lived in his humiliation here upon earth, you might have
seen such a dial. In which time the shadow of the dial did not agree with
the shining of the sun. But thanks be to God, all the better for us. When the
sun went backward ten degrees in the dial, then Ezechias went forward
fifteen degrees in his life. He lived fifteen years longer. And so the going
of this sun Jesus Christ ten degrees backward, has healed all our sickness,
and set us a thousand degrees forward, and infinitely advanced us by his death
to everlasting life. For Christ is that louinge Rachell, which dies her self
in childbirth to bring forth her son Benjamin alive; Christ is that
righteous Adam which by the bloody sweat of his brows has earned for us the
bread of life; Christ is that just Noah, which shutting up himself in his
Arcke as in a sepulcher saves all that come to him alive: Christ is that
tender Pelican which woundinge his own breast, does with his blood restore
again his young ones to life. And even as when many birds are caught in a net,
if a Pelican, or any other great bird that is among them get out, all the
rest that are little ones follow after: semblably Christ as a great bird having
broken through the net of death, all we escape with him: So that we may say
with the Psalmist, Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the
fouler, the snare is broken and we are delivered. Arnobius upon these words in
the psalm Psalm. 138.8.
, Despise not the work of thine own hands, writes thus, We are the work of
thine own hands, seeing we are thy workmanshippe Ephesians. 2.10. lysius sumus
factura conditi in Christo. Quantum ad substa^tiam fecit, qua^tum ad gratiam
condidit. Tertull. aduer. Mar. l. 5. non long a fine.
. Now because the work of thy hands was destroyed by the work of our hands,
therefore were thy hands nailed to the cross for our sins. That those hands
of thine might repair again the work of thy hands by the tree of the
cross, which was destroyed by the tree of concupiscence. Thus far Arnobius.
Whereby we may gather that the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil is evil, that is death, but the fruit of the tree of life, that is of
the cross of Christ, is life. When Alexander had thrown down the walls of
the Thebes, Phryne a harlot promised that she would at her own charges repair
them again, so that the citizens would suffer this title to be graven upon
the gate, Alexander has thrown them down, but Phryne has raised them up A
(...). Plutar.
. The case is quite contrary here. Eve has ouerthrowene not only Thebes, but
even all mankind. Christ has at his own cost and charges repaired and built
us up again. Therefore we must grave this title upon the cross of Christ,
Eve has thrown us down, But Christ has raised us up. Eues tree of knowledge
of good and evil has thrown us down, but Christ's tree of life has raised
us up. Nay I will be bold to say yet more. What is that? Marry this, That as
far as the tree of life excels the tree of knowledge of good and evil, so
far the cross of Christ excels the tree of life. I know well many will
muse and marvel much what I mean to say so. And some perhaps will scarce
believe it is true which I say. Nevertheless, most christian and blessed
brethren, make you no doubt of it. For it is not my opinion or my speech only.
They are the very words of our savior. I came, says he, that men might have
life John chap. 10.10.
, and that they might have it more abundantly. More abundantly? What is that?
That abundantly we might have more life by the cross of Christ, then ever
we could have had by the tree of life: that abounda^tly we might gain more by
the obedience of Christ in his death, then ever we lost or could lose by the
disobedience of Adam in his life. And therefore though that sin of Adam was
so heinous and so horrible; that it cast the image of God out of Paradise; that
it polluted all the race of mankind; that it condemned the whole world; that it
defaced the very frame of heaven it self; yet considering the sequel, how not
only the guilt of this sin, but even the very memory of it is now utterly
abolished by the blood of Christ, S. Gregory is not afraid to say, O happy,
happy, happy man was Adam that ever he so sinned and transgressed against God
O foelix culpa quae talem ac tantum meruit habere redemptorem.
. Because by this means both he and all we have found; such plentiful
redemption; such inestimable mercy; such superabundant grace; such selicity;
such eternity; such life by Christ's death. For as honey beeinge found in a dead
lion, the death of the lion was the sustenance of Sampson; so Christ's gall is
our honey Christifel nostrum mel.
, and the bitter death of Christ by reason of his righteousness is the sweet
life of man. Thus you see that the death of Christ is, the death of death; the
death of the devil; the life of himself; the life of man. And therefore he
says in this fourth part, weep not too much for my death, FOR ME. VVEEP NOT
FOR ME BUT VVEEP FOR YOUR SELVES.

I Perceive beloved I have bin somewhat long in this part. Therefore I will
make more have in the rest, and do what I can devise that I may not seem
tedious unto you. Now then to the fifth part. FOR YOUR SELVES. Weep not too
little for your own life. For the life of man is quite contrary. The life of
man is the life of death: the life of the devil: the death of himself: the
death of Christ. The reason of all this is his iniquity and sin. Which even
in gods dear children, says Barnard, is cast down, but not cast out
Deiectum, non ^^ectum.
. Therefore though sin can not sometimes rule over us, because it is cast down,
yet it will always dwell in us, because it is not cast out. For it is so bred
in the bone, that till our bones be with Joseph's bones carried out of Egypt,
that is out of the world, sin can not be carried out of our bones. The irish
history tells us that the city of Waterford gives this posey Intacta manet
It continues untouched.
. Because since it was first conquered by king Henry the second, it was never
yet attaynted, no not so much as touched with treason. Also that the isle of
Arren in that country has such a pure air, that it was never yet infected
with the plague. We can not say thus of the nature of man, That either it is
so clear from treason, as that city is, or else that it is so clear from
infection, as that Island is. Nay our very reason is treason, and our best
affection is no better then an infection, if it be well sifted in the sight of
God. Euagrius records libr. 5. ca. 15.
, that the Romans got such a victory over Chosroes, one of the Persian kings,
that this Chosroes made a law, that never after any king of Persia should move
war against the Romans. We cannot possibly subdue sin in such sort, as the
Romans did this Persian king. But do we what we can do, sin will always be
a Iebuzite, a false borderer, yea a rank traitor rebelling against the spirit.
Which makes the life of man first to be, says Chrysostom, a debt (as it were)
own and due to death (...).
. For the devil is the father of sin, and sin is the mother of death. Hereupon
Saint James says, that sin being finished travailing in childbyrth like a
mother brings forth death. And David in the ninth psalm calls sin the gate
of death. Because as a man comes into a house by the gate: so death came into
the world by sin. The corruption of our flesh did not make the soul
sinful: but the sin of our soul did make the flesh corruptible. Whereupon
Lactantius calls sin the relief or the food of death Pabulum mortis.
. As a fire goes out, when all the fuel is spent, but burns, as long as
that lasts: so death dies when sin cease, but where sin abounds there
death rages. The Prophet Abacucke sinning not, death was so far from him that
he was able to fly without wings: but king Asa sinning, death was so near to
him that he was not able to stand upon his feet. Nay we may see this in one
and the selfsame man. Moses sinning not death could not meet with him in the
bottom of the red sea: but sinninge death did seize upon him in the top of
mount Nebo. So that the life of man by reason of his sin is the life of death.

It is also the life of the devil. As Emisenus says, Each one has in him as
many devils as evils Tot daemonia quot crimina.
: every several sin being sufficient to maintain a several devil. The
godly finding no joy in the earth, have their conversation in heaven. But
Satan finding no joy in hell, has his conversation in the earth. So that ye
earth is a hell to us; but a heaven to him. Here he has his living. As it was
said at the first, Thou shall eat the dust of the earth all the days of thy
life. This dust, says Macarius, is the devils diet (...).
. And therefore as a scadle curre waits for a bone: so he that goes about
seeking whom he may devour, watches continually till the godly shake off the
dust from their feet, that is, shake off some sin which they have gotten by
walking in the world, that then he may lick it up as one of those dogs,
which did lick up Iezabels blood. This is meat and drink to him Dulce
diabolo peccare nos. Hila. Enarra. in p. 118.
. He loves it a life to see us sin, even as cursed Cham did to see Noah's
nakedness. And as flies are always busy about a sore place: so, says
Theophilact (...). In cap. Luke 16. p. 320.
, That is a sport or a pleasure to Satan, which is a sore or a pain to man.
Especially if he be a godly man. For this Behemoth the devil eats grass as
an ox Job. 40.10.
. Whereupon Gregory notes, that a sheep or any such other beast will eat any
manner of grass, though it be trampled and stained never so much: but an ox
will eat no kind of grass but that which is green and fresh. And so the
devil will be sure to have his feed of the very finest and best Esca eius
electa. Abacuc. 1.16.
. For the angel of the Lord reioiceth most when one that is a sinner
conuerteth. He eats grass as a sheep. But the angel of satan rejoices
most, when one that is a convert sins. He eats grass as an ox. If the
devil can not keep a man from living long, then he will hinder him from
living well Aut impetrat mortes aut impetit mores. Leo.
. If he can not kill him, then he will corrupt him. And indeed he takes
greater pleasure in corrupting one godly man, then in killing a hundred wicked.
He was more delighted when David slew but Vrias, then when Saul slew himself:
when Peter did but deny Christ, then when Judas betrayed him. So that the life
of man by reason of his sin is the delight, yea it is the very life of the
Devil.

It is on the other side the death of himself. O miserable wretch that I am
(says one) who shall deliver me from this body of death? The life of the godly
is a very body of death. But their death is only a shadow of death. Thales a
Philosopher being demanded what difference there is between life and death?
Answered, They are all one. Then being asked again, if he had not rather live,
then die? No, says he, as before, for they are al one. But Jerome says far
more excellently, They are not all one. That is not true. For it is one thing
to live in continual danger of death: an other thing to die in continual
assurance of life Aliud viuere morituru^: aliud mori victurum.
. Therefore Ecclesiastes says, that the day of our death is better then the
day of our birth. For when we are borne we are mortal: but when we are dead we
are immortal. And we are alive in the womb to die in the world: but we are
dead in the grave to live in heaven. Hence it is that the wicked are merry at
their birth day, as Pharaoh made a feast at his birth day, when his chief
baker was hanged Genesis 40.20.
and Herod likewise made a feast at his birth day when John Baptist was
beheaded: but they are sorry at their dying day, as Judas was sorry when he went
about to hang himself: and Cain was afraid every one would kill him that met
him. Contrariwise the godly are sorry at their birth day, as Job, Let the day
perish wherein I was borne: and Jeremy, Let not the day wherein my mother bare
me be blessed Ierem. 20.14.
But they are merry at their dying day, as Simeo^, Lord now let thou thy
servant depart in peace: and Paul, I desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ. Therefore we also keep holy days, and celebrate the memory of the
Saints not upon their birth-daies, but upon their death-daies, to show that
these two are not all one, but yt the day of our death is better then the day
of our birth. For whereas there are two ways, the one having in it, first a
tra^sitory life, and the^ an eternal death, the other having in it first a
transitory death, and then an eternal life: the wicked choose to live here for
a time, though they die for it hereafter eternally, but the godly choose to
have their life hid with Christ here, that they may live with Christ eternally
hereafter. Therefore the wicked never think of death; but the godly think of
nothing else. As Alexander the monarch of ye world had al other things, save
only a sepulcher to bury him in when he was dead; he never thought of that. But
Abraham the heir of the world had no other possession of his own, but only a
field which he bought to bury his dead (...); he thought of nothing else. We
read that Daniel strowed ashes in the temple to descrie the footesteps of Bells
priests, which did eat up the meat. So did Abraham strew ashes in his
memory, saying, I will speak unto my Lord though I be but dust and ashes. So
do all the faithful remembering they shall one day be turnde to dust and
ashes. That so seeing and marking the footesteps of death how it continually
comes and steals away their strength (as Bells priests did the meat) how it
daily eats up and wastes and consumes their life, they may be always
prepared for it. Our first parents made them garments of fig leaves. But God
misliking that gave the^ garments of skins. Therefore Christ in the Gospel
cursed the fig tree which did bear only fig leaves to cover our sin: but
commended the Baptist which did wear skins to discover our mortality. For not
only, as Austin says, Our whole life is a disease Vita morbus.
: but also as Bernard says, Our whole life is a death Vita mors.
. The life of man by reason of his sin is a continual disease, yea it is the
very death of himself.

It is lastly the death of Christ. The prophet Esaias calls Christ a sin, or a
sacrifice for sin Asham. Esaias 53.10.
, prefigured by all those sin offerings of the old law. Because indeed when
Christ was crucified at the first, he was broken for our sins. According to
that of Tertullian, Propter peccatum mori necesse habuit filius dei. Vide etiam
Aug. Medita. cap. 7. vbi docet hominem esse causam passionis.
Sin it was which brought the son of God to his death. The Jews were only
instruments and accessaries to it: sin was the setler and the principal.
They cried, Crucify him in the court of Pilate: but our sins cried, Crucify
him in the court of heaven. Now as the death of Christ was not efficient to
save the wicked: so the sin of the wicked was not sufficient to condemn
Christ. But the scripture says of them which either are, or at least wise
seem to be godly, They say they know God, but by their works they deny him:
and, Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? and, They crucify again unto
themselves the son of God. Zachary prophecieth of Christ, Zach. 13.6.
That when one shall say unto him, what are these wounds in thy hands? Then he
shall answer, Thus was I wounded in the house of my friends. That is, in the
house of the^ which ought to have bin my friends. So that our sins did wound
Christ's bands at the first. And now also not the wicked, which are no part of
his body, but we which are mystical members of his body, and therefore should
by good reason be his friends: we I say, do yet oftentimes by our sins deny
Christ with Peter: nay we persecute Christ with Paul: nay we crucify Christ
with the Jews. Yea (if it will please you to hear me) I will say yet more, we
crucify Christ far more cruelly then the Jews did. Then his body was
passible and mortal, now it is glorified and immortal; they knew not what
they did, we do ill enough, yet we know what we do well enough: they
pierced him with a spear, we pearce him with reproaches; they buried him in the
earth, we bury him in oblivion; then he rose again the third day: but we so
bury Christ, that not once in three days, no not once in three weeks he
arises or shines in our hearts. Nay, that which I am ashamed to speak,
though some are not ashamed to do it, there are in the world which have no
time, not once in three months, not once in three years, no not once search
in their whole life to think of Christ, but bury him in the perpetual
forgerfulnes of their careless conscience, as in a barren land, where all good
things are forgotten. Wherefore let every one as soon as he is tempted to any
sin, think straightwaies that he sees Christ coming toward him, wrapped up
in white linen clothes as he was buried, with a kercher bound about his head,
and crying after a ghastly and fearful sort, Beware, Take heed what you do,
Detest sin, abhor sin, Fie upon it, A shame light on it, It once did most
vilely and vilanouslie murder me: but now seeing my wounds are whole again,
do not (I beseech you) do not rub and revive them with your sins to make
them bleed afresh: now seeing the scepter of the kingdom of heaven is put into
my hand, do not offer me a reed again to mock me: now seeing my head is
crowned with the pure gold of eternal glory, do not set a crown of thorns
upon it again: now seeing I my self am enstalled in the throne of the right
hand of majesty, do not pull me out of my throne, and throw me into the
grave again, and with your sins seal a mighty great stone upon me, to
stiffle me, and press me, and hold me down in death. O beloved, good beloved
at his instance be persuaded, by whose blood you are redeemed. Have pity,
have pity upon poor Jesus. Once he voluntarily yea even joyfully dyed for us,
and if that one death had not bin sufficient, he would have bin content then to
have dyed a thousand deaths more. Now he protests, that the least sin of
any one Christian, does more vex him even at the very heart, then all his
dolorous pains upon the cross. Our sins are those soldiers which take him,
those tormentors which whippe him, those thorns which gore his head, those
nails which pearce his feet, that spear which sheds his blood, that cross
which takes away his life. And yet if to grieve him thus continually would do
us any good, then he would be most glad to prefer our good, though never so
little, before his own grief, though never so great. But it is not so. That
one death which he willingly suffered, was for our salvation. These diverse
deaths which we without sins so often put him to against his will, do make
for our greater da^natio^. Therefore he beseeches us, and I also being
prostrate at the very feet of every one of you heartely in his name exhort
you, if we will have no pity of him, yet for the tender love we bear to our
own dear souls, that we would not always keep him upon the rack, and
every day vex this just Lot with our unlawful deeds, that we would not any
more shead his precious blood, and tread it and trample it under our feet.
This I assure you (blessed Christians) will be a most forcible means, not only
to terrify and fraye us from sin which we may commit hereafter, but also to
mollify and melt our hearts for sin which we have committed heretofore, if we
consider, that the life of man by reason of his sin is the death of Christ.
Thus you see that the life of man, is the life of death: the life of the
diuill: the death of himself: the death of Christ. And therefore he says in
this fifth part, weep not too little for your own life, FOR YOUR SELVES, WEEP
NOT FOR ME, BUT VVEEP FOR YOUR SELVES.

THe sixth part is next, FOR ME FOR YOUR SELVES. Which notes, seeing both the
excess and the want are to be eschewed, that therefore the true mean which
we must keep between Christ and our selves, consists in a certain
qualification of these two extremities, FOR ME FOR YOUR SELVES both together.
Weep not too much, says he, for my death, which is the death of death: weep
not too little for your own life, which is the life of death. Not too to much
for my death, which is the death of the devil: not too little for your own
life, which is the life of the devil. Not too much for my death, which is my
life: not too little for your own life, which is your death. Not too much for
my death, which is the life of man: not too little for your own life, which is
the death of Christ. Saint Paul wills the Corinthians to approve themselves
by honor and dishonor. First by honor, then by dishonor. Teaching thereby
that dishonorable honor is better then honorable dishonor. Yet to keep a
mean in this matter, that we must as well count it an honor, to be sometimes
dishonored with Christ, as a dishonor to be always honored without Christ.
Even so says our Savior here FOR ME FOR YOUR SELVES. First FOR ME, then FOR
YOUR SELVES. Teaching thereby that to rejoice for Christ is better then to
weep for our selves. Yet to keep a mean betwixt both, that we must as well
sometimes descend out of Christ into our selves to weep, as always ascend out
of our selves into Christ to rejoice. For the Apostle says, that we must
rejoice with them that rejoice and weep with them that weep. If my friend be
always sorrowful and never joyful, he has no pleasure by me, if he be
always joyful and never sorrowful, I have no proof of him, but he is my
dearest friend, most delighted in me, best approved by me, that takes such
part as I do, sometimes rejoicing, and sometimes weepinge, rejoicing when I
rejoice, and weeping when I weep. The like is to be seen in this place. FOR
ME FOR YOUR SELVES. If a Christian always think of his own misery and never
of Christ's mercy, he will despair: if he always think of Christ's mercy
and never of his own misery, he will presume. But he is the best Christian,
so hye, that he cannot despair, so low, that he cannot presume, which inclines
as well to the one as to the other, sometimes rejoicing and sometimes weeping;
rejoicing for Christ and weeping for himself. A man cannot weep too little
for Christ, if he presume not: a man cannot weep too much for himself, if he
despair not. But he may easily despair, that weeps too much for Christ: and
he may easily presume, that weeps too little for himself. Wherefore as in a
balance, if there be any ods in the scales we take out of that which is ye
heavier, and put into that which is the lighter, til there be no difference
betwixt the^: So here we must way these matters well, that we our selves may
be just weight, neither too heavy for our own misery, nor too light for
Christ's mercy. Thus did David when he said to God, Hyde me under the shadow
of thy wings. What are Gods wings? His mercy and his justice. What is the
shadow of his wings? Our love and our fear. Our love is the shadow of his
mercy, which is his right winge. Our fear is the shadow of his justice,
which is his left wing. Now seeing he that is hid under the right winge only
may presume because he has no fear, and he that is hid under the left
winge only may despair, because he has no love, therefore says David, Hide
me, O Lord, under the shadow, not of one winge, but of both thy wings. That I
may never despair while I always love thy mercy, and rejoice for Christ:
that I may never presume while I always fear thy justice and weep for my
self. A Quail the very same bird which was the Israelites meat in the
wilderness, as he flies over the sea, feeling himself begin to be weary
lights by the way into the sea. Then lying at one side, he lays down one
wing upon the water, and holds up the other wing toward heaven. Least he
should presume to take too long a flight at the first, he wets one wing. Least
he should despair of taking a new flight afterward, he keeps the other
wing dry. Thus must a christian man do. When he lays down the wing of fear
upon the water to weep for himself, then he must hold up the wing of love
toward heaven to rejoice for Christ. That his two wings may be answerable to
Gods two wings. That as God has two wings, the one of mercy, the other of
justice: so he may have two wings, the one of joy for Christ, the other of
sorrow for himself. Shem and Iapheth Noah godly and dewtifull children, when
they saw their father otherwise then he should be, went backward and covered
him. They went backward, that they might not see him themselves: they covered
him, that others might not see him. Christ hanging naked upon the cross, was
the shame of men, and the outcast of the people. Therefore we that are the
children of God must go backward by abhorring them that crucified Christ: and
yet we must cover him and hide him, even in our very hearts, by remembering and
honoring his death and resurrection. Least we should presume, we must go
backward for fear: and yet least we should despair, we must cover him for
love. That as God hides us under the shadow of his wings which are love, and
fear, love the shadow of his mercy, and fear the shadow of his justice: so
we may hide God under the shadow of our wings, which are joy, and sorrow,
joy the shadow of our love, and sorrow the shadow of our fear, joy for
Christ, and sorrow for our selves. To this strange kind of going backward, the
Psalmist alludeth when he says to God, Thou have made my feet like hines
feet. A hine goes not still forward in one way, but as an ancient father
speaks, he iumpes cross out of one way into another Saltum habet transuer
sum.
Right so a christians feet must be like hines feet. He must iumpe cross,
from himself to Christ, and then back again, from Christ to himself. Would
you see such a hine? Then mark how Job footes it. That he might not despair,
he iumpes cross from himself to Christ, and says Chap. 33.9.
, I am clear without sin, I am innocent, and there is none iniquity in me.
Here is the mercy of Christ. But that he might not presume, be iumpes back
again from Christ to himself, and says Chap. 6.2.
, O that my grief were well wayed, and that my miseries were laid together in
the balance. Here is the misery of man. Thus must we way the mercy of Christ,
and the misery of man together in the balance, and be sure (as I said
before) we make the scales even, and when we way the reasons why we should
not weep for Christ, then we must way the reasons also why we should weep
for our selves. So we shall find, for great cause of joy in Christ, great
cause of sorrow in our selves: for greater cause of joy in Christ, greater
cause of sorrow in our selves: for greatest cause of joy in Christ, greatest
cause of sorrow in our selves: for that which is more then all to make us
joyful in Christ, that which is more then all to make us sorrowful in our
selves. The righteousness of Christ is the death of death. Great cause of joy
in Christ. If Debora rejoiced when Barack put Sisera to flight, have not we as
great cause to rejoice, seeing Christ has put death to flight? The sin of
man is the life of death. Great cause of sorrow in our selves. If Anna wept
for her barrennes, have not we as great cause to weep, seeing we can conceive
nothing but sorrow, and bring forth iniquity unto death? The righteousness of
Christ is the death of the devil. Greater cause of joy in Christ. If Judith
rejoiced, when she did cut off the head of Holofernes, have not we greater
cause to rejoice, seeing Christ has cut off the head of the devil? The sin
of man is the life of the devil. Greater cause of sorrow in our selves. If
Thamar wept being defloured by her brother, have not we greater cause to weep
seeing we commit spiritual incest and adultery daily with the devil? The
righteousness of Christ is the life of himself. Greatest cause of joy in
Christ. If Sara laughed when she heard she should have a quick child in her
dead womb, is not this the greatest cause of laughter which can be unto us,
that Christ lived in death, and was most free among the dead, and could not see
corruption in the grave? The sin of man is the death of himself. Greatest
cause of sorrow in our selves. If Agar wept being turnde out of Abraham's
house, is not this the greatest cause of weeping, which can be unto us, that
our life is no life, because we never cease from sinning, while we are here
pilgrims and strangers exiled and banished out of our fathers house in heaven?
The righteousness of Christ is the life of man. This is more then all to make us
joyful in Christ. If Queen Ester did rejoice, as Queen Elizabeth does at
this day (whom God for his mercies sake ever save and preserve, and let all the
people say Ame^) because she delivered her people from thraldom and
destruction, can any thing in the world then make us more joyful then this,
that we being cursed in our selves are blessed in Christ, being embased in our
selves are exalted in Christ, being condemned in our selves are justified in
Christ, being dead in our selves are alive in Christ? The sin of man is the
death of Christ. This is more then all to make us sorrowful in our selves. If
the virgin Mary wept so sore for the death of her son Jesus, as though her
tender heart had bin stabde and pearst thorough with a sharp sword (as Simeon
speaks) can any thing in the world then make us more sorrowful, then this,
that Christ being blessed in himself, was cursed for us, being exalted in
himself was embased for us, being justified in himself, was condemned for us,
being alive in himself, was dead for us? O dear brother, blessed Christian,
whosoever thou art, if thou be too sorrowful at any time, remember what
Christ has done for thee; how lovingly; how kindly he has dealt with thee,
and thou will soon be glad: if thou be too ioyefull at any time, remember
what thou have done against Christ; how ungratefully; how wretchedly thou have
dealt with him, and thou will soon be sorry. So shall we never suffer
shipwreck of faith, either by too much sorrow, as Esau did, who sought the
blessing with tears, weeping for himself, not rejoicing for Christ: or else by
too much joy as Herod did, who heard the Baptist gladly, rejoicing for Christ,
not weeping for himself. But even as a ship being neither too heavily
burdened, not too lightly balanced, seateth neither waves nor winds, but
sayleth safely to the heaven: so we being neither too heavy for our own
misery, nor too light for Christ's mercy, but joining FOR ME FOR YOUR SELVES
both together, shall neither be drowned with ye waves of desperatio^, nor puffed
up with the winds of presumption, but we shall sail safely in the arc of Noah
upon the fea of this world till we ariue at the haven of all happiness in
heaven. And this is the right moderation we must keep between Christ and our
selves, as appears in this sixth part, FOR ME FOR YOUR SELVES both together,
WEEP NOT FOR ME BUT WEEP FOR YOUR SELVES.

THe seventh part follows, VVEEP NOT FOR ME. Wherein we must condsider three
virtues that were in Christ. Wisdom; benignity; magnanimity. For wisdom he
says, WEEP NOT: for benignty, NOT YOU; for magnanimity, NOT FOR ME. Not
weep: not you: not for me. WEEP NOT FOR ME. First for wisdom he says
WEEP NOT. S. Austin has a very excellent sentence. And it is this Crux
Christi pendentis, cathedra fuit docentis.
Christ upon his cross did read us a lecture, like a doctor in his chair.
Indeed in that learned lecture of his he delivered unto us many notable points
of wisdom. And one especially we have here. Whereby we are instructed how we
should be affected toward the dead. For if we must not weep immoderatly for
the death of Christ, then we must not grieve our selves greatly for the death
of any christian. The ancient Italians used to mourn for their dead ten
months: the Egiptians seaue^ty two days: the Ethiopyans forty days: the
ancient Germans thirty days: the Lacedaemonians a leven days Johannes
Bahemus de morib. Gen
. But the Athenians and the Romans, which were in their time coumpted the
wisest men in the world, were much more moderat. For the Athenians had a law
given them by Solon their lawgiuer, which did forbid mourning at burials. The
Romans likewise had a law in their twelve tables, which did forbid to make any
exclamations or outcries at funerals Lessum habere funeris ergo.
. Yea the third counsel holden at Toledo in spain the one and twentieth canon
of the council flatly decrees, that christians should be brought to their
graves only with singing and rejoicing Cum canticis solummodo and psallent
iu^vocib.
. Because, quoth the council, the apostle to the Thessalonians says, I will not
have you ignorant brethren concerning them which are isleepe that you sorro we
not, even as others which have no hope. Therefore Cutbertus, who was Archbishop
of Canter bury long before the conquest Floruit regnante Egberto. Anno Domini.
747.
(...) his death charged that no lamentation should be made for him. And Ierom
writes, that when the dead body of Paul the Eremite was brought forth, holy
Anthony did sing hymns and psalms according to the christian Prolato for as
corpore Hymnos and Psalmos de christiana traditione decantabat. In vita Pauli
Erems.
tradition. And that when Paula a devout widow was Pontifices choros
psallentium duceba^t. In Epitaphio Paulae.
buried the bishops did bring her forth with singing. And that when Fabiola was
buried, psalms were song and Haleluiah was chaunted out so loud, that it did
shake the seelinge of the church Sonabant psalmi and aurata templorum reboans
in sublime quatiebat Haleluia. In Epitaphio Fabiolae. Vide praeterea Sulpitium
in vita Martini Ariopag. Et Eub. Hierare. ecclescap. 7.
. Igraunt indeed we may sorrow and weep for the wicked not only when they are
dead, but even when they are alive. But we must sing and rejoice for the godly
not only when they are alive, but even when they are dead. And why? Because
they beeinge alive are dead: but these being dead are alive. According to that
saying of the hebrew Rabbis Tsaddikim bemetham caijm etc.
The godly even in their death are alive: but the wicked even in their life,
are dead. Therefore David when his son Absalon died, whom he knew to be a
wicked man wept for him, saying, Absalon my son, O my son Absolon! would to
God I had died for thee. But when his young son died, whom he knew to be an
innocent babe, he was well apayd, and arose from the ground, and anointed his
face, and looked cheerfully, and said, I shall go to him, he can not return
to me. Whereby he warranteth that of Fulgentius who says, That the godly
deceased are Non amissi sed praemissi.
not lost for ever but left for a time, not gone away from us, but sent to God
before us. For if that be true which Ignatius says. That life without Christ
is death (...).
the^ this is true also which I shall say, That death with and in Christ is
life. The deaths of the saints are no funerals but triumphs Exercitia
suntasta non funera. Cypr.
. So that in respect of us which are alive it is a very charitable custom, yea
it is a very honorable custom to give mourning cloakes or gowns. But in
respect of them that are dead it is altogether needles. For what need we
wear black mourning cloakes in sign of forrowe, seeing (as it is in the
Revelation) they wear white long roabes in token of triumph. Therefore
Chrysostom says (...).
, It becomes us that are christians at the death of christians, rather to
rejoice as at a triumph, then to weep as at a tragedy. For, says Ierom
Desiderandi sunt vt absentes non deplorandi vt mortui.
We may indeed wish for them, because they are not with us; but we must not
weep for them because they are with God. Love, I grant co^maunds us. Well. Be
it so. What then? But yet faith forbids us to weep for the dead Pietas plorare
iubet, sides pro defunctis lugere vetat Isidorus.
. And therefore Paulinus says Salua fide pietatis officia pendamus, salua
pietate fidei gaudia praeferamus.
, Though we may notwithstanding our faith, perform to the dead the duties of
love, yet we must first notwithstanding our love, afford to our selves the
comforts of faith. So, if we shead some few tears which run softly like the
waters of Sylo, no force says Ambrose Erunt non doloris illices sed indices
pietatis.
, They will not bewray in us any want of faith, but only testify an abundance
of love. Thus and no otherwise did Abraham weep for Sara his wife: Eleazar for
Aaron his father: Rebecca for Debora her nurse: Joseph for Jacob his father:
Bershaba for Vrias her husband: Christ for Lazarus his friend. And here in
wonderful wisdom he teacheh us how sparing we ought to be in weeping for the
death of our godly friends, considering our good hope that are alive, and
their good hap that are dead. As if the very dead body whom some of you
perhaps even at this present so seriously think of, and so much lament for,
should now suddenly arise out of the grave, and step into the pulpit, and
preach and say unto you, VVEEP NOT FOR ME BUT VVEEP FOR YOUR SELVES. You indeed
as yet remain in this vale of misery, where you sin daily and howerly against
God: where continually you feel afflictions and punishments dew to your sins:
where lastly you are deprived of the glory of God: of the society of the
saints: of the joys of heaven. Therefore (if you will) VVEEP FOR YOUR SELVES,
BUT WEEP NOT FOR ME. I am in that state of perfection, where I never sin but
always praise and laud the Lord. I am out of the compass of all calamities, not
to be touched with any trouble. Ieuermore behold the amiable and the loving
countenance of Christ: and though I come not very near him, yet so far forth
I see him as this sight alone is sufficient to make me every way a happy man.
Thus would the very dead, if they should rise again, speak unto us. But we
will not any longer disquiet the dead, or disturb them which so sweetly sleep
in Christ. Certainly either this that has bin spoken will persuade us, or else
(as our savior says) though one should rise stom the dead, we would not
believe. For if these ancient and holy fathers Fulgentius, Ignatius, Cyprian,
Chrysostom, Ierom, Isidore, Paulinus, Ambrosius, should now all arise, they
would (I assure you) say no other thing, but even as you have heard them speak
already in those sentences and allegations which I have quoted and cited out of
them. The sum of all which is this, That it is great folly and childishnes to
weep immoderatly for the dead, and that it is on the other side a hie point of
wisdom to be moderate in this matter. Considering our Lord going here to his
death, teaches his friends not to weep for him, in that he says, VVEEP NOT,
VVEEP NOT FOR ME. Thus much for his wisdom.

Now for benignity he says, NOT YOU. For though the person be not expressed
in the english, yet in the greek verb it is employed. Weep not, as if it
were, weep NOT YOU. Which benignity appeared in that among all his
intolerable troubles, nothing troubled him so much, as that his friends were
troubled for his troubles. And yet (as it should seem) they of all other had
greatest cause thus to be grieved. All the people wept for Moses death: all
Egypt for Joseph's death: all Israel for Josias his death: all the Church for
Stephens death. But a million of Moysesses: of Joseph's: of Iosiasses: of
Stephens are not comparable to Christ. The women of Troy wept for the death of
worthy Hector their valiant captain, making this the foot of their doleful
ditty, we weep for Hector Hectora flemus Seneca in Troade. actu primo,
. How much more then ought these women of Jerusalem to weep for the death of
their captain Christ? All the widows lamented the death of Dorcas, because in
her life time she made them coats and garments. And had not these women then
far greater reason to lament the death of Christ who made every one of them a
wedding garment, wherein he did marry them to himself? Ye daughters of Israel
says David, weep for Saul who clothed you with Scarlet. How much more then
ought these daughters of Jerusalem to weep for Christ who clothed every one
of them with scarlet, and with the royal robe of his righteousness, yea and
gave his own dear self unto them, that they might put on the Lord Jesus?
When Christ was borne the night was turned into day, as it was prophesied
Psalm. 139.12.
, Then shall the night shine as the day. But when Christ was crucified the day
was turned into night, as it was prophesied Amos cap. 8. ver. 9.
, Then shall the sun go down at noone day. The sun therefore wept for Christ.
As Hammons face was covered when he was condemned to die: so the suns face was
covered, when Christ was condemned to die. The temple also wept for Christ. As
David rent his garment when he heard of Ionathans death: so the temple rent his
veil when it heard of Christ's death. The graves likewise wept for Christ. As
the king of Niniue threw up dust upon his head when he and his subjects were
appointed to die: so the graves opened and threw up dust upon their heads when
Christ was appointed to die. The stones lastly wept for Christ. As Job cut his
hair when he heard of his childrens death: so the stones were cut in pieces
and cloven asunder when they heard of Christ's death. An ass carrying Christ
into Jerusalem, the children sung most merely: Christ carrying his cross out of
Jerusalem, the women wept most mournfully. If those children had held their
peace and not sung (as our savior there protests) the very stones would have
sunge out the praise of Christ. If these women had held their peace, and not
cried, the very stones would have cried for the death of Christ. Or rather
indeed as soon as ever these women left weepinge, because Christ bad them,
straightwaies the stones fell a weeping, before Christ bad them. And what heart
of man then could here have refrayned from weeping, though it had bin harder
then any stone, seeing the hard stones before his eyes thus dissolved and
distilled into tears? Yet behold the benignity and loving kindness of Christ.
Christ died, not for the sun: not for the temple: not for the graves: not for
the stones: but for us men and for our salvation he dyed. Yet he suffers
these senceles creatures to weep and to have a lively feeling of his death,
though they had no benefit by his death. But being content himself to shed
his dearest and his best blood for us: yet will not suffer us in recompense to
shed so much as one little tear for him. No no, says he, I will bear all the
sorrow, you shall have only joy: and though I dye and shed my very heart blood
for you, yet you shall not so much as weep, or shed the least tear for me.
NOT YOU, WEEP NOT FOR ME. Thus much for his benignity.

Lastly for magnanimity he says, NOT FOR ME. Strange stoutnes and courage.
Especially in him that was otherwise so mild and so meek a lamb. But here the
cause and quarrel being ours, and he fighting for the salvation of our souls,
there is no rule with him, he plays the lion whersoeuer he goes. For holding
now in his hand the cup of trembling, and being ready to drink up the very
dregs of it, yet neither his hand nor his heart trembles. Ennius the poet, as
Tully testifies, could say thus much, Let no man weep for my death Nemo me
lacrymis decoret.
. And S. Laurence the martyr, as Prudentius witnesses, Do not weep for my
departure Desiste discessu meo fletum dolenter fundere.
. But as Ennius or any other pagan could never come near christians in true
magnanimity: so S. Laurence or any other christian could never come near
Christ. The blessed Apostle S. Paul of any that ever I heard of, comes
nearest to him. Going toward Jerusalem, what do you, says he, weeping and
breaking my heart, for I am ready not only to be bound but even to die also for
the name of the Lord Jesus? Even so says Christ here, or rather indeed not so,
but a thousand times more courageously. Going out of Jerusalem, what do you
(says he) weeping and breakinge my heart, for I am ready not only to be
bound, but even to dye also for the salvation of man? He knew well enough his
passion would be a new kind of transfiguration unto him. For at his
transfiguration he was accompanied with his dear disciples, Peter, James, and
John: but at his passion Peter denied him, James and John forsook him. And
there he was upon mount Tabor which smelled sweetly of herbs and flowers: but
here he was upon mount Caluary which smelled loathsomly of bones and dead men's
sculs. And there his face did shine as the sun: but here his face was covered,
nay it was buffeted and spit upon. And there his garments were white as the
light: but here his garments were parted, nay they were like Joseph's coat all
embrued in blood, and he himself stripped stark naked. And there he was
between two famous prophets Moises and Elias: but here when they thought he
called for Elias to help him, Elias would not come, nay he was between two
thieves, the one at his right hand, the other at his left. And there his father
spoke most joyfully to him from heaven, This is my beloved son in whom only I
am pleased; but here he screeched most lamentably to his father from the
cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Yet behold, behold the
magnanimity of Christ. Christ knew well enough before hand of all this
fearful and horrible passion prepared for him, wherein he was not transfigured
as before, but disfigured so as never was any man. Yet nothing could move him.
This cowardlynes of his disciples: this noysomnes of the place: these diuelishe
buffets upon his bare face: these bloody wounds upon his naked body: these vile
thieves: these hydeous screeches, could not one whit daunt his heroical heart.
But even as a noble champion having already had a leg and an arm slasht off,
when all the stage in admiration of his valor and manhood cries, save the man,
save the man, yet puts out himself, and standing upon one leg, and strikinge
with one arm fights still as stoutly as if he had never bin hurt at all: so
Christ having bin scorned and scourged already, when the whole theater of
heaven and earth wept for him, yea when the powers above the heaven came down,
and the dead under the earth rose up to move and pity him, only he himself
would neither ask any favor of others, nor yet show any favor to himself,
but was very angry and called him Satan that gave him such counsel; Yea
though all the saints in heaven and earth did bleed at the very heart Caelum
and terra compatiuntur ei. Anselmus in speculo Euangel. sermonis cap. 13.
in a manner as much as he himself did upon the cross, to see so good (...)
man so shamefully despited, yet nothing could stay him but still he went on
forward as pleasantly and as cheerfully is to any banquet or feast, to this
most ru^^ull and dreadful death. O sweet Jesus, O my dear Lord, forgive me, I
humbly beseech thee, for thy mercy sake, forgive me this one fault. Thou will
neither weep thy self, nor yet suffer me to weep for thy death. But I am
contrariwise affected. Though I do not see thee at this present led as a lamb
to the slaughter, yet only meditating of thy death so many hundred years
after, I can not possibly refrain from weepinge. Yea by so much the more do I
lame^nt and mourn, by how much the more I see thee joyful and glad. Come forth
ye daughters of Sio^, says he Canticae. 3.11.
, and behold king Salomo^ with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in
the day of his marriage in the day of the gladness of his heart. As if he should
have said, come forth ye daughters of Jerusalem and behold Jesus Christ, with
the crown of thorns, wherewith the sinagogue of the Jews crowned him in the
day of his passion, and in the day of his death upon the cross. He calls the
day of his passion the day of his marriage, and the day of his death upon the
cross the day of the gladness of his heart. Thus you see in this seventh part
the wisdom; the benignity: the magnanimity of Christ, in that he says, Not
weep: not you: not for me; VVEEP NOT FOR ME. VVEEP NOT FOR ME, BUT VVEEP FOR
YOUR SELVES.

THe eight part, which is the last, now only remains. BUT WEEP FOR YOUR
SELVES: wherein we must consider likewise three virtues that ought to be in
us. Devotion: compunction: compassion. For devotion, he says, BUT WEEP. For
compunction, BUT YOU. For compassion, BUT FOR YOUR SELVES. But weep: but you:
but for your selves. BUT VVEEP FOR YOUR SELVES. First for devotion he says,
BUT WEEP. Devotion generally is a super-naturall dexterity, wrought by the
holy Ghost in the heart of a devout man, whereby he is made prompt and ready
to perform all those duties, which appertain to the service of God. As a man
may be said to be devout in preaching: devout in hearing: devout in making
prayers: devout in giving alms. But here especially by devotion I understand
a certain softnes and tenderness of the heart, which oftentimes is resolved
into tears, considering the mischiefs and miseries of this world. For if
Christ in this place wished them of Jerusalem to weep for themselves, and did
himself else where weep for Jerusalem, saying, O Jerusalem, Ierusatem, how
often would I, but you would not? How much more then ought we to weep for the
wretchedness of this world? They of Jerusalem were carried captive into Babylon.
That captivity of Babylon endured seventy years, or threescore and ten years.
Now just so long lasts our life. As the Psalmist says, The days of our life
are threescore years and ten. So that by this account, our whole time in this
world, is nothing else but the captivity of Babylon. Therefore we may well
say, By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept, when we remembered thee O
Sion: And, My tears have been my meat day and night, while they said unto me,
where is now thy God? And, Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in Meshek,
and to have my habitation among the tents of Cedar. We read that King Edward
the third, having the King of Scots and the French King his prisoners here in
England both together at one time, held royal iusts in Smythfield. The iusts
being ended, he feasted both the Kings most sumptuously at supper. After
supper perceiving the French King to be sad and pensive, he desired him to be
merry as others were. To whom the French King answered Quomodo cantabimus
cantica in terra aliena?
, How shall we sing songs in a strange land? If the French King after all this
princely pastime, and stately intertainement, took it so heavily to heart,
that he was kept prisoner out of his own country: how much more then ought
we to mourn for our captivity? Especially seeing, neither we have such
welcome in the world as he had in England, neither yet is England so far from
France, as heaven is distant from them both. Jerusalem was once finally sacked
by Titus and Vespasian, whereas besides an infinite number which were otherwise
spoiled, ten hundred thousand men, ten hundred thousand men (I say) were slain
down right altogether, as Josephus a greek writer, and Iosippus an hebrew
author testify. But that which happened once to them, happens every day to
us. We dye daily 1. Cor. 15.31.
. Our whole life is nothing else but such a spoil and sackage. And among all
the miseries of this life, nothing is more miserable then this life it self.
For even those things which might be most comfortable unto us, as we use them,
do breed us much sorrow. Learning and knowledge a great delight. Yet Solomon
says, He that adds knowledge adds sorrow. Wealth and riches a good
complement. Yet Saint James says, Go too now you rich men, weep and houle
for the miseries which shall come upon you. So that the only happiness we can
have in this life is a devout and a godly bewailing of our unhappiness. Which
made our Savior say, woe be to you that laugh now, for you shall wail and
weep. But on the other side, Blessed are they that mourn now, for they shall
be comforted. Therefore holy Job desires God to spare him a little, and let
him live a while longer. Wherefore? That he might laugh? That he might be
merry? No Vt plangam delorem meum.
, but, says he, That I may weep for my woe and grief. He thought a man
could not have time enough in this life, though it were never so long, to
lament and rue the miseries of this life, though it were never so short. For if
every creature do sigh and groan in it self Romans 8.22.
; if the very earth which we tread under our feet do mourn and pine away
in sorrow, for the heavy burden of our sins wherewith it is almost wayed
and pressed down to hell, how much more then ought we, having the first
fruits of the spirit to have also true devotion in weeping for our miserable
estate in this world, according to this, BUT VVEEP, BUT VVEEP FOR YOUR SELVES.
Thus much for our devotion.

Now for compunction he says, BUT YOU. The person is employed in the greek
word, which signifies to weep as they do which have a broken and a contrite
heart (...) frango.
. Which weeping at the very heart is commanded in the fourth Psalm. For
whereas we commonly read it, be still in your chambers, the Septuagint
interpret it, have compunction in your chambers. Now the hebrew word which they
translate, have compunctio^, does signify to be pricked to the quick, till the
blood follow again Dommu a Dam sanguis.
. And by chambers our hearts are meant. As, when thou prayest enter into thy
chamber, that is, into the silence and secrecy of thine heart. So that, Have
compunction in your chambers, is as much as if he should have said, Bleed you
inwardly at the heart. Our tears must not be crocodiles tears. For as is
praying from the teeth outward; so is weeping from the eyes outward. But says
Bernard, we must be let blood, and have a vain opened with the lance of
compunction Scindatur and aperiatur vena ferro compunctionis. Ber. in sermon. p.
133.
. And this vain also must not be the liver vain, or any other vain, but the
heart vain only Non corporis sed cordis. Fulgen.
. Whereupon David says, I roared for the very grief of my heart Psalm. 38.8.
. And again, My heart droppeth for heaviness Psalm. 119.28.
. Not that his heart dropped in deed. But because the tears which he shed, were
not drops of water, running from the eyes which may be soon forced with
onions or such like, but drops of blood issuing from the heart, such as Christ
did sweat in the garden. For these no doubt are true tears, which are the
blood of a wounded heart Sanguis vulnerati cordis. Aug. Epistola. 199.
. So that the heart must first be rent and deeply wounded before the eye can
unfeignedly weep. But in case our sins fall upon us like thieves, and wound
us at the very heart, and leave us half dead, and make us power out the blood
of true tears, then by and by will Christ power in the wine and oil of
gladness. Therefore says a good father Malo sentire compunctionem quam scire
defimitonem.
I had rather feel the touch of co^punction, then know the truth of a
definition. For the heart of a Christian being a while cast down in sorrow is
soon after raised up in joy, and takes his former compunction not as a
punnishment, but as a preferment, and is right glad to be afflicted, because
he sees, that as the more the waters did rise the higher the arc was lifted
up; after the same sort ye more his sorrows increase, the higher his heart is
lifted up to God Cum per fletum men's ad summa rapitur, compunctionis suae
paena^ gaudons miratur, and libet affligi, quia afflictione sua conspicit se ad
alta subleuari. Gregor.
. Whereupon Ierom affirms that this compunctio^ does supple and soften our
hearts, when it pierces and afflicts them Dum pungit, vngit.
. Which we may see plainly in Saint Paul. All the while his heart was
hardened and seared with a hot iron, he played the wild colt (as I may say)
without any remorse or grief kicking against the pricks. But when it pleased
God to take out of his breast that heart of stone (to use the prophets words) and
to give him a heart of flesh for it, then he did not any more kick against the
pricks, but only one stimulus carnis, the angel of satan, was sufficient to
bridle him, and tame him, and rule him aright. For even as a bladder if it be
pricked all the wind and emptines voydeth out of it: semblably Saint Paul's holy
heart being pricked, and bleeding in wardly for his sins was freed of all
vanity and pride, of all conceitednes and folly. Wherefore as the man of Judea
and Jerusalem were pricked in their hearts Actorum. 2.37.
: so must we have true compunction in bleeding and weeping at the heart,
according to this, BUT YOU, BUT WEEP FOR YOUR SELVES. Thus much for our
compunction.

Lastly for compassion he says BUT FOR YOUR SELVES. It is good to pity others
and to wipe away the very tears from their eyes with the sponge of compassion
(...). Chrysostom.
. So says Job Job. 30.25.
, Did I not weep with him that was in trouble, and was not mine heart in
heaviness for the poor? But yet the greatest compassion is to show pity toward
thy self. As Ecclesiasticus says, Miserere aenimae tuae placens deo. c. 30.
v. 29.
Have compassion on thine own soul, if thou mind to please God. Thus did the
publicane. Being most desirous to please God, when he did pray to God, he said,
Lord be merciful unto me a sinner. The Pharisie was very sorry for the
Publican, and said, Lord I thank thee, I am not as this Publicane. But the
Publican was sorry for himself. Even as the high priest in the law did offer
first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people Hebr. 5.3.
: after the same fashion this Publican did first offer the sacrifice of prayer
for his own sins, and then afterward he prayed for others. Therefore he that
durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, did yet draw down heaven to his eyes:
and did enforce God also to have compassion on him, because he had first
compassion on himself. For look how Peter's cock did clap his own sides with
his wings, and wakened himself before he wakened Peter: in like manner thou
must smite thine own breast with the Publican, and clap thine own sides with
the cock, before thou cry or crow to others. Abraham's servant did drink
himself, before he gave his Camels drink Genesis 24.19.
: right so the wise man advises thee Prouer. 5.15.
, first for thy self, To drink the waters of thy cesterne, and the rivers in
the midst of thine own well; then for thy Camels, To let thy fountains
flow forth, and thy rivers of water in the streets. Thou must first pledge
Christ in his cup, and drink one hearty draught of tears for thy self, and
then thou may drink to others afterward. For if thine eye be single, all
thy body is full of light. But if thou have a beam in thine own eye, and yet
would take a mote out of thy brothers eye, all thy body is full of darkness.
Whereas the way were first to weep out, and wash out that great beam which is
in thine own eye, that so thine eye being more single, thou may see clearly
to take a little mote out of thy brothers eye. Otherwise thou shall be like
those hagges or fayries (called in latin Lamiae) which we have heard of in
old time, who (as they say) could see well enough abroad, but when they came
home, used to put up their eyes in a box. And then Christ will say to thee, as
he did to one elsewhere, Go to thine own house Abi in domu^ tuam. Mar. 5.29.
. Do not prye into other men's faults abroad, and put up thine eyes in a box
when thou art at home: but rather shut thine eyes abroad, and open them at
home. Be not like Crates Thebanus, who was called a doore-opener (...).
Laertius.
, because he used to rush into every other man's house; and there to find
fault with whatsoever was amiss: but rather look to thine own house, look
to thine own heart, weep for thine own life, weep for thine own self. Many do
turn Christ's, sed vos pro vobis, into Virgils, sic vos no^ vobis. They can
stu^ble at a straw, and leap over a block. They can swallow a Camel, and
strain a gnat. Though their own backs be surcharged and ouerloaden with ill
favored lumpes of sin, like Camels bunches, yet their backs are broad
enough to bear all that, they never feel it, they make no bones of it, they
can swallowe it down very well without any drink of tears. But if they see
no more then a little gnat sitting upon their brothers coat, by and by they
find a hole in his coat, they must needs (for sooth) weep for it, and
always urge it, and press it very sore, and strain it thorough their tears.
Such are the wicked ignorant Brownists, and other like factious Nouices of this
age. They tell us they weep daily for the ruin of Sion, and for the
desolation of our Church. But our Church answers them, as she has heard her
spouse Jesus Christ say in a like case, VVEEP NOT FOR ME, BUT VVEEP FOR YOUR
SELVES. I, sais our Church, was never more glorious in this realm of England
heretofore Foxus in prima consideratione ad Protestants praesixa Actis. Et in
prima persecutione primiti^ae ecclesie p. 32
, never am like to be hereafter, then I am at this day. And there is no one
point of doctrine or discipline which I maintain, that has not been within
this forty years confirmed, and besprinkled, and even enamuled with the very
blood of as blessed saints, our own dear countrymen, as holy martyrs as ever
did hold up innocent hands to God. Therefore WEEP NOT FOR ME. BUT VVEEP FOR
YOUR SELVES. You in deed have departed, not only from this Church, of which
you make so light: but also from the Primitive Church, of which you talk so
much. The order of the Primitive Church is set down in the Acts Actorum. ca.
2. v. 46.
. They continued daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at
home, did eat their meat together with gladness and singlenes of heart. So
then in the Primitive Church they continued daily with one accord in the
temple: you run out of the temple, and refuse to pray with us. In the
Primitive Church, they did break bread at home: you break peace abroad. In
the Primitive Church they did eat their meat together with gladness and
singlenes of heart: you have turnde all singlenes into singularity. You (says
our Church to the Brownists) you are those Donatists of whom Saint Austin
speaks Qui nobis etiam orationem dominicam impijs disput ationibus conantur
aufe^re. E^i 92. ad lanuarium.
, who by their impious arguments would take away from us even the Lords
prayer. So would the Brownists. You are those Nestorians of whom Cassianus
speaks Qui quia esse nolunt quod omnes sunt, cupiunt omnes esse quod ipsi
volunt. De incarnatione. l. 6. c. 4
, who because they will not be as all men are, therefore would have all men be
as they are. So would the Brownists. You are those Sectaries of whom Nazianzen
speaks (...). Apol. p. 28
, who make a stir about matters of no importance very unlearnedly, and yet
very impudently. So do the Brownists. You are those schismatikes of whom
Ireneus speaks Qui propter modicas and quaslibet causas magnum and gloriosum
Christi corpus conscindunt. l. 4 c. 62.
, who for light and trifling quarrels, rent and tear the great and glorious
body of Christ. So do the Brownists. You are those Luciferians of whom Saint
Jerome speaks Quibus familiare est dicere factum de ecclesia lupanar. Dialo.
contra. Luciferianos prope initium.
, who make it a common word in their mouths to say that the Church is now
become a stews. So say the Brownists. You are those heretics of whom Bernard
speaks Qui omnes qui de ecclesia sunt, canes censent and porcos. Epistola. 65
, who say that all we, or at the least wise the most part of us which are of
the Church, are no better then dogs or hogs. So say the Brownists. You are
those Audians of whom Epiphanius speaks (...). Anchora, p. 475
, who being busybodies themselves, and Bishops in other men's dioces, yet
think much that reverend and learned Bishops should bear rule in their own
dioces. So do the Brownists. You are those murmurers against Moses of whom
Optatus speaks Qui ante sunt sepulti quam mortui. Contra. Parme. l. 1.
, who were buried before they were dead, because they wept for others before
they wept for themselves. So do the Brownists. But to leave these now, as
they leave the Church, and to return to our selves again: we that are
Christ's loving friends, and loving friends also to his holy Church, must
weep for none other so much as for our selves. That so we may continually
practice, true devotion; true compunction; true compassion; according to this,
But weep; but you; but for your selves; BUT WEEP FOR YOUR SELVES. WEEP NOT
FOR ME, BUT VVEEP FOR YOUR SELVES.

THus have I gone over all the eight parts of this text. Now if I were as
happy as Solomon was, that I might have what so ever I would ask, I would, I
assure you (beloved) desire no greater gift of God at this time, then that we
might so meditate of this which has bin spoken, as our whole life and all our
affections, especially these affections of joy and sorrow, which rule all the
rest, might thereby be ordered and directed aright. For weeping, or not weeping,
are things indifferent, simply of themselves neither good nor bad, but
thereafter as according to circumstances and occurrences, they are either well
or ill used. Even as glorying: or laboring: or fearing: or ^uing. For glorying
it is said, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, but let him that glories
glory in this yt he knows the Lord: For laboring it is said, labor not for
ye meat which perishth, but for ye the meat which abides for ever. For fearing
it is said, Fear not him that can kill the body only, but fear him who is
able to destroy both body and soul. For loving (...) is said, Love not the
world, nor the things of this world, if any man love the world ye love of God
is not in him. Now then, glory not, but glory. Not in the wisdom of the world,
but in the knowledge of God. Labor not, but labor. Not for the meat which
perishes, but for the meat which abides for ever. Fear not, but fear. Not
him that can kill the body only, but him yt can destroy both body and soul.
Love not, but love. Not the world, but God. And so here, Weep not, but weep.
Not for me, but for your selves. VVEPE NOT FOR ME, BUT VVEEP FOR YOUR SELVES.
To weep is lawful: to weep without not weeping is unlawful. Not to weep is
lawful: not to weep without weeping is unlawful. Again, To weep for your
selves is lawful: to weep immoderatly for Christ is unlawful. Not to weep for
Christ is lawful: not to weep moderately for your selves is unlawful. Whereas
without any unlawfulness in either, both weeping and not weeping wilbee lawful.
If your weeping be always joined with not weeping; and your not weepinge be
sometimes joined with weeping. If your weeping be for your selves, not for
Christ; and your not weeping be for Christ, not for your selves. Therefore we
must mark well, what our savior says. He says not thus, weep not for me,
and weep not for your selves. That Is too much joy, and too little sorrow.
Neither thus, Weep for me and weep for your selves. That Is too much sorrow,
and too little joy. Neither thus, weep not for your selves, but weep for me.
That Is presumptuous desperation. Neither thus, weep for me, but weep not for
your selves. That Is desperate presumption. Only he says thus, VVEEP NOT FOR
ME, BUT VVEEP FOR YOUR SELVES. As if he should have said, weep not too much:
weep not too much for my death: weep not much for my death. Nay, weep little
for my death: considering, my wisdom; my benignity; my magnanimity; weep
little for my death. But weep not too little: but weep not too little for your
own life: but weep not little for your own life. Nay, weep much for your
own life: consideringe, your devotion; your compunction; your compassion; weep
much for your own ^se. Weep little for my death, but weep much for your own
life. VVEEP NOT FOR ME, BUT VVEEP FOR YOUR SELVES.

Wherefore holy brethren if we have any tears, now let us shed them, if we
have any psalms, now let us sing them. The whole gospel is nothing else but
joyful news, the sum whereof is comprised in that Evangelical and Angelical
message to the shepherds, I bring you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be
to all people. But then Christ was borne in his mothers arms. Now he holds
up the Angels, that they fall not, and lifts up men, which are fallen, with
his own arms stretched out upon the cross. This Cross is his kingdom, that
he carries upon his shoulder Esa cap. 9. ver. 6.
, which is a greater glory and credit to Christ then was the creation of the
whole world (...). Oecume. in cap. 2. ad Heb.
. For if God had created a thousand worlds, man had defaced them every one with
his sin. But to save if it be but one poor soul, and to redeem it from the
pit of hell, this indeed is the omnipotent power of the cross of Christ.
Sweet savior, I humbly embrace, and kiss the wounds of thy hands and feet:
I esteem more of thine hysope, thy reed, thy sponge, thy spear, then of any
princely diadem: I boast my self and am more proud of thy thorns and nails,
then of all pearls and jewels: I account thy cross more splendent and
glorious then any royal crown: tush what talk I of a crown? then the very
golden sun beams in their greatest beauty and brightness. This is that triumph
whereby Christ caused us to triumph in himself, and to be more then
conquerours 2 Corin. cap. 2. ver. 4.
, when as the goodness and the sweetness of Christ did triumph over all impiety
and malice Cum de impietate and malitia suauitas piet asque tryumphauit. Cypr.
. And therefore if the women met David playing and singing, Saul has slain
his thousand, but David his ten thousand; how much more then ought all the
sons and daughters of Jerusalem, all christian men and women, to meet Christ
playing upon the harp, and singing that new song to the lamb with the four
and twenty elders, Thou art worthy to receive glory, and honor, and power,
because thou wast killed, and yet thou have killed, and slain not only a
thousand or ten thousand, but even all thine and our enemies, and have redeemed
us thy friends to God by thy blood? There is a time to weep, and a time to
laugh, a time to mourn, and a time to dance Ecclesiastes 3. ver. 4.
. Why art thou then so heavy O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within
me? What man? Pluck up a good heart: trust in God: think upon the honorable
passion, and gladsome resurrection of Christ. And then though thou were never
so much afflicted, yet even in the fiery furnace of affliction, rejoice with
joy unspeakable and glorious. Dance now, not as Herodias did, but as David
did. Leap up in affection, as high as heaven. Where thou shall hear one rapt
up to the third heaven, saying, to himself, God forbid that I should rejoice,
rejoice in any thing, but in the cross of Christ; and to us, Rejoice in the
Lord always, and again, I say, rejoice. And again, and again, I say,
rejoice, and rejoice, always in the Lord. Especially at this time. For if,
when the matter was in doubt, and no man almost knew to what pass these
troubles would sort in the end, and very few in the church, no not the
Apostles, but only the virgin Mary did understand and believe the resurrection
of Christ, yet then our Savior said, VVEEP NOT FOR ME: how much more now ought
we not to weep, but to rejoice, seeing our Lord has so mightily declared
himself to be the son of God Romans 1.4.
, by raising up his own self from the dead? And if we might not weep when
Jacob went over Jordan with nothing but his staff in his hand Genesis 32.10.
, then much more now ought we to lift up our hearts in great joy to God and
say, O Lord we are not worthy of the least of all thy mercyes: for our ^^^essed
redeemer went over Jordan, with nothing but his cross, which is (...) Jacobs
staff (...). Damascen. l 4. cap. 88.
, upon his shoulder, but now he is returned again with two great troops. O
what a great troop, what a goodly flock is here? we with all the militant
church are one flock of Christ. And ye other ftock is the triu^phant church in
heaven. With whom we must continually rejoice for the victory and the salvation
which Christ has showed ^s this day. For though on good friday toward evening
the sky was red all over colored and distained with the blood of Christ Mat.
16.2.
, yet lauds be to our Lord, O praised be God, that was a good sign: this day
it is fair weather. The winter is now past: the rain is changed and gone:
the flowers appear in the earth: the time of the singing of birds is come:
and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our land Cant. 2.11.
. And what says the Turtle? Even as it is here, VVEEP NOT FOR ME. VVEEP NOT
FOR ME, BUT VVEEP FOR YOUR SELVES. BUT VVEEP FOR YOUR SELVES. Pindarus
reports there was an opinion of the city of Rhodes, that gold rained down
upon it (...) Ode. 7.
. If ever gold did rain down from heaven upon any city, I think it is rather
this city then Rhodes. Not only for abundance of gold and worldly riches
wherewith it is replenished, but also much more for infinite spiritual gifts,
and golden graces of God. O London, London, excellent, excellent things are
spoken of thee, O thou city of God! It is spoken of thee, that thou employest a
great part of thy wealth to the relief of poor orphans, of poor soldiers,
of poor scholars. It is spoken of thee, that thou do reverence religion,
and love the truth more then any part of this realm does besides. It is
spoken of thee, that none are more obedient, none more ready then thou art,
both with body and goods to defend the state. It is spoken of thee, that thou
art so famous in all foraine countries, that as Athe^s was called ye Greece of
Greece (...). Athenaeus lib. 1.
, so London is called the England of England. And we may almost as well say
that al England is in London, as that all London is in England. These are
excellent things, I assure you beloved, excellent things indeed. Wherefore we
which have received so many singular graces of God, should above al other be
thankful for them. And not only one, or some few, but even al of us, should
bring forth good fruits, answerable to such great mercies. Well, would to God
it were so. But certainly it is not so. Certainly all among us, all are not
pure corn, there are many tares: all are not good fishes, there are many bad:
all are not wise virgins, there are many foolish: all are not sheep, there are
many goats. Yet to ^^ueigh particularly against ye sins of this city, which
should make us weep for our selves, I think it not greatly convenient at this
time. Only I beseech you that we may try and examine our selves: that we may
enter into our own consciences; every one of us humbly bowing the knees of his
heart, and saying in this sort, O Lord Jesus, how have I bestowed all those
talents of gold which thou have given me? how have I requited thee for all thy
kindness toward me? what has my whole life been else but a continual warring
against thee? what has it been else but a daily renewing of all thy bloody
torments, and of thy whole passion? Ah vile wretch that I am, how often have I
like Judas himself betrayed thee, and sold thee for a little worldly pleasure,
or for a little luker and gain? how often have I bound thy hands, and even
most despitefully spit in thy face, by refusing those gifts which thou would
have given me, and by killing the comforts of thy Spirit? Woe is me, alack for
pity, I am that cursed Cain which have murdered innocent Abel my brother,
whose blood does now cry out for vengeance against me, because, that blood by
my sins only is polluted, by which the sins of all the world besides are
purged. For this will I weep day and night, yea though I had as many eyes in
my head as there are stars in the sky, yet I would weep them out every one
In sontem frontem, atque in flumina lumina vertam.
, to think that I should be such an unworthy wretch, as by my sins to
crucify Christ so often, and to put him to so many deaths, who has been unto
me so kind and so loving a Lord. O dear Abell, dear Abell! O my good
brethren that I could possibly devise what to say or what to do, to obtain
thus much of you, or rather of God for you, that you would weep, though it
were never so little for your sins. But alas, I can do no more now, but
commit and commend all that has been spoken to the effectual working of the
holy Ghost in you, and to the faithful obedience of your good hearts to God.
Blessed be God, I am yet very much revived (being otherwise almost quite spent
with speaking so long) when I look about me and behold every one that is
present. For I see no place in this great auditory, where there are not very
many ready to weep, the water standing in their eyes, and some already
weeping right-out, in true remorse and sorrow for their sins. You make me
remember that which we read in the book of Judges, when the Angel of the Lord
found fault with the Israelites for their disobedience, they lifted up their
voices and wept, and called the name of that place Bochim, and offered up
sacrifices there unto the Lord Judge. 2.5.
. This place also may be now called Bochim, that is, the place of weeping,
wherein you have offered up as many sacrifices to the Lord, as you have shead
tears for your selves. O what an acceptable sacrifice to God is this your
sorrowful spirit? I warrant you, you shall never repent you of this repentance:
you shall never be sorry for this sorrow. This sorrowful spirit of yours
makes God have a joyful spirit, and greatly pleases and delights the holy
Ghost. Wherefore now that we have once made the good spirit of God rejoice and
take pleasure in us, let us not in any case hereafter, let us not hereafter
grieve the same spirit of God, whereby we are now sealed up to the day of
redemption. The holy Ghost is grieved when we are not grieved, but if we be
thus grieved for our sins, then is the holy Ghost delighted. Yea such grief
and sorrow will not only be to the holy Ghost a great pleasure and delight,
but also it will be to us the very seed or the interest and loan of everlasting
life (...). Bas. Hom. (...) 144.
. For look how a father pitieth his own child, and if he see him cry, does
what he can to still him, and takes out his handkercher, and wipes the infants
eyes himself: after the same fashion God our heavenly father will with his
own holy finger wipe away all tears from our eyes, and take us most lovingly
by the hand, and lead us out of the house of mourning into the house of mirth.
Then though we have sown in tears, yet we shall reap in joy Tum breuibus
lachrymis gaudia long a metam. Paulinus.
. Yea though we have sown but a very few tears, which God has in a small
bottle, yet we shall reap all the infinite joys which God has in heaven.
Then though we have wanted wine a little while, yet in the end Christ shall
turn all our water into wine, all our sadness into gladness, all our musing into
music, al our sighing into singing. Then though we have been a long time
married to weeping blear-eyd Leah, yet at length we shall enjoy the love of
cheerful and beautiful Rachell. Then shall Abraham that good mower bind us up
into sheaues as pure corn, and fill his bosom full with us, and carry us
into the Lords barn to make a joyful harvest in heaven. Then shall we with
the wise virgins having store of tears in our eyes, which are as oil in our
lamps, go out of this vale of tears, which flows with woe and weeping, and
enter into the celestial Canaan, which flows with milk and honey. Then
shall Christ say unto us, not as it is here, VVEEP NOT FOR ME, BUT VVEEP FOR
YOUR SELVES: but he shall say, Weep not for me, and weep not for your
selves. For that which would be too much joy in this life, shall not be joy
enough in the life to come. Therefore he shall not only say unto us, Weep not
for me, and weep not for your selves: but he shall also say, Rejoice for me,
and rejoice for your selves. Rejoice for me, because I was once lower then the
Angels, but now I am crowned with honor and glory: and rejoice for your
selves, because you were once as sheep going astray, but now you are returned
to the shepherd and bishop of your souls. Rejoice. for me, because I am your
brother Joseph, whom once you sold into Egypt, but now all power is given me
in heaven and in earth: and rejoice for your selves, because you are the true
children of Israel, which once dwelt in a land of famine, but now you are
brought by triumpha^t fiery chariots into the land of Goshen, which is the
kingdom of glory. To the which kingdom of glory, and joy of all hands, joy
for Christ, joy for our selves, we beseech thee, O good Lord, to bring us,
after the misery of this woeful and wretched world, not for our own deserts
or merits, but for the most glorious passion, and most joyful resurrection of
Jesus Christ, to whom, with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory, power and praise, dignity and dominion, now and evermore, Amen.


