CERTAIN PHILOSOPHICAL Preparations of Food and Beuerage for Seamen, in
their long voyages: with some necessary, approved, and Hermeticall medicine;
and Antidotes, fit to be had in readiness at sea, for prevention or cure of
diverse diseases.
ANd first for Food. A cheap, fresh and lasting victual, called by the name
of Macaroni amongst the Italians, and not unlike (save only in son) to the
Cus^cus in Barbary, may be upon reasonable warning provided in any sufficient
quantity, to serve either for change and variety of meat, or in the want of
fresh victual. With this, the Author furnished Sir Francis Drake and Sir John
Hawkins, in their last voyage.

2 Any broth or Colase, that will stand clear and liquid, and not gellie or
grow thick when it is cold, may also be preserved by this lire of Nature from
all mouldinesse, sowrenesse, or corruption, to any reasonable period of time
that shall be desired. A necessary secret for all sick and weak persons at sea,
when no fresh meat can be had, to strengthen or comfort them.

3 Now for Beuerage: All the water, which to that purpose shall be thought
needful to be carried to sea, will be warranted to last sweet, good, and
without any intention to putrefaction, for 2, 3, or 4 years together. This is
performed by a Philosophical fire, being of a sympatheticall nature with all
plants and Animals. In the space of one month, the Author will prepare so many
Tons thereof, as shall be reasonably required at his hands.

4 By this means also both Wine, Perrie, Sider, Reere, Ale, and Vinegar, may
be safely kept at sea, for any long voyage, without fear of growing dead,
sour or mustie.

5 And, as for Medicine, if any Nobleman, Gentleman, or Merchant, shall by his
Physician be advised to carry any special distilled waters, decoctions, or
iuyces of any plant or any other liquid vegetable or animal body whatsoever
with him in any long voyage, this Author will so prepare the same only by
fortifying it with his own fire of kind, that he may be assured of the
lasting and durabilitie thereof, even at his own pleasure.

6 Here I may not omit the preparation of the juice of Limons with this fire:
because it has of late been found by that worthy Knight Sir James Lancaster to
be an assured remedy in the Scurby. And though their juice will, by natural
working and fermenting, in the end so spiritualize it self, as that it will
keep and last either simply of it self, or by the help of a sweet olive oil
supernatant: yet this Author is not ignorant, that it has lost much of his
first manifest nature, which it had whilst it was contained within his own
pulp and fruit: (as is evident in the like example of wine, after it has
wrought long, which differs exceedingly both in taste and nature from the
grape out of which it was expressed) whereas being strengthened with this
philosophical fire, it retains still both the natural taste, race, and
verdure, that it had in the first expression: and so likewise of the Orange.

7 There is also a specificall powder for Agues Quotidian, and Tertian^ and
sometimes it helps Quartans. Half a dram is sufficient for a man: and a
quarter of a dram for a child. It is taken in white Wine Beer, or Ale. It
cures sometimes at the first taking, often at the second, and seldom or never
falls at the third time. It is not offensive to the taste. It expels the
disease, without any euacuation or weakening of the Patient.

8 A sweet Paste, for the headache: which commonly gives ease, in one hours
space, either upon the first or second taking, because it is specificall. The
dose is the weight of ^. d.

9 A safe, general and gentle purging Powder, to be taken in white wine,
working easily without any convulsion, or other offense to the stomach. It is
pleasant, and has not any common or known purgative therein. It weakeneth not
the Patient, neither does the body grow costiue after it: which is usual in
most of the common purgatiues. There have been so many trials made upon all
sorts of complexions with this powder, as that it may well deserve the name of
a general purge: yet I can least commend it in Choleric bodies. The dose is
two drammes and an half at a time. This being taken in warm weather for three
days together, in the Spring and Fall, will prevent both the Gowte and
Dropsy, and most of those diseases that spring from rheumaticke causes: and if
it cure them in eight or ten days, take it for advantage. It cures the Pockes
newly taken in five or six days: and in ten or twelve days, at the most,
it cures a deep rooted Pocke.

10 And if the plague, burning ^eauer, or small Pockes, or Meazels happen to
infect any of the Soldiers or Mariners, or others in the ship: then if, within
six or eight hours after infection, a dose of my Antidotary powder (whereof
eight grains are sufficient) be taken, it commonly preuenteth the rage and
violence of the Plague, by mastering the poison, seldom suffering any sore to
arise: and it disperseth and conquereth the matter of the small Pockes and
Meazels: whereby in a few hours it vanishes, without making the Patient
heart-sicke. And, in the cure of any kind of poison, no Vnico^es horn, no
Be^^ar stone, no Terra Lemnia or Sagilleta, no Mithridate etc. is able to match
the same, though taken in a double proportion. It is an excellent remedy
against swooning, or any sudden passion of the heart.

11 There is also a medicine, which I will commend for the sea (being a notable
astringent powder) which stays any flux of blood in a short time, and often
cures the Piles and Emerhoides.

12 The Essences of spices and flowers (as of Cinnamom, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs,
Rosemary, Sage, etc) being in the form of powders, may with less danger be
carried at sea, are more apt to be mixed and incorporated with Syrupes, ^^leps
or Conserues, are more pleasing to nature, and are more familiarly taken, and
with better success then the chymicall oils themselves, drawn by limbecke:
their effects are answerable to the nature of the oils.

Thus much I am bold to offer and publish for the benefit of seafaring men, who
for the most part are destitute both of learned Physicians and skillful
Apothecaries: and therefore have more need then others to carry their own
defensatiues and medicines about them. Which if it shall receive enterteinement
according to the worth thereof and my just expectation, I may happily be
encouraged to pry a little further into Natures Cabinet, and so to disperse
some of her most secret Jewels, which she has long time so carefully kept,
only for the use of her dearest children: otherwise, finding no speedy or good
acceptance of this my proffer (but rather crossed by malice or incredulity) I
do here free and enlarge my self from rain own fetters: purposing to
content my spirits, with such private and pleasing practices, as may better
sort with my place and dignity, and in likelihood prove also more profitable
in the end, then if I had thankelesly devoted my self to Bo^ Public^^. In
which course, happy men are sometimes rewarded with good words: but few or
none, in these days, with any real recompense.

Vt Deus per Naturam, sic Natura per ignem Philosophicum.
H. P. Miles.


