The Woman to the PLOVV; And the Man to the HEN-ROOST; OR, A fine way to cure a
Cot-quean.
The Tune is, I have for all good Wives a Song,




BOth Men and Women listen well
a merry Jest I will you tell,
Betwixt a Good Man and a Wife,
Who fell the other day at strife,
He chid her for her Huswivery,
And she found fault as well as he.
With him for's work without the doors,
Quoth he, a pox on all such whors,
Since you and I cannot agree,
Let Us change our work content quoth she
My wheel and Distaff here take thou,
And I will drive the Cart and Plow.
This was concluded twixt them both,
To Cart and Plow ye good-wife go'th,
The good man he at home does tarry,
To see that nothing does miscarry,
An apron he before him put.
Judge, was not this a hansome Slut,
He fleets the Milk he makes the Cheese
He gropes ye Hens, the Turks and Gees,
He Brews and Bakes as well as he can,
But not as it should be done, poor man,
As he did make his Cheese one day,
Two pigs their belys brake with whay
Nothing that he in hand did take.
Did come to good, once he did Bake,
And burn,d the Bread as black as a stock
Another time he went to rock
The Cradle, and threw ye Child o'th floor,
And brok his Nose, and hurt it sore.
He went to Milk one evening tide,
A skittish Cow on the wrong side,
His pail was full of Milk, God wot,
She kicked and spilt it every jot,
Besides she hit him a blow o'th face,
Which was scant whole in six weeks space
Thus was he served, and yet too well.
And more mischances yet befell,
Before his Apron he would leave off,
Though all his Neighbors did him scoff,
Now list and mark one pretty jest,
'Twill make you laugh above all the rest.
As he to Churn his Butter went,
One morning with a good intent,
The Cot-quean fool did surely dream,
For he had quite forgot the Cream,
He churn'd all day, with all his might.
And yet he could get no Butter at night,
The second part,
to the same tune.




TWere strange indeed for me to utter
that without Cream he should make buter
Now having showed his Huswivery,
Who did all things thus oukwardly,
Unto the Good-wife jle turn my Rhyme.
And tell you how she spent her time.
She daily used to drive the Plow,
But to do it well she knew not how,
She made so many bank in the ground'
He had been better have given five pound
That she had never tan't in hand,
So sorely she had spoild his Land.
As she did sow the seed likewise,
She made a feast for Crows and Pies,
She threw a handful at a place,
And left all bare another space,
At th'Harrow she could not rule her Mare
But hid one Land and left two bare.
And shortly after on a day,
As she came home with a load of Hay,
She overthrew it, nay and worse.
She broke the Cart, and ^kild a Horse,
The good man the same time had ill luck,
He let in the Sow, and she killed a Duck.
And being grieved at his heart,
For loss on's Duck his Horse and Cart.
And many hurts on both sides done,
His eyes did with salt water run,
O now, quoth he, full well I see,
The Wheel's for her, the Plow for me.
I thee entreat quoth he good Wife,
To take thy charge, and all my life,
I Will never meddle with Huswivery more,
Nor find such faults as I did before,
Give me the Car-whip and the Flaile,
Take thou the Chyrn and Milking-pail
The good-Wife she was well content,
And about her Huswivery she went,
He to Hedging and to Ditching,
Reaping, Mowing, Lading, Pitching,
He would be twatling still before,
But after he nere twailed more.
I wish all Wives that troubled be.
With Hose and Dublet, Huswivery,
To serve them as this Woman did,
Then may they work and nere be chid,
Though she in the interim had some loss,
Thereby she was eased of a cross,
Take heed of this you Husbandmen,
Let Wives alone to grope the Hen,
And meddle you with the Horse and Ox
And keep your Lambs from Wolf and Fox
So shall you live contented lives,
And take sweet pleasure in your wives
M.P.

FINIS.
London, Printed for F. Grove dwelling on Snow-hill.


