TWO GODLY AND FRUITFUL TREATISES OF THE FOVLE And Gross sin of Oppression.

THE ONE TAKEN OVT OF THE Exposition upon the fist Chapter of Nehemiah,
written by that worthy Bishop and faithful PASTOR of the Church of Durham,
Master JAMES PILKINTON.

The other published of late by ROBERT SOME Doctor of Divinity.

Ecclesi. 7.9. Oppression makes a wise man mad.

Imprinted by Thomas Thomas Printer to the university fo Cambridge. 1585.

THE FORMER TREATISE AGAINST THE GROSS SIN OF OPPRESSION TAKEN OVT OF THE
Exposition of M. JAMES PILKINGTON upon the 5. Chapter of Nehemiah.
1. And there was a great cry of the people made and their wives against their
breethren the Jews.

WHile that Nehemiah had traueiled him self weary in keeping watch and ward,
and setting the people to building the walls again, and thought all was quiet,
both within the City, and safe against the utter enemy, behold, now bursteth
out a new sore, worsse then the former. The people and their wives come with
open mouth and make an outcry against the rich and Rulers among them, which
unmercifully had spoiled and oppressed them, in so much as they were not able
to live. Such is the state of Gods people here in the earth, hn.
that as our master Christ says, He came to overthrow the works of the devil:
so the devil cease not by all means possible to overthrow, or at the least,
so much as in him is, to hinder by his partakers, the building of gods house,
and the setting forth of his glory. And to declare the vehemence of the cry,
the holy Ghost notes it by such a word in the Ebrew, as signifies those
vprores and outcries which are made in Rebellious or Seditious Riots, or else of
such as cry out for great grief and anguish of heart. The parties that make
their cry, are the common people and women, of which it is hard to tell,
whether of them is often more importune in outcrying, and many times without
just cause. The people if they smart a little, and have not their own wills
fulfilled, are ready to exclaim, and women can weep and howl when they list,
and the basest sort are the worst. The parties against whom they cry, be the
jews their countrie-men, breethren in kindred, and professing one religion. If
this oppression and cruel dealing had been by strangers, where no mercy is
commonly showed nor looked for, it would have been less marueiled at, and
less it would have grieved them: but to be entreated cruelly by their
countriemen, kinsmen, and those that served the same God, and professed the
same Religion that they did, and at whose hands they looked for aid and
comfort: this was thought so strange, that it would make any astonished to
hear tell of it. With these circumstances the holy Ghost sets out the
greatness of the cry, to make it more horrible in men's sight, and so the more
easily to bring them to repentance, and make them ashamed of their cruel
dealings. When the Devil prevailed not by Sanballat and his fellows, to
overthrow the building, he sets now on the poor common sort and women, to
cry out against their Rulers, thinking by these means to overthrow all,
rather then to procure any remedy or relief for them: Though God of his
accustomed goodness (turning often our wicked doings to the setting forth of his
Glory) by this means wrought their deliverance and liberty. Such is the
wisdom of our God, that by our foolishnes he declares his mighty power,
wisdom, and majesty: and our ill dealing shows forth his justice and
mercy, and that against our will and meaning.

2. And there were that said, our sonnss and our daughters and we are many,
therefore we must take Corn that we may eat and live. 2. And there were that
said. The cause of their Cry is set forth in these 4. verses following:
Hunger, need, oppression, pinching poverty, and pining penury, made them so
to cry out. And this is to common a fault in our days, in the preaching of
the gospel. Some of the poorer sort, though they had not lands and goods, yet
God, as he uses commonly, had blessed them more then the richer sort with
children so many, that they could not tell how to get bread for them, except
they should sell them as slaves: And where they were free borne, they should
now become bond, and be used as beasts. What a grief it is to a good father,
that loves his child dearly, in the fear of God, to be driven by the
unmerciful dealing of the rich to sell his own children for bondmen, I leave
it to the consideration of those that be natural and loving Parents. For none
can express the greatness of that grief, but he that has been pinched with
it, and felt the smart of it. When Jacob should send little Benjamin into Egypt
with his brethren for corn, it was long ere he could be brought to it, and he
almost had rather died for hunger, then let him go from him. What a love had
David to ward his wicked son Absolon, even in the midst of his Rebellion, and
what charge gave he to his captains, that they should not kill him? 2. Sam. 2.
Such is the love of natural Parents toward their children, that they will
love them, and cannot cast them of, even in their ill doings, though many
times the children be most unthankful. Liberty is a thing that every man
naturally desires and by all means seeks for, therefore bondage must needs
be such a thing as every man does abhor and fly from: yet hunger is such a
thing, that it will break stony walls, and rather then a man will bear it
continually, he will sell lands, goods, wife, children, yea himself, to be
slaves for ever. Nay hunger is so pinching a pain, that a woman will eat her
own child, as in the siege of Jerusalem, in Samaria, and Saguntine; yea a man
his own flesh, rather then he will die for hunger. Hunger of all things may
not be abidden, what in conuenience soever fall out after. Consider then what
miserable case these poor men were in, that had so many children, and could
get no bread to put in their mouths: and wicked men, the richer sort, were
they, that had brought them to this poverty, and now would not relieve them in
this their extremity. We read of a Bishop of Mentz in Germany called Hatto,
who had great store of corn and would not relieve the poor with it in time of
great dearth, but let the rats eat it: in revenge of which, God raised so
many Rats about him, that they drove him from house to house to save his life:
and where he had a strong tower in the midst of the great river of Rhene, which
yet stands there to be seen in the midst of the river, he thought him
self sure if he could fly thither: notwithstanding the Rats, swam after him
thither, and there devoured him: and it is called the Rats tower at this day.
^ou. 11.
Solomon says, he that hides up his corn, shall be cursed among the people,
but blessing shall be on them that sell it. God grant the richer sort pitiful
hearts to open their barnes and pursse to the relief of the poor, that they
may escape Gods plague and man's curse.

3. And there were some that said, our fields, and our vineyeards, and our
houses we have laid to pledge, that we might have Corn in this hunger.

4. And there were some that said: we have boromwed onie of the Kings tribute
upon our lands and vineyeards

5. And now as the flesh of our breethren is, so is our flesh: and as their
children be, so are our children: and mark, we bring into bondage our sons
and our daughters as servants: and there besome of our daughters in bondage
already: and there is no power in our hands: our lands and our vineyeards are
in other men's hands.

3. And there were some that said. Thus far goes the cry of the poorest
sort: now follows another company, that cry as fast, but they are not
altogether so poor. They were pinched with hunger, but they had some lands,
vineyards, and houses to lay to pledge, that they might have some corn to fill
their bellies withal. These men were hunger-bitten also: for though they had
land, yet they were not able to store it, nor husband it, as husbandry
required: and therefore had no profit by it. And like enough they were such as
Aggeus the Prophet com-plained on, saying: that every man builds for
himself fair houses, and Gods house lay unbuilt, and therefore God plagued
them. They had sown much, and reaped little, their corn wasted in their
Barnes, and their grapes consumed away in the winepresse. These days were
like the time of Micheas the Prophet, who cries out against the Rulers for
their oppressing of the poor so extremely, saying, they pluck of their
skins from them, Mich
and their flesh from their bones. And they eat also the flesh of my people,
and flay of their skin from them, and they break their bones, and choppe
them in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the caldron.

4. And there were some that said. Yet comes another sort, but they were in
some better case, for they had some corn, and no money, and they cry out as
fast as the rest. The Kings of Persia, although they had given the Jews
license to go home to build their Temple and City, yet they laid a great
task on them, which they should pay, in token of their subjection, and
recompense for their liberties sake. The Rulers and chief of the Jews had
engrossed up in their hands vnmercifullie all the corn and money, that could
be come by, so that little or nothing could be gotten to fill their bellies, and
to pay the kings tribute withal: therefore these men must pledge their lands
and vineyeards to get some money for this purpose. O miserable wretches, that
had thus miserably oppressed their poor breethren and countriemen, who had
taken as much pains as they or more for the defense of their country,
building of their Temple and City: and now in their great need could find no
comfort nor relief at their hands. But these be no new things in the world:
for Amos the Prophet complains likewise of the oppression, (...) 8.
that the richer sort used toward the poor in his time. When will this moon
pass away, say they, that has so much plenty: and the time come, that we
may make the measure less, and buy the poor for silver, and the needy for
shoes, and sell the out cast of the wheat.

5. And now as the flesh of our breethren is. But now come they all howling and
crying together, and say, what better case are we in, that be come home to our
country, then our breethren, which live in captivity under the Chaldies,
Assirians, Babylonians, Medes, and Persians, or any other country,
where-soeuer they be scattred on the face of the earth. They live in penury and
hunger, and so do we. They be oppressed with their Rulers, and so be we. Their
flesh is partched with toiling in the heat, and frozen up with cold, and so is
ours. Their bellies cleave to the very back for hunger, and so do ours. There
is no strength nor courage left in them, no more is there in us. They be weary
of their lives, and so be we. They have not where with to fill their belly, and
cover their back, and no more have we. They pine away for sorrow, and so do we.
They have nothing left but skin and bones, and those will scarce cleave
together for sorrow, and in the same case be we. If they get a penny with great
labor, one or other is ready to snatch it from them, and so it is with us. As
their children live in as great slavery and misery as their fathers, so do
our children live as miserably as we do. There is no respect of age nor youth
neither there nor here, but all kinds of sorrow are laid vppons us without
mercy. If this sorrow were laid on us alone we could better bear it, but when
we see our children, young infants that cannot help themselves, to be wrapped in
the same misery that we be, and can help neither them nor our selves, it
doubleth and tripleth our sorrow, and yet both is remediles, endless, and
comfortles.

These be strange things which were laid to their charge for their ungentle
dealing: but lo, mark and consider farther, and these dealings that follow are
much worse monsters in nature, and things intolerable, both before God and man.
This word lo, mark or behold, Ecce, ever betokneth throughout the scripture
some notable thing either very good or very ill, that is spoken of
immediately afterward, and such a one as commonly falls not out among men:
And the holy Ghost of purpose uses to mark such notable things with this
word Lo, Ecce, mark or behold to put men in remembrance, and a wake them to
the consideration of the weighty matter that follows, that they should not
lightly pass over it, but deeply mark and consider it. Mark the greatness
of this oppression and unmerciful dealing of the richer sort toward us their
poor breethren and countriemen, of the same religion, and serving the same God
that they do, and have taken as much pains in building the Temple, City, and
defending our country as they have done, or more: and yet can find no mercy
at their hands, but are made their slaves. For behold in strange countries,
where our breethren dwell, strangers take their sons and daughters by force
and make them bondmen and slaves: but we are brought into such misery, that
we our selves are driven by necessity through the oppression of our rulers,
against our will, and willingly to bring and offer our sons and daughters to
them to be their bond-seruants, slaves, and used as beasts at their
commandment, that we and they may live, though it be in great misery, rather
then perish for hunger or penury. And, that ye may see the thing to be true,
and not feigned, some of our daughters are in bon dage to them already. It is
a great grief to parents, to see their own Children taken by strangers and
made slaves in their own sight: but it is a greater grief for fathers to be so
cruelly dealt with in their own country, at their friends hands and
countrie-men, that they shall be compelled willingly, though against their
wills, to sell their children for slaves, or else die for hunger. At strangers
hands, and specially if they be of another Religion, no man looks for any
favor, and if any do come, it is more then looked for, and so much the more
welcome, when it comes: but at a friend and countrie-mans hand, where all
courtesy is to be looked for, and to find none but all extremity, it is a
grief above all griefs, and man's heart can never digest it. It is against God,
against nature, and common reason which teaches all gentleness to such: nay it
is worsse then beastlines: for one beast will not deal so cruelly with
another of his own kind: and one thief will not rob another: therefore to
be spoiled and robbed by them of whom they should be defended and relieved, it
is a grief that passes all sorrow. But if these sorrows could have an end, or
there were any hope to have release of them in time we could take it the
better, and have some comfort: but all hope is taken away, for we have no power
left, we have nothing to help our selves withal, we have wrastled as long as
we might and made shift as long as it would be, but now we are able to bear it
no more, we have nothing left, all is spent and gone, and we cannot deuize
where to get any more: our houses, our lands and vineyeardes other men have
cruelly gotten from us, and vnmercifullie do keep them, and have no regard
to help us in this our great and extreme necessity. We can do nothing, but
cry out on heaven and earth, but they have hardened their hearts and stopped their
ears that they will not hear nor pity us. Mercy is gone, cruelty,
oppression, and greedines carry the^ away, that both forget god and themselves.
This was the miserable state of that time: a man would have thought that the
misery, slavery, and bondage, that they themselves were in of late, under
heathen Princes, in strange countries, and so late being restored through gods
free and undeserved goodness to their own country, with liberty, great gifts
and liberality, to build their temple and city, should not have been so sone
forgotten, but as they th^^ would have been glad of some relief, succor and
courtesy to be showed unto them at strangers hands, so they should now show
the like unto their breethren and countrymen: but such is the wickedness of man's
heart that the more mercies we receive at Gods hand, the more unthankful we
be: and such is the malice of Satan against God, his Church, and people, that
when the Lord of his own free will and undeserved goodness bestows his mercy
upon his servants, the Devil by his members and all devises possible, goes
about to overthrow and withdraw all sorts of men, so much as in him is, to a
forgetfulness of such merciful goodness bestowed upon them, and makes them
unmerciful to their breethren, which have received so great mercy at the
Lords hand. Religion is the chiefest help that god has given us to know him
by, to bridle our ill affections and desires withal, to make us love one
another, and set forth his glory: and yet if we look into our selves in these
days, we shall find that there was never greater cruelty, oppression of the
poor, Hypocrisy, and dissembling in Gods cause, and unmercifulness amongst
men, in this land, then has been since the beginning of the reforming of
Religion amongst us: yea, and that is more wonderful, of such as would pretend
to be favorers of Religion. Hypocrites, as they use nothing well, so they
misuse Religion, for a cloak to work their own will and pleasure by, to the
defacing of all good Religion. Things be fresh in memory, and cannot be
forgotten of them that will not willingly be blind: but they that list to
reed, may see in that worthy Father Master Latimer his Sermons many such
things opened, that then were preached, and would to God they were now
reformed, or not fallen to worsse and more shameful dealings, without hope of
amendment. As for begging or buiyng good things at the Kings hand, then
selling the woods, surueying the land, to the uttermost acre or roods of land,
inhaunsing of rents to the highest, from twenty pounds to an hundredth, racking
the Tenants by intolerable fines and Incomes, Sine fine, every 5. or 7. year
commonly, laying load on them, to carry and recarie what soever is to be done,
paying never a penny for their labor, ride and run when he is commanded,
etc. Then turn it into the Princes hand again, get as much, and use it as ill
or worsse, This practice has been so common, and declared by diverse, that few
can be ignorant of it, and many cry out on it at this day, but remediles. Yet
this is not the worst: if there be any broken title of the land, that may
make question in the Law, or if there be any danger of waters or
extraordinary charges, reparations, etc. then it is meet for the Prince by
exchange. When it is rackt to the highest, and a good thing gotten in steed
of it, yet that the Prince shall not be thought to have an ill bargain, he
will desire to be farmer of it himself after the same rate, to stop men's
mouths for a time. As it is reason, honorable, and Godly, that the Prince
should liberally reward and encourage the good seruitor: so is it reason
again, that the Princes goodness, nor the subject be misused. Master Latimer
did freely speak of these things, not without blame, as peradventure this
will be to: but would to God this had been used only in the princes state. but
he that will look and see, shall find the like to common in mean men's doings.
As for pulling down of Towns, turning tillage to pasture, and turning out the
tennants, as Achab did to Naboth for his vineyard, that they may have
elbowroume, make them large demeans, or set a shepherd and his dog, where so
many have dwelt, and that a poor man may not dwell so near a man of worship:
these be so common among the meanest sort of Purchasers, that men need not to
study where to find them. Raising of Rents, and taking unreasonable fines and
gressans, is thought no fault, it is so common: but some are waxen so cunning,
that it is strange to think of. A landlord is hungry, and needs must have
fines even of the poorest sort: and because he will be thought to deal
mercifully, this way is devised. The poor man has no money, and yet he must
pay: his goods, and specially his sheep, though they be few, shall be
preised, and according to the rate, out of those goods the fineshalbe raised.
And that some pity shall be thought to be showed, the poor man shall have his
goods again by the price, to pay his fine withal, and for occupying of those
his own goods, he shall pay a yearly rent or interest, as it were an usury:
and this dealing is thought great courtesy. Solon, when he was asked, why,
among the other good laws that he made, he made not one for him that killed
his father? He answered, because he would not put men in remembrance, that
there was any such a mischief, that could come into men's heads: So I fear the
opening of these things shall give occasion to some ill men, but not to the
good, to learn the like devises. So ready we be to learn that that is ill.
The law in deed opens sin what it is, that a man should fly from it, and
not be condemned for ignorance. Saint Paul says, Romans 7.7
I had not known lust and desire of ill things to be sin, except the law had
said, thou shall not lust nor desire them. The law is not to blame in declaring
what sin is, that by knowing of it we may fly from it: no more then the
Physician is to blame in opening the disease to his patient, and teaching him
what things to avoid, that he may recover halth. But as an ill stomach, what
good meat soever it eats, turns it into ill humors: and the Spider
gathers poison on the same flowers that the Be gathers honey: So on the
holy word of God and his blessed laws, which he made for our health and
salvation, ill men gather death and damnation, through their own wickedness,
and no fault in the law nor lawmakers. As the Israelites cried out in this time
justly on their Rulers for this great oppression, so it is to be feared that
in our days there is no less cause to cry aloud, that God may hear, when
man will not. There be four things that cry for vengeance out of heaven unto
the Lord, and the scripture uses the same word of crying with them, which for
memories sake are contained in these two verses: Clamitat in coelum vox
sanguinis, vox Sodomorum,
Vox oppressorum, mercesque, retenta laborum.


For murder and bloodshed God said to Cain, when he had killed his brother
Abel, the voice of thy brothers blood cries out from the earth to me in
heaven. (...) 4.
For the filthy incest, fornication, Pride, Glotonie, wealth, and Idleness of
Sodom, the Prophet Ezechiel and Genesis testify saying; (...) 19. (...) 16.
(...). 2.3.
the cry of Sodom is come up to me. The Israelites oppressed in Egypt with
making of brick, etc. God delivered them when they cried unto him, (...) 5.
and drowned the oppressors. S. James says, the wages withholden from those
that reaped their fields, cry out unto the Lord of hosts. These be good
lessons for such as oppres the poor, or deal streightlie with their tennants,
thinking they may use them like slaves or beasts at their pleasure. Though they
be servants here, yet they be children of the same God, and bought by the same
price that their masters be: and therefore ought of duty to be used with
Christian and brotherly charity, as thou would be, if thou were so. There
be other sorts of cruel oppressors, but not so common as these: As cosening,
by cunning dealing to creep into men's bosoms, to be Feoffies of trust,
Executors of will, Gardians of infants, and these play best be trust, but they
trust themselves best and go away with all. Cariers of corn, victuals, and
other commodities out of the realm, to make a dearth within the realm, yea,
and often to feed our enemies, and enrich themselves, by procuring licenses to
carry them out, are to well known how hurtful they be through all countries.
As for Ingrossers, fore-stallers, regraters, lease-mongers, they are thought
honest men. The lawyers of both sorts by feeding their Clients with fair
words, and the Questmongers with sluttish shifts, making them believe their
matter to be good, and with long delays* impouerish the suitors: and if he come
to be Judge in the same matter afterward, wherein he was a counselor before, he
says, I spoke then as a counselor, and now I must speak as a Judge, and
thinks that he has spoken good reason, as though God had made it lawful at
any time, or in any case to bear false witness or speak untruths. The
Physician and the Apothecarie deal so cunningly that no man espieth them, and
yet be as ill. The clergy that will take the profit and refuse the pains,
Lie at his ease from his charge and let his sheep hunger, are not better then
the rest. Pen-clearks, shirifs, bailifs, and summoners are not worthy to come
to this company, for they can return Non est inuentus, when they stand and
talk with him: and make cunning delays, until they make men pay double fees
for expedition. Worst of all comes the common cutpursse the usurer and his
broker, he stands on his reputation, he sits higest on the benche, and
looks big; nay he is crept unto mean men's dealings, he speaks
courteously, and deals cruelly: he defends his doings to be charitable,
when it eats up house, lands, and goods, turns infants a begging, and
overthrows the whole kindred: Captains convey as cunningly as Iugglers with
leger-demaine. Merchants and Artificers are so honest, that they may not be
touched: they have so few faults, that they cannot be told, and yet there could
never be laws enough made to bridle them, but they will creep out. When
receivers are become deceivers, controulers be pollers, Auditors searchers, and
Customers look through their fingers and keep their old custom: And
generally, every man is a Thief in his occupation, as the common proverb
says, there is craft even in daubing: it is to be feared, that as the course
of a stream being stopped, it gathers a great damme, and being let sodenlie
go, it overthrows all in his way; so Gods anger being stayed a time, the
windows in heaven being opened, it will power down on our heads plentifully.
How shoul Gods plague be far from us, when these cry vengeance daily? the
thief by the high way is not so ill as any of those, that deal not uprightly
in their vocation. For against a thief a man may fight for his pursse
wittinglie, and say, master thief gramercie. If a man consider in how little
tents, Shops, Offices, and houses these men dwell, and how great gains they
get, he shall easily see where the proficablest ground lies in the Realm. If
this people had such cause to cry out then on their Rulers, what cause have we
now here among us, where not only the richer and mightier sort ouerload the
poorer, but every one in his degree uses craft, subtilty, and deceit, to
oppress, undermine, and scratch from other, without respect of friend or foe,
what he can, not regarding how he comes by it, by hook or by crook, by
right or wrong, be it short or long. Here is nothing spoken particularly
against any man's vocation or occupation, nor any man that deals honestly in
them, but generally to note the general faults of the offenders, that every
man may look into his own bosom, consider his doings and amend one. If every
one would amend one, all should be well straight: but every one would amend
another, see other men's faults, but not his own, and therefore all lie still
as they did, nothing amended, and every one makes courtesy who shall begin
first. Sophony the Prophet complains of his time, and says, thy rulers are
roaring lions, thy judges are ravening wolves, and will not leave the bones
until morning: by prophets are lewd and unconstant, thy Priests have defiled
the holy place, and broken thy law. Micheas cries out and says: there is not
a good man left on the earth, and not a righteous man among men, all lie in
wait for blood, every man hunteth his brother unto death, etc. God grant our
times were not like. Among us it is merrily said of some, that there be some
Courts where law is executed without conscience: Another, where conscience is
without law: the third where neither law nor conscience; the fourth, where both
law and conscience shall rule, I can rather pray for, then look for, until
the last day come, when the righteous Judge shall judge both with law and
conscience. In the mean time we may mourn, and turn unto the Lord, that he
may forgive us, and receive us in his many and great mercies, for we are full
of many and great miseries. The pride of women is through the fault of men,
therefore they be blameles: God amend us all. It is written that Joseph in
Egypt used the people almost of like sort that they do here, 47.
and yet is he praised and and these justly reproved: which possibly some
marvel at, not understanding the diversity of their doings. Joseph laid up
corn in the time of plenty, when every man had enough: these men did it at
al times, without respect, in plenty and scarsitie. Joseph brought the money
into the Kings cofers, to serve the common wealth: these men laid it up in
their own Cofers, to their own private use. Joseph bought their cattle for
such price as they were worth: these men pay not the just price for any thing
they take. Joseph buieth their land and makes the people bond unto the King,
restoring them again the land, the King finding the seed to sow, the people
only laboring to till the ground. And where we think we deal courteously
if we let them to halfes, the Egiptians have the fourth part for their labor,
and pay the king the fifth part of the increase, for the land and seed, but
these men kept all in their own hands. Joseph bought not the Priests lands,
but gave them alowance of such things as they wanted out of the kings store:
and these men like unto our days, if they can scrape any thing from the
Church, that is a pastime among all other to laugh at, and thought best gotten.
So much more is a minister of Gods Gospel thought meeter to be spoiled by
these cutpursses, then Joseph thought meet to do to those Idolatrous priests.
Joseph opened his barnes in time of dearth, and sold liberally to the needy:
these men the greater that the need was, the faster they locked it up, until
they had their desire of the poor. Joseph restored their land and took but
the fifth part of the increase: these men restore nothing, and yet take
interest. As this cruel dealing toward their breethren and countriemen, was
thought strange to be found amongst this people, in the time that God had
showed to them such great mercies, in restoring them again to their country,
giving them the liberty to build their temple and City, with great gifts,
liberality, and favor of the kings, under whom they were bondmen and slaves:
So it is much more marueil, that among Christians, in the time of the gospel,
so mercifully restored unto us, and so freely taught, greater cruelty should
be found and exercised, then among the hard hearted Jews or infidel pagans.
But this is the common practice of Satan, that in no age, people, nor
country, he can be quiet to see Gods kingdom set up and flourish, and his power
fall: but he will rage, storm, besturre him, and by all devises that may be,
and by all power that he can overthrow it. And seeing this is no new thing but
has fallen out diverse times before, let us not now be astonished nor dismayed at
it, nor murmr and grudge against the doctrine of our salvation, so
mercifully offered unto us, as though it were not the true word of God,
because men live so far contrary to that which is taught, and they openly
profess. The devil is content, when he cannot overthrow the truth of the
doctrine, to deface it so much as he can, with the ill life of those that
profess it. But the gospel teaches us what to do in this case, (...). 23.3.
saying; do as they say, but do not as they do: The doctrine is good, though
they be ill. The truth and worthiness of Gods word hangs not on our life and
doings, but our life and doings should be reformed by Gods word: for that is a
Lantern to our feet, Psa* (...).
and a light to our stepps, that we may know when we be in the right way and
how to come into it. We must be judged by gods word, and not it by us: we must
be ruled by it, and not ouerrule it, according to our fantasies: we must hang
on Gods true saying, and not on man's evil living.

A TABLE OF SVCH POINTS AS ARE CONTAINED IN the second Treatise
1. What oppression is. 2. It is not lawful for any man to oppress another.
3. They which have done wrong unto, or oppressed any, must make actual
restitution. 4. It is the duty of the Magistrate, to deliver the oppressed out
of the hands of the oppressor. 5. The Magistrate loses nothing by delivering
the oppressed. 6. Oppressors shall be grieuouslie punished. 7. Oppressors
have no Religion in them.
To the Reader.
IT has pleased an English papist, to give out in print, that the Church of
Room does both teach, and require actual restitution, and that our church
does neither. His speech of us is very slau^derous, and my treatise against
oppression, is argument ynought to confute him. If they of Rome teach and
require actual restitution, it is no work of supererogation: they do no more
but their duties. If we should fail in this clear point, we deserve great
condemnation at almighty Gods hands. I confess that a man is good (and
therefore justified in Gods fight) before he does good works: but withal I
set down this, that good works do follow him that is truly justified, and
that such as have oppressed, or injured any man, shall not be pardoned at Gods
hand, unless they make actually restitution, if they be able to do it. If any
require proof of this, I refer him to this treatise of mine against
oppression.

THE SECOND TREATISE AGAINST THE FOVLE AND GROSS sin of oppression.
Question. WHat is oppression?

Answer. It is unjust dealing, used of the mightier, either by violence,
color of law, or any other cunning dealing, against such as are not able to
withstand them. The ground of this definition is contained in these places of
Scripture. Micheas. Chap. 2. verse. 1.2.1. These. Chap. 4. verse. 6.

2. It is not lawful for any man to oppress another. Give us this day our
daily bread. Mat. Cha. 6. verse. 11. Every Christian desires God to give
daily bread, (that is, all things necessary for this life) both to himself,
and to others: therefore no Christian is privileged to spoil another of his
necessary food.

If one of us must pray for the good of another, one of us may not pray upon
another. He that takes his neighbors living, Eccl. ch* 34. v. 2
is a murderer.

Thou shall not desire thy neighbors house, his field, etc. Deuteronomy. 5.21. If we
may not desire his house, or land, then we may not spoil him of his house, or
land, or in close that ground, whereby the poor either by right are, or by
right ought to be relieved.

If thou meet thin enemies ox, or his Ass going astray, thou shall bring him
to him again. If thou see thy enemies Ass lying under his burden, will thou
cease to help him? thou shall help him up with it again. Exodus 23.4.5.
Almighty God commands us to deal well with our enemies Ass, therefore we
may not by undoing our neighbor or spoiling him of any part of his land or
goods, make him an ass and send him a begging.

He that oppresses the poor, reproves him that made him, etc. Prou. 14.31.
It is a gross sin to reprove the majesty of God: therefore it is a gross
sin to oppress the poor.

It was one of the sins of Sodom, not to reach out the hand to the poor.
Ezech. 16.49. If it be a great sin, not to relieve the poor, it is a very
gross sin to spoil the poor. The bread of the needful is the life of the
poor: Eccl. 34.^.
he that defraudeth him thereof, is a murderer.

There is a writ in England, which bears this name, Ne unjust vexes, that is
to say, vex not any man unjustly: This is a godly law, and is derived from
the law of God, which forbids and condemns oppression.

There are certain beggars, which of purpose keep their legs sore, to get
money by it: If they are justly misliked which gain by their own sore legs,
what deserve they to be thought of, which gain by other men's sore legs?

When thou sellest ought to thy neighbor, or buiest at thy neighbors hand,
ye shall not oppress one another. Leuit. 25. ver. 14. This is the will of
God, that no man oppress or defraude his brother in any matter. 1. These. 4.6.
Therefore men of trade may not gain by little measures, false weights, and
false speeches, and oaths, nor any mighty men may gain by cunning dealing,
by color of law, or by using any violence what-soeuer.

3. They which have done wrong unto, or oppressed any, must make actual
restitution. GOd says thus unto Moses: speak unto the children of Israel,
when a man or woman shall commit any sin, that men commit, and transgress
against the Lord, when that person shall trespass then they shall confess
their sin, which they have done, and shall restore the damage thereof with
his principal, and put the fifth part of it more thereto, and shall give it unto
him, against whom he has trespassed. But if the man have no kinsman, to whom
he should restore the damage, the damage shall be restored to the Lord, for the
Priests use, etc. Number. 5. ver. 6.7.8. We are taught in this place, to whom this
actual restitution must be made, even to him, whom we have injured: if he be
dead, we must restore it to his kinsman: if he have no kinsman alive, actual
restitution must be made to almighty God, for the Priests use, and in our
time for the poores use.

Michah robbed his mother of 11. hundred shekels of silver: Iud. 17.2
his mother did not know that he had it, but he had remorse of that sin, and
made actual restitution.

Samuel says thus of himself: Whose Ox have I taken? Whose Ass have I
taken? 1. Sam. 1
or whom have I done wrong to? or whom have I hurt? or of whose hands have I
received any bribe, to blind my eyes therewith? and I will restore it you,
etc. It is certain that Samuel did not deal either corruptly or unjustly in
his office: if he had, he would have made actual restitution.

Zacheus was some times very disordered in his life: it pleased our savior
Christ to be a good God unto him, and to lodge in his house: Zacheus having
feeling of his former wants uttered these words, If I have taken from any man
by forged cauillation, I restore him, four fold. If Zacheus of Jericho, after
his conversion, was content to restore four fold, it is a good consequent,
that they have little sense of Religion, which will not restore the principal.

Question. If a man have deceived, robbed or oppressed other men, shall he be
pardoned at Gods hand, if he make not actual restitution.

Answer. God will not pardon him, unless he make actual restitution, if he be
able to do it: my reasons are these.

If the wicked restore the pledge, and give again that he had robbed, ip. 18.
v. 13.
he shall surely live, and not die, says the Lord. Eze. 33.15. Therefore, it
is a sure consequent, that he shall not live eternally, which being in case to
make actual restitution, does it not accordingly.

Is not this the fasting that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness to
take of the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye
break every yoke, etc. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer, thou
shall cry, and he shall say, here I am, etc. Esa. 58.6.9. If the oppressor
must let the oppressed go free, he must make actual restitution. If almighty
God will not hear the prayer of the oppressor (until he let the oppressed
go free) it is a necessary consequent, that God will not pardom him.

Augustine, Epist. 54.
is very flat for this point: if men be able to make actual restitution and
do it not, poenitentiae non agitur, sed fingitur: that is to say, their
repentance is no repentance, and their sin shall not be pardoned, until actual
restitution be made.

Question. If a man have secretly either robbed or deceived another, and is
very willing to make restitution, but cannot do it without some worldly
danger, and disgrace to himself, what must he do in this case?

Answer. Let him send that which he has taken unjustly, by some trusty
messenger to him whom he has wronged, and let his name be concealed.

Question. If he that has taken unjustly from others, has wasted all, and is
not able to make restitution, what shall he do?

Answer. Such a one, must desire pardon very humbly at Gods hand, and water
the earth with his tears.

4. It is the duty of the Magistrate to deliver the oppressed out of the hand
of the oppressor. EXecute judgment in the morning (that is, (...) 21.12. ^^y.
1.17.
carefully and without delay) and deliver the oppressed out of the hand of the
oppressor, says the Lord, etc. Seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge
the fatherles, and defend the widow. Almighty God commands the Magistrates
to execute judgment in the morning: therefore they must use no delays in
doing justice. God commands the magistrates to seek judgment, therefore in
cases of oppression, they must not stay till they be called for. God commends
unto the Magistrates all that are oppressed, but specially the fatherless and
widow, because they want the defense of their parents, and husbands, and
every man goes over, (...). 22.
where the hedge is lowest.

Josias executed judgment and justice, he judged the cause of the afflicted
and poor (says the Lord of Josias).

Job says thus of himself: I delivered the poor that cried, (...). 29
and the Fatherles, and him that had none to help him, etc. I put on justice,
and it covered me: my judgment was the eye to the blind, and I was a father
unto the poor, and when I knew not the cause, I sought it out diligently, I
brake also the chawes of the unrighteous man, and plucked the pray out of his
teeth, etc. It appears by this, that Job was a worthy Magistrate: God send
us many such as Job was.

The Sunamite (whose son Elizeus raised to life) so iourned in the time of
famine seven years in the land of the Philistines: in her absence, her lands
and goods were unjustly entered upon: at her return, she complained of the
injury to Iehoram the King of Israel: Iehoram without delay commanded an
Eunuch to restore her goods and lands unto her: Restore thou (says Iehoram)
all that are hers, 2. Kings
and all the fruits of her lands, since the day she left the land, even until
this time.

The Jews in Nehemiahs time were greatly oppressed: Nehemiah was very angry
with the Princes and rulers which oppressed them, Neh. 5.
and said unto them: you lay burdens every one upon his breethren etc.
Restore unto them this day their lands, their vineyards, their olives, and
their houses.

If it be the magistrates duty to deliver the oppressed, they must take great
heed, that themselves be neither principals nor accessaries in the sin of
oppression. If they be guilty, judgment shall be turned into wormewoode, Amos.
and 2.6.
and the righteous shall be sold for silver, and the poor for shoes: that is to
say, filthy bribes shall be more accounted then men's lives, which are most
precious.

5. The Magistrate loses nothing by delivering the oppressed. IF he do it
with a single heart (beside the testimony of a good conscience which is a
continual feast) he may assure himself of Gods favor and blessing, and of
the singular likeing of all Gods people.

Josias did eat and drink and prosper, (...) 22.
when he executed judgment and justice, when he judged the cause of the
afflicted, and the poor.

Job delivered the poor that cried, (...) 6.
and the fatherles, and him that had none to help him, and the blessing of him
that was ready to perish, came upon him.

Our sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth has dealt graciously with many poor
suitors at the Court, she has spoken comfortablie to them, and procured
restitution accordingly. If it be no disgrace to this noble Lady which
sits under the cloth of estate, to deliver the oppressed, it is no blot to
inferior magistrates if they do the like. If the Prince pleases God highly,
and wins the hearts of her subjects soundly, for releeuing the oppressed,
it is very certain, that those Cormorants, which grynde the faces of the
poor are accurssed of God, and loose the hearts of his people. If the Prince
sits fast in the seat of her Kingdom for tendering the case of the
oppressed, can they assure themselves of sitting quietly under their vines
and figge-trees, which eat bread, baked with the tears of men? It is
certain, they cannot. for (besides the manifold curses of God and his people)
their own consciences do mightelie sting them, and are enemies enough to
torment them.

6. Oppressors shall be greeuouslie punished. CVrsed be he, Deu. 22.17.
that remoueth his neighbors mark: and all the people shall say, Amen. If
they are accurssed by God, and his people, which remove the mark of the land,
they are more accurssed, which take away house and lend.

Oppression makes awise man mad. Eccle. 7.
Madness is a grievous punishment: God punishes oppression by madness, one
gross sin, by another.

Ye have builded houses of hewn stone, Amos. 5
but ye shall not dwell in them: ye have planted pleasant vineyards, but ye
shall not drink wine of them: The reason of this is set down by Almighty God
in the same verse, in these words: your treadings are upon the poor: and you
take from him burdens of wheat, (that is to say, the necessary relief of
him and his famility.) If the taking away of burdens of wheat from the poor
was so great a sin, the taking way of arable ground (which by tillage and Gods
blessing brings relief to a man and his family) is no little sin.

They shall not mourn for him (says God of Ioachim the King of Judah, which
was a great oppressor) he shall be buried as an ass is buried, Iere. 22
and cast forth (as a carrion above the ground) even without the gates of
Jerusalem. Ioachim had closed himself in Cedar, but that was not able to keep
Gods judgments from him.

The stone shall cry out of the wall, ^ac. 2.11.
and the beam out of the timber shall answer it, etc. As if almighty God
should say, rather then the vile dealings of oppressors should not come to
light, the stone shall cry out of the wall, I am built of blood and iniquity,
and the beam out of the Timber shall answer, I am built likewise of blood and
iniquity. If the stones and beams of oppressors houses, give in their
evidence (like honest Iurates) against such houses, the Oppressors must
prepare themselves to hear this fearful sentence pro nounced, by the Lord
chief justice of heaven and earth against them: woe unto him that builds a
town with blood, ^ac. 2.12.
and erecteth a City by iniquity.

They which oppress others, ^g. Epist. (...). 2.
do more hurt them selves, then those whom they oppress: the smart of the
oppressed has an end, the smart of the Oppressor is everlasting: for he
heapeth unto himself wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration
of the just judgment of God.

There were never any oppressors so many and mighty, but at the length they
were met with. Gods judgments have feet of wool, but they have arms of
brass: It is long God begin, but when he strikes, he pays home. Esaias. chap.
30. ver. 14.

Woe unto them that imagine iniquity, and work wickedness upon their beds: Iere.
5.
when the morning is light, they practice it, because their hand has power,
and they covet fields, and take them by violence, and houses, and take them
away: so they oppress a man and his heritage: therefore, thus says the Lord:
behold, against the family have I devised a plague, whereout ye shall not
pluck your necks. Mich. 2. ver. 1.2.3. God be merciful unto us and make us
afraid of his judgments.

7. Oppressors have no Religion in them. GOd Looked for judgment, Esaias. 5.7
but behold oppression, for righteousness but behold a crying. etc. Judgment
and righteousness are the true fruits of Gods religion, therefore oppression is
no branch of Gods Religion, and consequently, the oppressor is void of all
religion.

Do not all the workers of iniquity know that they eat up my people as they
eat bread? they call not upon the Lord: Psalm. 14. ver. 4. Opperssours call
not upon the Lord, therefore they are void of religion: for invocation is a
principal and necessary fruit of religion. If the oppressors say, that they
stretch out their hands and make many prayers, I grant they do so, but
Almighty God gives them this answer: I will hide mine eyes from you, I will
not hear: Esaias. 1.1
for your hands are full of blood.

I will be a swift witness against those, that wrongfully keep back the
hirelings wages, and vex the widow, (...). 3.4.
and fatherles, and oppress the stranger, and fear not me, says the Lord of
hosts, etc. They which oppress others fear not God, (...). 3.5.
therefore they are void of Religion. If they say they fear God, they deserve
no credit, because their doings confute their speech. A good tree brings
forth good fruits, and a justifying faith appreereth by good works.

The former governors did burden the people, (...) 5.15.
but so did not I (says Nehemiah) because of the fear of god. If Nehemiah did
neither oppress nor deal hardly, because he feared God, it is manifest that
oppressors fear not God, and therefore are void of religion.

When he (that is Josias) judged the cause of the afflicted, and the poor, he
prospered: was not this, because he knew me? says the Lord: But thine eyes and
thine heart (he speaks to Ioachim the King of Judah) are but only for thy
covetousness and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression etc. Josias was
a singular defense to the oppressed, because he did know and fear God: Ioachim
was a notable oppressor, because he did neither know, nor fear God, that is
to say, because he was void of Gods religion.

This which I have set down against oppression, may serve for oppressors to
look upon, and to reform themselves by. If it work their good, it is happy
for them: If it do not, let them remember that dye they must, and that after
death they shall have a fearful judgment. The best advise that I can give to
them which are oppressed, is that they desire the magistrate, to be their
defense. If by this ordinary means, they cannot compass their own, they must
patiently bear injuries, and commit their cause to almighty God, Psalm. 56.
who has their flittings in his register, and their tears in his bottell, and
will be surely, but yet justly, revenged of their Oppressors.

Veritas and dulcis est, and amara. Quando dulcis est, parcit: quando amara,
curat. Aug. Epist. 211. ad Romulum.

