An exhortation unto the governors, and people of her Majesty's country of
Wales, to labor earnestly, to have the preaching of the Gospel planted among
them.

There is in the end something that was not in the former impression.

PSALM. 137.5, 6. If I shall forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget
her self, if I do not remember, thee, let my tongue cleave unto the roof of my
mouth: yea, if I prefer not Jerusalem unto my chief joy.

2. COR. 1.13. For we write no other thing unto you, than that you read, or
that you acknowledge, and I trust you shall acknowledge unto the end.

1 COR. 5.13, 14. For, whether we be out of our wit, we are it unto God, or
whether we be in our right mind, we are it unto you. For, that love of Christ
does constrain us.

1588.

TO THE RIGHT HONORAble the Earl of Pembroke, Lord President of Wales, etc.
The rest of the governors there, and to all, the gentlemen, Ministers and
people my my brethren, the inhabitants of Wales: in this life, the true
knowledge of a saving God, the true feeling of sin, the full assurance of their
salvation in Jesus Christ, wroght by the word Preached, with outward
prosperity, if the Lord think it good to them, and in the life to come,
everlasting blessedness in the kingdom of heaven, I wish from my soul.
HOw many and dangerous (right Honorable, and beloved in the Lord) are the
ways, whereby Satan in this perilous and profane age wherein we live,
carries hedlong into hell the most part, even of those amongst whom, public
Idolatry, and the false worship of the true, or false God, has been
abollished; it cannot be hidden or obscure unto any, that vouchsaueth but with
a careless eye to consider, the desolate barrennes of GOD his Church, even
there where it might have been most fruitful. And of all the delusions whereby
the Lord in his 1. The. 2.11
just judgment, has given him power, to be forcible in the hearts of men,
none has been found more powerful and available then the persuasion, that the
eternal God requires no more at the hands of reasonable men, (the creatures)
framed according to his own Image. Collos. 3.10. Genesis 1.26 and 5.1. 1. Cor. 117.
Then to exempt themselves out of the number, of the out ragious and shameless
Idolaters, or at the most, to have some outward form of his worship, whereby
they might be discerned from heathen and profane Atheists; and so hope
eternally to be saved, though they should never come where the ordinary
means of salvation (the word preached) does grow. Cor. 1.21. Romans 10.14.
James. 1.21. Ephe. 1.13.
Now, I would to God that among the rest of the nations under heaven, this
latter persuasion had not taken fearful hold upon you my brethren the people
of Wales. For how have you lived now full 29. years, in all which time under
her Majesty's prosperous reign, you have not embrued your hands with professed
Idolatry? have you not for the most part, in respect of the public service of
God, contented your selves with less then public reading? and in the mean
time, do you not think that the Lord, in regard of the knowledge of his will,
and the outward practice thereof, the observations of his Sabboths, the right
use of his Sacraments, the full assurance of your own salvation; requires no
more at your hands? And which is most woeful, though you now live in this
palpable and gross darkness: yet very few or none among you, consider this
your case, to be the very condition of those, who shall never see Jesus Christ
in his kingdom to their comfort, but the mere estate, of such as shall
receive their inheritance in hell sier, with the devil and his Angels, even
most intolerable and bitter torments for ever and ever. From which reprobate
and accursed estate of woeful damnation, neither man nor angel can show, how
the whole country of Wales, or any part thereof may be delivered, unless it
shall please God to work in the hearts of all men there living, acording unto
their several callings, and especially in yours, (right Honorable) and the
rest in public authority, or supplying the place of ecclesiastical
governors, a conscience, to have the word of reconciliation, planted among
you and your people. Which if you the magistrates, and gentlemen, shall
neglect to bring to pass, you the Bishops and Ministers not regard to
perform, you private men, as a thing not belonging unto you, shall contemn:
then be you assured, whatsoever you persuade your selves to the contrary, that
on the fearful and dismal day of judgment, both the one and the other of you
shall be judged unto everlasting woe and destruction, for the offense which
contains in it these two sins. First the wilful contempt of that holy
ordinance, by which alone the Lord has appointed to convey salvation unto
men, the refusal of eternal blessedness, and consequently, the desperate
renouncing of Jesus Christ, and his precious merrits. Secondly, the odious
rejecting of those marks, whereby in the sight of Gods children and the world,
you might be known to be of the number of the Lords chosen, not one whereof
(beside your great contempt, contempt I say, for you may have the word
preached, if you would earnestly seek the same for ought you know) you
leave undone, if you refuse to undergo any pains, troubles, or charges, to
have the blessed Gospel of the almighty God proclaimed among you.

And first in regard of God his ordinance, know this, and know it to practice,
that if you hence forward, as hitherto you have done, presume to live without
the preaching of the word, you do by wilful and wicked rebellion transgress
that decree, whereby the Lord of his infinite and unspeakable wisdom has
ordained, to bring men unto his kingdom. The contrary whereof, if any dare
affirm, then the holy ghost demands what the Lord Jesus the glorious
wisdom of God the Father meant, when 1
he Ephesians. 4.8.1* 12.13.
ordained pastors and teachers to continue in his church, for the gathering
together of the saints, the work of the ministry, the edification of the
body of Christ, even (2) until we all meet together, 2
in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ. Would any of you blotte
himself out of the catalogue of those that are saints? Would any of you
dismember himself from our head Christ Jesus? I hope not: then, as sure as God
lives, you can not be privileged from continuing under those, whom the Lord
has appointed for that work, until such time as you be grown unto that
mesure of faith and knowledge, whereunto nothing may be added. (3) Can you be
made saints? 3
Can you be made members of Christ? (which you must needs be) 1. Cor. 11.^.
1. Cor, 10. 2. Ephesians. 1.1. and 4.7. 1. Cor. 5.16. Act. 20.23. Reave. 22.15.
or else you can have no inheritance among (4) them that are sanctified, but
be excluded out of the city of God, amongst dogs, thieves, murderers, and
inchanters, if you be not wrought upon by their hands, whom the Lord has
sanctified to that office? I am bold therefore in the cause of Gods honor,
and of your own salvation to entreat you, 4
as you mean to have any fellowship and communion in heaven with the blessed
saints and angels, as you intend to have any part in that kingdom, which the
Lord Jesus has purchased with his own blood, as you would have any interest
in him, and his sacred passions, that while you have time, you labor with
might and maine, to provide your selves of the means whereby you may be
translated out of the kingdom of darkness, wherein you now live, unto the
blessed possession of sweet Sion, the city of the living God. In which cause,
if your endeavors will be cold and backward, I pronounce unto you, that you
shall as surely perish, and be damned, as the Turks, Heathens, or any other
Idolaters, who cannot abide the name of Jesus Christ. Be afraid therefore, as
the apostle Heb. 4.1.
admonishes you, least by forsaking the opportunity of being saved, which at
this day is offered unto you, you be deprived of your salvation. How shall you
be able to bear it, when in the day of vengeance, you shall see your selves
arraigned of high treason before Gods tribunal seat, for rejecting the pardon
he offreth in Christ Jesus unto you? Would you but vouchsafe to seek the same
in the word preached? In the word preached, I say, for if you will embrace
Christ, and have pardon of your sins by his passions, you must have that
brought to pass by preaching. Christ, I grant, may be otherwise taught, but
as the apostle says, Ephe. 4.21
not as the truth is in Jesus, and therefore without comfort, and without
salvation. The small reckoning, my brethren, that hitherto you have made of
Christ truly taught unto you, testifies unto your faces, that you have not
known the Lord, Iere. 4.22.
that you are foolish children, wise you may be to do evil, but to do well
you have no knowledge, as says the prophet. Yea, it testifies, that you
declare your sins, as Sodom, and hide them not, and out of al doubt it will
bring woe unto your souls, Esaias. 3.9.
unless you have preaching, for you have rewarded evil unto your selves. For
Christ his sake, then for your own felieities sake, acknowledge in the
practice of your lives, that the Lord has tied (5) the food of understanding
and knowledge unto the mouths of those pastors, 5
Ier. 3.15.
who at the (6) least in regard of gifts, 6
are according unto his own heart. 7
The Apostle proclaims (7) unto the Colossians, Gollos. 1.20.21.
that as it was the good will, pleasure, and decree of the eternal, to
reconcile all men unto himself by Jesus Christ: so he never purposed to make
this reconciliation known unto any, but by the word preached: verse. 23.28.
he tells (8) Romans 16.25. 1. Tim. 3.16. 1. Cor. 2.7.
us in many place, 8
that salvation is a mystery, and so of necessity must have some wider
opening, than the withered hands of bare readers can reach unto. (9) Blessed
Peter shows in plain words, that our new birth can no way be wrought in
us, 9
but by the word preached. 1. Pet. 1.21
Those great and (10) hidden secrets, which the very Prophets themselves
could not attain unto without great inquiry, 10
1. Pet. 1.10
can be made known unto you, belike contrary unto the express word of the
holy ghost, vois. 12.
by those who can not preach the Gospel. 11
In what (11) a desperate case then is my dear country, the place of the
sepulchers of my fathers, Nehe. 1.
who hops for salvation, and has no means to be brought into the knowledge
of the truth, 1. Tim. 24.
by the public ministry? And what a public miniscerie, or misery rather is
that, in whose hands salvation is not, because the knowledge of the truth, is
not in their hands? Jeroboam, (12) would thou had again thy unlearned
priests: 12
2. Chro. 13 9
For it is out of controversy, that they are sit to be the ministers only of
them that would have no God, 2. Cro. 15.3.
but we would have Ichouah for our God, 13
and serve him. Timotheus (13) to the end he might be made more fit to call men
to salvation, was commanded to take heed unto himself, and unto learning,
and to continue therein: 1. Tim. 4.13 15, 16
but our Ministers, if they can read, are able without any further learning to
make salvation known unto us. Is reading (14) the way whereby the Lord will
bestow upon men the spirit of wisdom, 14
and revelation thorough his knowledge? Ephe. 2.17.
No, no, (15) down therefore unto hell with that doctrine whence it sprang, 15
and issued, that seeks salvation unto men by reading of that which canner be
understood, without an expounder. Act. 8.30.32.
And here I would (16) know of you, which so long have contented your selves
with bare reading, 16
whether for the space of nine and twenty years complet, you have selt, either
in your selves, or perceived in others, the word to have been so powerful as
it is said to be, Heb. 4.12.
If you have not, be you assured, that it is not the word whereof the apostle
speaks in that place, which works those effects in some of the hearers,
either unto death, or unto life. For the word of God is lively, as he there
sets down, and mighty in operation; and sharper then any two edged
sword, and enters through, even to the dividing asunder of the soul, and the
spirit, and of the joints, and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts,
and the intents of the heart. Besides, that woeful experience shows, that the
spirit of God, means not the word read in this place, the second verse of
the chapter, evidently conuinceth, that it must needs be the word
preached, unto whom these imperial titles (as I may say) are ascribed. But
say the holy ghost what it will say: the people of Wales, had rather be lims
of the devil, to be everlastingly destroyed, then labor to have the word,
that by means thereof, they might be made the members of Christ, and so
eternally saved. 17
Though (17) the or dinaunce of God be to demde the word aright, 2 Timothy 2.15.
unto the several use of the hearers, though (18) salvation be a thing that
must be learned, 18
even of them who can read: Colos. 15.7.
our reading Baalites, scane able to read, 19
(19) though the decleration of the same, be such a thing as every christian
who can read well and distinctlie, is not able to perform, 20
1. Tim 5.22. ephesians. 4.7.12.
(20) and such a thing as proceeds not from and gift of nature in us, Romans
12.3.77. ephe. 3.8. 1. cor: 3.21.3.10, he. 6.4.
reading a natural gift, (21) though it be a labor to be over any people in
the Lord, 1. Cor. 3.9. these 5.12. tim. 5.17.
a labor, (2) so wonderful, as the Apostle in the admiration thereof, cries
out, who is sit for these things? 21
2. Cor. 2.16.
Reading a work of small labor and less wonder: yet you my dear
countri-men, will rather adventure the blood of your selves, 22
(cruel and frozen security) than give ear unto that great salvation, which
first was preached by the Lord himself, Heb. 2.3. ephe. 2.17.
and can be made or dinarily known unto no nation under heaven, but by (23)
preaching. Romans 10.14.
How can the way of salvation (24) be made known unto you by those that are not
able to compare spiritual things with spiritual? 23
24
1. Cor. 2.13.
O Lord, have thou ever given them (25) any allowance to be thy Ministers, 25
whose lips never preserved knowledge, Mal. 2.7.
and dare we gainsay thee to thy face in admitting them, 26
furious madness (26) to think that our readers according to the Cannon of the
word, have the message of salvation in their hands, whereas they have no more
fitnes to declare the same, in regard of sufficiency, than a very Painim,
Turk, or Jew, which denies and defieth Christ Jesus, may well enough have,
if he can read English or welsh? A thing to be astonished at, even among the
worshippers of heathen gods, that the religion of christians, and the woorship
of the God that made heaven and earth, should not have in it so much as one
mystery, (27) whose secrecy, even in regard of knowledge, 27
might disable one that never heard of true religion, to be a public Minister
thereof. O earth cover this our sin: O heaven conceal it, least in the wrath
and anger of God, hell requite it. What words shall I use to make this sincke
deeplye into your Honors heart; and into the hearts of others whom it
concerns, namely, that the great God, the mighty and fearful Lord, has a
great and a blouddie reckoning with England and Wales, and the governors of
them, (28) because the of-scouring of all contempt, 28
and derision, are permitted to represent his place, and person among us. As
sure as the Lord lives, this sin shall never be un punished, unless
betimes you repent, and betimes redres this sacrilege, by placing those over
us, who may truly say of themselves; Now then are we ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ his
stead, that you be reconciled unto God. 2. Cor. 5.20.
He ought not (29) to be a minister, that has not this commission, 29
yea and does not faithfully excecute the same, whatsoever ungodly men babble
tot he contrary. The reason which out of their dark and devilish
understanding, they have framed for the confirmation of their error, which is,
that the Apostles indeed were commanded to preach the gospel, but our
ministers are to do no more then read, that which they preached shall be
vouchsafed, a large confutation when my former reasons, whereof I have inserted
above of score, to prove that our readers be no ministers, are answered. In
the mean time, I use these arguments against this leprous error. 30
First (30) the basest public readers ought to have more in them then Ephesians.
4.6. deuteronomy. 6.7. Psalm. 78.5^.
parents, both under the law and the Gospel, who though simple, and
unlearned, yet had the burden of teaching others, laid upon them, not by
reading, for it may be they could not do it, and a savage Caniball that could
read, might well enough instruct others, in that which could be made known
by reading. And will our curats reject it? 31
Secondly, (31) reading is not that wholesome doctrine, whereof the Apostle
speaks, 2. Tim. 4.3.
which every minister is bound to deliver unto the hearers: proved because
there was never any professing religion in any age, who could not well abide
the word red, so that there were nothing gathered out of the same, contrary to
their judgments or affections, whereas the apostle says, it should come to
pass, that men would not abide the wholesome doctrine, spoken of in that place.
I disdain to refell the objection that the apostle should mean either the
old heretics, who denied some part of the word, or the antichristian
Papists, who forbad the word to be read unto the people in a vulgar tongue.
Thirdly, (32) all men in what age soever they live, have as much need of
teaching, 32
as they who lived in the apostles time, because all are borne citizens of the
kingdom of darkness, and cannot be brought into the kingdom of Christ by any
other instrument than the Colos. 1.13.23
word preached. And the root of (33) corruption even in the regenerate, 33
brings forth buds like it self, which must be cut off by the word
preached. I do not deny, nay, I know it is warranted, that the word should
be read in the congregations of Gods children, Acts 13.15.17. Nehem. 8.2.
but that he should be taken as a public minister that has no other gift,
that I detest, that I abhor: because I know the Lord accounts it for no
better than swines blood, the cutting off of a dogs head, the blessing of an
idol, or the killing of a man, in his sight Isay 66.3.
, Lastly, the word read, is the (34) same unto all, 34
whereas the food of eternal life must be made milk unto the weak and
tender, and strong meat unto them which are capable thereof.

But woe is me, be the word read as gross as it may be, my country men
(lamentable and woeful delusion) think it enough for them, to swallow that
which contains in it the food of the soul, though in their stomachs it
should turn into stark iron. A few psalms, 35
a few prayers, with one chapter of the new Testament in Welsh (for the old
never spoke Welsh in our days, though, to my comfort, I understand it is all
ready to be printed) most pitifully evil read of the reader, and not
understood of one among ten of the hearers, is that means belike whereby
the Lord has decreed to make clear unto all men, in Wales, what the
fellowship is of the mystery, Ephesians. 3.9.
which from the beginning of the world has bin had in God. These be the only
visions that our prophets have told us of, for the most part. Oh that the
Prophet Jeremy, or some man endued with his spirit were now living, to raise
up that complaint of us, and our country, which he took against Jerusalem,
and the people of his dais? Iam. 2.13, 14.36
What thing shall take to witness for thee? What shall I compare to thee, 36
O'daughter Jerusalem? What shall I liken to thee that I may comfort thee, O
virgin, daughter Sion? For thy breach is great like the sea: who can heal
thee? Thy prophets have looked out vain and foolish things for thee, they have
not discovered thine iniquity to turn away thy captivity, but have looked
out for thee burdensome prophecies, and causes of banishment? Doubtless I know
not how our state might better be disciphered. For the words of the Lord are
found true in us, if ever in any people, the leaders of my people cause them
to err, and they that are led by them are deceived, and questionless, it may
be truly said of us, Ierem. 5.3^.
my people delight therein.

And forasmuch as men living without the word preached, think themselves in a
tolerable estate before the Lord, I would know 37
whether they may hope for eternal life, which profess not the true religion
in that sort alone, as the Lord would have the same professed: the answer
will be, they cannot. Again, I would know, whether there be any more true
religions, that is, ways to serve God aright, and so to come by salvation,
than one: it will be answered, no. And concerning salvation, it is manifest,
that there neither is, nor has been, any more ways, since the beginning of
the world, but Christ alone, as it is set down in express words: John 15.6.
I am the way, the truth, and the life, no man comes to the father, but by
me. Neither is there salvation in any other, for among men there is given no
name under Heaven, whereby we must be saved, but ouelie the name of Acts 4.12.
Christ Jesus, as Peter testifies. I demand also whether this way, both for
the substance and manner of Gods service, be not set down in the word of God
alone, and not elsewhere to be found? It will not be denied, I trow; I am
sure it cannot. For if either the substance, or manner of God, serurce swerve
from the Lords will revealed in his word, who knows whether it be allowable
in his sight or no? And therefore who will adventure to offer it unto him? These
things being thus set down, I affirm, that this one only true religion 38
was never publikelie professed, this one only way to salvation, never
ordinarily attained unto since the beginning of the world unto this day, but
by the word preached. And it will never be otherwise while the world
stands. Enquire now of the days of heaven that are past, which were before
you, since the day that Adam fell from his integrity, demand from the one end
of the heaven unto the other, and all with one consent will answer, that from
Adam unto Noach, from Noach to Moses, from Moses unto Jesus Christ, from his
blessed appearing in the flesh, unto this present hour, no face of a true
church apparent, without preaching, no ordinary salvation without preaching,
and this decree shall never be Genesis 3.15. iud. 14. gene. 4.26. and 5.22. hebr.
11.5, 6. 2. pet. 2.5. heb. 11, 12. 1. pet. 3.19 20. genes. 9.27. compared with
11.10. and 14.18. hebr. 7.1.8. gala. 3.8.6.9. romans 4.3. hebrews. 11. the whole
chapter, gene. 45.6. and 12.12. and 17.9. and 18, 19. hebr. 12.17. geness. 48,
49, the two whole cha. and 50.24, 25. exo. 3.7. acts. 7.20. hebr. 11.23. job.
33.23.24. deute. 33.9.10. mala. 2.5.7. nehem. 8.4.8. hezra. 7.2.5. hebr. 4.2.
psa. 95 7, 8. and 78.5, 6. acts. 15.21. and 3 22. deute. 18.15. heb. 1.1.2.
Iud. 1.5.1. 1. cor. 1.21. ephesians. 4.11. romans 10.14.
changed. I do not deny, but that the Lord may if he will, save those, who
never heard, or shall hear Sermon in all their lives. But wretches as we are,
what is that to us? We have no warrant to hope for any such salvation. Nay,
if any will presume, that they may come into heaven, and not submit themselves
unto the voice of the Preacher, I dare tell them, were they the greatest
potentates under Heaven, that they shall never be saved. I would to GOD then,
my brethren, that as many of you as live this day, whereas there is no
preaching, could consider in what an hopeless condition you live. I know you
feel not your own misery, if you did, you would not continue in it to gain a
thousand worlds.

Although it would be the joy of my soul, to see you in the way to heaven,
where in now you are not: yet it will not be the loss of a button unto me,
though you should all of you go to hell: and therefore whatsoever I write, it
is done in good will toward you, of love and compassion toward your
misery. Deceive not your selves then, ye are not in the estate of salvation,
having never enjoyed the word. O you are in hell, labor to come out, in the
shadow of death, seek for the sun of righteousness to shine upon you. I
will pawn my soul, that you are heirs of perdition, and shall surely go to
hell, for aught any man knows, unless you be otherwise taught than hitherto
you have been. Verily, the devil himself may as well hope to be saved, as you
can, who never saw the beauty of their feet that bring salvation, God will
not be mocked at your hands. Are you not reasonable men? Have you not souls to
be saved? Would you not be shrouded from everlasting woe under the wings of
Jesus Christ? Why then strive you not for the word preached? If the Lord
should summon you at this hour before his judgment seat, have you any
thing to show why he may not proceed against you with the sentence of
justice 39
in pursuing you with his eternal curse, for the breach of his law? What
will you answer for your selves, when indeed you shall be arraigned before
God and his angels, for contemning the word preached. I speak now unto the
gentlemen and people of Wales, will you plead, that the fault was not in you,
because you have been deceived by those, whom the Lord in his just indgement
has raised up to obscure the light of his gospel in this our age, I mean the
racke-maisters and tormenters of Gods blessed word, who laying the same upon
the rack, have constrained it to confess what it never meant, as either, that
reading is preaching, which is senseless, or that men may be saved without
preaching which is devilish? This will not serve the turn. Will you protest,
that you would gladly have had preaching? It is not so. For you never as yet
opened your mouths for the same. And now being stirred thereunto, it shall
appear what little reckoning you make thereof, by your careless enterprises
that way. One thing more I will say, that for any means you have to be saved
in the most congregations in Wales, you shall be firebrands of hell. Let the
magistrates in the mean time see how well the Lord is served under their
government. See you unto this, my Lord, or else the curse of God will light
upon you, for your carelessness in this point. Has the Lord called you to be
lord president of Wales under her Majesty, to the end, you should fit still
when you see your people run unto hell, and the Lord so notably dishonored
under your government? The estate of Wales not being amended by your means,
the poor people shall die in their sins, and be damned, but their blood will
the Lord require at your hands. If you say, it lies not in you to build up our
breaches, or that you are otherwise employed, and so can not intend this work:
that which a seely old woman replied upon Philip king of Macedonie, shall be
your answer. She cried for justice at the kings hand, and that her cause
might be heard, the king answered, that he was not at leisure. No? quoth she,
then be not my king. So, my Lord, with reverence be it spoken unto your Honor,
if it lie not in you to bring Wales unto the knowledge of God, or if your
leisure will not serve thereto, then be not the Lord president thereof.

That it essentially belongs unto your calling, to see all within Wales
taught by the word preached, is proved, by reason that you are governor over
all. For you ought to acknowledge your self ruler over none, that do not
subject themselves at least outwardly unto true religion: because that all
whosoever are under any man's jurisdiction, ought to keep Exodus 20.10 and
12.48, 49 Numb. 9.19.
the Sabbath: so that if any Turk, papist, or other pagan idolatour remain
in any our cities or towns, he ought to be compelled to conform himself to
the outward service of the true God, or expelled. This is showed by the
practice of Neh. 13.15.21.40
Nehemias. Now it is a clear case, that no people can keep the Sabbath 40
having not among them the exercises required by the Lord, to be practiced on
the Sabbath. And what exercises of the Sabbath can there be there, where the
word preached is wanting. Governors my Lord, must govern under God. They
have no allowance to be rulers, where the Lord is not served, where he has no
acknowledgement of superiority, there man has no commission from him to bear
rule. Satan has a kingdom my Lord, where Christ rules not. And dare you be
Satan's lieuetenant? Consider psalm. 2. and 101.7.8.
do you make no conscience to be regent, where the scepter of christ's word
bears no sway? especially not laboring by all means possible, that it may
have the authority. It has pleased God to send the word into your honors
family. If you would declare unto the world (which thing you ought to be
careful of) that the power of the word has touched your very soul, with a
conscience to serve your God, you can never do this as long as you have no
care that the Lord be glorified in as many as he has committed unto your
government. You are here diligently to take heed then, least you deceive your
heart in persuading it of the Lords favor toward you, if he has not made it
careful to build up the ruins of Jerusalem. Hereby also all the magistrates
under the sun may understand, that howsoever they maintain the truth of
religion, yet they have flatly denied the power of godliness, unless they
seriously endeavor to draw their subjects out of the snares of blindness and
ignorance. They are further to know, that the Lord requires the very same
thing at their hands, as a demonstration of their love toward him, which he
did of Ioh. 21.15.16.
Peter. Howbeit, in another manner. Saying, magistrates love you me? Then see
that all the people committed to your charge be fed with knowledge. Magistrates
love you me? then train up your people in my fear; Magistrates love you me?
then take heed that I be rightly honored of your people. The truth of the
things here set down concerning the magistrates duty, being as stable as the
heavens themselves, it shall be your H. part to answer the Lord no otherwise,
then by the execution of those things which he has so necessarily and fatally
laid upon your shoulders. Wey them, good my Lord, and let not another year of
your Presidentshipp pass over your head, before Wales of a daughter of wrath,
be made an heir of mercy and favor, which the Lord grant.

I am now to come unto our Bishops, and the rest that supply the place of
ministers in Wales, who in as much as they are the very groundwork of this
our miserable confusion, must not think much to have the words of the holy
Prophets in times past, spoken against their predecessors, the wicked prists
and Levites, applied unto them. But in this place being fallen into this 2.
Tim. 3.1.2.
iangling and prattling age of the world, wherein faith and the power of
religion, is thought by the most part, to consist only in the detestation of
Bishops, and withstanders of reformation; I confess from my heart, that I have
bin hardly drawn to deal with this wicked generation. Not because I would
have these cormorants untouched, but lest I should seem to feed the humors of
busibodies, 1. Tim. 14. and. 6.20. 2. Tim. 16.23
who increasing themselves still unto more ungodliness, think nothing so well
spoken or written, as that which is satyricall and bitingly done against L.
Bysh. and the rest of that stamp. As I would not nowrishe this frantike conceit
in any, so far beit I should allow with my silence, the butchers and
stranglers of the souls of my dear countrymen. Who if they be not driven by
this warning, to look better to their charges, I will hereafter so decypher
their corrupt dealing, that the very air it self shall be poisoned with the
contagion of their filthiness. They who are not guilty, or not touched in the
speech following.

Wales is said to be in a tolerable condition, for it has had many preachers
of a long time. The more shame then for them, that it has had no more
teaching. This I dare affirm and stand to; that if a view of all the
registeries in Wales be taken, the name of that shire, that town, or of that
parish, cannot be found, where for the space of six years together with in
these 29. years, a godly and learned minister has executed the duty of a
faithful teacher, and approved his ministry in any mean sort. And what then
should you tell me of Abbey lubbers, who will take no pains though they be
able? If I utter an untruth, let me be reproved, and suffer as a slanderer,
if a truth, why shall I not be allowed? I know very well, that to speak any
thing at all in these days against the Clergy men, is to speak in Bethel
with poor Amos 7.12.13
Amos, to prophecy in the kings court, and so to be busy in matters of state.
Miserable days; Into what times are we fallen? That thieves and murderers of
souls, the very paternes and patrons of all covetousness, proud, and more then
popelike tyrants, the very defacers of Gods truth, unlearned dolts, blind
guides, unseasonable and unsavory salt, drunkardes, adulterers, foxes and
wolves, mire and puddle, to be brief, the very swinestie of all uncleanness,
and the very ignomie and reproach of the sacred ministry, cannot be spoken
against, but this will be straightwayes made a matter against the state. And
therefore although all the misery, all the ignorance, all the profaneness in
life and conversation, has been for the most part by means of our Bishops,
and our other blind guides, yet may not a man affirm so much with any safety,
least he be said to be a mutinous and factious fellow, and one that troubles
the state.

For mine own part, the prophet Malachi shall deal with you, and let the
reader consider whether his words ought not in a fearful sort to strike and
astonishe you. A son Mal. 1.6.
(says the Prophet) honors his father, and a servant his master, if then
I be a father, Read Mala. 1. and 2. chap.
where is mine honor, if a master, where is my fear, says Jehovah of hosts
unto you. O ye Bishops of Wales, that despise his name? If you say, wherein
have we despised him? it will be answered, that you offer the blind, the lame,
and the maimed: unto the holy ministry, and say it is no evil, and so
despise the Lords name, because you say the Lords ministry is not to be
regarded. For seeing you your selves know, and all Wales knows, that you
have admitted unto this sacred function, rogues, and vacabounds, gadding about
the country, under the names of scholars, spendthrifts, and serving men, that
made the ministry their last refuge, seeing you permit such to be in the
ministerye, as are known adulterers, known drunkardes, thieves, roisters,
most abominable swearers, even the men of whom Job speaks, Job. 30.1.8.
who are more vile then the earth, do you not say that the Lords service is
not to be regarded? if you any longer either tolerate others, or continue your
selves to be theeuishe non-residents, and so sterue the souls of poor
innocents, do you regard the Lords honor, and the salvation of his people? Is
the law of truth sound in your mouths? Do ye convert any from iniquity? It
should be so indeed. Mala. 1.7.
For your lips should preserve knowledge, and the ignorant should seek the law
at your mouths, for you ought to be the messengers of Jehovah Mala. 2.9.
of hosts. But may this testimony be given of you? I fear me no: Nay rather
because all the world seeeth that judgment upon you, which the prophet
denounced against the prelates of his days, namely, that you are vile and
contemptible in the sight of the people, (for what is more contemptible among
the best, and basest of our people, then to be a Priest, yea a priestly
Lord-Bishop) I can judge no otherwise of you, but that you have not kept the
ways of Jehovah, gone out of the way, caused many to fall by the law, Deuteronomy.
33.10. mala. 2.6.
and corrupted the covenant of Leuy. And will you still continue in these
transgressions, God forbid. Be awakened now at the length, considering where
unto you are called. Undergo that calling no longer which you are not able to
discharge, I speak unto you all, even unto you that will be accounted
Lord-Bishops, though it be to the Lords Luke. 22 25. 1. pet. 5.3. mar.
10.43.43. ier. 5.31.
dishonor. Let the curse of damned souls cleave no longer unto you. For it
perceth deeply. You are one day to give a reckoning for your merciless dealing
with pore souls. Let not the wicked Papists have any more cause to vpbraid
the ignorance of our people, as they have done in that pamphlet which they
threw abroad the last year, to seduce our simple people. The confutation
whereof (if legendarie fables wherewyth that skroul is fraught, the translation
of some part of R.P. his resolution, of Didachus Stella, Dionysius Carthus.
deserves a confutation, I shall publish when the Lord shall give opportunity.
If their brutish slanders will not move you, let the words of Paul stir
you forward, whereby from heaven in most Patheticall and earnest sort he
speaks unto every one of you severally, in the person of Timothy 2. Tim.
4.1.2.
41
I adjure or charge thee therefore says he, before God, and before the Lord
Jesus Christ, preach the word, be instant in season and out of season,
improve, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine. Obey this
charge, or doubtless, most irksom shall be your damnation. Is it not a shame that
Jeremy may cry, Iere. 27.1.
that our land is defiled by such as you are, yea and in my house have I found
their wickedness, says Jehovah? Are not we the inhabitaunts of Wales, as odious
in the sight of our God as the inhabitants of Gommorrah, seeing he Iere. 8.14.
sees filthiness in you our prophets, and every of you from the greatest to
the lowest, is given to covetousness, and deals falselye. Iere. 23.14.
And what with your loitring, idleness, insufficiency, and evil life, Iud. 11.
you strengthen the hands of the wicked, that none can return from his
wickedness. Woe be unto you all, for you have followed the way of Caine, and are
cast away by the deceit of Baalams wages. Woe be unto you that account it
pleasure to live delitiously for a season, upon the price of souls, you shall
receue the wages of unrighteousness, 2. Pet, 2.13.
weping and gnashing of teeth in the pit of hell. 1. Pet. 2.15.
What comfort is it for you to forsake the right way for a little worldly
promotion, seeing the blacknes of everlasting destruction is reserved for you?
What may her Majesty and the H. I. L. of her counsel, think you to be, but
the curssed shepherds that scatter their flocks, seeing you have not turned
your people from their evil ways. Ierem. 23.22.
Jeremy proves you to be such. Therefore woe be to the shepherds of Wales,
says Jehovah, which feed themselves, should not the shepherds feed their
flocks, you eat the far and cloth you with the wool, Ezech. 34.23
but you feed not the flock. The sentence pronounced by the Lord against you
Ezech. 34.10.
shall be execured with out doubt in the time thereof, if you continue still in
your ungodly course. Take this from me also, that unless you forsake your
idleness, those personages and those chaires of pestilence wherein you sit, I
mean your Bishops seas will spue you out. And the Lord I hope will make them
so abominable, and reproachful, that all men fearing God, will be afraid
hereafter to enter into those seas of David's, Asaph, Bangor, and Landaff, by
reason of the character of sure destruction, that he will imprint on as many
as shall supply your places. And I trust in the Lord Jesus, to see his church
flourish in wales, when the memory of Lord-Bishops are buried in hell whence
they came. Bear witness hereof you adges to come. And give you over your
places, or doutlesse, the plague and curse of God will eat you up, You are
usurpers, you tyrannize over the Lords people.

I have other things to do then to be a contentious man, one with whom the
whole world should be at debate, and I am guilty unto my self of sins, which
give me just cause to look upon the ground: I have also a life, whereof there
is no cause I thank God I should be weary, notwithstanding this I offer, to
loose the life of my body before man, and the life of my soul before the Lord,
if I do not prove, that both you our non-residents, and you our Lord Bishops
of Wales, in that you be non-residents and Lord-Bishops, cannot be warranted
by gods word: yea, or utterly condemned by the same, and that all magistrates
who tolerate such as you are, to be under their government, are guilty of a
fearful sin before the Lord. And that the Pope of Rome has as good
warrant, yea the very same warrant, for his papal dignity (although I know
three differences between you and him: first, he is a professed Idolater,
secondly, claims authority over all pastors: thirdly, is subject to no
civil magistrate) that you have for the maintenance of your papal hierarchy
over all the Pastors in your dioces, which indeed is palpable Anarchie in Gods
church. If I prove not these things, let me be burnt alive, call me to mine
answer when you will, and thus I leave you.

As for you, our dumb ministers, I know you for the most part to be seely
men, poor souls, that made the ministry, a means to live in the world. What
should I say unto you, who may say of your selves, as did the foolish
Prophets. Though we wear a surplice, and black garments to deceive, Zach.
13.5.
42
yet are we but plain husbandmen, etc. Surely the people may ask counsel as
well of their threshhoulds, or desire their staffes to teach them knowledge, as
come unto you for any instruction. You are no ministers as I have, and again
will prove, you do most villanously profane the sacraments, and call for the
wrath and vengeance of God to be powered upon you. 43
Give over your places, or surely, I do not see how it is possible you should
be saved. Better were it to live poorelye here for a time, then to be damned
for ever. It is reason your outward estate should be considered. The Lord
will provide for you, your wives, and chidren, if of conscience you leave the
ministry, and the magistrate is bound not to see you want. You live now upon
stealth, sacrilege, and the spoil of souls The Lord open your eyes my
brethren, the people of Wales, to see these your plagues, and to avoid them.
It is impossible you should be saved as long as you content your selves with
these men and their ministry alone. And the Lord open your Honors eyes to
reform these confusions.

What the estate of my country is, before the Lord I have hitherto showed,
now in the face of the world, how it stands let us consider. That the most
congregations in Wales, have wanted preaching these nine and twenty years, I
take it granted. Their case being thus, I tremble to call to mind what censure
the holy ghost gives of all them, amongst whom the Gospel of salvation
has not bin preached. These two places of scripture (Ephesians. 1.13. and
2.11.17.) conferred together, show that they are without Christ, aliants from
the common-welth of Israel, have no hope, and are without God in the world (for
these be the very words of the apostle) who have not heard of the word
preached. Were the Prophet Jonas then now living among us, would he not cry
out? O you people of Wales, you are al reprobats and cast-aways, O you people
of Wales, you are aliaunts from the communion of the true Church, O you people
of Wales, you are not so much as encluded within the covenant of promise, you
are without al hope of heavenly blis, O ye people of Wales, whatsoever you
pretend of the knowledge of the true God, you are in very deed stark atheists
and without god, as many of you as since the time you came out of the den of
idolatry and Popery, were not made pertakers of the power of God to
salvation, which is the gospel. Of a truth, my brethren, there is no other
true censure to be given of you. 44
For it is impossible to make a true face of a Church appear among that nation,
which has professed false religion (as you have done under popery) without
the preaching of the word, which you have not enjoyed. In this place, I am
sorry, I am sorry from my heart, that the miserable estate of my poor country
affoordeth the adversary such a demonstration, to prove, that we want the
outward face of a church in the most assemblies in Wales, as I know to be
unanswerable. The marks of a true church, Mat. 28.18.19.
out of our savior Christ's own words are gathered to be three, the word
preached, the right administration of the Sacraments, and the outward form
of government. Now if an Idolatrous dog of Rome should affirm, that the most
congregations in Wales, since the time they were Romish sinagogues, have bin
marked with neither of these three former marks, and therefore must be
written in the black bill of insufficiency, to be churches of God, he were
able to prove both the one and the other, and we with confusion of face should
be driven with Hezekias servants to answer this Rabshaketh not a word. For 2.
King. 18.36.
alas, what might be our answer? 1. Pet. 1.21.
Begotten again out of the womb, of popery by the word preached, most of our
assemblies have not been. As for Discipline, our Prophets are not ashamed
publikelie to profess, that they will not be reformed by it. If we would fly
unto the testimonies that we might have from the Sacraments, the Lord himself
will deny it to be possible for them, to have been rightly used among us.
Which I will prove by many reasons, that my contrymen may be driven to seek
the remedy (if any thing can drive them) of such a pitiful condition, as
wherein they now are, (being without the word, without the true use of the
Sacraments, without Christ's holy government) by the knowledge of that
righteous one, who is said Esaias. 53.11.
thereby to justify many. Let no man do me the injury, to report that I
deny any members of Christ to be in Wales, I protest I have no such meaning,
and would die upon the persuasion, that the lord has his chosen in my dear
country, and I trust the number of them will be daily increased. To come to
the point, I affirm that the lords holy Sacraments, in the most churches
within Wales, are subject unto most horrible profanation, as well on the
behalf of the reader, who administreth the^, as the people who communicate. So
that a reading minister 45
cannot deliver the Lords holy seals unto the people without great
sacrilege, nor the people receue at the hands of such, without dreadful sins.
And that not only because the outward elements is administered without the
word, even unto a people who never had Christ Jesus laid open unto them in
all their lives: but also in as much as they are delivered by these persons,
unto whom the Lord never warranted by his word the undertaking of that
function. Now that the Lord alowes none of our bare readers to administer the
Sacraments, I have before showed by the manifold reasons alleged to prove
them no ministers, and again, do manifest by these following. Desiring my
godly learned and reverend brethren, who are contrary and as they shall be
found, to think of the conclusion. I deal not in this argument of any
singularity, but because I know, that unless these emptye caskes be suncke
under water, Christ's kingdom is never likely to swim.

That my reasons may be the better understood, we are to mark: first, that all
men being alike unequally capable of the ministry by nature, none are to
undergo this calling, save only they, whom the Lord in his word has
pronounced to be capable hereof. Again, we are to know, that we ought to
account none to be a minister, whom the Lord accounts not to be such:
for, must Gods ordinance, or man's pleasure take place in that choice? So that
although all the Churches under Heaven, should make him a minister, whom the
Lord denies to be capable of that function, it is nothing. I assume then, that
no bare reader is capable of the ministry before GOD. Confirmed, 1. Tim. 3.2.
1. Cor. 4 7. Ephesians. 3.7. Hebr. 5.1.4. 1. Pet. 4.10. Ierem. 14.14. and 29 9.
because the Lord has not qualified him with gifts fit for that function,
and therefore he neither is minister, nor ought to be acknowledged of Gods
people as a minister. Out of this conclusion I reason, whosoever receive the
sacraments at their hands, whom they ought not to acknowledge ministers, they
sin. Dumb ministers, (I do not tie my self unto exact forms in my
syllogismes) ought not to be acknowledged ministers, therefore it is a sin to
communicate with them, which no man should commit to save his soul, much
less to receive the seals of salvation. Yea, but we must acknowledge them
ministers for their outward callings sake. This objection is nothing else but a
denial of the conclusion. Notwithstanding thus overthrow it: they of 2
whose ministry there is a nullitie before God, although they have an outward
calling, ought not to be accounted ministers, and therefore not to be
communicated with. For, may we allow of that whereof the Lord disliketh? Where
is our warrant? The Church can not make good a meaner thing than this, as for
example: The Church makes an incestuous contract, the parties are married, I
demand whether the marriage be allowable, or they incestuous persons still?
All men, I know will cry for a diuorcement. Now there is as ungodly a match
made between a reader and an holy congregation, must it stand because the
church allows of it? Or may the congregation use him in the sacraments or
other duties essential unto a minister? Out upon it, no: for the contract was
incestuous, and therefore not effectual. The assumptio^ is, that of an
insufficient man's ministry there is a nullitie before God, though he have an
inward calling, because it was never any thing as yet in his sight.

To this purpose, we are to call to mind, that in a minister there is
required, first an outward calling contained in the sufficiency of gifts, 1.
Tim. 3.1.
and the willingness to practice them: secondly, an outward which the church
according unto the ordinance of God is to give only where the Lord will
have it bestowed, and not elsewhere. This outward calling being once given,
can be taken away by none but by the Lord, who gave it. For the calling is not
from man, but from the Lord by the hands of man, as by an instrument. Where
also we learn two things: first, that he is not a minister according unto
Gods ordinance, which wants either of these callings. Now 3
I ask the question, whether the sacrament may be received at his hands, who
wants, but that which man can give unto him, to wit, his outward calling? In
no wise. And may we then receive at his hands, who is destitute of the inward
graces, which neither man nor angel can give? Unreasonable: secondly, we
learn that of those men who have an outward calling, there be two sorts,
whose ministerye is annihilated before God, though all the world should go
about to make it good. The first is of those, who having an inward and an
outward calling, are notwithstanding repelled from this function. And they are
either such, as from whom the Lord in his secret providence has taken away
their fitness to teach, 2. Tim. 2.2 1 Timothy 4.2. Ezech. 4.4.10 12
or those, who by some notorious sin, have frustrated their calling, whom
the church upon their repentance ought to receive as brethren, but never as
ministers. The second sort of those whose outward caling, is no better than
abominable incense in the lords nostrels, is of them, who never had any
ability for the ministry, as infants, dumb men by nature, dumb men in
regard of their insufficiency to utter the Lords message. The outward
calling of these, yea, by all the presbyteries in the world, is but a seal
pressed upon water, which will receive no impression. How much less
authentical is a corrupt calling to be accounted? The reason for the defense
of the outward calling of idoll-ministers, which is drawn from the example of
the prophets, Isay. 66.10, 11. Zach. 11.17.
who did not dissuade the people of their time from the dumb dogs, against whom
they cry out, is so seely, that it deserves no answer. For we read, 2.
Chro. 29.6, 7 Isay. 1.1.
that the people living in Isaiah his own time, either under Hhuzzia, Iotham,
or Achas, who was the greatest adversary that ever the dumb Levites had,
neither burnt incense nor offered burnt offerings unto the God of Israel,
miss not to read the place 2. Chro. 29.6, 7
Where did Isaiah reprove this? No where that we can read. Now what an
horrible thing were it for a prince to expel the public service of God out of
his dominion, or neglect the same, and defend this practice as approved by the
word, because the Prophets did not reprove the like sin committed in their
days, and yet this reason would have some more stuff in it, than the other
for the dumb ministry? I could be well as large in showing the
insufficiency of the reason, as I have been already in the whole treatise.
But I make some conscience of being tedious, and therefore I content my self
with this I have spoken, being ready many ways to make the weakness of it
appear when it shall be requisite, I go forward.

They 4
of whom the Lord says, Ierem. 23.21.
I have not sent these, although they run, I have given them no commission to
deliver a Sacrament, although they are permitted to profane the outward
element, are no ministers, and it is a sin to communicate with them. They are
no ministers, because the Lord sent them not. Do not mistake me, Matthew. 7.22.
for a wicked hypocrite is sometimes sent of the Lord. It is a sin to receive
at their hands, because we can not ground our assurance upon the Lords promise,
that we may have a Sacrament by their ministry. For the Lord having given
them no allowance to deliver the same, have we any promise to receive it of
them? So that the Lord may say unto us; receive and you will, of unpreaching
ministers, for aught you know, it is no sacrament. Another reason, 5
whatsoever is not of faith is sin, but to communicate with insufficient men,
is not of faith, because we have no promise that they can deliver us the
Sacraments, and therefore to communicate with such, is a sin. Again we 6
have no warrant to receive an Romans 4.
extraordinary sacrament, but that which is administered, by ignorant ministers,
is an extraordinary sacrament, if it be any. (Because, according unto the
ordinance of God, a preacher is only to deliver the same) therefore we have
no warrant to receive it. And what dare we undertake with out warrant from the
Lords mouth? Belike then, will some man say, that is no Sacrament which has
bin administered by these who were not preachers, and so the most now living in
this age, are either not baptized, or must be rebaptized. The disgrace that is
brought upon the cause, as though it went about to enforce rebaptisation, is
easily wiped away. For the action performed is not denied to be a sacrament:
though it were, As I do not deny that which has been done to be a
sacramence. so if any can proue^ it to be non, I will not withstand him.
yet I would wish none to be rebaptized, for many causes. First, we are already
received into the bosom of the church, and acknowledged to have the seal of
the covenant, in as much as we were once offered and received into the number
of the godly, by the outward element, though corruptly. To what end then
should baptism serve us again? Secondly, the absolute necessity of baptism
to salvation by this means might seem to be maintained. Thirdly, least we
should seem to agree with the heretical Katabaptists. If these reasons can
be answered, I see neither heresy nor error in being rebaptized.
Fourthlye, other Churches have not publikelie decided the cause. Fifthly, that
the practice should not enforce them to be rebaptized, which have been
already baptized, by such as had commission from the Lord to deal in those
mysteries. Lastly, they who (being now in the age of discretion) have been
baptized by idoll-ministers, are either called or not called to salvation: if
called, why should they be rebaptized, seeing already they have been made
partakers of the outward element, and accounted in the number of christians? If
not called, neither should they be baptized, until they declared by their
works that they were Gods children. Concerning the controversy then, whether
the element administered by an ignorant man, be a sacrament, being once
delivered, delivered, I would wish all men in modesty to abstain from so
ungodly a iar, because it tends not to edificaion, and it is not the point,
it is not the question. A private communion ministered to one alone may be a
sacrament. What then? are men to receive at home being sick? No, for it is a
sinful breach of Gods institution. In like sort, Baptism, or the Lords supper
administered by a dumb minister, may be a sacrament, I affirm readers to be no
ministers, and for any thing that is raueled in the word, that they can deliver
no sacrament, and yet that which has been done by them may be be a sacrament,
and what contrariety is there id these assertions.
is it therefore lawful to receive it. In no wise, because it is a sin, and
that is sufficient to terrify any from that action. It has been before
convinced for a sin, and again is thus proved to be no less. It (7) is a
sin, either to receive the Sacraments at the hands of those, who are not
ministers, or to testify them to be ministers, unto whom the Lord has denied
that function. But they that communicate with dumb ministers, commit either
of these sins. If they say they do not receive at their hands who are not
Ministers, then they testify them to be ministers, and so are fonnde to
gainsay the Lord. For they say readers are ministers, the Lord says no.
Whether shall we believe? That, 7
the Lord says no, and proves it no, I thus prove. He says that there is
no minister, Mark. 28. mar. 16.16.1. cor. 3.7.1. pet. 4.10.
but a preaching minister by his institution. If it be thought other-wise, then
it must be proved that the Lord in his word has ordained (else the confusion
that every private man may administer the sacraments must ensue) two sorts of
ministers to deliver the seals of salvation, the one preachers, the other not
able to preach. Show an unpreaching minister out of the word, and I will
yield. Out of this reason, many arguments might be drawn. As first, that
readers (8) are not ministers of 1. Cor. 21. romans 10.14.1. pet. 2.5. and 2.22.
salvation, 8
and therefore ought not to deal with the seals thereof. Secondly they can
not (9) increase our union with Christ. 9
Thirdly, are of them selves ministers, 10
(10) of damnation only, because that keeping men from the food of life, they
starve them, and so work their damnation with many other which I omit, save
these following. We neither (11) ought to receive at their hands, 11
neither ought they to deliver the Sacraments unto us, who have not power by
virtue of their public ministry to engraffe an infidel into Christ. Bare
readers have not this power. For by virtue of the public ministry, this is
the proper work of a Preacher, therefore they neither ought Romans 10.14.
to deliver the sacraments unto us, neither ought we to communicate with them.
Further, 12
(12) they that come to a public minister rather then to a private man for the
seals of salvation, either profanelie consider not what they do, or profess
that they would have the assurance of no other salvation and no other Christ,
then of that Christ, and that salvation, whereof he that administreth has
warraunt from the Lord to assure them off. This warrant because mere readers
have not, it follows that in communicating with them, men either profanelie
consider not what they do, or make choice of a false Christ, and a deceiuable
salvation. Because they will have no other Christ, and no other salvation then
that Christ, and that salvation, the seals whereof ignorant ministers have
commission from the Lord to deliver, which indeed is no Christ and no
salvation. 13
Lastly (13) where as by Baptism I am iovned unto the society of Christians,
I declare thereby that if there be no salvation to be had among them, I will
not be saved, but am content to be a castaway for ever. Now alack if he that
administreth, has no warrant to receive me into this company, what comfort can
I have by that action. Though the Lord in mercy make it an authentical
Sacrament, I could be assured of no such thing. My good brethren, consider
therefore what you do, in permitting your children to be baptized by your
dumb ministers, consider what you do in receiving the Lords Supper, at their
hands. Would you have your children ingraffed into (your selves assured of) no
other Christ, then these your simple readers can lay open? If you would,
adventure no more to deal with them. Of a truth my brethren, your sin has
been already vnmeasurably great. Repent, repent, and that betimes. Fall down
before the Lord, desire him to forgive you. And sin no more in this
execrable profanation of Gods holy mysteries; Labor to have true Pastors
placed over you, and rest not until you have brought this to pass. In the mean
time carry your children a 1000. miles to a true minister of God to be
baptized, rather then offer them unto your hierlings. Yea if you cannot when
you have done al you can, get baptism without the breach of Gods institution
(as God be thanked, you may under her Majesty) leave them unbaptized. An
intolerable speech (will some say) in this age; Impudent and ungodly age,
wherein to affirm, that it is not lawful to break the law of the eternal,
is thought intolerable. 1
Is it not proved a(1) sin to communicate with our wicked blind Pastors,
and has this age, 2
any dispensation to sin. Hhuzzah(2) should not have offended, for not
upholding the ark Sam. 67.8. nb. 4.15.
although the same had been broken in shiuers, where as the very touching
of it, contrary to the commandment of God, even to stay it from falling,
cost him his life. And shall we escape, if we break Gods holy institution in
the Baptism of our, children, assuredly no. To (3) omit a sin is no
sin, and therefore to omit baptism, if it cannot be gotten without sin,
is lawful. It (4) is not the omission, but the careless and negligent seeking
offend not this way in any case, or the wilful or utter contempt of Baptism,
that displeases the Lord. The Israelites (5) should have sinned in offering
Deuteronomy. 12.5.4.1. king 8.29.
sarifice out of Jerusalem, and therefore all the time of their captivity in
Babylon, they would be with-but that comfort of their faith rather then offend.
So ought we rather to want the sacraments, then sin by inioyning of them.

Your Honor is cited in this place my Lord, before Gods tribunal seat, and
charged in the name of the etereall and almighty God, as you shall answer at
the dreadful day of judgment, that you suffer not his holy mysteries any
more to be profaned, where your authority may withstand the same. A word of
your mouth might restrain the flood of this pollution. The Lord give you a
feeling and an understanding heart. Remember the godly rulers, and noble men
that have been before you. Moses, Iehoshuah, David, Solomon, Iehosaphat,
Hezekiah, Ioshiah, Hebedmelech, Nehemiah with the rest, who now rest with the
Lord. Exo. 32.31.32.
Fall down before your God with Moses, and say, O this people have sinned a
great sin, in living all this while without the word preached, in suffering
their children to be baptized of ignorant ministers, therefore now will thou
pardon their sin. Nomb. 14.17.
And now I beseech thee, let the power of my Lord appear, as thou have said,
Jehovah is slow to anger, etc. Be merciful I beseech thee unto this people,
etc. and the Lord I trust will answer your honor as he did Moses, I have
pardoned them according unto thy request. Blessed, yea, ten thousand times
blessed, were your people, if you made such a prayer for them, and received
such an answer.

Well, the condition of my dear country being thus fearful before the
Lord, and damnable in the sight of the world, what is now to be done that
it may be bettered? Verily this, procure you the word preached, for your
selves and obey the same, or else woe worth you, woe worth you, I say
Magistrates, Gentlemen, Ministers, and people, for otherwise you reject Jesus
Christ, and will not have him to reign over you. I have set down the only
ordinary way to salvation, the Lord, for the maintenance of the estate of
any of you, will not find another though he may. Therefore enter into this, or
be damned. For shall the highest make new decrees, because the son of the
clay, dust, and ashes, base and contemptible man, will not tread the old and
ancient paths? No.

You must not only have the word, but obey, it in every point and show by
your good works, that indeed it has been sown among you. Therefore, if you
mean to be like the common professors of these days, who covenant before
hand with the Lord, that their pride and estate must be maintained whatsoever
he requires who are more busy to wonder at other men's infirmities, then to
beat down their own sins, who will not diminish one ior of their horrible
covetousness, and oppressing of their tenaunts, loose one gry of their
whoorish pomp, and more than curtisanlike bravery, though the truth should in
the mean time be gored through with slanders, presume not once to open your
mouths for the word preached, unless you would aggrauate your own
damnation. For assure your selves heoreof, that the popish Idolaters the
atheists and swinish epicures of these days, who have bidden battle unto all
religion and honesty, shall feel of the fierce wrath of god in the life to com,
but as for the mocke-Gods, I mean the common Protestants of this age, who
think they do a meritorious work, because they intertaine the word in their
families, yea do not expel the same, out of the places where they have ought
to do, woe be unto them Math. 11.21.
for they shall be like Corazin, they shall be like Bethsaida, they shall be
like Capernaum.

The word preached you see you must have, live according unto it you must,
serve the Lord as he wills, in every point you must, or soake for ever in
your own confusion. Difficulties in this case must not be alleged, for if
you seek the Lord with a sure purpose to serve him, he has made a promise
to be found of you. Prou. 2.16.
Away then with those speeches, how can we be provided of preaching; our
liuinges are impropriated, possessed by swine, as nonresidents and hierlings.
Come by it as you can, you shall go to hell, unless you have it. A goodly
matter. Is there no way to remove these beasts, by supplication to her
Majesty, etc. and to place better in their stead; Indeed you will seek
none: Be it you can not remove them. Can you bestow noe more to be instructed
in the way of life, then that which law already has allienated from your
possessions. You never made account of your tithes, as of your own. For shame
bestow some thing that is yours, to have salvation made known unto you.
Contemn not the grace of God offered unto you in these days of your peace.
For if you refuse to com unto the Lord when he calls, behold your answer when
you call for mercy at his handse. There is a time Prou. 1.24.30.
of repentance indeed, but that is limited according unto the Lords will and
not man's.

What should I take the pains to show how ministers, and their livings may
be provided for in Wales? Seeing I see none ready as yet to entertain the
word, and that which has been done heretofore in this point, is not
practiced. When any are willing to entertain counsel for this matter, I dout
not, but it will be an easy consultation. Not to do in some place what may
be done, because every place cannot be furnished with learned ministers,
and their liuinges is but to deride the Lord to his face, and delude his
people of their salvation.

The inhabitants of the city Thasus, being besieged by the Athenians, made a
law that whosoever would motion a peaco to be concluded with the enemy,
shdulde die the death. Their city began to be distressed, the people to
perish, both with the swoorde and famine. Hegetorides a citizen, pitying the
estate of his country, took an halter about his neck, came into the
judgment place: Spoke. My masters, deal with me as you will, but in any
case, make peace with the Athenians, that my country may be saved by my death.
My case is like this man's. I know not my danger in wtiting these things. I see
you my dear and native countrymen perish. It pitieth me; I come with the rope
about my neck to save you, howsoever it goes with me; I labor that you may
have the Gospel preached among you, though it cost me my life: I think it
well bostowed. And seeing I seek nothing hereby but the glory of God and your
salvation, what devils will be so shameless as to molest me for this work, and
hinder the word preached. If any such shall be found, I wish them to
consider, before the deal with me what the Apostle sets down, 1. These.
2.15.
concerning the persecutours of those that seek for preaching, and the
hinderers thereof, namely that they please not God, and are even contrary unto
all men, and this their doing is a sealed writing, that the vengeance of GOD
will come upon them to the full; Answer it how they may. Be it as it will
be, my comfort is the testimony of my conscience, that in simplicity and
singlenes of heart, not only, as in the sight of Gods children (unto whose
view and censure, this poor labor is offered) and his angels, but as in the
presence of Jesus Christ, I have behaved my self in this cause, having before
mine eyes that I am one day to yield an account unto his majesty, both of my
good meaning, and also of all circumstaunces, ouer-sight, vain and idle words,
in the action. But alas, what can proceed from me, that tastes not of old
Adam, and the body of sin which I carry about with me: whersoeuer I have
offended, either in matter or manner, let it be showed, and I will with mine own
hands destroy that which I have built amiss, be sorye for mine oversight, the
most aeger censurer of my self, and thank them from my heart, who shall
admonish me of my fault. Yea, but the tractate concerning the Idol
ministry, tends to stir up my countrymen, her Majesty's subjects,
whereto? To feel in what a miserable case they are before God, and the world,
being without the word, without the administration of the sacraments, and
without Christ's holy discipline, and in regard thereof, dutifully to entreat
her Majesty, and their honors, that it may be redressed? Truth; And would to
God they felt it. To mislike of the ecclesiastical government now
established among us? truth, for it is foreign and Antychristian for the most
part. To mislike of the civil government; That is a slander, and I dare write
in in my forhead for a slander. But why should I deal in this cause more then
others? The worthies of the Lord before me in preaching and writing for a
learned ministry, ye have dealt herein. If they had not, this is my reason.
Though all her Majesty's subjects, yea her faithfullest counselors should
conspire against her highness, I my self against them al would defend her, and
her cause to the loss of my life ten thousand times. And shall not I do the
like service unto the Lord?

To end, commending you all both honorable, worshipful, ministers, and
people, unto the Lord and the word of his grace, I take my leave of you in
that exhortation which we read in Job. Job. 23.21.22.25.
Acquaint your selves I pray you with the almighty, and make peace with him,
thereby it shall go well with you, receive I pray you, the law of his mouth,
and lay up his words in your hearts. If you return unto him, you shall be
built up, if you put iniquity far from your tabernacle, the almighty
shall be your defense, you shall make your prayer unto him, and he shall hear
you. Christ Jesus give them an heart to return unto thee, and be thou found
of them for thy mercies sake. Amen, Amen, Amen. yea, come quickly Lord Jesus.

Your poor countryman, who in all dutiful good will, has wholly dedicated
him self to do you good in the Lord. JOHN PENRI.

THus I have set down the exhortation, word for word, as it was in the former
impressio^, without the altering or deminishing of any one thing, (three
marginall notes added) saving the faults escaped in the printing. And having
here and there diffused my reasons against the dumb ministers, which I
perceive are not so easily to be gathered out of the same, because the most
part of them were brought in for other purposes; I thought good in this place,
to set them down syllogistically, to the end it may appear unto the church of
God, upon what grounds I deny them to be ministers. But here first the state
of the question is to be made known, The slate of the question is, whether he
be any minister at all, good or bad unto whom the Lord never said go and
preach. Mat. 28.18.19. I deny such a one to be any.
which is not whether our readers be such, as have the names, and supply the
places of ministers, (for he that will not grant this, denies heat to be in
the fire) but whether they, by the unlawful consent of our corrupt prelates,
stealing the names, and intruding themselves upon the places of ministers,
that is, having a corrupt outward calling, be ministers indeed. So that for
the better understanding of this controversy, I grant, that in our Church in
those days of her ruins, there be two sorts of ministers. First, a minister
(...) only in name, which is not a minister indeed. Secondly, a minister both
in name and deed: which also is double. First, a minister, (...) that is,
having not only upon him the name of a minister, but also in him these things
which are agreeable unto the name, and give the essence and being thereunto.
Secondly, a minister, (...) which both carries the name, is partake of the
essence thereof, and labors to perform indeed whatsoever belongs unto his
calling, only this minister is the good minister. As for the ministers (...)
if they be not (...) they are all of them evil ministers. Of the which crew,
are all those attainted with the faults spoken against 1. Tim. 3.4.7.
in the word; whom although by the censures of the Church, they should be
compelled to leave, either their faults, or their ministry: yet I dare not
deny to be ministers, as long as the church tollerateth them, unless their
offenses be such, as presently there ensues 2. King. 23.9. Ezeb. 44.10.
a nullitie of their ministry before the Lord. Those who are only ministers
in name (of which sort by the reasons following, I prove all our readers to
be) are not ministers indeed, and therefore can by no means be accounted
ministers. Especially, seeing as good and as able ministers altogether as they
are, might in civil policy be established among the sauadge Caniballs, who
feed upon men's flesh, though they should neither suffer any to come amongst
them, that might teach them true religion, nor resort them selves where the
same were professed. For our Liturgy book of Articles, manner of ordaining of
Bishops and Priests, articles agreed upon by the clergy, in the convocation
house, might be translated unto their tongue; and they by a Lord-Archbishop or
Bishop, Caniball, might be mad Deacons or foul Priests, to were a surplice, a
cloak with sleeves, a truncke gown, a cap and tipper, and I think bell and
babell (ornaments fit inogh for such deformed coxcombs) to read a Gospel,
church women, bid fasting days, and holy days, profane the Sacraments, pray
at the burial of the dead, pronounce a curse against sinners upon
Ash-wendsday, and at no time else, ordain a new Sacrament of the cross, in the
profanation of baptism, visit the sick with a wafer cake, and a wine-bottell,
read Homilies, pray for the prosperity of thieves, pirates, murderers, yea, a
Pope Cardinal, Archbishop, Lord-bishop, or any other enemy of God, and his
Church, if he travail by land or by water, and briefly to perform whatsoever
any reader within wales, by his outward calling is bound to do. Now any
reasonable man would deny these to be ministers: howbeit they emoyed the names
and rooms agreeable unto that function. And I pray you, what difference should
there be between these and our readers, in regard of their ministry? In
their persons I grant some might be showed, but that can be nothing to make
their ministry disagree. And this out of all controversy is most true, that
no ministry can be where true religion is not, no ministry can be out of
the church, as we see the ministry of our readers may. For the Apostle
inseperablie joins the gathering' together of the saints with the Ephesians. 4.22.
work of the ministry.

Where also the importunacie of the distinction that they are evil, that they
are maimed ministers, and therefore ministers is esier answered then propounded,
by granting the^ to be evil and may med ministers indeed, but so evil and so
maimed, as they are flatly none, and so making 2. kinds of evil ministers, the
one so evil and so maimed as they are none at al, the other in deed evil and
maimed, but so as they want not the life, whereby a minister is a minister. A
Chyrurgion entering into a camp of discomfited and wounded men, should find
them all (it may be) wounded and maimed in most miserable sort; but some so
maimed, as they were not men, but dead corpses. The same is to be said of our
foiled and maimed ministry in this Land, wherein all, from the highest to
the lowest (some few excepted which keep us from being like Sodom and
Gomoraah (shall be found mangled by Satan (sorrowful and desperate sight:) in
their very essential parts, but some so maimed, that they are as dead as the
door nail. Now that all our readers want the very life, essence, and being
whereby a minister is a minister, that is, are not ministers in deed. I prove
by these two reasons, and have proved in the book by the reasons that shall
ensue. Whosoever wants that life, which is either prescribed or included in
the word, to be the life of a minister good or bad, he has not so much as the
life of a badde minister, much less of a good. But our readers want both that
life, which is prescribed or included in the word to be the life of a good
minister, and that which is the life of a bad minister. Therefore our readers
have not so much as the life of a bad minister, much less of a good; The
proposition is most manifest. For whence learn we, what gives life and being
unto a minister, but out of the word? The proose of the assumption is thus
concluded. First, there is no essence of that minister, either as good or as a
bad minister, set down to the word, whereof there is at all no mention made
in word. The truth hereof Appius Caecus might see. Does the word show what
life and being he can have, whom it denies to be at all? But our readers
are not mentioned in the word as publik ministers; Because the word never dremt
of that minister, unto whom it is not said: go Math. 28.19
and teach. Therefore, there is no essence or life of our readers mentioned,
off in the word, either as good, or as bad ministers. Secondly, there is no
essence or life of that minister, either as a good or as a badde minister, set
down in the word, which is but the ordinance of the church, by the ordinance
of the church, I mean every ministry and minister, which is not read of in the
word, howsoever the outward calling be joined unto it. I know that the very
outward calling of a minister, is not the ordinance of the church, but the
inviolable prescript ordinance of God, in the delivery whereof, the church is
but an instrument, and I can prove our readers to be neither the ordinance of
God, nor of the church in that sense, whereby the ordinance of the church is
taken for the outward calling acording to the word; To the assumption. But our
readers to make the most of them, are no more then the ordinance of the church.
Therefore there is no essence or life of our readers set down in the word,
either as good or bad ministers. The assumption every man will grant; the
proposition is most firm; Because that every minister 1 Cor. 12.4.11.28. and
4.7. and 9.16.17. 2 Cor: 4.6. Math: 21.25. and 11.11. Romans 12.6. Ephe: 4.11.
Collosir. 25.
good or Phil: 1.15.16. 1. Cor: 3.3.15. Mat: 7.22. 1. Cor. 9.27.
bad, is the ordinance of God, in such sort, as to whome-soeuer the Lord has
not committed 1. Cor. 4.4. John's ministry was from God, therefore much more
every ministry more every ministry in the king done under the gospel. Math.
21.26. and 11.11
the dispensation of his will, well he may have the outward calling of a
minister, he is in deed no more then the ordinance of the Church, and so
wants the very life of a minister. For it is not the approbation of the
Church by the outward calling, that can give life unto that minysterie which is
not heard off in the word. Because the outward calling gives not the life or
being unto a minister, but the birth. So that to make a minister, therebe two
things required. First, a being or life, which the Lord only can give.
Secondlye, a birth, which the Church as an instrument of the ordinance of God,
is to bestow upon him by his outward calling. These two things are so
essentially to be required in a minister, that whosoever wants either of
them, he cannot possibly be a minister. For where is that man that consists
only of a soul, or only of a body? where is that man that never had life?
Or what was is his name that never was borne? whereupon it ensues, that neither
he which wants either of these two parts, must not presume to intermeddle
with those actions, which are by the ordinance of God, necessarily tied (as
the sacraments are) unto him that has both the life and the birth of a
minister, nor I adventure to go unto him for those things, which he has no
commission to deliver. Be a man therefore never so godly, never so learned,
endued with never so liuelye faculties of the ministry, yet he is no minister
in deed, unless he have the ordinance of his God upon him by his outward
calling. The preaching of the word being a gift, and not depending upon the
very ordination is not so tied to the person of a minister: but that he which
has not the outward calling, may offer the trial of his gifts unto the church
in the publik place, his spirit having before been subject unto the prophets,
1. Cor. 14.
that is, such as have judgment to discern of his gifts. On the other side,
beit that a man have the outward calling of the church: yet in deed he is no
minister, unless the Lord has given him the life of a minister, by committing
the word of reconciliation unto his hands. By this I have set down two maine
questions which trouble many that fear God in these days are decided. First,
because the outward calling is essentially required in a minister, it is
therefore thought of some to be that, which gives the life unto a minister. As
though a child has not life in the womb before it be born, or that his birth
be any thing to give him life: I grant indeed, that a woman cannot glory of
the fruit of her body, until it come to the birth, for the bigness of the
woombe may proceed of some Tympany. Secondlye, in as much as the manner of the
essential birth of a minister, is prescribed in the word, which prescript
cannot without sin be altered by any, either in taking upon them the
ministry, or in imposing the same upon others, some are seelilie carried away
to think them, to be no ministers which have not their birth in every point
according unto this prescription. The reason is no better, then if I should
deny him to be a true and a living child, whom I cannot deny to have the
life and the birth of a child, because he issued out at his birth by the way
he should not: Tranq. in vi^^ I^^i. Caes.
if C. Iulins had been taken out at his mothers side, should it therefore be
needless to warn him to take heed of the Ides of March? absurd.

The second reason against these untimely births, I thus frame; Whatsoever
ministry and minister, was then unknown in the Church, when all those
callings flowrished therein, which were in any age, or time appointed by the
Lord to be in the ministry; that ministry and minister has not so much as
the essence of a ministerye or minister, good or bad; Every one knows this,
who knows Paul to have set down, that the Lord Ephesians. 4.12.
ordained not a transitory ministry, but such as was to continue until his
second coming. And more then extreme folly were it to think him, to set
down a being for that minister whom he never meant to ordain. But our readers
and their ministry were the^ unknown in the Church, when al these callings
flowrished therein, which the Lord in any age or time ordained for the
ministry, I mean in the Romans 12.3.7. 1. cor 12 28. ephesians. 4.12.13.
Apostles time. Therefore our readers and their ministry, have not so much as
the essence of a ministry or ministers good or bad. Our of these two reasons
arise two proper differences, between the magistracy and the ministry. First,
there may be a lawful magistracy and magystrate according to the word, whose
name and office, was never heard of before in the world, much less read in
the word, so can there not be a ministry or minister. Tit. Liui. lib. 3.
Cicero in 2. Cat
L. Quintius Cincinatus is made Dictator. L. Tarquinius master of the horse.
L. Opimius, the counsel must see that the commonwealth be not endaungered by
any faction, the same place both before and after sustained many among the
Romans. In our time the care of the public peace in all the German empire,
was committed to Lazarus a Schiuendi. John. Funccinus
All these were new kinds of magistracies at their first institution, yet
lawful. The second difference is, that the life and office of a minister is
prescibed in the word, contained in his gifts, and severed from his, outward
calling. But the life of the magistracy, is neither prescribed in the word,
(for so there could be no magistrates out of the Church, nor any in the
Church, but such as are prescribed in the word, which were very impious to
think) or contained in the gifts of the magrstracie, not yet separated from
his outward calling. For the very outward calling is it, that gives life
unto the magistracy, though the person sustayning it, want gifts to discharge
the same. The reason hereof is evident, because the magistracy being an
humane constitution 1. Pet. 2.13.
as the holy ghost says, is appropriated unto his possession upon whomsoever
man bestows the same, if he be capable to possess (though unfit to
execute) what is allotted unto him. So cannot the ministry be, unless he
upon whom the Church imposes it, be made fit by the Lord for the execution
thereof. They who think the essence of a magistrate, any more to consist in
the gifts of courage, understanding, wisdom, fearing God, dealing truly, Exodus
18.21. deuteronomy. 1.13.
hating covetousness, (the only properties mentioned by Iethro, whence this
life of a magistrate is falsely gathered) then the being of a minister is
contained in his 1. Cor. 4.7.
faithfulness, very inconsiderately gainsay the Apostle Peter in the place
before quoted, because hereby they make the magistracy not to be an human
ordinance, but an ecclesiastical constitution, prescribed in the word. The
objection therefore that a minister should be no more denied to be a minister,
because he wants gifts, then a magistrate denied to be a magystrate, for the
same defect proves not worth the answering. Because the Lord has tied a
man's inherytance, no otherways unto him, then he has the magistracy unto
that person or persons who have authority to make a magistrate. So that the
very magistracy, may be derived from him by the outward calling, as well as
the substantial interest of this inheritance, by the best conuaiaunce in law.
No such thing being tied unto the Church, in making a minister; Because none
can say they are in the possession of a ministry, who have not the same from
the Lord. And what ministry have our readers from him? Any outward thing in
the possession of man: (of which nature all men know the magistracy to be:)
may be conuaied really and indeed, (ought not always I grant) unto him upon
whomsoever man the possessour thereof will confer the same, and there it ought
to be inuiolablie inherent, as long as man whose right it is to bestow it, or
take it away, will have it so. Has a man less interest in his money, because,
either for want of wit, he knows not how to use, or by his leudnes does
abuse it? Candanles a fool, is no less a magistrate, (a far worse I deny not)
among the Lydians, Herod. lib. 1. Plato de reip. dial. 2.
then Egesilaus among the Lacedaemonians, a wise and a politic governor. The
same is to be said of Ioab and Benaiah, of Licinius, a persecutour and
Constantine a christan emperor. Tib. Ghracchus abuses his magistracy, the
senate and people sin, because they deprive him not, but as long as they
tollerat him therein, the magistracy is his own, and therefore not lawful for
any private man by disobedience to rob him thereof. And why so? Because the
swoorde in his hand, is still the Lords sword, the sedition and tyranny in him
is his own. To come to the ministry, the Church makes that wretch a
minister, unto whom it will be said, I Math. 7.22.23.
know thee not, thou worker of iniquity. But did the Lord by enduing him with
graces meet for the ministry, say unto him go prophecy in my name? he did.
Then there is a ministry committed unto him, which is, neither his, nor the
churches, but the Lords, the same dare not I deny (until the Lord take it
away) for the foulnes of his hands. Another comes with the same calling of
the church, and he says b I am a plain heardman, a Zachary. 13.5.
neither prophet, nor the son of a prophet. (Now Lord if it be thy will, be
merciful unto them, convert them, and disburden thy church of them) but I have
my letters of orders from the Lord bishop, and am in possession of the living;
I know no ministry he has. And therefore I deny him to be any more a
minister for his outward calling sake, there Herdonius a traitorous and slavish
servant is a magistrate, though by treachery, he with a company of other
rogish vagabonds like him self, has now gotten possession of the Capitol.
That the spech may not seem strange unto any, let men way but the prerogative
which the Lord reserueth unto him self, in making ministers in his Church:
with the privilege, which her Majesty has in ordaining magistrates within her
dominions. The whole assembly of Parliament for some causes moving them,
ordain a Lord high Constable of England, (as France has) her Majesty shows
her publik disliking thereof. And that she will haven) such officer within her
Realm, is he a magistrate? he is none neither will I acknowledge him for any,
as long as it shall be against her will and pleasure to have any such within her
dominions. For what magistrate is he in this land, which she says to be none
as long as the royal prerogative is in her hand. In like manner, what minister
is he in the Church of God, whom the Lord denies to be any. The case is too
to manifest.

The distinction that readers are ministers of judgment (that is sent of the
Lord in judgment to punish the sins in this age) but not ministers of the
mercy and grace of God, is as if they were said to be ministers of an
ordinance never ordained: now far be it we should make a ministry of an
ordinance never revealed, of an ordinance that is but temporary. And in very
deed I cannot but think it a very strange matter, that these men who make a
conscience of that which they teach, being also wise and godly learned, are not
ashamed to be reported the forgers and setters abroach of such shifting and
siely stuff. The other objection concerning the ministry under Moses, is as
faulty For to square the ministry of the new covenant, according unto the
Leuitical priesthood, is to require the Consulship of Rome, to be framed after
the Maioraltie of London, besides many other foul inconsequentes it has in
it. I have already showed the weakness hereof, and if it deserved a further
aunsweare, I would vouchsafe it the same.

The reasons expressed in the book, are now to be set down. Such of them as
are noted with this mark, The things which they pretend to seek, I embrace,
their separation I detest.
* are some of the reasons, whereby I am necessarily induced, utterly to
condemn that course of those (I hope fearing God) who have made a separation
from those ministers in this land (and their congregations) who truly preach
the word. And although there be in our godly assemblies many corruptions,
and more wants tolerated, which every Christian heart must needs abhor: yet
I protest that I would (as to my comfort I do) join my self in the public
hearing of the word, receiving of the sacraments, praying, fasting, giving of
alms, and other holy exercises, which these congregations as the assemblies of
Gods people, amongst who^ public salvation is to be had, and with these
ministers, as the messengers of Jesus Christ, whose commission from him, to
make known unto me the way of salvation, I dare not deny for my soul because
there is some want in the seal, I mean the outward calling. My reasons are
these; Where I am obscure, the book may give light. The conclusion for
breuities sake I have omitted in the most. The Prosyllogisme or second proof of
any doutfull action where it is omitted, is afterward concluded in the
syllogism, which serves for a proof of all my reasons, where any of them
might be thought to be weak.

Every one that has the * life of a minister good or bad (or that is a
minister in deed) is ordained of God for the gathering Romans 12.3. 1. Cor.
4.11.28. Ephesians. 4.12.
together of the saints. For there is no other minister spoken of in the word.
No bare reader is ordained of God for this end. Therefore no bare reader is a
minister in deed, or has the life of a minister good or bad. The faithful
prechers in the Church of England have and do show by the good evidence of
their teachinge, whereby souls are gathered unto the church, and fed therein,
that they were ordained of God for this end. Therefore the separation from
them and their assemblies, is an ungodly, wicked, and scismatical rent from the
visible body of the church. An ungodly, wicked, and scismaticall rent, I call
it upon good deliberation and advice. Because that separation from the company
where public salvation is had and professed, which is made in such sort, as if
the said company had not the means of salvation sounding in it, or worshipped
God after a false manner is wicked, and scismaticall. Such is the rent of these
men. For as they themselves do anouch, they are separated from us, because in
all our meetings the corruptions are so great, that we serve the true God after
a false manner, hold not the foundation, and so have no means to be saved among
us. For the men themselves, I hope the Lord will recall them, and I am
persuaded the most of them have fallen into this snare of meare and simple
ignorance. And woe, woe woe (unless they repent) will be unto them, that in
smiting and keeping back the careful and harmless sheapheardes, have been
the cause of this lamentable dispersion and straying of the poor sheep. For
the course, which they take in seekinge good things it is to be avoided, as a
course very likely to shake them from eternal life that continue in it. I know
what I say. For where is there now any more means left for them to be saved
without their repentance (we having the only ordinary means of salvation
among us, as before is proved) whereas they separate themselves from us, as
from those who serve the true God after a false manner, and plainly show that
they would have no salvation rather then that whereof we are by the mercies of
God pertakers, through the ministry of the word in our assemblies. They
cannot deny (and I desire the^ to grant no more then the reasons following, and
the former prove in this point) but that salvation is to be had by the
ministry of our preachers. And they also know that there is but one ordinary
way to be saved, which being accounted but in one assembly to be the way of
serving God after a false manner, the passage of salvation is shut up every
where, unto them that are thus seduced, for any thing that I know to be
revealed. Shall I because the churche-gouernement is not as yet established
Tit. 1.5.
in Creta, or is injuriously kept out, and some great corruptions tolerated in
stead thereof, therefore affirm that those congregations of the Cretians,
where the word of god is taught by men of fit gifts; are assemblies where the
true god is worshipped after a false manner, and yet notwithstanding think I
may be saved by the word preached at Philippi (continuing still in the same
error.) Whereas they that deliver the word at Creta, are men endued with as
rare gifts from the Lord, for the work of the ministry, as upright in life,
and have called as many to salvation, as they had done who are at Philippi. I
doubt hereof. Nay, if I separate my self from the assemblies in Creta, to go
to Philippi, it shall not be because I deny them to be meetings of Gods people,
among whom he rules by the scepter of the word, or because I account them
profane synagogs, but because I see them too slack in growing to that
perfection, whereunto they desire to be brought, so that my departing shall
not be a separation, but a going forward. And while I address my self to go
forward, I will be sure not to cut of my self, from the public meetinges
where the word preached is enjoined. A strong manner of reformation, for men to
cut themselves off, from the true Church, to the end they may have a
perfect outward government. The practice of these silly men might seem to be
more tolerable, if they had joined themselves with any Church under heaven.
Nay, I would see what church dares receive them as long as they hold these
congregations for Idolatrous synagogs, where that ordinance of God is, by which
men are brought out of the kingdom of darkness unto the kingdom of Christ.
Every one of the syllogismes noted with this mark, * infer the former
conclusion against their practice. I wish their conversion from my heart, and
will be ready to perform any christian duty (as a brother) toward them
that the Lord has enabled me.

Every minister 2
indeed * of that ordinance Ephesians. 4.13.
which is to continue in the church, for the work of the ministry to the
worlds end. (...). Noe bare reader is a minister of this ordinance. For this
ordinance is the word preached. Ergo no bare reader is a minister indeed. 3
Every minister is able * to make the elect to be members of Ephesians. 4.13.
Christ. No bare reader is such an instrument. Ergo; 4
Every minister * is a means by the word of the grace of God to give the
elect an inheritance among them that are Act. 20.32.
sanctified. None of our readers is such a means, ergo: 5
Every minister indeed, is able to feed the * elect with the food of
knowledge and Iere. 3.15.
understanding. None of our bare readers are able to do this: ergo: 6
Every * minister at the least, in regard of gifts, is according unto the
Lords own Ierem. 3.15.
heart, that is, his ordinance reuciled concerning his * choice. None of our
readers is such: ergo: 7
Every minister is * an instrument to make known by the word preached, the
purpose Colos. 1.20.23 28.
of God concerning man's reconciliatio^. No reder is such: ergo: 8
Every minister is able to lay open * the mysteries of salvation. No reader is
etc: Look this reason in the book.
ergo: 9
Every minister is an * instrument of our new 1. Pet. 1.21.
birth. No bare reader is etc: ergo: 10
Every minister is able by the preaching of the Gospel. to manifest those
hidden secreats, which the Prophets themselves could not artaine unto, 1,
Pet, 1.10.12.
without great search and inquiry. No bare reader can do this by preaching:
ergo: 11
Every minister is * able by his public ministry, to bring the elect unto the
knowledge of the truth and so to salvation. 1. Tim. 2.4.
No bare reader can do this: ergo: 12
Whosoever are fit in regard of their sufficiency to be their minysters
alone, that would have no God, 2. Chron. 15.3.
are no ministers indeed. All bare readers, not being able to lay open the
will of the true God, are only fit to be their ministers that would have no
God: ergo: they are no ministers indeed. 13
They are no ministers, whosoever are able to perform the whole work of their
ministry without study, and giving heed unto learning, as the 1. Tim.
3.14.14.
apostle commands. But all our readers (if they can read) can perform the
whole work of their calling, as long as they live, without any further study:
ergo: they are no ministers indeed 14
. Every minister * is able to expound that which Act. 8.13.14.
cannot be understood without an interpretour, viz, that, which is to be
learned out of the word concerning the Lord, and man's salvation. Our bare
readers cannot do this: ergo: 15
. Every minister * is a minister of that way, whereby the Lord bestows upon
men the spirit of wisdom, and revelation through his knowledge. Eze. 2.17:
Our bare readers are not such: ergo: 16
. Every * minister is able to make the word of God powerful, either unto to
death or unto life, in Heb. 4 12.2. 2. chro. 2.1^
some of the hearers. Our readers are not able to do this: ergo: 17 Every
minister is * able to divide the word of God aright 12
unto the several use of the hearers. 2. Tim 1.10. co^os. 1.5.7.
Our readers are not able to do this: ergo: 18
18 Every minister is able to tech those that can read, 1. Tim* 5.22. and 3.10.
as well as himself. No bare reader can do this: ergo: 19
19 Every minister can do some thing in regard of teaching his flock, which
every christian, who can read well and distinctly, is not able to perform. Our
readers can not do this: ergo: 20
20 whosoever by natural gifts alone, are able to perform, whatsoever
belongethto their Rom 7.7. and 12.3. ephe^. 3.8. 1. coa. 3.10. and 4.7. heb.
5.4. ephesians. 4.7.
calling they are no ministers, because there is some thing (to speak the
least) in the ministry of every minister which cannot postiblie be performed
by natural gifts alone. Our readers are able by the only gifts of nature, to
perform whatsoever belong unto their calling, ergo: our readers are no
ministers indeed. 21
21 Every minister * has gifts to labor in Gods husbandry, and Gods
building: 22
1. Cor. 3.8. 1. These. 5.2. our readers have not: ergo: 22 Every * minister
has necessarily annexed, unto his calling, works of that admiration, that it
may be truly said of them, who is fit for these things. 2. Cor. 2.16. our
readers are not: ergo: 23
23. Every minister is able to make the Lord so known to the elect, that they
dare call upon him, in says and full persuasion to be hard. Romans 10.14. and
8.15. our readers cannot do this: ergo: 24. Every minister is able to compare
spiritual things with spiritual things, 24
and to speak the word 1. Cor. 2 13. 1. these 4.11.
of GOD, as the word of God: our readers are not able to do this ergo: 25
25 Whosoever preserves * not knowledge in his lips, that is, wants the
thing, the w^^^whereof, in a private man, not being censurable by the church,
viz. not being a sin in it self, gives the Lord and the church just cause,
both to keep them from the mynisterie, and to expel them out of the ministry,
in whom this want is found, though they be every way else qualified for the
ministry, according unto the 1. Tim. 3.2.7 ^ir. 1.6.7. 1. cor. 4.2.1. these.
2.2.11
proprieties required in the word, he is no minister. Our readers have this
want in them: because their lips do not preserve knowledge: ergo, they are no
ministers indeed. Thus my reason is in the book page 8. drawn out of Mala.
2.7. is to be concluded. For although a man want all other proprieties of a
minister, yet being fit to teach, he has some allowaunce from the Lord to be
a minister, whereas the want here of keeps back the Lords whole consent,
from the admission of him into the ministry, in whom it is.

The reason whereof is, that all other proprieties in a minister, saving this,
are such, as according to the ordinance of God, ought to be in every christian
(as to be modest, harberous, no striker, etc.) as well as in the minister,
though not in the same measute, this by the Lords institution, is to be in the
minister only of necessity: howbeit other christians also may be and are
capable thereof. 26
26 Whosoever undergoes that ministry, Look the book page 8.
and no other, whereof a Turk, Painime, or Jew, who will not learn true
religion, may be capable, he in deed is no minister. Our readers undergo no
other ministry; 27
etc. ergo. 27 They whose ministry make the whole religion of christians, not
to have in it, so much as one mystery, (the secrecy whereof even in regard of
knowledge, might disable one, that never heard of true religion to be a public
minister thereof) are no ministers in deed. The ministerye of all bare readers
is such* ergo, 28
28 They are no ministers, who for their ministry alone, call for the wrath of
God upon the govern ours and the land, where they are tolerated: our readers
though otherwise the holiest men under heaven call, etc, ergo. 29 All ministers
* may truly say of themselves, 19 2. Cor. 5.20.
now then are we ambassadors from Christ, as though God did beseech you
through us, we pray you in Christ's stead, that you be reconciled unto God: Our
readers cannot truly say, etc: ergo. 30 Every one that is a minister in deed,
has more in him, then parents, 30 Look the book page 9.
both under the law, and under the Gospel, were and are bound to have in the^,
who though they neither could nor can read, were and are bound to reach their
children: our readers have not thus much: 31 Look page 10.
ergo. 31 Every minister * is a minister of the wholesome doctrine spoken of by
the Apostle, 2, Tim. 4, 3: our readers are not: ergo. 32 Every minister, * in
what age soever he lives, 32 Colos. 13.29.
is able to bring the elect (who are borne citizens of darkness, unto the
kingdom of Christ: our readers cannot do this: ergo. 33
33 Every minister is able by the word preached, to cut of the buds that
spring, out of the root of corruptions, that remain in the regenerate: Our
readers are not: ergo, 34 Every minister * is able to make the food of life, to
be milk unto the weak, 34 b 1. Cor. 3.2. heb 5.14
(...) and strong meat to the^ that are capable thereof: our readers are not:
ergo. 35 Every minister * is able to make clear unto the elect, what the
fellowship is, of the mystery, 35
which b from the beginning of the world has been hid in God: our readers are
not: c Ephe 3.9.
ergo. 36 Look page 11.
36 They who are ministers * of those visions alone, that cannot turn the
people from iniquity, nor discover sinner, are no ministers in deed: our
readers are such: ergo. 37
37 The * people living under them that are ministers in deed, may hope for
eternal life by their ministry, if they faithfully execute the same: But the
people living under our readers, though they faithfully execute their
ministry, cannot hope: ergo. 38 Every * minister is a minister of the way,
38
whereby the Lord ordained, he should be publicly served of his people, and
they trained up in his fear: our readers are not: ergo. 39 They are no
ministers * whose flocks the Lord may pursue, 39
with his eternal curse, for contenting themselves with their ministry,
though they faithfully discharge, whatsoever by their outward calling is
enjoined them: But the flocks of our readers are such as, etc: ergo. 40 They *
are no ministers, 40
whose flocks by their ministerye, cannot sanctify the Sabbath: our readers
are such: ergo. 41
41 They * are no ministers in deed, that have not gifts to obey Paul's charge:
Our readers have not: 2. Tim. 4.1.2.
ergo. 42
42 They are no ministers in deed, whosoever may truly say of themselves,
truly we are no ministers in deed, b though we have an outward calling:
Zach. 3.5.
our readers may truly say thus: ergo. 43 They who are in the estate of
damnation for continuing in the ministry, 43.
though they be guilty of no other notorious sin, are no ministers: Such
are our readers: ergo. 44 They are no ministers, whose congregations having no
other ministry, 44
since they have been Idolatrous synagogs, can never by their ministry be said
to have the outward Mat. 28.18.19. Ephesians. 1.13. col. 2.11.17. Look page 24.25.
marks of a true Church: But the congregations of our readers are such: ergo.
45 They that are * ministers in deed, do not sin because they do administer
the sacraments: But our readers (as all the godly confess) sin in presuming to
deal with any action belonging unto a minister, 45
and therefore the sacraments: ergo. All these reasons, besides the other
syllogistically set down, where I deal with the profanation of the
sacraments by our readers, are expressed in the book. Now that every one of
these severally, and all jointly are of themselves alone (none of the^
depending upon the proof, that is gotten by the other) several, and joint
demonstrations, concluding our readers to be no ministers, I thus prove.

All these reasons whereof every one severally and all jointly, do conclude
them to be no ministers in deed, who are not preaching ministers, they also
conclude our readers to be no ministers. But all the former reasons (or the
most of them) conclude the^ to be no ministers in deed, which are not
preachers, (by preachers; I mean not every one that can speak for an hour in
the pulpit, but such in deed, as show b by the enidence of their reaching, Romans
10.14. ephesians. 4.12. gal. 3.1.2. cor. 10.4. 1. these. 1.5.
that they are ordained of God, for the gathering together of the Saints)
therefore also they conclude our readers to be no ministers indeed: Unto the
former I ad these. 46
46 The calling * of every one thot is a minister in deed, is a sanctified
calling in it self, to him that is thereunto called, and has gifts to
discharge the same. But the very calling, (I do not say popedomes,
archbishopriks, pride, covetousness, epicurism, detestable, and wretched
ignorance, Lording over others, opposing themselves to the Lord Jesus and his
members) of our readers, is an ungodly, and unsanctified vocation, to be a
calling of the ministry, because there is no such ministry as they
undergo, warranted by the word: ergo, they are no ministers in deed. 47
47 Their * calling is no calling of the ministry, and so they no ministers:
for the removing of whose ministry, it is Math. 9.38.
lawful * for us to pray: But it is lawful to pray for the remoouing of this
dumb ministry out of the Church: ergo. 48
48 They * are no ministers, who may betake themselves without sin, to
another calling, when the Church wants ministers, especially if they may
exercise their ministry in peace, Our readers may: ergo. 49 Every * one that
is a minister, 44
has that calling upon him, whereunto the Lord according unto his ordinance b
commits the charge of souls: our readers have no such calling: ergo. 50
Every minister * having a flock committed unto him may be, Act. 20.28.
either the Doctor or the Pastor thereof: 50
Our readers can be neither: ergo. 51
51 The birth of that which, was never conceived, is no birthe in deed. But
our readers are birthes that were never conceived, that is, ministers by their
outward ordination, whereas they never had any conception, that is, inward
calling: 52
ergo. 52 They * are no ministers, concerning whose trial, there be no rules
set down 1. Tim. 22. and 3.10.
in the word: Such are our readers: ergo. 53 They are no ministers, the
essential work of whose supposed ministry, may be performed according unto
the ordinance of God, by those, who both have a function, diverse from the
calling of these readers, and detest, without offense unto Gods children, such
a ministry, as ignorant readers take upon them. This proposition is most
true, because there is but one fort of ministers, namely, the ordinance of God,
and not of the Church mentioned in the word: But our readers are such, as the
essential work of their supposed calling, being the works of a minister in
deed, may according to the ordinance of God, be performed by those, who both
have a function diverse from (yea, contrary to) these readers function, as good
is to evil, vz. by preachers, whose calling being a sanctified calling, must
needs be in nature, not only diverse from, but contrary to, the caling of
readers, which is not warranted by the word, a calling warranted and a calling
not warranted being contrary, and detest without offense unto Gods children,
such a ministry, as dumb readers take upon them. Therefore our bare readers
though they have the name and supply the place of ministers, are not ministers
in deed: And not being in deed ministers, it is not left unto me as a thing
indifferent by christian liberty, whether I will communicate with the^ or no:
Because that of necessity, I am bound to com for the sacraments, unto the
ordinance of Math. 21.25. and 11.11. 1. cor. 12.4.11.
God, that is, unto a minister: and not unto the ordinance of the church,
neither have I any liberty to attempt the contrary. And as before has been
proved, every minister is the ordinance of 1. Cor. 12.5.28 ephesians. 4.7.11.
God, and not the ordinance of the Church, ordained when our savior Christ
led captivity Ephesians. 4.8. math. 28.19.
captive, and not since. Now our readers being but the ordinance of the
Church, ordained since that time, and the Church having no liberty to ordain
sacraments: I have also no liberty, no not in the time of necessity, to come
unto the ordinance of the Church for the sacraments: because there I can have
no more, for any thing I know, then the Church whence the ordinance is, has
power to give. And I pray you what sacrament is that, which the bare ordinance
of the Church can deliver?

These be some of the reasons, (and I take no delight in the number of them)
whereupon, as on the infallible truth of Gods sacred word, I dare boldly
conclude the most within wales, supplying the places of ministers, to be no
ministers in deed, and to have nothing in them, that gives life unto a
minister, good or bad. And thereupon I dare as boldly affirm the course to be
a wicked and sismatticall course, which they take, that separate them selves
from the public assemblies, where the word preached is truly taught in this
land, as from those who serve the true God, after a false manner. In the
examination of which reasons, I protest with a good conscience, that I have so
labored, both at the first edition of the book, (some reasons then moving me
to deal more timorouslie in the action) and since that time especialle, as I
have not suffered my self to be deceived by any sophisme, or fallation. And I
prorest before the Lord, that upon these grounds, I both assuredly know their
course, (of whom I have spoken, to be dangerous and detestable, and am also as
surely persuaded, that men not ordained of God for the gathering of the
saints, are no ministers whatsoever calling they have in the Church, as I
believe the blessed apostle Paul to have been an apostle sent from God. And
because I am one day to be reckonad with, before the judgment seat of Jesus
Christ, of my sinceare dealing in both those points, and live now in the
church of God, the least member whereof; Woe be unto me if I offend, because
also I live under her highness a Christian Magistrate, whose sacred ancthoritie
I subject my self unto, and reverence as the royal ordinance of gods own
majesty, and whose positive laws and proccdings, as far as I may with a good
conscience tolerate their imperfections, I dare not gain-saye, because
likewise, what I have written, shall be recorded and called in question in the
church of God, (when I am gone the way of all flesh) unto whom I am afraid to
commend my name, as a brocher of new doctrines: therefore I have been
careful to set down nothing, but that which will abide the trial of all
whosoever, and abide firm against all. If any of my godly, teuere^d, and
learned brethren of the church of England, will do me the favor (which thing
I earnestly request at their hands) in short syllogisms to communicate with me
in writing, their reasons for the ministry of these ignorant men. I shall
have cause to praise the Lord, and thank them for their love toward me in
this point also, and the easier satisfy whatsoever may be said on the behalf
of this unlearned (I would unknown) ministry. I greatly reverence many
godly and learned, that are contrary minded unto me in this cause; I know my
years to be subject unto that bold temerity, hot, and heady rashness, which
blessed Timothy in 1. Tim. 2.22.
consideration of his age, was bidden by the Apostle to avoid:
notwithstanding, in regard of the cause (in humility before the Lord, his
elect angels and children be it spoken) I may justly (for beit I should)
contemn and despise, almost not vouchesafe to answer, whatsoever man or
angel, can bring against it. And I dare arest and attaint, of high treason
against the majesty of the highest all those, both men and angels, who either
defend the communicating with them lawful; communicate with them, or tolerate
them as ministers under their government.

TO THE LL. OF THE COUNSEL.
ANd for as much, as both in this place, for tollerating the dumb ministry,
and in the book page. 36, for suffering non-residents, and the papal Lordships
of our 4. L. Bb. in Wales, I affirm our gouerriours to be guilty of fearful
sins before the Majesty of God, I am with all the humility, reverence and
submission, my heart can conceive, to use a speech unto your HH. my Lords of
her majesty's privy Counsel. The cause that moves me hereunto, is, the
discharge of my duty toward the Lord my God, toward his Church, toward my
native Country, and toward your Honors, which could not stand with my
silence in this point: concerning the Lord, because I am a poor wretched
sinner, upon whom he has showed great mercy, in calling me to the
knowledge of his son, and pardoning my dreadful sins; I have taken a bond of
my self by his grace, to be come an enemy unto sin, in my self especially,
and in all others as far as my calling will permit, without respect of
persons, time, place, estate or condition of life whatsoever. And therefore your
Hh. are not to marvel, if I seek the overthrow of these places, callings,
and corruptions (L. Bishops, readers and non-residents I mean) whose
continuance stands with the lords most notable dishonor, and detest sin
even in your Hh. whose aucthority, good name, credit, estimation, and high
places (next unto her royal Majesty's) I ought, and by the grace of God will
defend, against all the detractours there of, with the loss of my life, when
it shall be needful. As for the Church of God: whereunto I have been begotten,
through the word preached, by means of my abode in England, in these peaceable
days of her highness, I have wholye dedicated my self to seek the flowrishing
estate thereof. By laboring to beautify the same, both in the plucking up of
those filthy Italian weeds, wherewith now it is miserably deformed, and
planting therein, whatsoever may be to the co^lines of gods orchard. For my
pore country, because it has pleased the Lord of life, that therein I first
saw the light of the son, and have been by my parents there living, brought up
in both the universities of this land, I have vowed my self dutifully to
benefit the same, whether by my life or by my death, I do not greatly weye.

And wherein shall I stand my dear countrymen in any stead, if not by
speakinge in their cause, that are not able to make known their own wantes.
If not in blessing the deaf ears, in removing the stumblingblock from before
the eyes of the blind, if not in laboring to bring them to heaven, who of
their own natures should live eternally in a worse place to their own woe. The
aforenamed callings and corruptions, standing as enemies in the way to hinder
my brethren from eternal life; I profess my self to seek their overthrow
and confusion: And by the Lords assistance, as long as I live I will never
leave them, unless they leave the massakring of the souls of my brethren. In
respect of your HH. saying I received the former blessings through your hands,
by means of the outward peace, whereof her right excellent Majesty has made
the whole kingdom partaker from the Lord; I cannot of conscience, but in most
submiss. reverend, and humble sort, put you in mind, of the estate wherein you
stand before the Lord at this day.

I affirm therefore (and I would to God I could tell how, more dutifully to
express in words, that which in heart I have most dutifully conceived) that
all of you are in a fearful manner, both in this life, and in that to come
subject, to the intolerable masle of Gods wrath, the execution whereof, shall
undoubtedly come upon you and your houses, unless you prevent the fiercenes of
his indignation: And that for these 2. causes. First, inasmuch as the whole
country of Wales for the most part, all this time of the Gospel in England,
has been without the public service of God, in the public meetings of your
people, in such sort, as most parrishes within Wales have wanted the means of
salvation all this time of your government. The truth of this assertion is
manifested in this little book (because they have wanted Ia. 2.21: 1. pet.
1.25. Job. 33.23. 1. cor. 1.21. romans 10.14 ephesians. 1.13. and 2.17. act. 20.32
prou. 8.34.35. isai. 53.11.
preaching) and I have elswher to my power labored to make it known unto her
Majesty, and the parliament. Consider my Lords, what care you have had of the
souls of men, and how in the day of account these things will be answered:
Consider how lamentable a case it is, that in the flowrishingst government for
outward peace, that is again under the coape of heaven, where public
idolatry has been bannished, not one family, or one tribe, but a whole
nation should perish and be destroyed for want of knowledge. And see whether I
have not sufficient cause to deal with you, in the behalf of my countrymen.
My cry, my cry, is not the cry of guiltles and innocent a blood, b Deuteronomy.
21.8.
which were very woeful, but of lost and damned souls which is most
lamentable, and give ear unto it my LL. lest the blood of souls be laid to
your charge, and required at your hands. If I be thought to report an untruth,
in regard of the estate of the Church in my country, let me be brought face
to face for the trial hereof, with those unto whom the care (I should say the
spoil) of the Church there is committed, and being convinced to have uttered
an untruth, let me have no favor, but die the death, before your Honors, and
my blood be upon mine own head, for impeaching the credit of the princes of
my people, vndutifullie by public writing, whose estimation, I know it to be
unlawful for me, even in thought once to violate. I do here therefore before
your HH. offer to prove, that the most congregations in Wales, want the very
essential outward marks of a true church, and so the means of salvation, and
the comfort of faith, by the right administration of the sacraments: I also
offer to prove, that you shall be reckoned with, without your speedy
repentance, because that in this point you have plowed but iniquity and sowed
wickedness, and so as Job says, you shall reap the same. Believe them not
that tell you all is well, Job. 4.8.
under your government in Wales, and that they are a sort of clamorous and
indiscreet men, that affirm the contrary. Believe them not that tell you that
it belongs not unto your duty to be careful of the estate of the Church; and
that the Lord requires no more at your hands, but to maintain outward peace As
though men committed to your government, were but droues of bruit beasts,
only to be foddered, and kept from external invasions and inrodes: give care
rather unto the words of the prophet, who with a loud voice, cries unto
you, why will you die, you, your families, Ierem. 27.23.14.
and your people by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, and why
will you be damned, as the Lord has spoken against (I may allude without
injury to the word) all those governors that will not Ezra. 7.17.23. psalm.
2.10. and 101 2. chro. 29.10. and 30.9. and 34.27. exodus 20.10. gen 18.19.2.
chron. 15.12.13. and 17.7
see their people provided of the means of salvation. Therefore hear not the
words of the Prophets that tell you, you shall neither see sword, or famine,
though you be still as careless of your people, as you hitherto have been look
the punishment both of the flatteringe prophets, and of those that are
deceived by their flattery. Ierem. 14.16. Hear them not I say, but obey the
Lord in the execution of that duty which he efflagitateth at your hands, by
calling of your people unto the knowledge of his son, that you may live for
why should this land be made desolate for this your carelesnes. Ier. 27.17.
They prophecy vanity and a lie unto your HH. that say peace, peace unto you,
while in this point you despise the Lord, and walk still in this secure
course, or else Iere. 23.16.17.
Jeremy is deceived, if they be prophets. And if the word of the lord be in
their mouths, Ierem. 27.18.
let them entreat the Lord, her Majesty and your HH. (and stir you up to
see) that the misery of helpless Wales may be considered off. You are in a
miserable taking, my LL, that either you have none about you, to tell you of
these things, or that men dare not tell you of the^, you are more miserable if
being warned of your estate, you be hardened still in this security. But this
is not all.

Secondly therefore, the Lords wrath hangs over your heads for tollerating in
Wales the dumb ministry, the usurped and Antichristian seats of Lord
Bishops, and other Romish offices there remaining and so tolerated, as by your
consent and authority they are in force. If Moses by a positive law, should
have allowed the offering of strange fire, by Nadab and Abihu, tolerated the
ministry of Leui: 20.18 23
blemished and deformed Levites, enacted that one not being of the line of
Aaron, might press before the Altar, Nom. 16.10. and 18.7.
to offer the bread of his God, if David had made it lawful for Huzza to lay
his hand upon the Arc, if Josiah or any of the godly rulers had given leave
unto the cursed shepherds in their days, to place others in their steed Ezekiel.
44.8.
to take the oversight of the Sanctuary, briefly had established any thing
contrary to the commandment, in the Churche-gouernment prescribed by Moses,
had they not bin in danger of Gods wrath? questionles they had. And shall your
HH. be dispensed with, being guilty of tollerating and establishing greater
things amongst your people in Wales, in stead of the government prescribed by
Jesus Christ, assure your selves no. I do therefore in this point for the
discharge of my conscience and duty toward the Lord, his church, my Country,
and your Hh. taking my life in my hand, testify unto you before the eternal
GOD and his church, that our unlearned ministry is no ministry in deed,
that the calling of our L. Bb. Archdeacons, Commissaries, somoners, and al
other the excrements of the Romish vomit, as non-residents, etc, remaining in
Wales, are intolerable before the Lord: and that it is not likely that ever
your Hh. tollerating these things any longer, shall escape the revenging hand
of God. The truth hereof, I make known briefly, (because I would not be
tedious) unto your Hh. by the reasons following, and offer to prove these
things more at large upon the peril of my life, and by the grace of God will,
against our 4. L. Bb. all their Chapleins, retainers, favorers, and
welwillers, whether in either of the two universities in this land, or in any
place else in earth, or in hell, for in heaven I know they have no fautors.
These things I offer to prove against D. Bridges, who lately in a book of 7.
shillings price, has undertaken their defense, wherein besides the wrong done
unto the Church of God, he has offered her Majesty and your Hh. most
undutiful iniurye, by going about* for the defense of his bellye, and the
bellies of the rest of his coat, to overthrow her Majesty's title of
sovereign pre-eminence, and to alienate the hearts of the loyallest subjects
in the land, from their most loving and careful Prince and governors; As
though her Majesty and your. Hh. meant to turn the edge of the sword against
them, who indeed deserve not to be smitten with the scabard. And I will prove,
that he has crammed into this gorge, as plain popery for the defense of our
prelates: as ever Belarmin, Turrian, Harding, Saunders, or any other the
fierbrands, and ensign-bearers of Romish treason against her Majesty's crown,
have brought for the title of the popes supremacy. Although he has been, and I
doubt not shall be sufficiently answered, by those, whose books he is not
worthy to bear, yet, in as much as he in this book has showed him self to
be an Ammonitish, Tobiah, against the building of Jerusalem in Wales, by
desending (alas) reliquias Danaum, the very breaches and ruins of the
Babylonish overthrow, which by the just judgment of God under popery, we have
sustained to be the perfectest building that Syon can be brought unto, and so
by this slander, withstandeth the salvation (which I doubt not) her Majesty,
and your Hh. wish unto my Country; I have so framed my reasons following, as
they overthrow the very foundation and whole frame of that wicked book. And
on the condition, that his cause may falls. If I (besides that which others will
do (overthrow him, and his cause, I offer before your Hh. to lie in irons, and
eat the bread of affliction, until in a twice 7. penny book I disprooue by
the word, make an utter spoil, ruin, and overthrow, of whatsoever he has
brought for the defense of that, which in the government, is oppugned
according to the word, by the learned in this Land. I speak not more
confidentlye then I should do, for I know the cause to be a most confident and
sure cause, and therefore not timorouslye to be dealt in, but in the fear of
God, with all boldness to be stood too and aduouched.

Now that our dumb ministers, non-residents, L. Bb. Archdeacons etc, are
nothing else but an increase Nom. 22.14.
of sinful men, risen up in stead of their fathers the Idolatrous monks and
friars, still to augment the fierce wrath of God against this land, and you our
governors, and that this book of D. Bridges, and whatsoever else has been
written for their defense, are nothing else but edicts, traitors against God,
and slaunderers to your sacred government, to defend the sale and exchange of
church goods, and the very destruction of souls, to speak all in a word,
that both these cortuptions and their defenses, are condemded by the Lords
revealed will, as things directly against his will, and the laws of his
majesty expressed in his written word, and therefore not to be tolerated by
your Hh. unless, you think you may tolerate sin by law, nor yet once to
be spoken for, or countenannced, unless you would plead for Judge. 6.31.
Baall, I prove by these reasons.

That form of Church-gouernment; which makes Jesus Christ to be inferior
unto Moses, is an ungodly government, flat contrary to the Heb. 3.6. nom. 12,
7.
word, and therefore in no case to be tolerated, and the book, or books
defending the same, are ungodly wicked, and lying books. But our
Church-gouernment in Wales, by L. Bb. Archdeacons, dumbeministers, and other
ecclesiastical officers there, (as for non-residents, let this one reason for
all serve against them, they, in as much as in them lies, bereave the people,
over whom they thrust themselves, of the only ordinarye means to salvation,
which is the Romans 10.14. 1. cor. 1.21. 1. pet. 1.21.
word preached,) is such a government as makes the Lord of life, Jesus Christ
inferior unto Moses, and this book of Doctor Bridges does the same, therefore
this government in a government not to be tolerated by law in any state,
unless men would feel gods heavy judgments for the same, and therefore also
a government most pernicious and dangerous unto the civil magistrate where
it is established, and this book or books defending the same, are ungodly,
wicked, and lying books, traitorous against the Majesty of Jesus Christ,
crying for the importable vengeance of God upon such Magistrates as tolerate
them. The proposition is not to be doubted off. The assumption is thus
provided. That government, and that book, which holds Jesus Christ, God
and man, to have prescribed no external form of government in his church but
such as at the pleasure of the magistrate, when time and place requires, may
without sin be altered: prefers Moses before the Lord Jesus: This is
manifest out of the express word out of the text. Heb. 3.2.6. Because that the
Lord Jesus being the son, in this place is compared with Moses a faithful
servant, is preferred before Moses, in regard of the external government,
which Moses had so faithfully prescribed, as it was not to be altered or
changed at the pleasure of any magistrate, until the messiah should cause the
oblations to ceas. Dan. 9, 27.
For whatking was there ever in Judah, that without the breach of Gods law,
could ever alter the external form of the jewish Church in the Leuitical
priesthood and officers. And that the comparison between the son, and the
servant Christ and Moses, is concerning the external, and not concerning the
spyrituall government of the inner man, as D. bridges says it is plain,
bieause that Moses had nothing to do with the governing of the inner man, and
therefore it were no prerogative for the Lord to be preferred in faithfulness
before Moses, page 55. lin. 30.
in that thing wherein Moses never dealt. Now I assume that our form of
Church-gouernement in Wales, and this wicked book, holds Jesus Christ to
have ordained such an external form of government in his Church at his
departure from earth to heaven, as at the pleasure of the magistrate may be
altered, without the brech of Gods institution: which thing D. Bridges
affirms page. 55. and all our prelates will grant that the magistrate may
alter the form of government now established, and therefore this government,
and this book prefers Moses before Jesus Christ. And I cannot see how far
this differs from blasphemy. Now if Christ should be said to have ordained
no external regiment, then Moses is far before him, and so the thirst of
superiority in our prelates and their accomplishes is turned into extreme
drunkenness of impiety by this assertion.

I beseech the Lord in mercy to open your Hh. eyes, that you may see how he
and his people have been dealt with, by retaining such laws in force, as
iustle and overthrow the royal prerogative of his son. And the Lord make you
to see whether those men that defend the interest of the son of God in this
point, against the tyrannical usurpation of prelates, and have brought for his
title, unanswerable evidence, out of the sacred records of Gods own writings
(offending either in matter or circumstance, in no one thing: but that they
have not dealt more earnestly with your Hh. and more ronndly with the
adversaries in the right of their master) have deserved to be imprisoned,
thrust out of their livings, reviled, railed upon, and slaundered, (by ungodly
and wicked prelates,) unto your Hh. as seditious and discontented men with the
civil government, dangerous subjects, and enemies to her Majesty's crown. And
surely the cause being made known unto you as it is, howsoever the Lord may
bear with your oversight heretofore, in the ignorance of the weight thereof:
yet if you do not now abrogate and abolish such a Church government well may
you hope for the favor and entertainment of Moses, that is, the curse of the
law, but the favor and loving countenance of Jesus Christ, I do not see how
you shall ever enjoy.

My second reason. That form of church-gouerment, and book or books, which
makes the ecclesiastical regiment, to be an humane constitution, that is,
such a constitution, as is inclusiuely acording to the word, any more then the
civil government, which, 1. Pet. 2.13. and 2. Pet. 2.10.
also must be inclusiuely according to the word, and so may at the magistrates
pleasure be changed as the civil government may, that government, and that
book or books, (besides that they prefer Moses before Jesus Christ as before)
is a wicked government, and they wicked, sophistical and ungodly books: But
our government in Church causes, and page. 55.
this book with all other books of this greist, make the ecclesiastical
government to be nothing else but an human constitution, which may be
altered at the magistrates pleasure. Therefore our Church-gouernement in Wales,
and this book or books, are ungodly and wicked. The proposition is proved by
these reasons. First because they make no difference between that which
belongs to the true worship of God, as ecclesiastical government does, and
that which appertains unto civil policy. 2. Peter. 1.3.
Contrary to the Apostle who affirms in expres words, that we have received
by the knowledge of God, whatsoever belongs unto true religion, for so the
word Eusebeia (translated godliness) signifies in that place, whereas there was
never yet any place of scripture found, wherein we are said to have by the
knowledge of God, whatsoever belongs to anthropinen kteisin, the civil
magistrate called man's ordinance by the same apostle. Peter. 3.^3.
Wherein those things which are invented by them that never knew God, may be
inclusiuelie according to the word. Secondly Ecclesiastical government being
granted to be an human constitution, makes the Pope to have sufficient b
warraunt out of the word, not of his idolatrous and false religion, And D.
Bridges avouches* this for good doctrine as I will show.
but of his superiority over civil magistrates, and all the Pastors in the
Church. For why should not he (the civil magistrate granting him this
superiority as they under his jurisdiction do) be allowed by the word to be
above the Emperor, and all other magistrates and ministers whosoever, if the
ecclesiastical government be an humane ordinance. For I am assured that the
Emperor and all other princes in Europe may choose a magistrate superior unto
them all if they will. And why may not he be a Bishop or an Archbishop, if the
Church-gouerment be an humane ordinance, or if it be lawful for either of them
to be a Lord and be are civil office. Thirdly if Church-gouernment be an
humane constitution, then it may be lawful for a Church-gouernour to preach,
administer the sacraments, ouersee, excommunicate, etc. and to be a king. For
the Apostle makes it lawful for any supplying the place of an humane
constitution lawfully, to be a king, and I would they durst deny it? And
where then learned they that divinity, that it is more against the word, for a
Bishop to be Basileus a king, Hyperichon a suriour, Hegamon a captain or
governor, 1. Pet. ^.13. Luke 22.25.
being titles sanctified by the holy ghost for civil offices, then Curios a
Lord, Hyperpheron a prelat of the garter, Euergetes a lords grace. The former
and the latter being by our Savior himself forbidden unto Bishops or
ministers. The second vz. Hyperpheron never read in the word, that I can
remember. If they say, that the abuse of lordlines and graceless grace, is
forbidden by Christ; they have been answered, they are answered, and let them
reply if they can, that the Lord never allowed abuse or tyranny in civil
governors, whereas he does not forbid them to rule as Lords, and to be called
grace, and therefore speaks of the sanctified use of government and titles:
which sanctified use lawful in the civil magistrates, he denies to be
lawful in his ministers. Because therefore, first to make that which belongs
to the outward worship of God, to have no more ground out of the word, then
that which appertains unto the civil magistracy. Secondly to allow of the
Popes superiority, and to affirm that a minister may also be a king, are
wicked and absurd assertions, directly against the word as we see. Therefore it
is wicked in like manner, to make the Ecclesiastical government to be an humane
constitution. And not unlikely also by little and little, as experience in popery
techeth us, to paue the way for the undermining of the civil government. For
why may not a forged donation of Constantin, or Ludouicus Pius, in time ioyn
the crown of England to the sea of David, or Bangor especially, which from
Joseph of Aremathea can be proved to have a little better continuance of
personal succession, then Rome can from Peter, as well as it joined the
kingdom of Scicilia, the Dukedom of Naples the islands Corsica Sardinia, etc.
unto the Popes miter?

The third reason is thus ftamed (and I will be brief) That form of
Church-gouernment and that book or books, which teaches that there is
something to be observed, besides that, which was concluded in the commission
given by our savior christ unto his Apostles, Matthew. 28.19.20
wherein they were enjoined to teach us to observe whatsoever he had
commanded them, is a government execrable and accurssed, (and so are the
books) by the spirit of God in plain words. Gal. 1.9. And being such,
far be it that either the government or the books should be maintained by
law, such a curse being pronounced against the retaining of execrable things,
as we find: Deuteronomy. 7.15. But our form of Church-gouernment in Wales and this
book, with many others published by authority, teach the same. For where is
it included, much less, prescribed in the word, that our savior Christ
abollished an outward government of the Church, in the Leuiticall pollity,
being in no sort an human ordinance, but altogether prescribed by the Lord
him self, to the end, that under the Gospel, there should be no government,
but an human ordinance, that might be changed at the pleasure of man; Or
where is it revealed, that the apostles gave the civil magistrate, when any
should be in the Church, the commission to aboll she the presbytery
established by them, as our adversaries confess, (as the b word says by god
himself, 1 Cor. 13.5.12 Ephesians. 4.4. romans 12.6. 1 pet. 4.10. Mat. 21.25. and
12.11.
and therefore not to be abrogated until his pleasure in that point be known)
because there was no christian magistrate. Therefore this government and this
book or books are execrable and accurssed.

Lastly, that form of government, and that book or books, which affirm
the kingdoome of Christ in the ourward government to be a kingdom that cannot
be shaken, that is altered or removed as the ceremonial government was,
affirm that which is contrary to the express written word of God, Heb.
12.28. and therefore not to be tolerated in any christian estate. But our
Church government in Wales by L. bb. Archdeacons, dumb ministers,
commissaries, etc, in their making of minysters, censures, excommunications,
etc, is such, and such is this unlearned heap and sophistical book or
books. Therefore both the government and the book or books affirm things
contrary to the word, and so are not to be tolerated unless we would have the
Lord bring speedye shame and confusion upon us: Pro. 26.2.7
for maintaining sin by law. The proposition is most apparent; Because that
by the words (kingdom that cannot be shaken) must needs be meant
perticularlye, whatsoever signification else they have as more general) the
outward government received under the Gospel since the abolishing of the
ceremonial law, which being compared in regard of continuance, and remoouing,
or doing away, which Moses his government, is said to be a kingdom that cannot
be shaken, that is, such as the Lord never means to alter again unto the
worlds end, as to have another placed in the stead of it by him self, much
less by man, whereas that under Moses Hag. 2.7.
is affirmed by Haggay, and here by the apostle, to be a kingdom or
government that can be shaken or altered. And this is the proper meaning of
the place. For by the word kingdom, that cannot be shaken, must needs be
meant, either the assurance of salvation which we have under the gospel, or our
enjoying and possessing of eternal life, or else the outward government, not
only in the preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments, but
in the very church offices, the manner of their choice, and their subjects
wherein they are occupied. But as concerning the assurance of salvation in this
life, and the possession of eternal life in heaven, which the fathers under the
law had, it was no more to be shaken then ours, the means thereunto by the
word preached, they had as well as we, and so in these respects they had a
kingdom that could no more be shaken then ours. It remains therefore, that
theirs was to be shaken, in regard of their outward government, and therefore
ours immovable in this respect, which were senseless to be affirmed, if
Christ in his kingdom, whereunto we are here subjects had instituted no
external government. Can that be vnmoouable which is not at al? more
senseless it were to think this kingdom to be vnmutable, in regard of the
sacraments, and not of the persons and offices, who were to deal with those
mysteries.

To come again to your Honors, you are not to learn, that to defend by law,
or countenance by aucthority the breach of Gods ordinance, is the defense of
sin, the defense of the sin is hatred of God, who rewards the^ to their face
that hate him, deu. 7.10. and therefore also you are not to be taught, what
horrible sins you committee, in countenauncing and maintayning such execrable
impieties. They are no trifles as you see. And I assure you, that Dathan and
Abiram, the sons of Eliab, men Nom. 26 9.
famous in the congregation, had more color of right to claim unto them
selves, either the civil government from Moses, or the priesthood from
Aaron, because they were the sons of Reuben the first born unto whose lot
Genes. 49.4.
had he not defiled his fathers bed by all likelyhoode, either the scepter or
the priesthood should have fallen, then these usurpers have to claim the places
they are in, whereunto either by right of inheritance according to the flesh,
or ordinance from God, they can lay no title. You are wise enough I hope to
consider, what it is to tolerate the manifest breach of Gods law. Well if you
be not careful hereof, yet at the lest, look how you countenance the manifest
overthrow of her Majesty's sepreame authority and royal soueraigatie over
her people, both ministers and others which D. bridges as flatly ouerthroweah
in this book, as ever did any that gaine-saied the same. For the proof
hereof, let his own words be brought forth and arraigned bebefore your Hh.
page 448. line 3. these be his words. Does S. Peter then forbid, that any one
elder should have and exercise any superior government over the clergy,
understanding the clergy in this sense. If he does not but allows it, and
his self practiced it, then howsoever both the name, both of governing and of
Clergy may be abused, the matter is clear, that one priest or elder among the
residew may hane, a lawful superior aucthoritye over the clergy, that is,
over all the universal body of the Church in every particular or several
congregation, Compare Belacap. 10. lib 5. Con. 3. with this page, and you shall
find the one to have spoken for the arch bish. the same ^^at the other ^oth
for the ^ope.
and so not only over the people, but also over the whole order of ministers.
Thus far are his words A shameless and miserable doctor he is, if he dare deny
them, but more miserable and shameless, if affirming them he dare look any
christian subject in the face, much less your Hh. Belarmine the chief popish
writerin our days, has said no more for the pope in five whole books written
upon this controversy. Out of the D. words I thus reason. Whosoever affirms
that one priest amongst the residue may have a lawful superior authority
over the universal body of the Church, he (besides the inducing of a foreign
power (affirms that a priest may exercise a lawful superior authority over
her Majesty, and all other magistrates, much more ministers within the
vniuersallbodie of the Church, 1. Eliza. 1 13. Elizab. 1.1. Elizab. 5
and so directly is within the compass of treason, by the breach of the
statuts, provided for the maintenance of her Majesty's supremacy within her
own dominions. But D. Bridges does this, Doctorem ad capitale judicium voco
poenae talionis me offe rens, nisi laesa maiestatis rerum prob auero modo ipse
sibi constiterit. Ac deum testor me non patroni iugalum petere, sed causa
let his own words witness against him. Therefore he affirms that some one
priest may exercise a lawful superior authority over her Majesty, and so is
within compass of the said statutes, if he dare stand to that he has written.
Nothing can be inferred out of his words, but that which is set down in the
proposition, for I am sure, he will not be so impude^tly traitorous, as to deny
her Majesty to be contained within the universal body of the Church. For by
this means the wretched man would make her Majesty to be an infidel, and so
should snare himself again within the compass of * treason. And if he say,
his meaning is not that this priest should be a forainer, 13. Eliza. 1.
and so thinks to delude the statuts, the plaster makes the wound far more
grievous and irksome. For first the injurious indignity is far greater unto
her right excellent Majesty, to make her own vassal, to be a superior
governor over her, unto whom no prince else in all Europe, will yield any
homage, then to acknowledge her self to be within the sheepefolde of a
foreign Pope, who it may be is a Noble man borne, and has the Emperor, and
the greatest states in christendom, under his pastoral charge. In the second
place, what notable contumely is this for the noblekinges of Denmark and
Scots, the state of Germany, Heluetia and all others, that have rejected the
Popes authority as unlawful, not only in regard of his idolatry and pride,
but even of his lordly rule and supreme dignity, to hold it lawful for them
to have an English priest to usurp authority over them and the Churches
within there dominions? And I cannot express what indignity it were to
conceive so vilely of her Majesty, the whole assembly of parliament, and your
Hh. as to deem, that you banished popery out of the land no otherwise, then
you thought it lawful notwithstanding, for an English priest (I keep the
priestly D. own words) in stead of an Italian pope to have superior
authority over the universal body of the Church. And howsoever some lawyers
not understanding how the state of the question concerning the popes
prerogative is set down by the best late popish writers, might find shifts
for D Bridges, to avoid the danger of the statute, because there is not a
particular instance brought in by him of a particular priest, and a particular
prince: yet hereof your Hh. may be assuredly persuaded, that if the things set
down in this wretched and slanderous book, be tolerable and canonical, the
question concerning the popes supremacy, (which is the point I urge, and not
the treason) is granted on the papists side. For if it be yielded, that one
priest or elder among the residue, may have a lawful superior authority over
the universal body of the Church, that an Apostle might be a bish. affirmed
by page 272.
D. Bridges, that Peter was prince of the Apostles, being the title, and as it
were the iuibushe of page 445. 446.
2. pages, in this dutiful book, that from Peter the original of unity did
spring, that the Church might be grounded upon unity (alleged by the D. out
of page 445.
Ciprian: The like sentence being no less then thrice brought in by
Bellarmine out of Ciprian also, to the same purpose: if these things I say, be
granted, what can the papists desire more to infer the popes supremacy? for
either they will prove Peter's successor to be this priest, or some other must
be brought, that can show better evidence then he can. This is Bellarmines own
reason. De Romans ponti. lib. 2. cap. 12. 753. D. and these be the points, in the
proof whereof he has sweat and labored so sore, in his first two books, de
Romans pontif. And if the avoiding of a particular instant would answer the
statute, no popish traitors hereafter will be gotten within the compass
thereof, seeing in general terms they may lawfully avouch the popes
supremacy, and stand unto this high treason the particular opening whereof,
would cost them their lives, and they will say no more, but that one priest may
have a lawful superior authority, as D Bridges says Peter had, over the
universal body of the Church. Now whether this priest be the pope or no, or
whether the pope may have this superiority over her Majesty, as being within
the body of the church or no, they leave it to the consideration of others,
the instance would be as much as their life were worth. And what should they
endanger their lives by uttering that, in particular, which in general belike
may be affirmed with safety. The general assertion, that a priest may have a
lawful superior authority over the universal body of the church, being true
and void of treason: why shall not the particular instance that the pope may
be this priest which may have this superior authority over her Majesty, as
being included within the universal body of the church be so to? if one
priest may have this authority? what shall hinder why the pope may not be
this priest (though he be not) his idolatry he may leave, his pride he may
leave, his triple crown he may leave, his name of pope he may leave, and why
then may not he sometimes, though not always, be capable of this lawful
superior authority, Many of the Popes themselves never sat at Rome but either
at Lions, Arminia or Avinion, look Platina, Ba^e. Pantal. etc.
as well as some other priest? yea, but this priest must not have his scare at
Rome. The^ he will remove his chair unto Rauenna, or Canterbury, and so
there shall be no difference between him and this priest whereof D. Bridges
speaks. And by this good divinity, Sixtus the fifth, now pope of Rome, being
no idolater, void of pride, abandoning his triple crown, and name of pope,
remoouing also his seat unto LAMBETH, might be that one priest, among the
residue, that might have a lawful superionr authority over the universal
body of the church, as D. Bridges without blushing has affirmed. Let him now
go and bark at the godly ministers in this land, as he does slanderously in
the preface of his profane book. The intentes of undermining the cinill
government, are found in the undutiful casket of his own bosom, whereof their
clothes are not once privy. What should I at this time lay open any more of
his undutiful positions? his book I will at all times prove to be nothing
else, but a popish quilt, let him challenge me of mine offer when he will. This
matter concerning her Majesty's supremacy, being too too heinous of it self,
I mean not to agrauate and make more odious. Your Hh. may see, how pestilent
and pernicious this wicked government of our prelates is, even unto her
Majesty's supreme and superior authority, which never any sincerely seeking
for reformation, at any time either denied or diminished, the same being
rightly understood according to the meaning of the statute. And whatsoever he
has said of the godly learned ministers, you see that it is he and his
fathers house, with the government thereof, that go about to tread under foot
the Lords anointed. And this is the good divinity that this Balaam for his
lucres sake, is not ashamed to teach, and your Hh. dread not to tolerate. As
though we had to little to answer before the Lord, for the Antichristian
dominion of the pope in this land, he must needs make a priest in the land
which may fetch the plague from other nations to be powered upon us. Rather
then the madness of such a prophet should be unrebuked, the very dumb ass,
speaking with a man's voice, would gainsay the fury of such a philistian
tongue: I cannot think my Lords, but that the Lord has some memorable
plagues reserved for you and us under your government, if notwithstanding all
these things, you still countenance such (...) in Israel, as being the very
ornaments of the Lords tabernacle.

I have set down out of the infallible truth of Gods eternal word, the
reasons whereby the holy ghost cutteth the throare, of all the corruptions in
our church, and has given a deaths wound, unto the vital parts of this
popish warehouse of Doctor bridges. And let me see who will dare to reply
upon them? As for D. bridges him self, his vnfauery and unlearned style, his
popish reasons, long since bannished out of the schools of all sound deuines,
his tranflation of other men's writings, throughout his whole book, his ungodly
and abominable Page 655.
prayer that the preaching of the word may never be had generally throughout
the land, his scripture Page 287.
being the subscription of the second epistle to Page. 562.349.560.
Timothy, his alleging of writers, as clear against himself, as black is
to white, as of Augustine, Calvin, Aretius, etc, his Page 44^.
imperfect periodes without sense or savor, his Page a 272.
Bishop James, Archbishops, Page 259.69 266
Tim. and Titus, his translations of Page 450.
vos autem nolite vocari rabbi, into will not you be called rabbi, with
thousand other monumens of his profane imprety, sottish ignorance, and want of
learning, evidently convince, that he was never as yet, in Platonis Politia,
where any good learning grew, but has wallowed him self all his life, in
Romuli fece, whence learning has been long since bannished, and godliness never
shone. And therefore he of al others can disprove nothing: unless the question
before hand be granted of his side. Yet let him know, that I will either be
answered, or have the cause granted at his hands.
For to omit, that in 160. sheets of paper, he has don nothing, but over
thrown him self, utterly shamed his whoorishe cause, by showing the nakedness
thereof, translated other men's writings, taught the reader how to understand
the learned discoarse, and added marginall notes, so that if other men had
never written, he would have said nothing, this shall be found undoubtedly true
throughout the whole book, that he has made a covenant before hand, not to
dispute, unless you grant conclusion, and all, and rather flatly to be non
plus then prove any thing. But our 4. bishops and their fautors are, or would
be accounted learned, I desire no more against them al, but to be iudicially
heard, according to the word, if I be disprooued in any one thing I have
written, I will not desire to live.

Hence it must needs follow, (your Hh. having regard unto the state of your
souls, and bodies before the Lord, and your good name amongst posterities)
that if these things set down be true (if not bring upon me deserved shame
and punishment) you will either redress the miserable estate of distressed
Wales, by erecting there a godly ministry, and abbolishing of al Cananitish
relics: or for the maintenance of a few unconscionable and godless men,
adventure to undergo the fiery and flaming execution of the burning decree of
Gods anger. My LI. be not deceived, the Lord of heaven is angry with you, and
his whole Josh. 7.9.21. ezech. 38.22.
host for the Babilonish garments of these Achans. Retain them no longer, if
you would not fall before the enemy; When the Lord shall plead with you,
your wives, children, families, and the whole land, with pestilence, or with
blood, as he is likely to do, for these wadges of execrable gold, it is not,
the pontifical Lordships of bishops, at whose commandment, the lords sword
will Ierem. 47.6.
return again into his sheath, when your gasping souls, shall cry for mercy
at the Lords hands, it is not the proud, and popelike Lordships of bishops,
their usurped jurisdictions, their profane excommunications, their railing
slanders against Gods truth and his servants, their blasphemous breathing of
the holy ghost upon their Idol priests, that will drive the Lord to give you
and comfort. Let me therefore (though my person be base, and conte^ptible)
entreat your Hh. that the judgments of God against sin, both in this life, and
in the other of eternal woe and misery, may appear so terrible in your eyes,
and of that undoubted consequence, as you will no longer retain under your
government these things, whose continuance do give the Lord just cause in
this life, to pronounce this, sentence, by the mouth of Iere. 22.29.30.
Jeremiah against every one of you, and execute the same. O earth, earth,
earth, hear the words of Jehovah, write these men destitude of children, men
that shall not prosper in their days, yea, there shall not be a man of their
seed that shall prosper, and sit at the counsel table, or bear rule in
England any more. And in the life to come, to say: moreover, these Luke.
29.27:
mine enemies that would not suffer me to bear rule over them, and their
people, bring hither and stay before my face, yea, bind them hand and foot,
and throw them to utter darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth.
And let me, craving upon my knees, with all submission, and earnestness, and
more earnest if it were possible obtain, that my contrymen by your means
may have the word preached, even the means, whereby they may live for ever with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. Grant them this my Lords
though I die for it. Oh I would think it an happy death, which should make
me the first messenger to carry such joyful news unto the blessed Luke. 16.
Saints, and angels in heaven, as that Wales were converted from sin. And
this the Lord knoeth is the only scope of my writing, and not the discrediting,
and galling of our lord-bishops. Let not their places withstand the salvation
of my brethren, and the true service of God among them, and if ever I either
write, or speak more against them, any further then their sears are like to be
the ruin of her Majesty and your Hh. let it cost me my life. Hear me in
this suit, good my Lords, the reward whereof, your souls shall find,
otherwise, I am likelye to become a wearisome, and an importunate suitor unto
you. The countenance of that creature is as yet unseen, that shall enforce me
(by the lords assistance to take a denial at your hands.

The cause is so just, that if it were (as sometimes it was by the Act. 17.19.
Apostle himself decided), in the Athenians Areopago, a court for heathen
justice of famous and celebrated memory, I doubt not but it should be heard.
And shall it not have justice at the christian counsel table of England?
Justice my Ll. I say, for I seek nothing else, but that the statutes of the God
of judgment and justice, may be made known in my dear country, where now
they are unheard off, Then the which, I know not what can be more just,
neither can I see what justice in truth, can be ministered by them that
neglecte this cause. Verelye, for mine own part (GOD ayding me) I will never
leave the suit, until I either obtain it at your hands; or bring the Lord in
vengeance and blood, to plead with you for repelling his own cause

Here I know it will be answered, that counselors can do nothing in the
matter, her Majesty has referted all unto the prelates, in church causes.
They have dealt with her, they cannot, they may not be heard. Be it that her
majesty has bin moved by you for the redress of the church, you should do it
again, and again, and never leave until you be heard. Great matters are never
brought to pass, without great and mighty endeavors. Our sins have
otherwise deserved, then that the Lord should at the first incline mercy unto
us, in the sight of her highness. would any of you alter any part of the
government of his family, being persuaded by leude flatterers, that all were
well, unless the abuse were showed, and you earnestly dealt with for a
reformation? And can you blame, that our sovereign is hardly drawn to reform
the Church, whose estate even in her hearing, is said daily out of the pulpit,
to be most flowrishing, whereas the deformity thereof is not made known unto
her? I know it is no small persuasion that should draw a Monarch, to alter and
establishe new laws; unless the unanswerable necessity thereof were made
known unto her or him. Her Majesty knows not (I speak as I am persuaded)
the exacting necessity that lies upon her shouldrrs, of re^^^ning the Church.
e She knows not the estate of her untaught and damned subjects to be as it
is. Wherefore serve Counselors, if her eyes must be every where to see every
thing? And what do your Hh. see, if you see not our case, and lament it? In
this point I grant her eyes should be her own chusers: but if of oversight the
waightiest matters be omitted, should not you my Ll. put her in mind hereof,
and in submission entreat her, yea and never leave entreating, until she
yield, to turn away the wrath of God from her self and her kingdom, by
abolishing ungodly ordinances, and restoring beutie unto Sio^. Which of you is
he that has, that does, or will perform this duty to our Sovereign? which
of you will make known unto her this which I have written? I know I shall be
traducted, (and torn again in pieces with slanders) as a seditious firebrand
of new attemptes, to stir up her people to innovation, at the least, let me be
made known unto her by this name, that some way I may come to the trial of my
cause in hand, and my warrantable proceedings therein. I am neither papist,
Annabaptist, libertine, familian, one that dares separate himself from the
godly assemblies in this land, where the word preached sounds, nor yet one
that holds any thing, either in substance or circumstance contrary to the
wholesome doctrine expressed or included in Gods revealed word, of the old and
new testament: therefore let me have the benefit of a Christian, if not of a
christian subject, not to be condemned before my cause be heard; which is not
mine own, but the cause of God his Churches, my countries and your Hh. I have
forged the most notable slanders that ever were coined, or else the estate of
my country is most miserable, and yours no less lamentable if it so continue.
And if you make not the same known unto her Majesty, and labor not to amend
it, the Lord make Queen Elizabeth and her crown free from the blood of her
destroyed people, and I pray God my Ll. their souls be not required at your
hands, and the Earl of Pembrokes, when you and he shall not be able to
answer for them. But it may be you will ay, that the work is so difficult
that it cannot possibly be performed. Do what lies in you, and then the
Lord is answered. The farther you wade herein, the easier will be the
passage. Because it is a work of difficulty, therefore must you needs hinder
the same by law, as you do in tollerating these abuses? Because the whole work
is difficult, therefore shall it not be begone? Because it is a hard matter to
plant the ordinance of God, therefore must the breach thereof be in force and
maintained? Because in Canaan, the sons of Nom. 13.14.
Anak, and towns walled up to heaven (mountains of pietended excuses) have bin
seen, therefore must you needs suffer the people brought by her Majesty, out
of Egypt, to remain still in the wilderness, on this side lordan, even under
those men, the dumb ministers, nonresidents, L. Bb. I mean, who are fit for
nothing, but to be captains, Nom. 14.4.
(whenever opportunity shall serve) to bring them again into Egypt? Because
our land by reason of our continuance in sin, and that we have not had
skillful workmen among us, does not now bring forth religion and godliness in
the measure it should, therefore must you needs be sure, that prophanenes and
Atheism shall be sown, and the breach of Gods law flowrishe there in the persons
of these men. Therefore the just Lord will be just, in Read Ezekiel. 2^ Zeph. 3.3.
the midst of you, whenever he reckons for these things, because you are
so far from doing what you may, in the planting of godliness, that you suffer
impiety against his majesty to bear sway, and that by law and authority?
Concerning the hardness of the work, this I make knoen unto you, that if you
will be ruled by the canon of the word, you shall be abl with eas, and the good
liking of your people, to do so much therein, as you shall deliver your own
lives from the heavy wrath of God. But if that rule shall not take place, any
farther then it may stand with the countenance of L. bish. and other
corruptions of the Ecclesiastical state (for as concerning the civil
government, the Lord knows how far I am from dealing with it) I see not
what you can say unto the Lord, when he has made you and your people, an
astonishme^t, and an hissing unto all the nations under heaven: but Nehem. 9.39.
surely thou art just in all that is come upon us, for we would not be ruled
by thy word.

Well, the word teaches and requires 2. things, and no more of you in this
work. In both it requires your obedience if you would be directed by it.
First, it requires that Wales may be redressed, by proclaiming that commission
given by our Savior Christ unto his Apostles in every corner thereof, Math.
28.19.
and both the parts of the commission, it requires to be kept inviolable, as
well that, of go preach and baptize as the other, of teach them to observe
whotsoeuer I have commanded you. Secondly, while you stay the Lords leisure, to
raise up fit men for this work in every congregation, it requires that the
people where preachers cannot be placed at the first, may have some stay, that
inconveniences be avoided. For the Lord will not have religion so indiscreetly
established, as that inco^ueniences (as much as may be) be not wisely
prevented. In effecting hereof, two things are to be looked unto, both of them
greatly furthering the work. First the blessing of God is to be labored for,
by humbling your selves and your people, with Daniel before the Lord, Dan.
9.1.3.
in fasting and prayer, and then you shall see, he will be with your endeavors.
Secondly, you must enjoin every man according unto his place, to have a hand
in this work, and encourage the gentlemen, and people that shall be found
forward, by gracing and countenancing them for their forwardnes in religion,
and showing that the more forward they be, the more credit they are like to
purchase with your Hh. And you must not suffer an uncircumcised mouth to bring
Nomb. 14.36
a slander upon that good land whereunto the Lord offers to bring you and
your people, if you would obey, much less to lift up a Nom. 14.10.
ston against Caleb or Ioshuah, that withstand the fury of a who I wicked
host in the Lords defense. For otherwise, if you suffer all to sit still, and
look upon our desolations; the most to live on the sweetness of our ruins,
and discountenance all that labor therein: you can look for nothing else
shortly, but this lamentable complaint, and it is a great work of God, that we
have not hard the same long ago, of every professor in this land. Whither shall
Deuteronomy. 1.18.
we go? our brethren, and their hard entertainment hane discouraged our
hearts: would to Nom. 14.2.4.
God that we had died in the land of Egypt, would to God we were dead: were it
not better for us to turn into Egypt? come let us make a captain, and return
thither. The land in deed is a good land, whereunto when our soueueraigne
brought us out of Egypt, we intended to make our journey: but alas, we are
never able to stand against the poverty, losses, imprisonment, discountenance
by our superionrs; that our brethren have sustained, which have set their faces
toward this land, never able to swalow up the slanders, and bitter names of
Puritanes, precisians, traitors, sedicious libellers, that we see, raised
against those that would bring us thither. And therefore my Ll. in vain shall you
use other means, and leave this vnattemted.

The redress of Wales consists of two parts both must be speedily set
upon by your Hh. or else certainly the judgments of God will find you out.
First you must abolish out of the Church, whatsoever you find to be a breach
of Gods ordinance (as I have proved dumb ministers, nonresidents, and 1. bish.
to be) or else your reformation will be little better, then that of the 2. King.
17.33.
Samaritans, who feared Jehovah, but worshipped their own gods. Secondly you
must place as many godly learned, as can be found, to call the people, and see
them provided for. If the complaint be made for want of sufficient men, and
sufficient stale for their livings: for the men, take al those whom the lord
has made fit for this work, and he can require no more at your hands until
he raise more, which if he never do, your good endeavors and encouragements
unto students and others, not being wanting to bring this to pass, he cannot
in justice punish you, though your people be not taught. Because you have
seen al those well bestowed, whom he quallified for that calling, and so do now
expect a blessing from him upon your labors, that you might send more. The
subterfudge will be, but the covert of a net, to ask (as commonly our prelates
do) how there should be possibly found, as many learned men as Wales
requires, seeing they who are found, are not placed there. And do you deal
well with the lord, that be cause al cannot be brought at once to serve him, as
he wills, therefore they that may shall not? The same is to be said of the
ministers livings. Remove the dumb ministers, nonfide^ts, the L. bb. (if you
will not do this, you go beside the word of God, and so there is no direction
for you) and there will be mo livings void, able to maintain godly ministers,
then shall be, I fear me, good men found to supply the places. And verily, I
marvel what men persuade themselves, the Lord to be, whereas they think he
can be satisfied with such sielie shifts? is it not a strange matter, to find
Church livings in Wales for L. bb. nonreside^ts, and idols, to sin against
God, and starve souls withal, and deny any to be there, for godly ministers do
honor God, and work the salvation of his people. The children must starve for
want of bread, because the dogs before their eyes must be fed therewith. Good
reason? yea, but the removing of those men, would be likely to set the land on
fire. Mark how sutile the devil is, in the maintenance of his kingdom. When
godly ministers are deprined, because they will not link themselves with wicked
B. b to betraie the kingdonm of Christ, and overthrow the laws of this land,
there is no inconvenience sered. But if satan's messengers be once shoued at:
behold, the land will not be able to bear this loss. I grant in deed my Ll.
that men which make no conscience for gain sake, to break the law of the
eternal, and massaker souls (as these do) are dangerous subjects, and not to
be trusted any further, then they are fed.

The stay therefore must be either in regard of these men, or the common
people. These men are of 2. sorts, some few have gifts for the ministry, those
would be employed that way, and compelled to be faithful. The most of them
are unsavory salt, notwithstanding far be it that they and their families,
should be turned unto the wide world to seek their livings, and therefore some
part of that which now they possess with sacrilege, bestowed upon them, being
out of the ministry, they might enjoy with a good conscience. And a small
thing this way allotted unto them, would be blessed, whereas whatsoever now
they possess is execrable. For the people, the stay for them is, either in
regard of the public meetings on the Sabbath, or the sacraments, marriage, and
burial. For the keeping of the Sabbath. The word requires they should, if
possibly they can, resort where preaching is, until good ministers be placed
in every parrish. If the places be too far, as commonly our parrishes be very
large, and it is not likely in short time to plant preachers, so near
together, as the people may every Sabbath resort to them, they must be enjoined
to meet together in their parish churches, and some discreet man from among
themselves appointed to read the word, and use some form of prayers as shall be
thought meetest by the advice of the godly learned. Concerning the sacraments,
the word requires they should resort unto a preaching minister for them, There
is adultery amongst the ^^fidels, therefore a minister is not essentially
required in Matrimonle. Ruth 4.10.11.
and not attempt to keep their children unbaptized any longer then they must
of necessity. Marriage is most conveniently to be done by the minister. But it
is no proper essential work of the a minister, and therefore may be solemnised
by others, at the magistrates appointment. Concerning burial, it is a work of
christian charity, and being the last duty that we are to perform toward
the departed, we ought to accompany them decently, and orderly, with all
comeliness unto the grave. The word mentions or includes no form of prayers
used at burials, therefore they are superfluous, nether is the minister as in an
actio^ belonginge to his office, to have any more to do herein, then any other
of the brethren

Thus have I set down unto your Hh. the only course in regard of substance,
that the word waranteth to be taken in such a deformed estate, as ours is. And
now my Ll. let my counsel be acceptable unto you, Dan. 4.24.
break off your sins, by rooting out these plants, which the Lord never
planted in his vineyard, and your iniquities by adoring the same, as much as in
you lies, so there may be an healing of your former ouer-sight. If not, the
lords face will be against you, yours, and the whole land for evil and not for
good. O my Ll. is it not a miserable case, that me^ should so live under your
government in this life, as they cannot possibly but live in hell in the life to
come. O my Ll. heaen cannot be obtained when we are gone; Oh my Ll. now is the
time for the gospel to flowrish in Wales or never; Oh my Ll. if her Majesty,
and your Hh. (whom from my very heart I wish the Lord to bless) should be
gone the way of all the world, for mine own part, the very staff of my hope,
to see any good done amongst my brethren, should be broken. Blame me not
therefore, if I deal earnestly in a cause of so great a moment, and so
unlikely to be obtained of our woeful posterities, whom my suit in a most nere
sort concerns. Oh why should they have cause to say, the Lord be judge
between us, and the governors, which were under Queen Elizabeth in the
days of our fathers, for they might have opened our eyes, and healed our
wounds, which now, (alas) are desperate and past recovery.

It is now full 29. years and upward, since Babylon has bin ouerthrown in
Wales, rather by the voice of her Majesty's good laws, (whom good Lord forget
not for this work) then by the sound of any trumpet, from the mouths of the
sons of Aaron among us. But alas, what shall we and our posterity be the
better for this, if Syon be not built. And what comfort can Zerubabell or
nehemiah have to bring a people out of Babylon, if they mean but to reaedifie
Sbilo, seeing it is the beauty of Syon, wherein the Lord delights. We have
cause indeed to thank God, that this wicked eitie has been by her Majesty
in some sort broken downer but we are never the better, seeing the walls of
Sion lie even with the ground. Now for the space 28. years, no man greatly
labored to her majesty, the Parliament, your Hh. or to the people themselves,
either by speaking or writing in the behalf of either of these unreconcilable
eities. Men belike thinking no more to be required at their hands, then the
razng of Babell, and the devil as yet contenting himself with Bethel. The last
year, as I am almost pesuaded, the very same day, or by all likly-hood the
very same week: upon a sudden, the enterprises of the building of both, in 2.
several books, issuing from two of the remotest corners in our land
(South Wales, and North Wales) was taken in hand. The one of the books
pleading the cause of Sion, coming forch privileged by public authority, and
alowa^ce, was directed unto her majesty and the Parliament, requiring at their
hands, by virtue of the lords own mandatory letters, the performance of this
work, showing by evidence of gretest antiquity, this to be required of duty
at their hands, as a part of the homage due unto his highness, whose feudaries
and vassalles, all the princes and states under heaven must acknowledge
themselves to be, and a portion of that inheritance, being theirs by liniall
descent from their predecessors, the godly kings and rulers, who time out of
mind, always laid their shulders unto this burden. The other written in
Welsh, printed in an obscure cave in Northwales, published by an author
unknown, Y druch Christ. anogaw.
and more un learned, (for I think he had never read any thing, but the
common published resolution of R. P. a book containing many substantial
errors, friar Rush, and other shameful fables) stood to by none, and having
no reasons to show why his Babylon should be reaedified, it contained it self
within the hands of a few simple private men and never durst unto this hour,
be made known unto your Hh. Both the books in this thing had the same success,
in that both together they fell into the hands of the prelates, who as they
pretend are enemies unto both places, but undoubtedly unto Syon, especially, as
it appeared by their hard dealing with the pation of that cause, whereas the
fautors of the other, were either not at all dealt with, or very courteously
entertained of the^. The reason of their enmity unto both: but their hatred
unto Syon, is, that never I fear me, meaning to go thither, This is spoken in
regard of the Church-gouermen.
and constrained by law to be enemies unto the other, they have of the gold of
Caldea, and the dross of Jerusalem compacted the^ a city, wherewith they mean
to content themselves, until they return unto Babel again, or (the Lord be
merciful unto them) unto a worse place. Have they not therefore good cause to be
the more beholding unto the one for the gold, then to the other for the
dross? Well my Ll. be you assured hereof, that they who stirred up both these
instruments both at one time, will never suffer them to cease, until in Wales,
either a church of Christ, or a synagogue of satan be built. Out of question,
the concurring of both causes shows, that the Lord has some secreat work
in the matter. Satan's instruments for their parts, were never busier, since her
Majesty's reign, then they are at this hour, and shall be still? they
trecherously against the laws of God and this land, seek to bring the people
again unto Egypt. I acording unto both dutifully endeavor, never to let them
rest, until it please God, by her Majesty and your Hh. to bring them within
the land of promise, no though they were upon mount Nebo, whence with their
eyes they might view the same. They have dealt, and deal secretly with poor
souls in dark corners, and dare not make known their fabulous cause. I have
dealt all this while, in the face of the sun, and now before your Hh. I want
not a good cause, and by the grace of God, it shall not want a defender, or
hide the face as long as I live. Whether you countenance it or no, I know it
shall one day prevail, when this will be the Lord knows best: but the matter
is, whether you will embrace christ in the building of his church or satan in
continuing the breaches thereof. Therefore my Ll. entertain THIS CAUSE, and you
give satan the foil, reject this, and you streng then him. And try, if you
deny it the hearing, whether the very papists in this land, will not be
thereby encouraged to supplicate unto your Hh. that you would grant them the
liberty of their seared consciences, to commit public idolatry.

All that hitherto I have spoken, I have spoken, either in the cause of christ,
which is a good cause, or in the cause of satan. If I seek the building of his
synagog, will you let me live? if of the church of christ, will you deny me your
help? which yet again, and again in the name of the eternal God, I require
and for the precious death and passions sake of Jesus christ I earnestly desire
at your hands. My Ll. as you would have the Lord to entertain your souls in
the life to come, as you would have him show you any mercy, as you love her
Majesty and her life, as you would have the continuance of her reign over us,
which the lord undoubtedly thretneth to shorten, because he would bring ruin
upon you and us all, for the contempt of his truth, as you would not have
your names razed from under heaven, as you would not have the Lord to bring
upon us the Spanish, Italian Romish, or Guisian forces, as you would not have
those, who shall live to see the desolation and desperate sorrow, which the
Lord is to bring upon this land, not abide to see, you, and your children
ride or go in the streets, as you would not have the most contemptible to
stretche forth his hand upon the dearest things you possess, and offer
violence before your eyes, unto the fruit of your bodies: so entertain this
cause, grant this suite, and have a care of the Lords true service, in Wales:
etherwise I fear me, the vengeance of God will never leave you and your
posterities, as long as there is a man of your houses under heaven. And
notwithstanding the case of the Earl of Pembroke is never the better, if he
still presume to bear rule within these gates, where the Lords Sabboths are not
sanctified.

Ezekiel in deed is not now living, to put you in mind of the necessity of
redressing of things amiss, by laying open the corruptions of all estates
under your government, as he does, cap. 22, of his prophecy. His words I
will set down, that your Hh. may way our estate with the time wherein the
prophet lived, and see whether the Lord will spare you and us, if we still
provoke him to smite. There is a conspiracy of her prophets in the midst
thereof, Ezekiel. 22.25.26.27.28.29.
faith the prophet, like a roaring lion, ravening the pray, they have devoured
fowls: they have taken the riches and precious things: they have made her
many widows in the midst thereof: her priests have broken my law, and have
defiled mine holy things: they have put no difference between the holy and
profane, neither discerned between the unclean and the clean, and have hidd
their eyes from my Saboth, and I am profaned among them. Her princes in the
midst thereof are like wolves, ravening the prey, to shed blood, and to destroy
souls for their own covetous lucre. And her I rophets have dawbed the^ with
untempered mortar, seeing vanities, and divining hes unto them, saying: thus
says the Lord Jehovah, when Jehovah has not spoken. The people of the land
have violently oppressed by spoiling and robbing, and have vexed the poor and
needy: yea, they have oppressed the stranger against right. Thus far Ezekiel.
Be the sins of our prophets, of our princes, and of our people the same, that
hear he speaks against, be they greater, or be they less: yet without
controversy, Verse. 30
if the Lord may say, I have sought for a man among the cou^sellors of
England, thatshuld make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the
land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none: then woe be unto us, for
that shall follow, which is set down in the prophet. Therefore have I powted
out mine indignation upon them, Verse. 31
and consumed them with the fire of my wrath: their own ways have I rendered
upon their heads, says the Lord Jehovah. And unless there were just cause to
think that this Lord had either already, or shortly meant to pronounce this
sentence against us, we might contemn and scorn at the carped assaults of
the Spaniards, or any other the enemies of the gospel and her Majesty's
whosoever. But as long as we give not the right hand unto the Lord by entering
into his sanctuary, we have just cause to fear a nation that is no nation,
much more a people in number as the sand, which is by the sea shore. Our leags
and most stable covenants with the enemies the lord will soon disanull,
standing thus at the staffes end with his majesty as we do. And as Ierem. 37.
Jeremy said unto the king, and states in his time: though we had smitten the
whole host of the Spanyardes (that intend our overthrow) and there remained
bur wounded men among them: yet should every man rise up in his tent, and
ouerrun this land. Let us look assuredly, whenever the abiecte and
contemptible enemy shall assail us, abject and contemptible I say, in all
respects in comparison of the value and strength of our men and munition (and
the lord increase them a thousand fold more) that this God whose service is so
little esteemed of us, will send a terror into the hearts of our valiantest, and
stoutest men: so that he, whose heart is as the heart of a lion, shall become
as weak as water: and one enenimie shall chase a thousand of us, because the
hand of the lord will be against us for our sins. It is not therefore the
Spanishe furniture and preparations: but the sins within the land, that we
are most of all to fear. For although the army of the Spanyarde were consumed
with the arrows of famine: although the contagious, and devouring pestilence
had eaten them up by thousands: although their tottering ships were dispersed
and carried away with the whirle-winde and tempest: although madness and
astonishment were amongst them, from him that sits in the throne, unto her
that grindeth in the mil: although the lords revenging sword in the hand of the
savage Turk had so prevailed against them, as it had left none in that
uncircumcised host, but languishing and foiled men, notwithstanding a
conte^ptible and withered remnant of the plague and famine: a navy of wind
and weather-shaken ships: a refuse of feeble and discomfited men, shall be
sufficiently able to prevail against this land, unless an other course be
taken for Gods glory in Wales by your Hh. then hitherto has been.

If I did speak unto infidels and ungodly atheists, I know I should not be so
plain, because unto such the truth is at sometimes unseasonably spoken. But I
speak unto your Hh. that have undertaken the profession of Christianity, and
therefore should be at all times fit to hear the truth of your God. And I
know no temporizing truth, no temporising judgments of God against sin, no
truth that is to be concealed unto Christians, because their Hh. cannot brook
the same, no truth my LL that is, either not at all, or minsinglye not to be
uttered, because states love not to hear thereof. So that I was in this
matter, not to consider what your high places were content to hear but what was
the duty of your high places to hear. And therefore I should think it, I
protest an undutiful and flattering petition, to entreat your Hh. not to be
offended with me, for uttering the truth. As though I supposed you would
think it wonderful that a man should adventure to speak even in the cause of
his GOD, any farther then stood with your good liking.

I know the infirmities and wants of men that deal in good causes, are commonly
beaten upon the bak of the cause they handle. Therefore the Lord knoeth how
careful I have been to keep it unspotted, and my self out of all
unnecessary danger. Setting down nothing before I had weighed what might
ensue, either in regard of the matter, or manner of delivery. This I am assured,
that in the whole work, there is nothing whereby any law of the land can
take hold of me. But why did I publish a matter of such weight, before I
acquainted your Hh. therewith? Grant the pitition, and I will redeem mine
oversight herein, (if it can be proved any, which I know to be none) with the
loss of my life: if you do not mean to yield unto it, neither would you have
done it being moved thereunto by private writing. The cause I make known; to
the end it may be granted, and herein let not my life be precious unto me, upon
the necessity of the publishing thereof I stand: because that the world may
see, when you redress those things, that you did nothing, which you durst
leave undone, unless you would have brought swift destruction upon your
selves, and the whole land. But what folly is it to think, that such great
matters in our days will be reformed? Rather what injury do they to your Hh.
that think you will countenance any longer the breach of Gods laws. And in
this point let the good opinion, that they which aleadge such pretenses
conceive, be weighed with my dutiful persuasions of your Hh. and both our
causes judged accordingly. For mine own part, I think the majesty of the cause
to be such, as they who are the lords, dare not but entertain it, and tremble
to think that all this while it has been so carelessly attended upon. And it is
in the behalf thereof, that I have presumed to deal with you, who other-wise
durst not have suffered my voice to be hard in the ears of the rulers of my
people. Let what I have written be examined, yea by mine adversaries them
selves, (if I have any) and it shall appear that I have made a conscience how
I have dealt with my superiors, especially those concerning whom it is said,
you are gods, least I should seem to leave behind me the least print, of a
mind in any sort tending to diffame them or their government. As I have
been careful hereof: so let the Lord, yea and no otherwise, (which I speak as
far as my corruptions do permit) grant this cause and my self also if it be
his will, favor in your eyes. Indeed in regard of the cause I commandatory
wise unto your Hh. but in regard of my self, I come in fear and trembling, as
unto the lords vicegerents, entreating most humbly, that the dignity of so
worthy a cause be thought off, nothing the more dishonorably: because it is
brought in my hands. And I protest, in respect of my sins, that the Lord may
justly deny it the favor it deserves in your eyes, because I am a dealer
therein. But this should be no cause why your Hh. should give it a repulse. For
in the eyes and ears of all the world I make it known, that it is the cause of
the living god, wherein I deal, and that if it had been possible for me to
have written more humbly and dutifully, I had done it. Or if I had seen any
way, that might have been likelier to preuail with my superiors then this
course: I take the Lord to record unto my soul, that I would not have used
this. And I would to GOD I could tell how to make the cause plaucible. So far I
am from setting down any thing, that might carry with it any show of occasion
to hinder and disgrace the same. Well, I have done my endeavor: the success I
expect at the lords hands, unto whom I commend the cause, and the salvation of
that pore people.

The sword of justice (reached unto you by the Lord himself, to take
punishment of him only that is an Rom 13.4.
evil doer, I fear not: because I have not offended. If it should be drawn
against me, for this action the president would be such as they, who meant
hereafter to prophecy unto your Hh. might be advisedly counseled, Micha. 2.6.
not to prophisie, and the Lord as a token of your just destruction to ensue,
would say they shall not prophecy nor take shame. If I have spoken any untruth,
bear witness thereof, if a truth, I dare by the lords assistance stand to it,
and demand what he is, that will presume to object, and throw himself unto the
vengeance of God, by punishing me an innocent? The Lord may for my other
sins, bring mine head unto the grave with blood: but in this cause, what have
I offended? and therefore undoubted woe will betide him that shall molest me for
this work, Howsoever it be, thus I have performed a duty toward the Lord,
and his church, my country and your Hh. which I would do if it were to be
done again, though I were sure to endanger my life for it. And be it known.
that I am not afraid of earth in this cause. And if I perish, I perish, my
comfort is that I know whether to go, and in that day, wherein the secreats of
all hearts shabe manifested, the sincerity of my cause also shall appear. It
is enough for me that howsoever I be miserable in regard of my sins, yet unto
Christ, I both live and die, and purpose by his grace, if my life should be
prloonged to live herafter, not unto my self, but unto him and to his church,
otherwise then hithertoo I have done. The Lord is able to raise up those that
are of purer hands and lips then I am to speak and write in the cause of his
honor in Wales, and the Lord make them, whosoever they shall be never to be
wanting unto so good a cause, the which because it may be the Lords pleasure,
I shall leave them behind me in the world, I earnestly and vehemently
commend unto them as by this my will and testament: And have you pore Wales in
remembrance, good my Lords, by establishing the word preached there, that the
blessing of many a saved soul therein, may follow her majesty, and your Hh.
overtake you, light upon you, and stick unto you for ever. The eternal God
give her Majesty and your Hh. the honor of building his church in Wales,
multiply the days of her peace over us, bless her and you, so in this life,
that in the life to come the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven may be her
and your portion. so be it good Lord.

Were my dutiful heart toward your Hh. thoroughly known, then I doubt not,
but I should be better known unto you then by my name.

JOHN PENRI.

TO THE READER.
Master D. SOMES book was published this day, I have read it. The man I
reverence from my heart as a godly and learned man. The reasons he uses
against me, in the questions of the reading ministry, and communicating with
them, I had answered as you may see in this book before he had written. They
are faulty, either because they desire that for granted which is the
question, or make those things of like nature, wherein there is a great
dissimilitude, as the arguments drawn from the magistracy and the Leuiticall
Priesthood. I have answered the^. The cause, and the reverence I owe unto the
man, though the reasons he uses, deserve not to be twice read over) will
enforce me to answer him at large. There be certain faults escaped in the
print, bear with them.


