The braineles blessing of the Bull
The horns, the heads and all,
Light on their squint eyed skonses full
That boweth their knees to Ball.

The cancred curse that would consume this realm with wrack and ruin,
Return to Rome with fire and fume, to bring the Pope in tune:
If neither curse, nor blessyng bare, may mend these parties throw,
I then bequeath (cursed as they are) to Plutoes kingdom now.

WAS never world so far from orders rule,
That men durst speak such saucy words of Kings
Nor never Pope so like an Ass or Mule,
Or dunghyll Cock to crow and clap his wings.
Stand back good dogs, the Bull he leapes and flinges
He bleates and bleathes as he a baightyng were,
And fomes at mouth, like Boar with bristled hear.
A beastlye sound, comes runnyng from his paunch,
He beats the ground with foot, with hip and haunch:
As though hell gates should open at his call,
And at his beck, the heavens high should fall.
O Satan's son, O Pope puffed up with pride,
What makes thee claim the clouds where God does dwell?
When thou art known the glorious greedy guide
That leads in pomp poor seelye souls to hell.
The pumpe of ship has not so foul a smell
As has the smoke and fume that flames from thee,
O graceles grace, O rotten hollow tree.
The branches bud, but never bring forth leaves,
Thy come is dead, when Reaper looks for sheaues:
Thy gold is glass, and glistereth gay a while,
Till tromperie comes, and makes the world to smyle.
Who bad thee bliss? O Buzzarde blind of sight,
Buylt God his church upon such clots of clay?
Thou do blaspheme thereby the GOD of might,
And robbest with craft his honor clean away.
Curse whom thou list, he better thryues that day,
Bless whom thou wylt, and I dare gage my head:
For all thy charms, he brynges a fool to bed.
Book bell and syse, are bables fit for those
That gape for flies, where Waspes and Hornets blows,
The pardonies box, wherein thy relics lie,
Does smell like Fox, or Swyne shut up in stye.
A Pope was wont to be an odious name
Within our land, and scrapt out of our scroules,
And now the Pope is grown so far past shame
That he can walk with open face in Poules.
Go home mad Bull to Rome, and pardon souls
That pyne away in Purgatory pains,
Go triumph there, where credit most remains.
Thy date is out in England long ago,
For Ridley gave the Bull so great a blow
He never durst apeach this land till now,
In bullyng time, he met with Hardyngs Cow.
A Calfe or twain has here ben gotten since,
Whose heads were sold of late in butcher row
Come cheap Calves heads, and bring in Peter pence,
Though some are bought, our butchers look for mo.
For Walthams calves, to Tiburne needs must go
To suck a bull, and meet a butchers axe,
The Shambles full is stuffed, with pretty knacks:
As Goat, and Lamb, and Sheep of three score year,
We have good hope, calves heads will not be dear
If Hardyngs cow be bulled as she ought,
Calves heads enough for little will be bought.
The Pope does naught, but practice mischief still,
And lets his Bull run riot for his ease:
But whiles his Calves are drawn up Holborne hill,
Both Bull and Cow are safe beyond the seas.
O that it might our holy father please
To come himself, and hang but half an hour,
With such poor friends as here maintain his power.
I say no more, for fear the babes awake
That hold with Pope, and hang for Hardyngs sake,
Some knackes now lurkes, that we shall know full plain,
When Hoballes Ox bulls Hardyngs cow again.
I scorn to write a vearce in any frame,
To answer words that rayled have so much
Yet baightyng often, may make a Bull so tame
That every dog that comes, may have a twitch.
I here protest, if that my power were such
By pen or skyll, to chafe the Bull at stake,
I would be glad some further sport to make.
But since I want the cunnyng and the art,
To baight the beast, and play the Mastiffs part:
Let this suffice to let you think in deed,
I hate the Bull, and all the Romish breed.
FINIS.
Imprinted at S. Katherins beside the Tower of London, over against the Bear
dance, by Alexander Lacie.


