Save a Thief from the Gallows and he will hang thee if he can:
Or, The merciful Father, and the merciless Son.
To the tune of, Fortune my Foe.
gallows scene I am Giltles.


Save my Father* I am Gilty.




YOu disobedient children mark my fall,
And at my timelesse end take warning all.
Against my own dear Father have I done
A deed the like did never graceless Son.
In blooming years I was enticed to sin,
Ere I perceived what danger lay therein:
And so from day to day, unto this hour,
To leave the same I had not any power.
My Mother dead, my Father cockered me,
As men will do when motherlesse we be,
And nothing then he thought for me too dear,
Which brought me thus into a graceless fear.
And when as I to elder years did grow,
By wicked courses got I timelesse woe:
Each vain delight belonging to young men,
Deceived me, and brought my ruin then.
The deadly sins that are in number seven,
Without more grace has lost my joys in heaven:
From first to last of those most cursed crimes,
Have made me now a wonder of these times.
For wanting means to nourish up delight,
I went the wrong, and left the ways of right:
(...)ich to maintain, my father being grown poor,
(...) getting God, I daily robbed for more.
(...) times he saved me from the Gallow tree,
(...) ^^^es he cast himself in debt for me,
(...) he set me up in good estate.
(...) ^eepe me from ^ntimely fate.
(...) ^rouerb is fulfilled here,
(...) from gallows finds it dear:
^
So wanting means still to relieve my need,
Put me in mind to do a hateful deed,
And seek by blood the highway unto sin,
Who wanting grace I soon grew perfect in.
My Fathers brother of good livings known,
Being dead, as next of kin they were mine own:
The which I wrought with these accursed hands,
To be the heir of all mines Uncles lands.
With mind prepared for murder, thus I went
Into the field which he did much frequent:
Where meeting him with mine own fathers knife,
Which I had stolen I took full soon his life.
And laid it then all bloody by his side,
That all might see my Uncle therewith did,
And challenged it my Fathers knife to be,
When people came the murdered corpse to see.
O homicide, O cursed viprous brood,
Like Caine, to seek my dearest Fathers blood:
My own dear Father being thus betraide.
I his own child the evidence was made.
So judged to death for that he never did,
The Lord in mercy did the same forbid:
For as he was to execution led,
A world of torments in my bosom bred.
To see him stand upon the Gallow tree,
From which before (good man) he saved me,
I could not choose but tell what I had done,
And so confess my self a wicked son.
Gods judgment now is rightly shown, said I,
Dear Father I have (...)
^
The confession and repentance of George Sanders Gentleman late of Shugh in the
County of Hereford, who unnaturally killed his Uncle, and accused his own
Father for the murder: but by Gods providence being discovered, he dyed for the
same. Where he writ this Song with his own hand.

To the tune of Fortune my Foe.
Lord bring my Soul out of Prison.

Psalm. 142.7.


WHereat the people all in that same place,
There praised God that gave me so much grace,
To quit my Father from that crying sin,
Where I with blood-red streams am drowned in.
My Father saved and I to prison sent,
Where now I live with many a sad lament:
Which when you hear, you cannot choose but say,
Repentance comes before my dying day.
His repentance in prison.
To the same tune.
Among Lions fell in Daniels Den am I,
In lowest prison cast with Jeremy,
Fed with Elias by the Ravens fell,
And placed with Jonas in the maw of Hell.
Naked with Esau, fearful do I walk,
Dumb with old Zachary silent do I talk,
Afflictions bread with Micha is my food,
And with the Prophet drink I sorrows flood.
As poor as Job even now so poor am I,
Despised with Lazarus in great misery,
Banished with David from my native land;
Cast up with Jonas on the Ninivite^ sand.
Made blind with Tobit by the swallows dung,
And with poor Joseph cast in prison strong;
I weep with Mary who had lost her Master,
And run with Peter who should run the faster.
I sinned have, for sin God cursed the ground,
I sinned have, for sin the world was drowned;
I sinned have, sin Sodom set on fire,
Also for sin did Egypt feel Gods ire.
I sinned have, for sin did Adam die,
I sinned have, sin caused David's cry;
I sinned have, and for sin Satan fell,
From an high Angel to a Devil in Hell.
Shall David weep for sin, and shall not I,
Shall Mary weep, and shall my eyes be dry?
Shall Esau weep, and shall not I weep more?
Did Peter weep, such tears let me have store.
Did Mary weep for loss of Master dear?
Did Martha weep for sorrow touched full near?
Spring eyes with tears to wash his sacred feet,
That for my sins did shed his blood most sweet.
Larke-like I fly unto thy living Spring,
Desiring pardon of my heavenly King;
Past worldly hope, now like the thief on tree,
I only fix my faith and hope on thee.
Look back to me as thou did unto Peter,
Speak to my soul as to the thief more sweeter?
Oh spy me out with Zache in the tree;
And with good Bartholomew call me Lord to thee.
Oh let me now with holy Abraham spy
A saving Ram that Isaac may not die;
Oh let me live for to sound out thy praise,
That I may show thy mercy in my days.
Make me now a Sparrow in thy house O King,
That Swallow-like I may there sit and sing.
O let me in thy Temple keep a door,
That I may praise thy name for evermore.
George Sande^^

FINIS.
Printed at London for Edw^^ (...)


