The woeful lamentation of Mistress Jane Shore a Goldsmiths wife of London,
sometimes K. Edwards Concubine, who for her wanton life came to a most
miserable end.
Set forth for an example to all lewd women.
To the tune of Live with me.
depiction of Jane Shore

IF Rosamond that was so fair,
Had cause her sorrows to declare,
^hen let Jane Shore with sorrow sing,
that was beloved of a King:
^hen wanton wives in time amend,
(...) love and beauty will have end.
(...) ^^^ den years my beauty bright,
(...) ^oued dear of Lord and Knight:
^ut yet the love that they required,
(...) then was not as my friends desired.
My Parents they for thirst of gain,
A husband for me did obtain:
and I their pleasure to fulfill,
^as forced to wed against my will.
(...) Matthew Shore I was a wife,
^ill Lust brought ruin to my life:
and then my life so lewdly spent,
now makes my soul for to lament.
^n Lumbardstreet I once did dwell,
(...) London yet can witness well:
^^ere many Gallants did behold
(...) ^eauty in a shop of gold.
(...) my plumes as wantons do,
^^^e sweet and secret friend to woo,
^^^ause my love I did not find,
agreeing to my wanton mind.
At last my name at Court did ring,
Into the ears of Englands King,
who came and liked, and love required,
^ut I made coy what he desired
(...) Mistress Blage a neighbor near,
^^^^e friendship I e^^eemed dear,
(...) ^^y it was a ga^^^nt t^ing,
(...) beloved of a King.
(...) ^^r persuasions I was led,
(...) ^o d^^^^^ my marriage bed,
(...) my wed^ed ^usband Shore,
(...) ^^^^s before
In heart and mind I did rejoice,
That I had made so sweet a choice:
and therefore did my state resign,
to be King Edwards Concubine.
From City then to Court I went,
And reapt the pleasures of content:
I had the joys that love did bring,
and knew the secrets of a King.
When I was thus advanced on high,
Commanding Edward with mine eye
for Mistress Blage I in short space,
obtained a living of his Grace.
No friend I had but in short time,
I made unto promotion clime:
but yet for all this costly pride,
my husband could not me abide.
His bed though wronged by a King,
His heart with grief did deadly sting:
from England soon he goes his way,
to end his life upon the Sea.
He could not live to see his fame,
Empaired by my wanton shame:
although a Prince of peerlesse might
did reap the pleasures of his right.
Long time I lived in the Court,
With Lords and Ladies of great port:
for when I smiled all men were glad*
and when I mourned my prince grew sad,
But yet an honest mind I bore,
To helpless people that were poor:
I still redrest the Orphans cry,
and saved their lives condemned to die.
I still had ruth on widows tears,
I succored babes of tender years:
and never looked for other gain,
but love and thanks for all my pain.
At last my Royal King did dye,
And then my days of woe drew dye;
for when K. Richard got the crown,
sweet Edwards friends were soon put down.
I was then punished for ye sin,
That I so long had lived in:
yea every one that was my friend,
that tyrant brought to timelesse end.
Then for my lewd and wanton life,
Who made a Strumpet of a Wife:
I penance did in London street,
in shameful manner in a sheet.
Where many thousands did me vi^^
That late in Court my credit knew:
which made ye tears run down my face
to think upon my foul disgrace.
Not thus content, they took from me,
My goods, my livings, and my fee:
and charged that none should me relieve
nor any succor to me give.
Then unto Mistress Blage I went,
To whom my Ie^els I had sent,
in hope thereby to ease my want,
when riches failed, and love grew scant
But she denied me the same,
When in my need for them I came:
to recompense my former love,
out of the doors she did me shoue.
Thus love did vanish with my state,
Which now my soul repents too late*
therefore example take by me,
that friendship parts in poverty.
But yet a friend amongst the rest,
Whom I before had seen distressed,
and saved his life being judged to di^*
did give me food to succor me.
For which by Law it was decreed,
That he was hanged for his good deed:
his death did grieve me ten times more,
then I had dyed my self therefore.
Then those to whom I had done good,
Durst not restore me any food:
whereby in vain I begged all day,
and still in street by night I lay.
My gowns beset with pearl and gold,
Were turned to simple garments cold:
my chains, and gems, and golden rings,
to filthy rags and loathsome things.
Thus was I scornd of maid and wife,
For leading s^^^ a wicked life:
both sucking babes, and children small*
did make a pastime of my fall.
I could no^ get one bit of bread,
Whereby my hunger might be fed:
nor drink but such as kennell yields,
or stinking ditches in the fields.
Thus weary of my life at length,
I yielded up my vital strength:
within a ditch of loathsome sent,
where carrion dogs do much frequent*
Which Ditch now since my dying day,
Is Shore-ditch called, as Writers say,
which is a witness for my sin,
for being Concubine to a King.
You wanton wives that fall to lust,
Be you assured that God is just,
whoredom shall not escape his hand,
nor bide unpunished in the Land.
If God to me such shame did bring,
That yielded only to a King,
how shall they escape that daily run
to practice s^^ne with every man.
You husbands match not but for love
Lest some misliking after prove:
women be warnd when you are (...)
what plagues are due to lustful livers.
Then wanton wives in time amend,
For love and beauty will have end.
FINIS.
At London printed by (...)

The second part of Jane Shore: wherein h^^ sorrowful husband bewaileth his
own esta^^, (...) wives wantonness, the wrongs of m^rriage, and the fall of
pride: a warning for all wanton women to take heed by.
To the tune of Live with me.
IF she that was fair Londons pride,
For beauty famed both far and wide,
With Swan-like song in sadness told
Her deep distresses manifold:
then in the same let me also,
now bear a part of such like woe.
The description of Jane Shore. This woman's beauty has been highly praised by
a famous Writer that lived in her time, named Sr Thomas Moore, who described
her in this manner: before her death she was poor and aged, her stature was
mean, her hair of a dark yellow, her face round and full, her eyes gray, her
body fat, white and smooth, her countenance cheerful like to her condition.
There is a Picture of hers now to be seen in London, it is such as she was
when she rose out of her bed in the morning, having nothing on but a rich
Mantle cast under one arm over her shoulder, and sitting in a Chair, on which
her naked arm did lie. What her Fathers name was, or where she was borne, is
not certainly known, but her Husband Matthew Shore, a young man of right good
parentage, wealth and behavior, abandoned her bed after the King had made her
his Concubine.

Kind Matthew Shore men called me,
A Goldsmith once of good degree,
And might have lived long therein,
Had not my Wife been wooed to sin*
ah gentle Jane thy wanton race,
has brought us both to this disgrace.
Thou had all things at wish and will,
Thy wanton fancy to fulfill;
No London Dame or Merchants wife,
Did lead so sweet and brave a life:
then gentle Jane the truth report,
why leftst thou me to live in Court?
Thou had both gold and jewels store,
No wife in London then had more:
And once a week to walk the field,
To see what pleasure it would yield:
but woe to me, that liberty
has brought us both to misery,
I wedded thee whilst thou were young,
Before thou knewst what did belong
To husbands love, or marriage state,
Which brings repentance now too late:
thus wanton pride made thee unjust,
and so deceived was my trust.
But when the King possessed my room,
And cropped the gallant Rosy bloome,
Fair Londons blossom and my joy,
My heart was drowned in deep annoy:
to think how unto public shame,
thy wanto^ love brought my good name.
And then me thought each man and wife,
In jesting sort accused my life,
And every one to other said,
that Shores fair wife had wanton played*
whereby I grew in mind to change
my dwelling in some country strange.
Then lands and goods I sold away,
And so from England went to sea,
Oppressed with grief and woeful mind,
But left my cause of grief behind:
my loving wife whom once I thought
would never be to lewdness brought.
But women now I well espy,
Are subject to inconstancy,
And few there be so true of love,
But by long suite will wanton prove:
for flesh is frail and women weak,
when kings for love great suit do make
But yet from England my depart,
Was with a sad and heavy heart,
Whereof when as my leave I took,
I sent back many a heavy look,
desiring God if it might be,
to send one sigh sweet Jane to thee.
For if thou had but constant been,
These days of woe I never had seen:
But yet I grieve ^^d mourn full sore,
To think what plagues are kept in store
for such as careless tread awry
the modest steps of constancy.
Ah gentle Jane, if thou did know
The uncouth paths I daily go,
And woeful tears for thee I shed,
For wronging thus our marriage bed:
then sure, I know, thou would confess
my love was true, though in distress.
Both Flanders, France and Spain I past,
And came to Turkey at the last,
And then within that mighty Court,
I lived long in honest sort:
desiring God that sits in heaven,
that lovers sins might be forgiven.
And there advanced thy lovely name,
Of living wights the fairest Dame,
The praise of Englands beauties stain,
All which thy Husband did maintain:
and set thy picture there in gold,
for Kings and Princes to behold.
But when I thought upon the sin,
Thy wanton thoughts delighted in,
I grieved that such a comely face,
Should hold true honor in disgrace:
And counted it a lucklesse day,
wherein thou first did go astray.
Desirous then some news to hear,
Of her my soul did love so dear,
My secrets then I did impart
To one well skild in Magike Art,
who in a glass did true^^ show
such things as I desired to kn^^
I there beheld thy Courtly stat^
Thy pomp, thy pride, thy glor^ (...)
And likewise there I did beh^^^
My Jane in Edwards arms (...)
thy secret love I there espie^
thy rise, thy fall, and how th^^ (...)
Thy naked beauty in the street,
I saw do penance in a sheet,
Barefoote before a Beadles wand,
With burning Tapers in thy hand:
and babes not having use of tongue,
stood pointing as thou past along.
Thus ended was this shame of thine,
Though God gave yet no end to mine*
When I supposed thy name forgot,
And time had washed away the blot:
then in another Princes reign,
I came to England back again.
But finding here my friends decaid*
The Princes laws I disobaid,
And by true justice judged to dye,
For clipping gold in secrecy:
by gold was my best living made*
and so by gold my life decaid.
Thus have you heard the woeful strife,
That came by my unconstant wife:
Her fall, my death, wherein is she^^^
The Story of a Strumpet le^^
in hope thereby all women (...)
take heed how they the (...)
FINIS.
At London printed by G. ^.


