THE Second Tome of the Travails and adventures of Don Simonides, enterlaced
with variety of History, wherein the courteous and not curious Reader, may
find matters so leueled, as may suffice to please all humors.

For melancholy men, they shall not need to sail to Anticera, for here they
shall find pleasant expulsiues. For merry minds, sober discourses to
prevent excess. For devout, wholesome lessons to confirm their
contemplatio^. For all sorts, such delights as neither allow of daliaunce, nor
discommende honest pleasure. Written by Barnabe Rich, Gentleman.

Malui me diuitem esse quam vocari. Imprinted at London for Robert Walley,
dwelling in Paul's Churchyard. 1584,

To the Right honorable my very good Master Sir Christopher Hatton Knight,
Captain of her Majesty's Guard, Vicechamberlaine to her Highness, and one of
her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
NOw at length (Right honorable) our Simonides has finished his Journey, he
has visited Rome, seen Naples, beheld Athens, sailed into England, over vewed
both Court and Country, and in conclusion returned into Civil.

Amongst his cheifest friends, J as one privy to his conceiptes, have
determined the publishyng of his travails, and dedicated them under your
honorable protection: May it please you to shadow them from contempt, since
they are not altogether unnecessary, for in this cause (with Marcus Cato) I
would not stick to stand to the judgment of my most deprauer Titus Gracchius.
J have avoided lasciviousness, yet enterlaced pleasure, discoursed of serious
matters not pretermittyng measurable mirth, and like a cunnyng Painter,
affordyng every shape his shadow, I have finished this counterfeite of a
Lover, in all proportions, of a Trauailer and his success: wishing every
dram of pleasure an ounce, and every light motion that fitteth your honorable
fantasy, a continued dilatation of rethoricall eloquence. Thus leaving my self
and that J present to your honors censure, J rest.

Your Honors servant and Soldiour always at command, Barnabe Rich.

To the Gentlemen Readers, Barnabie Rich Soldiour sends greeting.
GEntlemen, under rhese Clouds of fained Histories (if it please you to pry
with advised insight) you may find the Anotomy of wanto^ youth, seasoned with
over late repentance: And amongst you that be stayed, good lessons to confirm
your experience. For other that are now entering the world, may find
wholesome counsel to prevent inconvenience.

Simonides has now imitated Sophocles the Tragedian, who accused before the
Magistrates of dotage, repeated before the^ his Tragedy of Oedipus Coloneus
(which at that instaunt he had made) so that his accusers confounded in their
own ouerweanyng, departed with a shameful repulse: So our Spanyard amongst
our curious Precizians condemned of lasciviousness, now concludes their
opinions to be corrupt, which accuse him by only reportyng this his true
intent, which urged him to publishe his own follies.

It was first his will to warn the unstaid by his fall, and to instruct the
inconstaunt, to gather up the fruits of experience, so as the after
repentance might not make them loathsome. He was counseled by the advice of
aged Aristo, yet refused it. He was admonished by the fall of Porcia, yet he
continued inconstant. What women were, Lamia taught him. What Love was,
Titerus made trial: and neither the persuasion of a gallant Soldiour, nor the advice of an ancient Father, neither yet the sharp inuectiues of his
trauailyng companion Anthonio, were ever able to withhold him, but he would
needs prosecute his folly to the end.

These medicines opertunitie offered him in his first travail, now what
succeeds in this volume, let the advised Reader be Judge. The end is
Simonides found women inconstaunt, the world unstable, pleasure still vadyng,
hope uncertain, expense remediless, lost time unrecoverable, and with a tear
concluded thus. Good Gentlemen, let my Cantharus laid in Balm, that is, my
youthly follies seasoned with repentance call you home. And since at Civil
Ladies have been stained, I beseech you remember this, that as the Climate
can not alter the effect, so this mischeef may as well reign in England as in
Spain, and therefore my counsel is, that you rather content your selves with
Clarindas first repulse, then in the end to become partaker of Simonides too
late repentance.

But now Gentlemen, for that I know very well, that my lines shall as soon
find a Scipio Nascica to reprehende, as a Vitellius to commend, a
disdainefull judgment to mislike, as a favorable opinion to allow, I have
concluded with my self to laugh at Naeuius when he finds fault, and to jest at
Boldunus when he cauelleth: so turnyng the fury of their reports on my
person, I doubt not but to find shoulders to bear the burden of reproof. For
you courteous Gentlemen, I doubt not but you will wincke at that you would not
see, and laugh at that you best allow of. And thus leauyng my Book under the
benefit of some blessed asspect, and to the censure of your friendly reports
I take my leave.

Barnabe Rich.

The second part of the Adventures of Simonides, and first of his being at Rome.
SIMONIDES (our amorous Pilgrim) according to his purposed travel having
attained Rome, the only noted place of renown (once for exceedyng virtue, now
for habundaunt vice) betook him self to consider the situation of the place,
and the disposition of the people: to note the zeal of the religious, and the
forwardness of the Citizens, in whose progeniturs, not only the mirror of
Military profession, but also the image of true nobilite was resident. And
according to the subject that served his contemplation, he began with him self
to compare Rome that is, to that which was: those Monuments that are, to those
which were: those men that be, with their progeniturs which have bin, to the
end he might gather a conclusion of the world, by the comparison of both
ages: which observation assuredly (in the judgment of the wisest) is the most
confirmer of a confused opinion, not yet persuaded with probable authority:
And to the better accomplishyng of his purpose, he conuaied him self to his
lodgyng, whereunto accustomarily, many and sundry Gentlemen did resort:
partly to take their repast, partly to meet good company, which makes the
Bankett more accounted of, although the Caates be not so costly: And finding it
Noone tide, and the company ready to sit down to their dinners, he incited by
hunger (which is the companion of Trauailers) and desire of satisfaction of
that he mused upon, sat down by good fortune in the company of a religious
Father, a learned Lawyer, and a industrious Soldiour: our Votiue called Friar
Sebastian, our Ciuilian Segnior Sandalio, and our Martialist Don Pirro de
feragosa: at first sittyng they served their appetites, afterward betakyng
them selves to table talk, and espiyng out our religious trauailer Simonides
by good fortune, yet most convenient serving to the gain of our Pilgrim, they
fell into discourse of the excellency of their professions, and for that they
would more honor our passionat stranger, they concluded that he should be the
judge and decider of their controuercie, upon which conclusion, Father
Sebastian having taken counsel of his cup, and leanyng on his elbowe
extendyng out his two fingers oritoriously discoursed thus.

The Objection of Friar Sebastian against the Lawyer and Soldiour.
WE have vndertake^ at this present so great a task (Honorable stranger and
religious Pilgrim) yea we have attempted such a controversy, as neither
memory can furnishe us with sufficient discourse, nor our method any ways be
aunswerable to the dignity of the subject: Suu^ cuique pulchrum, yet neither
this nor that nor a third opinion can conclude a certainty: for what so ever
is certain in it self needs no demonstration: For my profession, I can
allege no more sufficient commendations as touching the dignity then this,
that it has relation to a high contemplation, that it perfecteth the soul,
subdueth the earthly part, yea, and extreminateth al worldly pleasure out of
memory: our object is God, whom while we consider of, our soul is as it were
reared up and in such divine contemplation are we at that instant resident,
as we do but labor with Paul to be dissolved and to be with Christ. These
considered, what may the Ciuilian admit of himself or discourse of in his
Science: if he reason of comparisons, he can not continue: if of the efect,
what works he but a transitory peace, where Deuinitie makes both peace
with God and man.

Naie, the greatest dignity that may be gathered by Deuinitie is this, that
the ground work is infallible, still permanent and irreuocable: where amongst
our Lawyers, this Cannon may be anichilated by this learned Doctor, this
distinction frustrated by that Expositer, yea, and what not turned topsie
turuie to serve the season for the Ciuilians commodity.

The first disposer of Civil policy was your Justinian, the first informer of
him was God, he concluded equum and bonum, the highest taught him equum and
bonum: Numa Pompilius and man not privy to the true knowledge of God, yet
cheifest of all, referred his endeavors to the service of the Gods, acompting
that state unhappy, where the Gods have not received due reverence: all States
have reverenced the profession I am of, each one has honored the dignity I
am called unto, yea even amongst the enemies of Christ, the power of the
highest has broken out by the mouth of the Christian: whereas law is but
leueled by derection, administered by appointment, yea, and referred all to
reformation, the confirmation whereof, need to be sought for in no other
place, then in your own Cannons and Decreetalles, in which you should find
such corrections, such frustrations, such anticipations and cautelles, as the
studient had every day need of a new memory, to consider of his new coated
clause. If we reason of antiquity, and mean thereby to make a superiority,
no sooner was the world made but Deuinitie was known, yea, the word was
before world: for it was God, and where Religion was most honored, there was
peace most plentiful.

Then Justinians radices were not known, but the law of the Tables were
taught, then the law was not in the Civil Magistrate to dispose, but the
Priest had it to propounde, that law was delivered by succession, and
confirmed by the presence of the Lawgiuer, and while that law was continued,
Israel was partaker of the promise, and benefited by the plenty, the Heathen
fell before them, for the Lord of hosts was amongst them. In falling from the
law, they were delivered into the hands of their enemies, where in continuyng
in the law, they were the Lords of all Nations: so that we ought to note
this, Deuinitie is a heavenly law, confirmed by antiquity, sealed by God the
Lawgiuer, Clergy men sanctified and appointed, who not only instruct our
Ciuilians touching their souls, but also how to dispose their Civil
conclusions. Our habit is aunswerable to our profession, our life correspondent
to them both: where Lawyers are sumpteous in apparel, though his profession
is virtuous, and concluded in Mediocritie: yet his life so far from his
learning, that they be pugnantia inter se, they condemn Covetousness, yet
themselves are never satisfied: They excomunicat the Incestious, yet who more
dissolute then they: They make their Plea according to the peney, and not to
the truth: They coin delays for private advantage: they make straight
crooked, and crooked straight: Men they are fed with vainglorie, led by fond
opinion, counseled by uncertain Cannons, reverenced rather for their
authority then virtue: yea, Room were happy if either they were not or were
better, by the one she should be rid of contention, by the other benefited in
their amendme^t. Good Lord, how many Athenian Orators have we that
counterfaite Squinancy for a little coin, yet are to open mouthed against the
poor man's Process, such delays from Court to Court, such dilatorie Pleas,
such Judgment with Prouiso, that the poor suitor finds his purse sooner
emptied, then his cause ended, they affectat eloquence to maintain bad causes,
they are studiously affable to procure new Clientes, they are deuillishly
subtle to cloak inconveniences, so that though the precepts they study be
never so perfect, yet the professors are still so untoward, that seemyng to be
the ministers of light, they hunt after continual darkness, concluding the
truth within a golden Cloud, making black white, and white black, darkenyng
al things with their distinctions that should give light: so that though in
all things they seem civil, yet in all things they are most inciuill.

But it may be (Signior Sandalio) you imagine these words to be spoken of
spite, and that they are concluded by no proof: certainly if you do so you
are deceived, for what soever is here spoken by me, I will not only confirm
it by written authority, but also conclude it by your own profession: naie, I
will find out that your expositers of Law wrote many things pugnantia inter
se, and agreeyng no ways: one thing confirmed this day, and frustrated the
next day, yea, if I should gather up all inconveniences in heap, I should not
be satisfied with a sedull, but write a whole volume: which if no otherwise,
yet even by Protulus the son of Nerua, may be confirmed, who by his
injurious cauilations, was the destroyer of Othos cause, a man singulerly
familier with him, and whom by his own profession to Vitellius he wickedly
betrayed: For contrarieties, who does not accuse Baldus Perusinus, who
although for his exceedyng learning he was honored amongst the famous Writers
of our time, yet amongst the learnedest is accused for inconstancy in his
writing and contrarious opinions, in that wherein he should have bin most firm.

Christopher of Castile, he to show the variety of his wit did innouate: so
that to conclude, the most part of you bind your selves prentese to varyetie,
not bent to any stabilitie, but according to the vanity of the time, do you
fasten all your conclusion. Some of you will seem to be: yet are not, as
Eneius Popilius, who being cited as witness in a cause, blockishly made
answer, that he knew nothing.

Saturius, an other of your sect, has this praise waityng of him, that he was
never the reporter or admitter of any profitable sentence in law.

For covetousness, who more commonly noted the^ Demostines amongst the
Athenians? or Hortensius amongst the Romans? whom Tullie very prettily
nippeth of his nerenesse, by openyng in covert how he had received a silver
Spinx of Verris for pleadyng his cause: so Angelius Raise among the Neopolitans,
who for that his Client denied him change of a piece of base money, concluded
with his Adversary, non suited the cause neither afterward supplied the place
of an advocate.

Now Signior Sandalio, you may see that I am led by example, not fed by
opinion, I take not hold fast of any report: but am confirmed by mine own
knowledge, for resortyng to our common place of Justice, I hear many
execrations powered out: some openly exclaim against injurious delays, few or
none live by gettyng, al spend, so that Lawyers are only made rich, the poor
Client miserably poor.

But you may well say that this touches nothing the profession it self, and
admit I think so, notwithstanding this I must and may conclude touching the
controversy that we have now in hand, that where as the ground works of law,
are at the disposition and invention of man, they are by far odds more base
then our precepts which are written and set down with the finger of God,
delivered by those that were enspired by God, yea, and so they take efecte, as
not only they are the ground work of all other professions, but also the
mainteiners of all both Divine and Civil policies.

But you may (perhaps) think to touch me nere, admittyng what I speak of
Deuinitie it self, but reprehendyng the professors of the same, yet herein if
you bethink your self, of the surest holdfast, you shall be the farthest of
from your purpose. Then the religious who more devout? as Apolonius the Abbot,
who an hundred times day and night with great contrition and compunction of
spirit called upon the highest, in his often prayer who wondreth not at his
diligence, in his bendyng of his knees, who praises not his humility.
Pastuuius an other of our profession, was so intentiuely bent to prayer (as
Sabellicus reports) that in health he was never found unoccupied, in
sickness when weakness constrained him to keep his bed sat still devout,
having the use of his tongue taken from him, yet continued religious, yea, no
sooner ceased he meditation then his soul was separated from his body.

Isace Sirus in the City of Spoletum, prayed continually three days and three
nights upon his knees without ceasyng, which some of the City admittyng for
an hypocritical attempt stroke him, reuilyng him with ungracious and bad
language: which notwithstanding, such was the zeal that accompanied him, and
the Judgment of God that awaited on the wicked, that the unhappy mocker and
striker of this holy man, was possessed with a Devil, wherein this virtuous
Votiue not respectyng the injury offered, but the zeal of a true Christian,
by prayer succored and restored for an injurious wrong a gracious benefit.

Many other could I repeat unto you: who not only for their assidious prayer,
but also for their integrity of life, the world has had and does hold, in
wonderful admiration. But Signior Pierro de feragosa, think you in these
actions to escape scotfree, assuredly sir that may not be, for well I wot you
are as studiously bent to take hold of the poor Divine, as any, yea, and as
erreligious as the best: for your profession the more I look into it, the more
I looth it, preferryng with Tully the iniustist Peace before the iustist War:
accompting Soldiers the most unnecessary members that may be in a State:
For that by experience, their practice, their honor, nay all actions
whatsoever they attempt, are begun, continued, and ended in blood.

These Soldiers the best sort of them, what be they, perhaps noble in
birthe, yet lascivious in behavior, constaunt in nothing but in cruelty, wise
in few things but in Stratagemes, in reuengyng to cruel, in unchaste love to
dissolute, the Captain in fear of the Soldiour, the Soldiour cozoned by the
Captain, and both of them commonly the consumers of the Citizens. Let War
once take hold of a plentious land, the Citizen is made subject in his own
house, his wife deflowred, his daughters defamed, his riches not his own, yet
all this while the Soldiour will be coumpted commodious: And were they to be
admitted in a State, the Country Husbandman is forced by fear to forsake his
labor, and what he trauaileth for in sorrow, the Soldiour consumes in riot.
But neither the beginning of War, neither the effect, neither the action, nor
the agent are virtuous, and therefore not commendable. The beginning of
Dissension was desire and covetousness of others Possessions. The effect of
War, is the destruction of Countries, the desolation of noble Houses, and the
sackyng of opulent Cities: the action depends upon fortune or misfortune:
upon oportunities, delays, forwardness and untowardness of a number of
vain headed followers, whose behavior and life, being never leueled nor
ordered by derection, how may it be thought that any of their actions should
be either praise worthy or virtuous. They are the hyrelynges of ambicious
Princes, whom though the subject allow of for fear, yet would they gainsaie
them if they durst.

Naturally the Soldiour is borne Martialist, bloody minded, subject to rage and
anger upon slight or no cause, which has followyng her always revenge: Now,
if the Soldiour grow into fury on so light occasion, think you the revenge
to be ordered by discretion. What Prince can escape the Soldiers fury? nay,
are not they naturally mutinous in themselves? How injuriously left the
Egiptians their King Psammetricus in his War against the Ethiopians, when as
two thousand of them at one instaunt revolted to the Enemy, neither having
respect to the honor of their Prince, nor the sauegard of their Country.

Nay when the Roman Horsemen were sent out to incou^ter the power of their
enemies, when at pleasure they might have destroyed them, yet remembryng the
delaie, their consul Fabius made in passing the law Agraria, they pretermited
to their great shame, the offered opertunitie.

The like mischeefes by their means fell on Apius Claudias, who for that they
would dispossess him of his Triumph, they admitted rather of a dishonorable
flight.

I would note also the defect of the Frenchmen, under the government of
Quintilius Varus, the horrible murder committed on Anthony Bassianus
Carracalla Emproure by his sworn Soldiour Martialis, and the destruction of
Adoaldus King of Goths, by one of his own retinew called Zilla Gepida. Truly
truly, the memory of the notable disasters, ungracious and bloody Murders,
Incestious and ungodly Rapes committed by the Soldiers, inforceth me almost
into a horror to call them to remembrance.

But let us but have an eye toward themselves, and behold how beastly they
be, the brute beast by natural instinct do daily eschew the inconvenience
that follow them: and have an eye to that which may profit them.
Contrariewise, these Soldiers like to Hircan Tigers, revenge them selves on
their own bowelles, some Parricides, some Fratricides, all Homicedes.

Alexander the great the only noted man for a Soldier, how injuriously and
cruelly used he Calistines ye Philosopher, who for that according to the
precepts of Philosophy, he refused the Diefieng of a mortal Prince,
whervppon (as a traitorous and rebellious subject) he caused him to be
dismembered and torn in pieces, his ears cut from his head, his lips and
nose deformed, and by these vnacostomed and most horrible torments miserably
to make end of his life.

It erketh me to remember the horible and murtherous mischeefes that befortuned
unhappy Room in the time of the sedicious Warrior Caius Marius, how many
notable Citizens, renowned Orators, aged Fathers, suckyng Children, and
sorrowful Mothers were devoured by this Monster, who was not only satisfied
to martire them by his Tormentors, but also endeavored to be an actor in
ministryng the torment, where neither eloquence, neither desert toward the
common weal, neither the tears of the Roman Matrons, nor the submission of
the Cities in league could stay the fury of so great a bloudsucker, but that
Marcus Anthoni that sweet tongued Orrator (who in time by his eloquent
persuasion assuaged the fury of the Soldiour, and kept his sword in sheath)
must sacrifice with his blood to the unjust fury of Marius: the father and the
son both Crassi, in each others sight were cruelly murdered. Yea, alas what
will not be attempted if the Soldiour once break out into fury. Pontanus
makes report of a most execrable and cursed murder, as me thinks (Signior
Pierro) no time may wine out ye stain from your profession, certain
quarrelsome Soldiers having fallen out amongst them selves, and often times
skirmished togethers, be fortuned at an unfortunate meetyng to kill one of the
contrary faction, whose dead body when they had gotten into their hands
(truly I am abashed to speak of it) with bloody hands they cut in small
pieces, afterward taking out his liver and heart, they broyled it on the
coals, distributed it in small gobbettes to every one a little amongst the
copsemates at a Breakefast, afterward with great joy and gladness they
satisfied their insaciate thirst of revenge, with the very taste of the
murdered wretches blood, not leauyng to drink to the Goods themselves, the
very reuengers of so detestable injuries. I may therefore religious
Gentleman, leave all now to your consideration, who have heard the dignity of
my calling, with the great innornitie of the profession of these two Gentlemen,
that is to say, the covetousness of the Lawyer with the cruelty of the
Soldiour, and will conclude with the humility of the Divine, and according to
veretie, report your judgment: for I now leave farther to discourse, and
doubt not but Signior Sandalio will supply the place.

The Lawyer and Soldiour both touched with the hard objection of this
Oratorious Divine, after they had a while gnawne on the bitte, and disgested
their choler, Sandalio, as his place served him began his reply in this sort.

The reply of Sandalio the Lawyer.
AMidst the desert of Scithia, a renouned Abbot called Moses was resident, who
being desired to give his censure upon a Friar of the brotherhood that had
offended, he came in presence with a great sack of sand at his back, and being
demanded what he brought with him, he made answer they were his sins, whche
scarcely he was able to bear they were so burdensome, much less to correct
an others. Saint Fraunces trauilyng in company with one of his fraternity,
and they meetyng with a poor man, the Friar his companion said unto him:
Father, although this man be poor touching the riches of the world, it may
be yet, in desire to enjoy much, he is rich: which speeches being well waied
of this Godly father, he forced this coniecturyng Divine to disrobe him self
and to cover the poor man, thinkyng him worthy to make recompense by a
benefit, who with leude language had injuriously slaundered the poor man.

The actions of these holy men well considered, be sufficient to condemn your
presumtion Father Sebastian, I fear me you have more cause to carry the sack
then had Moses, and to be disrobed then the other Friar, who not only have
taken upon you to slander others but also to dyfie your self, feedyng your
own fancy with the copiousnesse of your sweet set words, and imagine that
your colors be of continuance enough to shadow your iniurous counterfaite,
but by that time you have heard but a little what you have mistaken, and
consider of that I can report, you shall find how greatly your own self have
need of reformation, and how vainly you vaunt before the victory. Your strst
arguments you brought touching the dignity of your profession, as I remember
was this, that it was Divine, inscrutable, still parmenent, prescribed by God,
immitated by you of the Clergy, opened to us of the Laietie, and all this I
admit, nay I honor, I acknowledge what so is religious is Honorable, and if
better title might be I would minister it. Yet thus far (master Docter) I
must wade, that our Laws although they were the dispositions of mortal me^,
yet are they the inspiration of the highest, and what so is set down by the
finger of God for offensive and not to be followed, is neither admitted of the
Lawyer, nor let slip without correction. Where the Lord was not known, law
ministered equite, and where God is known, the contempt of some is such, that
if no corporal punishment did terrify, the bare commandment of the law
ministered by the hand of Moses, would little or nothing prevail: And truly
touching law in it self I find thus much, that having past through so many
interpretours handlyng, it can not be but the method should be exquisit, and
looked into by so many Religions, it can not be disordered: And certainly being
(as it were) leueled and proportioned according to the true meaning of the
Scriptures it can not far miscarie.

The end whereto Law has relation is to profit the good, perfect the common
weal, releaue the oppressed, and minister Justice according to the equity of
the cause, not the dignity of the person. There is no vice but Law bridleth
it, yea, whatsoever past from the very Ethnycke, did always abate the power
of excess. Dionisious of Siracusa, though otherwise a Tirant, yet in this made
a wise Law, that those which excessiuely gave them selves to banquetyng
should be punished very asperly. Licurgus, made Laws against Drunkenness, the
Romans against wicked and ungodly Whorehunting, the Grecians, against incest,
the Lacedaemonians against excess in apparel. Augustus Ceaser, against
pompious buildings, the Lucans, against prodigality, ye Aegiptians, against
Usury, the Thebans, against injurious Parents, the Romans, against cruel
and hard hearted Masters.

In my readyng this find I Sir Sebastian, yea, and further more dare assure
you, that what so you cry out on in the Pulpit, we condemn in place of
Justice, and what so you find neglected in religion, we correct with great
seuerenesse.

I see not moreover how you are to touch the person of the Lawyer, more then
your self, either with contrarious opinions, or unnecessary positions, or
injurious delays, or auaricious desires. In general, the men be very studious
(for the art requires no less) and where the mind is ocupied with wise
precepts, the actions of the life can hardly be unconstant, if at any time
contrarieties pass, unless in a particular man's opinion, this touches not
the Law it self with any variety, but the misdeamyng man: yea, you know well
in art, this matter is undoubtedly true, yt by contraries the truth is sonest
found out, and without controuertyng (in mine opinion) the groundworkes of all
arts should be left but nakedly bare, but for the science in it self, it is
still the same never alteryng. What the Cannon Law is and of what authority,
you can as well as I bear witness, which has his original from the mouth
of our holy Father the Pope, and from the counsels, from the decrees of the
ancient Fathers, and positions of learned Deuines, the which (I believe) you
admit nothing more holy, since by the Church, the disanullers of the same are
excommunicated with Bell Book and Candle.

Yet for all this if it might be spoken, non idem semper est canon, I must not
say contrarious, but if liberty were granted me to touch what I know true,
Lord what squaryng could I find amongst your general Counsels, what
daliaunce with Scriptures: should I say wrestyng of them, no, mum budget, you
are of the holy house, and therefore far be it from me to reprove you, when I
like not the look of a faggot: But this I dare say for the Divine, as he for
the Lawyer has already auowed, he has as humble a Habit as the best, yet as
lascivious is he as the most, which poinct although you can hardly fasten
upon the Lawyer, yet the most part of you, can not but in your conscience
confess you culpable: yea, and Master Divine is covetous too, and can as well
skill of a Peter peney, as the Lawyer of his Clientes fee. But it may be that
what so is viscious in the Lawyer, shall be virtuous in the Divine, and so in
deed you may match me: Yet for examples sake I will open the lives of some
of our Romish Prelattes, whom though you have preferred worthily for their
humility, yet some I may touch for their approved follies: so that with you
I will turn all upon the Clergy men, and leave the Scripture, as it is
perfect in it self, except it be perverted by his Interpreter.

Amongst you Prelattes some are Heritickes, some to much learning does make
them mad: Some blind bussardes that will not see: Some so well learned that
they list to err. So that you shall confess (except of purpose you will prove
obstinate) that more Clergy men have erred touching the interpretation of
Scriptures, then Ciuilians ever doated in the Cannons of the Law.

For Covetousness, who laugheth not at the Bishop of Treuers, Ieames of
Sirke Prince elector, who so importunatly begged of the Emprour, that he was
forced to cast him of thus, if thou make not an end quickly of askyng, I will
quickly find out the way to denaie.

Antiochus the Bishop of Phenissa (honored for his eloquence, yet disdained
for his covetousness) at Constantinople, gathered up a great mass of money by
preaching, and yet he himself wrote a Book against covetous hordyng up of
riches. The like did Seuerranus Bishop in Siria, who by indirect means
sought to dispossess S. Chrysostom of his Sea, yet according to his deserte,
he finished his purpose with unhappy death.

For ignorance in the Clergy men, we need not seek out antiquities,
whereas the present time ministers matter enough to write on.

Livings now are sold, not given by deserte, corruption is the Belweather in
leadyng of Beneficed men, and a man may as soon step up to place of dignity
by riches, as by righteousness.

In revenge, who more cruel then the Ecclesiasticke, he covers all things
under Clouds, yet is as highly incenced with rancour and disdain as the best.

Marcus Placentias Priest, hatyng with habominable envy the Bishop Adrian, and
attending long time at the door of his Chamber, to execute his pretended and
murtherous villainy, not able longer to suffer the delay, turned the fury of
his revenge on himself, and dyed on his own sword.

Sixtus Bishop of Rome, being enuiously accused by Marianus and Bassus two
Priests, that he had deflowred Crisogomita a Virgin, having acquitted himself
before the general Counsel, excommunicated his accusers, refusing upon their
humble and penitent submission to reconcile himself to them.

How horrible was the hatred of the Bishop of Rome Boniface the 8. whose
enure extended so far, as to open his conceived rancour, he neither regarded
the place, for he was in the Church, nor the action, for he was at Prayer,
neither the day, for it was Ashwednesdaie, but only bent to vomit out his
venom, when he came to besprinckle the Bishops and Abbots with Ashes, he
turned the dust into Porcetus Spinalas eyes, saying: Remember thou, thou art of
the faction of the Gebelins, and yt thou shall turn to dust (threatnyng him
farther with the faggot) who rather expected his Asperge. I can not well think
but that these matters are odious, yea, and so notably to be detested, as no
religious ear may well brook them. Furthermore, I can not but wonder at the
hypocrisy of some of you of the Clergy, who committyng all these errors in
open sight of the world, yet blind all men's eyes with power, that they may
not see: compel those by threats whom vain persuasions can not allure:
entice some with gifts which otherwise would mislike your faction: and
excommunicate those with curses, which will not dissemble your injurious
follies. Totquotes, Pluralities, they are but common Fees from the whole
Fleece: the richest of you be non residentes, and if a man had your finger in
a hole to make you sing your Cofiteor, I fear me (Sir Sebastian) we should
have you confess that your holiest Saints have some what loved
lasciviousness, and some religious feminine Votaries, to carry some impression
of a Friar on their belly, though the Picture of our Lady be the Saint they
sue to.

And whereas you object how injuriously the Lawyer deals in delaying the
Processes of poor men, in eating them out of their own, I fear me the
Pardoner is as nere a sickpeney of the poor man's good as the Lawyer, and where
we only feed them with delay for a time, you persuade them to that which is
to be doubted of, if it will ever fall out at all. Not otherwise then according
to the liberality of the giver, you bestow your prayers, as for the oppressed
(I believe) you approve the Proverb, no peney, no Pater noster: So that I must
necessarily conclude this, that since you be men more swallowed up in sin
then the Lawyer, you are more unworthy, and for that your talent is the
greater, you are to answer the more: You play bo peep with us of the
Laytie, reproving us for that which your selves daily commit, and will be
still correctyng our misdeedes, yet confirm us in error by your
misdemeanors. We if we pervert any ma^s cause, hinder but his worldly honor:
You in inuertyng any thing in your profession, are the destroyers of the soul.
We if we use contrarieties, may be ordered by the Judge: You though never so
unjust in your positions, will yet be Judges on your own causes: Our humility
whatsoever, with you is hypocrisy: You though the proudest Prelattes of the
world for one knee bendyng, will be coumpted humble. If you will be more
worthy, then in offendyng, you are the more to be misliked of. If you will be
heads, why govern you not discreetly. If you will have superiority, why are
you so negligent: Humility despises honor, yet you hunt after them: Those
that sauer of the world are not of God, yet are you worldly: The high minded
often err, yet can not the Clergy man vary: for what so is perpetrated or
attempted by any of you, though it pass the limits of virtue, it can not be
but vice: though it be irreligious, it can not be without religion: though it
be black it must be white, and why, you that make all colors, will dispose
of them as you list. Your eyes be penetrated to look on all men, yet all men
must be blind least they look into you: so that I must even conclude of you
thus, you are of that making, that only you are exempted from the Judgment of
the world by your own power, and the world must of force allow of you for
Correctors, where as in sooth your selves are most worthy to be corrected.
Yet in truth (Sir Sebastian) I misdeeme not of your opinion in the Soldiour:
for in that I do agree so well with you, as I utterly forbid him a place in a
well governed State: and herein I allow your learned positions, examples and
conclusions. For what is there to be allowed of in Warlike bloudsuckers: not
their policy, for that it has relation to an ill end: not their diligence,
for that it respects naught but murder: not their obedience, for that it is
for fear: not their Judgments, for that they are severe: not their orders,
because they are uncertain to command: not their life, because it is leude.

Their imagination is revenge, their minds bloody, their dispositions
wrathful, their attempt inconstant: yea, and such they be as will sell God
for gold, and their Country for commodity.

But because Father Sebastian has touched this clause nere enough, I will be
the breefer only addyng this anticipation to Don Pierros apology, that the
Soldiour is not so nobly acounted of amongst Princes as the Lawyer, for that
which in our memory a most renounced Emperor Sigismunde, of exquisite valewe,
yea, and a brave Soldiour confirmed it to one George Ficellas a learned Lawyer,
on whom he not only bestowed the order of Knighthood, but in all causes he
also preferred him as a Counsailer, which being obicted against him by some of
his noble Soldiers, he made answer, that it was easy for him to make an
hundred Soldiers in one day, but to make a Doctor, required a thousand years.

Herein may our Soldiour perceive (if he please) how light their profession is
when it is learned in a day, and how far to be unworthy in respect of the
Lawyer, when a Prince of such memory concluded of it so slenderly.

I could report unto you father, the estimation that Alexander had of the
Ciuilian Vlpianus, whom in all his secret attemptes and serious businesses, he
took counsel of him, and would admit nothing to pass, which were not
confirmed by him.

Yea, the Princes of our time have so honored Lawyers, as that they by
special authority enjoined them, that if ought did pass their hands (yea,
though under privy signet) they should not allow, were it repugnant or
contrary to Law.

My conclusion is therefore noble Judge, that since the Lawyer is less vicious
then the Divine, and of greater dignity then is the Soldiour, he should have
place above them both, whereas the one is excessiuely sinful, the other
excedingly perverse and cruel. The determination whereof I leave to your
correction, and now yield successively the room to Don Piero de Feragosa to
speak for him self.

Our Soldiour having attentively bent his ear to either of the inuectiues, and
concluded with him self how to answer, began to discourse thus.

The Apology of the Soldiour in his own defense
ALthough I have no School Rethoricke (Gentlemen) or fine phrases to make my
cause more commendable, yet as the naked truth leads me, and mine own
experience has taught me, I will make you privy to my little skill.

In my youth when I was bookishe, I remember I red a Pretty Story of Saint
Barnade, who if by chance he fortuned to spy out a poor man meanly appareled,
he would always say to him self thus: truly Barnade this man with more
patience bears his cross then thou. If one richly apparelled, it may be
that this man under his delycate clothing, has a better soul then thou have
(Barnnde) under thy religious habit. In which action of his this I bluntly
imagine of (master Divine) that the Godly Father had his eye never parciall,
but always condemnyng him self, and not reproving others.

This lesson if you and the Lawyer had learned, and you especially sir
Sebastian had followed, you would not have bin so busy in bewraiyng other men's
errors, but endeavored to be industrious, in amendyng your own imperfections.

Aesopes Crow and our Clergy men are now adays of one condition, ye bird
cared not how many feathers she borrowed to make her self brave, nor they how
many vices they correct, so they cloak their own, the bird in aspiryng to be
King had a reproachful fall, and disrobed of her plumes proved but a black
Crow, the Clergy men, in endeuoryng to seem holy prove vicious, and but
severed from the dignity of their profession, are in the end as black in
vices as the bird in colors.

Think you (good Sir Sebastian) that as nature has made us Soldiers
reasonable, so she has not allowed us the fruits of reason, both to look into
other men's actions and to order our own, yes sir yes, though the clarke be
never so subtle the Soldiour can compass him, and the Lawyer never so crafty
simplicity may discover him: and in that you make Soldiers altogether
vicious, it must needs fall out that some of your sins and theirs are of
acquaintau^ce, or else yours are so proud that they disdain ours. But because
you must not err, you are with out sin, yet notwithstanding, give me leave
to say somewhat in mine own cause. The Soldiour say (Master Divine) is an
unnecessary member, the only maintainer of the aspiryng Princes pleasure, the
foe of Citezens, the distroier of country men, the sacker of Cities, the
deflourer of Maidens, a light headed revenger, a harebrained atte^pter, a
bloody performer, constant in nothing but in cruelty, yea, to conclude
worthy of nothing but not to be.

Now I by my experience can show, and by your profession will persuade either
of you, that a Soldiour in living is more continent then you both, and for a
Commonwealth as profitable as the best. War is a minister of Gods Justice,
for either contempt of Religion, or wicked life in civil Magestrates, so that
it is your sins that drawethe the Soldiers sword: which if you lived well
should be sheathed perpetually. God is not the author of ill, but the chafticer
of abuse, he orders the will of Princes to revenge, and we as obedient
subjects, are the ministers to perform. If power were not to maintain
Princes Proceedinges, the Prince should be dispossessed of his state, cruel
hands would be laid on the Ministry, yea, the Lawyer pulde from place of
Justice: so that in peace, the name of a Soldiour restrains the rebillious,
in war makes subject the proudest resister.

We refer our actions to the Princes will, the Prince by the direction of
God, who since he is the governor of both actions, I dare auowe they are not
vicious.

But you may object that in proud attemptes of Princes, the Soldiour is still
present, not respctyng the cause, but his own profit. Truly in injurious
causes I know that for certain, the Soldiour is as contrary to the War as
the best, who by proof (and not by guess) conclude of the euente of the
battle, when the cause proceeds of a wrongful ground, not like the eDuine
who will continue his errors without controlement, nor like the Lawyer, who of
purpose will take a wrongful cause, to cousin his Client of his coin.

If then wars be lawful, warriors are not illegitimate: if in general, the
profession is to be liked of, then can you but find fault with particular men,
and if so you mind to nippe me, neither Master Divine shall escape scotfree
with his smooth looks, nor Master Lawyer with his glozes: for this I dare
auowe, that if each of our lives be looked into, the Soldiour is as surely tied
to all virtuous actions as any one profession what so ever. In the choice of a
Soldiour, we do not only regard the ability of his body, but the quality
of the mind, for if Religion, circumspection, prevention, counsel, experience
by long practice, zeal, faithful performaunce of promise, resolutnesse in
attemptes, continency in life, carfulness to satisfy be not in him that
would enter the profession, truly the charge will be ill lookte into, neither
is such a one to be admitted in choice, then if a Soldiour of judgment be
had, when he is imployde, how lives he in the feelde, in the fear of God, not
assured of his life from one hour to an other, abstinent in diet, hard
lodgyng, diligent to please, careful to correct, both hands, thoughts, and
all are occupied: so that neither leisure serves him to be idely occupied, nor
the severity of the Captain admits him to run astraie. Well then, since it
so fallethe out that such they should be, and thus they are employed, you must
confess that some there are or else the name and title should be hardly
bestead: For the bad, it may be they borrow some of their errors from you,
you are so privy to their escapes.

But me thinks your judgment in disposition of Nature, whereas you make the
whole sort of Soldiers rash, rebellious, bloody minded, and murtherous is
but very bad: truly if they should be rash, it is nothing but in venturyng
their lives for you that hate them: for if they were not governed, their
success should be more unfortunate then it is. If rebellious, truly
Alexander the great had not conquered so many Countries, subdued so many
Kingdoms, and overcome so many Nations, and as it were but with a handful of
his Macedonians and Gretians. If bloody minded, why then spared Ceasar those
Senators and Citizens of Rome, whom both by their own hand writings and
often attemptes, he well knew to be the followers of Pompei and his capital
enemies. If murtherous, how often might the Venetian Armies have worthily
spoiled the whole Island of Creat, which not only had murdered many of their
Families with the sword, but also rebelled against them more then five times.
If Incontinent, what caused Scipio to redeliuer that noble young Virgin, who
for her passing beauty and great admiration of person, was presented unto him
as a rare gift, Scipio himself amazed at the sight, would yet deliver her to
Luceius, to whom she was espoused, and gave him also for a Dowry the gold
that her Parents had brought to redeem her. If covetous, how fell it out that
after L. Mummius had taken Corinthe, and adorned all Italy with the riches of
that Spoil, keepyng so little to his own use, that the Senate was feign for
very need, to give Dowry to his Daughter of the common Treasure. There is no
reason that either you can object against us of your own knowledge, or allege
by your readyng, but I have salued it up, either by reasonable demonstration,
or sufficient instaunce. And to speak my conscience, I know not the best of
you, if War should wait on you, that would not crouche to have a Soldiers
countenance, and bend if he beckoned.

But why is he not liked of with the Religious, because he can not find in his
heart to color an error: and wherefore is he discommodious to the Lawyer, for
that he abridgeth him of convenient time, to practice his corruption. Thus the
poor Soldiour stands in hard terms you may see (Religious Gentleman)
when he shall be backbited of those, who most leudly govern them selves: and
be condemned by such as have greatest need of amendment.

But what is he (I pray you) that is spoiled by the Soldiour but the Enemy:
whom if he should suffer to prosper in his wealth, the continuance of trouble
would decaie our own state, and we might suffer others to be rich to make our
selves poor, ministryng our enemies fuel, to set our selves on fire, and
like innocent babes, bring our Master a rodd to beat our own tails.

But this let I willyngly slip, giuyng the ignorant rather leave to correct
what they know not, then openyng those experimentes that time has driven into
me by many occasions, I might make them note that which if they knew, they
would never well imploye. But for that I have learned some one poinct of
Rethoricke of you both, I will now approve it if I can, openyng a little the
escapes of both your two professions: so that in findyng many errors in you,
I may the better color mine own.

And first for you Master Clergy man, thus much must I crave, that as
liberal I may speak what I think, as you what you please, so doubt I not,
but to prove you as erreligious as the best, and the Lawyer as lawless as the
most. Incontinencie is the badge of your profession, or else Pope Ione could not
have a young Monk in her belly, nor so many Clergy men combred with young
Maidens first children.

The Libertines as you call them, the Protestants I mean (for amongst those
in my time I have been conuersaunt) although they may perhaps in points of
Deuinitie be far from you as you think, and though the errors wherewith you
charge them be above my reach, yet truly as touching their life, I have not
found them so leude, and yet having sinned are so little corrected.

Nay, this error is not only perpetrated by your selves, but also wincked at
in others, where if a man be never so incestious, he may be assoyled for
silver, and a dubble Ducket (amongst you) will release more Sins in a moment,
then the wickedest man may commit in his whole life: so that you who should
restrain, grant liberty: and for a private gain undo many, which led by
fond lusts have small regard of them selves.

If I were as privy to your Books as your selves, and could report unto you
the most notable misdeedes of other ages, as I can make open some of our time,
neither would you sit to hear my long discourse, nor my voice able to serve me
to finishe out my tale. But touching your lives this I find, who despises
sin most, follows it a little, and though in open face of the world some
of you can not brook to be accounted covetous, yet if a private commodity
lighten in your lappes, you will be as ready to catch as the best, and with
as fair speeches to flatter for commodity as the most. You are lime fingered
for Livings to catch them ere they fall: yet if a Lay man be but a little
covetous, he were best to amend for fear of condemnation: Nay, not only are
you covetous but blood suckers, not satisfied with the blood of the father, but
workyng revenge upon the very harmless infauntes his children, as did
Rogerius Vbaldinus, Bishop of Pisanum, toward Vgolinus, whom when with his
three children he had long time kept in prison, and fed him with hope of
present liberty, if so he would make the said Archbishop privy, to
certain treasure which he had hidden: which when he had confessed, and the
Bishop having got the money, he not only broke his promise, but also starued
him and his three children most miserably to death: which fact, the world
does not only wonder at, but also abhor the wicked practices of such
villainy.

Some of you are Apostates, falling from the faith, as Theophilus a Priest in
Cilicia in my memory, who for that he was wrongfully deprived of his
Archdeaconrie, bound himself to the Devil, that if he would restore him to
his former dignity, he would become his body and soul: afterward being again
in his present place of honor, he began vehemently to be perplexed in mind,
with the combraunce of his own conscience, and with tears seeking the favor
of the Almighty, he was mercifully saved and delivered. These and such like
sort of men are you, and yet men must be tongue tied in reprouyng you, and
you liberal in speaking what you please: but as plainness is my profession, so
plainly have I opened my mind, meaning a little to quite the speeches of
Signior Sandalio: he is a Lawyer, and I would be loathe to dye in his debt,
because mine heirs might not be troubled after my decease. Of him self I
account thus, he may be good, but for the greatest number of his profession,
they are stark naught in that they are covetous: for if corruption were not in
the law, his profession were not gainefull: For if so be the law be certain
in it self, why should Judgment be delaied: If bent to do right, why are so
many poor men wronged: If grounded on conscience, why is it parciall. But if
the use of the thing be only ill employed, the fault is in the Lawyer: Then
thus it falls out, that he who knows the will of his Master and does it
not, should be beaten with many stripes, how like you this Cannon Master
Doctor?

I remember as I travailed to Athens, and being desirous to see the Monumentes
there, it was my hap by a good companion of mine (that smelt somethyng out of
your dealinges) to bring me to the Altar of Minerua, by which oftentimes
Pleaes were maintained on both parties: in which place, we found two silver
Celles, having on each of them, their several inscriptions: on the one was
written, The Pulpit of reproach, on the other, The Cell of Impudency. A
strange thing it is to see, that so many ages past since the setting up of
these, yet the vices are not ceased, since in all whatsoever you reason of,
either you are reproachful or impudent: reproachful, in accusing only on
report: Impudent, in maintainyng naught but hearesaies. For us Soldiers,
admit our swords fasten on the Enemy, yet venture we our lives for the
sauegarde of our friends: you neither have respect of friend nor familiare,
but so you may profit your selves, you spare not to eat your Clientes out of
house and home.

But where as you would persuade me by the favor that the Emprour Sigismund
showed to a Lawyer, if by that it were to be concluded, that the Lawyer is
more excellent, if favor be that you take holdfast on, neither you can be
admitted before a Soldiour, nor the Divine take place before a Warrior: For
you, one Emperor serves your turn, but look but from the first foundation of
this famous City, and you shall find that the Soldiour was he that defended
the State: the Soldiour was he that made Rome notable: yea, the Soldiour was
only he that had the creation of the Emperors. In the loss of a Soldiour,
how mourned Julius Ceaser, whom not only he buried with bitter tears being
dead, but also alive benefited with great honors.

Pompei the great, built the City of Nicopolis, to no other end but to harbor
Soldiers, yea, our most notable governors of this Empire, accounted of a
Soldiour as of his fellow in misfortunes, and in attemptes: of you, but as his
flatterers, to confirm but what he please. Perhaps for maintaynyng of a good
Plea, the Lawyer may get a little populer praise, but we for subduyng of an
Enemy to Rome, had the benefit of a triumph.

Some of your Orators for their presumptions have been cut of, most of our
Soldiers for their deserts, have had their statues set up in the marked place.

When Haniball knocked at Rome gates, why prevailed you not by eloquence, why
confounded you not by Religion: Alas the while, your Cake was dowe, and had not
the Soldiour given the enemy the repulse, your actions had been scarce
saileable. While the Soldiour governed, peace was as plentiful as now it is:
the revenues of Rome greater then now they be: the excess of Rome lesser then
now they are.

In our time of government, Rome was renowned for her Justice and faithful
laws: Now, when the sword is in the hand of the Religious and civil
Magestrate, Rome is noted for exceedyng vice.

In the days of Traiane, other Countries sought their Laws from Rome: In
these latter times Rome is accounted lawless of all the world.

Now for the Clergy man, what may he vaunt of, when he only defends
Religion but with his tongue, but the Soldiour in danger and hazard of his
life. For the Lawyer, you can not bring him to speak at the Bar but with a
great fee, where the poor Soldiour his hyre is but eight pence for the very
day service he loses his life: And whether is he more worthy that if he be
employed, it is but proulyng with his pen for private pence, or he that oposeth
himself with his Pike for public profit. So that for the sake, both of
Divine and Lawyer, yea, for the maintenance of the whole State we venture our
lives: and yet for all this let Peace smile on Rome a little, and Soldiers be
unnecessary.

And seeing it now coms in question, what profession is most worthy, of sondrie
men I have heard sondrie opinions.

King Dridanias was wont to say to the Cicilians, that to the sacrificyng
Priests of the Temple most honor was due. Bryas King of Argiues, gave most
honor to the Philosophers that read in Schools. Numa Pompilius amongst the
Romans, was of opinion that he was worthy of most reputation, to whom had
happened the victory of any famous Battle. But Anaxarchus the Philosopher,
ordained amongst the Phinetiens, that in a Commonweal, such should be
honored, who in the time of Peace entertained the State in tranquillity, and
in the fury of War, was found a valiant Protecter, of the limits and
liberties of his Country. And I pray (Master Divine) what wantes he in
worthiness, who defends Religion with the loss of his life as the Soldiour,
of him who does but coat it down in his quiet Study as the Divine. And good
Master Lawyer, whether is he most beneficial to the Citizen, that defends
him in rest upon the fronter of his enemies as the Warrior, or he that cozins
him of his coin within the City walls as the Lawyer.

But to conclude, both to the Divine and Lawyer, this I add, that since they
be so perfect in life and exquisite in living, I would I were such a one as
they think themselves to be, and not as they are.

So that noble Gentleman to whom the judgment of this controversy belongs,
I am to refer all to your derection: assuryng you this, that although my tale
be more blunt then these Oratorious Deuines, yet it might please you to gather
of my conclusions as you please, and to give your judgment as the equity of
the cause requires.

Simonides, having heard the sundry and several discources of each of these
Signiors, and perceiving that it fell to his turn to conclude, bespake him
thus.

The censure of Simonides upon the Divine, the Lawyer, and the Soldiour.
GEntlemen, my ignorance in each of your professions, my want of knowledge of
the fashions of this State, the unstable conte^plations which now govern my
mind, were reasons enough (if you knew them) to mislike of my judgment: yet
since it pleased you to pick me out as an Arbiterer in so ambiguous a cause,
as my little skill will serve me, I will make recapitulation of your
Objections, and make you breefly privy to my conclusion.

This Religious Gentleman (in mine opinion) very eloquently, both by Profane
and Ecelesiasticall examples, has maintained the dignity of his profession,
and condemned many imperfections both of Soldiour and Lawyer.

The learned Ciuilian has both answered the Objections were laid against
him, and inuerted them against his Adversary, both of you conclude against
the Soldiour, who though in bare terms he maintained a sufficient cause, yet
certainly he has painted out both the Deuines and Lawyers imperfections in
approved colors. Generally I find this, Covetousness is both in the
Clergy man, Lawyer, and Soldiour: Excess in Divine, Lawyer, and Soldiour:
yea, and affectation of honor, both in Divine, Lawyer, and Soldiour. I
account the Divine the very only man to be honored if he live well: The
Lawyer to be wondered at if he judge well: And yet the Soldiour not to be
inferior for he defends well.

I can not tell what Soldiers be in Rome, neither am I privy to their abuse:
but what they are in Genoua well I wot, where as not only excess by a
Soldiers means was banished, but also the whole State worthily counseled by
an honorable Captain. If therefore, I should resolve with my self, to give
judgment on either party, either the Divine might correct me in displacyng
him, or the Lawyer condemn me in preferryng the Soldiour, or the Soldiour
mislike me in admitting you both. Whereupon, since imperfectly from my youth up
hitherto I have always judged of colors, I would if I might so order my self
now (having seen somewhat) that in pleasing you all I might yet prefer the
truth. Your virtues in each profession are few, your vices too many, but since
your errors are more in number then your good qualities, your good is simple
bad in that it conquereth not the worse.

When first I attempted Journey toward this famous City of Rome, noated and
renowned through all the world, I thought verelie that neither the Clergy
man should be contencious he was so divine, nor the Lawyer covetous he was so
looked into, nor the Soldeour dissolute, where is or should be so much
discipline. But now when I fall in company amongst Citizens, I find reported
Rome for virtues, is now the very Rome that is vicious, for great must the
errors be in the state, where both Divine Lawyer and Soldiour are altogether
dissolute.

I remember in our Cronicles of Spain, when covetous Presidentes sent from
this City did govern us, oppressyng us with exactious, and suckyng the
marrowe of our wealth from the body of our Commanweale, we had always
redress here: this place was the nurse of reformed justice throughout the
whole world, but sith the members now are so far gone from them selves, as
that they slander the head, and the Citizens ingenerall by their particular
errors note out the ennormities of Rome. I see well old justice is banished,
and those that once gave Laws to others, ought now to be restrained and
brideled them selves, whervppon brefely thus I conclude, that since the
controversy betwixt you is for the superiority of the person, and not the
dignity of the subject, that the Divine is unworthy, squaryng from his
profession, the Lawyer not allowed of, being inconstant in his own decrees, and
the Soldiour less to be discommended then you both.

And that you may see I ground not upon light oppinion, give but ear a
little to my tomparison, and I doubt not but to resolve non although you meant
to doubt.

It befortuned that three Scithian Brothers after the decease of the King their
father, fell in controversy for the Kingdom, each of them aleadgyng his own
worthiness both in virtue, value, and nobilttie: the cause being doubtful, the
Counsel of the State referred it to a King, a neighbor of theirs, that he
might decide the controversy, he concluded thus, that each of them armed with
Crosbowe and arrowe, should be set in a convenient place, and he of the three
Brethren which could most nearest strike the heart of the dead King, (whose
body to that purpose was taken out of the Sepulcher and fastened to a Tree)
should succeed him in the Empire: Upon this conclusion, the eldest Brother
taking level, struck his father in the breast, yet missyng the heart: The
middlemost in the throat: But now the time seruyng for the younger Brother to
try his maisterie, he detestyng to perpetrate so great impiety, cast away
his Bow and Arrowe, despising rather the authority of a Prince, then willing
to commit such notable and unnatural ennormitie: The which the barbarous
King notyng, he not only preferred him to the Kingdom, but also worthily
recompensed him with condign honors.

So fares it at this present with you three Gentlemen, your father (I mean
your Country whereof you be children and members, I mean Rome that now is) is
dead to that it has been, having buried his manifold titles of renown in the
errors of his sondrie ungracious Citizens: you his children striuyng for
succession, that is, indeuouryng for superiority in the State, are to hear
the awarde of me a barbarous Judge, the whole fortune of Rome has been laid
for you to level at: the eldest (I mean the Divine) has pierced the breast,
having fallen into many errors, as Covetousness, Incontinencie, misconstruyng
of the Scriptures and what not, displaced one of the Pillars of the State, I
mean Military profession: Your second brother the Lawyer has stricken both
neck and breast, not only being corrupt in himself, but also corruptyng his
Science, and with the eldest consented to the banishyng of all warlike defense:
The younger brother, though willing to possess, yet loath to wound his fathers
corse, reproves but the Divine and Lawyers several vices, not altogether
banishyng them from any title in the State, that is not vouchsauyng to lay
bloody hands on his father, and therefore a comparatis I conclude, he is at
this time to have the pre-eminence in the cause, until the Divine live better,
and the Lawyer amend his misdemeanour.

Thus Gentlemen, you may perceive my conclusion, if I have erred in ought,
bear with my Imperfections, I meant well, and as I thought so I speak: If my
judgment please not you, I am to refer it to a better learned then my self:
and Gentleman Soldiour, you are preferred but with a Prouiso.

These three admittyng very well of Simonides discourse, according to their
several affairs, only the Soldiour delighted in the variety of his wit,
discoursed thus.

Gentleman stranger, your plausible judgment of late thoroughly persuades me
of your bryngyng up, and your well ordered behavior assures me of your worthy
and noble birth, and makes me the willynger, either in courtesy to do you
pleasure, or if my service may any ways stand you in stead, I am readily
willing to answer your expectation. Wherefore, if it shall please you in
ought to imploye me, you shall not be more earnest to require, then I willing
to perform.

Truly sir (answered Simonides) neither will I let slip your proffered
courtesy, nor be unthankful for your courtlike affability: If therefore it
shall please you to accompany a stranger, to ouersee the Monumentes of this
City, I shall in this courtesy be greatly beholding unto you. In brief being
both agreed, Don Pierro de faragosa, conveyed him to the most ancient and
renowned Monumentes that were to be seen: at the last attainyng the Market
place, they espied a great assembly of Doctors, Prelattes, and diverse other
Citizens: some pleasauntly disposed amongst them selves: some others,
grievously complainyng upon some injury, and to the end they might know the
cause of this turmoyle, the Soldiour demanded what might be the cause: to whom
it was answered, that if it pleased him to look on Pasquius Pillar, he should
perceive the whole matter. Whereupon, taking Simonides by the hand, he drew
nere to the colome, on which he found this Inscription.

Pasquius Inuectiue, against the lascivious Pope and his lecherous Clergy.
Mendacem dicere verum quis vetat.
WHence grows it that, with colored charms, you bleare the Commons eyes
O Celestine, it is but in vain, by craft for to surprise
The simple sort, it was never seen, that ever Paul was proud,
Or Peter such, a pompious train, to Prelat once aloude
Who was content, with simple troop, no Kings his stirrope held
No triple Crown, no Crosier staff, his holy hand did weild
But continence, the badge of truth, did rule his holy mind
How comes it then, succeedyng him, thou sweruest from his kind
He never bare, the bloody sword, was bathed in Christians blood
But mildly suffered, martyrdom, to do the faithful good
Nay rather Neroes, ofspryng thou, thy mothers womb do rent
With wreakefull tortures, on her limbs, thou torments do frequent
Ye Pasquine sees, thy privy scapes, Popes now in nets do dance
Their dalliaunce, is a holy right, they are but chaste by chance
A Curtizan, with holy Lamp, the Chamberlain lets in
Whom holy Pope, with holy Oil, annoynteth free from sin
Each Cardinal, may have his trull, yet may not married be
And why once married, cloyd with one, not else with two or three
Chaste Wedlock hurtes, devotion now, and Lechery makes devout
O wicked time, when such vain men, do guide the common route
But yet in time, proud Celestine, I wish thee mend thy miss
Or Rome shall fall, where now thy pomp, and greatest glory is
Thy Sodomites, thy Baales Priests, shall be consumed with fire
Thy foul escapes, shall opened be, and Princes hateful ire
Shall turn the walls, of Sodom down, lo this is Pasquius prophecy
Of thee proud Pope, and hateful Rome, unless you cease iniquity
Our Soldiour and Simonides over readyng this inuectiue, and wonderyng at the
Writer, being both in a maze departed, but especially the Soldiour who of long
time holdyng his peace, at the last was thus interrupted by our amorous
Pilgrim, who said as follows.

Sir, if it be not displeasaunt to the manifold courtesies that hitherto you
have showed me, ad this one more, resolve me of this doubt which wonderfully
busieth my mind, I read here very strange inuectiues against our holy Father
the Pope, blasphemous exprobrations against the Clergy, all Rome detected of
vnconstauncie, which makes me astonished, considering that all Nations fetch
their precepts of true Religion from hence, where this libell reports vice
to be most rife. Don piero answered him thus. Truly gentleman if it should
please you by faithful promise to bind your self that you will be secret in
what I say, though it be vnaccostomable to find such courtesy in this City,
I will open you my mind. Semonides faithfully vowyng service the Soldiour
bespake him thus.

Rome now adays (Gentleman) is not Rome which should be, our Popes rule by
fear not by love, they are honored for their power not pure life, yea, they
are the heads of dissolation and the very pillars of al lascivious life, they
are al deuilishly politic of inexplicable revenge: Religious in show, hell
hounds in their deeds: they claim of Peter, yet disclaim virtue: they will
be called just, yet inuert all right: they will be of God, yet are worldly
minded: they will be Christ's Vicars, yet be the only distroyers of his flock:
they are inuerters, not faithful expositers of the Scripturs: hear is not
that chaste life which was left in the Apostles time, but foul incestious
living, with filthy and lothesome buggerie: here is no regard of civil
Magestrate, but blindness cloaketh all things, and from hence the veil of
errors spreads throughout the whole world.

Assure your self (good Sir) all this report is true, which many men would set
open if they durst: I know the escapes of some and lament it, only my
conscience is free before God of their habomination, though necessity perforce
constraines me upon urgent affairs to be here resident.

The truth is (Sir) these men are not of God, they are Phariseis fair spoken
Simones Magi blind guides and such like.

Forsake therefore this habit good sir, leave this place if you desire to be
virtuous, for here the ill are made worse, the good are made by torments to
abjure the true profession.

Simonides wonderyng at the liberal discourse of this Godly Soldiour, and
detesting the abominable hypocrisy of Romish Prelates (according to Don
Pieros good counsel) refusing the habit of so loathsome a profession, and
betakyng him Garments beseemyng his degree, having abode ten days in the
City, he bethought him to journey toward the noble City of Naples, a place
noated for Courtlike courtesy and brave behavior: and thus taking leave of
the courtious Soldiour he followed his trauaill.

Simonides Iourneying toward Naples, missyng his way happened into a Desert,
where a strange adventure befortuned him.
SIMONIDES having Iourneyed long, yet incounteryng with very few, by reason
whereof him self altogether ignorant of the way, he straied into a Desert and
wild Wilderness, ouergrowne with sundry sorts of vnaccostomable brambles and
briers, and the further he traueled, the more the way seemed uncouth, so that
it might be thought, the place was only the resceptacle of despair, or the
Bower which untoward Suspicion had builded, ye air seemed as it were with
scouldyng Clouds to answer the desertnesse of the place: no melody was hard
there, but only such as fed the mind melancholy, their Progne lamented in
more then accostomable sorrows, the whistelyng Winds yielded forth such
whirlyng reports, as that a man might no otherwise imagine, but that despair
did sing the plain song to those vnaccostomable and sad mournyng descantes.

Simonides overcome with these solitary asspectes, began to bethink him self
of former sorrows, of his Mistrisse unjust refusal: so that what so ever sorrow
he could imagine by reason of any event ouerpassed, was dubbled and redubbled
again, by those unacquainted and sour obiectes, that at that very instaunt
solicitad his senses.

Manigyng him self thus with doleful contemplation, and pacyng on softly
altogether solitary, he espied at length a huge Rock, from the top whereof
into the valies round about a silver Stream descended, compassing it on every
side, save that the wave, as it were, refusing to shape his course that way, in
fear to behold what there was to be seen, declined backwarde, yeeldyng a
full stream into the Channel, which made way by customable reuolutions
toward the Ocean, within which Rock, Nature her self has made a solemn
habitation: For by castyng his eyes on every side, Simonides at the last found
an entrance: into which being desirous to hear of company, and willing to
see some novelty, he suddenly entered: when as behold a woeful Lady, as it
seemed by her mornefull habit, macerated and made lean with ouerwearyng
sorrows, combred with millions of misfortunes was resident: not attired in
fashions of Courtlike Damsels, neither did gorgious Couertures compass in her
golden bushe of heir, but declinyngly it hanged down along her shoulders and
shadowed her face, her eyes made red with restless tears began to forsake the
benefit of light: her often reuerberation of her breasts, make a mournful
reply from the very heart. So that it was to be thought Despair being dead,
had made this poor Lady the Anotomie of her self, her habit was so
mournful, her behavior was so malancholy: who no sooner spiyng our amorous
Spanyard, but rousing her self from her cursed Couch, she angerly inueighed
thus.

What hateful Fury has sent thee hither to be the beholder of my
misfortunes, whose vnaccustomable calamities requires no mortal asspect,
neither may be finished but with miserable death: depart I say from
beholding my secrets, who loathes the sight of thee, since thou renuest my
sorrows: and conjure thee to depart from her, that has sworn to be
comfortless.

Simonides hearing so discomfortable a discourse, uttered with such bitter
asperitie, at the first could hardly conclude with himself what to say: At the
last considering that unless by her means, he might not conceive a conclusion
to light on his right way, he soberly replied thus.

Madame, although your misfortunes drive you into such extremities, as that
not only company is loathsome unto you but also hateful, yet if it shall
please you to consider of me as one enforced by necessity, not come hither of
set purpose, you will the rather bear with my fortune and pardone my escape.

The Journey I pretended was toward Naples, neither at my passage from Rome
imagined I of this place, but Fortune has either sent me hither (I think
Lady) to be partaker of your sorrows, or else to persuade you from
solitariness. Wherefore Madame though your affections be such, as human
society seems loathsome unto you, yet I beseech you give place to an
extremity, and as Fortune has proffered me to your presence by unacquainted
happ, so graciously I request you, counsel me toward the accomplishyng of my
Journey toward Naples having lost my way, and to the satisfiyng of my
hunger, being ouerwearied with penury and painful travail.

The Lady seeing the gentle and courteous demeanor of the young Gentleman,
greatly commendyng in her mind the natural affability of the man, answered
him thus.

Seeing by casualtie and not of purpose you are come hither to be an ouerseer
of my Purgatory, though hereto for I have disdained any intercourse or
enterparle, yet to answer your extremities with my ready provision and
simple counsel, you shall not find me negligent. Whereupon, taking him by the
hand, and conueying him through the wandles of the Cave, she brought him to
the place of her provision, and courteously placyng the Gentleman on her right
hand, with such Caates as she had she entertained Simonides.

He rather at Meal time feedyng on the courtlike behavior of this Votiue,
then on the provision set before him, forgot his diet by falling into a
secret contemplation of her estate: which the Lady perceiuyng, recoueryng
her self somewhat, making her speeches like to the invincible magnanimity of
her mind, interrupted him thus.

Signior, it should seem that you rather feed on some amorous imagination at
this instant, then on that is set before you: if that way you be perplexed,
doubt not but either the extremity of the passion will lightly vade, being
slightly conceived, or grounded on assurance grow to some effect.

Madame (quoth Simonides) although I must confess I am bondslaue to Beauty,
yet at this present it is neither the memory of any misfortune causes me to
be sad, nor the remembrance of my Mistress makes me melancholy, but only
the veiwe of you makes me altogether astonished, in whom beauty being resident,
sorrow overcomes, with whom although all the signs of a noble and
invincible mind are conversant, yet see I a transmutation of your self in your
self, and were it not (good Madame) to molest you, I would not only to
accompany my sorrows, have some acquaintance with yours, but also to
confirm my unable mind to bear delays, learn by your renowned valewe, how
in extremities I might master my affections.

The noble and renowned Lady, conceiuyng the issewe and purpose whereat the
young Spanyard shot, and considering by uttered request the inward desire of his
mind, willing (though to her own sorrow) to satisfy the Trauailer with
courtlike humanity, she answered him thus.

Noble Signior (for your behavior purposes no less) where as I seek by every
means discomforte, and openyng of sorrows is some means whereby for a space
to lessen them, I shall seem contrary in my self, and in not aunsweryng your
expectation discourteous to a Stranger: Whereupon, rather to the pleasuryng of
you, then in the decreasing of mine own sorrow, I will satisfy your
expectation so much as in me lies. Whereupon, after our repast was ended, and
courteous thanks given and taken on both parties, she brought him into a
solitary out place of this desolate Cave, wherein not without great foysen of
tears, she discovered two dead bodies of exquisite proportion, each one (as
it were with auster looks) manacyng the other, and both of them having each
others Rapier sheathed in his enemies breast: The sudden sight whereof so
amazed Simonides, that what with pity to behold, and sorrow to see the
Ladies calamity, he was not able to govern his manly passions, but that he
vehemently burst into tears, which the Lady perceiuyng comforted him thus.

Gentleman, these tears of yours delare an inward remorse of a noble mind,
and prognosticate unto you that you are to hear of such a report, as might
well move the cruel Tigresse to compassion, may it please you therefore to
rest your self a space here by me, then breefly shall you hear the whole
report of mine and these two murdered Gentlemen's Tragical misfortunes.

Simonides acceptyng the courtesy, and seated by her, they both having dried
up their brinishe tears, the Lady discoursed thus.

I doubt not noble Gentleman, but that the renown of the noble House of Medici
has bin brought to your ears, whose power and authority in this Country,
has not only been long famous by descent, but also in every man's mouth, from
thence took I mine ofspryng, being only Daughter and heir of Lodouico
Gonsasy, who in my prime of youth, at such time as my young years were
mellowed with the cheifest perfections of Nature, was sought to in way of
Marriage by two young Italian Princes: the one the Prince of Aucona, called
Vascalio, the other Saluanio, Son to the Duke of Venice: each of these with
many amorous interscessions, incessauntly lay upon me for Marriage, and
continually solicited my father for his favor: who tenderly loving me his young
Daughter called Priseilla, and unwilling not to march me contrary to mine own
likyng, made me free to take my choice, and to answer the expectation of these
two young Princes according to mine own fancy. Both these young Princes I fed
with delays, neither preferryng the one, nor refusing the other. Whereupon,
Vascalio wearied with my ouerburdensome delaie, began to wax sickly: which
opertunitie seruyng Saluanio very well, he ceased not with continual courtyngs
to coast my affections, not pretermittyng any opertunitie, either to entice by
present, or win favor by service. Notwithstanding, considering how serious
the cause was I had in hand, and how dangerous it were to repulse either the
one or the other, I thought it most convenient to make a stay for a space, in
which time, either the fancy of the one might be lessened, or the serious
affection of the other extinguished: But alas the while, as they that are stung
with Scorpions, are wont from the harmer to seek their recure, so these two
noble Nouices, having their faithful affections fixed on ye glistering gleames
of my youthful beauty, thought no other means might be had to remedy their
miss, but only by the attaineme^t of my especial favor.

Alas that simple feminine beauty, should so bewitch reasonable Nobility, or
such misfortunes should befall, by beholding my declinyng favor.

These young Gentlemen, desisted not their attempt: for what the one in person
preferred with humble submisson, the other proffered in papers with a faithful
assurance of loyalty. In brief the coals of fancy were kindled, and such
unacquainted humors at last began to govern mine actions, that the fire
which feign I would have raked up in the embers of discretion, brake out with
fury to mine own confusion: For being altogether affectionate toward
Saluanio, who (as ill fortune served) was always present with fuel to
increase my fire, helped by opertunitie, and overcome by his importunity, at
the last I yielded to the assault, promising him the full possession of my
heart, if he would so moderate himself by a twelve months space, as no one
token of accordaunce, should frustrate my private intent: and to the end that
our undoubted assurance should never be separated, I imparted unto him a
Gemme of approved valewe, assuryng him that the possession of me, belongs to
him and no other, who continued the custody of my committed Jewel. Saluanio,
ravished with the contemplation of his good fortune, and gloriyng in the
plausible favor I had bestowed upon him, returned to his fathers Court, where
with such great royalty he demeaned himself, that the renown of his toward
proceedinges, was common Table talk amongst our Jtalian Princes.

But at last, the other noble young Gentleman, having considered with himself,
that absence breeds forgetfulness, and delaie was unnecessary in causes of
Love, betook himself to walk abroad, and watchyng still for some conuenience
to utter his mind, especially incited thereunto by the absence of his rival
foe Saluanio, he unfortunately on a time found me alone in a private meditation
of my constant Lover, utterly void of myndyng him, and being helped by this
opertunitie, he boldly incountered me thus.

Madame, the long sorrows I have conceived by your delays, and the earnest
zeal that attends on my heart, the true loyalty wherewith I honor you, and
the fervent affectes of Love which altogether enforce my thraldom, bind me
to beseech your favor, that either by your grant of grace I may be revived
now almost dead with despair: or if your displeasure be such as no favor
will be had, I may be adjudged, the most unfortunate Lover that lives: Good
Lady, those your glorious eyes, these your exquisit lineamentes, that your
seemly behavior have applied such an impression to my heart, as neither Art
can eat out the corrosiue by counsel, nor life continue if you contemn: For
how can the Moon glad the darksome night, if her borrowed light of the Sun
be extinguished, or the heart continue in good estate, if the vital powers be
determined. Can I living by your gracious look, otherwise but dye by your
frown. Alas, that heart which easily yields to like, can hardly brook to
neglect, and that Arrowe which has wounded mine eye with reflection, will
never be losened but by the asspect of beauty: So that in your repulse, I am
tied to such extremity, either to live a dying creature, being manaced by
your cruel contempt, or else dye on mine own sword, to avoid the fury of an
everlasting Purgatory. Whereupon good Lady, make an end of my torments, or
increase it to the uttermost: My deserts, my faith, my true affection crave a
gracious acceptaunce: my birth not the basest: my rival Signior Saluanio,
satisfied but with a look is flidge and away: I continue constaunt, rest
yours, serve for you, live by you, and without your favor shall dye forsaken
through your repulse.

I having given him scope to discourse, not forgettyng the Idol of mine own
fancy, and repliyng upon the continuance of his faith, answered my Lord
Vascalio thus.

My noble Lord, I am sorry that ought should be in me, whereby either your
health should be impared by my delaie, or your passion remediless in my
repulse, for that the faate that waits on me, has prefixed me a companion,
where though your worthiness deserves to inioye one more to be esteemed then
my self: yet my fortune is such, that until my appointed hour fall out, I
may not be fortunate in Marriage noble Vascalio: Therefore, since it is not in my
self to appoint the limits, but that I am bound to the direction of time, and
chiefly to a private affection that governs me, I must crave your pardon,
besechyng you to learn that one lesson of Sandalio, which he practices, that
in vnnecessare sorrows, and woman's repulses, you never trouble your self with
heart breakyng, when as the cheifest commodity once gotten it is scarsly
beneficial. And thus not respectyng his reply, I left the solitary Gentleman
in his solemn aspectes, who altogether amazed at my confused speeches and
sudden departure, being desperate of his attempt, and out of all hope to
attain my favor, betook him self contrary to the nobility of his name, to
such unacquainted and melancholy sorrows, that he refused company, and like
Timon of Athens, he became the only Misauthropos of the world: His delight in
naught but in sower discourses: his muse w^ityng nothing but lamentable lays,
and for that he desired a place several to himself, and agreeable to the
agonies that ouerwearied him, he by long travail did light upon this Desert:
Here with woeful remembrance of my repulse, and with lamentable record of his
misfortune, he abode for the space of four months, in which time all these
records which you see here of his cursed mishappe, he affixed within this his
and my Purgatory, which to the more satisfaction of your mind, before you
pass any further you may ouerlooke. Whereupon, discoueryng a Table of
Allablaster, in Ciphers as it seemed written with his own blood, was regestred
his misfortune in these terms.

NOT noble birth, alas unhappy man
Could conquer beauty, neither by desert
Does Cupid level, why repinst thou than
Vain wretch, from Cradles rock turmoyld thou art
To bide these woes: then since thy froward fate
Prefixed thy torment, glory in thy state.
Faith was the first, that linkt this lastyng love,
Death is the last, thy sorrow must alay
Beauties repulse, inforst me to remove
From stately Court, into this desert way
Here lead J on, my life that love may see
My zeal was such, as scarce the like may be.
Here leave J lines, of unacquainted style
Set down with Incke, of vnaccustomde hew
What here my Pensil wrote, my thoughter while
Engrau'd within, my heart for love to vewe
Mine inward woes, the Pouers may look on
For outward lines, they serve when J am gone.
Infortunatus miser and quid non.
Upon the Testerne of his bed, as it seemed made of Cipris, and squared with
even proportions, was left this Monument.

THou witnisse of my woe, my careful bed
Tell forth my nights repose, if ought it be
Unto the world, speak is thy master dead
What freed from thrall, tell truth how rests he
Alas my couch, thou know as well as J
My sleapes are sighs, and from my waking eyes
My lukewarm tears, be wet me as J ly
And if by chance, a slender sleep surprise
My lustlesse looks, in sighyng dreams J say
Repulsed wretch, disdain this hateful light
Since beauty daines, to daunt thee with denay
Thus with a sigh, J break forth out of sleep
Condemnyng that, repose J never had
Thou know those hours, I pointed have to weep
Compare the times, and cipher out my glad
But figure forth my woes, not one nor three
Make every moan, a million if thou please
Thou shall not err, the count shall pass from me
Keep thou thy tale, so if that fortune please
When J am dead, to send a second slave
For to succeed, Vascalios vowed vain
Report to him, the nights J passed have
And in comparyng mine, his proves no pain.
Infortunatus miser and quid non.
Simonides, having over read these Sonettes, the Lady began again to continue
her discourse thus.

These tokens and monumentes of this poor Gentleman, Noble Signior, are
sufficient to open you the Jtalians martyrdom, whose mishapes (as it seems)
the powers pitiyng, by misfortune drove a Noble gentleman of Jtaly (a very
singular favorer of Vascalios) into this Desert, who lightyng by adventure on
this cave, encountered with our Duke of Ancoua, and agreued with the sight of
his miserable estate, persuaded him with such and so probable demonstrations,
as at last the Nable youth began to recover him self, yet altogether resolut
to continue in his vowed mantion, nevertheless, replenished with a lingeryng
hope which by his friends persuasion was trained on, and thus it was
concluded between them, that according to the necessity of the cause (seeing no
other means would be wrought for the Princes saftie) by subtell conueyaunce
from my fathers house to steal me away into this inaccessable Desert, whereas
force perforce persistyng in my proud contempt, they might compel me to
mercy, or punish my contumacy. Whereupon, Polibius (for so the Gentleman
called) having taken his leave of the Prince of Ancoua, and being determined
upon his plighted promise to practice the conuayance of me, came unluckily
into my fathers Court, at that very instant, when as inpacient of delays, and
repentaunt of my years conditions, I had compacte with certain of the court
to have stolen away toward Venice.

Polibius very circumspect in that he went about, had learned out the
certainty of my escape, and which way I pretended to travail, by one of my
private Handmaides, whom only in that cause I faithfully trusted, and loath to
let slip the opertunitie, with certain of his retinew (whom he had armed to
the purpose) about two leages from my fathers house, vnhorsing, and putyng to
flight all those that were in company and of my conspiracy, which done, he
violently by the help of his associates, mounted me behind him self, and
without knowledge of any what he pretended, in post have he galloped toward
this Desert, by such unacquainted ways, as unless the Desert groves, no one
mortal creature resounded an Echo to my exclamations.

But now knowing him self to be free from persute, and that the time required
to open unto me the effect of his pretense, he softly pacyng his hackney,
courtiously spoke unto me thus.

Madame, your injurious exclamations, grounded on no Noble demeanure, in
unnecessary occasions, argue small staiednes. Think not that I either have
attempted a rauishment of Nobility, for I detest it, or a matter contrarious
to Honor for I am noble, but moved by the pitious martyrdom of a noble
Gentleman my friend, and disdainyng your rude refusal, I have determined to
make an end of his sorrows, and to counsel you to make your mercy
aunswerable to the excellency of your renouned beauty: what gracious mind
affected with the least benefit of nature, unless swalowed up in the unjust
gulf of disdain, but would pity the passions of poor tormented Vascalio, who
only for your love Madame Priscilla, has abandoned his pompious train, his
accostomable Glory, and only acquainted himself with the solitariness of
this inaccessable Desert. Whereupon, if ever mercy prevailed with chaste
beauty, finishe up his martyrdom, and conclude a peace between both your
fancies, for to this only end have I practiced this attempt, and for his
rocouerie (Madame) do you accompany me here to this Desert. I hearing his
fair and smooth delivered speeches, though altogether confounded with
susspition, yet now resolved of the occasion, incensed with hateful disdain
against both him, his friend, and his attempt, bitterly inuaied against him thus.

Ungracious Rauisher, it is neither thy painted glozes shall make me lauishe of
mine Honor, neither thy sugered persuasions withdraw me from my resolutions:
mine affections fetchethe not their limits from smilyng similitudes, neither
enforced will I make sail of mine Honor, wretched caitife as thou art,
think thou the blood of the Medices, is either terrified with a simple
threat, or confirmed with a courtious request, the only limits of thy revenge
is my destruction, thy unreasonable demand is more odious unto me then death,
resolve the of thy exigent, for I am determined of my purpose.

Nay then replied Polibius, what fair words will not persuade, force shall
bring to end, thou art not to look in this Desert (disdainful Lady) for
flocks of friends, but in contempt of Nobility that reuerenceth the reuengyng
foes, and to conclude in brief, unless your actions savor out better of
lenity then pure words, you shall find quickly what the difference is
between aspeare speeches and austeare execution. In these and like terms we
ouerpassed the tediousness of our travail, it was Vascalios hap to epsy us
a far of, who (poor Gentleman) ravished but with the imagination of my
beauty, and doubtful of the euente was to follow, sounded breathless, so yt
at our ariuall, Polibius espiyng him for dead, ouerwronge with intolerable
impatience, laiyng violent hands upon me, unsheathed his Rapier, brandishyng
the blade over my head, gave me this cold comfort.

Thou ingratfull Tigresse, sproung of the loins of Magera, not from the
offspring of the Noble house of Medici, receive the guerdon of thy contempt, who
gloriest in the fall of so noble a Prince as Vascalio: whereupon ready to
execute his fury, unfortunately the poor Lover recovered, who spiyng the
intention of Polibius, castyng him self prostrate at his friends feet, besought
him thus.

Oh Polibius, by the Honor of the noble name thou bear, by that inuyolate
Nobility as is in thee, by that constaunt promise thou have kept toward me,
I beseech thee vouchsafe to stay thy hands from practicing so horrible
impiety, and let me (by whom the error first sprounge, and whose fond
affections have procured these extremities) make only this action tragical by
my proper fall, alas see thou not (sweet friend) how consumed alredie with
sorrow, I stay but the summons of the Sisters, yield therefore the unhappiest
man that lives the rest he seeks for, and live thou sweet Priscilla, to see
the faithful end of constant Vascalio.

Polibius wateryng his cheeks with tears, as the true tokens of his woeful
heart brake, replied thus.

Nay noble Duke unhappy were I, if to lessen thy sorrows I would not make
satisfaction with my own blood, for whose only cause I have attempted this
action, the which the heavenly powers bring to a good end. Whereupon, turnyng
him self once more toward me his eyes altogether bleared with wayling, he
entreated me thus.

Lady, if ever gracious suppliauntes suite prevailed in your merciful mind,
disdain not to accept the submission of such a petition as for his
constauncie, deserves the noblest Parragon in the world, you see how
interchaunable sobbes interrupt his speeches, and what the tongue in terms
should utter, the heart abundantly persuades by the euacuation of tears: see
how on bended knees he beseeches: behold him here that with gentle
persuasions entreat, that his love is constant: Consider but this, you are
here at his own power, where neither your feminine weakness could resist,
nor any reasons hinder your Rape: yet see the noble Gentleman, who not only
reliyng in your favor where he might command, requesteth: where he might
enforce, prays: Pity therefore (good Lady) his passion, and make an end of
these Tragical discoursinges with a Comicall conclusion. Vascalio, to these
persuasions added this humble exortatorie.

Oh thou the Mistress of my life, if my unmeasurable torments, were an eyes
obiecte, I doubt not but to accompany this Rock, you would yield to ruth, who
were they not senseless, I know could not be silent dear sweet, my passions
are so vehement, as I am at this instaunt, to require your conclusion but in
these two things: the one, either to grant me your gracious and favorable
acceptaunce, or else with this sword to finishe my sorrows.

I ouerwearied with these woeful exhortations, submissions and lamentations,
conclusiuely answered him thus.

Signior Vascalio, I had thought Nobility would have so wrought with you, as
that considering my reasonable conclusion, you would not thus have attempted my
voyolation perforce, nor your cruel Polibius in choloricke opinion vouchsafed
to have sheathed your sword in a Virgins entralles, but since the
vnconstauncie of lust blinds one, and cruelty ouergouerneth the other, I will
make way to both your affections: whereupon, my final conclusion is this,
that it may please you both to determine my death and to save mine Honor:
and for my self, I am resolved, never to love nor like any other then he that
has my heart, which is Signior Saluanio, who having title to me, shall
receive this honorable report of my constauncie, that death rather liked
Priscilla, then faithflesse breach of promise.

These two Gentlemen hearing my unhappy resolution, having privately discoursed
together, Polibius taking his horse and leauyng me to the mercy of my
captiuate servant, betook himself by a contrary way to his own Castle,
Vascalio, with his naked Rapier in his hand, accompanied only with me his
disdainefull Mistress, and millions of imaginations compassyng in himself which
ways to mittigate my fury. Alas the while, how inscrutable be the reuolutions
of the Planettes, at this very instaunt, Saluanio severed from his train, and
having lost his way between Naples and the next City Rome, infortunatly came
in place, whom no sooner I espied, but with often exclamations, I brought him to
the finishyng of his own life: for having spied me claspt in the arms of his
rival foe, incensed with great fury, with naked weapon he assailed Vascalio,
who ready to withstand his force, at one instaunt, each of them unfortunately
sheathed their weapons in either others body, wallowyng together in their own
blood, and several reportyng this one speech successively, Priscilla Vascalio
was constauntest, Priscilla Saluanio was constauntest: and in these and such
like exclamations, yielded up the ghost.

I pale and wanne for fear not knowing whom to succor nor what to atempt,
fell stark dead in a trance at both their feet for a long time, till at the
last recoueryng my self, after I had bathed both their bodies with floodes of
my tears, and sacrificed to their gostes with the offalles of my hear, vowed
here to finish my life, and conueiyng their bodies (as you see) into this
caben, here have I kept them these five years, myndyng in recompense of both
their honorable affections and my unjust foresight, to recompense with some
service to their dead bodies, and finish my life with them here, whose lives
was but death being refused by me.

Thus have I breefly reported unto you (noble Gentleman) the whole discourse of
my misfortune, whose mishappes are so manyfold, as neither death can determine
them, nor life led in misery, in part satisfy the perfection of these two
noble Gentlemen here dead.

Simonides astonished at this tragical discourse, which seemed to abridge the
fame of those of more ancient memory, began in this sort to open his opinion.

Truly Madame, the misfortunes of these two worthy personages, together with
your resolution, makes me presuppose, that all honorable affection, is here
only in Jtaly, and constant retribution, in the ladies of this country, I
find my self benefited in this my misfortune, that seeing feminine perfection
so much, I may valiauntly continue the assault, though hitherto by repulse I
have been still afflicted, and though the breach be alredie made, and the
assaylaunt entered, yet to keep one skonce sure against the sowers of disdain.

Happy is Signior Vascalio, (in my fancy noble Lady) who has determined his
Tragedy, and left a singular confirmation of his constancy, even before his
eyes who only was the sole mistress of his heart, leauyng that person here
being dead, to blazon out his renown, whom living he honored with loyal and
constant service.

Strange is it to see, the stratagemes of this life, how one death as well
deuoureth ye surest constant, as most disloiall, one mould vouchsafes both
noble and in noble, whereas the desert of the one required diefiyng, the escape
of the other shamful reproach, and scarce worthy the benefit of sepulture.

And wonderful are these effects, when nature shall vouchsafe to admit, that
is unnatural toward nature. The contrarieties of your affections (I mean
Vascalio and yours) altogether contrarious, yet were they one, for what you
wished, your poor suppliaunt desired, yea, what you imagined to dispossess
him, he turned to the honoring of you.

But I see, the opening of green wounds is dangerous, and the remembrance
of misfortunes newly past, procure a bitter disgestion of anticendentes:
whereupon (Madame) I had rather be silent to slake your sorrow, then
taulkatiue to augment mine own grief: yet I beseech you, bear with my
presumption, and vouchsafe humble thanks at my hands for your doolefull
discourse, and farther if it please you, let me not want your direction, toward
the accomplishing of my journey.

Madamisella Priscilla, allowyng of Simonides discourse, yet altogether
unwilling he should long abide with her, after she had with honorable
semelines co^uaied him to a path way toward Naples, and directed him in what
she might, toward the accomplishyng of his desire, not forgettyng to learn out
his name, birthe, cause of trauaill, and such like wherein she stood in
doubt, she courteously gave him this farewell at partyng.

Since Fortune (amorous Spanyard) has with like repulse afflicted thee as it
has Vascalio, she has to this end sent thee hither to learn of Vascalio,
and if thy Mistress contumacie disdain thy courtesy, doubt thou not but she
may be made partaker of my hard hap: Persevere thou therefore (noble
Simonides) in faithful affection, so in the end thou shall reap renown for
thy labor. This said, she courteously betook her to her vowed Mansion, and
after some reverent salutations presented by Simonides, he passed forward on
his Journey, and not pretermittyng the cautions the courteous Lady had
prefixed him, he at last overcame the tediousness of the solitary Desert, and
came into the high way toward Naples. In iourneying he met with diverse, who
upon sundry affairs were trauellyng to that City, and as diligence
overcomes all tediousness, so with the good company he met withal, and the
expedition they altogether made, they might behold the Town which so long
they had wished for.

How Simonides ariuyng at Naples, was entertained by his Country man
Frederick de Cicuta, sometimes a gallant Courtier, but now a Carthusian Friar.
SIMONIDES being thus arrived at Naples, a famous City and Town of Garrison,
was no sooner entered the Port, but he was stayed by the court of Guarde, and
was presented before the Viceroy of the City, who finding out by his reports,
that he was a traveling Stranger, caused him courteously to be conveyed to a
convenient lodgyng in the City, where he might imploye himself as he pleased.

Simonides reposing himself for that night, on the morrow questionyng with his
Host what Strangers were habitaunt in the City, he reported unto him, that
amongst the Carthusians (a Sect of Friars instituted by Bembo of Paris) there
was at that instaunt invested a Gentleman of Nobility, a Spanyard once
renowned for his holy life, though heretofore he had bin a Courtier of singular
bravery within that City, and having learned his name, which was Frederick
de Cicuta, he likewise sought the mean to find him out, and being preferred
to his speech by the license of the Superintendent or Provost, he saluted him
thus.

Signior, being arrived a Stranger in this City, and understanding by report
of your being here, who are (as I am informed) my Country man, I thought it a
poinct of wisdom, to acquaint my self with one of mine own Nation, and a
part of civility, to visit a Gentleman of such renown as I understand you
to be of, willing, if you have any service wherein to command me, if it be
your pleasure at any time to employ me, you shall find me more willing to
perform, then you ready to command.

Friar Frederick having given him the Baseles manes (after the fashion of our
Napolitan Courtiers) answered him thus. It can not be courteous Gentleman,
that my Country man a stranger, should want any service I may accomplish,
especially, perceiving you to be a Gentleman, and willing to grow into the high
way of experience, wherefore if you please to walk with me, into my private
Cell, you shall according to mine ability be welcomed, and if in the City I
can do you any courtesy, doubt not but you shall command me.

Whereupon, they both passing to the fornamed place, and having discoursed of
the causualties of their Country, they recommended each unto other, the
original cause of their travail, of their birthe, abode, and such like: in
the end, Friar Frederick, demanded of Simonides, the cause of his departing
from Civil, and why he travailed toward Naples, whom Simonides satisfied
thus.

Religious Father, your reverent ears should hardly daine (considering the
subject) to vouchsafe the hearing of a discourse so unnecessary, especially,
since my cause of travail stands on such nice points, as ere I had
resolved to depart Civil, I was almost at Rome. My young years (as you see)
subject to sundry impressions, at last took holdfast on unstaid Love, and
mine eyes being curious in regardyng Beauty, fixed them at last vnremoueably
on the blaze of a fair Damsel called Clarinda, whom (according to custom)
when I had eft courted, yet never conquered, impacient of delays, I desperately
left Civil, trauailyng to unknown Cities, led by this resolution, that by
sight of many things, I should learn something, and in returnyng home
constaunt in love, and accompanied with many good qualities, I should be better
welcomed to my Clarinda. On this ground I have seen Ferrara, visited Venice,
past through Genoua, attained Rome, where enticed by the general report of
the nobility and courtlike behavior of Naples, I am come hither to weete if
the bravery be correspondent to that I have heard, the demeanure so
commendable as it is esteemed of. These breefly are the causes of my travail,
somewhat I have seen else where, and now what I look for here, if by your
means I might, (good Country man) I would gladly accomplish.

And was it Love (noble Simonides said Frederick) that made you leave Civil,
truly an unjust cause to adventure tedious travail, for small or no
commodity: It is a great error (Country man) that made you amorous: it was
not the garishe beauty of your Mistress, the aluryng rays of her eyes, ^he
exquisite feature of her body that captiuated your senses, but an idle mind
of yours, inclinyng to no good exercise, and disdainyng orderly
aduertisementes, which vouchsafed to follow such inconstant grounds as these
be: for it never falls out but where Idleness is predominaunt, that Love
prevails: for where heavenly contemplation occupies the mind, and orderly
functions employ the body, the soul disdaineth to like of dust and ashes, the
body subdued by discretion, becomes not desolute. If we keep as dutiful
dispositions of our times, as the limitations of Nature has prescribed us, our
errors should be finished in an instaunt, our virtues increased every hour:
for as all things may be recovered but loss of time, so unlawful pleasures
should be no reasonable man's companions.

I have known of many Lovers thus much, that for a little pleasure in their
youth, they have proved unwieldy men in their age: but for those that in youth
have been Studientes in Philosophi, in their declinyng years they have proved
Philosophical, and not troubled with distempreture of bodies. If you knew
therefore Simonides, what it is to compass the time, neither love should
prevail though it assault you, nor vain pleasures conquer you when you are
well armed with happy exercise. For he that distinguishes times well, and
compares the commodity of his hours reading to his days lotering, would
wish his days spent in Love, readyng hours: and repent every minute let
slip, with a thousand sighinges. For by how much we ouerpasse our days in
idle exercise, by so much we abridge the limits of our happiness: and by how
much we aply our mind to blind and amorous actions, by so much we
dispossess our mind of the most blessed benefits of reason. In studiyng to
attain Love, we are recompensed with small reward: In studiyng to possess
Virtues, what one thing may be compared to our blessedness. In possessyng
such transitory pleasures, as Love is, a man is envied at by his Rival: In
attainyng the inscrutable benefit of verteous and sacred knowledge, a man is
reverenced even by his Enuiers. So that you see, the slothful amorous man, is
tamed and made less then a man by his folly and negligence, where contrary,
he is most happy and blessed, that fearyng to be idle, is not content to be a
man, and indeuouryng in honest exercises, is a demi God by his virtues.

Oh Simonides, I speak all this to this end, that thou should see thy
follies, and in seeing them subdue them in thy self: for in those only
actions, we prove our selves reasonable, wherein we subdue such contrary
affectes, as withstand aduisement, and master those fleshly passions, as
altogether dispossesseth our happiness: For it is a point of reason, to
distinguishe good from ill, so is it the part of a reasonable man to follow
the better and fly the worse. These considered (good Country man) for your
first part of travail you can not but confess it to be grounded on small
reason: yet notwithstanding, I will with you confirm this, that by it you have
gotten experience: and whereas here you are arrived to learn the fashions of
Court, whatsoever by eye sight your self shall perceive, I by my experience can
already lay open: and not only describe you a Courtier in all his colors,
but also open unto you the imperfections that proceed from their
profusednesse: whereupon, if it please you to yield attentive ear, I am
determined to begin my Narration.

The Court of Naples here renowned by the excellency of this Signior that now
governs it, has incited many young men (having the rain in their own
necks) to resort hither, where both by the serenitie of the air, they may
have assurance of their health, and by the bravery of the Court, satisfy
their youthly humors. Othersome, by their fathers appointment (in hope of
preferment) are sent hither to be attendaunt on the Viceroy, who by their good
deservings, either are to grow in favor, or by their valewe and force of
Arms, are to be confirmed with Marciall honor. These intentions, makes the
Court here so ample as it is, and so accounted as it seems to be: For the
first sort of noble Courtiers, as their humors are, such their retinewe is:
vain heads are attended on by seducyng Flatterers: Follies work altogether
masters with them: Fashions make them of comely Personages disguised Maskers.
Idleness, of able Gentlemen lascivious Mecocks: Their feats of Arms, are
turned to a Sinquipace: They had rather tread a trick of one and twenty
follies, then perform an action that might increase honor.

Such are the dispositions of these sort of Gentlemen, that if they err in
ought, they are soothed in the same: if they delight to be praised, the
Flatterer will prevail: if to be reverenced, they shall have capp and
courtesy: if for title of credit, they shall be worshipped and reworshipped:
if lascivious and wanton, they shall want no privy Brokers: if riotous, who
doubts but Spendthriftes will haunt them: if dainty in diet, they must have a
French Cook: if fashionatiue, the Town shall be sought for an inuenting
Tailor: So that at the last some pleades purse empty, and very many are non
suited of al their costly attire: and the Farmer in dischargyng the Merchants
books, has either his Lease renewed or continued for ever.

It is a strange thing to see, how in Court our dainty Nobles brave it,
desiryng rather to feed their Mistress eye with delicate aspect, then maintain
the distressed Soldiour with necessary provision: yet in this, I altogether
blame not the Gentleman, whereas (perhaps as Court fashion is) pleasing of
humors is most profitable: he desiryng to be a Penifather will venture his
stake amongst the rest, but where one speedeth a hundred fail, who over run
with arerages, are feign them selves to pull down their bristles, and to
settle their sails lower to avoid the Perrie of perdition.

Truly now adays (Signior Simonides) the fashion of Naples is such, as
favor prevails with many by occasion, not by desert: by opinion, not by
worthiness: And now since peace makes all plentious, Gentlemen will be
delicate: Ladies amorous: the Prince perhaps studious. And though not seeing
all ennormities, yet compassed about with many that be enormous.

Our Courtiers now adays, from the practice of the Lance, have learned to
love: perhaps in remembrance of their former endeavors, they will turnie a
course or two to please their Mistress: but for old daily experience, which
inureth the body to assaults, alas, they are to combersome, we must none of
them, but if our Mistress like of a codpeece Dublet, it shall cost them the
setting on but it shall be had: If short Breeches, all Padua shall be searched
for them. So that now from the Englishman, our Italians have stolen their
portrature, and they must now be pictured naked, with a pair of Sheares in
his hand, they are so combred with new fashions and inventions. In the Court
of Naples, now Aristides for his plainness shall be thrust out, and Aristippus
for his niceness preferred. Crisippus with his sweet eloquence shall
prevail, where Cato with his sour censures shall be mislikt. When Damocles
flattereth fastest he shall be preferred sonest, where if any severe Calistines
reprehended he should be punished.

Although in this Court we have sundry wise men, yet somethyng may slip
they can not see all, and where so many matters are so often debated, no
marvel though reason be somethyng abated.

Pithagoras with his own hand, wrote this Inscription on his School door.

Who so knows not what he ought to know, is a beast amongst men,
He that knows no more then he has need of, is a man amongst beasts,
He that knows that may be, is a God amongst men.
It may well be a just Prince might prescribe this before the Court of
Naples, but should he enter into the examination of the Premises, I fear me
he might worthily condemn the most, who ought to know that excess is
unnecessary, and yet our Courtiers do commonly use it, and therefore
brutishe: Many we have that know no more then they need of, and yet but men
amongst brute beasts: but for those that know all things, they are but Pauci
quos equus amauit Jupiter atque ardens euexit ad athera virtus.

Let Traian prescribe good laws for eternal memory, and yet where are they
sooner broken then in the Court of Traian. Let Marcus aurelius store his Court
with wisemen, yet even there they wax dissolute. And our Court guise here is
such, that in short space we learn to know what is ill, but for that is
good, we can hardly compass it in a long season. And how can it otherwise be,
that where all things are ministered to please the appetite, that reason should
prevail: where all studies are to invent vices, we should admit virtue: where
all our exercises are amorous, any one endeavor should be Philosophical:
Custom inuerteth all things: Error destroys all things, where only
similitudes serves the Court, what shall become of substance.

Truly if Catos censer, had as great authority in our Napolitan Court as he
had in Rome, and if the Animaduersions of Idleness, were as austere here as
they were in his government it was then, I fear me some of our nice Courtiers
should kiss the Marmotiue, and bear those corrections, which be fitted their
follies.

In his government, all Rome banished Idleness: in our government, noted vices
grow and increase Idleness: whereupon, it proves that the brauest Soldiour,
is become the commonest Courtier, and the fury of the sword is supplied, with
the fame of the tongue: the mediocritie in diet and attire, to banquettyng in
diet and bravery in attire. Thus our whole Court by Idleness is made
dissolute: by custom corrupt: where fashions fix folly, folly breeds
vanity, both inconstaunt.

This Court in elder age, was accounted the Mother of Wisemen, the stepdame of
Fools: where now, a Fool shall glory of more favor, then the Wiseman of
acceptaunce: And no marvel since the world as now runs at this rate, that
as Mothes eat the cloth, and the Cankerworme pearceth the Tree, so flatteryng
Sicophantes beguileth all the world. But for those sorts that depend on
their desartes, alas the while, I pity their misfortunes, they wantyng power
and ability to maintain a part, are put back from compassyng benefit, and
if in striuyng to arise they have but one faune of fortune, those eyes that
look into al procedinges, and are watchful only to their own profits, will
prevent them, turnyng them of with a little preferment, not sufferyng them to
rise to hie, for lickyng the fatt from their fingers, so that now adays
Promotion is determined in such sort, as fancy rather confirms the
election then discretion, in so much that desarte may now go a beggyng when
all the world is guided by opinion.

But whereas we have but looked a little into the private actions, attire, and
external practices of their life and found so much error, if we but now
consider the inward disposition of the mind, of troth you may wonder. The
whole state of them tooth and nail, by all possible means from their first
rising up affectate honor, not by those means that are required in men of
liberal mind, but altogether according to the nature of those they depend
of. If Phaleris will torment, Perillus will invent: If Aemilius will martyr,
Paterculus will minister: If Alexander will be stately, Photion will be humble:
If Domitius foolish, Hipodamus will be frantic, every great man's vain
shall have a follower, and by these steps of soothing Gouerners fantasies
now adays, our Courtiers seek to clime, rather the^ by any other action that
is commendable: So though the honor they attain make the^ renowned in the
face of the world, yet the means wherewith they attain are odious in the
opinion of the wisest. For what can be more discommendable, then for a noble
mind to apply it self to servile functions? What booteth Nobility, where the
man makes himself abject? If glory amidst the universal benefits of fortune
be cheifest, (for that it is the only record of virtue, and virtue by no
other means is to be atchiued but by honest endeavors) I count him
unfortunate that by contrarious steps would clime to it, and seeking by
unjust means to attain being unmeet for it.

As for those honors that depends upon the opinion of Princes, as it is
conceived so fears it in an instaunt: Those titles of renown in true glory
pass by desarte: in fained preferment are committed by casualtie: the proud
borrows the state and title of the humble: the humble of the proud: For
where the Judgment is in an indiscreet eye, how can it otherwise be, but that
all things must pass by opinion. It was true honor grounded on desarte, that
preferred Fabius to the title of Maximus: It was the austere actions of
Marilius, that made him to be termed Jmperiosus in undoubted renown.
Therefore we see Simonides, the preferment without counterfaite, but in fained
and momentany glory (which bears no small swaie in this Court) all runs by
hearesaies.

But this I dare boldly affirm, that if honors were to be compast by vices,
as in old Rome they were by virtues, there would more prove honorable (in our
Court of Naples) in one year, then Rome had of good men in a whole age.

How many Democriti should we have, that would deride al men accomptyng them
mad, when he himself was out of his wit? How many Epicuri that are led
altogether with sensual lust, yet disdain the strickt life of others.

Truly if our Napolitans, had every part of their bodies, according to the
number of fashions they wear, they should have Flemishe heads to their Dutche
hattes: French faces to their marquisotted cut: Parisian necks to their
Parris ruffes: Italian bodies to their big bellies: Millian buttocks to their
mincyng Breeches: Spanish legs to their Spanish Stockynges: English feet to
their English Pantoffies: And if every Country for his fashion might crave a
member, I think it were more wisdom in equal distribution of each Country
is part, then wit to acquaint our members with so many Country fashions.

Truly it were better for a Courtier with the Atlantibae, rather to want his
name, then good nurture: for unnamed his honor shall not grow in question, but
spoken of, his vices shall be noted.

But to let slip our men Courtiers, with their affectation of honor, with
their unorderly means to attain renown, let us now turn to our Courtlike
Ladies, and we shall find there was not so much variety in the one, but
there is twice as much vanity in the other: the Gentleman is not so foolish,
but the Gentlewoman is even as fond: so that both of them are coupled in a
lease of agreeable follies: the one to follow, the other to entice. These
Damoselles can make Emperors idle as Authony: Valiant men effeminate as
Hercules: wisemen dissolute as Solomon: Eloquent men lascivious as Aurelius:
their eyes have power attractiue: they never pry but they pearce: never
glaunce but they conquer, so that none but Mercury, can abridge their
sleightes to entrap: nor ought but wisdom, prevail against their sugared
inticementes. I have known the brauest Courtier in Naples, to day bravely
mounted trauesing the Streates, richly demeined, bravely attired, and being
overcome but by a glauncyng passion, the next day in mind melancholy: in
habit mournful: in gate inconstant: nay, in all actions not himself, such
pearce have these Ladies eyes, and they bestow them so cunningly, that making
out their choice on the Idelest, they always become conquerers. No Nouice may
escape their hands, but from Heaven with Prometheus he bringes away some flame:
So that in the Princes Court (I dare auowe) there are more at this instaunt
inamoured, then of continent habitude.

Madamisella her self what practices she not, this youth must be her servant
and wear her colors, that Gentleman her Partner and wear her sleeue, a third
her Lover and possess unchaste bed pleasures: And though the two first be as
lauishe in their gifts as the last, yet they both are forced to hold the
Candle, while the other offers to our Lady. Such be these Gentlewomen, that
they have tongues to train, eyes to alure, bodies to perform: no opertunitie
with them shall be let slip for a pleasure: nothing pretermitted to make
themselves finish.

In their youthly beauties, they procure many favorers, who led by colors not
substance, thinks that the old painted face of Proserpina, is the same it
was when she first became Plutos wife. They have colors to be rubie tallowe
faces, medicine to allaie gross humors, Maskes to cover deformed visages,
Periwigges to countenance their black bushes, strong buskes to straighten
crooked bodies, great Ruffes to abate their fulsome cheeks, small Rusfes to
seem big their pretty faces, French Vardingalles to set out and bolster
their bummes, high Pantoffles to make them to seem tall, loose Gaberdines to
shadow their wrong shapen bodies, straight Gowns to set forth their proper
proportions: Yea, such sweet souls be these, as neither fashion shall fail
them that they favor, nor pleasure unsought for that may delight them.

These makes our youths to be dissolute, not studious: amorous, not
venterous: wanton, not wise: curious, not constant. In so much that you may
see here as much riot, as in Rome suspected Religion.

This is the demeanure of the Court of Naples, this have I seen and learned by
mine own experience. And for this Simonides, as thou say thou art come to
Naples, if to eschew by seeing, and not to practice by beholding, I think no
man better welcome then my Country man, but if to follow that which I have
past over with repentance, no man sooner wished from hence thence Simonides.

Lucius Malius a formal Painter, yet having deformed sons, was partly
touched at a Supper by a friend of his in this manner.

Malius, thou paintest well, but fashionest ill, to whom the Painter answered
thus. Sir, I beget and fashion children in the night, and never paint but by
day.

As it fared with Malius in paintyng, so it falls out with advised men in
their actions, for what they enterprise, is narrowly examined before it be put
in proof: yet what so by them is formed in silent, that is past their heads
unawares, these as framed in the dark, they mar in the fashion: but what
experience persuades thee too, paint that by day, as a sweet impression in
the soul: If ought suddenly ouerstippe thee by error, count it a bastard
thought and refuse it, it came not of thy reason. Whatsoever is here to be
seen in Court, I have told in word, and if thou doubt of it, or that my
reports fail me, I will breefly show you in deed. A more convenient travail
for you (in my conceit Country man) were this, to go to Athens, where in
studiyng you may confirm your experience with readyng, acquaint your self
with learned Writers the fathers of the world, and delight your self with
heavenly contemplation which beseems your person.

In Athens you shall find Weapons to subdue vice, raines to keep in reason,
yea, in Athens thou shall read the good persuasions of Demostines, the
eloquence of Tully: there may thou meet, if for feature, with comely: if for
knowledge, with learned: if for good counsel, with the hoare hedded.

And amongst the whole cataloge of comely scholars, there shall thou meet
with a Gentleman of such experience, as may confirm thee in thy travail,
counsel thee in thy Love, commend thee into strange Countries, comfort thee
in all thy sorrows, teach thee how thou ought to walk, yea, with so sweet
a tongued Orator shall thou meet, as Aeschiues should be skoft at if he
discommended him, and Anthony the Orator derided at if he did imitate him.

All these perfections there, shall thou find in one man, who as the Be
sucketh Honey finds virtue, as the Camelion feeds on the Air follows
contemplation, who can Court it with the best, and Scholar it with the most,
in whom I know not whether I should more commend his manners or his learning,
the one is so exquisite, the other so general. Happy shall thou be in thy
travail to meet with this Euphues, who is curious in describyng the Anotomie
of wit, and constaunt in reprehendyng vanities in Love. Him seek thou out in
Athens, for Athens is renowned by him, with whose acquaintance thou shall
return to Civil so well counseled, as that Clarinda shall either sue to be
partaker of thy perfections, or thou alowyng a continent life, desist from thy
follies.

Thus have thou heard my cautions against Love, the customs of this Court, my
counsel in thy travail, and the commendatio^ of a noble Gentleman whom I
would acquaint thee with, to whom I will not only commend thee by L^^^ers,
but also with earnest entreaty desire him to entertai^^ thee as my Country man
and a courteous straung^ (...)

Thou see well what my will is and what thy wish should be, what thy wantes
are, and how to amend thy wreake, I pray thee as thankfully esteem of my
counsels, as I do willingly bestow them on thee my Country man: which
since they be the fruits of my experience, I wish them to prevail
effectually with thee.

As this holy Friar was thus discoursing with our Simonides, the report came
that the Viceroy himself with his whole train, would at that very instaunt,
visit the Relics of the Carthusians: whereupon Frederick de Cicuta, taking
Simonides by the hand, conuaied him into the Church, where conveniently he
might behold the majesty of the Regent, and the royalty of the Courtiers:
and according to his expectation, each thing fell out, so that our Spanyard was
glutted with shows, both of manly seemelinesse, and womanly comeliness.

The Euensong being finished, he was driven out of his dumpes with the return
of our religious Votiue, who questioning with Simonides, how he allowed of the
bravery of Naples, was satisfied with this answer.

Truly Don Frederick, I see here the report and the thing it self aunswerable
in them selves: Notwithstanding, I account with you all these but painted
Sepulchers: whose bodies, though clad with bravery, yet are their inward
dispositions stored with vices: and even at this instaunt, I was bethinkyng my
self of Athens. Here the Friar interruptyng him, said thus.

Continue that opinion Simonides, for it is verteous, I will further thee in
this, and furnish thee with Shippyng. Whereupon, conueying Simonides toward
his Lodgyng, at the Key he incountered with an Athenian Scholar called
Periander, of whom learning out that a Ship was ready to depart with the
next Wind, he said to Simonides.

Lo Country man, all opertunities bless thee with good fortune, and the
Floodes seem to favor thy proceedings. Wherefore, let us to thy Lodgyng
where thou may repose thy self, and I will presently to my pen to dispatch my
Letters. Whereupon, agreeing with the Master for Simonides passage, and
vesiryng him to call for him, when wind and tide might serve, they went both
to Simonides Lodgyng: and having first served their appetites, Simonides
betook himself to sleep, but Friar Frederick to his pen, salutyng Euphues in
this sort.

The Letter of Frederick to Euphues.
ON that very 16. of April, on which the Priests of the mother of the Gods,
with mournful howlings (presagyng some ill fortune) began to weep, on that
very day Frederick de Cicuta, sends Greetyng, and wishes good success to
Euphues of Athens: The report runs here in Naples, that your Grecian
eloquence is sauced with a little suspicion of flattery, which makes me to
use plainness in report, least in eloquence I might borrowe a little of your
error. Our affairs here (for I know you look for news) is after the old
state, our Court is amorous as it was, and the state as Peace able as it should
be, so that if old news be news, I have sent you some news: yet if
novelties be the news that you look for, I have both novelties to acquaint
you with, and a new friend to present you with. Don Frederick the Courtier,
is become Friar Frederick the Carthusian, having left of his Courtly
costlinesse, he has bound himself to a Religious habit, and as a man both
altered in habit and behavior, so is he changed both in style and study,
yet wishyng thee the favor of the heavens in extremity, and the gracious
aspect of the Muses in thy studies. There came of late into these quarters, a
Gentleman of my Country, who has left his Native soil for Love, and tried
such like path ways as once did Euphues of Athens, him in these Letters I
commend unto thee, whom if thou wisely look into, thou shall find him like to
the Willow, the more thou subduest his affections by reason, the better will he
grow to the attainement of wisdom, and whom if thou counsel according to
thy knowledge, he shall not only learn by thy living to avoid the fire, but
also recarrie into Ciulll, a certain testimony of thy Athenian wisdom, him
counsel according as he erreth, so may thou confirm thy self, and in
seeing him tread awry, both underlay thine own vnleueled fantasies, and
teach him how to bridle his. If in like courtesies I may satisfy thee in
Naples, use me: mean while, I commit thee to the benefit of good fortune, my
friend to thy tuitio^, and my self to my prayers, desiryng the powers to make
thy actions as prosperous, as my Orisons shall be fervent.

From Naples 16. Calendes Aprilis. Yours assured, Frederick de Cicuta.


No sooner had the Friar ended his Letters, but that the Master gave warnyng
that Wind and Tide served to set forward to Athens. Whereupon he awakyng
Simonides, with these terms took his last Vale of him.

Country man, since the opertunitie of your travail calls you away, and
now (as it should seem) I am to commit you to the mercy of the Flood, and to
the courteous entertainment of my friend Euphues, I am thus much to entreat
you in my name to salute him and deliver him these Letters: And for that
acquaintance has fallen between us by such good fortune, let not (good
Simonides) but that I may hear from thee by Letters, and for every line, I
will return twain, with a thousand thanks besides.

Simonides regardyng the gracious behavior of his Religious Country man,
answered thus.

Although heretofore, the fury of the Waves has hin such, as I partly vowed
no more to trust it, yet led by the benefit of good fortune and your
counsel, I will once again venture my carcass on the merciless Floodes,
and if Fortune alot me happy ariuall at Athens, I will not only perform what
you have given me in charge, but also think my self happy, that my rude lines
shall be requited with such fatherly counsels.

With these and such like talk pacyng to the Key, they both in freendly
manner gave the other a courteous farewell.

How Simonides being on the Sea between Naples and Athens, was entertained
with a very pleasant discourse by one of the Passengers.
SIMONIDES seeking out a Cabben in the Ship, after he had given Friar
Frederick his last farewell by waggyng his hand, the other being on the
Shore, their Ankers wayed, and the Southwest wind blowing up a pleasant Gale,
with merry cheer, the Mariners toss the Cannes. Simonides with diverse other
Passengers, setting them selves close togethers, wished them selves at the end
of their Voyage, before they had in manner begun their passage: Amongst the
rest a merry companion, willing to pass the time with pleasure, began to
cheer his Compheres thus.

Currage my friends, methinkes our delights are not aunswerable to the
clerenesse of the Weather, what do we droupe? Let us either with pleasant
discourse beguile the tediousness of our Passage, or else the Welkin may over
cast and lower, to see us all so sowerly disposed.

Simonides replied, and surely sir you say sooth, me thinks each of our
hands is on our halfpeney, we are not frolike, and where in disposition we be
sullen in our selves, there may little mirthe pass from us, but if it please
you to make your discourse aunswerable to your pleasant humor, you shall no
doubt make of all us melancholy folks, to become merry Greeks.

And is it so said Corubus (for so the Gentleman was named) then your word
shall stand, and if it shall please you to hear a pretty discourse that is as
true as it is pleasant, give ear for now I begin my tale.

In the City of Scienna (a pleasant and commodious town, renowned as well for
the bravery of the noble, as the wealth of the Merchant, and stored with
great foyson of beautiful Damsels) there dwelt a six years ago an
honorable and renowned Magnifico called Sertorius, who having large sums of
money in most of our banks of Jtaly; grown at last to the greatest estimation
in the City, and blessed every way with the best supplies of fortune, was only
deprived of this comfort, that he was wiuelesse: to the remedy whereof, he
endeavored to cast his eyes abroad, mindyng to fix his fancy on some fair
young damsel, by whose company in his declining years, he might perhaps be
beautified with issue and heirs to possess his inheritance. At the last by
long travel, having attained the sight of a delicate young Maiden, by birthe
noble, and of passing beauty, one of the Daughters of the Signiors of the
City called Brunellus, the Virgins name Orienta, he sought by all means
possible, how he might best imploye him self to the attainement of his purpose.
In the end, he solicited the Father, questioned with the Mother, visited the
Daughter, he clothed himself in unaccustomed colors, maquisityng his
Munch^ches to look youthly, stretchyng out his stark limbs almost wrethen
with age after the fashion of a Monarko: so that without all peraduentures, he
persuaded himself he should speed he was so frolike. Whereupon (after the
Italian guise) he concluded with the father and friends, who more alowing of
his wealth then of his goodly personage, they brought him in the end to the
speech of the Daughter.

She being young, tender, fair, amiable, and full of all graces, and seeing her
self sued too by such an old crust, began even with a smilyng regard to
pretend what was to follow, and being courteously saluted by Sertorius, she
returned him a requital. Whereupon the old Magnifico began to woe thus.

Mistress Orienta, that sweet beauty of yours, which is able to subdue the
most indurat affection of the wisest, and conquer the greatest resist of the
strongest, has made me your prisoner, not otherwise able to be delivered from
the martyrdom of Love, but only by the possession of your favor, whereupon
my poor heart feeds all his sweetest contemplation. And though my years
perhaps may make breach between your tender delicacie and m^ forworne age,
yet persuade your self thus, that although I am not the only to be liked, yet
know I thoroughly, I have not in me utterly to be loathed, what every year
shall diswade in mine age, I can recompense it with a caske of Crowns: and for
wealth, Italy shall not afforde you a better housband, though for youth it may
allow you more to be accounted of. This writhen body (sweet Damsel) may
perhaps afforde you as much honest pleasure, as one more nice: other
supplies much more and far better. Wherefore gentle Orienta vouchsafe me
favor: for if you should once martyr me with repulse (alas the while) my life
would prove but death, and my happy and blessed days should be determined.

The young Gentlewoman, having heard her lusty Woers suite, replied thus.

Me thinks Signior Sertorius, your years being almost grown to their date,
you should not be given to doat, and the heirs of experience beautifiyng your
head, you should with good advertisement call your self home.

To shape an Ox and an Ass in one Plough, were but a mockery: to place hot
and cold in one consert, were as great folly: to join age and youth in vowed
Wedlock, were very noisome: how can there be agreement, where all things are
contrary: or love, where the parties be loathsome.

Twere better to be buried honestly chaste, then to be a Bride in an old man's
bed.

One of your feet Signior Sertorius, is in the grave, the other declinyngly
bendyng, can not brook long to uphold so crooked a corse.

I in my prime of youth, native heat, chief beauty, like to maintain combat
against the fates a long time.

You if perhaps (as I doubt me) you speed of that you speak for, when your
small heat is satisfied, will tipe up your heels, and leave poor Orienta, a
sorrowful Widow, and having mourned a little for manners sake, findyng my self
vncombered from such a loathsome burden, might disporte my self at my
pleasure, and make my self blessed in my new choice.

Noble Magnifico, think you of your Beads, not of your bed: of your Mattins,
not of your Marriage: It is now time to finishe your account of pleasure, since
your principal performaunce is extinguished. As for me, let me alone silly
maid as I am, there be more fitter in Scienna for you to wed then my self, and
more meeter for me to match then with you.

Thus desiring Signior Sertorius to bear with Orientas rudeness, she takes
her leave minded to follow her business.

This old amorous Gentleman, having bin galled so nerely, as scarce he could
bridle his choler, yet yeeldyng to the repulse for the present, not doubtyng
but in time the humor would ouerpasse, and that by her friends persuasion,
his Mistress would be pacified. This notwithstanding, he continued his wonted
port, feastyng the Father, flatteryng the Mother, presentyng the Daughter, who
delighted not in such stale youths, so that opertunitie (or the importunity
of the fates) served, that to frustrate his enterprise, Love began to wring the
heart of a young Gentleman, one of the same City, who findyng his passion no
otherwise recurable, but by the favor of Orienta, practiced in what he might
to compass his purpose, toward the attainement of her good grace, in so
much, that as occasions were proffered, if Orienta would be holy, Fuluius
would go to Church: if disposed to walk for recreation, her suppliaunt must
take the air.

Thus presentyng fire to the flax, the incurable heat of the torment inflamed
the yeeldyng affectes of the young Damsel to receive the impression, that
being both touched with equal desire, the young man perplexed by reason of the
match the father pretended with Sertorius, she holding back by maidenlike
shamefastness, because she was vnproffered, and both of them otherwise
detained then they wished for. The noble courage of the young Gentleman, led by a
smilyng hope of heavenly reward for a small adventure, compassyng in his
cogitations many matters: At last he be thought himself of his acquaintance
with Sertorius, whose wanton woyng was known very well through all Scienna, by
him only in his mind, he concluded the attainement of his purpose, though in
deed his only enemy in this attempt.

Fuluius having sought him out, with subtle information, he saluted him thus.

Signior Sertorius, the old familiarity between my father and you, and the
report of your courteous and honest dealings in Scienna, has made me (being
forced thereunto by necessity) to come and crave your favor.

Thus it is, that being greatly indebted in Scienna, by reason of continual
suites between the House of the Coruasij and me, for a certain Castle
between this and Aranthum, I am forced now by the Judicial decree, to buy
their part, and to this issue altogether unfurnished of money, I am to sell or
morgage certain Revenues, to the accomplishing of my purpose. Whereupon (good
Signior) if either upon morgage or sale, it please you to furnishe me with one
thousand Duckettes, I shall by this means, not only be greatly bound unto
you for your favor, but also if in any service I may stand in stead, pressed
at your command.

The old Fox though his lips did water, dissembling to love no Grapes,
answered Fuluius thus.

Good Fuluius, the nobility of the House you come of, the faithful freendship
between your father and me, with the toward and honorable behavior of your
self, were sufficient to enforce a stranger, much more a friend to pleasure
you. But when I look into my present estate, and see the occasions I have to
imploye my money, truly I am loath to set foot in the cause: notwithstanding,
to pleasure so honest a Gentleman as you, if you be minded to sell any
Signorie, I will strain my self you shall have money, Fuluius shall find a
friend of Sertorius.

The Gentleman seemyng very desirous, gave our Magnifico hearty thanks,
assuryng him that to the adventure of his life, he would requite the favor
showed him. Hereupon he makes price of a most pleasant and beautiful Manner
house with the demeanes, situate out of Scienna five or six Leagues, the
bargain is beaten out and accordingly agreed upon, that Sertorius shall have
the Fee simple of the Signorie of Brentio, Fuluius for his title twelve
thousand Crowns, and for that liuerie and season was requisite the day is now
to be prefixed to perform it. At this time Sertorius bethinkyng himself of
Brunellus with his fair Orienta, began to say thus in his own imagination.

Oh happy bargain for me, this is a passing present for my Orienta, I doubt
not but if gifts will please the Gods, rewards may entice women: And on
this he concluded in him self to delaie the liuerie and season for one month,
at which time, he besought Fuluius to make honorable preparation for him and
his company: addyng this moreover, that the only Gemme he desired in the
world, should be there at the banquet.

Fuluius perceiuyng how the game would go, promised to perform what he
required, and being assured by Sertorius to receive his ready money he
departed, and labouryng by sundry means to come to the speech of Orienta, he
fell in acquaintance with an old Gentlewoman, who had often recourse to the
house of Brunellus, and privy familiarity with Orienta, to whom Fuluius
opened the bitter assaults of his passion, and between fair speeches and
liberal rewards he so compassed this woman, that she promised not only to
prefer his suite, but also to apply what persuasion she thought necessary,
toward the attainement of the Maidens favor.

Breefly it was thus concluded, that Fuluius should wright and Esp^raunce would
deliver, who taking pen he thus opened his passion.

The Letter of Fuluius to fair Orienta.
IT must needs be some divine fury, not yearthly folly (sweet Mistries) that
makes a mortal creature constauntly to love, and vnmouably to persevere, and
heavenly must that subject be, that by one only radiant aspect, can knit two
souls in one, and make uncertain dust and ashes, pertaker of the constauncie
of the Gods. If they led by a sacred custom swearyng by Stix erreuocably
punish, the Lover enchained by affection will undoubtedly persevere. Whereupon
(sweet Orienta) having been in this one benefit, made pertaker with the Gods
in constauncie, by one only aspect of your beauty, I am now (being altogether
inclined to heavenly pleasures) to beseech you to empleat more pleasure, to the
end, poor Fuluius may be more constaunt, J saw thy beauty (sweet
Mistress) and seeing it wondered, and wonderyng, am enforced to woe, that either
J may by your means be blessed with the possession of your beautiful favor,
or be bereft of mine eye sight least I see to my confusion, Madamisella, I
beseech thee by the sweet beauty of thy locks, by the amorous delicacie of
thine eyes, by the power attractiue of thy celestial beauty, to ease his
harms who only restes thy poor tormented.

Fuluius.


This Letter sealed up, Esperaunce, according to her name, so appliyng her
nature, putting Fuluius in good hope of the benefit of good fortune,
pretermitted no time, but with conueniencie opened his affection to Orienta in
these terms.

My good Mistress, the great and passionate affection of my friend, his humble
and incessaunt suite, have made me incline to pity, and to take in hand to
present you the submission of a most loving Gentleman, and although it may be
thought by you, that this office is uncomely for my years, yet assure you
this, that where in chaste love you are sude unto, and by a noble Gentleman, I
dare auowe the action is not discommendable.

And with this, taking Fuluius Letters in her hands, she delivered them to
her, desiryng her to be favorable in the cause, and to regard the Gentleman's
humble suite.

Orienta blushyng with bashful redness replied thus. Good Esperaunce, the
honest opinion I conceive of your staidness, confirms me now in that,
which otherwise no modest maid durst once to attempt: but since it can not
infect to read, and to an unreasonable request I have a tongue to denay, I
will be bold to over read his question, and for your sake shape him an
answer. Whereupon, openyng the Letters, and over readyng them again and
again, the old embers vnraked discovered quick coals, and the fire sent out
the flame with a scaldyng sigh, whereupon, after a little pause she bespake her
thus.

Esperaunce, if these fair promises made by Fuluius, will be answered with
the perfection of his person, if as he writes well he will do well, perhaps
I know a friend as good as my self may either prefer him, or so nere
kinsfolk shall fall out, as none but death can disseuer.

Tut sweet heart (said Esperaunce) doubt not of the Gentleman's honor, I
know him well, and stick not to account of his courteous demand, when he
desires not to strain you to the breach of your honor.

And if it be so (said Orienta) then in the stead of his written Letters,
deliver him this token of my honorable favor, that he may see I esteem his
suite. And that (if he be so affectionate as he seems) he may in person
prefer his cause tomorow in the euenyng, for that his Mistress this next day,
must be at Signior Sinatos Weddyng, as a bidden guest, where if he want no will
to atchiue, he may find season both to speak and speed, and so commend me
to him.

Esperaunce, with her answer at tongues end, quickly encounters with
Fuluius, who honorably rewardyng her endeavor, wonderfully rejoiced in his
happy and good fortune, and bethinking with himself how with least suspicion
he might visit his Mistress, he concluded on a Mask. Whereupon, calling a
sort of his courteous Companions together, it was agreed they would make the
Bridegroom privy to their coming, who accepting of their courtesy in most
freendly manner, promised them a hearty welcome.

All things prepared for this purpose, the next day came Orienta with her
father and mother to the solemnising of this Weddyng.

Our snudge Magnifico, is there in his best colors to court it: Night being
come, the Maskers being mounted on great Horses, apparelled after the Turkey
fashion all in cloth of Tissue entered the great Court, where dismountyng
them selves, they orderly marched into the great Chamber, the company
attentively beholding the bravery of the Maskers, Fuluius had given his
compartners a lesson, whereby Orienta was left for his own choice, whom softly
taking by the hand, and with a coye regard, she seemed at the first to
strain courtesy, but easily persuaded to that she most desired: after they had
paced the first measure, each Masker falling to the courtyng of his Lady,
Fuluius began his discourse in this sort.

The occasion (sweet Mistress) that you allowed me, is even now happily
atchiued, and he that was bold to sue in paper, is now here ready to perform
in person, here is your loyal sworn servant Fuluius, who without your
gracious aspect, must finishe his life with unmerciful martyrdom.

Here interrupted by the Musitions, and having traced on neatly the other
Corranto, Orienta answered.

I am not so injurious Signior Fuluius, but I will add one benefit to him
that prefers all occasions: and if in chaste love, so good a Gentleman as you
has vowed your service, it may be his chance to find as constaunt a friend
to yield him his reward.

Here interrupted again, at the third pause Fuluius spoke thus.

For benefits that shall pass from Beauty, Fuluius will be thankful, and if
it shall please Orienta, to fit all occasions so well as she framed this,
Fuluius shall no doubt find a remedy, and his Mistress shall not repent her.

Here the instaunt that interrupted the Lover, shortly served the Lady, who
discoursed thus.

My sweet friend, if the Mistress of thy heart, will be persuaded by my means,
fear not, but ere long she will make either time serve affection, or both
satisfy thy expectation. Whereupon, desiring him to be circumspect, for fear
of suspicion (for the Magnificoes eyes were watchful over her) the Gentleman
refrained until the Mask being ended, and each Gentleman accompanied with his
Mistress went to banquet, he choosing a convenient corner to discover himself to
Orienta, in these terms persuaded with her.

Since the equal powers have vouchsafed an unity between our affections (good
Mistress) I pray you let neither circumspection be wantyng to avoid danger,
nor prevention be sought for to disburden us of all hinderaunce.

All Scienna can well report of the love Sertorius bears you, of the
importunate suites wherewith he soliciteth earnestly your father and you, and
it may be for his exceeding wealth, he may wipe the fatt from my fingers,
unless policy prevent that which injurious resist has proffered: so that
now (good Mistress) you must stand to your tacklyng, or else the Market is like
to be marde.

And lies it in me sweet friend (said Orienta) to perform, truly then give
me instructions, and I will quickly have them without book.

Then gracious Orienta (said Fuluius) thus it stands, I seeing no means to
attain the discovery of mine affections toward you, of late colourably went
and compassed with the old Magnifico your Woer, to sell a piece of Land, by
that means thinkyng to wring out somewhat, by growyng in familiarity with
him, but the Fox being wily, set me beside the Coshin, yet greedily gapyng
after my Revenues, was contented to imploye twelve thousand Crowns for a
Manner of mine liyng six Leagues from out this City, desiryng me to make
honorable provision for his coming that day month, for that the sweetest
Gemme in the world should be there with him. I smellyng out his drift, breefly
concluded on it, and by good fortune meetyng with courteous Esperaunce, by whom
this good hap has been furnished, now having taken counsel of my seven
nights pillow, if it shall please Orienta, Fuluius at that season shall be her
married pheare, and perhaps, make the Magnifico bestow a good childs part
on Orienta.

The quick wit of the young Maiden, conceiving at the first the conueiaunce of
all, smilyngly thus interrupted him.

Fuluius, I must take your tale before it fall, I smell out the drift of your
pretense, to the furtheryng of which, Sertorius shall neither want fair
promises, nor sweet regardes: be thou as careful in the rest as I will be in
this, and the Gole is wun, the maisterie is our own.

Thus giuyng him a gentle Basele bouche, they thrust them selves amongst the
company, where Orienta, to call away suspicion, said thus.

I had thought (Gentleman) that so many and sundry entreaties, might have been
sufficient to have made you discover, but since I see you are so resolute, you
will admit no persuasion, though you denaie us the benefit of that, yet
vouchsafe us the courtesy in this, that though you eat none of our Iunkettes,
yet it will please you keep some in store for your friends.

It may be (replied Fuluius) my humors be such now (fair Damsel) that if I
should discover, I might bar my self of a supposed benefit, but for these
delicates, I had rather they should lie uneaten, the^ my fancy want to
prosecute an occasion.

Why sir (said she) look about you, perhaps even amongst these Iunkettes,
there will be found somewhat to feed your humor.

For Comfectes Mistress (replied Fuluius) some be costiue, and that fittes not
my complexion: some comfortable to the stomach, where I desire quiet in mind:
all formde to please the sense, where I desire medicine to confirm the soul.
So that seeing there seems no equality, neither in their operation, neither
in my imagination, I think it better to let them lie for those that list, for
they fit not the humor of them that Love.

In these discoursinges the night over past, and the time drew on that the
Bride would to bed, their Mask therefore now ready to depart, Orienta,
breefly took her leave in this sort.

Be thou as careful as thy friend will be constaunt, and as faithful, as she
will be firm, and no doubt but good fortune in thine own house shall present
thee with the greatest pleasure thou desire, and so till then farewell.

Fuluius satisfied with these sweet words, straining her softly by the finger
said thus.

I beseech the just heavens, so to further my proceedings, as I am fed with
thy delicacie, and so to hasten on the accomplishment of thy desires, that
Fuluius may enjoy that sweet, for which this long time he has tasted many
sowers.

This said, with his company he marched away, leauyng Orienta devising on
the constauncie of her servant, and Fuluius admiryng at the beauty of his
Mistress.

The Marriage thus finished, Brunellus with his fair daughter accompanied with
Sertorius drew homewarde, and in the way, who takes occasion to court it but
our Magnifico.

Mistress Orienta (says he) how like you these sportes that are past, were they
not pleasant. Truly Signior (replied she) I never saw better sport, nor any
pleasure that more delighted me. And I Madame (said he) never received less
contentation. And why so (quod Orienta) alas my sweet (answered he) your
repulse has so ouergrowne my heart with sorrows, as unless your grace, my
greefes must rest incurable.

Well well (said Orienta) it may be if your fit hold till to morrow, I will
stand so much your friend as to be speak you an Asculapius, to lenifie your
Fever.

Sertorius revived with her sweet words, giuyng her hearty thanks for her
cordial comfort, for that night took his leave, devising highly upon the
favor, his Gods had so graciously granted him, and on the morrow being
ready to depart his house, Fuluius myndful of his business, came to know his
resolution touching the former bargain, Sertorius triumphyng before the
victory, made Fuluius privy to all his pretense, and in respect that he
thought himself assured of Orienta for his wife, he was contented to bestow
that Patrimony that then he was to take possession of, upon her, franckly and
freely as a testimony of his love, desiryng Fuluius the rather, with as much
honor as he might to receive both himself and his retinue, not doubtyng but
in the end thoroughly to recompense such favor as he could or would bestow.

Fuluius feedyng him with fair words, took his leave, compactyng with a
Priest to be in readiness, for the better accomplishing of his purpose,
sparing no cost for all the dainties that might be gotten, and what Sertorius
wished for the receiuyng of him and his company royally, Fuluius employed to
the solemnising of his Marriage secretly. He busy about his affairs, our
Magnifico resorted to his Mistress, whom findyng at her morning Mattins, as
pliable as at her Euensong she was gracious, he attempted her thus.

This only suppose of your experience to subdue my passion (sweet Orienta)
has made this nights sleep more pleasant then it would have been: and this
morning so solitary as I know I should have found it, so that comforted by
your fair promise I desire to be confirmed in your favor, and that no let
nor hinderaunce may intercept our proceedings, if you make stay for dower,
thinkyng me more in love with your cofers then with your beauty, to ease you
of that doubt, if it please you to take the air for a day or two in your
fathes company, you shall see by evident proof what prouiso I have prepared
for the matter: if for any thing else, that my silly understanding can not
conceive, the least rebuke you can use should make a mendes, for Sertorius will
only be addect to do you service.

The courtious damsel smilyng at the unnecessary kyndnesse of this old
libidious doterell, knowing well how to bestow all colors, drue exquisitly out
this counterfite.

As the Marble is at last with many drops made to yield, the Iron by many
fires is made fluxible, the Tigresse by man's industry made gentle, so my
tender heart wone by the evident tokens of your goodwill beginns now to
discover those conceiptes, which willyngly I would have kept close and in
silent.

Those straung regardes I have bestowed on you Signior Sertorius) was not in
disdain, of your person but in trial of your loialtie, if at your first
repulse you had given over, I should by that means have found your lack of
love, where now perseueryng in your constauncy, I follow you, in brief,
Orienta is at your command in sauegard of her honor, to accompany you where
you please, and in honost Matrimony, will be willing to fulfill your desires.

The old Gentleman, findyng all things to sort out so currantly on his side,
runes to the Father, imbraceth the Mother, prasing their daughters wisdom,
gloriyng in her favor and disiryng altogether, to acompanie him to see a
purchase that he has made, promising Brunellus, his daughters pains should
not be ill imploid.

The day long desired by Fuluius, and as often wished for by Orienta is come,
our Magnifico with his supposed Father and Mother in law with his sweet Mistress
are mounted, and aprochyng nere to Fuluius Castle (who attended their coming)
he thus entertained Signiori and mes Dames, you are al heartily welcome, you
Singnior Sertoruis, to receive the possession of your own, these to be
pertakers of such pleasures as at this instant I can aquaint them withal, as
the person whom I most honor in Scienna, wherefore if it shall please you to
enter, you shall try that in deed which I report in promise.

They yelding him very courtious thanks, but especially Orienta zelously
honoring his humanity, with soft speeches uttered these words.

The powers I think in thy affability, has concluded such force, as maugre
all effects the brauest must bow: this said, they altogether entered. It
were in vain to recount the bounty of their repast, the seemelinesse of their
Lodgings, the variety of their pleasures, for these would but set Seafaryng
men's lips on water, let us but look into the success to make us merry.

Truly Gentleman so it was, that the first night over past, Sertorius willing
to conclude what he had in mind, accompanied with Brunellus his wife and
daughter, began thus to break with them.

In respect of the bounty of your sweet Daughter (good Brunellus) who setting
aside all nicetie and coyness, has at the last vouchsafed me her favor, to
the end I may in somethyng make evident my zealous good will, I will at this
instaunt, franckly and freely imparte that unto her, which by the payment of
twelve thousand Crowns I am to enjoy: then calling unto him a Notarie, whom
for that purpose he had brought thither with him, he made a faithful
conueiaunce to Orienta, of the whole Purchase, in as full title and proportion,
as he bought it of Fuluius, and in presence paiyng the ready money, he caused
the liuerie and season, with all coueyauntes, conueiaunces, specialities what
so ever (in the presence of the whole company) to be delivered to Orienta, who
bashfully receiuyng them, spoke thus to Sertorius.

I do not bestow my fancy for peney favor (liberal Magnifico) but for love,
neither mean I by gifts to be tied to inconvenience, it may therefore please
you with my favor to receive them again as my gift, for what in love shall
pass from me, shall be bound to no conditions.

Sertorius altogether inflamed with her courtious and wise demeanor, began to
protest before the assembly, that without respect of any thing what so ever he
bestowed the benifite, who vouchsafed very well, to imploye so small a purchase
on her, who was the only continuer of his decaiyng life.

The friends of Orienta seeing his noble and liberal affection thanked him
highly, each one praised his bounty, but especially Fuluius whom it best
behooved, who seeing now that all opertunities did hasten on his happiness, all
that day plied his guestes with bountiful cheer and store of good wines.
Night drawyng on, they were by their retinue conuaied to their Lodgings,
Orienta, desirous to see the issue of her delights, and being altogether
impacient of delays, whisperyng Fuluius in his ear she spoke thus.

Oh Fuluius, the fates alowing thee all things as thou list, why loyterest
thou, is thy hot love so suddenly cooled, Oh make an end of the Comedy begun,
and let our fastings be finished with a happy Weddyng.

Content your self my dear (said Fuluius) for this night Himeneus shall dance
at our Weddyng. Your fath^rs Chamber (where you lie) has in the corner
extendyng to the East, a Trappe door, by the which when your father sleapeth
soundly, if it please you to conuaie your self, I and my friends will attend
you, to finishe up the long desired pleasure: they both being thus privy to
each other intent, and replenished with mutual joys, took their leave, he to
keep sentinel, she to watch opertunitie, the company and season both served,
and Fuluius attendyng with some of his honorable friends for the coming of
Orienta: at last with great joy, in the presence of sundry Gentlemen, they
solemnised the Nuptialles, and having a long time feasted them selves, at last
they were conveyed to their bed pleasures, our Magnifico snortyng very
soundly, our Brunellus and his wife sleepyng as profoundly, little suspectyng
what had passed, till on the morrow Brunellus wakyng, and findyng his Daughter
conveyed away, with open exclamations both he and his wife ran upon
Sertorius, buffetyng the old fool on the face, who wonderyng at their
outrage, beseeched them to be more wise then they seemed, who for his good
will, had not deserved such a requitaunce, but Brunellus overcome with choler,
fell thus a railing.

Thou old Palliard, it is neither thy painted speeches shall diswade, nor thy
fair gloses may deminishe the fury of mine ire, who like a subtle wetch,
have ravished me of my only pleasure, and brought me hither to the abandonyng
of mine own Daughter, is this the love that with solemn vows and open
protestations thou wast wont to make, is this thy loiall freendship, be these
the fruits of thy liberality. O that I had buried my poor Orienta, or
preserved her from a Lecherous bed, but this wrong shall be revenged.

And now and then in this discoursing, he entermedled his speeches with a
buffet, he on the one side, his wife on the other side fliyng with her nails
to the face of Sertorius, the noise whereof brought in the assistauntes of
Fuluius, who laughyng merrily at this mad conceit, after they had first parted
the fraie, they began to question with Sertorius, what might be the cause of
this broyle, who poor man, altogether ignorant of the meaning, exclaimed thus.

Unhappy man that I am, who in mine old years, and in the time I looked for
rest, should be thus afflicted with sorrows. But Brunellus, if thou knew
how thou have done me wrong. I know shame would co^straine thee to be heartily
sorry. The Heavens know, and my deeds might well witness, that neither was I
willing to defraude Brunellus in any thing, nor to have voyolated Orienta whom
I love as mine own life, but if misfortune has befalne us, it is by other men's
lewdness not by mine, whose practice if I might learn out, I would so avenge
my self, as well should acquit me of all suspicion, and make mine innocence
well known to the world. With this, interrupted by the forseu of his tears,
he fell down dead with very grief of mind. The whole company, pitiyng the
destresse of the old man, releued him as they might, till Brunellus persuaded
somewhat by the sorrows he made, said thus.

Well Sertorius, although many and sundry occasions might persuade me to
suspect, yet truly, thy bitter bewailings do somewhat induce me to believe
thou art iniuried, but seeing impacience can not now serve to medicine our
grief, let us find the means to find out the practiser.

An aged and noble Gentleman, a dear friend to Fuluius, and privy to all the
premises, seeing it now season to break of all suspicions, said thus.

Sertorius, and Brunellus, you have seen many years, and (as it should seem)
learned but little modesty, that in your friends house who uses you so
courteously, you demean your selves so dishonourably.

Your Daughter sir, is without any stain of good name, yea and worthily
fittyng her degree (before my self and sundry other Gentlemen) she is solemnie
married to Fuluius, and is now accompanied with her noble housbande, so that
Brunellus, you have no cause to mislike, nor Sertorius, it is now no time for
you to sorrow, Love made them in one unity to conclude freendship, and we as
willing to prefer chaste Love, have vouchsafed the ioynyng of them together,
so that satisfy you your self as a Father, for your Daughter has made a good
choice, and you Sertorius, altogether unmeet for such a match, praise
fortune who has better provided for ye Gentlewoman, and for your self, I would
wish you to live in Scienna according to your years in devotion, let these be
admitted to the Marriage bed that may live in the world with blessed increase.
Hereupon, Lodouico de villa noua (for so this Gentleman was called) taking
Brunellus and his wife, the one in one hand, the other on the other, he
coueied them to Fuluius bed Chamber, where Brunellus not knowing in what
passion to enter his speech said as follows.

And have I brought thee up (Orienta) to follow thine own desires, and not to
be leueled by my derection. Is thy hautie courage such as thou disdainest my
persuasions in thy proceedings. Alas, unhappy was I in departing from
Scienna, unlucky thy Mother, but Sertorius most unfortunate, who for his
benefits thou have rewarded with so foul disloyalty: but since the mischief
is remediless, I beseech thee Fuluius, by the nobility of thine Auncesters,
so tender my Daughter, that I may have cause to bless thy Weddyng bed, and
not occasion to curse thy conueiaunce.

Orienta, overcome with sorrow could not answer, whereupon Fuluius
comforting her, and the better to confirm both father and mother, said thus.

Father (for now Marriage makes me acquainted with that name) if you knew the
zeal wherewith I reverence your Daughter my wife, you would turn your woe to
gladness, and rejoice in this success, being assertained of your
proceedings. That we loved one the other, Marriage may persuade you, for
unchaste Love always shunneth such conclusions, that I am noble you doubt not,
for my Revenues I am a Signior in Italy, so that neither is this match to be
contemned, nor Parents to be agreeued. For your Daughter, on mine honor here
I assure you, that what so in reason you shall request in Dower I will allow,
and so desiryng you to cease your needelesse sorrows, I beseech you withdraw
your selves till we may prepare us in readiness to come forth amongst you.

Both father and mother ravished with exceedyng joy to hear the reasonable
persuasion of Fuluius, ran unto him embracyng him with mutual love, and in
open terms blessing their new unlooked for son in law. And having
satisfied their expectation, and leauyng the new Married couple to their
private pleasures, they resorted to Sertorius, who Bedlem mad with anger,
stampyng and staryng with doutie Duggion in his unwieldy fist, swears by no
Beggars he would be revenged, calling Heaven, Earth, and all to witness what
injuries he had sustained: whom when by no means he could be persuaded,
Brunellus attempted in this forte.

My good friend Sertorius, although my persuasions may not work with thee,
for that I know I have wronged thee, yet let reason induce thee to be pacient
since the cure is remediless, thou may neither blame the fates, nor accuse
me, but thine own folly who laid the Trappe to catch the Mouse, and poisoned
the bait to beguile the fish, it was thou brought us hither to encounter with
these troubles, and therefore since by thine own endeavors the remedies are
incurable, cease to follow fury which is unnecessary.

The angry Magnifico, when he had a while stormed, replied thus.

Now thou have buffeted me Brunellus, thou would give me a plaster, but the
wrong shall not be endured though hitherto I have bin silent, In mine own
house, at mine own suite, to be cozoned of mine own Love. Oh wicked Fuluius,
millions of plagues light on such Purchaces. Oh cruel Orienta, is this the
reward of my constauncie, is this the effect of thy beauty, aye me that have
lived to see these miseries. But Brunellus, what I promised Orienta I revoke
it, and I doubt not but to cry quittaunce with Fuluius. Whereupon (like a mad
man) he runs about the house seeking for Fuluius, who laughyng very heartily
to see our Magnifico in such choler, caused him forth with to be shut out of
doors, who exclaimyng a long time yet without remedy, bethought him in the
end to take his Horse, and so forthwith to post to Scienna to seek Justice.
Mean while, all occasions of strife were shut up, between Fuluius, his new
married wife, her father and friends, the father prefixed a proportion, the
Gentleman made a liberal Dowry, each party being thus pleased, with great
iolitie (being accompanied with their chief friends) they all resorted to
Scienna, which being once bruited in the City, Sertorius feed his Advocates,
he exclaimes on Fuluius before the Judges, they ready to redress wrongs
perfixt a day of hearing, Fuluias and Orienta were summoned, and at the
appointed day they appeared, the Judges being set, Sertorius becan thus to
accuse.

Noble Magistrates, being sought to by this subtle Gentelman for a supply of
money, there passed a bargain between us both, the sail of a Manner of his
called Brentio, the price was set 120000. Crowns and accordingly the money
paid, I took seasure of the Land, and being in possession, I bestowed it on
a Gentlewoman whom I thought to make my wife, her this crafty seducer so has
compassed, that having gotten her in Marriage, I am by that means cut of not
only from my wife, but also from my Land: moreover cozoned of my Crowns I
disbursed in the Purchase. Whereupon, in cause of Justice may it please you to
do me right, that either I may have my money which I paid for the Purchase,
or the Manner I have by my silver purchased.

Fuluius willed to make answer for himself, said thus. Sertorius (noble
Signiors) complains before your honors of me for no unlawful act, and
therefore unjustly: if I sold him my Patrimony, I was worthy the money: if he
bestowed his Purchase liberally, it was not in me to hinder it, and being his
own dead, he is to condemn none but himself: for the Marriage of Orienta; she
is here let her confess if I used any mean of inforcement, but was concluded
in chaste and loyal Love, so that now I am to leave the whole to the
consideration of your Judgments, willing if I have offended to be punished,
if I be faultlesse to be dismissed.

The Judges when they had well considered on the cause, could conceive no
occasion to condemn Fuluius, adjudged thus.

Sertorius, so far as we can find, you must bear the burden of your own
folly, for Fuluius having made no breach of law, we have no punishment for him
that is faultlesse: whereupon, we counsel you in your after dealings to be
more circomspect, and for Fuluius, we discharge him from further trouble.

The whole assembly praised the equity of the Judges, the policy of Fuluius,
with the constauncie of Orienta, and thus departed givyng at our Magnifico for
his dear bought pleasures.

Thus to drive away dumphes (Gentlemen) I have told you a pretty Novelty,
which me thinks has past our way that we are within kennyng of Land.

And truly your Novelty is such (said Simonides) as might well make a Comedy
for the mirth, I wot well it has made some of our eyes to water.

In these and such like talks passing the time, at last, the gorgious
buildings appeared in sight, and the merry Gale had blown the^ within
compass of the Haven, where the Master merrily receiuyng his due, wills the
Mariners to launch out their Cockboate, to set the Passengers on Land.

How Simonides coming to Athens, was welcomed by Euphues, and of a strange
adventure that befell.
SIMONIDES having recovered the Shore, entered the City, lodgyng him self so
conveniently as he might, till such time as he could find out Euphues, and
because he would not pretermit any occasion, either by inquiry or otherwise,
he questioned with his Host and inquired of many, in the end lightyng of a
Scholar, he learned how at that very instaunt, Euphues was come from the Mount
Silexsedra into the City, and was lodged hard by the Market place. With these
instructions, he went to find out our Athenian, and according to direction,
delivered him Friar Frederickes Letters, who having ouerread the same and
considered of the contents, he gave Simonides a courteous and freendly welcome
to the City, then bringyng him to his own Chamber, he made his provision one
dishe more then ordinary: their dinner being ended, for that he would not
fail in any one courtesy he proffered Simonides, to acco^panie him into the
City, where (if it so pleased him) he might see those Monumentes, which best
be fitted a Trauailers fancy. Simonides acceptyng his proffered courtesy, was
conducted by Euphues to the several Schools of the learned Philosophers,
showing him their convenient walks, their prospect into the Sea, the amenitie
of the Land, and with as much delight, described him the situation of the
City. These Novelties were pleasant to the eyes of Simonides, but as they
were wanderyng up and down the Streates, they fortuned on the Key to see a
great number of the Citizens, beholding (as it should seem) some strange
accident, which made them the willinger to draw nere and the more serious to
behold, and in truth this fortuned, a company of poor Fisher men, entending
their fishyng at the Sea, halyng up their Nets in hope of good fortune, their
hap was to draw up a Coffin of Lead, wherein they esteeming some high hid
treasure, they conveyed this purchase to the City, presentyng it before the
Governors as the benefit of their good fortune, who at that instaunt
gatheryng together in clusters, to behold some rich present derived from the
fleetyng Wave, but in stead of great treasure, they found the corse of an
aged man (as it seemed) altogether consumed to dust, amongst the remainaunt of
whose ashes was found a long written Scrole, the effect whereof was this.

FOrsaking flood, to which with bootelesse hope,
J whilome did, my body recommend,
J come to Athens, for to claim my due,
Who here deserude, a royal Tomb to have.
Ne boots it not, mine ashes to revive,
Since in these liuelesse lines, mine Image is,
Erst in this state, by dome of power divine,
Licurgus poynted, was by deep conceit,
To fashion raines, unto your wanderyng wills,
Whose tongue inspired, with secret rules of right,
Made Athens Greece, and Grecia Athens Town,
And as from Delphos, Phoebus did inspire,
So plast J truth, the Lodestone of your lives.
But as amidst, a swarm of sundry sins,
A little good, is shadowed by the bad,
So in so many, years of flowryng wealth,
A proud contempt, has banished continence
And glut of gold, has gorgd you full of vice.
So I who banished, my self from Greece,
And bound the athenian, Lords by solemn oath.
Without infringyng, of my sacred laws,
To tread the path, that J had wisely wrought.
Till back again, Licurgus should retire,
And forced from wave, the cinders of my self
For breach of troth, to Athens to return:
Wherein vpbraidyng, terms they may rebuke,
The fickle faith, the athenian Princes held.
How runs the world, when where should wisedoms reign,
A flatteryng tongue, preferres to royal trone,
And honors pace, by bribes not common voice,
Contempt of Gods, attempt of that is ill.
My Country soil, has late seduced thee,
And what of old, my painful pen set down,
Like Sibiles books, by Numa are refusde,
Yet has not that, mine old acquainted love.
Be buried with, the Masters lively form,
But that mine ashes, shall restore such fruit,
As walking long, amidst the Lesian feeldes,
It gathered has, by term of many years,
And in this Scrole, O Athens what so is,
Believe me well, my self did not devise,
But in the secret, adites of the Gods,
The lines are left, for everlasting days,
This second lesson, lent me by the powers,
I mean to leave, behind in Athens Town,
For these poor relics, of decayed dust,
Return them thence, from whence the Gods them sent.
But for the precepts, that J leave behind,
Coat them in books, of everlasting fame,
This wish J done, and these my censures be,
Jn choice of Prince, compare not flocks of friends,
But store of virtues, for the Kyngly throne,
Breeds many sweetes, or else to many sowres.
For as the Prince, such will the Subject be,
To whom admit, such counsel for to guide.
As rather seek succeedyng styles of fame,
Then pompious wealth, to leave their wanton hires.
Whose eyes may see, and follow that is just,
Not formyng Justice, like a nose of wax,
Which quickly leaves, the impression it had once.
Whom thus I wish, in studiyng still for peace,
To work the feate, by no unlawful means,
Least happy end, be spoyld by lewd attempt.
By such vain means, King Phirrus would not win,
Then such vain means, let noble minds refrain,
Jn peace adore, the secrets of the Gods,
By whom your peace, her cheifest of spryng had,
And if aspiryng, thrist of others rain,
Thy naybour King, do force thy sword vnsheath,
Appease the powers, at first with holy vows,
Next with the Grecian Prince a Nester choose,
Who may consult, when Ajax would attempt,
so train your youth, that idle rest may not
Enforce them fall, upon their enemies sword,
But teach in peace, how to prevent in war,
To take occasions, grows from the Gods,
And blessed is he, that can prevent in time.
Give warrior wealth, in quiet calm to live,
That in distress, he may the better fight,
By this it fortunes, that not nipt by want,
He will not bend, his ears to rich rewards.
Believe me Athens, this is certain true,
Desire of gain, has power on powers and men.
And needy men, will sonest bend to bow,
Prevent this error, with advised eye,
From foreign wars, unto thy Court in peace,
Thou Prince that in, my Country loves to reign.
Beware of Pride, among those amidst the train,
For vain opinions, makes men to aspire,
And as disposde, so feed thou humors to
Yet make a medlie, of the sweet and sour,
For though some bend, by words some force not blows,
Turn them the edge, let others have the blunt,
And if they like, the shows of Kyngly state,
Hang sharpened sword, vpheld by horses hire,
Ore flatterers heads, to make them know the cares,
That wait on those, whom honor does advance.
As for the choice, of Judges in the state:
Whose errors cause, the King to bear the blame,
Choose such as measure, not their private gain,
But Princes glory, and the subjects good,
With whom let right, so ouermaister wrong,
As tyrauntes tauntes, may never them affright,
Whom neither favor, may by Letters win:
Nor Midas compass, with a Mase of gold
Jn rulyng thus, the good perceiuyng then,
That honor shall, betyde them doing well,
Will labor more, and more in Countries cause,
The bad confirmde, that favor will not yield,
And breach of law, shall stoop to Justice sword,
Will rain their wills, from working wicked wyles,
Thus each estate, by wisdom leueld out,
Prevent thou then, such means as may corrupt,
Restrain the greedy, mind of neighbors good,
Who pills the poor, to make his fleeces fat.
And cast a collar, on the headstrong Jade,
Least loath to yield, he break the Riders neck,
Excess is that, which only Athens spoils
In that the rich, to honors are preferde,
Each plies it now, by hook and crook to gain,
Jn hope by wealth, to clime the steps of state,
Prevent the means, the matter then must fail
Prefix reward, to that which profit bringes,
And punish that, which only fostereth vice,
So idle arts, will sone be laid aside,
And each will follow, that which may prefer,
Jn choice of Citizens, conserve these rules,
As Romans did, as records do resite,
Jf hand be hardined by assidious toil,
That man is meet, to have a subjects rome,
Jn softined fistes, small profit does consist:
Who labors well, does scarce imagine ill,
All only factions, first from idle spring,
Who only serve, to serve usurpers turn,
Who when they find, no means to maintain war
Will fear attempt, or climyng catch a fall:
Believe me what, so Prince preferres these rules,
He shall conceive, the profit they do bring,
But for those weals, wherein the wealth consist,
Of Athens good, keep thou unto thy self,
Let not thine enemy, know thy private power,
For while thou holdst, him in suspicious thought.
Thy little power, will make him think it great,
Thy great supplies, will make him fear to war.
Cut of suspicion, to thy foe of fear,
Make him believe, thy sword is ready drawn,
With Mass of gold, supply not neighbors need,
Least he refrainyng, till his fist be full:
Assail thee then, with those thy gold maintainde,
And make thee glad, to stoop to servile yoke,
In each defense, suppose there is offense,
Put not thy power, into a traitors fist:
For flatteryng shows, Imbassads may prefer,
See and not see, and search by questions strange
What hidden venom, is in flatteryng guile,
Thou may in this, full sone find out the false,
Jn plighted leage, prevent all cause of breach,
Yet if alies, first fail in fixed faith,
Take thou revenge, as though thou knewst it not.
Disceite is well rewarded by disceite:
By this those illes, which once by breach of law,
Which your Licurgus, leueld for your weal:
You ouerslippe, you shall in time prevent.
And J shall rest in peace amongst the Saints,
Rejoicing in, my Countries happy state:
This leave I witness, of my tried zeal,
This crave J last, before both Gods and men,
That thou O Athens, for Licurgus sake,
Will not accept, this precept of renown:
Which as in brief, thou have presented here,
So let no age, extinguishe proof thereof.
This wish J done, and this my last adewe,
Jn fear of Gods, O Athens still proceed,
And fly excess, and thus I bid farewell.
This sedull over read by one of the cheifest Magistrates of the City, the
whole assembly continued mute along space, in the end, an ancient
Philosopher (as he seemed) bespake him thus.

Unsearchable (O ye Athenians) is the power of the Gods, by whose benefits,
since this Town has been a long time maintained, yet cease they not by their
everlasting wisdoms, to continue it, to whose beneficence, if we compare our
ingratitude, we shall justly conclude, that the Gods created us to many
virtues, and we have bound our selves bondslaues to monstrous vices: If
therefore we look into our own states, and compare our aunciters good, with
our ill, we shall confirm Licurgus dead testimony, and pointyng to our best
Athenian Philosophers, we shall touch this one with the blot of auerice, and
note that other with the blemishe of vain glory.

If by the hidden workyng of the Gods we are put in memory of our escapes,
let us mend them. And since with more favor then to other Cities, they have
blessed us with more circomspection, in reverence of their bounty let us
become more circomspecte.

This scedull presents unto our Prince policy: to our Religious
sanctimonie: to our Layetie continency. By excess only we are found to have
fallen, having gathered in so many years over passed, many errors, recovered no
virtues. Oh happy Athens, when Agis not respectyng the fury of his comparte
nor King, began to pull down the pride of Athens. Oh unfortunate City when by
the diligence of Pericles, Gold brought pride into Athens. We stand amassed now
confounded in our selves by our seldom asspectes, impartyng the giltinesse of
our conciences, neither having that confirmitie of mind in us that befitteth
Philosophers, nor that valewe to attempt as in the days of the Law maker
Licurgus we once had. If we will be wise, why are our attemptes sauced with
repentance: if learned, why are we blind in discipline. If we remember our
selves of our former estates, how we have been glorified in our well doing,
contemned in our ill, how accounted of for our expeditions, how disdained for
our flatteries, we shall find all our goods to proceed from good counsel, as
our baddes from contempt of the Gods.

So that now thus it stands, since the floudes, the fates, yea the Flisian
feildes are so favorable, that the one casts up, the other blesses, the
last greeteth us with heavenly documentes and necessary forewarninges, let the
head rule the feet, each member follow the superior, all conclud in a
mediocritie, and not only leave those memories ingrafted in table of record,
but also imprinte them in our hearts, to the satisfaction whereof, O you
Athenian Senators, I conjure you to apply all your studies.

The grave old father having thus finished his oration, each allowed his
counsel, and the Magistrates of the City having according to the direction
of the sedull, redeliuered the coffin unto the floods, with many solemn
ceremonies performed unto Neptune, they upon advised deliberation, did commit
the scrole unto the common treasure, as an everlasting and memorable miracle.

Fuphues and Simonides beholding all these things with incredible admiration,
departed toward their lodgyng, where after they had a while rested themselves,
Euphues brake of their unnecessary silence thus.

It is neither occasion (noble Spaniard) that prefers, nor policy which
procures but the Gods which favor these actions.

Thou art come to Athens to see but blind guides, yea, blind are we in colors
that should know all proportions.

Frederick my freende, has presented thee with a flower without sent, with a
bare shadow and no substance, with a virtuous town in name, but bad in nature.
So that unless thou canste make of venomous confections, wholesome Triacles, of
poysonable Mummi comfortable Methridat, in seeking here for Sibill thou shall
encounter a Siren, and for the image of Alexandre the protrature of Jrus.

I have seen much (Simonides) and marked somewhat, yet in Athens never knew I
more fools less Philosophers. The Rose sauoreth sweetly yet has his
prickell, Mercury is snow white yet deadly poison, the Peacocke fair plumed
yet black footed, the Athenians sweet tonged yet ill manired.

If as Demostines trauiled to Corinth, to enjoy Lays, Simonides be come to
Athens to learn fashions, as the Philosopher disdained to be lauishe for a
little pleasure, Simonides will be as curious to imitat so vain presidentes.

In Athens it fares now, as in Rome it did once, here plenty makes us proud,
their high honors made them haughtei.

As these errors I note are incident to these Cities, so are the virtues the
nominated in sedull, practiced far of from this City, which when better
opportunity serves, I will not only utter to thy pleasure, but also open to
thy profit. Mean time, if it please thee to take part of a Scholars repast,
thou shall have the benefit perhaps of a morrall discourse, which may make
recompense for the slenderness of thy diet.

Simonides, comparyng all Euphues courtesies together, knit up his answer in
this form.

The benefit that is reapt by good counsel (gentle Euphues) as it profits
him that by experience utters, so confirms it the other who as yet was
ignorant.

So fares it with me, that hearing those sage precepts that pass from thee:
I am not only persuaded of the singularity of thy wisdom, but also inured to
the imitation of thy virtues. Many casualties happen, which although they be
beneficial vniuarsallie, yet confirm they some one particular more then the
rest, and I think that these casualties as now has happened in Athens, when
as such a one at the instante is resident, who with eloquence may blazen out
the myraculousnesse of the accident, and by good admonition subdue the errors
of this City.

As I came to Athens to see it, so sailed I hither to here thee, and though the
delight of the one be somewhat aunswerable to my travel, yet thy eloquence is
that which only excedeth the report.

For this City, I find it more faughtie then famous, for thee, more learned
then I have yet hard spoken.

As for the novelty that latly happined, if so the state be ruled any where as
there it is set down, I doubt not but peace has there seated her self in
security, and that either the Climate is so gracious that all are wise from
their cradell, and all fortunate by the benifit of the place. For thy repast, I
accept it: for thy morrall discourse I wish for it, and desire in as short
space I might be made copartner of thy conformity, as I shall with thankful
heart be pertaker of thy diet. This said, they sat down, and having
satisfied them selves with such provision as then was prepared for them,
Euphues at length began thus.

Simonides, though the coursenesse of thy diet be not according to the bounty
of the court, yet here amongst us students, we rather esteem of a Socraticum
conuiuium, than the excessive dainties of the banquets of Cleopatra, thinking
that no more than necessary repast is requisite for the professors of sciences,
especially to satisfy nature, whereas in respect of the soul it can not be
sufficiently confirmed with the sweet precepts of philosophy.

Truly quod Simonides (interrupting Euphues,) such as the complections of the
body and the disposition of the soul is, such esteem I the external
actions, and the internal delight, as for this meal we have made, we have I
confess sufficiently served our appetites, but for the soul, it has sundry
operations, and what one likes, another loathes.

Truth it is, said Euphues, that Venus delights her self in daliance, where
Diana alonely aloweth chastity, Democritus soliciteth him self in laughter,
but wise Cato in gravity and sadness: each nature as it is disposed fo
works it, which makes appearance even now in my self, who tho whilome I
liked love, now loath I lust, though once I counted Cupid for a God, now I
account vain love godless.

But it may be Simonides in this my nature, and your constitution we disagree,
you fire, I frost, you amorous, I studious, which if it be so, I doubt not but
to sit such occasions, as touching that most nearest which hitteth you most
feately, I may in this imitate Phirne the harlot, who being presented by
Praxetiles the Painter with that picture which soever that best wiihin his
whole story should please her fantasy, she very careful to make a wary
choice of so pleasant a giste, caused one suddenly to inform the Painter
that his shop was on fire, who amongst the rest of his tables, demanding if
the picture of Cupid was unviolated, was cunningly compassed by Phirne in this,
who satisfied her expectation by the opinion of tie workemaister himself. So
shall Euphues in searching out of dispositions work with Simonides, if thou
give me but an inckling, I will take an Item, if thou bewray by a wincke, I will
compass by a wyle, and having the reine in hand restrain thy affection, and
knowing the size of thy foot, fit thee with a pantofie.

O Simonides, Frederick of Naples knows well, and Euphues of Athens has
tried well, that the she bear can know her whelps, the Turtle her true love,
the shape his shadow, the Criple his crutch, the Mathematician his compass,
who has tried love can des^ ^e love, who has felt the fire can shun the
flame, who has offered at Ephesus knows Venus chief temple. I my self do
gather by thy conclusion of dispositions, and by my friends opinion of thy
travel, that Simonides for all hos experience has his coltes toothe, that
Simonides in serving our Lord forgets not our Lady, and that Simonides is he
that only has trod the path of repentance, and is yet to learn what it is
to shun errors.

Charilaus of Lacedaemon, being demanded why all the statutes of the Gods were
armed, made answer, that by it was prefigured to the Lacedaemonians, that in
being assuredly fenced in their souls from vain affections, they should
imitate the Gods, who had armed bodies not affectionate deities.

As Charilaus to his countrymen, so Fuphues to Simonides, if thou will be
accounted fruitful in travel, be not lauishe in affection, if a man led by
reason, eschew lasciviousness, if love be unprofitable persevere not.

Every chaste eye judges not by coulors, and every wise affection passes
not by likelihoodes, and when as I promised thee a moral discourse to amend
thy fare, it shall be no other than a cooling card to alay thy fancy:
Simonides interrupteting his attempted purpose said thus: O Euphues, beware
least in bewraying my errors, thou open thine own escapes, I confess thou
haste touched mine opinions, and yet perhaps can hardly persuade by thy
propositions.

An inueterate evil having taken deep root is hardly invested from his
holdfast: I have seen several cities, gathered many experiences, forsaken
sundry opinions, but in that only which thou would reprove, I have
perseuered most constant, and herein do I distinguish my love from lightness,
for vain, affection, making but a light impression, is soon displaced where
the love I bear to my Clarinda of Civil, was nether a first sights fancy,
neither can be extinguished before my last minutes sighing.

But for that Euphues has attempted to dissuade, Simonides will be attentive
to hear, and if there grow a Metamorphosis by Athenian persuasion, it may be
I will return my fancies again to my country Civil.

Fuphues pausing a while of thief speeches at the last brake into these terms.

As Zopirus the Persian for the love of Darius, so Euphues of Athens for the
love of Simondes: he spared not to deforme his members to subdue the
Babilonians, I not to disclose mine errors to confirm thy unsteadiness.

In my prime youth I was amarous in Naples, and therefore unfortunate, I loved
Lucilla, and therefore unlucky, my serious services were requited with light
mislikes, and therefore vainly attempted, my confirmitie grew by experience,
and herein was I happy.

Simonides is now he whom Euphues was once, he loves, but whom, a woman, and
she sliding, he serves, what saint, Clarinda, and is he sure she is constant?

I fear me unless Tirpandrus lenifie by Music, Clitemnestra will not be
chaste, and tho our Spaniard bydes torture for his Maistresse, yet may it be
doubted that she vouchsafes a minion.

Every clear morrow makes not a fair day, neither every swalow a summer, al
hook nosed men are not Ciceroes, nor every blemished face ye Image of
Alexander, every beautiful is not virtuous, ne every sweet face of sound
behavior: Helena cornuted Menelaus, yet was she comely, Dalida bewrayed,
Sampson, yet was she lovely.

Each sweet shape is not perfect, a stain will be seen on the picture of
Venus her self.

O Simonides, when I compare mine hours studying to my days loving, I find
no one attempt in love so commendable, that mine hours reading confirms not
to be corrupt.

Truly, as the tears of the heart are bitter, so are the attempts in love
balesome, as the tears of the boar are sweet, so are the refrainings from
beauty most necessary.

Alas sweet friend, little wottest thou the venom the serpent covers under
sweet shadows, the poison she presents under pleasant aspectes. As it
fares with Ligus the woman, fo falls it out with beauty the seducer, Ligus,
rather than to bewray her hidden son, esteems not the renting of her
bowelles, beauty rather than to open her imperfections, cares not with how
many blemishes thou stainest her.

Zeno Citicus beholding a proud precise fellow passing over a quagmire, very
daintely reproved his error thus, he does worthily suspecte the quagmire, in
that he cannot behold his proportion in it as in a glass, women in their own
opinions, in aught that suspitiously touches their honors, pass it over
slightly, and by this means unto the wise bewray their vanity, who demying
with their daintiness to dau^ce in anet, are by the circumspecte found
guilty of those errors, which by their mincing ouerslips they would have
pretermitted.

I never saw in beauty that which was not sauced with sour, in love, that
which sauoured not of folly, in blind affection, that which was not repented
with many hearte-breakings.

The pompous glory of the world may entice, for they bear a show hf
continuance, promotions may persuade for why they are the benefits of good
fortune.

Love may never by any assumptions allure, when as neither the body is
affected with certain honor, nor the soul recompensed with the least
perfection whatsoever.

With like happiness possess lovers their Maistresses, as Vatinius his
Consulship, whose honor neither froste nor spring, winter or summer did ever
behold, as Tully pretily iested, and whose continuance of favor depending on
instants, has but a days breeding, and a months ending.

In love what sees the eye, lasciviousness, what hears the ear,
lasciviousness, what utters the tongue, lasciuiousnes, what thinks the
heart, lasciviousness, what inureth the body, lasciviousness.

Truly Simonides, the folly of affection is wonderful, yet are the errors
of beauty more admirable, when as in her self she is but a painted sepulcher,
and in her actions, the deminisher of all natural and moral reason.

What need I repeat former examples, to confirm later attempts? O Simonides,
I had a friend, who now being separated from me, abides in a delectable Island
with the Mistress of his pleasures, in whose love I found war, and straighte
truce, now truce, and then war, as the Comedian says: ye when the agony of
love governed his proceedings, neither was the league of friendship accounted
of, nor serious persuasions allowed of.

I have heard of many that were mad for love, yet never heard I of any that
were wise in love, I have read of conquerours that by love have become
esfeminate, I never found any (though never so great a Monarch, that was not
seduced by love, I have known the wise have been besotted by fancy, yet never
knew I fancy that made a wise man.

If as the Camelion by the air men live by love, as the best is in a moment
transformed to as many colors as it beholds, so is the lover afflicted
with as many cogitations as he imagines of, now happy, straight hapless,
now fortunate, straight froward, now blessed, straight cursed.

Now Simonides, since thou see the sour, choose the sweet, admit persuasion
as a Cullice to comfort, or a sword to destroy as an Antidotum to confirm, or
an Aconitum to confound.

Refuse love for it will harm thee, the green grass shrowdeth the black
serpent, the painted pot the devouring poison, the fair woman the wanton
mind? has thy Maistresse repulsed thee, then art thou happy, for, if her
fortune were to prove lascivious, then how blessed art thou to loose her, if
too wise, she would be too busy, if foolish, she would be too combersome: so
that he might be counted to be over frantic, that for a bed pleasure,
would be troubled with the nursing of so unwieldy a babe.

If men would dispose their eyes as warily, as women displaye their beauties,
garishly they should borrow birdlime from the fouler. and bind the birder by
compass in his own briars.

Atatus Pbilometor, was wont in his princely gardens, to set Aconitum, and to
weed out the blessed thistle, and women in the promptest and readiest wits
that be, ingraffe follies, and dispossess virtues. As if Euripides from
laughter, Simonides could refrain from love, the Poet should not so much be
recommended for his tragedies, as Simonides for his virtues.

If men were as thoroughly armed with persuasions as Dionisius with bad
clothing, they would as well escape the lewers of fancy, as the tyrant the fury
of the soldier.

But for that night calls away, and thy drowping eyes persuade me thou
would be a sleep, Simonides, let this suffice, that since love is
unnecessary, thou refuse it, and since the pleasure is not permanent, build
not thou thy opinions on it, and since I persuade with reason persevere thou not
in error, so shalt thou think thy travail well employed to Athens, and thy
return shall be more fortunate to Civil. Simonides with his eyes full of
sleep, began dreamingly to determine thus.

Although thy eloquence should make me Argus, yet the matter thou talkest of
inforctth me to be Endemon, what is subdued in thee, is rooted in me, so
that, though persuasion may confirm for a while, yet if fancy do but a
little kindle the coals, we shall soon have fire: but for that night calls
on, and I desire to be more ready to morrow, to hear the accomplishment of
thy promise touching the Island thou talkest of, I beseech thee let us use the
advice of our pillows, whether this nights discourse be available.

And do Simonides (quod Euphues) so perchance at Sun rising, thou will
either repent thee of a folly, or remember thee of a good lesson.

This said, Euphues conveyed Simonides to his Lodging, and after betook
himself to his own couch, where reposing them selves a convenient space, at
last the messenger of the Sun with pleasant redness be colored Euphues
face: who being very studious betook himself to his books: And after some
deliberation, thinking it good time to go visit his new guest, he came unto
him whom he found ready, and after a gentle Bon ioure past between them, they
determined to take the air: And walkyng out into a pleasant Grove, having a
goodly prospect into both Sea and Champion: for it was eminent, Simonides began
thus.

Feeend Euphues, beholding now the wave, which presented Athens yesterdaie
with Licurgus good counsel, I am brought in memory of a certain report of
yours, wherein you specified an Island, whereas those documentes were practiced
which the sedull presented, may it please you now, from your bitter
inuectiues against Love, to fall to your worthy declaration of this Island,
whereupon perhaps I may be persuaded, that having past over a great part
of the world co see fashions, I may make a few months sail thither to
learn virtue.

Euphues having paused a little space, in the end brake out into these
speeches.

Truly Simonides, thou at this instaunt perswadest me to the remembrauece of
that in which once, having placed my cheifest felicity, I now am almost
ravished with the remembrance only of the place.

Thou desire a report of that noble Spanyard, which with out wonder I did not
see, nor without pleasure thou can not hear.

And hereupon I can not imagine, whether with more admiration I may speak of
the situation of the place, or the disposition of the people, the one is so
worthily fenced by nature, the other so nobly nurtured by virtue.

For the Island it self, in old time it has been called Albion, and after by
the ariuall of the Troyan Trauailer Brutus, it was called Britanie, afterward
brought under the government of Engustus, it was called Engustland, and die
succession as now continues the name of England.

The Governors hereof by their manifold virtues, have not only filled
Europe, but also replenished Asia, the Climate very beneficial for provision to
maintain a State, neither wa^tyng Wool for clothyng, nor Corn and Cattle for
food: So that if any one Country in the world be blessed with benefits, I
think this Island happy, being fenced by the Occean against foreign
Invasions, and governed by good laws to avoid populer Mutinies.

The Princes have ever been ruled by discrete governors, they have conquered
and subdued many Nations, the Jrishe are under their subjection, from the
French by Conquest they bare a title: yea, so happy this Nation is, as in
their peace all Princes wonder, and in their favor each Country glories.

So that it can hardly be said, whether they be more feared for their power,
or honored for their prowess. Generally, they are all valiant not fearyng
Warlike attemptes, but with as great wisdom prevent, as with valewe they
perform.

Of personage they are seemly, of behavior comely, of apparel costly, in
entertainyng strangers none more ready: religious they be without hypocrisy:
serious in preferryng their Country: to their friends Lambs: to their
enemies Lions.

The men being thus, what more to be wondered at then their women: Beauty in
them has bestowed her sweetest colors: Nature has benefited them with all
seemly proportion: Art finished them with science and affability.

They are sweet in behavior, without lightness, steadfast in loving, yet not
lascivious, constant in religion, not superstitious, brave in attire, yet are
not proud.

Thus Simonides, country, laws, men, women of all sorts are thus good by
nature, and of this behavior through wise government: now seeing al these
perfections do thus concur in one, of what exquisiteness should the prince
be, whose subjects are so perfect.

Truly the English regiment (to each man's admiration Simonides) at this day
is so governed, as neither Solomon in Jury for justice, nor Alfonsus of
Aragon, for affability, nor Vespasian of Rome, for correction, are to be
compared to her that wildeth the kingly scepter there, who being a virgin, and
making her virtue answearable to her renowned fathers victories, she has as
much to glory in her pe^ce, as he in his conquests: sprung she is out of two
the renowned houses of Lancaster and York,, in whose birth (as it seems) the
cruel mutinies forepast (by reason of affectation of dignity) between those
noble families, is even determined.

She, as report runs, these xxv. years has so governed her dominions, as
neither conspiracy could either escape the circumspection of the gouerner,
nor mercy be pretermitted, if submission were preferred: This blessed
Princess Elizabeth, has now dominion over this bountiful Island, whose
benefits of nature being so great, as none can match them: yet such affinity
have the perfections of the mind with the proportion of the body, as neither
art can cipher out the person in approved colors, nor wisdom conceive the
inward virtues since they exceed imagination.

I have read of many, that for their wisdom, excellency, and other their
virtues were worthy of souerainty, yet neither Helerna, for wisdom, nor Zoe
for policy may match her: Hermodica she is for her proportion, Aspasia for
her knowledge in philosophy, fitter to govern a kingdom than Zenobia, and
meeter than Arete to teach Aristippus, for chastity she matcheth Adesia, for
eloquence Cornelia, for religion Fabiola, my tongue fails me to declare, not
her virtues, to supply matter: her princely majesty is mixed with natural
clemency as the rose amiddest the brambles, so her virtues amongst many
women, I must with Politianus as of his Cassandra, so of this Elizabeth end
thus: O decus Anglorum virgo quas dicere grates quasue refer, parem
quod etiam honor me tuarum literarum non dedignaris, etc.


For her counsel they are sage, prudent in all things, negligent in nothing,
for their laws, they have relation, first to religion, next to determination,
thirdly, prescription and custom, they auow titles, al courts whatsoever, and
pleas what so they be having paste the afperite of the law, may yet be ordered
by conscience, so that if aught be neglected by error in pleading, may be
relieved by equity of conscience.

Their ministry is ruled by discreet pastors, their preachers reprehende
sin liberally, the common sort zealously amend, great is the love of the
subject toward their Prince, hearty the love of the prince toward the
subject: but who that but looks into the Princes court, shall find, not
only cause to praise, but to wonder. The Nobility be so valiant, the Ladies
so continent, their trains so well ordered: beautiful maidens be there yet not
too amorous, bountiful Nobles be there yet not too prodigal: all courtlike
actions are so sauced with discretion, as neither excess make aught to be
misliked of, nor niggardliness cause any thing to be exclaimed on.

Truth it is, Elizabeth's mantion is an Academie, no court where men are so
eloquent, women so prudent, al so continent.

There is not the pomp of Seleucus, yet is the state magnicent, there is not
the train of Darius, yet such are they there, as be gallant: the end is, the
English court excels all princes palaces for virtues, and matcheth them for
unstained glory, for the practice of moral precepts what country so
fortu-tunate, as equity rules at home, so injuries are not preferred abroad:
yea, but look into one years action there, and it will follow, that whatsoever
Licurgus left here in paper, thou may behold there in practice.

The country being so fortunate as it is, the countriemen so blessed as they
be, the laws so upright as they are, O Simonides it seems me, that to an
unbridled mind it were best there to fit a reine, for an unruly colte
there to get a snaffle, for an unwieldy heiffer there to provide a yoke. And if
in aught thou allow my counsel: I wish thee make one journey thither, where by
my courteous friends thou shall not fail of entertainment, nor by the
abundance of all wisdom want to learn some wit.

I will recommend thee by my letters, pray for thee in thy travail, and all the
time I shall there hear of thy abode, better thee if I can with my counsels.

If thou art delighted by this discourse I am glad of it, if it please thee to
shape this Journey, I will rejoice in it, I had rather thou should sail
into England to learn wisdom, then stay in Athens to continue errors: This
said, Euphues ceased, and Simonides, sighingly said thus:

O Euphues, I think them blessed from above that by their paineful travail,
have attained understanding, and by good aduisement, restrained their former
follies.

The v^rietie of thy discourse makeh me loath, the vanity of my days
misspent, and desire earnestly as well to be partaker of thy experience, as of
thy travails.

My dear friend, though thou had not counseled me to seek England, I
would have changed Athens, but since the commendation of it is so rare, my
travel thither shall be more hasty, on which I both request thy counsayles,
and refuse not thy letters: only this I wish, that thou return my cause of
travel to Naples, and commend unto Frederick his countryman trauailyng
toward England.

In these and such like exhortations, demonstrations, counsels, and
conferences, they passed over the forenoone, the midday called them to the
remembrance of their noone diet, whereupon taking their way homeward, they set
them down to dinner, whereas Simonides only fed him self with the remembrance
of his travel, and on the sudden, unlooked for, a Pylot aryued out of England
with letters directed to Euphues, and came to his lodging at that instant when
they were repasting themselves, who friendly received by our Athenian, was
presented with lines from Philautus, whereupon breaking the seals, and over
reading the substance, he gave it Simonides to ouerlooke, who reported it to
follow in this form: Philautus to his friend Euphues.
IF thy musing in Silexsedra (friend Euphues) has made thee mute, or
forgetfulness of thy friends altered thy wonted customs, Philautus in
England lamenteth thy misfortune, and bewaileth thy imperfections: though my
pen be not acquainteh with sweet phrases as thine is, yet contynueth my heart
his old remembrance of thee as it ought to do, and though Euphues be musing
on his intricate studies, yet is Philautus mindeful of his old acquaintance,
if thou compare thy friends in England to thy families in Athens. thou shall
find some here thou would accept of, though thou were a Timon: since thy
departure from us, and thy last letters to me, there has nothing happened here
worthy the report, nor nothing more wished for than thy presence: my violet
continues her savor still, wishing her sent would either pierce to Athens to
draw thee by delight hither, or that thy person (severed from his melancholy
aspectes) were with us present to pass the time and be merry. Surius thinks
thee so wedded io thy books, that thou forgettest thy friends: Camilla
imagines the change of air has altered thy good customs: so that, if now
we had thee here, we should either account the place new for thee, or thou
new for the place, or both too new for rhy friends: Good Euphues if Philautus
may persuade, vouchsafe thou either with many letters to satisfy our desires,
or by one travel, put end to all misdeeming by the one thou shall content us
with thy courtesies, by the other, confirm us in our chiefest pleasures: as
we all salute thee, so we would all see thee: This messenger having occasion
to trafique in Naples, is sent of purpose to visit thee, who having haste to
return, I pray thee dispatche with expedition, and either help to furnishe
him with thy presence, or fraught him with thy letters.

Thine, or not his own, Philautus.




This accident wonderfully delighted both these Gentlemen, Euphues in hearing
from his friends, Simonides to see all things so happily to sort out for the
conueniencie of his travail. Whereupon, learning of the Master what time he
might be ready to set sail, and understanding that on the morrow he would be
readily prepared, Simonides bargained with him for his passage, and making all
things ready against the next day, he besought Euphues not to forget him in
his Letters: who taking himself to his studies, and leauyng the Master and
Simonides to their affairs, shaped this freendly answer to Philautus
freendly lines.

Euphues to Philautus.
IF I muse in Silexsedra (Philautus) on my studies, yet am I not unmindful of
my friends, and if forgetfulness in ought prevail with me, it is rather by
committing my errors to oblivion, then by ouerslippyng the manifold courtesies
of my dearest friends: If thou art myndfull of Euphues and constant in
freendship, thy friend rejoices at thy staidness, and concludes, that
Marriage has wrought wonders. Upon the very delivery of thy Letters, I was
recountyng thy happiness, and so gloried in the benefit of thy good fortune.
And though in person J can not my self satisfy thy expectation by reason of my
business, yet have I sent thee my second self to be befrended by thy
acquaintance. I commend this Gentleman as my self to Surius, whom I pray thee
salute from me, assuryng him that my last lesson was to avoid ingratitude, so
that my book teach me that, which he altogether suspecteth to be far from
my study. If thy vyolet smell sweet to thee, she delights me, assuryng her
this, that she can not more zealously wish for me, then J wish well to her.
For Camilla, since she knows change of soil can not alter manners, I doubt
not but she will account Euphues as constaunt in loyal affection, as she
beautiful in her wiuely modesty. Though J may not satisfy thee with my
presence, I pray thee content thee with my present, in these Letters thou
shall read the lines of tried zeal, in this Gentleman, thou shall see the
person of amorous Euphues. J have helped your messenger fraught and furnished him
with Letters, and so cease as I was wonted.

Thine own if marriage change not manners Euphues.


These Letters dispatched and sealed up were delivered to Simonides, who having
furnished himself of all things, and Supper time now being come, Euphues for
that night (considering it was Simonides farewell) kept more then ordinary,
and accompanied him with sundry Athenian Gentlemen, where neither wanted
Music nor dainties.

And as time suddenly ouerpasseth, so wind and tide seruyng, Simonides was
quickly called for, who being conducted to the Waterside by Euphues, gave him
this for a farewell.

Simonides, since time delivers me of the benefit of thy presence, I can not
tell whether with more sorrow I might bemone thy departure, or with delight I
might rejoice at thy travail: for by the one I am severed from a friend, by the
other I am satisfied in that I wish: But how soever it stands now we must
part: so that Euphues recommendes him to Simonides, desiryng Simonides to
remember Euphues. Salute my friends in England, and think of thy friend in
Athens, so shall they bid thee more welcome, and I write oftener unto thee.

Simonides with water in his eyes, prevented with the multude of his sorrows,
embracing Euphues fast in his arms, and giuyng him a solemn farewell, he
took shippyng, when Euphues impacient of his friends departure returned to his
Lodgyng.

How Simonides departing from Athens toward England, was entertained with a
Philosophical discourse.
IT blewe a merry gale at Sea, and Simonides slept sweetly a long season,
ouerpassyng with sound sleapes his former sorrows. For this benefit has
Nature lent to mortal men, that though never so many mishappes ouerburden by
day, yet one quiet nap alaieth all the sorrows at night. But having yielded
Nature her due, and raised from his Cabin he mounted the Hatches beholding the
wide Sea on every side, and cheared by the passengers Master and Mariners, he
sat down to dinner, where being satisfied with such provision as was to be
found on Shipboard, he began to pluck up his sprites, and according to the
counsel of the Masters mate, each took them selves to their pleasure.

Only one amongst the rest, who by his Habit seemed to be some Philosopher,
stood still sometime beholding the Welkin, other sometime he would look down
to the Wave. Whose contemplation Simonides perceiuyng, and willing to be made
partaker of his studies, interrupted him thus.

Sir, if it shall stand with your liking, to make a poor Trauailer partaker of
your studies, you may in so doing both satisfy your self, and also pleasure
me, for that I much desire to look in Sciences.

Truly answered Philesius (for so the Philosophers name was called) I am
silent more then I would be (good sir) in that perhaps some here (as the most
part of the world) disdain Arts, accomptyng the professors thereof to be
either foolish or frantic. Whereupon, I thought it more meet to contemplate
in silence, then to be contemned for my Philosophy.

What other men's dispositions are I know not (quoth Simonides) but for my
self, I not only delight in Science, but also desire to know it, please it
you therefore (the rather to abridge our travail) to vary on some
proposition, whereby either some hidden secrets of Nature may be opened, or
some celestial working of the superior heavens in these inferior creatures
may be denotated.

Philesius, as willing to perform as Simonides to require, said thus: Gentle
sir, my present musing at this time, is not to be included in few terms,
neither may a reasonable volume comprehend my imaginations, for why, the soul
passes through more in a moment, than in many years may be effectually set
down.

Whilome I was comparing the world, which is spherical and round (which of
all proportions is the best) next of the government of so myraculous a
firmament: thirdly, of the operation the superior powers have in these
inferior subjects: fourthly, what affinity may be between Art and Nature:
fifthly, how Art came first to light, and was continued by succession.

Al these propositions have I compared in thought, and now orderly will I
speak of them for your pleasure.

For the world (according to the form) what is more excellent, whose orderly
reuolutions, distinguishing times, and prefixing euentes to every casualtie,
give occasion (to a considerat judgment) to wonder at the motion, and
reverence the mouer: the beauty whereof is such, as in old time it has not
only been diefied for the glory it possessed, but also accounted of by some
of no small judgment in Philosophy for a GOD: which reason contemned of those
of some judgment in that it was created, causes that more honor is atributed
to ye workmaister then the work.

But for the opinion of the Philosophers touching this subject, truly we of
late judgment, and grown more nerer to the knowledge of God, reprove all for
passed positions as friuelous, and confirm with Pithagoras, that God only is
wise: Men but lovers of wisdom.

But that we may measure former imaginations of Philosophers, with our latter
experiences in this cause, let us consider what our Auncesters have imagined,
both of the creation of the World, and the beginning of the Creature.

Thales Milesius, one of the wisemen of Greece, beginning to look into the
generation of all things. For the soul he imagined it immortal, for the
world he concluded it to have his beginning by water.

Anaxagoras trustyng to his own opinion fabled thus, that the Sun was
composed of bright Iron, that the Heavens were of stone wonderfully knit
together least they should fall.

Euripides his scholar, he faines that the Moon had vallei^ and mountains in
her, and that the mind was the beginning of all motion: concludyng, that all
creatures had their creation of Water, Fire, and Earth: whereunto had he added
the other Eliment of Air, I think it could neither have been dissonant from
reason, nor repugnaunt to true Philosophy.

For the creation of the Earth, Archelaus will have it of liquide water
inflamed by the heat of fire, and by resolution turned into dust.

Heraclitus, he thinks all things to have their original of fire, concluding
with Aristotle, that the generation of one thing is the corruption of an other.

Democritus and Leucippus with the residue of their coherents, imagining
somewhat, yet concluding nothing, they refer the original of the world to a
little nothing, and making up a something of this Chaos, conclude it to be
subject to corruption, wherein they harped on a truth in their error,
confirming the vanity of our Metaphisickes, who wading paste their reatch,
conclude somewhat, they know not what.

In these opinions our old philosophers being conversant, the farther they
looked into the beginning of all things, the more they lost them selves: so
that one of them a most profounde clearke called Simonides, desired by Hiero,
the tyrant to inquire what God was, and demanding but one days respite, was
in his deepest imaginations so confounded, that seeing the farther he sought
the more he failed, he was enforced to cease the attempt, and subject his
opinion to the inscrutable essence of the highest.

In leaving therefore these opinions of philosophers to their Masters, we must
conclude, that the world of nothing was made wonderful, finished in a triuall
dignity which is most absolute, for though in six days work the whole Mass
was finished, yet in three persons the fabricature was composed, and the
fabricated redeemed: so that in unequal numbers an inexplicable wonder was
wrought, when as by the omnipotency of triuall dignity the world was made,
man created, man sanctified, and man redeemed, by the operation of three
persons in one godhead.

Some philosophers (and not unaptly) by serious insight in this beautiful
firmament have distinguished places, apointing first a place of residence to
the Majesty, which is they say Celum Emperium, next place they Cristalinum,
the heaven of Crystal: next in seven circular motions distinguishe they the
planets, appointyng Saturn for the first, and so by descent to Luna, in these
imperfect numbers, and circular motions, placing all the beauty of the heavens,
and the glory of the firmament.

Plato in his book of common wealth, will needs make a common wealth of
diuelles in the skies: thus each has his error, and every one a several
fantasy, but since we certainly know how the World was made, and by the
beholding of the same, wonder at the workemaister, since we see the
imperfection of our Philosophers, that would enclose the divinity within
limits, let us now wade further, and consider of the operation of the
celestial bodies in our terrestiall subjects: and herein the vanity of many
are to be wondered at, attributing many things to destiny and fortune, whereas
nothing passes without the providence of the highest: but for the working of
the higher powers: there is some similitude in this, that according to the
operation of the planet, the creature is disposed, and if oppositions fall
contrarious in the heavens, the contrariety takes effect here on earth: for in
truth, man is that table, wherein is included all the secrets of nature, and so
are his members disposed by providence, that if by all circumspection he can
conceive his own constitution: neither can the operation of the planets be
hiden from him, nor the novelties of the earth pass his understanding, in the
the whole mass of nature, neither is hidden Art concluded so secret, that is
not included in man, neither any effect in things without life, that has not
relation to the lively substance, according as the heavens are round, so is
man's head sphericall, as the understanding and intellectiue part, has
congruence with the higher heavens, in which reason as in inscrutable power
disposes al things, and rules al things, the senses which are the orgaines
whereby reason works, though in number they differ, yet in effect they vary
not, ministering with equal compass to every member, at the spheres with one
Sumphonia inuiron the center.

But to pass from generalities to particulars, we conclude a Jouist to be
liberal minded, bounteous, fair borne to honors: a Martist quarrelsome, red
haired, auster lookte, bloody minded, inconstant: a Mercurialist a liar, a
thief, borne eloquent, subtle, and such like: a Saturnist, melancholy, of
deep insight, steadfast to persevere, commonly wise, concluding according to the
constitution with Aristotle, that melancholy men are most witty, and in like
sort of all the planets.

Thus see we a certain hidden working, and agreement passing our reatch,
which fleightly we may imagine of but inwardely we cannot comprehend, wherein
we must condemn these vain heads, who clyming too high beyond their reach,
confound them selves in their own deeming, taking upon them to know other
men's fortunes, when they be ignorant of their own mishappes. Such sky
gessers have we nowadayes, that can see Jupiter in his ascendant, and cannot
know them selves till they come to the discendant. But ouerslipping these, I
muse with what fate it falls out, that in notable and rare blessing and
cursing, we have some foreknowlege of good or bad.

A Comet pretended the birth of Christ Jesus, a Comet prefigured the
destruction of Jerusalem, a universal darkness covered the face of the earth,
at such time as our savior was crucified: at the creation of Eugenius the
third of that name, fire from heaven devoured Church steeples in Rome: Romulus
the founder of that ancient city, was devoured by fire from heaven.

So that we see both the heavens work toward the disposition of the creature,
and manace toward the dissolution of the creature, and yet but as instruments
of their divine governor, who by the mysteries of his glory, prefigureth his
future power.

But leaving this, let us come to the affinity between Art and Nature, where
we are to consider with the Philosophers what Nature is: Tullie in his Offices,
has this saying: If we follow nature as guide we shall never err, esteeming
nature for a God, by whom our chiefest good fortunes hap.

Aristotle's interpreters divide nature into two forms, calling the one Natura
Naturans, and the other Natura Naturata, that nature that naturateth, is that
which Tullie accounts for a God: that nature that is naturated, is man.

If Art be compared to that which perfiteth all things, it should strive with
his founder, but compared with his equal, it perfiteth it, so that Nature is it
which prese^teth the subject, Art, it which perfecteth the subject: for many
naturally are borne with inclinations both to good and bad, Art searching
narrowly into the secrets of al things, confiyrmeth according to the
disposition, either cleansing that which was corrupt, or confounding the evil
disposed in their own enormitie.

The inclination of some by nature is to be lascivious, the correction of the
natural error by Art, is to be continent: some by nature are borne cowardes,
the same by Art are made constant.

Zopirus by exterior signs, adjudged Socrates to be wanton and vain headed,
who, though he confessed his natural infirmity, yet thus he disanulled the
former proposition, Essem ita si me philosophia non correxisset, I had been
so, had not philosophy mended me.

But as Art profits Nature in some things, so Nature excels Art in many
things, and yet have these two so striued together, that in Protogenes table
were as fair grapes in colors, as in Natures gardens, they were in
substance: for Nature indeed not only affects the sight, but also the
senses, where Art in setting out of colors presents a shape without a
substance.

But so are these two knitte together, that if Nature allow no fenell, Art can
make no fire, if Nature bestow no colors, we can have no paynting, and he
that will strive to make an Ass eloquent, will, inuita Minerua, work great
wonders, and yet a Crow could cry Caesar, although Nature allowed her no
limits.

Betwixt both Nature and Art then, let us put an intermedium, which is Use:
Nature first frames, Art teaches, Use makes perfect.

Art was sought out first by natural man, and Art at first confirmed
natural man, yet was there a framer of the one and an inspirer of the other.

Some are borne eloquent, yet Art confirms them in their eloquence. Some
valiau^t, yet Art compasses their exploites. What secret soever Art found
out Nature ministers it, and what soever Nature has in her bowelles included,
Art has sought it out.

So that in striuyng to exceed, they so agree in confirming, that in a learned
man it is hard to say, whether Nature or Art prevail or profit most. But for
that Nature was before Art, we will in this prefer her: yet if Art and
Wisdom be Relatiua, I fear me Nature must loose the stirropes, and Art set
in the saddle.

But as touching our last proposition of the invention and continuation of
Arts, truth it is that the opinions of the Philosophers are ambiguous in these
points: Notwithstanding, according to my remembrance, I will breefly pass
through so many as on this sudden my memory will afforde me, touching that in
a Letter for brevity which else would ask a volume.

The first foundation of Letters is attributed by some to Mercury, by other
some to Cadmas, other some Palamedes, who by the criyng of Cranes added four
letters to the Crosrowe: some to Simonides Melicus, other to Anticlides of
Aegipt, but those of latter memory as Crinitus report, that in a certain
Library this Monument was left for memory.

Wise Moses first the Hebrew letters found,
And wise Phaenices first prefixed the Greek:
Nicostrata the Latin letters made,
And Abraham Syras the Caldean taught,
And Isis she the Aegiptian letters shode,
The Crosrowe of the Getes Gulfila wrote.
Logic had his first original of Zeno: Polihimnia invented Rhetoric:
Thalia Poetry, Alcmenon Crotomates natural Philosophy: Ihon of Aegipt
Physic: Tuball Music, yet some father it on Appollo, Theuth Arethmeticke,
Erato Geomitrie: Abraham Astronomy, Zoroastes King of the Bactrians the
Metaphisickes. As for the Manuell arts as they are not of such excellency as
the other, so labor I lefe about their original, yet to touch them somewhat
and their founders, Noe invented Tillage, Proteus and Acrisius Warlike
Instruments, Bellecophon Horseridyng, Danaus by Ship first shapt course into
Greece: The Carthagians invented traffic of Merchandise, Phidon Chariottes,
Giges Paintyng.

Thus Arts had their original by diligent inuestigation of the insight into
Nature, and are continued unto these times, wherein we find that as the age
changes, so the fashion alters, and that Nature and Art are at such an
atonement, that what so, either in the center of the earth may be found out to
work upon shall be ministered: and what so, either memory may allow Art shall
perfect: and what is obscured by time, shall be made new being again renewed.

But for that (good Gentleman) the task I prefixed is finished, the Sun
already settled in the West persuades us to sleapyng, if it please you we will
here make an end, beseeching you to bear with a Scholars rudeness, who
according to the Talent his studies have afforded him, has discoursed thus
long to do you pleasure.

Simonides greatly pleased with this clearkly discourse, concluded thus: truly
Philesius, I know not whether I should more praise thee for thy learning, or
commend thee for thine eloquence, the one is so singular, the other so
sufficient: but my conclusion is (for that I would be loath to be troublesome)
that thou have deserved the name of a Philosopher, wyshing after thy repose, to
be made still partaker of thy purposes. In such like commendations, Simonides
discoursing with Philesius was finally interrupted thus:

To apply praise to those that allow it not, is to minister water to increase
flame, I had rather be in deed, than to be praised in word, but let us slip
over these unnecessary praises, and to morrow we will fall to some other such
discourse.

They both being agreede, betook them selves to their cabins, where I leave
them to their rest, til on the morrow at the Sun, Philesius not accustomed to
sleep excessiuely took the hatches, and calling Simonides up, whom he found
fast a sleep, he merrily in this sort iested with him.

It seems by your wakefulnesse, that you have studied Astronomy too little,
or affected slothfulness too much, that you can suffer the goodliest
comforter of the world to shine upon you, and you sleeping soundly, scarce to
salute him.

I cannot tell by what benefit it falls out Philesius quod Simonides, but so
sweet this nights sleep has been to me, as all my hours forepassed (in
comparison of this) seems but a dream.

And good reason (said Philesius) for seeing your days exercise was not vain,
it must needs follow you should sleep sound, for the fantasy is never
troubled with dreaming, but when the body and mind by day have employed
themselves, in practiue exercise, or excessive diet.

Yes by your leave (said Simonides) some Dreams there be that not only be
fortune in the temperatest bodies, but also be foretokens of some fortune to
come.

Herein I agree with you (said Philesius) but these are in an other kind then
those Dreams we talk of: for although they may borowe the name of a Dream,
yet in nature they are revelations: For in Dreams there are distinctions both
aloted by the Poets, and allowed by the Philosophers, attributyng one to men,
the other to beasts: for the fantasy, it works on insensible things, and
in dreamyng, not only by the power of the highest a certain inward knowledge
of the immortality of the soul is gathered, but also certain forewarninges
either of good or ill are prefigured. For such Dreams as have their original
only of the disposition of fantasy, and the complexion and operation of
humors, they as incident to brute beasts need little discourse. For such
as proceed of the affectes of the mind, which troubled with that it wrought
upon by day, now has operation and workyng of it by night, that I leave to
thy consideration, wishyng thee but to observe the quality of the cause and
the order of the workyng.

For those Dreams that in deed have Deuinitie in them, in which hidden
secret mysteries be presented, of them I will (for pleasures sake) prefixe
thee some example, and afterward I will betake my self to my private
contemplation.

Genadius of Carthage, a man deeply seen in the Art of medicine, doubtyng of
the immortality of the soul, esteeming it to perish with the body, beholding
in his sleep at two several times, a young man standing before him, who
presented him with the portrature of a fair city, and the next night
returnyng unto him, he demanded of the physician if he knew him, who
answered, that he knew him, and forgate not his dream, and demanded by the
same young man again, where his body was, he answered in his bed, yet
confounded with the strangeness of his knowledge, that sleepyng very soundly,
he could yet make relation of the state of his body, by these means
gatheryng it was the workyng of his soul, he revoked his error, and what by
long study he could not compass, by a little dream he found out, and was
thoroughly confirmed, that the soul was immortal.

Cirill reports this dream to have fortuned to him self, being in his bed,
and after he had finished his prayers, that he was fallen asleep, it seemed
unto him, that he felt an unmeasurable and horrible stench, which the sense not
admittyng, at last, the dead body of his own kinsman called Rufus appeared
unto him laden and chained with great iron shackles, vomityng out of his
mouth, fiery flames, and sendyng from out all parts of his body innumerable
sparkles, and tokens of the inward fire that was kindled within his breast,
whom thus beholding with intolerable fear and compassion of mind, he at
last with tremblyng voice as minister of his fearful heart, demanded of him
thus: O Rufus, how falls it out that thou living as thou did in most
blessed behavior accounted of for the integrity of thy life of all men, and
should be thus tormented.

Alas Cirillus answered Rufus, thou art deceived, for these plagues are laid
upon me only for the loosnesse of my life, for my leude living, my Dieyng
and unlawful Gamyng, has brought me to be punished with so many horrible
plagues.

With these words the Vision avoided, and Cirillus with fear awakyng,
reports this wonder.

Thus you may see (Gentleman) that the mind is affected when the body
sleapeth, and wonders are opened in dreams, to confirm wakyng men in virtues.

Some in dreams receive inspirations of knowledge as Aeschilus did, who
tendyng his fathers vines being a child, in a dream was warned by Bacchus, to
write tragedies, who making proof of his cunnyng being waked, found his
ability to perform indeed, that which before he had imagined but in dream.

And for that I have private studies to apply, I am forced to end abruptly,
whereupon, leauyng you to your pleasures good Gentleman) I take my leave, and
thus with a Philosophical beck Philesius departed to his Cabin, and
Simonides continued his musing of the accidents forepast, and wonderyng at the
effects of learning, he brake into these terms.

O unsearchable secret of Philosophy, by which Art first was known, Nature
sought into, Weals public begun, commonweals governed. How happy are they
that have the possession of thee? How blinded in error are those that are
without thee? O blessed Euphues, who seeing the sweet of studies, have
refrained to be worldly and attained to be happy. How fortunate is that
soul which is partaker of the secrets of the Gods, and by learning and
serious study has comprehended the deuinitie of it self? What booteth
perfections of the body, when the mind is imperfect. For beauty, who doubts
but that other creatures excel men: but it is wisdom only that beautifieth.

Oh unhappy Simonides that left Civil for Love and not for Learning. From
this time forth during the time they were on the Sea, Simonides only
solicited himself in the company of Philesius, till the Master of the Ship
comfortyng his Passengers told them that they were upon the Coast, and that he
doubted not but shortly he should see Sandwiche: These news made the company
frolic, and as time brings all things to end, so after eight weeks
sailyng they attained the harbor: whereupon Simonides being set a Shore with
Philesius in his company, he feasted himself and the Philosopher (being both
ouerwearied at the Sea) with such dainties as the Town could presently
afforde them.

Philesius perceiuyng the have Simonides made on his Journey, he himself not
yet prepared to bear him company, gave him this freendly farewell.

Noble Spanyard, as thy affection is great to learning, so I pray thee make
thy knowledge aunswerable to thy desire, and when opertunitie shall serve thee
to fall to thy studies, I beseech thee forget not to search Philosophy: for
findyng her she will feed thee. The Gods prosper thee in thy travails and me
in my studies, and for that I see thou have haste on thy way, I will no longer
trouble thee, but bid thee heartily farewell.

Simonides giuyng him freendly thanks, presently took order for the conueying
of his necessaries to London, and being mounted on Horseback, by convenient
Iourneyes he came to the City.

How Simonides coming to London, was friendly entertained by Philautus.
SIMONIDES having recovered London (after some inquiry) he found out the house
of Philautus, to whom when he had delivered his Letters, was entertained by the
Jtalian in these freendly terms.

Gentleman, if my friends recommendations were not, your own want of
familiarity should persuade me to pleasure you in what I could, but when
Euphues presents you as a freende to Philautus, doubt not but the best
courtesy in England (that lies in my poor) shall be at your command if it
please you to imploye me: mean while, you shall if you please take a poor
lodgyng with me, which though not so decently furnished as beseems your
honor, yet so friendly welcome are you, as that by it only, I doubt not but of
courtesy you will bear with the coursnesse.

After Simonides had given him hearty thanks, he was conducted by Philautus to
his wife, recommending the stranger unto her in these terms.

My vyolet, see how favorable our freende Euphues is to us, who though he can
not in person come and see us, yet has presented us with a courteous young
Gentleman to bear us company.

And he may assure himself of his welcome into England (said Mistress Fraunces)
wherefore, the hearty affections the Ladies bear our Athenian friend, he shall
not be long without a Mistress.

Madame (answered Simonides) neither know I how to recompense your favor,
nor how to requite your courtesies, only this well I wot, that if for Euphues
sake Simonides find favorable Ladies in England, he shall. Naie forth said
Madame Fraunces, for I fear me I have wrong where it biteth.

And it may be so my vyolet (said Philautus) for this is young Euphues, or
Euphues Letters are faulty.

Would God sir (said Simonides) I were Euphues in deed, or partaker of Euphues
virtues, and as for the passion which you Madame seem to catch hold on, if
I seem a Saint, I doubt not I shall escape the Devil, and if I continue
constant to that Shrine which so often I have sacrificed to, my hope is in the
end, to gain the high Priesthood for my good devotion. As for the fair Ladies
in England, I will do them honor, but for my service, as it was vowed
before, so shall it continue hereafter.

And if your perfection be such as you make show of (said Mistress Fraunces) I
will not doubt but to cannonise you for your constancy, and also prefer you
as one that is praise worthy, but I fear me there will such Suns shine
here in England, that your Moon will be extinguished else where.

It may be your Suns want light here in England, or mine shines to fair
in Civil (said Simonides) or it may be I am either blind in judging
colors, or beetle headed in beholding beauty.

And blind you may be if a Lover (said Lady Fraunces) or else Love stains
in other colors in Spain then in England.

If I be blind I would not see (said Simonides) and with these words
Philautus brake of their purpose, and preasyng Simonides hand in his, said
thus.

Gentle sir, you may see the ready wits of our Ladies, who can take a tale
at rebound, and fit fancies as they please.

Herein are they more to be wondered at for their wisdom (said Simonides)
who with quick capacity can comprehend every thing, and with witty
conclusions can finishe as they please.

In these and such like devises they passed the time till supper was served
in, where neither delicates were wantyng, neither variety of Music, nor
delectable discourse, so that Simonides astonished at the brave behavior of the
Ladies, the sundry dainties of their repast, and the sweet harmony of the
Music, was revived by Lady Fraunces thus.

It seems courteous Gentleman, that you have certain ceremonies to perform
you sit so sadly, I am sorry amongst so many of our poor pleasures, no one of
them will wring one smile from your heavy countenance.

Truly (said Simonides) you are mistaken, for neither am I so holy as to
meditate to much, nor in so pleasant mood, to laughe at every conceit, if
ought amase me, it is rather the excellency of that I behold, then the
cogitation of that which I thought not of.

My thought is the less sir (said she) and your welcome the more, but how
like you England said Madame Fraunces.

As I should do Lady (said Simonides) it is pleasant in Climat, populus in
Cities, plenteous in dainties, storde with brave personages, and full of fair
women. Not so fair as in Civil, said Lady Fraunces, it may be in mine
opinion (said Simonides) not having as yet seen but little, but if hereafter
I light of a more fair prospect, I will not doubt Madame to make you privy to
my opinion, mean while, I conceive this, if al be as fair as the Mistress of
this house, no marvel though Italians leave Naples to dwell at London.

By this time the Table was taken away, and every Gentleman stranger had his
welcome, and as the custom of the Country is after Supper, they betook
themselves to disport each as fitted his own fancy. Amongst the rest, the
Mistress of the house taking Simonides by the hand, and ioynyng unto him other
Gentlemen and Ladies of the company, said thus. Noble Simonides, as this
Country guise of disporte is after their repast to reason, so will I acquaint
you now with the orders, because that findyng your capacity to be so
execellent as it is, I may imploye you to be a moderator, amongst such
unexperienced reasons as we poor Ladies be.

If you reason no worse Madame (said Simonides) then hitherto yet you have
discoursed, I think I shall have greater reason to give ear and be silent,
then enterruptyng a sweet tale with a sower censure, shall rather shame my
self then delight the company.

You say well sir (said the Lady) yet you may not wring out with this wyle,
wherefore Gentlemen, I pray let me entreat you, to enterprise a discourse,
for on my word I have fitted you with a convenient moderater.

At her request they all condescended, among the which acomely young Gentleman
called Siluius began thus.

Since you have begun (Madame) to enterprise, and to appoint him that shall
dispose, may it please you to order how the disputation shall pass, and then
with more conformity we may go forward.

Be it so Siluius (said Madame Fraunces) and according as you intimat you
shall first reason with Mistress Claudia, Fauellus with Secrobia, and Furnelius
with me.

As for him that shall conclude, you know who is enjoined Segnior Simonides,
upon this conclusion, we all are attentive Segnior Siluius: And I will not be
long silent, said he, whereupon turnyng himself with a courteous regard
toward Maistresse Claudia, he began thus:

There is a punishment (fair Maistresse Claudia) amongst the Indians, that by
the drinckyng of a bitter poison, the body in sleep, is so tormented with
horrible visions, that wakyng it does destroy and subvert it self, as in those
tortures, so in these attempts, it is not only a punishment prefixed to talk
against love, for commonly the most contemners are subject to this mischief,
that tastyng their fill of fancy, they not only in nights dreams behold
their days sorrow, but also by day discontinu^^^^ their wakyng happiness,
which makes me now, so to prefixe limits to my arguing, that being loath to
commit an error, yet am not I willing to commend too much, whereupon, if it
please you, we will reason whether beauty be more commendable in a base borne
creature, than in her that is sprung of noble parentage: and for that I will
leave you that which belongs to your self, being descended of honorable
parents: I mean to maintain this, that the excellency of beauty is more
commendable in her that is sprung by progeny of small regard, than in her
that is beautiful and enriched with many titles of honor.

My reasons be these, first nature is emploid more strangely than mind can
conceive, when on thistles she grafteth roses, or on the hurtful hemlocke,
the hurtlesse hearbgrace, in the deformed womb, a perfect substance, when
gross humors, homely feedyng, and disordered diet, work both in active and
passive substances, if there were not more than a supernatural workyng, we
must conclude, that the female should be subject to many defaults, and
humors either abandonyng or defaulting in Nature, the babe should be either a
monster or changelyng in proportion: so that, by how much the more the rare
effects of Nature are to be wondered at, by so much the wonderful benefits
of beauty are to be commended.

And with some hidden reason, the powers bestow these benefits on poverty,
that where they have not ministered to it in worldly honors, they forget not to
recompense in seemly similitudes: so that it must be concluded, that Nature
more strangely works in unnoble than in noble, when from so base substances,
so sweet a perfection is gathered. So that I fear me, if there were the like
custom in England, as was at Elida, that she that was the beautifullest,
should be crowned in regard of honor, I doubt not but our base borne
beautiful, might sacrifice a target to Minerua, when our brauest courtiers,
and Ladies of greatest honor, should be but ministrs to accomplish the
sacrifice.

And it would so fall out, that the fair maidens of Tenidos, should carry
away the bucklers, when our beautiful damosells of Troy were to be deprived of
their honor they so strive for.

But to make my reasons more forcible, I must infer this, what so a noble
mind beautified with all titles of honor desires, must be concluded to be
both rare and wonderful, but the beauty of her that is borne but of unnoble
parents, has subdued mighty Emperors, and therefore more to be maruailed at.

For you fair damosells, the abundance of your wealth, the promotions of your
fathers, the expectation of worldly pleasure makes you to be sought after, and
to be sued to, when as they having none of these possibilities to prefer
them, are as courteously entreated as your selves, and more accounted of, than
many of you.

It was a law amongst the Lacedaemonians, that who in battle had gained
victory, should in the presence of the king be crowned with garlands of
honor, whereupon noble Judge, I must now request you, that seeing I have
concluded so undoubtedly, I may be rewarded with honor accordingly.

Maistresse Claudia conceiuyng his conclusion, chopte him this answer, who
triumphs before the victory, may sooner carry a faggot for his penance than
wear a garlande for his honor. Stichicus might strive with Hercules in
slight matter of pleasure, but if he challenge the combat, he might have a cold
comfort in his proceedings.

So Signior Siluius it will fare with you, who in matters of pleasure like the
Lamb may play with the Lion, but if you stretche past your compass, you
may hap to have a clindge for your labor, neither ought you to claim the
reward of victory, since with most certain demonstration I will defend, and
with more probability I will conclude, that beauty in the Noble is more
commendable, then in those of obscure name it is praise worthy. In good sooth
tell me (Signior Siluius) is not the Sun more beautiful in the Firmament,
when the obscurity of the clouds defaceth it not, than when it is
ouershadowed with darkness: is not the delectable sent of the Rose more
commendable, when it is mixed with his companions in Nature, than ouerpressed
with unsavory smelles, I see not but that the moon is more fair amidst the
glimsing stars, than amongst the shrowdes of darkness, and affects the eye
sight with more pleasure, and the trauailer with greater comfort.

Place beauty in an honorable personage, and it has affinity with an
honorable mind, which makes it so much the more to be wondered at: As for the
matching beauty in a base personage, it is to put pearls in a swines
nostrels, to prick flowers in a filthy donghill, or to dress an Ass in a
Lions skin.

I can bring you many that were nobly borne, that were exquisite in all
professions, but for them that are obscure in birth, never found I any,
neither if I did would I believe it.

A beautiful noble woman brought up in virtuous demeaner is a president to
those that follow after, who with emulatio^ will contend to exceed or match her
at the least. But when a beautiful in noble shall fortune by wonderful
destinies to grow to great perfection, what imitation shall we find or
succession amongst these obscure maidens.

No Segnior Siluius. I conclude, and you must confess, that my reasons are the
stronger, and for that I will not be tedious, I leave the rest to the
discretion of the Judge.

The whole company alowing this methodicall contention, after some pawse, were
attentive to hear the second disputation, when as Fauellus a noble Gentleman,
and one well nurtured, turned to Secr^bia, and said thus:

Madame, since we two must enter disputation, I would so fit you, that each
might be partaker of the pleasure of the subject, and the eloquent delivery of
your discourse, whereupon, if you please, we will argue thus: if in choice of
husbands, you were to be limited between two personages, whether would you
allow of the Souldior for your bedfellow, or the Courtier for your husband?

Truly Fauellus (said Secrobia) I allow well of the Souldior, but I must yield
the prise to the Courtier.

And I Madame (said Fauellus) will prove the Soldier more worthy to be
allowed of, and a more meet man to be beloved, and this not without reason:
first, for personage most commonly he is as perfect as the best, for bed
pleasures, Idoubte not as active as the most, in discourse, as delectable, in
love as stedefast, his affections are not so various as the Courtiers, for that
his life is not so lascivious, if thine honor be depraved, he will revenge it,
if thou be subject to any imperfection, he will bear with it, for it must
needs follow, that he who winketh at so many outrages in his Souldior, will not
be much incensed with a woman's natural fragilitie: their eyes are chaste in
all places. But where they love, their actions more honorable when they
remember them of their beloved.

Alexander that noble Macedon, though he had in his subjection the wife of
Darius and his beautiful daughters, he would not violate them, whereas I
fear me if a Courtier were so fair offered, he would have made one of them,
sing a fa burden while he were descanting a loft.

A soldier perhaps may be accounted bloody minded, and therefore not mete
for a delicate damsels bed, but in my opinion it were better to marry a man
than a meacocke, for the Soldier offers no rigor but to his enemy, if he
be displeased, it is with such as envy the felicity of his Mistress: the
Courtier perhaps shutes it out in better colors, but the Soldier having no
fine phrases to please humors, lays it on with plain truth, which is the
plea of him that in love will prove most constant.

Whereupon I must conclude (mistress Secrobia) that either you must prove
affectionate in your choice, or perverse in resolution, making election of the
worser and leauinge the better, and on this conclusion I refer my self to
judgment.

And to this conclusion I shape this answer (said Secrobia) though you have
tied me within limits of election (Signior Fauellus) yet I will susspend my
resolut judgment, and for that you shall not think by your reason thus to win
the goole, thus much for the courtier.

Who so in all actions most fitteth wonens fantasies. is most convenient to be
allowed, but Courtiers are they that most con: ueniently satisfy fair Ladies
likings, and therefore metest to be had in wedlock.

For the truth is so, that whereas fair demoseles are delighted with
seamlinesse, modest pleasure, with like courtly behauiours: such things are
most agreeable to their delicate humors, and therefore it cannot be but that a
Courtiour must be admitted who is the only man for this purpose to furnish
them in that they look for.

The Courtiour with seamly parsonage, with honorable behavior, with philed
phrases, with sweet music, and with twenty amarous devices will delude the
time so pretely, that we Laidies can not imagine them, but to be the only
ministers to procure our pleasure.

In the Soldiour, what rests there either to be wondreth at or wished for
that the Courtiour wants, in the Courtiour, is there any thing missyng in
which he exceeds not the Soldiour, the Courtiour is as good a horseman, as
practiced a man at arms, as valiant to defend his mistress, yea more resolute
in beauties cause, they stand on every light term of honor, not sufferyng
the least stain to take hold of their gentry.

The Soldiour is fed with murders, delighted in blodshed, the memory of
whose massakers, would make the memory of his pleasures most loothsome. And
Signior Fauellus, that contenencie which you impute to Soldiers, aledging the
example of Alexander that would not regard the beauty of Darius wife and
daughters, imagiyyng thereby the chastity of Soldiors minds, I can not by
this excuse your gross imagination, but do rather think Soldiers to be so
betle blinded that they are not able to distreye the perfection of beauty: or
else composed of so base a substance not to estem of so rare a benifit, as has
mad the wisest to stoop.

The Courtiour continues in one comp^sse, that is always constant, ready at a
beck for all service: the Soldiour when his mistress should have most need of
him, is wandryng I know not where, and returns I can not tell when.

The Courtiour pretermitteth not a day without variety of delight, lyberall
he is in expense, bountiful to her he honors, he respects not either this
occasion of conquest, or that booty to inriche him, but acountes his chefest
felicity in the attainment of beauty, and to do fair Ladies service, and
should not they (think you) be to unkind, that would forget the diligence of
so loving Gentlemen.

Truly Fauellus I must conclude my fancy with fair Laidies opinions (for I
take my self sometimes to be one of their preuie counsel) that Soldiers are
more fitter for the feilde, then for the feilde bed: more meter for a massacre,
then for a marriage: And the Courtiour to be the only necessary man, that
fitteth to work a fair Ladies pleasure. If this be not true, I referr me to
the just determination of this gentleman our judge.

All the company laughed heartily at this merry conclusion, till such time as
madame Eraunces discoursed thus.

Since the matter is sorted out thus far (gentle Furnelius) I will now streine
curtisie with you and inuert the order, and because my memory is but brittle,
I will begin the sooner least I forget the latter.

Your profession (I dout not) is such good sir, as you which have practiced the
profit thereof so long, are not now to seek how to praise it, whereupon at
this present, I mean to argue thus. Whether the Lawyer or the Physician be
more commendable in a state, I will defend the Lawyer, for you as being a
Physician by profession, you may the better defend since you are the more
practiced.

The professer of the law, if he had naught else to commend him, the very name
it self would make it praise worthy, for by the laws good disciplines are
prescribed, the state governed, and all policies to the maintenance of peace,
both begun, continued and ended.

The Lawyer, knowing the punishment of all errors, and findyng him self to be
a president in all good demeaner, so orders him self as when he but passes
the streates as Cato Censer did, all Rome refraineth idleness and becomes
well ocupied, he purges the state of suspicious inconveniences, he prescribes
in the Commenwealth such preuentions as that an error now spronge up can
neither take head nor be contenued, no not in those of great countenance the
professer of the law has relation to lead him, conscience to direct him,
justice to counsel him, honor to reward him. In his life he is virtuous, in
his counsels constant, in his judgments upright, in his pleadings
incorrupt, in conclusion, he is the only necessary membre in a state, by
whom the Noble are counseled, the subject kept in awe, and the truth is, that
the Common wealth is unhappy, whereas the Lawyer has not both preferment by
his practice, and pour to reprove what he misliketh.

It was a Lawyer (yea and a learned practiser of the science Apius Claudius)
who when the whole senate and state hunge in susspence by the approach of the
enemy, not only counseled that which was profitable, but also preferred
those precepts which were honorable for his cuntrie: neither yet knew I any
regiment fortunate, where either the Prince was self opinionatiue not
respectyng law or the subject so dissolute that he regarded not the Lawyer. As
for you Docter Furnelias, if your potions be wholesome, they are as perlions to
the Soul as they are profitable for the body, for your pacient being once
restored to health, he is made prone to put in practice every kind of
inormitie: again, your medicine is commodious but to one particular person,
but where one good Axiom passes from a Lawyer, it is not a sole pleasure, but
in truth it is publicly commodions

If then, by the dignity practice and profit, the law as most commendable, the
professer of force must not fail of pre-eminence, whom since I have concluded
for a more necessary person, I doubt not but the judge will determine, that in
the ^^ate he is most profitable.

Here ceased Lady Fraunces when thus the grave Docter began his discourse.

Madam perhaps (as commonly amongst Ladies it falls out) your Ladishipe
rather deameth upon affection then judgment, which makethe you so parcially
to think of the Lawyer, and so iudicially to condemn the Physician, but if a
burning feeuour as now had handfast of your body, I fere me you would rather
sacrifice to Asculapius, then shake hands with Justinian, persuaded by proof
and experience in this that a medicine can alay that in the body which moral
precepts ca^ never aswage, and that the Physician in extreamitie of sickness is
your Gods good, where now in your discourse he is smally accounted of.

As man is made but of Soul and body, so next the Soul the health of the
body is to be preserved before worldly pelf, and as richesse are but slaves to
minister to the bodies want, so the greatest commendation that may be given to
a Lawyer is but in justice to give every one his own, yet this far
vncomperable to the Physician, that gives every one his health. But admit
what you have said to be true, that the Lawyer is to be thought worthy the
commendation you have given him, yet the Physician is he that continues him
his health, and then I doubt not but you will conclude, that the perfiter is
more worthy then the perfited, and that he that ministers perfection to the
Lawyer, is of more excelencie then the Lawyer. If sickness should take hold on
your most upright iusticer, by whom (as you conclude) the whole state is
releaued by, I pray you then who is sent for, is not the Physician sued unto,
then runs this Lady for that preservative, now for that preparatiue, again
for this purgation, and should not the humor by Physic be expelled, our
Lawyer might bid goodnight to his friends, is it not then true that the
Physician is to be preferred when he not only is a good membre in a
Commonwealth, but also continues in good health the stays and vpholders of
the state. If the memory be ill, physic will recover it: if the body be
consumed, a medicine will help it: if beauty be decayed, physic will
restore it: and madame, can you find in heart to speak ill of so necessary
members. He that must be a Physician and a master in his science, must be able
to search into the nature of the Heavens, the course of the Planetes, the
distintio^ of times, the operations of complextions whereas to be a sufficient
Lawyer requires no great art, but a discrete judgment, a good memory, with a
few principles, so that the conclusions of law may be comprehended in 20
years limet, where to be a good Physician requires Nestors years.

Yea, madam, for that you shall know the Physician is as profitable and as
expert in state as any others, do but mark this, that in the time of Eugenus
the third, at a general counsel, a Physician interteinynge the whole
rablement of profound Philosophers of Asia, and at that sityng, not only
answered them to their depest opositions, but also confounded them in their
own grounds, and not without reason, whereas he that perfiteth the memoryes
of others can be, without the same perfection by which he works.

Truly fair Ladies if you were examined upon your consciences, how many of
you would prove kind pacientes to your Physicians, and confess that unless
our medicines had sharply alaied some humors would have proved over lawless,
neither able to be corrected with a common Lawyers cautions, although in your
Ladishippes opinion, now they must have the pre-eminence.

But good madame since we have referred all to an arbiter and judge, I request
you suspend your judgment and leave it to his discretion, who being a
stranger and having in travel gathered many experiences, will not fail to
conclude according to discretion, and prefer the person according as his
deserts enable him.

Why said madam Fraunces, Signior Simonides, the whole rests in you, who to
conclude this our nights disport, are only to furnish us of a judgment
touching all our doubts.

And I madame according to the tenuite of my judgment, will fulfill what you
have enjoined me, although I am bound in these causes to some extreamyties.

Since you Signior Siluius confirm a wonder, Mistress Claudia a meruell,
beauty as I esteame (fair Ladies) as it was first made incomprehensible by
reason of excelencie, so is it not bestowed but upon rare personages: for
nature in the first composition of all creatures, proportioned the beautiful
in such form, as if Ethinick poets may prevail to persuade, it not only
bewitcheth the Gods, but also intangleth the creatures, so that where the
benifit of beauty is employed, there because the person is to be wondered at the
powers, by hidden secrecy adequat the delight of the one, with the perfection
of honor, not vouchsafing beautiful brightness but on the sun, nor fair
face but on an honorable personag, willing on this to contenue their wonted
equality, who bestow all graces alike, not sufferyng beauty to dround honor,
nor honor to excede beauty, so that when nature bends at my time to the
baser, it is but to show that she can of infamous make noble, and of base borne
beautiful yet notwithstanding, as the Painter generally bestowith all his best
coullers on the sweetest simulytudes, so nature most commonly bestows her
rarest perfections on the roiallest substance, immitatynge herein the course
of the world, where there is haboundaunce, there more shall be bestowed, and he
that is pressed with penury, must still be contented to bide the penance.

So that Signior Siluius, herein I must deprive you of that you wish for, in
that you commend that which only is but probably true, where this
Gentlewoman having experience in these dispositions, has iudicially concluded,
leauyng me a bad scipher to finishe up her sentence.

But for you Signior Fauellus, who has entered into the nature of divine
creatures, bindyng women's likings within limits, I must use you and your
resolutions as the Anthropophagie use their enemies, who fat them then most
excessiuely, when they entende to murder them cruelly, so alowyng you a little
scope to confirm the plausibilitie of your wit, I must with the same reasons
dissuade by which you confirm, so beatyng you with your own rod, and
maisteryng you in your own conclusions, Mistress Se^robia must have the day and
you the disaster.

You grow in commendation of Soldiers, in whom what note you but constauncie
(and that is a virtue) in whom what allow you but valewe, (and that placed as
it ought to be is a black swane) yet who fitteth the fair Cambrick with a
black stain, and the sweet Amber with the rank Mandrake, shall find he has
but acquainted an Ass with eloquence, and a Plow man with Philosophy.

Are Soldiers constaunt (Fauellus) it is then in inconstancy? Are Soldiers
valiant (Fauellus) it is then in extreamities, and I think who never does
well before he be urged, his well doing is not praise worthy, for where the
action is not freely enterprised, though the success be never so fortunate,
the unwilling attempt concludes an unworthy exigent.

It is a Soldiour that you would make a Ladies master, and fair Damoselles
vouchsafe not to accept so base fellows to be their servants, so then in
mine opinion we must conclude, that he that will prefixe raines to women's
fantasies, and would prescribe them limits to keep them within compass, must
both bid the repulse of his unjust comparison, and be displaced of Judgment
when he seeks to conclude that which is infinite.

A Courtier is a collop of pleasure, which was first bred to feed Ladies with
variety, and to suck the Marrowe of the youth, and to determine the pleasures
of their age.

A Soldiour is no doubt of it reserved to an end, yet that exigent so
sequesters them from any liberty of likyng, that he who but carries the name
for his after commodity, must be glad of the repulse for his unjust title.

So that now Fauellus, I must conclude in beauties cause, as unjust tyrauntes
in their own ouerweanyng, Stat pro ratione voluntas, Beauties alowance stands
for reason: And if I have not concluded well fair Ladies be you Judge.

But Madem Frunces, as you invented the order, so now must I alter my sentence,
and as your conclusions were most serious. so will I more severely conclude of
your censure.

You as naturally inclined to maintain a Commonwealth (in that you are a
necessary membre to multiply) give pheminence to the law maker, and not
without reason.

First he contenueth and increases peace, prescribes and performs good
laws, ye so orders all things, that no things can be lawless that is
within his reche, nor any thing unlooked to where he may have liberty. But
Docter Furnelius, who can descant on all natures, in coloring the errors of
the Lawyer, ciphereth out his own perfections, he will not tell how the Lawyer
is a penny Father, how a maintainer of contencions, how like to Aesopes Rite,
who while the mouse and the Froge strove together for suprimecie in the M^rshe,
he denoured them both, and made the sour of their contention the swet of his
pray,

But he wisely reputes him praise, by that means to imploie the excellency of
his practice, for (says he) if the Lawyer be commodious then he that
contenueth this commodity must of force be accounted more profitable.

But if Doctor Furnelius, should remember, that by the operation of his
potions, the evil are enabled to more unlawful practices, and the Lawier being
by him recovered, is left to follow his wonted exercise, to maintain strife
and contention in a state, for the very brables and quarrelsome debates that
are had amongst fools, is the only credit, reputation, and maintenance of
the Lawyer: And therefore (Madame Fraunces, not to dissemble with you, who has
said so well for them, and not to flatter Master Doctor, who has aleadged so
much in his own behalf, I must conclude the Physician to be the most
profitable member in a common wealth, for that he many times with his medicines
kills the Lawier, who, while he lived in health, cousins the poor
comminaltie of their coin, with his craft.

So now my fair Ladies, and good Gentlemen the debate may cease: and if it
shall please you to sleep upon my verdite, if to morrow you shall not like it,
you may reuerse it with a writ of error, so you put in good sureties: And we
will not trouble the Judge with common bail (said Madam Fraunces) in so
serious a cause: yea but Madame (said Simonides) I must put you to your book
oath before I admit you: As for that conclusion (said Lady Fraunccs) since
it lies on your courtesy to esteem, I doubt not but you will forbear if you
carry a good opinion Segnior Simonides,

With these merry greetings, the assembly being broken up, each betook
themselves to their lodging, leaving Simonides to the courtesy of Philautus and
his violet, who conducted him to his chamber, and left him to his nights rest
after his long travail.

He thus in a strange soil, and amongst strange people, was troubled with as
strange imaginations, first with the felicity of the Island, next of the
opulencie of the inhabitants, then of the bounty of their repast, thinking in
himself, that Euphues praise might well persuade so far, and that England was
only fortunate, being so fruitful in all blessings.

And sleepyng on these imaginations, on the morrow at convenient time, he was
conducted by Philautus unto the English court, where he not only received a
freendly Bein Venu of Surius, but also a courteous salutation of Madam Camilla.

And here it were a wonder to write, how his imaginations wrought, comparyng
Euphues reports, with his own proofs, there saw he as great bravery as might
be, as much beauty as was requisite, each subject so sumptuous, that ravished
with the imagination of the inferior, he began even then to meditate what
might be in the superior, but when the Princess Elizabeth presented her self,
in whom findyng austere seemelinesse befittyng a Princess, courteous
affability to entertain friends, incomparable beauty to allure an enemy:
admirable chastity against all assaults of fancies, constant resolutions in
wortthy attemptes, inestimable dowers of learning without any blemish of
arrogancy: he concluded as the Paynter did of Venus proportion, that since
these very Principia of her virtues were unspeakable, it were not possible to
cyphre out the true similitudes of her perfections, nor resemble that by
shadows, which relied upon a more than heavenly constellation.

Thus fared it with Simonides at that instant, as that altogether confounded in
his imaginations, he here set up his rest confirming, that if England were as
happy for subjects as it was blessed in a Prince, that it might be reported
of, as it was of Rome in the time of Cato, that the government was happy by
reasons of virtues, but especially blessed in so gracious a gouernesse.

Hereupon he posted over his wanderpng eyes to more baser, yet seemly
obiectes, and taking the view of the beautiful Ladies in Court, in whom
beholding such strange and sundry fashions, such imitating of all excess,
that was used through Europe, he concluded in his imagination, that either the
Ladies bare these patterns in scorn of the abuse, or loath to yield to any
country in curiosity, vouchsafed the fashion though they admitted not the
vice.

When he looked into the whole state of Gentlemen, and finding some of the
younger sort to be more than half effeminate, light in attire, imitating such
newfangles, as are vnseamly for men. He varied in his opinion thus much, that
either Euphues sought to confirm him by contraries, or English bravery was
Napolitan excess, and that both Napolitan and English riot was to be
lamented, not commended.

This befell on Simonides in the oueruewe of the English Court, and thus fared
it in his fantasies, so that in him self he began to conclude an opinion, when
at the very instant noble Surius with Madamosilla Camilla, with Philautus in
the company, all at one instante came unto him, conductyng him unto their
mantion house, where Simonides beheld such new bravery as wrought in his mind
a new wonder.: The music was so delicate, the meat so dainty, the
entertainment so hearty, the seruise so statly, the seruitours so seamly, to
conclude every thing was so sumptious, as the glory of the Spanish Court seamed
proposterous in comparison.

Camilla willing to delight the stranger with as great variety as she could,
leaving the rest of the company, betook her self to entertain him, began in
these terms to commence her discourse.

Curtious Gentleman, it seems me that either you are fed with disdain, or led
with some mislike, your behavior is so malancholike, and your demeanor so
miscontent: if ought be here therefore that mislikes you, forbid it, if any
thing that might delight you command, and it shall be had.

Madam said Simonides, if wonder bread malencholie, I confess my self subject
to the humor, the pleasures here be so infinite, as one drowneth an other, and
al have relation to one beauty on which they attend, which amongst all the
delights that wait on your Court, on mine Honor most contenteth me.

And if beauty please your affectes so much (said Camilla) truly this house
is unfortunate only in that pleasure, notwithstanding, such lovely brown as
our Courtiours are acostomd to, you may be aquainted with: and your Ladieship
may do me great favor in this (said Simonides) whereupon the Lady calling
out three of the most beautiefull Damoseles of her train, began to discourse
again thus with Simonides.

Since (noble Spaniard) it is beauty that delights you, I have brought you
three patturns to imploye your cunnyng on, which shall atend both on your cup
and trencher, and supply such simple discourse as their young heads will
afford them

And I madame (answered Simonides) graciously accept your honorable curtisie
and their singular favor: whereupon streinyng each of them gentely by the hand
he began to discourse with them thus.

Fair Ladies if all perfection of your minds, be aunswerable to the habitudes
of your bodies, I fear me that neither any climat in Europe, can afford more
beautiful nor ouerlooke more wise. Mistress Elida, a Gentlewoman of very quick
capacity, and incomparable beauty, answered him thus.

Gentleman, since so preiudicially you condemn all Eur^pe, and admit of three
silly offalles of beauty, leauyng a whole Catologe of Courtiers unlooked, yet
seems either you count us mete subjects to work upon, since our
imperfections be so many, and the only brown which furthereth your whit in
your secret imagenation: which if it be so, you may if it please you go
forward in your purpose, and we silly siphers will sit still, while you figure
forth your fantisie,

My fair Maidens (said Simonides) I am neither so corrupt in nature, neither
so alinated from good nurture, to say one thing and think an other, nor so
sequestered from all good government, as not to conclude with judgment and
determine with discretion, if therefore you doubt I alter in any thing, I crave
you to yield a reason before repulse, and condemn not without a cause. Thucida
ye second returned him this answer.

Signior Simonides, if your opinion and thoughts work a like, the end must
thus follow, that where you allow so precisely you must love a little, else in
contemnyng that you commend, we shall condemn you in that you plead not
guilty.

And will you bind me (Mistress) to that extreamitie (said Simonides) truly
then the case will go hard, for if it must be concluded, that I must love
there where I commend, I should love the white Mercury though deadly poison, I
should feed on the glorious Diamonde though rank Aconitum, yea, I should by
the deemyng of mine eye, be domed to mine own destruction: but because it is
wisdom to avoid such an error, fair Ladies I must conclude this, that I
love you all being beautiful, I honor you being virtuous, and reverence you
being wise.

I but (said Mistress Philida) these colors are not half well shadowed, I must
tey you within shorter limits, you love us all you say, sir and we like you,
but well I wot three such flees would comber one bed, and one such Gentleman,
would be shrewdly cloyed to manage such a leashe of merlines, you must
therefore grow to an equality, and alowyng one the superiority in beauty,
shroud your self under her favor, so we shall be left to them that list, you
aloted to her you love, and the Gentlewoman won by your good like, love him
faithfully which esteems of her so nobly.

Simonides, upon the sudden thus tropmed upon, was almost past all help how
to recover himself: notwithstanding, trustyng unto the plausabilitie of his
wit, he concluded all their circumuentions by this pretty delaie. It was a
custom (fair Ladies) amongst the most renowned Cities both of Asia and
Europe, in matters of importance, not to conclude upon the opinion of the
Citizens, but to refere the censure to the Oracle of Appollo, whose imitations
since I know them necessary, I will now allow of, beseechyng you (Mes dames)
to give me leave to take counsel of my pillowe, and to morrow you shall
both hear my resolution, and I doubt not but allow of my choice.

No sooner had he ended, but Madame Camilla brake up the assembly, so the night
drawyng on, and the company ready to depart, Philautus and Simonides, both
taking their leave, withdrewe them to their Lodgyng, where Simonides,
counsailyng with his pillowe, of that he had seen by day, and remembryng
himself of his Mistress Clarinda, he brake out into this discourse.

I see now that the state of the world is strange, and opinions of men
uncertain, the pleasures of this life but shadows, and no happiness to a
contented mind.

Have I travailed from Athens to England to be acquainted with virtue? Have I
left Athens and sought England to find continent staidness, and neither in
Athens nor in England, can I find what I looked for. The sumptuous Buildinges
of stately Palaces, the gorgious attire of the Ladies, the noble entertainment
of the Gentlemen is to be accounted of, yet the virtue Simonides looked for,
being resident in contine^ce, not in excess, I think it more convenient to
give England, a worldly commendation, then such great titles of virtue as I
can not find here.

Thou may see now Simonides what trust is in uncertain praise, what
difference between the name and nature, and since thou have gathered up all
these experiences together, confirm now thy self, return al these benefits
to Civil, where acquainted with thy Mistress Clarinda, thou may practice the
experimentes of all places in Civil, and having attained the love thou have
long looked for, satisfy thy self with the remembrance of thy forepassed
travails: and confirmed by experience cease to doat upon this wicked world
to much.

Upon these resolutions, all delight of over vewing England was ceased, and now
at last our Trauailer bethinkes himself of home, and willing to make end of
all his sorrows, on the morrow he began to harken out shippyng for Spain,
which because it is frequent about London, he was not long a seeking, and
pretending presently to be packyng, he sent his necessaries aboard, and willing
with some honorable adewe, to satisfy all his English friends, he enuited
them all to a noble Spaniards house within the City, where entertainyng them
all very royally, and acquaintyng them with his departure, he gave them all
this freendly farewell.

Noble Surius and courtious Camilla, worthy Philautus and gracious Madame
Fraunces, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen in general, if for my many courtesies with
thankful acceptaunce, if for noble entertainment with humble requital,
Simonides may be aunswerable to his English friends in any thing, no doubt
but his departure would be both pleasant and his return short, but since
the English Nobility exceed so much in courtesy that none may come nere
them, I think it requisite for me only to build upon thanks, assuryng you
all of this, that if the poor Spanyard, may meet any his English friends
in Civil, he will not be ingrate for great humanity. In these and such like
terms, giuyng them his Vltimum vale, they all took their leave, yet very
loathe of his departure, only Philautus and his vyolet accompanied him to the
Riall Exchange, where bestowyng no small store of Crowns on presents for his
Mistress Clarinda, they conducted him to Blackwall, where leauyng him to the
mercy of the Flood, Philautus took his leave in these terms.

Noble Simonides, since thy occasions be such that they make thy departure
thus sudden, I can not but be sorry, yet hopyng all shall turn to thy avail,
I am somewhat satisfied: Notwithstanding, this I request thee, that my vyolet
and I may sometimes hear from thee, and if a merry gale blow for England,
if thou make a cut over, we will not be unthankful for thy courtesy.

Simonides ouerpressed with sorrows, gave Philautus this short replye.

Noble Italian, these tears I shead may witness what I mean, many words I
can not use for you see what interrupteth me, Simonides is and will be yours:
Hereupon imbrasing Philautus and his wife, he left them to their pleasures and
betook himself to his Journey.

How Simonides shippyng for Spain arrived at Civil, and with what fruits his
Love concluded.
LIttle knew the poor Lover how cold his entertainment should be in Civil,
for Clarinda both forgettyng Simonides himself, and also her own protestation
of vowed chastity, after his departure for all her simperyng ciuillitie, became
the married wife of an old doting Citizen called Baldio, a man neither of
equality in years to fit her likyng, nor shape of person to procure her
pleasure, but the only cullice the Miser had to comfort her, were a few
rustie Crowns, sealed up in an old bag, which in reason, should not so much
prevail to bewitche a fair Lady, but such are the dispositions of women,
that like the Weathercocke they turn at their pleasures, and like a feather in
the wind, they are moved with every breath of persuasion.

But Simonides ignorant of the sequel, arrived at Civil, the rumor of whose
return, was brought to ye ears of his father, but Lord how pleasant were
these news to the old man, how iocond was the mother, the whole City gave
him a friendly welcome: But as every sweet is quickly ouerlaied with a little
sour, and the Sun darkened with a black Cloud, so these delights were as
sone crossed, by the unjust disaster of Clarinda the discourteous. For,
Simonides enquiryng for his Mistress, was answered how she was married to an
old Merchant called Baldio her neighbor, how comfortable these news might
be to Simonides, Lovers, I report me to you, do you think he did not take it
grievously, yes assure your selves: He forsook all pleasures of the City, and
renting in pieces that trashe which he had provided for her, he enueied thus
bitterly against womankinde.

Is this the fruits of Love, O you Heavens, are these the rewards of loyal
service, are women's fantasies so fickle, and Ladies trothes so uncertain. Oh
wicked sex, that under fair white, shrowdest black venom, that under
seemly substaunces, concludest unstable perfections. Cursed Clarinda, thinks
thou thy injustice is not such, as the very blemishe staineth all womenhood?
Was age more seemly for thy bed then youth? Was loathsomeness in better likyng
then tried love? Did thou vow to be chaste, and have proved dissolute.
Can thou promise fair, and perform so ill. Would thou show to be a
Saint, and prove a Devil. Would thou look demurely, and like dishonestly.
Could thou simper it with civility, and be bereft of all humanity. Woe is
me that gave trust to inconstancy, learnt Love on unworthy, showed favor to
falsehood, and continued constaunt to a carrion.

Far was thy nature (Clarinda) from Nobility, that made no better choice,
but it was in despite of Simonides, who in despite of thee will conclude thus,
Foemina blanditur laqueos parat arma ministrat
Foemina Cerberum digne fouere canem.


In these detestations Simonides finished his love, betakyng himself wholly to
inueigh against feminine inconstancy, and framyng himself to more orderly
studies, he concluded the Catastrophe of love with this cautile, beauty is
unjust, women inconstant, lovers fools, he most fortunate that can forbear,
and blessed that is not burnt.

The Authors conclusion to the Ladies and Gentlewomen.
LAdies and Gentlewomen, having brought Simonides to Civil, and hearing his
inuectiue against the femine in general, because he found Clarinda only
slipper: I altogyther displeased with his prejudicial exclamations, began in
hot terms to disalow of his unseemly vpbraidings, he (poor Gentleman) nothing
at all discountenaunced by the memory of his misfortunes, gave this answer:
It is not the fair damoselles of England, my friend, nor the glory of that
nation, which I comprehend within these limits of reproof, but only our
changelings of Civil, for such of your country, would God I had either loved
there, or never travailed hither: O blessed England, where Ladies are so
learned, Gentlewomen so constant, Virgins so modest, nay all the feminine sex
so honorable: they never offend in breach of faith, they never look with
unchaste eyes, they never burn in unlawful lust, they never use to commit
abuse: Their beauty has no stain but of nature, their minds are not alinated
with pride, their passions grow not on light love, they are not carried with
every light persuasion, they are not subject to flattering allurementes, they
are not faulty in any thing that is licencious or light: they are religious
not loose, they are comely, yet constant, they are modest, yet merciful: yea
such they be as their honorable actions do only make me allow of their sex,
and wish, that either I might be partaker of their graces or the offals of
their good qualities, were bestowed on our brauest Spanishe Ladies, within
this country.

I being thus persuaded (good Ladies) by this unfeigned report of Simonides,
was unwilling to let slip any one jot of praise that tends to your
preferment, and what Simonides said in Civil, I am ready to avouch it here in
London, and if he or I have erred in any thing, I refer me to your own
judgments, and conclude with Simonides, that you are the only blessings of
this life, the only sweetes of the world, and the only paragones, both of
Asia, Africa and Europe, and this I set down as an article of my belief, and
so Mes dames I commend me to your good graces.

FINIS.

