A FOUNTAIN SEALED OR The Duty of the sealed to the SPIRIT

And the work of the Spirit in Sealing.

By Rich: Sibbes, D. D. The 3d. Edition.

Printed for L: Chapman and are to be sold at his shope at Chancery Lane end
in Holborne.

will: Marshall. sculpsit. 1638.

engraved title page

A FOUNTAIN SEALED: OR, The duty of the sealed to the Spirit, and the work of
the Spirit in Sealing.

Wherein Many things are handled about the Holy Spirit, and grieving of it:

As also Of assurance and sealing what it is, the privileges and degrees of
it, with the signs to discern, and means to preserve it. Being The substance
of diverse Sermons preached at Grayes Inn.

By that Reverend Divine, RICHARD SIBBES, D. D. and sometimes Preacher to that
Honorable Society.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Lawrence Chapman, and are to be sold at
his shop at Chancery lane end, in Holborne, 1638.

To The truly Noble, and much honored Lady, the Lady Elizabeth Brook, Wife to
Sir Robert Brook.
Madame:
BEsides that dese^ved interest your Ladyship held in the fections and esteem
of this worthy man more then any friend alive, which might entitle you to all
that may call him Author. This small piece of his acknowledges a more
special propriety unto your Ladyship. For though his tongue was as the Pen of
a ready Writer in the hand of Christ who guided him, yet your Ladyships hand
and Pen was in this his scribe and Amanuensis whilst he dictated a first
draught of it in private, with intention for the public. Jn which labor both
of humility and love, your Ladyship did that honor unto him which Baruch
(though great and Noble) did but receive in the like, transcribing the words of
Jeremiah, from his mouth: wherein yet your Ladyship did indeed, but write the
story of your own life, which has been long exactly framed to the rules
herein prescribed. We therefore that are entrusted in the publishing of it,
deem it but an act of Justice in us to return it thus to your Ladyship, unto
whom it owes, even its first Birth: that so where ever this little Treatise
shall come, there also this that you have done, may be told and recorded for a
memorial of you. And we could not but esteem it also an addition of honor to
the work, that no less then a Ladies hand (so pious and so much honored)
brought it forth into the world, although in it self it deserves as much as
any other this blessed womb did bear. The Lord in way of recompense, write
all the holy Contents of it, yet more fully and abundantly in your Ladyships
heart, and all the lineaments of the Image of Jesus Christ, and seal up all
unto you by his blessed spirit, with joy and peace to the day of Redemption.

Madame, we are your Ladyships devoted, THO. GOODWIN. PHILIP NIGH.

THE CONTENTS.
GRieve not the holy Spirit of God. The Holy Ghost why called a Spirit, page 3
Why holy, page 5 From the Apostles disswasion, these four presupposed truths.
1 That the holy Ghost is in us, page 8 2 And is as a guide to us, page 12 3 The
best of us are apt to grieve him, page 13 4 Therefore we should be careful
of it, page 14
1. Of grieving the Spirit. I What it is to grieve the Spirit, 16. how the
Spirit works in us, page 20 II Wherein do we especially grieve the Spirit. 1
In our selves, and that in these particulars. 1 In walking contrary to, and in
neglecting of its motions, 25. and comforts, 27. seeking comfort from the
flesh, page 28 2 By unkindness, 29. the sins of Professors, and those that
have most acquaintance with the Spirit, grieve most, page 30 3 By presumptuous
sins, 33, sins against knowledge of two sorts. ibid. why voluntary sins
are so great, and grieve the Spirit so much, 36, the reason why sins of the
second Table grieve most, 39, upon diverse respects the same sort of sins may
grieve more and less, page 44 4 By worldliness and paying tribute to the
flesh, page 45 5 Abusing spiritual things to our own ends, 48. and fathering
the works of the flesh upon the spirit, page 49 6 By sins against the Gospel,
49, slighting ordinances, page 51 7 Sins plotted and contrived, page 57 8 By
false judgment of things, page 55 9 By not using the helps we have, page 58
10 Cavelling against the truth, page 59 11 By doing duty in our own strength,
page 61 12 Thrusting our selves into overmuch worldly employment, 61, whence,
13 Omission or sl^ght performance of duty, page 63
2 In others many ways, as 1 Neglecting the grace in them, page 65 2 Sharp
censures, page 65 3 Superiors by unjust commands, page 66 4 Inferiors by
untractablenesse, 5 By evil examples, page 68

III How we may know when we have grieved the spirit, 69 and what is the danger
of it, page 71 How far a child of God may grieve the Spirit. page 76 Of the
sin against the Holy Ghost, 81, and a twofold miscarriage about it in
censuring, page 82
IIII What course we should take to prevent grieving the Spirit 84, in diverse
rules. 1 Give your self up to the government of it, page 84 2 Subject
constantly to the Spirits motions: they are known from other motions. 1 By a
special strength in them, by which they are raised to higher ends, page 87 2
By their constancy, page 88 3 They proceed from a changed heart, page 89 4 They
are seasonable, ibid. 5 A self evide^ce in them, page 90 6 Orderly, in respect
of both Tables of the law, ibid. 7 Dependant upon God, page 91
3 Join and cooperate with the Spirit, page 92 4 Turn motions into
resolutions, 94 and resolutions into practice, page 95 5 Depend on ordinances,
and get a heart suitable to them, page 96 6 Observe the Spirits first
withdrawing, and search the cause, page 100 7 Take heed of such sins as we
term little ones, 102, and look upon all sin in the rise and root of it,
104 8 Get spiritual wisdom to know what is pleasing and displeasing to the
Spirit, page 105 9 Upon breaches, renew repentance, page 108 10 Avoid corrupt
communication, page 109 Whereby you are sealed.

2 Of the sealing of the Spirit. 1 Christ is sealed, page 122 2 So are
Christians, page 125 I What this sealing is, and how it is wrought, page 125 II
The privileges of it. A seal serves for
1 Confirmation, page 131 2 Distinction, page 132 3 Appropriation, page 139 4
Estimation, page 141 5 Secrecy, page 144 6 Security, page 146
III Degrees of sealing. 1 The work of faith, page 149 2 Sanctification, 150.
yet not without a new act of the Spirit, 153, the reasons, page 155 3 Joy, 156.
which has its degrees also, 158, being from the spirit, page 159 Of the three
witnesses on earth, 160, their order, page 164, Of the witness of the Spirit
immediately from it self, which is the highest, and that which brings most
joy, page 166 Of such joys and raptures of the Spirit, and how they are known
from illusions, Page 169. as 1 By what goes before them: as 1 The word embraced
by faith, Page 171 2 Deep humiliation, Page 172 3 Selfe-denyall, Page 174 4
Comfort and victory, Page 175 5 Spiritual strength put forth in duty, Page 176
2 By what accompanies them: as, 1 Pryzing ordinances, Page 177 2 Liberty and
boldness with God, Page 179 3 And for the most part Satan's malice, Page 180
3 By what follweth them, 1 More humility, Page 180 2 Increase of spiritual
strength, Page 181 3 A joyful expectation of Christ. Page 183 4 Other degrees
of sealing from the diverse degrees of revelation, Page 185 Unto the day of
Redemption.




3 Of the day of Redemption. Page 191 From the consideration of what formerly
has been spoken, some general conclusions are collected, Page 202 I Concl.
We may attain to the knowledge that we are in the state of grace, Page 203
All that have faith, have not assurance, Page 209
II Concl. Upon knowledge of our state of grace for the present, we may be
assured of our future full redemption, Page 215 Why we pray for forgiveness of
sins notwithstanding, Page 218 This assurance we have, Page 221 that, first,
God may be glorified, 222, secondly, our souls comforted, Page 223
III Concl. This assured knowledge is wrought by the Spirit, Page 224 IIII
Concl. The sealing of the Spirit unto salvation, should be a prevailing
argument not to grieve the Spirit, Page 228 1 To those that are not as yet
sealed. Page 230 2 To those that are sealed either in a lower, 233. or higher
work of sealing, 236 and that from 1 Ingenuity, Page 237 2 Benefit received
from the Spirit, Page 239 3 A kind of necessity, Page 240 4 The nature of
love, Page 241 5 And other graces, as faith and hope, that work by
assimilation. Page 242 The doctrine of assurance is ^0 doctrine of liberty Page
243 But of deep and sweet in^agement, Page 244 Therefore we should preserve he
work. Page 247




FINIS.
Ephesians. 4.30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed
unto the day of redemption.
WHether the words be a Command ensuing from authority, or counsel, from
wisdom, or a caveat from Gods care of our souls, it is not material:
considering both Counsel and Caveats of the great God, have both force of a
Command, with some mixture of the sweetness of love: the Apostle as his manner
is, from in the largeness of his Spirit, rises from a particular disswasive
from corrupt communication, Scope of the words.
in the verse before, to this general advise of not grieving Gods Spirit by
sin; especially against conscience enlightened: and this disswasive from
evil, is enforced from a dangerous effect of grieving the spirit of God; and
the danger of grieving arises from this, that it is the Spirit of God, and God
himself whom we grieve, and a holy Spirit, holy in himself, and holy as the
cause of all holiness in us; and he that after he has wrought holiness in
us, seals and confirms us in that act of grace, until the day of our
glorious redemption: so that the grounds of not grieving, are from the
greatness and goodness of the person whom we grieve, and from the greatness
and constancy of the benefits we have by him. Holy Ghost called Spirit, why.
To speak something of the person, the holy Spirit is called a Spirit, not
only by nature, as being a spiritual essence, but in regard of his person and
office, he is both breathed from the Father and the Son, as proceeding from
them both; and by office, breathed into ail that God has given Christ to
redeem, and him to sanctify; he is so the spirit of God in proceeding from
God, as that he is God, which who so denies, deny their own Baptism, being
as well Baptized into the name of the Holy Ghost, as into the Father and the
Son; and no less a person, then God, is needful to assure our souls of
Gods love, and to change our nature, being in an opposite frame: who can
reveal to us the mind of GOD, but the Spirit of God? and herein we may see
the joint forwardness both of the Father and Son and holy Ghost; when both
Father and Son join in willingness to send so great a person to apply unto
us, and to assure us of that great good the Father has decreed, and the Son
performed for us.

Holy Spirit.
That attribute the Spirit delights in, is that of holiness, which our corrupt
nature least delights in, Holiness not only an attribute in God, but the
excellency of all his attributes. He is holy in mercy, in justice, in
goodness, etc.
and most opposes: holiness is the glory and crown of all other excellency;
without which they are neither good in themselves, nor comfortable to us. It
implies a freedom from all impuritie, and a perfect hatred of it; an absolute
perfection of all that is excellent. What is it then to grieve such an holy
Spirit; before whom the heavens themselves are impure, and not only the Devils
tremble, but the Angels cover their faces? What shall we think then of them
which do not only neglect, but despise, yea oppose this holiness, and endure
any thing else? what is hated in the world with ^eene and perfect hatred, but
holiness, without which yet, we shall never see God, nor enter into that pure
place, into which, we all profess a desire to enter? Two desires in man by
nature.
There was planted in man by nature, a desire of holiness, and a desire of
happiness: the desire of happiness is left still in us, but for holiness
which is the perfection of the image of God in us, is both lost, and the desire
of it extinguished: and that men might the better drive it out of the world
under a form and show of it; they oppose the truth of it, and that with the
greater success, because under that great color the Devil and his Vicar,
carry all their divellish policies under a show of holiness. We see in Popery,
every thing is holy with them, but that which should be holy, the truth of God,
and the expression of it. The man of sin himself must have no worse title,
then his Holiness: a show of devised holiness pleases man's nature well
enough; as being glorious for appearance, and useful for ends. But the truth
of it being cross to the whole corrupt nature of man, will never be
entertained, until nature be new molded by his holy Spirit in the use of holy
means, sanctified by himself for that end: it is this that makes a man a
Saint, and civil virtues to be graces, which rayseth things that are
(otherwise) common, to an higher degree of excellency: this is that to a
Christian which reason is to a man: it gives him a being, and a beauty
different from all other: it makes every action we do in obedience to GOD a
service, and puts a religious respect upon all our actions, directing them to
the highest end.

Four things presupposed.
Now that which the Apostle disswades from, is from grieving so holy a Spirit.
These truths, are presupposed: First, that the holy Ghost is not in us
personally as the second Person is in Christ man, 1 The spirit in us.
for then the holy Ghost, and we should make one person: nor is the holy Ghost
in us essentially only: for so he is in all creatures: nor yet is in us only
by stirring up holy motions, but he is in us mystically, and as Temples
dedicated to himself: Christ's humane nature is the first temple, wherein the
Spirit dwells; and then we become temples by union with him. Difference of the
Spirits being in Christ, and in us.
The difference betwixt his being in Christ and us, is, that the Spirit dwells
in Christ in a fuller measure by reason that as a head he is to conveigh
spirit into all his members. Secondly, the Spirit is in Christ entirely without
any thing to oppose: the Spirit always finds something in us, that is not his
own, but ready to cross him. Thirdly, the Spirit is in us derivatively from
Christ, as a fountain we receive grace at second hand, answerable to grace in
him. How the Spirit was in Adam in innocence.
The holy Ghost was in Adam before his fall, immediately; but now he is in
Christ, first, and then for Christ in us, as members of that body, whereof
Christ is the head: and it is well for us that he dwells first in Christ, and
then in us: for from this it is that his communion with us is inseparable, as
it is from Christ himself, with whom the Spirit makes us one. The holy Spirit
dwells in those that are Christ's after another manner then in others in whom he
is in, How in carnal men.
in some sort by common gifts, but in his own, he is in them as holy, and as
making them holy, as the soul is in the whole body in regard of diverse
operations; but in the head only as it understands, and from thence rules
the whole body: so the holy Ghost is in his, in regard of more noble
operations, and his person is together with his working, though not personally;
and though the whole man be the temple of the holy Ghost, ye^ the soul
especially, and in the soul the very Spirit of our minds, a most suitable to
him being a Spirit. Whence the Apostle wishes the grace of Christ to be with
our Spirits, the best of spirits delight most in the best of us, which is our
spirits: in the Temple the further they went, all was more holy, till they came
to the holy of holiest. So in a Christian the most inward part the spirit is,
as it were the holy of holies, The holy Ghost dwells not in us as in ordinary
houses, but as Temples. The holy spirit makes all holy, where ever he comes.
where incense is offered to God continually. What a mercy is this that he
that has the heaven of heavens to dwell in, will make a dungeon to be a
temple; a prison to be a paradise; yea an hell to be an heaven? Next to the
love of Christ in taking our nature, and dwelling in it; we may wonder at the
love of the holy Ghost, that will take up his residence in such defiled souls.

The second thing presupposed, is that the holy Spirit being in us after he
has prepared us for an house for himself to dwell in, 2 The spirit a
Counselor and Comforter.
and to take up his rest and delight in, he does also become unto us a
Counselor in all our doubts, a Comforter in all distresses, a Solicitor to
all duty, a guide in the whole course of our life, until we dwell with him
for ever in heaven: unto which his dwelling here in us does tend: he goes
before us as Christ did in the pillar of the cloud and fire before the
Israelites into Canaan: being a defense by day, and a direction by night. When
we sin, 3 We are prone to grieve the Spirit.
what do we else but grieve this guide?

The third ground is, that we, the best of us, are prone to grieve this holy
Spirit: what use were there else of this caveat? we carry too good a proof or
this in our own hearts: we have that which is enmity to the spirit within us,
sin; and an adversary to the spirit and us, Satan: These joining together,
and having intelligence, and holding correspondence, one with another, stir
us up to that which grieves this good Spirit.

4 We should be careful of grieving it.
The fourth thing presupposed, is, that we may and ought by Christian care and
circumspection, so to walk in an even and pleasing course, that we shall not
grievously offend the spirit, or grieve our own spirits. We may avoid many
lashes and blows, and many an heavy day which we may thank our selves for,
and God delights in the prosperity of his children, and would have us walk in
the comforts of the holy Ghost, and is grieved when we grieve him: that then
he must grieve us to prevent worse grief. The due and proper act of a
Christian in this life is to please Christ, and to be comfortable in himself,
and so to be fitted for all services.

These things premised, it is easy to conceive the equity of the Apostles
disswasive from grieving the holy spirit. For the better unfolding of which, we
will unfold these four points. First, Four points observed.
what it is to grieve the Spirit. Secondly, is wherein we specially grieve the
Spirit. Thirdly, how we may know when we have grieved the Spirit Fourthly,
what course we should take to prevent this grief.

1 What it is to grieve the Spirit.
For the first: The holy Ghost cannot properly be grieved in his own person,
because grief implies a defect of happiness in suffering that we wish
removed. It implies a defect in foresight, to prevent that which may grieve. It
implies passion, which is soon raised up, and soon laid down: GOD is not
subject to change; it implies some want of power to remove that which we feel
to be a grievance: and therefore it is not beseeming the Majesty of the Spirit
thus to be grieved. We must therefore conceive of it as befitting the
Majesty of God, removing in our thoughts all imperfections. First then we are
said to grieve God, Spirit grieved how.
when we do that which is apt of it self to grieve: as we are said to
destroy our weak brother, when we do that which he taking offense at, is apt
to misleade him, and so to destroy him. Secondly, we grieve the Spirit, when
we do that whereupon the Spirit does that which grieved persons do; that is,
retireth and shows dislike, and returns grief again. Thirdly, though the
passion of grief be not in the holy Ghost, yet there is in his holy nature a
pure displicence and hatred of sin, with such a degree of abomination as
though it tend not to the destruction of the offender, yet to sharp
correction: so that grief is eminently in the hatred of God in such a manner
as becomes him. Fourthly, Spirit confidered as in himself, as in us.
we may conceive of the Spirit as he is in himself in heaven, and as he
dwells and works in us; as we may conceive of God the Father, as hidden in
himself, and as revealed in his Son, and in his word; and as we may conceive
of Christ as the second person, and as incarnate: so likewise of the holy Ghost
as in himself, and as in us, God in the person of his Son: and his Son as
man, and as Minister of Circumcision, was grieved at the rebellion and
destruction of his own people. The holy Spirit, as in us grieveth with us,
witnesses with us, rejoices in us, and with us; and the spirit in himself,
and as he works in us has the same name, as the gifts and graces, and the
comforts of the Spirit are called the spirit; even as the beams of the Sun
shining on the earth are called the Sun: and when we let them in, or shut
them out, we are said to let in or shut out the Sun. We may grieve the
spirit, when we grieve him as working grace, and offering comfort to us: the
graces of the Spirit have the name of the Spirit whence they come, as the
Spirit of love and wisdom. Again, our own spirits, so far as sanctified,
are said to be the Spirit of God: So the Spirit of God, not in it self, but in
Noah did strive with the old world; and so we grieve the Spirit, when we
grieve our own or other men's spirits, so far as they are sanctified by the
Spirit.

How the Spirit works in us.
Now the spirit as in us works in us, according to the principles of man's
nature, as understanding and free creatures, and preferveth the free manner of
working proper to man; and does not always put forth an absolute prerogative
power, but deals with us by way of gentle and sweet motions and persuasions;
and leaves it in our freedom to embrace or refuse these inferior works of
the Spirit: and our hearts tell us it is in our power to entertain or reject
the motions: which when we do in our own apprehension, we churlishly offend
the spirit, as willing to draw us to better ways; and we cannot otherways
judge of this, but as grieving. God in his dealing with men, puts his cause
into our hands, that by our prayers and otherwise, we may help or hinder him
against the mighty. And Christ puts himself into our hands in his Ministers,
and in the poor counts himself regarde^ or neglected in them: so the holy
Spirit puts as it were his delight and contentment in our power, and counts
when we entertain his motions of grace or comfort, we entertain him, and when
we refuse them we grieve him. And the holy Ghost will have us interpret our
refusing of his motion, to be a refusing of him; and not only a refusing of
him, but of the Son, and of the Father, whose spirit he is. Oh, if we did but
consider how high the slighting of a gracious motion reaches, even to the
slighting of God himself: it would move us to give more regard unto them. As
we use these motions. so would we use the Spirit himself, if he were in our
power. They are not only the Ambassadors, but the royal offspring of the
spirit in us, and when we offer violence to them, we kill as much as in us
lies, the royal seed of the Spirit.

Object. We intend not in sin, to grieve the Spirit. Answ. We do it in the
cause.
Ob. It may be objected, when we do any thing amiss, we intend not the
grieving of the Spirit? It is true, unless we were devils incarnate, we will
not purposely and directly grieve the Spirit; but when we sin, we will the
grieving of him in the Cause. No man hates his own soul, or is in love with
death, yet men will willingly do that, which i^ they hated their own souls.
and loved death, they could not do worse. Why will you perish, you house of
Israel? says God, they intended no such matter as perishing: Gods meaning is,
why will you go on in such destructive courses, as will end in perishing? if we
could hate hell in the cause of it and way to it, as we hate i^^ in it self,
we would never come there.

2 Wherein we grieve the Spirit.
For the second point, wherein we especially grieve the Spirit: grief arises
either from antipathy and co^trariety, or from disunion of things naturally
joined together. In greater persons especially, grief arises from any
indignity offered from neglect or disrespect, and most of all from unkindness
after favor showed. Thus the holy Ghost is grieved by us: what more contrary
to holiness, then sin, which is the thing, and the only thing that God
abhominates, yea, in the devil himself? But then add to the contrariety in
sin, We grieve the Spirit by unkindnesse.
the aggravations from unkindness; and this makes it more sinful. What
greater indignity can we offer to the holy Spirit, than to prefer base dust
before his motions, leading us to holiness and happiness? what greater
unkindnesse, yea, treachery to leave directions of a friend to follow the
counsel of an enemy? such as when they know Gods will, yet will consent with
flesh and blood, like Balaam, who was swayed by his profit against a clear
discovery of Gods will. We cannot but make the Spirit of God in us in some
sort ashamed to think of our folly; in leaving the Fountain, Ier.
and digging Cisternes: in leaving a true guide, and following the Pirate: men
are grieved especially, when they are disrespected in their place and office.
It is the office of the Spirit to enlighten, to soften, to quicken, and to
sanctify; when we give content to Satan, it puts the holy Ghost out of
office. The office of the holy Ghost is likewise to be a comforter: it cannot
therefore but grieve the holy Spirit, when the consolations of the Almighty are
either forgotten, or seem nothing unto us in the perishnesse of our spirits;
when with Rachel we will not be comforted. Who in stead of wrestling with GOD
by prayer, wrangle with him by cavelling objections: They take pleasure to move
objections, instead of a holy submission to higher reasons that might raise
them to comfort: and take Satan's part against the holy Spirit, and their own
spirit: and against arguments that are ministered, by those that are more
skillful in the ways of salvation, then themselves. How little beholding is
the holy Spirit to such, who please themselves in a spirit of opposition? and
yet so sweet is this holy Spirit, that after long patience, he overcomes many
of these with his goodness: and makes them at length with shame, lay their
hands upon their mouths, and be silent. Yet that is one reason they stick so
long in temptations, and are kept so long under the Spirit of bondage. Those
likewise cannot but grieve the Comforter, that leave his comforts, and seek
for other Comforters: that think there is not comfort enough in Religion, but
will bow down to the world, such as linger after the liberties of the flesh,
after stolen waters; as if God kept house not good enough for them. It is a
great disparagement to prefer husks before the provision of our fathers
house, and to dye (like fish out of their proper element) if we want carnal
comforts. But above all, they grieve the Spirit most, that have had deepest
acquaintance with the Spirit; and have received greatest favors from the
Spirit. When the holy Ghost comes in love, and we have given way to him to
enlighten our understandings, and when in our affections, we have tasted of
the good things of God, that the promises are sweet, and the Gospel is good.
When we have given such way to the Spirit, then to use him unkindely; this
grieves the Spirit. Where the holy Ghost has not only set up a light, but
given a taste of heavenly things, and yet we upon false allurements will grow
to (...) distaste, it cannot but grieve the Spirit. And this makes the sin
against the holy Ghost so desperate, because there has been a strong
conviction and illumination. Aggravation of sins of Professors.
Therefore of all sins the sins of Professors o^ Religion, grieve the
Spirit most; and of all Professor those that have most mean^ of knowledge:
because their obligations are dee^ and their engagements greater. The deeper
dee affection has entered, the greater the grief must needs be in unloosing.
The offense of friends, grieves more than the injuries of enemies. And
therefore the sins that offend GOD most, are committed within the Church;
where is the greatest sin of all, the sin against the holy Ghost committed,
but within the Church? and where there is the greatest light, and the greatest
means. Sins against knowledge grieve most, especially, if there be a
malicious opposing: for there can be nothing to excuse it. The malice of the
will makes the sin of the deeper die: and it is contrary to the spirit, as
it is a Spirit of goodness, and hence is it that pr^su^ptuous sins so much
grieve the spirit, for by such sins we abuse the sweetest Attribute of Gods
Spirit, his goodness, and be therefore evil because he is good, and turn his
grace into wantonness, Sins against knowledge are such either, 1 Directly
the sin of this age. Sins against knowledge are either such as are 1. Directly
against knowledge, as when we will not understand what we should do, because
we will not do what we understand: such put out the candle, that they may
sin with the more freedom. This kind of ignorance does not free from sin,
but increases it; some men will not hear the Word, nor read good Books,
lest their consciences should be awaked; this affected ignorance increases
the voluntarinesse. Again, when we maintain untruths for any advantage,
knowing them to be untruths; as many learned Papists cannot but do. What a
great indignity is it to the Spirit of GOD to sell the truth, which we should
buy, yea with the loss of our lives: and to prefer the pleasing of a base man,
or some gain to our selves before a glorious beam of GOD? Other sins if we
know them to be sins, are sins against knowledge, 2 Indirectly,
not so directly, but collaterally: yet this will be the chief aggravation,
when our conscien^^^s are once awaked, not so much that we have sinned, as that
we have sinned against the light, when the will has nothing to plead for it
self, but it self; it would, because it would, though it knew the contrary.
Involuntarinesse, takes away something of the heinousness of sin: when there
is ignorance, perturbation, or passion, there is less sin, and less
grieving of the Spirit: but when there are none of these, but a man will sin,
because he will; accounting it a kind of sovereignty to have his will, this
will prove the most miserable condition: for not to have the will regulated by
him that is the chiefest good, is the greatest perverseness, and will end in
desperation.

Q. Why are voluntary sins so great, and so much grieve the Spirit of God?

Why voluntary sins grieve the Spirit so much.
Answ. When there is passion, there is some color for sin; as profit,
pleasure, fear to displease, etc. When there is ignorance, there is a want of
that that might help the understanding; but when there are none of these, and a
man willingly sins, he is more directly carried against the command and will
of God: there is nothing puts him on: yet he accounts it so small a matter,
that he will do it without any provocation, out of a slight esteem of the
good pleasure and will of God.

As common swearers, can they plead ignorance? they know the Commandment, God
will not hold them guiltless, Exodus 20.
that take his name in vain: can they plead perturbation? They do it often in a
bravery, when they are not urged: there is no engagement in that sin of profit
or pleasure, but a voluntary superfluity of pride. They would have you to know,
that they are men that care not for God himself; let God and his Ministers
take it as they will, though I have no pleasure or prosit by it, yet I will have
my liberty. The heart that has been thus wicked, will hardly admit of comfort,
when it stands in need of it.

We are not said to be ill, because we know ill, but because we will and
consent to ill; it is the will that makes up the bargain, sin were not sin
else. God has given us the custody of our own souls, and as long as we
keep the keys faithfully, and betray not our souls to Satan, so long we
possess our own souls, and our comfort: but when he suggests; do this, or
speak this, and we consent; he takes full and free possession of us, as much
as in us lies; and God in judgment says Amen to it. God says take him Satan:
since he will not have my Spirit to rule him, it is fit he should have a
worse. The more willingness, the more sinfulness, and the less defense; and
Gods justice cannot better be satisfied than by punishing the^ mos^ against
their wills, who sinned most with their will. The clearer the light is, and the
more advantages it has the more we sin.

Sins against the second Table in^ what respect they grieve most.
In this respect it is, that sins against the second Table grieve more then
sins against the first; because here the conscience is more awaked. These be
sins against a multiplied light, against the light of nature, light of the Word
and Spirit: and such sins are contrary to humane society, they dissolve those
bonds that nature, even by the common relics it has left, studies to
maintain. Though corrupt nature has no good in it, for we deserved to be
like devils, yet God intending to have civil society, out of which he usually
gathers his Church, preserves in man's nature, an hatred of sins that
overthrow society: such sins therefore being committed against more light,
wound more: as in case of murder, notorious perjury, theft, etc.

Gods method in dealing with sinners.
Therefore God often gives up men, upon breach of the first Table, to breaches of
the second, that so they may come to more grief, and shame, as being the
breakers of both Tables: Men never fall into the breach of the second Table,
but upon breach of the first: No man despises man's Law, but he despises Gods
law first; No man breake^ the law of nature, but he despises the God of
nature. Profane Atheistical persons that glory in the breach of the third
Commandment by swearing; GOD meets with them by giving them over to gross
abominable sins of the second Table; which vexes them more (though they
should no^) than sins against the first Table, exposing them, besides inward
grief, to open shame; then God opens Conscience to tell them, not only that
they are too blame for their gross sins, but for the root of them; Atheism,
profaneness, looseness, which are sins against the first Table. This is an
aggravation of sins against knowledge, when our knowledge has been helped
and strengthened by education, by example of others running into our eyes,
which is a more familiar teaching than that of Rule, and strengthened also by
observation and experience of our selves; and the former strength we have had,
against the sin we now commit: and sweetness we have found in the resisting
of it. None are worse than those that have been good, and are naught, and might
be good, and will be naught. When there is more deliberation and foreknowledge
of the dangerous issue, and this also joined with the warning of others. As
Reuben said unto the rest of hi^ brethren, Spoke I not un^ you, etc? So may
Gods Spirit, and conscience, say t^ men, Did not I acquai^ you with the danger
of sin^ You are now in misery, an^ terrors of conscience, bu^ did you not
slight forme^ admonitions, and helps, and means? Conscience is a^^ inferior
light of the Spirit to do things against conscience, is to do them against
the Spirit. God spoke to me, and I heeded him not, how does God speak? When
conscience speaks, and says this is good, this is bad then God speaks,
conscience has somewhat divine in it: it is a petty god, it speaks from God;
especially when the Spirit joins with conscience, then God speaks indeed,
then there is light upon light.

Some sins grieve more than other.
Upon diverse respects some sin may grieve more or less than another. As the
holy Ghost is a Spirit, so spiritual sins grieve most; as pride, envy;
imprinting upon the soul as it were, a character of the contrary ill spirit.
Carnal sins, whereby the soul is drowned in delight of the body, may more
grieve the spirit in another respect; as defiling his Temple, and as taking
away so much of the soul; love and delight, carry the soul with them, and the
more deeply such sins enter into the creature, besides the defilement, the
less strength it has to spiritual duties: grace is seated in the powers of
nature, now carnal sins disable nature: and so sets us in a greater distance
from grace, as taking away the heart, Hos. 4. Hereupon the Apostle sets being
filled with wine, contrary to being filled with the Spirit. Ephesians. 5.18.
And hence it is the Apostle forbids, in the former words, unclean
communication: the holy Spirit is a Spirit of truth, hates hypocrites, being
painted sepulchers; but as a spirit of purity, hates soul livers, and
soule-mouth'd speakers, as open sepulchers. They cannot therefore but much
grieve the spirit, that feed corrupt lusts, and study to give contentment, and
pay tribute, to the flesh; to which they owe no service and are no debtors: and
by sowing to the flesh from which we can reap nothing but corruption. Gal. 6.
When our thoughts are exercised to content the outward man, to contrive for
the things of the world only; this is to pay tribute of the strength and
vigor of our affections to the utter enemy of Gods Spirit, and our own
souls: when our thoughts run deeply into earthly things, we become one with
them.

Who will think himself well entertained into an house, when there shall be
entertainment given to his greatest enemy with him? and shall see more regard
had, and better countenance showed to his enemy, than to him? when the motions
of corrupt nature are more regarded, then the motions of the Spirit. The
wisedom^ of the Spirit which is from above, is first pure, and makes us so,
and rayseth the soul upward to things above. Christians indeed have their
failings; but if true Christian examine himself, his heart will say that every
day he intends the glory of God, and the good of the state he lives in: he
has a larger hear^ than a base worldling, that keeps within the sphere o^
himself; spending all his thoughts there, and consults only with flesh and
blood, with profit and pleasure, to hear what they say. Such baseness cannot
but grieve the Spirit, as contrary to our hopes, and heavenly calling, which
are glorious.

It is a dangerous grieving of the Spirit, when instead of drawing our selves
to the spirit, we will labor to draw the spirit to us, and study the
Scriptures, to countenance us in some corrupt course; and labor to make God of
our mind, that we may go on with the greater liberty. When men get to
themselves teachers after their own ^^sts, as many do (especial^y if they be
in place) Ahab shall not want his 400 false Prophets. When men cut ^he rule and
standard to fit themselves, and not fit themselves to it. You have some that
are resolved wha^ to do, and yet will be askin^ counsel, and if they have an
answer to their minde^ then they rest; if not, the^ their answer is: This is
you^ judgment, but others a^^ of a contrary opinion: an^ thus they labor to
mak^ the Spirit of God in his M^nisters to serve their turn so did the Jews
in Ierem^^^ time. Jer. 42.


Some will father tho^^ sinful affections that ari^^ from the flesh, and a^^
strengthened by Sathan^ upon the holy Spirit, counting wrath that is kindle^
from hell to be fire of hol^ zeal coming from heaven. Thus the enemies (...)
Religion think they do^ God service in their massacres; such are those that
wickedly oppose the ways of God, and yet are ready to say, Glory be to the
Lord; such men study holinessen in the show, that they may overthrow it in the
power; and will countenance an ill course by Religion.

Such also are faulty who lay the blame of an uncomfortable life upon Religion,
when men are therefore uncomfortable, because they are not religious enough.
The ways of wisdom are the ways of pleasure.

The Spirit is grieved by sins against the Gospel.
In these times, being the second spring of the Gospel, we must take heed of
sins against the Gospel. Benefits, the greater they are, being neglected, or
abused, bring the greater judgment. The office of the holy Spirit is, by the
Ministry, to lay open the riches of Christ, and the glory of Gods grace in
him: by neglecting so great salvation, and by thinking this favor of God to be
a common favor; we sin against, both Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and in
that they desire most to be glorified. Such therefore as say to the clouds,
Drop not, and to the winds, blow not; and to the Prophets, prophecy not; that
study to keep out the light and sin against it, as discovering them, and
awakening them, and hindering them from taking that solace in carnal courses
of the world: as opening the eyes of others to know them further than they
would be known, and so to lose that respect they would have in the hearts of
men. This cannot but grieve the Spirit of God; and move him to take away that
truth that we are so far from thinking a blessing, that we are weary of it,
and fret against it.

The office of the Spirit is to set out Christ, and the favor, and mercy of
God in Christ: Slighting ordinances.
when we slight Christ in the Gospel, the ordinance, and organ of working
good in us, the holy Ghost is slighted, and grieved. Bad is our condition by
nature, and what a deal of misery do we add to this bad condition? Are we
not all the children of wrath? And have we not since we were borne added sin
unto sin? Do we not grow in sin as we do in years? Is not God just? and
hell terrible? Now God out of infinite mercy having provided a way to free us
from the danger of sin; and not only so, but to advance us to life
everlasting; and that we should not be ignorant of that he has done for us,
he has set up an ordinance wherein the holy Ghost discovers his love. When we
slight this, and account it but an ordinary favor, nay, rather a burden, and
think the opening of divine mysteries, things that may be spared; that there
is too much preaching, and what needs all this ado? This grieves the Spirit,
whose office is to lay open the unsearchable riches of Christ, the infinite and
glorious mercy, and goodness of God in Christ, wherein God has set himself,
in all his attributes, to triumph, and be glorified. We grieve all the sacred
Trinity: God the Father is grieved, to see his mercy slighted: God the Son,
to see his blood accounted common; and God the holy Ghost, whose office it is
to discover these things. The sin of these times.
This is the common sin of the times, and kingdom, which threatens
judgment more than any thing else. When the Gospel, the blessed truth of
salvation is published, The axe is laid to the root of the tree, the instrument
of destruction: if men slight the mercies of God, entertain not Christ, walk
not worthy of the Gospel, they shall feel the stroke of his sharp anger. The
bloudred horse follows the white horse, Revel. 6.4. The white horse is, the
publishing of the Gospel: when God sets himself to glorify himself, in
mercy, in the greatest benefits, and we account them nothing, or but common
favors, God removes the Candlestick; the red horse of blood, and destruction,
follows. And indeed what man will endure his greatest favors and kindnesses
to be slighted?

Now a degree in grieving the Spirit this way, is, when men will not be
thoroughly conceived of their own sinful condition, and of the infinite love
and mercy of God in Christ, in the pardoning of them. If God by his Spirit in
the Ministry, or in a particular reproof come to men, and discover their
natural condition, and tell them they are worse than they take themselves to
be: they will oppose it, and study revenge, as Saint Paul says, Am I become
your enemy, because I tell you the truth? this must needs grieve the Spirit.

By false judgment of things.
Again the holy Spirit is grieved, when ye have a corrupt judgment of things,
not weighing them in the right balance, nor value them according to their
worth. When we esteem any knowledge rather than divine knowledge, any truths
but truths that concern Christ, when men look upon grace as contemptible, and
prefer other things above it, make a tush at holiness, give us (say they)
gifts and parts. Alas, what are all gifts and parts, without a gracious heart?
Have not the devils greater parts then any man? Are they not called Daemones,
from the largeness of their understanding? If parts and gifts were best, the
devils were better than we. What an indignity is this to the holy Spirit, to
think it better to be accounted witty, and politic, then to be holy, and
gracious?

When we plot and contrive sin, the Spirit is grieved.
Again, those sins wherein there is plotting, and contriving, exceedingly
grieve the Spirit: because they are done in cold blood. David deeply wounded
his conscience, and grieved the Spirit, in plotting the death of Vriah, which
was the diminution of the credit of David: that the Scripture says, he was
good in all things, except in the matter of Vriah: why? because therein he
grieved the Spirit most, in plotting, and contriving the cruel murder of so
good a man. How can they think they have the Spirit of God, that plot, and
undermine men's estates, to have their wills in unjust courses; or if they have
the spirit, can this be without grieving it; for the Spirit will perpetually
suggest the contrary.

And sin having helps to do the contrary.
Again, we grieve the holy Spirit, when we commit such sins, as we might
avoid, such sins as we have some helps against, and least provocation unto.
It is a general rule, Quanto major facilitas, etc. The more the facility of
not sinning, the greater the sin. Therefore when we are tempted to sin,
consider what conscience says: I have been an hearer of the word, what has
the Spirit of God revealed and discovered unto me? He has showed that this is
a sin: whom do I grieve, by the commission of it? The Spirit of God, and
wound my own conscience: and then consider, will that, that I sin for,
countervaile this? Do I not buy my sin too dear? Sins are dearly bought,
with the grieving of the Spirit of God: therefore wisely think before hand
what sin will cost.

By caveling against the truth.
Men grieve the Spirit, by cavelling against the truth. The heathen man could
say, It is an ill custom to be cavelling against Religion, whether in good
earnest, or in jest: yet we have a sect, a generation of men, that are of all
religions, of no religion, men of a contradictory spirit, that always take the
opposite part; that cavell at the truth to show their parts: this is too
ordinary among the wits of the world.

Neglect of prayer and dependence.
This grieves the holy Spirit also, when men take the office of the Spirit from
him, that is, when we will do things in our own strength, and by our own
light, as if we were gods to our selves. Man naturally affects a kind of
divinity (it was the fault of Adam) and till God drive him out of himself by
his Spirit, and by afflictions, he sets much by his own parts, and wit, and
thereupon neglects prayer, and dependence on God, as if the Spirit had nothing
to do with his regiment. When men set upon actions in the strength of natural
parts, perhaps they may go on in their course as civil men, but never as
Christians, to have comfort of their actions, because they will be guides, and
gods to themselves. If a man belong to God, God will cross him in such ways,
wherein he refuses to honor God, and to give him his due place: he shall
miscarry, when, perhaps, other men shall have success, though it be to harden
them to destruction. This is a subtle way, by which Satan abuses men. The
life of a Christian is dependant on an higher principle than himself, to rule
and guide him.

Overmuch worldly business.
Another way whereby we commonly grieve the Spirit of God is, when the mind is
troubled with a multitude of business; where the soul is like a mill, where one
cannot hear another: the noise is such as takes away all intercourse: It
diminishes of our respect to the holy Spirit, when we give way to a multitude
of business: for multitude of business, begets multitudes of passions and
distractions; that when Gods Spirit dictates the best things, that tend to our
comfort, and peace, we have no time to heed what the Spirit advises.
Therefore we should so moderate our occasions, and affairs, that we may be
always ready for good suggestions. If a man will be lost, let him lose
himself in Christ, and in the things of heaven: for if we be drowned in the
world, it will breed discomfort.

Omission of duties.
Lastly, omission, or slight performance of duties, grieve the Spirit: the
Spirit as he comes from the Father, and the Son, from God, so he is great in
himself being God; Offer this to thy King, says Malachy, when he saw them
come negligently and carelessly to the worship of God; when people hear
drowsily, and receive the Sacrament unpreparedly: this grieves the Spirit,
because it comes from irreverence and disrespect: And the reason why so many
are dead hearted, is because they make no conscience of omissions, of
drowsinesse, of negligent cold performances. Such Christians what do they
differ from carnal men induties, for they will hear, pray, receive
Sacraments. He is the best Christian that is the most reverend Christian, the
most careful Christian, most jealous over his own heart. Usually those are
the richest in grace. Even amongst good men, those that are most careful, and
watchful over themselves: they go away enriched with the greatest blessing.
Therefore let us hear, and so hear, let us receive, and receive Thus, So let
us eat of this bread, etc. The Scripture fixes a reverend respect before
duty, suitable to the Majesty of the great God, whose business we are about.

The Spirit grieved in others, is grieved by
Besides grieving Gods Spirit in our selves, there is an heavy guilt lies upon
us for grieving the Spirit in others, which is done many ways.

First, Neglects.
by neglecting the grace of God in them, or despising them for some infirmities,
which love should cover. Contempt.
Contempt is a thing which the nature of man is more impatient of, then of any
injury, those that are given this way to wrong others, are punished with the
common hatred of all.

Censures.
We likewise grieve the spirit of others, by sharp censures: and the greater
our authority is, the deeper is the grief, a censure inflicteth: many weak
spirits cannot enjoy quiet, while they are exercised with such sharpness.
They think themselves excommunicated out of the hearts of those, in whose good
liking they desire to dwell.

By superiors.
Again, those that are above others, grieve the spirits of those under them by
unjust commands: as when Masters press their Servants to that which their
consciences cannot digest, and so make them sin, and offer violence to that
tender part.

By inferiors.
Again, we grieve the Spirit of others when those that are inferior, show
themselves untractable to those above them in magistracy or ministry. When
they make them spend their strength in vain: thus the Spirit of God in Noah
strove with the old world: our duty is therefore, to walk wisely in regard of
others: and if it be a duty to please men in all things lawful in the way of
humanity, much more ought we to please Christians in those things wherein we
do not displease God; as being joined in communion with them in the same
spirit. Yet here we must remember that it is one thing to cross the humor,
and offend the pride of another; and another to grieve the Spirit in him: no
cures can be wrought without grief in that kind, and if we grieve not their
spirits, when such humors prevail in them, we shall grieve our own for
neglect of duty.

By ill example the Spirit is grieved.
And in the last place this causes another grief when those that are good
watch not over their ways* the Spirit is grieved for the reproaches of religion
tha^ come from the wicked: for what say they? does religion and the Spirit
teach yet this? thus Christians make the name of God to be ill spoken of; and
this grieves the Spirit, and will grieve them if they belong to God. Oh wretch
that I am, that I should open the mouths of others and grieve the spirit of
God, not only in my self, but in others, because he is grieved by me!

Scandalous courses: either by unreasonable use of our liberty, without respect
^o the weakness of others; ^r by actions that are in themselves evil, or of
ill re^ort; by such actions we ^rieve the spirits of others. An ill example
always either grieveth or infecteth. The spirit of Lot was grieved for the
unclean conversation of the Sodomites, which no question hastened their ruin.

How it may be known when the Spirit is grieved.
How shall we know when we grieve the Spirit? we may know that by the sins
before mentioned, as the cause of grief. Again, the Spirit will bring report
of ^^s own grief: we may know we have offended a friend when he leaves our
company; so we may know we have discontented the Spirit by spiritual
defen^ons, both in respect of assi^stance in the performance o^ duties, and
resisting tempta^tions, and bearing afflicti^ons; as also in respect o^
comfort, as when we find a strangeness and dulness^ of disposition; unless
it be from some natural distemper of body, we may fear all is not well.

When we find a prounenesse to divert to other comforts, and to hold
cor^respondency with carnal persons: and delight not a^ formerly in the
communion of Saints, but find an in differency for any acquaintance. When we
drive hardly, and our wheels fall off; when conscience will not let us omit
good duties, and yet we want the oil of the Spirit to make us strong and
nimble in the performance of them: whereupon they come not off with that
acceptance to God or our own spirits. These indispositions show we have not
used the Spirit well, whom otherwise we should find a Spirit of strength, a
Spirit of comfort, a quickening Spirit.

Issues of grieving the Spirit.
The issues of grieving the Spirit, will prove very dangerous: for the Spirit
may justly leave us to our own spirits and deceitful hearts; which as they
are arch Flatterers, so will prove arch-Traitors to us, and so let in a worse
guest into our souls. The ill Spirit is always ready, presently to take
possession; who, by joining with the stream o^ our corruptions, may please us
for a time, but will de^stroy us for ever.

When we grieve the good Spirit of God, and cause him to leave us; our soul is
left as a hell: for what is hell but the absence of God, in his favor and
mercy?

Again, we cannot grieve the Spirit of God in doing any thing against it,
Grieving our spirits.
but it will grieve us again, and being a spirit, may fill our spirits with
that grief that may make our conditions a kind of hell upon earth. Few
reprobates feel those terrors here, that the godly often do by their bold
adventures: for besides the terrors of the natural conscience, they have the
Spirit, to set them on; and that spirit, that had so well deserved of them
before: which cannot but increase the horror and shame. In hell it self, this
will be the bitterest torment, to think of refusing mercy, mercy pressed, and
offered with all love. A careless spirit often proves a wounded spirit, and
that, who can bear? and that, who can bear? until he that wounds, heals
again by giving grace to afflict our selves, and wait his good time to take
pity of us: that which we say of conscience, is true; it is our best friend,
and our worst enemy. If a man's conscience be his friend, it will make all
friendly to him: it will make God his friend, affliction his friend, nothing
can sit at the heart to grieve him. But if a man's conscience turn his enemy,
there need no other enemies be sought out, he has enough in his own heart, his
own tormenting conscience tearing it self. This may be as truly said of the
Spirit of God, who is above Conscience: if we make him not our best friend, we
are sure to have him our worst enemy, that sets all other enemies upon us.
Displeasure is as the person is: it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God, who knows the power of his wrath? it is a powerful wrath,
no creature has power over the Spirit immediately, but this Spirit of spirits,
who can fill the soul, the whole soul, and every corner of it, being
adaequate to the soul, as large as the soul, and larger, he can fill it with
wrath, of God, when the Spirit of God sets it on once?

Qu. Whence is it that we grieve the Spirit?

Answ. Because there is a cursed principle in us, always active, which is not
perfectly subdued in this life. Death is the accomplishment of mortification:
but while we are, here, this corruption in us will always be working. The flesh
lusts against the Spirit: the flesh is an active busy thing, it bestirs it
self: now when co^traries are so near, as the flesh and Spirit, in the same
soul: they must needs thwart and grieve one another continually.

Quest How far a child of God may grieve the Spirit.
It may be emanded how far forth a child of God may grieve the Spirit, and
yet remain the child of God?

In Answer to this, Answ.
know, that we must not judge of sin by the matter in which, but by the
Spirit, from which sin is committed. There is no sin so gross, but the
Saints of God may fall into it, but yet the child of God is hindered by a
contrary law of the Spirit, from yielding full consent before, or taking full
delight in a sin, or allowing or persisting after. And though in regard of
ingratitude, the sin of a godly man admits of agreater aggravation, than the
finne of others: yet setting that aside, the sin it self of a godly man is
less, for his temptations be stronger, and Satan's malice more eager against
him, and his resistance of sin greater; all which does abate the heinousness
of the guilt. The more resistance from within, argues a stronger party from
within, in the godly, the force of sin is broken from within: take a godly
man at the worst, there is some work of the Spirit in him, that in some
measure is answerable to the counsels and motions of the Spirit without him:
the holy Sprit has some hold in him, by which he does recover him. A wicked
man proceeds from grieving to quenching, and from quenching to resisting. The
Spirit has no party, no side in him, and therefore when the Spirit is gone,
fare well he: glad they are, that then they can follow their pleasures and
sins without check.

Sometimes God leads his children to heaven through some to heaven through
some foul way, by which he lets them see what need they have of washing by
the blood and Spirit of Christ; which otherwise perhaps they would not so much
value, when they grieve the Spirit, and the Spirit thereupon grieves them, and
that grief proves medicinal; the grief which sin breeds, consumes the
sin that bred it. We are in covenant with so wise and powerful a God, that
overrules even sin it self, to serve his purpose in bringing his to heaven.
They have that in them whereby they hate the sin they do, and love the
goodness they do not: whereas others hate the good in some respects they do,
and love the ill which they dare not commit. Howsoever they are drawn into
sin, yet they will never break their conjugall bond betwist Christ and their
souls, so far as that sin should reign in them as a commanding Lord: they
will not forsake their oath of allegiance to serve willingly a contrary King.
They may presume sometimes upon Christ, thinking they have a Balm ready to
cure the wound again, (as some to show the virtue of their oils, do make
wounds in themselves) the deceitfulness of sin seducing them: but God ever
chastises this boldness, and takes such a course with them, that it ends in
taking the greater shame to themselves; and by so much, as they have been more
presumptuous. The loss of comfort, and the sense of sorrow they feel, makes
them say from experience: that there is nothing gotten by sin, and that it
proves bitterness in the end.

Gods children commit not the sin against the holy Ghost.
Again, though they are not kept from sins (in some sense) presumptuous, yet
they are always kept from that great offense. Though they may commit a sin
against the holy Ghost, Since against the holy Ghost, what?
yet they can never commit the sin against the holy Spirit, because this is a
sin of malice after strong conviction: expressed in words dipped in malice by a
tongue set on fire by hell, and in actions coming from an opposite spirit, and
tending to opposition, and to bitter persecution, if their malice be not
greater then their power. And it ends always in impenitencie, by reason they
despise that grace, and cast away that potion whereby they should recover:
their pride will not stoop to Gods way.

Thirdly, after such fearful relapses, darkness in the understanding, and
rebellion in the will increases, sin grows stronger, and they weaker and
weaker to resist.

Fourthly, Satan being once cast out by some degree of illumination and
reformation, brings seven devils after, worse than himself; when they see
their former courses stand not with their lusts and hopes, they take a contrary
course, and so fall to bitterness in the end.

Miscarriage concerning the sin against the holy Ghost.
There is a double miscarriage about this sin: some are too headlong in their
censures of others, whereas the greater the sin is, 1 Concerning others.
the greater caution should be in fastening it upon any, especially whose
spirits we are not thoroughly acquainted withal; considering so many thing must
meet in this sin.

2 Concerning themselves.
The second miscarriage is, in an ungrounded censure of our selves: there be
three things that fear frees us from the danger of. First, Fearefrees from
three things.
fear lest the time of our conversion be past, because we have so often
grieved the Spirit: whereas if their time were past, they would be given up to
a careless security. A second is fear of some judgment which God stirs up
in the heart to prevent the judgment that we may not feel that we fear,
because fear stirs up care, and care stirs up diligence to avoid what we
fear: a third is, fear, lest we have committed the sin against the holy
Ghost, which shows we have not committed that sin; it is never committed
but without fear, and with delight. In these cases we need fear them least,
that fear themselves most.

How to prevent grieving the Spirit.
The fourth point is, what course we should take to prevent this grieving of
the Sprit.

1 Give up our selves to the guidance of the Spirit.
Let us give up the government of our souls to the Spirit of God; it is for our
safety so to do, as being wiser then our selves, who are unable to direct our
own way: it is our liberty to be under a wisdom and goodness larger then
our own. Let the Spirit think in us, desire in us, pray in us, live in us,
do all in us: labor ever to be in such a frame as we may be fit for the
Spirit to work upon; as Nazianzen says of himself, Lord I am an instrument
for thee to touch. A musical instrument though in tune sounds nothing,
unless it be touched; let us lay our selves open to the Spirits touch. Thus
Saint Paul lived not, Gal. 2.
but Christ lived in him: this requires a great deal of sefle-denyall, to put
our selves thus upon the guidance of the Spirit: but if we knew what enemies
we are to our selves, it would be no such hard matter.

2 To obey him perfectly.
Secondly, study to walk perfectly in obeying the Spirit in all things, which
requires much circumspection in knowing and regarding our ways: and then we
shall sinde the Spirit ready to close with us, and tell us, This is the way,
walk in it: and upon obedience we shall find the Spirit encouraging us by a
secret intimation that this or that is well done. Thus Paul was said to be
bound in Spirit, the Spirit so put him on, that he could not withstand the
motions until the execution of it. We must take especial heed of slighting
any motion, as being the Spirits messenger, they are Gods Ambassadors sent to
make way for God into our hearts, therefore give them entertainment. Many men
rather then they will be troubled with holy motions, stifle them in the birth,
as harlots, that to avoid the pain of childe-birth, kill their fruit in the
womb: let us take heed of murdering these births of the Spirit. But seeing
Satan will often interrupt good motions by good motions, that he may hinder both:

How shall we know from whence the motions come? Quest.


Answ. How to know the motions of the Spirit.
When two good motions arise, seeming diverse, the Spirit of God carries strong
to one, (and that is from God) more than to the other. Good motions are either
raised up in us, 3 They raise higher.
or sent unto us, by the Spirit, both these if they be raised by the Spirit,
will carry us to God: they will rise as high as the Spring is whence they come:
what arises from our selves, ends in our selves.

2 Are constant.
Those motions that the Spirit stirs up from within, come from sanctified
judgment and estimation of what they are moved to; other motions, are hasty,
and gone before they have their errand: holy motions are constant, (as
strengthened from constant grace within) will they see the issue of what they
are moved to: other motions are like lightening, and sudden flashes, that leave
the soul more da^ke and amazed then before. Holy motions are answerable to the
duties of our calling: other motions often lead us out of the compass of our
calling.

3 They change the heart.
The Spirit moves in the godly, first by a dwelling in them, and working in
them gracious abilities, and then draws forth those abilities to good actions.
But the Spirit dwells not in others, nor produces any sanctified abilities
in them, but only moves them sometimes to good actions, without changing of
them.

4 Are seasonable.
The holy Spirits motions are seasonable: other motions often press upon us, to
disturb an holy duty. The breath of the Spirit in us is suitable to the
Spirits breathing in the Scriptures: the same Spirit does not breath contrary
motions.

5 Evidence themselves
Motions of the Spirit when they come in favor carry their own evidence with
the^, as light does. The motions of the Spirit are sweet and mild, and lead
us gently on; they are not ordinarily violent raptures. Removing the soul from
it self, but leave in the soul a judgment of them, and of other things.

Again, 6 Orderly.
the Spirit moves us so to duties of Religion, as agree with civil honesty,
and charity to our neighbors. Those therefore know not what spirit they are
of, who under a pretense of zeal, will be uncivil, and cruel, showing they
are not led by that spirit that appeared in the shape of a dove. Both Tables in
this are one; that they come from one spirit: and the second of like the first,
and require love. And because all graces and duties come from the same spirit,
therefore one duty never crosses another; but the wisdom of the Spirit moves
to all holy duties in their several and suitable places.

7 Dependant on God.
Motions for the matter good, yet may be carnal, in regard of selfe-confidence
from whence they come. That which Peter resolved upon was good, but confidence
in himself marred it: those motions which the Spirit stirs up, are carried
along in relying upon assisting grace. So much for that question.

3 To concur with the spirits motions.
Again, if we would not grieve the Spirit, let us take heed of being wanting to
the Spirits direction. The flesh here will make a froward objection, We can
do no more then me can.

Answ. The Spirit is always beforehand with us, preventing us with some
knowledge, and some ability, which if we join with the spirit in putting
forth, the spirit is ready to concur with us, and lead us further. And our
conscience will tell us so much, that if we do otherwise; it is not for want
of present assistance, or privitie, that the Spirit will deny us strength if we
put our selves upon if: our own hearts, though deceitful, will tell us, that
we do what we do out of willingness; preferring some seeming good before the
motions of the Spirit. Herein we carry in our conscience, that which will quit
God, and condemn our selves. There is not the worst man, whose heart runs
away from God, but God follows him a great while with sweet motions, though
such be the invincible stubbornness of the heart, that it will not yield: this
will take away all excuse, as Saint Austin argues well. If I had known (says
a wicked man) I would not have done thus: says he, the pride of thy heart
suggests that, had thou not motions and admonitions that told thee the danger
of it? if the Spirit even in the worst actions, concur se^ far as they are
actions and motions; may we not think that he is much more ready to concur
with holy motions stirred up first by himself? if the Spirit be willing to
concur in natural actions, much more in spiritual, whereunto it self is
the first mover; the Spirit leave^ not us, till we leave the Spirit.

4 Cherish holy motions.
When the Spirit suggests good motions, turn them presently into holy
resolutions. Is this my duty, and that which tends to my comfort? certainly I
will do it. Let not these motions dye in us. How many holy motions are kindled
in hearing the Word, and receiving the Sacraments, etc. which dye as soon as
they are kindled, for want of resolution? therefore let us not give over till
these motions be turned into purposes; and those good purposes ripened to holy
actions, that they be not nipped in the blossom, but may bring forth perfect
fruit. Let us labor to improve these talents, to the end for which they are
sent: are they motions of comfort? let us use them for comfort: are they
motions tending to duty? let us make conscience to do our duty: let not our
despairing hearts cross the Spirit in his comforts, nor stand out stubbornely
as enemies against our duty, for that is to cross God, and to nip his motion^
in the bud.

5 Give the Spirit scope in his ordinances.
Let the Spirit have fu^^ scope both in the ordinances and in the motions
stirred up by the ordinances this is the way to make the ordinances and the
time glorious; but the liberties of the Gospel are contrary to the liberties
of the flesh^ it turns all things upside down, and men out of themselves.
Hence is it tha^ there is nothing so much opposed by the spirit of the world,
as the purity and power of the Gospel, which is a sufficient prejudice of an
ill condition that all such men are in. But there is another spirit in gracious
men, they are the children of light, and love it. If we would not grieve the
Spirit, we must be willing to bring our selves under all advantages of the
Spirits working: as conversing with those that are spiritual, and especially
attending on those ordinances wherein the Spirit breaths: wherein we may
meet the Spirit. The walks of Gods Spirit are, in the means of salvation,
hearing the Word preached, and holy communion one with another: the Word and
Spirit go together, therefore if we will have the comforts of the Spirit, we
must attend upon the Word. Men grieve the Spirit by neglecting the Word, and
holy conference, and. It is with the Word and Spirit, as with the veins and
arteries: they veins have arteries, that as the veyns carry the blood, the
arteries carry the spirits to quicken the blood. The Word is dead without the
Spirit, and therefore attend on the Word; and then wait on the Spirit to
quicken the Word; that both Word and Spirit may guide us to life everlasting.
Motions of this kind come from the Spirit: as it is said of old Simeon, that
he came by the motion of the Spirit into the Temple. John was in the Spirit on
the Lords day: our Manna falls most then, Christ's Spirit and Word dwell together
in the heart: therefore the A postle uses the dwelling of Christ in us, and
the Word, indefinitely. Faith wrought by the Word, lays hold upon Christ, and
brings him into the soul, and keeps him there. It is a blessed thing, when
the Spirit in the ordinance, and the Spirit in our hearts meet together: this
is the way to feed and cherish the Spirit in us, and to put oil as it were
into the Lamp; because the Spirit as it is in us, is thus nourished, even as
the fire, though in its own element, feeds upon nothing, yet with us here
below, it is maintained with fuel, otherwise dies and goes out. Take heed of
slighting any help of faith, that God affords us, as wicked Achaz: Isay. 7.
GOD offered him for the strengthening of his faith, a sign from heaven, or
from earth, or any other creature: oh no, he would not tempt God: he seemed a
pious man, he would not tempt God, but what says the Prophet? Is it little
for you to despise me, but you will grieve God? insinuating, that when we
despise those helps God has given, we grieve the Spirit of God. Those that
neglect the Word and Sacrament, what do they despise, a poor Minister? and
neglect bread and wine? no, they despise God himself, who knows better then
our selves what need we have of these helps.

If the Spirit withdraw, ^ea^ch the ^^^se.
Again, when we find the Spirit, not assisting and comforting as in former
times, it is fit to search the cause, which we shall find; some slighting of
holy motions, or the means of breeding of them, or yielding to some corruption
which we are more especially addicted unto, or some sin unrepented of, which
we take no notice of. It is good therefore to scarce our souls to the
bottom: there may be some hidden corruption lying in the soul, which may
undermine our grace and comfort: there may be a privy thief that robs us of
all. And besides beloved and secret sins: it is good to bethink our selves
of old sins, which perhaps hitherto we have but outwardly thought of: and
God is willing by some deadness and trouble of spirit, to mind us of renewing
of sorrow for them: for want of strict accounting with our selves, God calls us
to these arrerages and back reckonings as we see in Joseph's Brethren. If we
find not that sweetness of communion with the Spirit, that formerly we
enjoyed, bethink our selves when and wherein we lost it, that we may meet
the Spirit again in these ways wherein we found him before we lost him, and
take heed of those courses, in the entrance of which we found the Spirit
leaving us.

Take heed of lesser sins.
Again, take heed of little sins, which we count lesser sins perhaps than
God does. We weigh sin in our own balance, and not in his, whereas no sin
is to be accounted little: for if it were once set upon the conscience, and
the wrath opened due unto it; It would take all comfort from us. And therefore
we must judge of sin, as the Spirit does, if we would not grieve the Spirit;
as the communion of the Spirit, is of all the sweetest, so the preserving of
it, requires most exact watchfulness, and through understanding of our selves.
Take heed of the beginning of sin, when any lust arises, pray it down
presently, say nay to it, let it have no consent, be presently humbled,
otherwise we are endangered by yielding to grieve, by grieving to resist, by
resisting to quench, by quenching, maliciously to oppose the Spirit: sin has
no bounds, but those which the Spirit puts, whom therefore we should not
grieve. And let us look to the head and spring of sins, Look to the first
rise of sins.
whereby we grieve the Spirit of God, not to the sin so much, as to the
root. We are angry with our selves for being passionate, but what is the cause
of passion? It comes from pride. Jonas was a passionate man, in that measure
that he was passionate, he was proud: he was loath to be shamed when he had
said, Niniveh shall be destroyed, he thought upon the sparing of them, he
should be discredited; and he preferred his credit before the destruction of a
populous City. So there is much depraving, and detraction in the world, and
thereupon brawles, and breaches. What is the cause? a spirit of envy, and often
times a spirit of pride. So men run into the danger of others, by wronging
them, what is the cause? worldliness, base earthly-mindednesse. Men think not
of the root of sin, but dwell upon the act done, we should be led from the
remote streams, to the Spring and sourse of all, and bewail that especially.

This care will be helped by spiritual wisdom, whereby we may discern both
wherein we have grieved the Spirit, and wherein for the time to come we may.
We cannot maintain friendship in perfect and sweet terms with any, whose
disposition we know not, what will please or displease them; therefore we
should study the nature and delight of the Spirit, and wherein we are prone
both to forget our selves and the Spirit. We esteem not much the friendship
of those who are so much friends to themselves, as they pass not much whether
friends be contented or discontented. The Spirit dwells more largely in that
heart that has emptied it self of it self: the Israelites felt not the
sweetness of Manna, till they had spent their flesh pots and other provision
of Egypt. The nature of Gods Spirit is holy; as it is holy, so delights only
in holy Temples: those therefore that set up any Idol of jealousy in their
souls against God, that do not preserve their vessels in holiness, cannot
think of any communion with the Spirit. The Spirit is jealous of our
affections, and will have nothing set up in the heart above God; though the
Spirit stoopes to dwell in us, yet we must not forget the respect due to so
great a Superior, but reverently entertain what ever comes from him.
Reverence and obedience is the carriage due to a superior, and where this
distance is not kept, a breach will follow. We should reverence our selves for
the spirits sake, and think our selves too good for any base lust to lodge in;
that heart that the Spirit has taken for it self, should turn off all
contrary motions with abomination: what should pride, and envy, and passion
do in an heart consecrated to the spirit of meekness and holiness?

Renew repentance.
Upon any breach, we must first look by renewing repentance, and faith in
Christ, to renew our peace with God, before we can expect the grace and
comfort of the Spirit. For as the Spirit comes from the Father and the Son,
and is procured by the death and satisfaction of the Son to the Father, without
which, we could never have expected the gift of the Spirit: so still we must
have an eye to this satisfaction by Christ, and reconciliation through it,
before we can recover communion with the Spirit, as being the best fruit of
the love of God reconciled through Christ. We see David in the 51. Psalm,
first importunes God for mercy again and again, and then for the Spirit, and
for the joy of salvation.

Avoid corrupt communication.
And take heed that nothing come in, nor go out of our souls that may grieve
the Spirit of God: some things come in to us that grieve the Spirit; the
corruptions we receive from others: some things come out of our hearts that
grieves Gods Spirit, as corrupt thoughts, and speeches, that indeed is the
scope of this place, Let no corrupt communication come out of your mouths,
etc. and then follows, And grieve not the holy Spirit of God. And after again
he says, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and clamor be laid aside;
insinuating that one way of grieving the Spirit, is by ill and cor^^^ ^^^g^age.
We can never ^a^^e with company that is not spiritual, but they will either
vex, and grieve us or ^^^t, and defile us; unless it be in such exigences of
our calling as requires our converse with them. But I speak of a voluntary
choice of such as savor not good things. Many men to please their own carnal
spirits, and the carnal spirits of others, they vent that that is against
conscience, and against that that is higher then conscience, a more divine
principle, the holy Spirit of God: loose carnal speakers, are people void of
the power of Religion.

Let no man say, Object.
Here is ado indeed, duty upon duty, this will make our life troublesome.

The life of a Christian is an honorable, Answ.
a comfortable, sweet life; indeed it requires the most care, and watchfulness
of any life in the world, being the best life, it is begun here, and
accomplished in an everlasting life in heaven. Nothing in this world, neither
our estates, nor our favor with great persons, can be preserved without
watchfulness: and shall we think to preserve the chief happiness of our
souls without it, having so many enemies without and within, that labor to
draw us into a cursed condition?

Motives not to grieve the Spirit.
Therefore to stir us up to the practice of these duties, that we may give
contentment to so sweet a guest, consider what reason we have, to regard the
Spirit, and his motions, from the good we have by them.

The holy Spirit of God is our guide: who will displease his guide? A sweet
comfortable guide that leads us through the wilderness of this world, as the
cloud before the Israelites, by day, and the pillar of fire by night: so he
conducts us to the heavenly Canaan; if we grieve our guide, we cause him to
leave us to our selves. The Israelites would not go a step further then GOD
by his Angel went before them. It is in vain for us to make toward heaven
without our blessed guide; we cannot do, nor speak, nor think any thing
that is holy and good, without him: whatsoever is holy, and pious, it grows
not in our garden, in our nature, but it is planted by the Spirit.

There is nothing in the world so great and sweet a friend that will do us so
much good as the Spirit, if we give him entertainment. Indeed he must rule, he
will have the keys delivered to him, we must submit to his government. And
when he is in the heart, he will subdue by little and little all high
thoughts, rebellious risings, and despairing fears. This shall be our
happiness in heaven, when we shall be wholly spiritual, that God shall be all
in all; we shall be perfectly obedient to the Spirit in our understandings,
wills, and affections. The Spirit will then dwell largely in us, and will make
the room where he dwells, sweet, and lightsome, and free, subduing
whatsoever is contrary; and bring fullness of peace, and joy, and comfort. And
in the mean time in what condition soever we are, we shall have suitable
help from the Spirit. We are partly flesh, and partly spirit, God is not all
in all, the flesh has a part in us, we are often in afflictions, and under
clouds. Let us therefore prize our fellowship with the Spirit. For are we in
darkness? he is a Spirit of light: Are we in deadness of spirit? he is a
Spirit of life: Are we in a disconsolate estate? he is a Spirit of
consolation: Are we in perplexity, and know not what to do? he is a Spirit of
wisdom: Are we troubled with corruptions? He is a sanctifying, a subduing,
a mortifying Spirit: in what condition soever we are, he will never leave us,
till he has raised us from the grave, and taken full possession of body and
soul in heaven; he will prove a comforter, when neither friends, nor riches,
nor any thing in the world can comfort us. How careful should we be to give
contentment to this sweet Spirit of Gods?

No Christian is so happy as the watchful Christian that is careful of his
duty, and to preserve his communion with the holy Spirit of God: for by
entertaining him, he is sure to have communion with the Father and the Son.
It is the happiest condition in the world, when the soul is the Temple of the
holy Spirit; when the heart is as The holy of holies, where there be prayers,
and praises offered to GOD. The soul is as it were an holy Arc, the memory
like the pot of Mannah preserving heavenly truths. It is an heavenly condition,
a man prospers to heavenward, when the Spirit of God is with him. You know
Obed-Edom, when the Arc was in his house, all thrived with him: so while the
Spirit and his motions are entertained by us, we shall be happy in life,
happy in death, happy to eternity. For it is he

By which you are sealed to the day of redemption.

The Apostle seals this grave admonition by an atgument taken from the
Spirits sealing of them to the day of redemption.

We are all by nature in bondage to sin and corruption: we are all redeemed
from sin by the first coming of Christ, and are to be redeemed from
corruption by the second.

There is a day appointed for this glorious work.

In the mean time God would have us assured of it aforehand.

This assurance is by sealing.

And this sealing is by the Spirit, none esleneed do it, no meaner person can
do it.

And what respect is due to the Spirit, for doing so gracious a work, that we
grieve him not; and not only so, but that we endeavor so to please him, as
he may with delight go on with this blessed work, that it has pleased him
to take upon him.

As the duty is spiritual, so the arguments that enforce it are spirtuall; and
the argument here is fetched from that which has a most constraining force;
love expressed in the sweetest fruit of it, and the stability of it sealing,
and sealing to the day of redemption, as if the Apostle should reason thus; God
the Father has ordained you to salvation by the redemption of Christ his
Son, and that you might have the comfort of it in the way to it against all
discouragements you may meet with; the holy Ghost has assured you of it, and
set his seal upon you, as those that are set apart for so great salvation:
that the sense of this love might breed love in you again, and love breed a
care out of ingenuity, not to offend so gracious a Spirit.

The holy Spirit by which you are sealed.
THe holy Ghost delights to speak in our own language: we cannot rise to
him, therefore he stoopeth to us.

This sealing is either sealing of persons, or of good things intended to the
persons. Sealing is not only a witnessing to us, but a work upon us, and in
us, carrying the Image of him that seals us, whereby we are not only assured
of the good promised to us, but fitted for the receiving of it. God prepares
no good for any but whom he prepares and fits for that good. There is not only
an outward authorizing of the great grants we have by promise, oath, and
Sacrament; but an inward, by the spirit: persuading of our interest in them,
and working that which does authorize us to lay claim unto them after the use
of a seal, both in confirmation and representation, and resemblance of him
that sealed.

The persons sealed are first Christ, and then those that are given to Christ
Christ is sealed,

The sealing of Christ.
1 By the Father, Christ was ordained by him to be^ a Savior in our nature,
predestinate to be the head of the Church. Wherefore he often says he came to
do his Fathers will. Him has the Father sealed, Ioh. 6.27. anointing him,
calling him, setting him forth, sanctifying him by the spirit, and every way
fitting him with all grace to be a Savior.

2 He was sealed, by the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in flesh, abased, and
exalted for us, so his flesh is the flesh of the Son of God, and his blood the
blood of God.

3 Sealed by a testimony from heaven of all three Persons by the Father, Act.
20.28.
This is my welbeloved Son: by the Holy Spirit descending like a dove: by
himself, to his humane nature dwelling in all fullness in it. Christ is sealed
by miracles done upon him, and by him, by his baptizing and installing into his
office, and by giving himself up to shed his blood for sin, by which blood
the Covenant is established and sealed.

In being justified in the spirit, being raised from the dead, Romans 1 4.
and declared thereby to be the Son of God mightily with power, and then
advanced him to the right hand of God, that through him our faith and trust
might be in God, 1 Peter 1.14. and appearing there for ever for us, shows
not only his ability and willingness to save us, but that it is done
already: We any see all what ever we can look for to our selves, performed in
our head, to our comfort.

2 Christians are sealed.
As Christ was sealed and fitted for us, so we are sealed and fitted for Christ.
There is a privy seal in predestination, this is known only to God himself:
The Lord knows who are his. And this knowledge of God of us, is carried
secret, Simile.
as a River under ground, until his calling of, and separating us from the
rest of men. When first by his Spirit he convinces us of what we are in our
selves, and of our cursed condition; and thereby lays us low by sorrow and
humiliation for finne, as the greatest evil. And then a pardon is more to us
then a Crown; then we will wait for mercy, and continue so, and beg for
mercy, and that upon Christ's own condition, by denying and renouncing any thing
of our own, then Christ is Christ unto us. Indeed after this, it pleases
Christ by his Spirit to open a door of hope, and give some hints of mercy, of
love; and withal, to raise up the soul by a spirit of Faith, to close with
particular mercy opened and offered by the Spirit, whereby the soul seals to
the truth of the promise, Ioh. 3. He that believes has set to his seal that
God is true. It is strange, that GOD should stoop so low as to receive (as it
were) confirmation by our belief: but thus GOD condescends in the phrase of
Scripture; As we are said to help God, curse ye Meroz, because they came not
to help the Lord, etc. God stoopes to be helped by us, and to have his truth,
and power, and goodness ratified, and confirmed by us, when we believe the
promise of God in Christ (though it be by the help of the Spirit) we seal
Gods truth. And then God honors that sealing of ours, by the sealing of his
Spirit; After you believed, you were sealed, says the Apostle; that is, the
gracious love of Christ was further confirmed to them. GOD honors no grace so
much as Faiths Why? because it honors God most of all others; it gives GOD the
honor of his mercy, and goodness, and wisdom, and power, and of his truth;
especially he that believes in God, by believing seals that God is true, and
God honors that soul again by sealing it to the day of redemption: God has
promised* Those that honor me, I will honor. Therefore, He that believes,
has the witness in himself, that grace promised, belongs to him, for he
carries in his heart the counterpaine of the promises; he that confesses and
believes shall have mercy. I believe, says the soul, therefore the promise
belongs to me, my faith answering Gods love in the promise, witnesses so much
to me. The Spirit not only reveals Christ, and the promises in general,
but in attending upon the ordinances by an heavenly light: the spirit discovers
to us our interest in particular, and says to the soul, God is thy salvation;
and inableth the soul to say, I am Gods: I am my beloveds, and my beloved is
mine. Christ loved me, and gave himself for me. Whence came this voice of
Saint Paul? It was the still voice of the Spirit of GOD; that, together with
the general truth in the Gospel, discovered in particular Christ's love to
him. It is not a general faith that will bring to heaven, but there is a
special work of the Spirit (in the use of means) discovering and sealing the
good will of God to us, that he intends good unto us; and thereupon our hearts
are persuaded to believe in God, and to love God as our God, and Christ as our
Christ.

This is excellently set down in the sweet communion of marriage, the Spirit
is the paranymphos, the procurer of the marriage, between* Christ and the
soul. Now it is not sufficient to know that God and Christ bear good will to
all believers (though that be the ground, and general foundation of all, and a
great preparative to the special sealing of the Spirit) but then the Spirit
comes, and says, Christ has a special good will to me, and stirs up in me
a liking to him again, to take him upon his own conditions, with conflict of
corruptions, with the scorns of the world, etc. Whereupon the mutual marriage
is made up between Christ and us: this work is the sealing of the Spirit.

Many are the privileges of a Christian from this his sealing, as the use of a
seal in man's affairs is manifold.

1 Seals serve for conformation and allowance, 1 For conformation.
to that purpose measures are sealed: God is said to seal instruction. Job
33.16. Confirmation is either by giving strength, or by the authority of suck
as are able to make good what they promise; and also willing, which they show
by putting to their seal, which has as much strength to confirm him to whom
the promise is made, as he has will and power to make it good that has
engaged himself. Amongst men, there is the writing, and the seal to the
writing; when the seal is added to the writing, there is a perfect
ratification: So there are abundance of gracious promises in the Scriptures*
now when the Spirit comes and seals them to the soul, then they are sure to
us; the Spirit puts the seal to the promises.

2 2 Distinction.
The use of it likewise is for distinction from others that carry not that
mark. So the sealing of the Spirit distinguishes a Christian from all other
men. There is a distinction between men, in Gods eternal purpose, but that
concerns not us to meddle with, further then to know it in general. 1 Timothy 2.
God knows who are his, and who are not his (...) but in time the holy Spirit
distinguishes, and ranks men, as they were distinguished before all worlds,
and as they shall be at the day of judgment: the beginning of that distinction
that shall be afterward is in this life.

A seal makes the imapression of an Image; the Princes Image uses to be in
his seal: so is Gods Image in his, which destroys the old* Image and print
that was in us before. Holy and good men by this work of the Spirit are
distinguished,

1 From civil men by the work of holiness, which mere civiil men have not
at all, but despise.

And secondly, from seeming good men, by the depth of that work, the Spirit of
God works a new nature in them, whereby they are distinguished. Now nature in
every creature is carried to one thing more then to another. There is a
distinct propension in a good man, to God, to grace and goodness, his aims,
and bent are distinct: and thereupon he has a greater enlargement of heart
suitable to his great aims; he looks above the world and worldly men; they are
narrow, low, base spirited men, the best of them.

Again, things by nature work from within: Herein painted hypocrites are
distinguished from a true substantial Christian: he works from a principle
within, another man is moved as the Automata, things of motion, Simile.
Clockes, and the like, engines of wit, that move from a weight without that
poyseth them: if they do any good, it is from somewhat without that swayeth
their aims and ends, and not from an inward principle: nature works from an
inward principle; light things go upward, and heavy things downward,
naturally: artificial things are forced. Thus good men are distinguished from
those that are seemingly holy; there is a new nature wrought in them.

Again, nature is constant; what is done naturally, is done constantly: heavy
bodies go always downward, and light bodies upward: every creature works
according to his nature, an holy man is exercised in holiness constantly,
because he does it from an inward principle, from a work and stamp within.
Different things may seem the same; as wild herbs may have the color and
form of those that are planted in the garden, but there is difference in the
virtue of them: Similie.
the seeming graces and actions of an hypocrite, they have no virtue in them:
as there are some drugges without virtue, dead things. But there is a
distinguishing virtue in the faith of a Christian, whereby he overcomes the
world and his lusts, whereby he does all duties, prays, and hears, and is
fruitful in his conversation; in all his graces, there is a comforting
strengthening virtue. Similie.
True gold has the virtue to comfort and strengthen the heart, that Alchymy
gold has not. True grace has a working comforting virtue. Another man's
formal artificial actions have no virtue in them, neither is it intended;
they being only put on to serve a turn. Two men may do the same things, and
yet there be a grand difference; the one doing them from the seal of the
Spirit, from a deeper dye and stamp of the Spirit: the other if from the
Spirit, yet it is but from a common work at the best. Some dies cannot bear
the weather, but alter color presently; but there are others that having
something that give a deeper tincture will hold. The graces of a true
Christian, hold out in all kind of weathers, in winter and summer, prosperity
and adversity; when superficial counterfeit holiness, will give out: thus we
see the seal of the Spirit, serves for distinction.

The use of a seal is likewise for appropriation. 3 Appropriation.
Merchants use to seal their wares they would not have others have any right
unto.

A Christian is Gods in a more peculiar manner than others; there is not only
a witness of the Spirit that God is his, but the Spirit works in him an
assent to take God again: there is a mutual appropriation, Can. 6.
I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine; when the soul can say, thou art my
God, it is not frustrate; because God says before, I am thy salvation: where
the Spirit seals, God appropriates: Psalm. 4.
GOD chooses the righteous man to himself. And we may know this
appropriation by appropriating God again; Whom have I in heaven but thee,
Psalm. 73.
and what have I in earth in comparison of thee? There is no action that God
works upon the soul, but there is a reflect action by the Spirit to God
again. If God choose and love us, we choose and love him again. God
appropriates us first: we are his, and we are Christ's; we are Gods, because
he has given Christ for us; we are Christ's, because he has given himself
for us; we are, as the Apostle says, a people of acquisition, A people
purchased, purchased at a dear rate by the blood of CHRIST; those that are
Christ's, the Spirit appropriates them: this appropriation is by sealing.

Again, we use to see our seal only upon that we have some estimation of; 4
Estimation.
set me as a seal, says the Church in the Canticles, upon thy right hand,
have me in thy eye and mind, as a special thing thou valuest.

The witness and work of the Spirit, shows Gods estimation of us: the
Scripture is abundant in setting forth the great price that God sets on his
children; they are his Children, his Spouse, his Friends, his Portion, his
Treasure, his Coin, he sets his mark, his likeness on them; they are things
hallow^d and consecrated, they are first fruits. Israel is a holy thing; Ier.
2.3.
their titles show the esteem that God has of them; he values them more than
all the world besides, which are as chafe and dross. The righteous man is
more excellent than his neighbor. As there is a difference of excellency
between precious stones, and other common stones, between fruitful, and
barren trees; so there is amongst men: and in this regard, God sets a higher
esteem upon some, and thence it is that they have those honorable and
glorious titles in Scripture, of Sons, Heirs, Kings, and co-heyres with
Christ: when others are termed dross and dung, and thorns, and have all the
base terms that may be.

Now this estimation, by sealing is known to us by the grace God works in us:
common gifts and privileges, and favors of the world, are no seal of Gods
estimation. If God should give a man kingdoms, and great Monarchies, it seals
not Gods love to him, at all; but when God makes a man a spiritual King to
rule over his base lusts, this is a seal of Gods valuing him above other men.
Therefore we should learn how to value others, and our selves, not by common
things that cast-awayes may have, but by the stamp of God set on us by the
Spirit, which is an argument that God intends to lay us up as coin for another
treasury, for heaven. It is the common grand error of the times, to be led
with false evidences. Many think God loves them, because he spares them, and
follows them with long patience, and makes them thrive in the world. Alas, are
these fruits of Gods special love? What grace has he wrought in thy heart by
his Spirit? he gives his Spirit to them that pray; insinuating, that next the
gift of his Son, the greatest gift is the Spirit, to fashion and fit us to be
members of his Son: this is an argument of Gods love and esteem.

Seals likewise are used for secrecy, 5 Secrecy.
as in Letters, etc. so this seal of the Spirit is a secret work, GOD knows
who are his, they are only known to him, and to their own hearts; The white
stone is only known to him that has it, Revel. 3.
and the hidden Mannah: none so infallibly can know the state in grace, as
those that have the gracious work themselves. Holy men in some degree are
known one to another, to make the communion of Saints the sweeter: there is a
great deal of spiritual likeness in Christians, face answers to face; that
one has strong confidence of the salvation of another: but the undoubted
certainty of a man's estate is known only to God, and his own soul: nay,
sometimes it is hidden from a man's self; there are so many infirmities, and
abasements, and troubles in the world, that this life is called a hidden life
in Scripture: our life is hid with Christin God: it is unknown to the Saints
themselves sometimes, and the world always; they neither know him that begets,
nor them that are begotten.

Hence likewise the use of a seal, 6 Security.
is to show that things should be kept inviolable: hereupon the Church is as a
sealed fountain; sealing shows care of preservation from common annoyance:
hereupon likewise it is, that sealing is the securing of persons or things
sealed from hurt. No man will violate a Letter, because it is sealed: the Tomb
where Christ was butied, was sealed, and the Prison doors upon Daniel, that
none might meddle with them: so the Spirit of God by this work of sealing,
secures Gods children, as the blood sprinkled upon the posts of the doors of
the Israelites, secured them from the destroying Angel. In Ezekiel. 9. there was
a mark set upon those that were to be perserved; that secured them; and in
Revel 7. the sealed ones must not be hurt. So where this seal of the Spirit
is, it is an argument that God means to preserve such a one from eternal
destruction, and from prevailing dangers in this world. They are Gods sealed
ones, no man can hurt them without wrong to God himself, Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: And likewise from devouring sins, and
dangerous apostasy: a man that is truly sealed by the Spirit of God, he
never becomes a member of Antichrist, a stigmatized Papist (for Antichrist has
his seal too) he is kept from soule-murthering errors, he has this security
upon him by the work and witness of Gods Spirit. Whatsoever the use is, or
can be, of a seal in man's affairs, that God will have us make use of in his
heavenly intercourse betwixt him and us.

Whereby you are sealed.

Degrees of sealing.
Now there are diverse degrees of the Spirits sealing.

1 Faith: 1 Faith.
He that believes has the witness in himself. 1 Ioh. 5.10. he carries in
his heart the counterpane of all the promises. This grace is first planted in
the heart, and answers to Gods love and purpose toward us of giving eternal
life: the seal and first discovery of election is manifested to us in our
believing, Act. 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal life believed. This
believing is also a seal to us, in that it is of whose gifts that accompany
salvation, of which GOD never repents him by calling back again, it is a feed
that abides for ever.

2 Sanctification.
2 The work of sanctifying grace upon the heart, is a seal, whom the spirit
sanctifies, he saves. The Lord knows who are his: but how shall we know
it? By this seal, Let every one that names the name of the Lord, depart from
iniquity: not only in heart and affection, but in conversation, and that shall
be a seal of his Sonneship to him: none are children of God by adoption, but
those that are children also by regeneration: none are heirs of heaven, but
they are newborn to it. Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has begotten us a new to an inheritance immortal, etc. This seal of
sanctification leaves upon the soul the likeness of Jesus Christ, even grace
for grace.

But because in time of desertion and temptation we are in a mist, and cannot
read our own faith, and our own graces, it pleases Christ after some trial
and exercise to shine upon his own graces in the heart, whereby we may know we
believe, and know we love: until which time the heart sees nothing that is
good, and seems to be nothing but all objections, and doubtings. We may be
sometimes in such a state as Paul and his company was in the ship, Act. 27.20.
when they saw neither Sun nor Stars many days together, almost past all
hope. So a Christian may for many days together see neither Sun nor Star,
neither light in GODS countenance, nor light in his own heart no grace issuing
from GOD, no grace carrying the soul to God, though even at that time GOD
darts some beam through those clouds upon the soul: the soul again by a
Spirit of faith, sees some light through those thickest clouds, enough to keep
the soul from utter despair, though not to settle it in peace.

In this dark condition, if they do as Saint Paul and his company did, cast
Anchor even in the dark night of temptation, and pray still for day; God will
appear, and all shall clear up, we shall see light without, and light
within: the day star will arise in their hearts.

Thought by reflecting upon our souls we are able to discern a spirit of
faith, GOD may hide himself from the soul in regard of comfort: Nay, a
Christian may know himself to be in the state of grace, and yet be in an
afflicted condition. As in Jobs case, he knew his Redeemer lived, and he
resolved to trust in him even though he killed him: he knew he was no
hypocrite, he knew his graces were true: an for all the imputations of his
friends, they could not dispute him out of his sincerity; you shall not take my
uprightness from me. Yet for the present he saw no light from heaven, till
it pleased GOD to reveal himself in special favor to him. There is always
peace and joy in believing, yet not in that degree which gives the soul
content, until by honoring God in believing and waiting still his good time,
he honors us with further sense of his favor, and powers forth his Spirit
to us, manifesting his special love toward us: and this is a further degree
of sealing of us, confirming us more strongly then before.

The reason why we can neither have grace to believe, nor know we believe,
nor when we know we believe, enjoy comfort without a fresh new act of the
Spirit, is because the whole carriage of a soul to heaven is above nature,
where the Spirit makes a stand, we stand and can go no further; we cannot
conclude from right grounds without some help of the Spirit, some doubts, some
fears will hinder the application to our selves, even as those that live in
some damnable sin cannot but grant that those that live in such a sin shall
never inherit heaven: and their conscience tells them they live in such a sin,
yet self-love blindes them so, that they will not conclude against themselves
that they shall be damned, so true believers cannot conclude for themselves
without divine light and help.

It pleases God thus to keep every degree and act of sealing in his own
hand, to keep us in a perpetual dependence upon him, and to awe us, that we
should not grieve the Spirit of grace, and cause him to suspend either act of
grace or comfort.

Joy and strong comfort come from a superadded seal of the Spirit. The works
of the Spirit are of a double kind: either in us by imprinting sanctifying
grace, or upon us, by shining upon our souls in sweet feelings of joy: what
the Spirit works in us is more constant, as a new nature which is always
like it self, and works uniformely: but comfort and joy are of the nature of
such privileges as God vouchsafes at one time, and not another, to some, and
not to others.

This degree of sealing in regard of joy has its degrees likewise: sometimes
it is so clear and strong, that the soul questioneth not its state in grace
ever after, but passes on in a triumphant manner to that glory it looks for.
Sometimes after this sealing, there may be interrupting of comfortable
communion of far as to question our condition: yet this calling into question
comes not from the Spirit, which where it once witnesses for us, never
witnesses against us, but it is a fruit of the flesh not fully subdued, it is
a sin it self, and usually a fruit of some former sin. For howsoever we
should not doubt after a former witness of the Spirit, yet there will be so
much weakening the sense of our assurance, as there is yielding to any lust.
The knowledge of our estate in grace and comfort thereupon, though it may be
weakened by neglcd of our watchfulness, yet still it has the force of an
argument to assure us when the Spirit pleases to direct us to make use of it,
because Gods love varies not as our feeling does, and a fit does not alter a
state. The child in the womb stirs not always, yet it lives, and that may
be gathered from the former stirrings.

This degree of sealing by way of witness and comfort, is appropriated to the
holy Spirit: every person in the blessed Trinity has their several work;
the Father chooses us, and passes a decree upon the whole groundwork of our
salvation. The Son executes it to the full. The Spirit applies it, and
witnesses our interest in it by leading our souls to lay hold upon him, and
by raising up our souls in the assurance of it, and by breeding and cherishing
sweet communion with Father and Son, who both of them seal us like wise by the
Spirit. This joy and comfort is so appropriated to the Spirit, as it carries
the very name of the Spirit, and is one of the three Witnesses on earth, that
witnesses not only Christ to be a Savior, but our Savior. The three
witnesses on earth are the Spirit, water, and blood: for the better conceiving
of which place, we must know th^^ great work of Christ of redemption and
justification was typified in the old Testament by blood; and the great work
of Christ of redemption justification was typified in the old Testament by
blood; and the great work of our sanctification typified by their washing: To
answer which types, when Christ's side was pierced, there came forth both blood
and water, showing that Christ came not only by blood to justify us, but by
water to sanct^fie us. Hereupon blood and water have the power to be
witnesses. The blood of Christ being sprinkled on the heart by the Spirit,
does pacify the conscience in assuring it that God is pacified by blood, as
being offered by the eternal Spirit: this quieting power shows that it was
the blood of God, and shed for me in particular.

The witness of water is from the power the Spirit has to cleanse our nature:
which no creature can do but the Spirit of GOD; change of nature is peculiar
to the Author of nature. If we feel therefore our natures altered, and of
uncle become holy, in some measure we may know we are the children of God, as
being begotten by the Spirit of Christ, conforming us to his own holiness:
our spirit as sanctified can witness to us that we are Christ's.

But often it falls out, that our own spirits, though sanctified, cannot stand
against a subtle temptation strongly enforced, God super-addes his own
Spirit: guilt often prevails over the testimony of blood, that of water by
reason of stirring corruptions runs troubled. Therefore the third the
immediate testimony of the Spirit is necessary to witness the Fathers love to
us, to us in particular, saying, I am thy salvation, thy sins are pardoned.
And this testimony the Word ecchoeth unto, and the heart is stirred up, and
comforted with joy unexpresseable. So that both our spirits and consciences,
and the spirit of Christ joining in one strongly, witness our condition in
grace, that we are the sons of God.

In this threefold testimony the order is this; blood begets water:
satisfaction by blood procures the Spirit from God, as a witness of Gods love;
and by feeling the power of blood and water, we come to have the Spirit
witnessing, and sealing our adoption unto us to establish us in the state of
grace against storms of temptation to the contrary. The Spirit petiwadeth to
look unto blood, convinces the heart of the efficacy of it, and then
quieteth the soul, which gives it self up to Christ wholly, and to whole
Christ: and thence feels his heart established against carnal reason, so as
he can and does oppose Christ's blood to all the guilt that does arise. And
this witness of the Spirit comforting the soul is the most familiar, and
affects most.

If we feel it not (as often we do not) then rise upward from want of this joy
of spirit to water, and see what work we find of the spirit in clensing our
souls, and if we find these waters not to run so clearly as to discern
our condition in them; then go to the witness of blood, and let us bathe our
souls in it, and then we shall find peace in free grace procured by blood:
for often times a Christian is driven to that pass, that nothing can comfort
him, within, or without him, in heaven or earth, but the free and infinite
mercy of GOD, in the blood of Christ, whereon the soul relyeth when it feels
no comfort, nor joy, of the Spirit, nor sees no work of sanctification: then
it must rest on the satisfaction wrought by the blood of Christ; when the soul
can go to God, and say, If we confess out sins, thou art just to forgive
them, and the blood of Christ shall cleanse us from all sin. Therefore though
I feel not inward peace, nor the work of the Spirit, yet I will cast my self
upon thy mercy in Christ. Hereupon we shall in Gods time come to have the
witness of water and the Spirit more evidently made clear unto us.

The Spirit is that witnesses with blood, and witnesses with water, and by
water, whatsoever of Christ is applied unto us, by the Spirit, but besides
witnessing with these witnesses, the Spirit has a distinct witness by way of
enlarging the soul: which joy in the apprehension of Gods fatherly love: and
Christ's setting the soul at liberty. The Spirit does not always witness
unto us our condition by force of argument from sanctification, but sometimes
immediately by way of presence; as the sight of a friend comforts without help
of discourse: the very joy from sight prevents the use of discourse.

This testimony of the Spirit contains in it the force of all, word, promise,
oath, seal, etc. this is greater then the promise, as a seal is more then our
hand; and as an oath is more then a man's bare word. The same that is said of
Gods oath in comparison with his bare promise, may be said of this sealing in
comparison of other testimonies. That as G O D was willing more abundantly to
clear to the heirs of promise their salvation, he added an oath, Hebr. 6.18.
So for the same end he added this his Spirit as a seal to the promise, and to
the other testimonies, Our own graces indeed if we were watchful enough,
would satisfy us: The fountain is open as to Hagar, but she sees it not,
etc. howsoever the Spirit, if that comes, if subdueth all doubts.

As God in his oath and swearing joyneth none to himself, but swears by
himself: so in this witness he takes confirm it, but witnesses by
himself. And hence arises joy unspeakeable, and glorious, and peace which
passes all understanding; for it is an extract of heaven when we see our
being in the state of grace, not in the effect only, but as in the breast and
bosom of God.

But how shall we know this witness from an enthusiasticall fancy and
illusion? Quest.


This witness of the Spirit is known from Answ.
the strong conviction it brings with it, which wayeth and over-powers the
soul to give credit unto it. But there be, you will say, strong illusions?
True, bring them therefore to some rules of discerning. Bring all your joy, and
peace, and confidence to the Word, they go both together, as a pair of
Indentures, one answers another. In Christ's transfiguration upon the Mount,
Moses and Elias appeared together with Christ. In whatsoever transfiguration
and ravishment, we cannot find Moses, and Elias, and Christ to meet, that is,
if what we find in us be not agreeable to the Scriptures, we may well
suspect it as an illusion.

That you may know the voice of the Spirit of God from the carnal confidence of
our own spirits, inquire,

1 What went before. 2 What accompanies it. 3 What follows after this
ravishing joy.
1 What goes before this witness of the Spirit.
1 The Word must go before it, in being assented unto by faith, and submitted
unto by answerable obedience. In whom after you believed the word of promise,
you were sealed. So that if there be not first a believing of the word of
promise, there is no sealing, The God of peace given you joy In believing.
There must be a believing, a walking according to Rule, Gal. 6.
or else no joy nor peace will be unto us. If we cannot bring the Word and
our hearts together, it is not Gods, but Satan's sealing, a groundless
presumption, and it will end in despair: as Christ came by water and blood, so
does this testimony, it comes after the other two. First the heart is carried
to blood, and from thence has quiet: then follows water, and our nature is
washed, and changed, and then comes this of the Spirit; though it be not
grounded on their testimony, but is above theirs, yet they go before. Where
we thus find the work, we may know it to be right by the order of it.

It comes after deep humiliation, and abasement: though we know our selves
to be the children of God in some such measure, as we would not change our
condition for all the world; yet we would have more evidence, we would have
further manifestation of Gods countenance toward us, we are not satisfied, but
wait: After we have long fasted, and our hearts melted, and softened, then
God powers water upon the dry wilderness, and then it comes to pass, through
his goodness and mercy, that he comforts, and satisfies the desires of the
hungry soul; GOD will not suffer the spirit of his children to fail.

3 Likewise after selfe-denyall in that which is pleasing to us, it is made up
with inward comfort: if this selfe-denyall be from a desire of nearer
communion with GOD, God will not fail them in what they desire. There are
wretches in the world that will deny their sinful nature nothing, if they have
a disposition to pride, they will be proud; if they have a lust to be rich,
to live in pleasures, to follow the vanities of the times, they will do so,
they will not say nay to corrupt nature in any thing: will God vouchsafe to
give any true joy or comfort of spirit to such ones? No: those that let loose
their natures without a check, shall never taste of this hidden Manna. But
when we deny our selves, deny to hear or see that which may feed corruption:
When we deny to take delight in that, that we might if we would go the
course of the world, there is a proportionable measure of joy, and peace, and
comfort in a higher kind made good to the soul. GOD is so good, we shall
lose nothing for parting with any thing for his sake.

4 It is usually found after conflict and victory, as a reward. To him that
overcommeth, Revel. 2.
will I give to eat of the hidden Manna. Gods children after strong conflict
with some temptation or inward corruption, especially, that which accompanies
their disposition and temper, when they have so conflicted as that at last they
get the better, they find by experience sweet enlargement of spirit: to strive
against them, is a sign of grace; but to get victory over them, even to subdue
our enemies under us that rise up against us, this brings true peace and joy.

5 After we have put forth our spiritual strength in holy duties, God crowns
our endeavors with increase of comfort. A Christian that takes pains with his
heart, and will not serve God with that which cost him nothing, enjoyes that
which the spiritual sluggard wishes for, and goes without. God is so just that
those men which have striven to live according to principles of nature, have
found contentment proportionable to their endeavors; some degree of pleasure
attends every good action, as a reward before a reward.

2 What accompanies, etc.
Besides these things that go before this joy and testimony, there are secondly
some things that do accompany it, if it be right: as,

1 This spiritual comfort inlargeth our hearts to a desire after an high
prizing the ordinances; so far is it from taking us off from a dependence
upon them. In the Word and other means it found comfort from GOD, therefore
delights to be meeting GOD still in his own ways. The eye of the soul is
strengthened to see further into truths, and is enabled more spiritually to
understand the things it knew before: as in many of the same truths that wise
men understand, they understood them when they were young, as when they were
old, but then more clearly. So all truths are more clearly known by this;
the Spirit by which we are sealed, is the Spirit of illumination, not that it
reveals any thing different from the Word, but gives a more large
understanding, and inward knowledge of the same truths as were known before.

2 A liberty and boldness with GOD: for where the Spirit is, there is a
gracious liberty; that is, further inlargements from the law, guilt of sin,
and the fear of the wrath of GOD, that we can come with so me boldness to
his throne, and to him as our Father, a freedom to open our souls in prayer
before him. This stands not so much in multitude of words, or forms of
expressions, but a sonne-like boldness in our approaches in prayer. The
Hypocrite especially in extremity, cannot pray, his Conscience stoppes his
mouth: but where the Spirit seals, it gives this liberty, freely to open and
spread our case before him, and call upon him, yea under the evidence of some
displeasure.

3 There does likewise ordinarily accompany this sealing of the Spirit, Satan's
malice and opposition; who being cast from heaven himself, envies this H^aven
upon earth in a creature of meaner rank by crea ion then himself: we must
not think to enjoy pure joy here without molestation, If there be danger of
exalting above measure, we must look for some messenger of Satan. 3 What
follows after th^s witnessing of the Spirit.


After this witness it leaves the soul more humble: none more abased in
themselves, then those that have nearest communion with God; as we see in the
Angels that stand before God, and cover their faces: so Isa. 6. Job after God
had manifested himself unto him, abhorred himself in dust and ashes. It
brings with it a greater desire of sanctification and heavenly-mindednesse. As
Elias ascended up into heaven, his cloak fell by degrees from him: the higher
our spirits are raised, the more we put off affections to earthly things.

2 Again, the end of this further manifestation of the Spirit being
encouragement to duty, or suffering in a good cause, the soul by this
witness of the Spirit finds increase of spiritual mettle, it finds it self
steeled against opposition. Whilst this wind fills their sails, they are
carried on a maine, and are frighted with nothing that stands in their way. See
how the believers triumph upon the Spirits witnessing to their spirits, that
they are the sons of God, Romans 8.

GOD usually reserveth such comforts for the worst times, Pro. 32.6.
Give wine to those that be of heavy hearts: Proverbs 31. The sense of this
love of Christ is better then wine. This refreshing Paul had in the dungeon,
and he sung at midnight. After this witnessing therefore look for some piece
of service to do, or trial to undergo.

Much must be left to GODS fatherly wisdom in this, who knows whom to
cheer up, and when, and in what degree, and to what purpose and service, and
remember always, that these inlargements of spirit are as occasional
refreshings in the way, not daily food to live upon: we maintain our life by
faith, not by sight or feeling. Feasting is not for every day, except that
Feast of a good conscience which is continual: but I speak of grand days,
and high feasts: these are disposed, as GOD sees cause.

3 Where this sealing of the Spirit is, there follows also upon it a lifting
up of the head, in thinking of our latter end; it makes one think of the times
to come with joy, as the holy Ghost here mentions the day of redemption; as a
motive to them to take heed that they did not grieve the Spirit: intimating,
they should think of the day of redemption with a great deal of joy and
comfort. The Saints are described in Scripture to be those that look for the
appearing of Christ: they are Christ's, and in him their reckonings and accounts
are even. And therefore with delight they can often think and meditate upon the
blessed times that are to come.

There be diverse degrees of sealing, arising from diverse degrees of revelation.
God first reveals his good will in his promises to all believers; this is the
privilege of the Church, especially in these latter times: then by his Spirit
reveals those saving truths to those that are his by a divine light. So that
by argument drawn from the power, they feel from truths in searching secrets,
in casting down, in raising up, in staying the soul, they can seal to them
that they are divine.

The same Spirit that reveals the power of the Word to me, reveals in
particular mine own interest in all those truths upon hearing them. Whereupon
they are written in my heart, as if they had been made in particular to me:
the comfortable truths in the Word are transcribed into my heart answerable to
the Word; as that GOD in Christ is mine, forgiveness mine, grace mine:
whereupon adoption in Christ is sealed; which God still seals further to my
soul by increase of comfort, as he sees cause for encouragement. The same
Spirit that manifests in me the word, I hear and read to be the truth of
God, from the power and efficacy of it: the same Spirit teaches to apply it,
and in applying of it, seals me.

Therefore we ought to desire to be sealed by the Spirit, in regard of an
holy impression; and then that the holy Spirit would shine upon his own
graces, so as we may clearly see what is wrought in us above nature; and
because this is furthered by revealing his love in Christ in adoption to us,
we must desire of GOD to vouchsafe the Spirit of Revelation, to reveal the
mysteries of his truth unto us; and our portion in them in particular; and so
our adoption: and in the mean time to wait and attend his good pleasure in the
use of all good means. Thus we waiting, God will so far reveal himself in
love to us, as shall assure us of his love, and stir up love again: and the
same Spirit that is a Spirit of Revelation, will be a Spirit of
sanctification, and so adoption. Dignity, and fitting qualities sureable to
dignity, go both together.

In that grand inquiry about our condition, there is a great miscarriage, when
men will begin with the first work of the Father in election, then pass to
redemption by Christ: I am Gods, and Christ has redeemed me; and never think
of the action of the third person in sanctification, which is the nearest
action upon the soul, as the third person himself is nearest unto us. And so
fetch their first rise where they should set up their last rest. Whereas we
should begin our inquiry in the work of the third person, which is next unto
us: and then upon good grounds we may know our redemption and election.

The holy Spirit is both a Spirit of Revelation, and of Sanctification
together, as has been said: for together with opening the love of the Father,
and the Son, he fitteth us by grace for communication with them.

People out of self-love will have conceits of the Fathers and Sons love
severed from the work of the Spirit upon their hearts which will prove a
dangerous illusion. Although the whole work of grace by the Spirit arise from
the Fathers and Sons love, witnessed by the Spirit, yet the proof of the
Fathers love to us in particular, arises from some knowledge of the work of
the Spirit: the error is not in thinking of the Fathers and Sons love, but
in a strengthening themselves by a pleasing powerless thought of it against
the work of grace by the Spirit, which their corruption withstands. So they
will carve out of the work of the Trinity what they think agreeable to their
lusts, whereas otherwise if their heart were upright, they would for this very
end think of Gods love, and Christ's, to quicken them to duty, and to arm them
against corruption.

To the day of Redemption.

Redemption double.
There is a double redemption: redemption of the soul by the first coming of
Christ, to shed his blood for us; redemption of our bodies from corruption, by
his second coming. We have not the perfect consummation and accomplishment of
that which Christ wrought in his first coming, till his second coming, then
there shall be a total redemption of our souls and bodies, and conditions.
There is a double redemption, as there is a double coming of Christ; the
first, and the second; the one to redeem our souls from sin and Satan, and
to give us title to heaven, the other to redeem our bodies from corruption,
when Christ shall come to be glorious in his Saints. As likewise there is a
double resurrection, the first and the second, and a double regeneration of
soul and body.

In sickness and weakness of body, or when age has overtaken us, that we
cannot live long here, and the horror of the grave, the house of darkness,
is presented to us. Oh let us think, there will be a redemption of our
bodies, as well as of our souls! Christ will redeem our bodies from
corruption, as he came to work the redemption of our souls from sin and
death; and he that will redeem our bodies out of the grave, he will redeem
his Church out of misery, he will call the Jews; he that will do the
greater, will do the inferior. When we hear of this, let us think with
comfort of all the promises that are yet unperformed.

Full redemption not yet.
Secondly, full redemption is not yet, What need I bring Scripture to prove it?
It is a point that every man's experience teaches. Alas, let our bodies speake^
we are not free from sickness and diseases: nay, what is our life but a going
to corruption? the sentence is passed upon us, earth returns to earth; till
death we are going to death, so besides sickness and weakness here, we must
dye, and after death be subject to corruption. The Apostle in this respect
calls our body, a vile body. As for our souls, though they be freed from
the guilt and damnation of sin, yet there are remainders of corruption that
breed fear and terror; and though they be freed from the rule of Satan, yet
not from his molestation and vexations by temptations. In a word, our whole
state and condition in this world, is a state and condition of misery, we are
followed with many afflictions, so that there is not yet perfect redemption,
whether we look to body, soul, or state; the body being subject to diseases,
the soul to infirmities, the state to misery.

But there is a day appointed for it.

A day of Redemption.
By a day we are not to understand the time measured by the course of the Sun
in 24 hours, but in the Scriptures meaning, a day is a set time of mercy or
judgment. As there was a solemn day, the fullness of time, for the working of
the first redemption, so there is a solemn time set for the second redemption,
when all the children of God shall be gathered; those that lie in the dust
shall be raised, and for ever glorified. It is the day of all days: that day
that by way of excellency, is called THAT day in the Scriptures, and the day of
the Lord. The day that were should think of every day; especially in sickness
and trouble, and crosses, and molestations, from the wicked world, and in sense
of the remainders of corruption. There is a day of redemption to come, that
will make amends for all. The frequent thoughts of that day would comfort us,
and keep us from shrinking in any affliction and trouble; it would move us to
a carriage and conversation answerable to our hopes, and also it would help to
fit us; it would infuse a desire of qualification to be prepared for that great
day.

The day of Redemption ought to be thought on.
But how little of our time is spent in thoughts this way? If we could often
think of the day of redemption, our lives would be otherwise, both in regard
of gracious, as also of comfortable carriage, should we be disconsolate at
every loss and cross, at sicknesses, and the thought of death, when we shall
be turned into our first principle, the earth? if we did think of the day of
redemption, when all shall be restored again, all the decays of nature, and
the Image of God be perfectly stamped: the thought of this would make us go
willingly to our graves, knowing that all this is but a preparation for the
great day of redemption The first day of redemption, when Christ came to
redeem our souls, and to give us title to heaven; It was in the expectation
of all good people before Christ; they are said to wait for the consolation of
Israel; that was the character to know those blessed people by. And what should
be the distinguishing character of gracious souls now, but to be such as wait
for the coming of Christ? how often in the Epistles of Saint Paul is it? There
is a Crown of righteousness for me, and for all that wait for the appearing
of Christ.

There was a year of Iubile among the Jews every fifty years; then all that
were in bondage were set at liberty. So at this blessed Iubile, this glorious
day of redemption, all that are in bondage of death, and under corruption,
shall be set at everlasting liberty. No question but the poor servants that
were vexed with hard masters, they thought of the Iubile, and those that had
their possessions took away, they thought of the Iubile, the day of recovering
all. So let us often think of this everlasting Iubile, when we shall recover
all that we lost, for ever to keep it, and never to lose it again as we did
in the first creation. Let us often think of this day; it will infuse vigor and
strength into all our conversation. Indeed to the ungodly, it is not a day of
redemption, but a day of judgment, and the revelation of the just wrath of
God, when their sins shall be laid open, and receive a sentence answerable.

Day of vengeance to wicked.
Alas, there is such a deal of Atheism in the world, (and the seeds of it in
the best, unless it be wrought out daily) that we forget the God of vengeance,
and the day of vengeance. Would men go on in sins against conscience, if
they thought of this last day? It is impossible: such courses come from this
abominable root of Atheism, and unbelief, for had they but a slight Faith,
it would be effectual to alter their course in some measure: therefore the
Scripture gives them the name of fools (though they would be thought to be
the only wise men.) The fool has said in his heart, there is no God: and
what follows? Corrupt are they, and abominable. The cause of all is, the
fool has said in his heart, he will needs force it upon his heart; that there
is no God, hell nor heaven, nor judgment; thence come abominable courses.

Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
Redemption.
FRom the consideration of all that has been formerly spoken of, the sealing
of the spirit to the day of Redemption, there arises these four conclusions.

First, that we may attain unto to knowledge that we are in that state of
grace.

Secondly, that upon knowledge of our state in grace for the present, we may be
assured of our future full Redemption.

Thirdly, that this assured knowledge is wrought by the Spirit.

Fourthly, that the consideration of this assurance wrought by the Spirit, is
an effectual argument to dissuade from grieving the Spirit.

The first conclusion.
For the first we may know we are in the state of grace: first, because the
Apostle would not have used an argument moving, not to grieve the Spirit, from
a thing unknown or guessed at; it is an ill manner of reasoning to argue from
a thing unknown.

2 Again, sealing of us by the Spirit, is not in regard of God, but of our
selves. God knows who are his, but we know not that wear his, but by sealing.

3 The scope of the Scriptures indicted by the Spirit, is for comfort, the
Apostle says so directly, and what comfort in an uncertain condition, wherein
a man knows not but he may be a reprobate? Wherefore came our Savior into
the world, and took our nature upon him; why became he a curse for us; why
has he carried our nature into heaven, and there appears for us till he
has brought us home to himself, but that he would have us out of all doubt
of his love after once by faith we have received him? whence proceeded those
Commandments to believe, those checkes of unbeleevers, the commendation of
them that did believe, those upbraidings of doubting, as springing from
unbelief: to what use are the Sacraments, but to seal unto us the benefits of
Christ? if upon all this we should still doubt of GODS love, especially when
besides the sealing of the promises to us, we are sealed our selves by the
Spirit of promise.

Object. This is true, if we know we do believe:

Answer. It is the office of the Spirit, as to work Faith and other graces, so
to reveal them to us: every grace of GOD is a light of it self, coming from
the Father of lights: and it is the property of light, not only to discover
other things, but it self too; and it is the office of the Spirit to give
further light to this light by shining upon his own grace in us: an excellent
place for this is the 1 Cor. 2.12. We have received the Spirit that is of God,
that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God, in the mouth
of two or three witnesses shall every thing be confirmed: one witnesses is the
Spirit of man which knows the things that are in man; the other witnesses is
the Spirit of God, witnessing to our spirits that we are the children of God.
Here is light added to light, witness added to witness, the greater witness
of the Spirit to the less of our Spirits: the Apostle joins them both
together, Romans 9.
My conscience bears me witness through the holy Ghost.

Obje. Man's heart is deceitful.

Answ. But the spirit of God in man's heart is not deceitful, it is too holy to
deceive, and too wise to be deceived in this point of assurance: we plow with
the Spirits Heifer, or else we could not find out this Riddle: where there is
an object to be seen, and an eye to see, and light to discover the object to
the eye, sight must needs follow. In a true believer, after he is enlightened,
as there is grace to be seen, and an eye of Faith to see, so there is a light
of the Spirit discovering that grace to that inward sight: in the bottom of a
clear River, a clear eye sight may see any thing; where nothing is, nothing
can be seen; it is an evidence that the Patrons of doubtings have little
grace in them, and much boldness in making themselves a measure for other.
Those that are base borne, know their Mothers better then their Fathers; Ioh. 1.
the Church of Rome is all for the Mother, but the babes of Christ know their
Father; the remainder of corruption will indeed be still breeding doubts, but
it is the office of the Spirit of Faith to quell them as they arise. We are
too ready in time of temptation to doubt, we need not help the tempter, by
holding it a duty to doubt; this is to light a candle before the devil as we
use to speak.

Question. May not there be doubtings where there is true faith, may not a true
believer be without assurance?

Answer. There be three ranks of Christians: first, some that are yet under
the spirit of bondage, that like little children do all for fear. Secondly,
are ^^^h as by the love of God shed into the^^ hearts by the Spirit of
adoption, are carried with large Spirits to obey their father, and herein like
unto those children, that not only obey, but take a delight in it upon a
judgment that both obedience and the thing wherein they obey is good; this we
ought to labor for, but we find many Christians in the second rank, many
truly believe in Christ by some light let into their hearts by the Spirit of
adoption, who are not yet fully assured of the love of Christ. There is the act
of faith, and the fruit of Faith; the act of faith is to cast our selves upon
Gods mercy in Christ, the fruit of faith is in believing to be assured of
this: we must know that faith is one thing, assurance another, they may have
faith, and yet want a double assurance: first, assurance of their faith, being
not able to judge at all times of their own act; likewise, secondly, assurance
of their state in grace, as in time of desertion and temptation: a soul at
such a time casts it self upon Christ, as knowing comfort is there to be had,
though he be not sure of it for himself: and this the soul does out of
obedience, though not out of feeling, as the poor man in the Gospel, Lord I
believe, help my unbelief: the soul often times out of the deep, cries, and
in the dark trusts in GOD, and this is the bold adventure of faith, the first
object whereof is Christ held out in a promise; and not assurance, which
springs from the first act when it pleases God to shine upon the soul, and
is a reward of glorifying Gods mercy in Christ by casting the soul upon his
truth and goodness. Assurance is GODS seal, faith is our seal; when we set
to our seal by believing, he sets to his seal, assuring us of our condition:
we yield first the consent and the assent of faith, and then God puts his seal
to the contract: there must be a good title before a confirmation, a planting
before a rooting and establishing, the bargain before the earnest. Some would
have Faith to be an over-powring light of the soul, whereby undoubtedly they
believe themselves to be Christ, and Christ to be theirs: which stumbleth many
a weak, yet true Christian, for this is rather the fruit of a strong Faith,
then the act of a weak, which struggleth with doubting, until it has gotten
the upper hand. True it is, there must be so much light let in to the soul,
as the soul may rely upon Christ, and this light must be discovered by the
Spirit, and such a light as shows a special love of Christ to the soul. And
again, it is true that we are not to take up our rest in the light, until
the heart be further subdued: as many are too hasty to conclude of a good
condition upon uncertain signs, before they have attained unto fuller
assurance, but yet we must not deny faith where this strong assurance is
wanting, so far as to conclude against our selves; if there be desires,
putting on, to endeavor with conflict against the rising of unbelief, with a
high prising of the favor of God in Christ, so as to value it above all
things. Degrees do not vary the kind, weakness may stand with truth; but
where truth is, there will be an uncessant desire of future sealing.

The second conclusion.
The second conclusion: We may upon the knowledge of our present estate in grace
be assured for the time to come: for this sealing is to the day of Redemption;
that is, till we be put into full possession of what we now believe; and
besides, sealing is for securing for the time to come, and our Saviors promise
is, that though He departed from them, yet the Comforter should abide with them
for ever, John 14. And why are we certain of the favor of God to our comfort
for the present, but that we doubt not of it for the time to come?

Faith and love, and these graces, they never fail finally; therefore when the
Scripture speaks of Faith, it speaks of salvation by it for the present: as
if a man should be in heaven presently so soon as he believes. We are saved
by faith, say the Scriptures: we are not yet saved; but the meaning is, we
are* set by faith into a state of salvation. Being put into Christ by Faith, we
are risen with Christ, and sit in heavenly places with him. Col. 2.
Faith makes the things to come, present: and Faith believes, that neither
things present, nor things to come, Romans 8.
shall be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ. So that our
assurance is not only for the present, but for the time to come. We are sealed
to the day of Redemption, and who can reverse Gods seal, or Gods act and deed?
Grace is the earnest penny of glory: God has made a covenant, and given
earnest, he will not lose it, the earnest is never taken away, but filled up;
if we be assured of grace for the present, we may be sure it shall be made
up full in glory hereafter. If the spirit of Christ be in us, the same spirit
that raised Christ from the dead, will raise us up likewise, Romans 8.11
and not leave us until we be in full redemption, we shall walk, filled
with his image. Psalm.


No opposition shall prevail, God has set us as a seal on his right hand to
keep us, I and on his breast (as the high Priest had the twelve Tribes) to love
us, and on his shoulder to support us. The marked and sealed ones in Ezech. 9.
and Rev. 7. were secured from all destruction. If we be in Christ our Rock,
temptations and oppositions are but as waves, they may dash upon us, but they
break themselves.

Quest. Why then do we pray for the forgiveness of sins?

Why we pray for forgiveness of sins.
Answer. We pray for a clearer evidence of what we have: secondly, as the end
is ordained, so the means must be used: God does and will pardon sin, and
therefore we must pray for pardon, as a means ordained. Thirdly, prayer does
not prejudice the certainty of a thing: Christ prays for that he was most
sure of, John 17. I pray for them which thou have given me, for they are thine.

Pregnant for the proof of this point, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5.
is that of Peter, We are begotten again to a lively hope, a hope of that
life which makes lively. Oh but we are weak! true, but we are kept by the
power of GOD: an inheritance is not only kept for us, but we are kept for it.

Ob. But Satan is strong, and his malice is more than his strength?

Answ. True, but we are kept as by a Garrison, we have a guard about us.

Ob. All this is true, while faith holds out; but that may fail?

Answ. No, we are kept by the power of GOD through faith; God keeps our
faith, and us by faith.

Ob. But the time is long between us and salvation, and many dangers may fall
out?

Answ. Be it so that the time is long, yet we are kept unto salvation, even
until the day of Redemption: for the Spirit by virtue of the Covenant, puts
the fear of GOD into our hearts, that we shall never depart from him: GOD
does not promise what we shall do of ourselves, but what he will do in us,
and by us. Thus the holy Ghost puts a shield into our hands to ward off all
objections; and helps us to subdue the reasonings that are apt to rise within
us against this blessed hope. So that this happy condition is not only sure to
us, but God has assured us of it. Why God assur^^^ us of our salvation.
Gods gracious indulgence is such, he sees here we go through a wilderness,
and are molested every way, therefore he would have us assured of a blessed
condition to come. So good is God, he does not only find out a glorious way
of Redemption by the blood of his Son* God-Man, but he acquaints us with it
in the days of our pilgrimage. 1 For his glory.
Partly, that we may glorify him, that he may have the praise before hand of
what good he intends us: for assurance of that blessed condition will stir
up our spirits to bless God. What the thing it self would work, Faith works
the same in some measure. Therefore Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 1. Blessed be God
(says he) who has begotten us again to a lively hope of an inheritance
immortal, underfiled, that fades not away, reserved in the heavens. Why does
he bless God before we have it? because we are as sure of it as if we had
it: what is revealed before hand, is praised for before hand. GOD would have us
assured, that he may have glory.

Partly to comfort us: 2 For our comfort.
for Faith is effectual to work that comfort that the thing present would do
in some measure. What comfort would the soul have, if it should see heaven
open, and it self entering into it, if redemption were at hand? The same Faith
works in some measure. What is more sure then the thing it self? What more
comfortable then Faith in it?

When the Israelites were in the wilderness going to Canaan, they had many
promises that they should come to Canaan, and many extraordinary helps to
lead them thither; the pillar, and cloud, and Angel: and God out of
indulgence condescending to their weakness, gave them some grapes of Canaan:
he put it into the mind of the spies to bring of the fruits. So God give us
some work of his blessed Spirit, whereby he would have us assured, and sealed
to the day of redemption.

The third conclusion is this, The third conclusion
that the spirit does seal us. This cannot be otherwise, for who can
establish us in the love of God, but he that knows the mind of God toward
us; and who knows the mind of God, but the spirit of God?

Then am I sealed, when I do not only believe, but by a reflecting act of the
soul, know I do believe: and this reflection though it be by Reason, yet it
is by Reason enabled by the Spirit; our spirits by the Spirit only can
discern of spiritual acts: it is not for us to know things above nature,
without a cause above nature. None can know the meaning of our broken desires,
so as to help us in our infirmities, but that Spirit that stirred up those
desires. Again, none knows the grievances of our spirits, but our own
spirits, and the Spirit of God, who knows all the turnings and corners of the
soul.

Who can mortify those strong corruptions, that would hinder us in the way to
heaven, but the Spirit clothing our spirit with power from above? who
purifieth the conscience, but he that is above conscience? Who can raise our
spirits above al temptations and troubles, but that Spirit of power that is
above all?

The strength and vigor of any creature is from the spirits: and the strength
of the spirits of all flesh is from this Spirit, whose office is to put spirit
into our spirit.

As GOD redeemed us with his blood, so GOD must apply this blood, that
conscience may be quieted. He only can subdue the rebellion of our spirits,
and soften our hearts, and make them fit for sealing. The Spirit only can so
report the mercy of God to our souls, as to persuade and work our hearts to
this assurance, otherwise we would never yield. For partly the greatness of
the state is such, that none but God can assure: and partly the misgiving and
unbelief of our heart is such, that none but God can subdue it. The thing
being so great, and our deservings so little, being unworthy of the things of
this life, much more of that eternal happiness; this cannot be done without
the high and glorious Spirit of God.

How earnest and desirous then is both the Father and the Son to save us,
that pleased to send such an Orator and Ambassador as is equal with themselves
to persuade us, to assure us, to fit us for salvation? and how gracious is the
Spirit that will vouchsafe to have such communion with such poor fi^full
spirits as ours? And should not this work upon our hearts a care not to grieve
the holy Spirit? and so we come to the fourth conclusion.

The fourth conclusion is, The forth conclusion
that the sealing of the spirit unto salvation, should be a strong prevailing
argument not to grieve the Spirit, that is, not to sin: for sin only
grieves the Spirit. Tit, 2.11.12.
The grace of God (says Paul to Titus) that brings salvation, Christ
appeared: and what is Christ but grace? Christ appeared, and the free favor of
GOD in Christ, whereby we are assured of salvation: which teaches us, what to
do? to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously* and godly in this present world. Even the consideration of the
benefits of Christ, that are past, such as came with Christ's first coming, but
that is not all, Verse 13. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ. The second coming of
Christ enforces likewise the same care of holin fle. Phil. 3.20
Our conversation is in heaven, and not as theirs (spoken of in the former
Verse) whose end is damnation, whose belly is their GOD, who mind earthly
things: no, we mind heavenly things, and these heavenly desires from whence
sprung they, but from the certain expectation of our Savior the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall change our vile bodies, etc. that is, shall redeem us fully
even our bodies as well as our souls.

It is an argument to them that are 1 Not sealed.
It is an argument of force, whether we be not yet sealed, or be sealed: if not
sealed, then gieve not him whose only office it is to seal, entertain his
motions, give way to him, that he may have scope andliberty of working.

Set no reasons against his reasons, hearken to no counsel against his
counsel, stand not out his persuasions any longer, but yield up your spirits
to him, lest he put a perio^ to his patience: he is long suffering, but not
always suffering: if he give us up to our own spirits, we shall only be
witty to work out our own damnation: we are not given up to our own
spirits, but after many repulses of this holy Spirit: and at length, what now
will not serve for an argument to persuade us, shall be used hereafter as an
argument to torment us. The Spirit will help our spirits to repeat and recall
all the motions to our own good, that we formerly put back. We should
think when conscience speaks in us, God speaks, and when the Spirit moves
us, it is God that moves us, and that all excuse will be cut off: answer will
be, did not I tell you of this by conscience, my deputy? did not I move you to
this good by mine own Spirit? Take heed of keeping out any light, for light,
where it does not come in and soften, hardens: none so hard hearted, as those
upon whom the light has shined: there is more to be hoped from a man, that
has only a natural conscience, then from him, whose heart and spirit has
been long beaten on: there is more to be hoped from a heathen Pilate, than a
proud Pharisee. Those that will not be sealed to their salvation, it is just
with GOD that they should be se^led up to their destruction; the soul without
the spirit is darkness and confusion, full of self accusing and self
tormenting thoug^ts: it we let the Spirit come in* it will scatter all, and
settle the soul in asweet quiet.

2 Those that are sealed either in a 1 Lesser degree.
For those that have been sealed by the Spirit, and yet not so fully, as to
silence all doubts, about their estate: those should out of that beginning of
comfort which they feel, study to be pliable to the Spirit, for further
increase. The Spirit seals by degrees: as our care of pleasing the Spirit
increases, so our comfort increases; our light will increase as the morning
light unto the perfect day. Yielding to the Spirit in one holy motion, will
cause him to lead us to another, and so on forwards until we be more
deeply acquainted with the whole counsel of God concerning our salvation:
otherwise if we give way to any contrary lust* darkness will grow upon our
Spirits unawares, and we shall be left in an unsettled condition, as those that
travail in the twilight, that cannot perfectly find out their way. We shall
be on and off, not daring to yield wholly to our lusts, because of a work of
grace begun: nor yield wholly to the Spirit, because we have let some unruly
affection get too much strength in us, and so our spirits are without comfort,
and our profession without glory.

We shall lie open to Satan, if he be let loose to winnow our Faith: for if
our state come to be questioned, we have nothing to allege but the truth of
our graces: and if we have not used the Spirit well, we shall not have power
to allege them, nor to look upon any grace wrought in us, but upon those
lusts and sins whereby we have grieved the Spirit; they will be set in
order before us, and so stare us in the face, that we cannot but fix our
thoughts upon them. And Satan will not lose such an advantage, but will tempt
us to call the work of grace in question: which though it be a true work,
yet for want of light of the Spirit to discern it, we cannot see it to our
comfort. Whereas if the Spirit would witness unto us the truth of our state,
and the sincerity of our graces, we shall be able to hold our own, and those
temptations will vanish.

2 Those that are sealed in a higher degree.
For those that the holy Spirit has set a clearer and stronger stamp upon,
that do not question their condition, they of all others should not grieve the
Spirit.



the Image of God our glorious Savior: who carried the Image of Satan before?
And by this to appropriate us unto GOD, to be laid up in his treasure, as
carrying his stamp, and by this to be separated from the vile condition of
the world; although we carry in us the seeds of the same corruption that the
worst does, differing nothing from them but in GODS free grace and the fruits
of it. For God to esteem so of us, that have no worthiness of our own, but
altogether persons not worthy to be beloved: as to make our unworthiness a
foil, to set out the freeness of his love; in making us worthy, whom he found
not so. For the Spirit by sealing of us to secure us in the midst of all
spiritual dangers: and to hide us as this secret ones, that that evil one
should not touch us to hurt us. These, as they are favors of an high nature,
the more care they require to walk worthy of them. We cannot but forget our
selves, before we yield to any thing against that dignity the Spirit has
sealed us to.

Nature helped with ordinary education, moves every man to carry himself
answerable to his condition: a Magistrate as a Magistrate, a Subject as a
Subject, a Child as a Child; and we think it disgraceful to do otherwise:
and shall that which is disgraceful to nature, not be much more disgraceful
to nature renewed, and advanced by the Spirit? And indeed as we should not, so
we cannot grieve the Spirit so far forth as we are renewed. 1 Ioh. 3.
Our new nature will not suffer us to dissemble, to be worldly, to be carnal,
as the world is, we cannot but study holiness, we cannot but be for GOD and
his truth, we cannot but express what we are, and whose we are.

It is impossible a man should care for heaven, that does not care for the
beginnings of heaven: he cannot be said to care for full redemption and
glory, that does not care for the spirit of grace: fullness of grace is the
best thing in glory; other things, as peace and joy, and the like, they are but
the shinings forth of this fullness of grace in glory.

Again, when the Spirit assures us of Gods love in the greatest fruits of it,
as it does when it assures this redemption: That love kindles love again, and
love constraines us, by a sweet necessity to yield cheerful and willing
obedience in all things: there is nothing more active and fuller of invention,
than love, and there is nothing that love studies more than how to please,
there is nothing that it fears more than to discontent. It is a neat
affection, and will endure nothing offensive, either to it self, or the spirit
of such as we love: and this love the Spirit teaches the heart, and love
teaches us not only our duty, but to do it in a loving and acceptable manner.
It carries out the whole stream of the soul with it, and rules all, whilst
it rules, and will not suffer the soul to divert to by-things, much less to
contrary.

Again, these graces that are conversant about that condition which the Spirit
assures us of, as faith and hope, are purging and purifying graces, working a
suteablenesse in the soul, to the things believed, and hoped for: and the
excellency of the things believed and hoped for, have such a working upon the
soul, that it will not suffer the soul to defile it self. Our hopes on high,
will lead us to ways on high, therefore whilst these graces are exercised
about these objects, the soul cannot but be in a pleasing frame.

It has been an old cavil, that certainty of salvation breeds security and
looseness of life. And what is there that an ill disposed soul cannot suck
poison out of? A man may as truly say, the Sea burns, or the Fire cools: there
is nothing quickens a soul more to cheerful obedience, than assurance of
Gods love, and that our labor should not be in vain in the Lord; this is the
Scriptures Logic and Rhetoric to enforce and persuade a holy life from
knowledge of our present estate in grace. I beseech you by the mercies of God,
Romans 12.
says Saint Paul: what mercies? such as he had spoken of before.
Justification, Sanctification, Assurance that all shall work together for
good, that nothing shall be able to separate us from the love of God in
Christ: all duties tend to assurance, or spring from assurance.

Gods intendment is to bring us to heaven by a way of love, and cheerfulness;
as all his ways toward us in our salvation, are in love. And this is the
scope of the covenant of grace; and for this end he sends the Spirit of
adoption into our hearts, that we may have a childe-like liberty with God in
all our addresses to him. When he offers himself to us as a father, it is fit
we should offer our selves to him as children; nature teaches a child, the more
he desires his fathers love, the more he fears to displease him. And he is
judged to be graceless, that will therefore venture to offend his father,
because he knows he neither can, or will disinherit him. Certain it is, the
more surely we know God has begotten us to so glorious aninheritance, the
more it will work upon our bowels, to take all to heart that may any way touch
him: this wrought upon David, when the Prophet told him, God has done this and
this for thee, and would have done more, if that had been too little, 2 Samuel
12.
it melted him presently into an humble confession. Those that have felt the
power of the Spirit of adoption on their hearts, will both by a divine
instinct, as also by strength of reason, be carried to all those courses
wherein they shall approve themselves to their father. Instinct of nature
strengthened with grounds, will move strongly.

To conclude this discourse, let Christians therefore be careful to preserve
and cherish the work of assurance and sealing in them.

2 What God does for us, 1. Means.
he does by grace in us, he will preserve us that we shall not fall from him by
putting the grace of fear into us, Ier. He will keep us, but by what means?
Phil. 3.
The peace of God which passes all understanding, shall guard our hearts. God
makes our Calling and Election sure in us, 2 Pet. 1.
by stirring our hearts up to be diligently exercised in adding one grace unto
another, and in growing in every grace, as 2 Pet 1. Therefore we must attend
upon al spiritual means of growth and quickening: so shall you have a further
entrance into the kingdom of Jesus Christ: that is, you shall have more
evident knowledge of your ent^a^ce into the kingdom of grace here, and likewise
into the kingdom of glory hereafter. Those that do not so, shall have no
comfort either from the time past, for they shall forget they were purged from
their sins, or from thoughts of the time to come, for they shall not be able
to see things far off.

2 If assurance be in a lesser degree, 2 Means.
yet yield not to temptations and carnal reasonings: if our evidences be not
so fair, yet we will not part with our inheritance. Coins, as old groates,
that have little of the stamp left, yet are current. We lose our comfort many
times, because we yield so easily, because we have not such a strong and
clear seal of salvation as we would, to be borne down that we have none at
all, is a great weakness: exercise therefore the little faith thou have in
striving against such objections, and it will be a means to preserve the
seal of the Spirit.

3 Because this sealing is gradually, 3 Means.
we should pray as Paul, Ephesians. 1. for a spirit of revelation, that we may be
more sealed: (the Ephefians were sealed, for whom Paul prays, and so the
Colossians; yet) that GOD would reveal to their spirits, more their excellent
condition. Col. 2.2.
There are riches of assurance, the Apostle would have the^ labor not only for
assurance, but for the riches of it, that will bring rich comfort, and joy and
peace. Times of temptations and trial may come, and such as, if we have not
strong assurance, we may be sorely troubled, and call all into question. This
may be the sad condition of Gods own children, and from this, that in times of
peace, they contented themselves with a lesser degree of this assurance and
sealing.

4 Lastly, 4 Means.
be watchful over your own hearts and ways, that according to what you have
now learned, you grieve not the spirit, for by it you are sealed, intimating,
that if in any thing we withstand and grieve the spirit, we shall in so
doing, prejudice our selves, and suffer in the comfort and evidence of our
sealing.

FINIS.

