GALIA On the happy marriage of the most accomplished pair, H. R. Esquire And the
virtuous A. B.

ACADEMIA: OXONIENSIS:
Christus: Lucrum

Veritas in Profundo:

(...)



OXFORD, Printed by L. L. AN. DOM. 1640.

AD SPONSVM AEDES Brumhamianas primo invisentem.
SIste gradum, quavis Juvenis dignissime forma,
Haec statio erranti est placidissima; pectoris aestu^
Hic relevare potes, nec pulchri indagine vultus
Per varios migres agros, variasque per urbes.
Occupet ignarum forsan Brumhamia; in illis
Aedibus alma Venus posuere and castra Cupido.
Hospitium praedulce Deae peregrine subito,
Saucius exibis: Nam quos non vulnerat Anna
Sanguinis antiqui Bayntonia! dives avorum,
Et decor ipsa suis, cunctis praelata puellis;
Et forma praestans, and primis nubilis annis.
Huic similem quondam servavit ahenea turris,
Aethere cui puro descendit plurimus auro
Jupiter, and fulvus pro munere depluit imber.
Pro love munus erat; plus nostra elucet in Anna;
Plus pro dote feret; siquidem supereminet omnes
Virgineus pudor and divina modestia dotes.
Vreris infaelix? Age, divam ambito puellam,
(Non been convenient aestus in amante, pudorque)
Basia, stulte, petas; nec tantum basia prosunt,
Quantum sola nocent. Peragat facundia causam.
Quam non suasit Amor, fervens and pectoris ardor?
Diva Venus, Venerisque leves faveatis Amores.
Tu quoque casta licet, noli morosa videri,
Et cave ne renuas sortem, quam fata benignam
Insolito misere: vagae quot rure puellae,
Jllius (heu!) cupidae quot sperant basia matres
Virginibus cessura suis! Tibi fata dederunt,
Quae reliquis inimica negant; quos sola recusas
Qualibet amplexus emissent art puellae.
Ne te difficilem praebe; vix dignior illo
Quisquam nocte tua est, nuptae thalamoque pudico.
Vicimus, o Juvenes, laetas Hymenaeus ad aures
Fertur, and insignis patitur Bayntonia vinci,
Dat quoque victa manum, Veneris jam foedere gaudens.
Oscula nunc repetas pulchris signata labellis,
Oscula blanda dabit, nec quaeras oscula tantum:
Virginitas jam tota tua est, cum Cynthia noctem
Speratam tulerit, Sol and se merserit undis.
Phoebus abit; Properes, and dulcia bella capessas,
Collectumque diu cupidus largire vigorem.
J. E.

To the happy Bridegroom.
Whilst we, fair Sir, approaching Winter moan,
And grieve to see our May and July gone:
These gentler Months conspire to crown your fate:
And with joined temper still attend your state.
He that enjoyes a Paradise, which yields
The Pride of Gardens, flowery Lawnes, and Fields;
Changed seasons cannot feel: to him the year
'Twixt spring and summer does throughout appear.
To the most virtuous Bride A. B.
The Paths of Love are plain; and we his Darte
Can trace, when it wounds but a common heart.
In you, fair Spouse, the winged Deity
Is Knots and Charms, Riddle, and Mystery.
1 Tell me, Before what pearled row
Ripe Cherries do in Autumn grow?
2 What earthly Glories, scattered rays
Excel Apollo's hair and Bays?
3 What Climate in the North breaths forth
Aires, then the Eastern beds more worth?
4 What twin-like stars below do prove
Light and eclipse to those above?
5 What Snow is that, which is both flame
And frost to him that courts the same?
6 What chaste cool Ice has heat so much,
To melt th'embracer with its touch?
7 What Sun is that, which risen benights
Fresh Summer, set breeds his delights.
Would You unriddle these? in order set
The two first letters of the Alphabet.
T. F.

EN En stellato fulgens Venus aurea coelo
Praeludit Thalamis; and multis lucida flammis,
Faustas promittit taedas noctemque benignam.
Vobis (faelices Animae!) post taedia longa
Has seeds sacravit Amor: jam fata potestis
Improba ridere; and vanos contemnere casus.
Sic postquam iratum tranavit navita pontum,
Et fruitur portu, Fortunae oblitus iniquae,
Demulcet Genium; atque udis poene obrutus undis
Ignigenae indulget Baccho, tepidoque Lyaeo:
Et nondum siccas, expellunt pocula curas.
Ite, agite, o Juvenes, and vos, castissima turba,
Quae nondum Veneri specula appendistis, honores
Ferte omnes Sponso and Sponsae; lectissima circum
Nectite serta torum, multoque e flore corollas:
Hoc templum Veneris, tenerique Cupidinis ara.
En ubi casta venit vittis redimita capillos
Victima purpureos, niveoque insignis amictu.
Tali Agamemnoniam cultu incessisse puellam
Credibile est, quando forma commota Diana,
Supposita cerva maestis servabat ab aris.
Turba puellarum, cur non imponitis arae,
(Huic molli lecto) nuptam? ne brachia vincla
Impediant, nec vincla pedes: succumbat Amoris
Victima, sponte sua. Cur palles sacra puella?
En mystes tibi sponsus erit: tibi vulnera figet,
(Cur iterum formosa times?) at vulnera Amoris.
Mill genis teneris, and mill and mill labellis
Atque oculis frontique affiget basia, donec
Deliquium patiatur Amor: tunc arctius ulnis
Corpus formosum amplectens, and eburnea colla,
Pectore mulcebit tepido, viresque vagantes
Colliget, atque novos sensim producet amores.
Adsis sponse sacer: mystes and sponsus: Amoris
Mystes, and sponsus Veneris: solennia sacra
Sunt peragenda tibi; faveat tibi noctis amicae
Longa quies, and sero suos sol dividat ignes,
(Quaerit Amor tenebras and amica silentia noctis.)
Virgin sic tandem oblata sacrisque peractis,
Mane novo innumeram possis praedicere prolem.
P. M.

GOod morning to your chastest loves; the day
Hasts to complete your joys: Sol could not stay
One minute longer ere he rose; he fled
The tedious courtships of his Tethys bed
And wooed Aurora with a gentle smile
That she would open the day, and so beguile
Night of her due: she blushed, and straight the hills
Were mantle'd all in red; the wood quire fills
The groves with Music: the morn, the groves, and all,
Welcome the coming of loves festival.
Virgins deflowre the feilds: (you may commit
Rapes on the medows and be Virgins yet.)
Rob Flora's gaudy wardrobe, and o'respread
The way with flowers where the Lovers tread.
This is an honest theft, this, no offense:
To sin when Love command's is innocence.
This done, the lovers may to the Temple go:
The Temple has a share in Loves rights too.
Religion is the band of love: we ty
The lovers knot in this solemnity.
The ring's the pledge of love: no other stone
Gives it its price but its own union.
Blessed Couple! (do I not a sin commit
To say a couple when this knot is knit?)
This right performed you both victors are,
Conquering each others hearts: each has a share
In the others love: from the self same fire
Both loves receive their warmth: the same desire
Burns in each breast: two bodies thus may be
By one soul moved: it is Loves Philosophy.
Love has proclaimed a feast: his courts do ring
With sweetest Music; and the Minstrils sing:
The court's inspired with mirth: who ever now
Looks sad and pensive, or contracts the brow,
Savours of Schism and faction: he will prove
Not of the court, but family of Love.
Had some decrepite pair entered Loves bands
Snowie with age, and joined palsi'd hands,
Mirth would have bin a mock-show. Jf the Bride
Had chanced to smile, you would perhaps have spied
Empty unfurnished gums: to sing, at best
Had bin to cough in tune: and all the rest
Of Loves solemnities, but only shown
The Bride and Bridegroomes imperfection.
Here both are young: youth dances on their brows;
Fresh and untainted vigor gently flows
Within their veins: hither does nature bring
The richest tributes of the youthful spring.
See where the Bride appears: such Majesty
Did not invest the Cyprian Queen, when she
Ore' came on the Phrygian Mounts: or when she strove
With armed Mavors in the field of Love.
Let but her aged parents gently sipp
The balmy sweetness of her virgin lipp,
It will repair their age, and straight restore
A fresher spring then ere they had before.
Blessed Sr, be happy in your Bride: those arms
Are more effectual then the strongest charms:
They will effascinate your soul: but this
Bewitching is unto a future bliss.
Enjoy her, chaste, and modest: (there can be
No better dowry then Virginity.)
Chaste as the blushing morn, or pearly dew
Which drops from Virgin-Roses; whose fair hue
The Sun has not yet courted. Taste the sweet
Due to your wedded souls: it is not meet
That you should now in contemplation move
But try at length the practick part of Love.
Warmed by each others loves, you may beget
Each night a Cupid and be youthful yet.
P. M.

SPonsa veni; differs nimis expectata mariti
Gaudia, quam pretiosa Tibi dilabitur hora,
Dum nimium been compositis Te vestibus ornas
Tu plus nuda places. Paridis sententia, Palmae
Ipsi nec Veneri victricia serta dedisset,
Si non nudatae. Nimiam sub pectore curam
De cultu retines; non vest ornatior ulla
Quam Tali, Qualem Tibi connubialia praestant
Stragula, lodicesque, sacri velamina lecti.
Undique conspersis sternatur floribus alma
Tellus, and Quicquid calcaverit haec Rosa fiat;
Lilia virgineae dispergite verna puellae,
Hoc agite, and vobis talis precor accidat hora.
Accendas, Hymenaee, faces, facilisque vocatus
Ritibus his adsis viridi velatus amictu:
Sisque maritatis florentis nuntius aevi.
Nolo equidem decores humeros velamine flavo;
Zelotypi color iste decet connubia sponsi.
Ast hinc suspicio, procul hinc quoque vana facessant
Jurgia, sollicitae procul hinc discedite curae,
Et quicquid violet peramica silentia noctis.
Aequo and perpetuo nexu jungantur Amantes
Turturibus similes; solo hoc discrimine distent,
Nullo cum gemitu, nullo cum murmr vivant.
Rumpe moras Zonamque tuam; Quid sponsa moraris?
Pro Zona cingat, pulcherrima virgo, mariti
Gratior amplexus; vivusque sit annulus iste,
Quo sua perpetuo firmet connubia nodo.
Teque viro jungas, nec vitis amicius ulmo
Haereat, aut plures (opto) ferat illa racemos,
Quam Tu filiolos: parias foecunda Quotannis,
Et geminum parias, longaque propagine, foetum;
Sitque alter Matris, Patrisque sit ectypon alter.
G. W.

COme Hymen haste, and bring thy lights,
And for a while let us know no Nights.
Put thy glad saffron Garment on,
Let all dull sadness far begone,
And sing with Music by thy side,
Joy to the Bridegroom, and the Bride.
Behold here is a loving Pair,
They both are young, and both are fair,
Thy Torches yet did never see
Brave Youth, and Beauty so agree.
Haste Hymen then to join their Hands,
Haste thee and loose their virgin Bands.
What beauty on his cheek does shine!
It Is lovely, yet not Faeminine.
Each cheek endeavors to excel,
And in this Friendly strife do dwell.
A red in either does abide,
As if they blushed at eithers Pride.
In Hers what Modesty does sit!
The Rose and Lilly there are knit.
From Her snowy spotless look,
The face of Jnnocence was took.
Her Lips in Labor swell, soft Kisses
Th'ofspring are, and sweeter blisses.
Their Friends and Fortunes aequall be,
Their virtues, and estates agree;
Their Age is too so nigh the same,
That they scarce differ but in Name.
They seem to me as if they had
Bin Man and Wife by Birth, not made.
Haste thee Hymen, what do fear
The threats of this, or the other shire?
Can Bromham mourn, or Cannington
To see so blessed an union!
If to a Gemme, a Gemme you join,
The more's the Prize, the more's the shine.
Thou rob'st not this, or the other place,
But add'st to both a double Grace;
They two being wed, those Towns may be
Partakers of the Mystery.
Two stars conjoined, both may dispense
To sundry climes their Jnfluence.
The fruitful vine does from one Root,
Diffuse his Moisture round about;
So that the farthest Branch may be
The thickest clustered on the tree.
So from the stock may branches grow
To shade those Towns and Countries to.
And now I see 'em joined, the Bells
To listening Friends the glad news tells.
Joy sitts on every brow, each eye
Mov's quick as Heaven with Lollity.
One wedding brings a thousand forth,
For all seem married unto Mirth.
But see the Sun how fast he flies
And to his amorous Tethys hies:
How red he blushes, as he were
A shamed to have kept the married Pair
From their due joys so long? Their day
Js night, he cries, so poasts away.
And haste thou, Muse, too, only wish
Each night may prove no worse then this;
Their Love may still increase, and they
Kiss still as loving as to Day.
The children like the Parents prove,
Some Mars'es, and some Queens of Love
R. P.

HUc, huc o Veneres, Cupidinesque,
Huc Nymphae, Charitesque quotquot estis,
Sed castae Veneres, Cupidinesque
Sed quales Charites beatis illum,
Sed quales Charites beatis illam,
Huc laeto simul advolate cursu.
Huc and vos properate, grata, Musae,
Turba, and quaelibet induens Thaliam,
Vestros jungite Gratiis lepores.
Illi junctus Hymen choro beabit
Fausto carmine blandulum maritum,
Fausto carmine blandulam maritam.
Haec junget socia dies catena,
Hugonem juvenum venustiorum,
Et sexus decus omne mollis Annam.
Ne citum nimis urgeas Phlegonta,
Currum qui regis arbiter diei;
Cedas serius at nigrae sorori,
Festi gaudia protrahens amaeni.
Atat, gnavus and impiger maritus
Lento irascitur, invidetque Phaebo.
Sponsi gaudia plena quid moramur?
Et quid vota novae modesta sponsae;
Amplexusque pios, sed and ruborem:
Sincera oscula, sed simul timorem:
Et quae dat genialis ille lectus,
Blanda and Cypridos incruenta bella?
Ah pigros nimis urgeas caballos,
Currum qui regis arbiter diei;
Da furvae citius locum sorori;
Nec sedem prius occupa relictam,
Donec officiosa turba amici,
Inter brachia molliora sponsi
Nuptam corripiant novam, relicto
Nuper nomine virginis rubentem.
AN ECLOGUE.
Coridon, Alexis. Cor. Hoe Alexis, gentle swain
Turn a little back again.
Whether run'st thou with such speed,
Whilst thy flocks neglected feed?

Alex. Have, Coridon, make have away
This is Sheep-heards holyday.
See thou how the glad swains run
With each an acclamation
Of joy, and pleasure, to betide
The happy Bridegroom, and his Bride?

Cor. Courteous Sheepe-heard read to me,
Whose is this solemnity?

Alex. Wot'st thou not how Brumham's pride
(Happy Virgin, happier Bride!)
Pan's eldest Nymph, and nearest care,
Wedds Sylvanus son and heir?

Cor. She? the glory of these plains,
Whose beauty so bewitched the swains
And in her fond admirers struck,
Amazement with each graceful look?
She whose every accent might,
Charm with wonder, and delight;
And challenge in harmonious measure
Syrinx, Pan's transformed pleasure?
Who when her eye she does advance
Conquers a heart with every glance?
She who made the amorous boys,
To esteem no other joys;
But neglect their flocks to fold,
While her eyes they might behold;
And not mind the swift-pac'd Day,
Gazing on a brighter ray?
Whose amorous and awful eye,
Moves with such tempting modesty,
At once it would kindle a loose flame,
And check it? Is It not She?

Alex. The same
Yet all this beauty now is won,
By the Swain of Cannington:
Then whom Phoebus yet has spied
Nothing fairer, but his Bride.
One in whose ennobled breast
Virtue's self has chose to rest.
True in heart, and strong in tongue;
Wonder, in a swain so young!
Nothing Noble, nothing fair,
Lacks to make a perfect pair.

Cor. Join we then, and let our love
Call for more blessings from above
On this rich couple. Send them down
Every Deity a Crown.

Alex. Pallas wisdom.

Cor. Juno treasure.

Alex. Hebe youth.

Cor. And Venus pleasure.

Alex. Bacchus and Apollo join,
To make this a fruitful vine.

Cor. Hymen with thy brighter flame
Quite expel all cause of blame.
Far hence vain jealousy be set,
Where youth and beauty so are met.

Alex. That so their numerous joys may never decrease,
Each being others greatest happiness.

T. P.

ECLOGUE.
Damon. Cloris. Dam. COme, Cloris, let us have away,
We must all now keep holiday.
Thirsill to day must Coelia wed,
Pan will enjoy him in his Bed.

Clo. The news is welcome, such a pair,
So young so handsome and so fair
Arcadia yields not, what a face
Does the gentle Coelia grace!
How did she Captivate the Swains
That ever saw her on the Plains!
What Garlands would this Sheep-heard bring,
What Roundelaies that other sing!
That scarce a Pipe was heard to play
Unless in praise of Coelia!

Dam. And, Cloris, Thirsil is a Lad,
That in as great esteem is had,
What Sheep-heardesse on all the green
Has not Thirsills lover been?
Pretty Daphnis often would make,
Garlands, and Posies for his sake,
And often in flowers his name would set,
And wear it in her Coronet,
And then she would vow that his name lent,
The flowers their color, and their sent.
Phyllis too did often send,
Tokens to him, as her friend,
She wrought him Handkerchiefs, which she
Conveid unto him privily,
And if at any time he chanced
To use them when he public danced,
Phyllis then was happy made,
And ample recompenses had.
What shifts would Amarillis frame,
If she but heard of Thirsills name!
She Would drive her flocks to his, and swear
They better fed, because so near.
His eyes she would call those heavenly showers,
That deck the earth with grass, and flowers,
And it was no mar'le since she did view,
How in his cheeks sweet Roses grew,
She called his face a Flowery May,
His eye a never falling day:
If that he, but a piping were,
Sheed cal't the music of the Sphere.

Clo. Oh Damon thou thy self can say,
How Coelia does both sing and play,
How all the youngsters of the plains,
Are ravished with her curious strains.
How when she sings her Flock will look
As with admiration struck,
They leave of grasing straight to hear,
And only then do feed the ear.
Some stand stone still, as if afraid
To disturb the beauteous Maid.
But others friske it here and there,
Dancing to the Tunes they hear.
Whilst all the Sheepheardesses yield
To her the honor of the field.

Dam. Then Cloris they are happy met.

Clo. They Are like a Rose to a Rose set.
Like two bright stars they do appear,
Both are fair, and both are clear.
Sol with bright Venus does conjoyne,
Beauty, and Majesty combine.
Pan crown their wishes, may they be
Not happy, but foelicity.

A. S.

WHat strange sound's this! an invocation
Of Cupid, Hymen, Love, Peace, Union!
It Is well some yet agree; for by those Gods
J thought that all the World had been at odds.
And did thou say a Wedding? is it not, Friend,
A Tournament these Families intend?
Or more vast quarrel, such as threats our Land?
Look, yon's as brave a troop as the Royal band.
But hence all terrors, since J well discry,
Here Is naught intended but a blessed supply
Against both wars, and sicknesses: hopes yet,
Since though we cannot save, we may beget:
He that gave Angels Immortality,
Jn liew of that, did bid Man, Multiply.
By what name shall I saint these hours? some say
It Is not so much a Nuptial, as Birthday.
Since Parents, Friends, each one this day begins
To acknowledge him, that was borne single, Twins:
And yet I fear we have erred grossly who
Do style these Twins; They are not so much two;
But shall become, ere these ten Moons be gone,
Incorporate one Babe, one Little-one.
Of that complete, and perfect Unity,
All you boast yet, is but as Prophecy;
Your Loves, as ring, are types, that the Church willed,
But Progeny is Marriage fulfilled.
Nature expects this from you, as her meed;
Then for your birth you thank her, with your breed.
R. P.

Fiddlers, go break your strings, more music lies
Jn the Brides mirth, then your harsh melodies.
Dancers, be you gone too, her panting heart
Keeps truer musick-time, then all your art.
And what needs these strewn flowr's? if for their sent,
Her breath Arabian spices does present!
But if the color please your eye, why see
A blushing rose in each cheeks modesty.
Your junkets too are useless, for each guest
Finds in the Bride a most delicious feast.
Hymen put out thy torch; though love's a fire,
Yet darkness, and not light is his desire.
But if again you would revive the Sun
Let the Bride open an eye, and straight it is done.
Thus happy Bridegroom you enjoy in one
A wife, and wedding preparation.
How will the Hinds of Somerset, glad Swains,
Run hobling with their welcomes over the plains,
When Canington shall turn loves paradise,
With the wished presence of your beauteous prize?
They Will leave their harvest thougb it shine; the plow
The flayle, and all shall lie neglected now;
And to a bag-pipe, whistle, single Kitt,
Lift up their heels 'till they the Seiling hit:
Scraping such welcomes that your hall will be
Turned fallow with their Gamboll jolitye.
As if their plowing shoes would there foretell,
The plenteous viands which again shall swell
Your full crowned tables, equalling that store
Your Fathers charity used spend before.
Your flourishing age does prophecy their mirth
Shall yearly be renewed with a fair birth.
Such hopes are dashed, when youth mungrels it is blood
With a rich threescore ore-worne Widdow-hood.
Where the not pleasant, but most reverend bride
Lies like a Sybill by her husbands side,
Who kisseth her with such devotion,
As Anch'rites do some Relic, or Saints bone.
But here is no wrinkles, save what Venus hurles
On her fair brow, when it with smiles she curles.
These strict embraces teach the fruitful vine,
And show the honyedwood-bine, to entwine.
Like two perfumes mixed may they know no strife,
But to infuse in a third Odor, life.
G. K.

On the happy Marriage of H. R. and A. B. masked under the names of ASTROPHIL
and CHARILLIS.
YOu Virgins that did never yet prove
The power and sweet effects of love:
And yet feign would learners be,
J'th' chaste and natural mystery.
Go not to your wanton vine
It Is not love she does define
But loves error, see her Top,
Makes use of every Neighbor prop:
And rather then she will lie alone
She Will loosely mingle with her own.
The Jvy too as well does twine
About the Elm as lofty Pine,
If she has store she does not care
How crooked and deformed they are.
Such love as this though typ'd by trees
Is practiced by those looser she is,
Whose dotage thinks all ware will pass,
If veiled with loves diviner glass.
Her true complexion would thou see,
Such as is not Heresy,
Whose unmixt and cleaner fires
Owe their birth to such desires,
As a Hermit may admit,
Or a frozen Anchorite:
Let Astrophil thy Tutor be,
Or Charillis chastity.
Who to each Virgin breast shall prove*
Not lovers but the Art of love.
Which having learnt and that you be
Proficients in the mystery;
At your Tutors Bridal day,
Every Virgin sing a Lay:
And as sacrifices bring
The pride and glory of the spring.
Lillies, Daffadills, and Posies
Of the blushing Damask Roses,
Primroses and other flowers
To bedeck the Wedding bowres.
Chaplets fresh, both white and green,
Such as fit Loves, King and Queen.
Since to each Virgin breast they will prove,
Not Lovers but the Art of Love.
That done with soft and dutious feet
At Brumham house together meet:
Where if the Bride (as innocent
As if there were no marriage meant)
You find asleep, each one may sip
The balmy Nectar of her Lip,
Which treasure up, for it will be
The best preserve for Chastity.
Then with voice as soft and still
As Zeph'rus, whisper Astrophill.
At which word, as at the Bell
Which rings a Dirge or Matins Knell,
Rise the chaste and watchful Nunes,
She Will disclose her clowded Suns:
Which having seen you boldly may
Tell the world it is break of day.
Then with no unseemly rimes,
As are usual at such times
Amongst loose Madames of the Court,
Make immodesty a sport.
But with hearts as pure and free
From bad thoughts as Martyrs be
When they laughing court the stake,
Finer try your charge to make.
Which nor sad, nor froward do,
You may be chaste and merry too.
Each virgin to her self may say
That I had such a wedding day!
Having bound her flaxen tresses
And put on the choice of dresses,
To her Love that all this while
With a sweet and unforc't smile
Does expect in one soft kiss
To give and take an unpriz'd bliss,
You must deliver your rich store
Both the Indies boast not more.
And like learners watchful stand
At the Bride and Bride-groome's hand.
Since to each Virgin Breast they will prove
Not Lovers but the Art of Love.
Next, when as their lips have shown
Their souls more Constant Union;
And the God of Marriage stands,
With Virgin-Tapers in his hands,
Which he lately lighted by,
His or her refulgent eye,
Then I say, the Virgin crew
Of Brumham Nymphs know what to do.
And the swaynes of Buckington,
Lacok, Chalne, and Heddington,
Pleasant Bremble, where the fleet
And parted streams of Avon meet,
Wait the Bride and Bridegroomes Nodds
Like that troop of lesser Gods
That once met on Phlaegras green
To attend Heavens King and Queen.
And the Birds who chirping say
This shall be your Bishops day,
From your cheerful hollow throats,
Strive to drown the Minstrells notes.
See they come, what light is here!
Phoebus is out-shone I swear,
And for shame behind a cloud
His fainting conquered beams does shroud.
Tell me Virgins have you seen
On the Spy or Wansditch green
Such a lovely well-shapd Creature?
Or e're dreamed of such a feature?
For I know your dreams suggest
What does please your fancies best,
Brown his hair is, which does show
The owner often is trusty too.
Proper as the lofty Pine
Or the trees of Apennine.
Strait as straightest lines of Art,
Or those beams the Sun does dart,
When no thick or clowdy days
Do refract or break his rays.
Would you have me to express
In a word all comeliness
That nothing may be said beside,
He Is as beauteous as his Bride.
And with her there is no compare,
Venus self is not so fair.
She has goodly eyes it is true,
So has bright Charillis too.
Venus forehead thoug't be high
Js not white as Jvory.
When Charillisses I know
Whiter is then falling snow
Whose sudden, chaste, and spotless birth
Never mingled yet with earth.
Her Lips -- but oh J cant'runne over
All the parts of her rich store,
Hymen's torch burns all this while,
And the Bride and Bridegroomes smile
Gently chides at my delay,
But they shall no longer stay.
Virgins o'pe the Temple gates
Where the Priest and people waits
Each as jocound as if they,
Saw and had this Bridal Day:
Now with fervor join your hands
As in love so Hymen's bands.
While my humble muse retires
Seldom warmed at such bright fires
And betakes it self again
To it is blunt and usual Pen.
And if e're J chance to woe,
Beauteous pair, I Will think of you.
Since to all Virgin Breasts you prove
Not Lovers but the Art of Love.
G. B.

HAnds joined? 'Twas never Better: see
They shadow out some Majesty!
It Is this stately Posture crowns
Kings and Queens Ambitions:
For to make sure his mystique Bands
Hymen ties one knot of Hands.
Here, Great Love, thou have a Pair
More soft then purest Kidd, more Fair:
Which do lend the Gloves they wear
Perfume, beyond the Millainer.
And where can Rich Sents breathing lie
Fitter then in such Jvory?
Then Happy Sir, the common voice
Must needs commend You and Your choice,
Who are so virtuous, so Best
You will even consecrate your Priest.
Come then from Church, There Is other Rites
Wait to accumulate Your delights.
View the Board and see what fare
The Household Goddess can prepare!
For now I cannot believe Lar will
Live a Batchelour-God still.
But hence warming her desires
Vesta too kindles New fires.
Strike up All in midst o'th Feast,
Let Mirth enliven every Guest:
Ceres Ladyship shall dance
Attendance, and His Plumpnesse praunce
That Is Bacchus hight, for let me see
To Dance is Wines chief Quality.
So we the Guests have what to do,
Till the Room seems to dance round too.
Then sadly take our leave, The Year
Yields few such days in's Calendar.
Such a Night I me sure 't cannot yield,
Till Platoes dream shall be fulfilled.
When in the same blessed place
You shall repeat the same Embrace.
And, but the Diamonds sparkling Eye
None present at Loves mystery.
Then shall you boast that you have twice
Breathed Indies, and dreamed Paradise.
And recounted of your blisses
The second Chiliad of Kisses.
So your successive Love shall no End see;
For Time Repeated is Eternity.
I. G.

Fair Ones, how will you pacify
The little angerd Deity?
Whose Altars none will after dare
TO approach with sacrifice, which are
Less then Perfection's self; then how
Will he find votaries enough?
His Temples will turn Groves, and these
Perhaps of fatal Cypress trees.
Expect you not he will make retire
With His leaden Dart your noble fire,
That so the meanest of his train
May hope his favors cheap again?
No with your single Vows he is more
Honored, then with his wonted store
Of common suppliants. What if here
He loose a couple, who not dare
To show their faces now (alas,
They meant their Lands should make them pass.)
Or if he miss some well-borne pair,
Whose only Arms are rich and fair?
Others, who for their years expect,
The winged Boy will not dare reject
Their reverend vows, would hither move
To Increase the cinders of their Love.
Some couples happily are kept back,
Who every Good, but Beauty, lack.
Some, who being only virtuous,
Thought other Graces of no use;
Nay, that they lessened virtues praise;
As if the shadow added rays
To the unseen Light, or the Sun
Less welcome were, in the brightest noone,
When every Atome feels a ray,
Then when it beclowded just makes Day.
Let these or more forsake Loves Quire,
You make the Harmony entire:
Had Nature some one Gemme refined
To the worth and luster of the Kind
We could have spared each glittering stone,
Which boasts single perfection.
The wanton Deity is proud,
His roof such worthy Guests can shroud,
And would his Mother straight remove,
TO enthrone a fairer Queen of Love,
But that he fears, were this once done
He should be 'sham'd to keep his own.
Since then already you possess
What he can only wish were less,
See, he forsakes his useless Throne,
And tenders a petition;
That when he now and then supplies
His halfe-spent Quiver from your Eyes,
You Will not complain to Jove's high Court
Of his too bold, though harmelsse sport:
How will he tremble to be doomed
To the Rock, til's Liver be consumed?
You need not fear, he will spend too fast
This golden treasure, and so wast
Your stock away: think how much more
Would sickness spoil that precious store;
How many beams would Care put out,
Or some unlucky jealous doubt,
For one, that he shall borrow thence?
And all these Fiends he will drive from hence.
You cannot wish more happiness to obtain,
Then such a Client, such a Guardian.
G. M.

The Bridegroom to the Bride.
COme, Lovely Maid, and let us walk
Into the Garden, where we will talk
Of Knotts, and flowers there, which may be
The Emblems of Loves mystery.
See how yon honey Columbine
About that sturdy Oak does twine!
It tells thee, these embraces Be,
And Emblemes in Loves Mystery.
See how yon Marigold displayes
It Is self, and Courts Apollo's Rays;
It tells Thee, that thou must be free,
And open; in Loves Mystery.
Yon Camomill, when most it is pressed
(Observe fair Virgin) thrives the Best!
It tells Thee, it is the way to prove,
To admit the Pressure of thy Love.
See how yon Vine to the Wall Clings,
And propt, Observe, what fruits it brings!
It tells you if you would fruitful Be,
You must be propt, as well as She.
Yon Lovely Pippin there is spread.
Because the Sun it Kissed, with Red.
It tells thee that thy Lovers Kiss
Will make thy Cheek as red as His:
But stay, Fair Maid, yon Rosemary
Preferres an earnest suit to thee,
That you, would straight married be,
And he will Bequeath yon spriggs you see.
Stay then no longer; Meet thy Love,
And in thy Union Fruitful prove.
Virginity is little less,
Then affected Barrenness.
N. V.

Blessed Union! So have I seen
Two Stars, whose fires when having been
Divided, showed to the Vulgar eye
Like Common People of the sky,
With rays Conjoined dart forth a blaze
So bright, as made all eyes to gaze,
And Wonders to the World dispense
By this their doubled Influence.
Blessed Wilts! that never joynd'st a pair
More good, more gentle, sweet, or fair,
Whose veins swell with a richer flood,
Of nobler or more ancient blood.
In many Alembicks Gold's refined,
Before to Elixar it is sublimed.
N. W.

LAdy, when first, and last I saw you set
Grace of Great Baintun's Table, as you are yet.
Methought the guests more heartily fed by the eye;
To see their meat so carved did satisfy.
And something was in each man's thought, which told
Until this Instant would have bin too bold.
The general neglect of their rich fare,
Showed there was somewhat choycer, and more rare.
Not to be tasted though, so the chief dish
Was then (what now you will better know) a wish.
The wine which nimble Ganymeds still brought,
It was not to the Venison, but a Thought.
The Supper was a Project, and we fed
(As if we had the Rickets) in the Head.
Then were our Fancies, (Fancy's very Fleet)
Carried I know not where with Love-wing'd Feet:
Now into This, now That, great Family,
Sometimes the Portmans, Paulets, and then Fly
Unto Great Heles, and Smiths, and such trim dances,
Until at last we rested at Sir Francis.
Here it was time to stay, for next like you
Something was here, that did invite our view.
It was a Face the Purblind God had missed,
Venus reserved it to be private kissed.
By her own Lipp, and often smiled, and laughed
To see this Breast unhitt by ber Sons shaft.
The warmed youth strang'd at this unknown flame,
And knew not what it was, nor whence it came.
Venus was angry at his ignorance,
And in his strangeness lost her daliance.
Whereat she called her boy, (He Is never far)
To join that Planet unto This chaste star.
This was his business, his delight, his work;
And in an instant by his wonted lurk,
He wounds, inflames, unites this noble Pair,
And fills them full of Love, and Free from Care.
By This We hungry were, and straight fell too:
Yours is a Feast alike; so pray do you.
E. G.

ECLOGUE.
Damon: Phyllis. PRithee (Phyllis) Why this stay?
Loose these Rites, and loose the day*
See thou, how the Sun drives on,
As if (...) ^nt to dance anon?
Or rather Posted over his Light,
That he might make the longer Night.
See thou how the Rival Morn
With Roses does her Cheek adorn,
As if in this her blushing Pride
She were not Bride-Maid, but the Bride?
Hark, the sweet Birds are Tuning, Hark,
The warbling Thrush, the Early Lark
New Lays from one another Borrow,
And all to bid the Bride Good Morrow.
And thus they will Chaunt away the Light;
But mean to strip themselves at night
Of their soft down, to build a Nest
For the most equal Pair to Rest.
Why then (Phyllis) Why this stay?
Shall we only loose the day?
Phyllis. Rather my Damon, why this Have?
What matter though the Rites be Past?
Are there such joys, such Trophies won,
In seeing a Virgin-soule Undone?
Kind Swayne --

Damon. -- Fond Nymph, Blaspheme no more:
Natures dear self has deeply swore
A stepdame hate, against such as prove
Rebels to the pure Throne of Love.
Undone? weak Heretic! to give
Her lost for that, by which we Live!
Should all Breath Virgin thus, our Stage
Would turn to desert in one Age.
This; 'twould Undo the World, and Rate
The day of Doom before it is Date.
Nay, had thy Mother taught this Geere,
Sure (Phyllis) thou have never been here.
Undone? so is the Fragrant Rose,
When Plucked, it in her Bosom grows:
So is the Incense spoyld, when used
To perfume Heaven, because it is Bruised.
Diamonds may shine in their Own Mold,
Yet are more Worth when set in Gold.
Call'st thou then her Undone, that is Going
The way to thrive by her Undoing?
To Lodge two souls under One Roof;
To Live two Lives, two Lives of Proof;
To part with Maid, yet keep that Name;
(Chaste Wife and Virgin are the same)
To be all Jce, and yet all Fire;
To be Divided, yet Entire;
Be multiplied, yet be but One;
Call you me this to be Undone?
Now she may live as long as They
Of the First Age, a Live-long Day:
And when Nine hundred years are told,
She in her stock shall scarce be Old.
To be All Riddle thus, which none
Can solve but Death; nor He Alone;
Jf this be loss, if this be Woe,
O who would not be Undone so?
Without this Hymen-knot the Frame
Of Heaven and Earth had stood as Lame:
Both sexes make but Man: His Aid
Was Eve the Woman, not the Maid.
For else a Friend had Cheered his Life;
But God gives more then Friend, a Wife.
O Powerful Charm, which once put On,
Perfects the grand Creation!

Phyllis. Yet, Damon, once thou said to me
Jn Heaven we all should Virgins be.
Jf such Bliss rests of the Marriage Bed,
Pray tell me, why don't Angels Wed?
Is there that Petty joy can Miss
Them, who are sated with All Bliss?
Cease then to Woe with words not Even:
" The Wife Fills Earth, the Virgin Heaven.

Damon. True: but yet had thou never been Born,
Thou never should see the Eternal Morn.
How should Heaven fill with Virgins Worth,
Did not Earths Womb first bring them Forth?
And though in Heaven no Marrying be;
"Yet there the Bridegroom we shall see.

Phyllis. Thus far you Conquer: But to be
Robbed of my Native Liberty;
To loose my Holy Days, when the Swaynes
Trip it over the Carpet Plains;
Is this no Loss? Nay, there is no Gyves
(Say some that Tried) to the poor Wives.

Damon. Some such perhaps who strangely take
Girdles for Bonds; some such who make
Garters and shackles one; Dear Girl,
As if this Chain of Mother-Pearle.
Did Manacle thy Hands, that Ring
Captive thy Finger. Any thing
I Will grant my sweet but this. No More:
There is no Life to Hymen's Lore.

Phyllis. Suppose: yet can thou name a Doom
To the dread sorrows of the Womb?
Nomaea once Counted to me
The thousand Pangs she paid for Thee:
And if Swaynes cost thus dear, what Cares,
What Throbs buy Natures Choycer Wares?
The teeming Deaths of each sad Mother --
Damon J've done, Name such another

Dam. Come Come, Who would not pay some groans,
To buy the pretty little ones?
To be a Mother at no Rate --
Forbid it Heaven and awefull Fate.
But soft; They Come. So breaks the day
From mantled Night: so in full Ray
Shines the bright Sun, when from his bed
He donn's his Beams to deck his head.
The Rose though fair, would stain That Cheek:
Lillies look wan, nor bright, nor sleek
To her clear Front; where the warm snow
Of driven Jnnocence does grow;
While on her Cheek the Grain and Dye
Of Blushing Virtue Courts her Eye.
And then her balmy Lip nor Paint
Nor studied Verse can make more quaint.
So many sweets throng in that Face,
Each single would Create a Grace.

Phyllis. Yet had she more (if more can meet
Jn One) more Fair, more Pure, more sweet;
There Is He that will deserve her Tall
And Full-brim Graces, even All.
That Gate! that Look! -- Fair Maid, never grutch
Thy easy loss, that gain'st so much.
For if the Casket shine thus Clear,
How shines the Gemme that lodges there?
Help me, my Damon. Help, whilst I
Talassio and Talassio cry.

Dam. But did thou mark that smile? that Kiss?
That smile again, and That, and This?
See how they mingle souls; and dart
Their Eyes into each others heart.
So Jove embraced his Swan; that Twine
Darkens the long-fam'd Eglantine:
That living Wreath were it a Bough
Would fit some Conquering Caesar's Brow.
Nay Phoebus would forswear his Tree,
One day to be halfe-blessed by Thee.
See thou fair Nymph? --

Phyllis. -- Too much to move
My spring of Blood: Jf this be Love,
I do Recant: By the next Sun
I am quite Lost, if not Undone.

G. W.

Blessed Pair,
Whilst others rear huge Temples to your praise,
Give a poor Swain an Altar leave to raise
Of Wishes made. Success be Sacrifice,
And Time ye Priest, your Blis sweet gu^mes and spice.
So chaste a flame, possess each breast,
As that which fire's the Phoenix nest,
When she her self her self does Woo,
Being Husband, Wife, and Jssue too.
Sun light's supplied from your own eyes,
Both being Fire, Priest, Sacrifice.
And may't as long and lasting burn
As did the Lamp in Tullias Vrne.
May every look so graceful prove
As that, which first did make you love.
May she grow you, you her, both one,
Both multiplied by Union.
May you as large an issue see
As those, whom God bid Multiply.
And may each birth as easy pass,
As when you make your self in the glass.
And all so like the Mother be,
That she may think when first that she
Beholds the pretty infants face,
The Nurse has only brought the glass.
As years increase so may your love,
Like flames in Winter hottest prove.
When you're grown young in Progeny,
Sweetness be changed to Majesty.
(So Trees for pleasure and sweet shade
First set, at length were Temples made;
Delight became Religion
And love changed to Devotion.)
Your whole lives be one Wedding day.
(Winter's a Spring unto the Bay)
And when you are dead, may you b'esteemd by all
Loves saints, your Histories Canonical;
And Wives and Virgins yearly to your Tomb
As to Loves Altar in Procession come.
D. I. S.

N. U. P. T. I. A. L. E. T. F. E. L. I. C. I. T. A. T. I. A. D. C. O. N. N. U.
B. G. E. N. E. R. O. S. I. Ss.

H. R.

E. T. L. E. C. T. I. Ss.

A. B.

M. O. R. E. M. A. J. O. R. E. X. V. O. T. O. S. A. C. P. O. S. D. E. D. I. C.
G. C.


