Compendium Belli: OR THE TOVCHSTONE OF MARTIAL DISCIPLINE. Wherein is set
forth brief rules and Directions to take special notice of. The next of
Marches, Exercising of a Company, ordering of Muskaters, Imbattelling from 100.
unto 40000. The form of Encamping, with brief Notes belonging thereunto:
Plots of Fortifications and Forts: With the manner of Lading and blowing off
Great Ordnance, making of Granados. Also showing the Extraction of the square
Root, with a Table from 16. unto 10000. Likewise certain Questions of
Arithmaticke concerning Millitary Discipline: With a Table also for the
discovering of numbers by Rank and File. Virtus gloriam paret.

Witten by JOHN ROBERTS of Weston near Bath, Gent.

London printed by I. Norton and A. Mathewes. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable WILLIAM Earl of Pembrooke, Lord Herbert of Cardiffe,
Lo: Parre and Rosse of Kendall, Lo: Marmion and St. Quintin: Lord Warden of the
Staneries in the County of Deuon and Cornwall, of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, Knight: Chancellor of the University of Oxford, and Captain of the
Kings Majesty's Town and Castle of Portsmouth, and the Island of Portsey, Lo:
Chamberlain to his Majesty, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most
honorable Privy Council.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
BEing filled with a studious observation of your noble parts, and a
declaratory fame of the Virtues and Heroicke actions of your Fame-worthy
Progenitors, and those trans-mitted unto You by a successiue Lineall and
Hereditary right: so that that rare Conjunction of Castor and Pollux, Imeane,
Nobilitas, and Ortu, and Art, are both happily conjoined in your noble Person.
The Curious survey of the multitude of your Honorable parts bred in me a
number of desires: so that J have adventured to break the barren soil of my
unlucky Portion, that prosperous success should rather want to my endeauours,
then diligent endeauours to my loyal determination. My submissiue respect to
your noble and Heroicke Virtues have bin a presumptatiue cause to desire your
Lordships gracious Patronage of this my Compendium Belli, but how my
unworthiness may hope of your Goodness, J cannot find but in the notes of your
transcendent and generous disposition. Thus in the lowest humility of
affection, J offer both my self, and the Employment of my undeserving service,
freely to your Honors acceptance: and do desire both to be, and to appear to
be

Your Honors humblest and most devoted Servant JOHN ROBERTS.

To all Gentlemen and Lovers of the Art of War.
NOble and ingenious Reader, I have presented to the world, and to thy view
this Compendium, that thou with it may reap, that only, by thy intuitiue
speculation, which I have got by my laborious practice: I make no doubt, of thy
skill and knowledge herein, but that thou know, and have seen, this in thine
own practicke, by thy industrious travel; Which now thou see here in the
Theoricke, by my laborious pains. Therefore I desire your courteous censure in
the perusal of this Book: for if any thing be mistaken through equivocation
of words, or ambiguitie of sense, blame the fruitless rage of Destiny, that
carries the best shafts of my unlucky Quiver far distant from the white I
aimed at. I did it for the honor of my Country, and the general good of the
common weal: for which reasons, I hope it may pass without the molestation of
any of the unskillful: The Learned and Ingenious I honor; and willingly stand
to their censure; To the rest

Farewell.
Compendium Belli: OR THE TOVCHSTONE of Martial Discipline.
Principal and especial Rules for every Commander to be perfect in.
THose things that helps the Enemy greatly, annoyeth thee, and the same that
helps thee, hurts him.

He that is more careful and vigelant, to observe the cunning and polliticke
devises of the Enemy, and also takes most pains in the exercising his
Company, or Army, shall be sure to incur least perils, and may have greatest
hope of victory.

Never enterprise any dangerous encounter with thy Soldiers, but first by thy
policy, let there be given out, hope of victory.

It is better to conq^er the Enemy with famine, then with the sword; in the
victory of which, fortune may do much more then valor.

No plot or purpose is better then that which is hid from the Enemy, until it
be executed.

To know in the war how to understand occasion, and take it, more avails
then any thing.

Nature breeds few strong and valient men, but industry and exercise makes
many.

Discipline may do much more in time of battle, then fury.

If any of the Enemies Soldiers depart from them and fly to thee (so they
prove faithful) they shall be allwaies unto thee great gains, and stand thee
in great steed, for that the power of thy Enemies are thereby deminished, and
much more weakened, then of those that be slain, though the name of a Fugitive
be to old frinds odious, to new suspected.

Better it is in pitching the field, to reserve behind the first front aid
enough, then to make a big front, which will do great hurt, and disperse the
Companies.

He is difficultly overcome, which knows his own strength, and the power of
his enemies.

The valor of the Soldiers, more avails then the multitude.

Sometimes the situation helps more then valor.

New and sudden things make Armies affraide; slow and accustomed things be
little regarded: Therefore make thy Army practice; and know, with small
fightes a new enemy, before thou aduenterest to fight a field with them.

He that with disorder follows the enemy after that their order is broken,
will become of a Conqueror a Conquered.

He that prepares not necessary victuals, with all manner of Ammunition, is
overcome without the Sword.

He that trusts more in Foote-men then Horsemen, or in Horsemen more then
in Foote-men, must accomodate himself with the situation.

When thou would see if in the day there be come any Spy into the Camp,
make proclamation that every man go to his lodging, so shall you know your
own men from strangers.

Change purpose if thou perceiuest that thy enemy has foreseen it.

Consult with many about the things thou ought to do, the same thou will
after do, confer with few.

Soldiers when they abide at home, are mainteyned with fear and punishment;
after, when they are led to the war, with hope and reward.

Be sure the enemy know not how thou will order thy Army in battle; and
whatsoever manner sets the battle, make that the first Band be received off
first and second.

In fight never occupy the battle to any other thing then to the same for
which thou have appointed it, if thou meanest to make no disorder.

Sudden accidents are remedyed with difficulty, those that are thought upon
with facility.

Before thou bring thy Soldiers to give battle, cause them to be ranged in
form of battle, making of his Foote-men sundry Battalions, and of those
sundry fronts; to divide the Horsemen also in sundry troops, placing the
Lances, Light-horsemen, and Hargubusiers, every front in several troops by
themselves, to cause the forlorn to issue out, and skirmish them before the
battalions, as if the enemy were indeed present, and upon a retreat sounded
and beaten, suddenly to retire: The Horsemen to charge, and suddenly to
return again into their place; upon their retreat to cause certain sleeves
of Pikes, and light armed, to run out to their reskew, as though the enemy
did pursue them: Then the Battalions of the first front to march forward, and
charge the enemy, and suddenly after the sound of the retreat, to retire
themselves orderly, between the Battalions of the second front: Then the
second front must charge, and march forward together with the other that last
retired, and make head together upon the enemy.

Last of all, the light armed Foote-men and Horsemen must issue out, as it
were to do execution upon the enemy.

Whilst fair weather is, the General must acquaint the Soldiers to sleep
upon bare ground: Although the enemy be far absent, yet duly to maintain
the Skoutes, lay out their Pardues, set forth their Centryes, and perform all
manner of Millitary Orders, as curiously and carefully as if the enemy were
present: He must keep his Soldiers in continual exercise; and by feigned
Allarums, to see in what readiness his Forces would be (if necessity
required:) But if the enemy chance to cause any Allarum indeed, it is his
policy then to cause the Camp to be in arms by the sound only of the
Drumbestickes, or some other private watchword, or some Warning-peece, which
when the enemy perceiues that the Camp is in Arms without any manner of
Allarum, will much amaze and terrify them, to find them in such readiness,
daring them and their affronts.

Also, the General ought to show them all manner of ways how the enemy may
attempt them, discovering also to them their remedy, and how they are to
answer to those attempts; for no Man is borne a Soldier, but by exercise and
industry it is attained, and by discontinuance again it is lost, as all other
Arts and Sciences are.

You must have a special care, that the Army have not in their faces the dust
to blind them, the wind to disturb them, or the Sun beams to annoy them,
before they enter into any maine Encounter; the which Impediments, not only
altogether, but each one by himself alone, does bring great toil, trouble,
and disadvantage.

The form of several Marches.
depiction of military formations.

IF you mean to exercise a Company, you must bring them into this form. viz.
The Muskatiers must be placed on both sides of the Pikes, five Files on one
side, and five on the other, the Pikes ten deep, and so many square in the
middle.

To your Right Hand.
First note, that before you begin to exercise the Company, you first command
them to advance their Pikes, and to shoulder their Muskets: Then you have no
more to do, but to cause them to turn to their Right Hand, which is thus;
They must not remove their Left leg from the ground, but turue upon it, and
remove only the Right, to make the Right hand File the Front, as you see in
this Figure.

As you were.
As you turned to your Right, so in the same manner you must turn back to
your Left, keeping your Left leg still upon the ground, until you come even
with the Front.

depiction of military formations.

To the Left Hand.
Because the Enemy may sometimes Charge on the Left Hand Flank; Therefore,
that you may be sudainely ready to defend your selves, and offend them; and for
diverse reasons besides, this Motion is used: And to do it, you must move with
your Right Foot, until your Faces front toward the Left Flank, your Left
Foot not moving from the place where it stood before, but turning.

As you Were.
Then having performed the aforesaid Motion, the Captain commands, As you
wear, and then they move all toward the Right Hand, until they are turned
to the first Front, moving upon the same Foot you did before.

To the Right Hand About.
This Motion is used, when the Enemy does Charge in the Rear; then keep your
Left Foot still, and turn to the Rear, and Charge, or otherwise for exercise.

depiction of military formations.

To the Left Hand as you were.
Having performed the former Motion, the Captain commands them, To the Left
hand as you were, the Left Foot remains fixed, until their faces be turned
to the former front.

To the Left Hand about.
Sometimes it is more convenient to turn to the Left Hand then to the Right,
therefore this Motion is used, the Left Leg still standing.

To the Right hand as you were.
It is but turning toward your Right Hand, until you come to the former Front.

depiction of military formations.

Ranks to your Right Hand Double.
This Motion is only used, to double and strengthen the Front; and thus it is
done, all in the second Rank, march up in the first; and first, they must set
forward the Right Leg, and then the Left, making but two Paces to the Front,
and so the Fourth, the Sixth, the Eight, and Tenth Rank, must likewise do all
at one instant.

Ranks to your Left Hand as you were.
Having performed the former Motion, you turn about at the Word of Command,
and set forward your Left Foot, and so make two Paces, coming into your form
again, all at one instant.

Ranks to your Left Hand double.
This is almost all one as you did with the Right, save you must set forward
your Left Leg first, and put your self on the Left Hand of your Leader.

depiction of military formations.

Ranks to your Right Hand as you were.
You must first t^rne to your Right, because you will come the better into your
place; and then set forward your Right Foot, it is more seemly and Soldier
like by much then any other way.

Because you see there is an odd File of Muskatiers, you must place the
Muskatiers all to the Right Flank, and it is easily done thus, causing the
Left Wing to stand still, and the rest to move one pace forwards; then the
word of Command is; Left Flank to the Right Hand, and march through thy
Files, which with ease is to be done.

Files to your Right Hand double.
There is occasion sometimes to strengthen the Flanks, and then they use this
word of Command, which is no more to perform then this, if it be to the Right
Hand; then the Right Flank stands still, and the next File doubleth it, that
is, fall just behind his Side-man, in File with him; Then the Third, Fifth,
Seventh, and every other stands: Remember that you must make them do it all at
one motion together.

depiction of military formations.

Files as you were.
All those that doubled, return into their proper places, by setting their
left Leg first to pace: Remember when you double to your right hand, you put
your right Leg forward, and when on the left, your left Leg, and so
backwards.

Files to your Left Hand double.
This motion differs little from the other, save that the left flancke do
stand still, and the Second doubles it in this action; in doubling the left
Leg, goes to double, and the right coming back.

Files as you were.
Is just as the other was, save they fall back to the right hand, with the
right leg.

depiction of military formations.

Having performed the doubling of Files, which was don with the Shot in the
Right Hand Flanck of the Pikes: Now you must place them as they were before,
one half on the Right Flancke, the other on the Left of the Pikes.

Half Files to your Right Hand, Double your Ranks.
This must be done by the sixth Rank, and you must do it at ten Paces thus;
First with your Right Leg set forward, you must March forward, and advance your
Ground toward the Front, all the Rank observing the Right Hand Leader, and
so move altogether to the Front, with whom you must Rank; observing likewise
that when you thus begin to double, you Advance your Pikes, and when you have
doubled the Front, Order your Pikes, the Sixth must rank with the First, the
Seventh with the Second, the Eight with the Third, and so all the rest.

depiction of military formations.

When you have performed the former Motion, they must turn to the Right Hand,
which is more graceful and comely, with the Right Foot set forward, and so
Retreat to the Rear, at ten Paces more, observing your Left Hand, and then
you will be tenn deep again as you were.

Half Files to your Left Hand, Double your Ranks.
There is no difference, but only that the half Files must march up to the
Left Hand of the Files that stand.

Half Files to the Right Hand, As you were.
The half Files advance their Pikes, and falls back with their Right Leg,
to be clear of their Sidemen, and so march into their proper places.

depiction of military formations. Half Files to your Right Hand, as you were.
Half Files to your Left Hand, double your Ranks.
Half Files to the Right Hand, as you were.


Files to your Right hand Countermarch.
When a Charge is expected in the Rear, and it being thought convenient to
have the Leaders of the Files in the places of the bringers up, because they
are men best able to receive the Enemy. The Leaders advancing with their Right
Leg turned to the Right Hand, and march down toward the Rear, all the body
of the Company, moving together: for when the first Filers turn, the Second
aduanceth in their places, and does the like, and so Third, Fourth, and Fifth,
etc. There is also another kind of Countermarch, which is called the
Lacedemonian Countermarch, which is for the First Rank to Face toward the
Rear; the Second, and all the rest of the Body to March up, and turn behind
their Leaders, you may Countermarch likewise by Ranckes as you do by Files.

depiction of military formations. Files to your Right Hand, Countermarch.


Files to your Right Hand Countermarch.
This motion differs nothing in the world from the other, for you must turn
up on the same Hand again, and advance with the Left Leg, and turn to the
Right Hand, and then you March just in the place you were in before.

Close your Files both ways at a Foot and Half.
If a Charge of Horse be expected, then the Foot are to be in the closest
Order, which is one Foot and a Half in File, and there in Rank.

Close your Ranckes to three Foot.
Which is nothing else, but to Pace on to the Sword point, which is the just
distance of Three Foot,

depiction of military formations. Close your Files a Foot and a half.
Close your ranks to three Foot.


Ranckes to the Right Hand wheel.
If the Enemy Charge on the Right Hand Flancke, to receive them with the most
able men which are commonly in the Front, it may be thus performed; the Leader
of the Right Hand File stands fixed, only turning his body, and the rest
move upon him as the Center, observing still the distance and straightness of
their Rancks and File, without which, this motion will not be performed
gracefully.

Rancks to your Left Hand wheel.
There is no difference in the performance of this motion, and the latter, but
that the Left Hand Leader stands, and the rest wheels toward him.

Ranckes to the Right Hand wheel upon a Center.
All to the Right Hand of the middle of the Front go backwards, and on the
Left forwards.

Rancks to the Left Hand wheel upon the Center.
All the Left Hand of the Center wheels backwards, and the right forwards.

Ranks to your Right Hand Wheel.

Ranks to your Left Hand Wheel.

Ranks to your Right Hand wheel upon the Center.

Ranks to your Left hand, wheel upon the Center.

Open your Ranckes backward.
To open the Banckes, understand that the Front or First Rank stands still,
and the other nine Ranckes fall backwards altogether, until the Second Rank
be Six Foot distant from the first, and then it stands still: so likewise
must you do with all the Ranckes, until they be distant six foot one from
another.

Open your Files both ways.
In opening your Files, half the body move toward the right hand, and half
toward the left hand ingrosse, and then the two middlemost files when they are
three foot distant, stand still, and the rest of the body continues moving
both ways until the next two files, are distant three foot more, and so of
all the rest.

Here you are in your Order as you were at first, three foot in File, and six
foot in Rank.
depiction of military formations. Open your ranks Backwards.
Open your Files both ways.


How to exercise Muskatieres.
First Rank give Fire, and Countermarch to the Rear.
First, you must understand that they must be three foot in file, and three
foot in rank, and then the Captain gives the Word of Command, and they
Countermarch to the rear, and there rank: note always that you Countermarch
still to the right hand, and never to the left: this is done standing, and
therefore loses ground; some will say Countermarching with Muskets in
skirmishing is improper, but I say it is as the situation is, for if you have
but little ground to make a front, and have a bigg front to oppose you, then
you may use Countermarching, because you have not ground enough for to fight by
divisions.

The Second Order.
You must make a division in the midst, of six foot, then the Captain
commands first and second ranks, make ready, and then Marches with them some
six paces from the front, and then says, First rank give fire, which when
they have performed, they Marchone half through the Division, and the other by
the right flancke to the Rear.

depiction of military formations. First Rank give Fire and Countermarch to
the Rear.
First and second Ranks make ready: First Rranke give Fire, etc.


The Third Order.
As you did before, so you must do now, but that as soon as you have drawn
out the two first rancks, and when the first is come in place to present, you
may use this Word of Command, Second Rank to your right hand, Double your
Front, and give Fire then as you were: Lastly, let them March one half through
the Division, and the other by the right hand flancke, as before to the rank
in the rear; observe that as soon as the first falls off to the rear; the
second immediately follows, and this demonstration is of gayning ground, for
the body is still marching softly forward.

The Fourth Order.
The Company retreating, the Captain says to the last rank, To the right
hand about and give Fire, and then they rank in the rear, and performs the
same, the one half marches through the Division, and the other by the right
hand flancke, to the front, and so by the last rank continually; this is an
order of loosing ground.

The Fifth Order.
Upon your Retreat, the Enemy following hard near you, to annoy them, you
cause the last rank to doubl^ the rear still, and give Fire, which before
you gave Fire with ten; now you do with twenty, and so done, they March in
their places as before.

depiction of military formations. Second Rank to the right Hand double your
Front, and give Fire.
Last Rank to the right Hand about, and give fire.
Last Rank to the right Hand about, double your Rear, and give Fire.


The Sixth Order.
To this Order you must make no Division at all, and when you have given Fire
according to the Word of Command, you must cause them to stand still, only
turning their faces to the front, and prime upon their Rests, and when the
other File is clear of the right flank, they perform the like, I mean,
turn to the right hand, and give fire; then instantly the right flank
Marches up to the front of that File, and the other File primeth upon their
Rest the while, and so all the Files does the like: note that the body still
Marches, this Order is used when you are Charged upon the right flank.

The Seventh Order.
This order is all one with the last, save that the flank as soon as they
have given fire, the one half marches through the Division, and the other by
the rear, and ranks in the left flank, just as they were before; so the
second, third, and all the Files, one after another gives fire.

You must cause the first rank to give fire, and stand, then the second rank
does March up through the first rank and Files with them, and gives fire, and
so of all the rest: note that as soon as the second rank begins to move, the
body all moves up to the same distance, as their Order was at first.

depiction of military formations. Right Flank to the right Hand, and give
fire: Prime on your Rests.
Right Flank to the right Hand, and give fire.


The Eighth Order.
Closing your Division, you cause the Company to March, and command them, make
ready all together, then you give the Word of Command to them, as soon as they
have discharged, they must Countermarch to the rear; this Order is getting
ground, all one with the first Order, save one marches and gets ground, the
other stands and loses ground.

The Ninth Order.
The Captain commands them to make ready altogether, then says to the first
rank, Give fire, which done, the one half of the Pikes marches through the
midst of the body, which for that end is divided, every man falling into his
own File; this Order is standing, and moves only by ranks.

The Tenth Order.
As you are marching, the right flank stands still, and the second File, which
is next unto doubles him, and then they turn to the right hand, and gives
fire, presently upon that they fall into their first Order, and primes upon
their rest, until the rest of the Company be clear of them, and then the two
utmost files again does the like; look upon the sixth Order, and there is no
difference, but only still in doubling the flanckes.

depiction of military formations. First Rank give Fire and Countermarch to
the Rear.
First Rank give Fire.
First File to your right Hand, double your Flank, and give fire.


The Eleventh Order.
This Order differs nothing from the last, but only the action must be
performed on the left hand.

The Twelfth Order.
First, you must cause the second rank to double the first; then command
them as they were; next, make them two ranks to Countermarch: so of all the
rest.

The Thirteenth Order.
Let the first rank give Fire, and Countermarch, the second must March up
where the front was before, and give fire as the first did, and so of all the
rest.

depiction of military formations. First File to your left Hand, double your
Flank, and give fire.
First and second Rank make ready, second Rank double your Front, and give
Fire.
First Rank give Fire, and Countermarch to the Rear.


The Fourteenth Order.
The second, third, and fourth Ranks, must March up, and give Fire, and
Countermarch; so likewise the same Word of command, must be used still to
make them fall into a square, so shall you have a square Battalia out of a
Diamond, thus.

The Fifteenth Order.
To this Order, there is no more but command them give fire, and Countermarch,
and they will fall into the same Order as they did before, if you would get
ground, they must March, if loose ground, they must stand still.

The Sixteenth Order.
Look in the fifteenth Order, and as you did that, so must you do this
without any alteration, observing that eight give fire at one time, and no more.

depiction of military formations. Right and left hand files of the second,
third, and fourth Rank march up, give fire, and countermarch to the Rear.
First Rank give fire, and Countermarch.
First Rank give fire and Countermarch to make a Square.


The Seventeenth Order.
The ranks must be ten foot asunder if the files be five, if six, then they
must be twelve, and as soon as you have given the word of Command, they fall
into one file, the right hand flank standing still, only turning his face to
the right hand, and so likewise if any occasion serve, you may perform it on
the left hand, as follows in the next Order.

The Eighteenth Order.
The same Order you observed on the right, the like must you do on the left;
remember that the files when they do this, must be in their closest Order:
also if you have any occasion, you may do it both ways at once by making a
division in the midst, the word of Command, is Ranks to your right and left
hand, by Conversion, but then your files must be even, as four, or six, or
eight, or any other even number, the which is performed in the next following
Order.

Ranks to your right and left hand by Conversion.
This Order is done by making a division in the middle, to charge the Enemy
upon both flanks, or for to make a lane for great Ordnance, to play between
them, and is no more but to cause them to be done at once, just as the former
is, only you must turn to the right and left hand in your Conversion. Some
do hold that the proper word is, Wheel to the right and left hand, now you
are acquainted with both, choose of the two which you list.

Ranks to the right Hand by Conversion and give fire.
Ranks to your left Hand by Conversion and give Fire.
Ranks to your right and left Hand by Conversion, and give Fire.


Deuisions of Pikes and Muskatieres to your right and left hand by Conversion.
Make two deuisions of Pikes, and two of Muskets, then the Pikes next to the
right hand division, of that must turn to the right flank of Muskatieres by
Conversion, and the Pikes next the left flank of that, must convert themselves
to that division, and the Shot also, as they did in the precedent Order, so
shall you make of twenty files but four files only.

The Twentieth Order.
If you please you may discharge by doubling your ranks, or by fingling; as
you see occasion you must command them to make ready altogether, this Order is
of great force.

depiction of military formations. Deuisions of Pikes and Muskatiers to your
Right and Lelft hand by Conversion.
Frontiers give fire, and fall off through Deuisions.


How to reduce a Diamond out of a Square, and also out of a Diamond, into a
trianguler form.
If you are disposed to turn a square into a Diamond, look upon this figure,
and you may easily perform it, it is no more but to turn their faces to him
that leads the right or left hand file, and so march with the Corner forwards:
Likewise out of a Diamond to make suddenly a triangle: first I as you see
marches up to make even with D and K, then N O, the rest as you see it
performed in the figure: note that any just square will make a Diamond, and out
of a Diamond a triangular fashion, and no other number will make them but a
just square.



The reason I set down here so many several sorts of Battalias, is, because
you must when you Imbattell, order them according to the situation, wherefore
you cannot observe one order, therefore as you find cause take choice, for
variety is never hurtful.
The first Battalia of Pikes and Muskets.
The square that you see marked with A, must be 49. Pikes, seven times seven,
and three in the rear; the two flanks marked with B 18. a piece, which are
three files, and six deep, the rear C seven files, and three deep.

100.
The square A in the second Battalia, is 49. whose root is seven, the front B
is seven files and three deep; the two flanks C are three files a piece, and
six deep.

204.
The Diamond in the midst A, must be 84. beginning first with two, next with
four, and so Diamond wise, until you come unto 84. the four crosses B,
flanks 30. a piece, five in file, and six deep.

depiction of military formations.

200.
The Border that must go round the square A, must contain 90. Pikes, the
uppermost must have 11. Files, and three deep, the lowermost as many, placed
in the same manner, flankt with three Files, and four deep, the odd you must
place in the front and rear, which are ten: the wings of Muskets B are four
Files, and ten deep, at the front and rear of the Pikes C, are five Files,
and two deep: when you see cause, the Shot may retire in within the Pikes,
and when you list issue out again; the midst of the Battalia marked with D are
empty for the Shot to retire in.

301.
The front A, rear C, and both wings B and D are Muskateres, the last rank of
Muskets (I mean of every flank) are mixed and rankt with Pikes, there are
three Files of Muskets eleven deep, the Pikes E are 13. square, charging to
every corner of the Battalia, as you may perceive by the form of the Battalia;
when you please the Shot may retreat in within the Pikes, from any noyance of
Horse.

depiction of military formations.

392.
The square A of Pikes twenty ranks, the files ten, which is 195. the half
Diamonds B in the front and rear 36. a piece, the ground rank eleven, the
next nine, and so until they be 36. the six wings C on the flanks twenty,
each one five files, and four deep.

400.
The long square of Pikes A are ten ranks, the files twenty, the both flanks
B of Muskets 80. four files, and ten deep, the six loose wings C 120. four
files, and five deep, the Ensigns in all manner of Battalias in the midst.

depiction of military formations.

506.
The Pikes A sixteen square, the Forlorn Hope B 55. that is four ranks, and
eleven in file, the rear C as much more, the four small wings D in the
corners fifteen a piece, five files and four deep, the four other wings E
in the flanks are five Files, and four deep also.

600.
The two squadrons of Pikes A and B, are 144. a piece, eighteen Files, and
eight deep, which amount unto 288. the twelve odd Pikes place in the rear of
the last division of Pikes, the deuisions of Shot in the front C, are 64. a
piece, that is sixteen files and four deep, the flanks D are eight files,
and fourteen deep, which are 236. the four odd place in the rear.

depiction of military formations.

511.
The Pikes A are 21. files, and thirteen deep, the two half Diamonds B 49. a
piece, the four small wings at the corners C fifteen a piece three files, and
five deep, the four greater D are twenty files, and four deep.

714.
The Pikes A are eighteen square, and the remainder 26. the wings of Shot
marked with B are eight, six files, and eight deep a piece.

750.
The two long squares A B of Pikes in the midst, are 180. each one five files
and eighteen deep, and ten odd Pikes, the two flanks of Muskets C are 90.
a piece six files, and fifteen deep, the four long squares D in the front
180. that is 45. a piece, five files, and nine deep.

depiction of military formations.

800.
The Pikes A B C D are 400. twenty files, and five deep, 100. in every
squadron, the wings of Shot E fifty a piece, five files, ten deep: this Order
and all the rest where you see the Shot placed round about the Pikes, are to be
used where you are surrounded by the Enemy.

900.
The Pikes A are 21. square, and nine odd, the Muskatieres must be 108. in
every square 8, 36* that is six square, the long squares C 36. more, four
files, and nine deep, which are in all 444. the odd six.

depiction of military formations.

1500.
The great squadron A of Pikes 27. square, the rear B of Shot 300. thirty
files, and ten deep, the Forlorn Hope C fifty, five files, and ten deep,
the four other wings D 100. which is ten square, there are thirty odd Pikes.

2000.
The four long squadrons of Pikes A are 250. a piece, twenty files, and ten
deep, the four long squares B of Muskets, are ten files, and twelve deep,
which are 480. the six lesser C which are in the Forlorn Hope and rear, are
nine a piece square, the two little squares D are eight a piece, two in files,
and four deep.

depiction of military formations.

1000.
The square A in the middle are 22. Pikes every way, the half Moons B are
100. a piece, files five, and ten deep, in one division, the long wings C in
the midst of the half, Moons are six files, four deep.

1200.
The four squares or squadrons A B C D of Pikes, are 144. a piece, twelve
square, the odd Pikes are 24. the four triangular squadrons E of Shot, are
72. a piece, the ground rank sixteen, the next fourteen, and lessen every
rank by two, which four wings or squadrons are 288. the four long squares F
are 77. a piece, seven files, and eleven ranks, and four odd Muskatieres
vnplaced.

depiction of military formations.

4500.
The two squares A B must be thirty three a piece square, the remainder of
Pikes are 36. the two flanks of Shot C, 300. a piece, twelve files, and twenty
five deep, the four wings D in the front 361. a piece, nineteen square, the
rear E are 206. Pikes, twenty files, and ten deep, there are six odd Pikes.

The great square A must be fifty square, every one of the wings B 200. a
piece, ten file, and twenty deep, the small wings in the front and rear C,
which are squares, are 196. a piece, fourteen square, the four lesser wings D
in the right, and left hand flank, are 56. a piece, seven files, and eight
deep, and one odd Muskatiere.

depiction of military formations.

3000.
The Pikes A which are in the midst, I mean the long square are thirty files,
and fifty deep, which are 1500. the two flanks C D of Muskets on the right
and left of the Pikes are 420. each one, that is six files, and 70. deep, the
two squares at the front and rear D are also 600. ten files, and thirty deep,
there are 60. shot remaining, which must be placed in the front or rear.

4000.
The squadrons of Pikes innermost, A are fifteen square, and the odd Pikes
are 224. which are placed in the midst to guard the Ensigns, the Shot are all
in the outside, and are as many more square; likewise the remainder of them are
208. if you note it, the Muskets may issue or retreat in within the Pikes upon
any occasion, also the remainder of Pikes and Shot, may be placed in the midst
C to guard the Ensigns.

depiction of military formations.

6000.
The long squares that are like unto a Cross, are 510. a piece, fifteen in
file, and 35. ranks, which are four of them, that is in all 2040. the long
squares B adjoining, are ten files, and 24. deep; the eight squares C that
you see placed by the heads of the Crosses, a^e Muskatieres, and are thirteen
files, and fourteen deep, 48. remaining, the twelve other wings D that are
placed betwixt the heads of the Crosses are 126. a piece, nine files, and
fourteen deep; but out of the 48. odd men, you must borrow twelve to make up
your full number.

6690.
The four middle squadrons of Pikes A B C D are 860. a piece, 43. files, and
twenty deep, the ^wo flanks E of Muskatieres, are thirty files, and ^^fty
deep, the two bigger squares F in the front, (...) one hundred a piece, ten
square, the least G, at ^^e head of them two are fifty, five files, and ten
^eepe.

depiction of military formations.

9000.
The eight squares A in the midst, are 460. a piece, two files, and 28. deep,
the odd Pikes are sixteen, all the out wings noted with B are Muskatieres,
twenty files, and 28. deep, and as many Shot vnplaced, the Shot may retire
through the lanes and galleries of the Pikes, then may the Pikes join the
longest ways together, and make a just square to inuiron the Pikes; and again
when you see cause, form your selves after this manner again to skirmish with
your Shot, this fashion may be used with any number.

10000.
All those squares you see within the circle noted with A B C are squadrons of
Pikes, the four great long squares must be 936. a piece, 36. files, and 26.
deep, the four other long squares B are 206. a piece, twenty files, and ten
deep, the squares at the corners C are 100. a piece, ten square. The Shot
are all placed without the circumference noted with D, and do contain 24.
wings that will do service all at one time without the hinderance one of
another, two hundred each one, ten files, and twenty deep, the remainder two
hundred: upon any occasion, the wings of Shot may retire within the squadrons
of Pikes, and the Pikes but straighten their squadrons, will make a just square
to secure and inpall the Shot from any anoyance of Horse.

depiction of military formations.

11000.
The half Moon Battalia A is 5400. twenty files, and 270 deep, the odd
hundred is placed in the square B within the half Moon, to shut up the
Muskets, when the fury of the Horse shall force them to retreat within the
Pikes, the two longest squares C are 1000 a piece, twenty files, and fifty
deep, the four other long squares D are 34 files, and 22 deep, and eight
vnplaced, the four lesser wings E in the middle of the fourelast named, are
120 a piece, eight files, and twelve deep, besides twenty vnplaced.

12000.
The two middle most squadrons with the four corner squadrons marked with P
are Pikes, the other six marked with M are Muskets, and are 1000 a piece,
wanting 39 each squadron and wing, which are in all 468, those you may employ
for the guard of the Artillery, or in small wings at your pleasure.

depiction of military formations.

14000.
The three Battalias or Squadrons of Pikes A are in the midst, and are 2310 a
piece, 77 files, and thirty deep, the odd Pikes 70, the Forlorn B and rear
1750 a piece, 70 files, and 25 deep, the four flankers C are 870 a piece, ten
files, and 57 deep, there are twenty Muskatieres to be spared, the Hargabusers
D are 200, Lances E 200, and the light Horse F as many.

16000.
The great square A in the middle is 77 square, which some is 5929, and 71
vnplaced, the utmost Pikes B that do impall, the four squares, and the eight
long squadrons of Shot are 2000, five in file, and 100 deep, the Forlorn Hope
are 2100, one hundred in every square, the rear 2000 more squared, as the
others are half Diamond way, the four squares D in the corners are 96 a
piece, fourteen square, there are sixteen vnplaced, the eight long squares
are 385, each one 77 files, and five deep: The Horse E 6000, a thousand in
each wing.

depiction of military formations.

20000.
The four squadrons A in the midst, are 961 a piece, that is 31. square, the
Impall B are 4000 which is ten files, and 100 deep, the squares C that comes
from the Impalment B to the four squares A in the midst, are 1600, one hundred
in every square, the long square I in the foot is 300, ten deep, and 30
files, the remainder 356 to guard the Ordnance, the flanks D E and rear of
Shot 3000, ten files, and 100 deep, the Forlorn Hope G 3000, an hundred each
one; the four squares H as the corners 441, twenty one square a piece, the
remainder 236, you may use as many Horse as you please, and place them at the
letter K.

22000.
The triangular Forlorn Hope A are 3600, a hundred in every square, the two
wings B 800 a piece, the rear C triangular form 2800, the wings D are also
800 a piece, the long squares E that flank the Pikes 1400, which are 700 a
piece, seven files, and 100 deep, the four squadrons marked with F of Pikes,
are 10304 each one, are 1156, which are 24 square, the Horse G 1000 a piece,
and upon any occasion the rear may march up through the lanes and galleries of
the Squadrons of Pikes, to assist the Forlorn, and the Forlorn to retire
back, the odd Pikes are to close in the galleries of Pikes, and to defend the
Shot from the anoyance of the Enemies Horse.

depiction of military formations.

30400.
Every one of the little squares are 100 men, ten square, the long squadrons of
Pikes A 2500 a piece, 25 files, and 100 deep, the four corners B, which are
like right angles, are 1000 a piece, fifty files, and twenty deep, the squares
C in the corners, are 225 a piece, fifteen square, the remainder are 100, by
the figure here placed, you may plainly see how the Muskatieres may issue out,
and again retire in within the Pikes, upon any occasion as they see good, and
upon any occasion the squadrons of Pikes A B C, may inuiron them in, and
preserve them from the assault and fury of the Horse.

24000.
The Impall A is 133 deep, and fifteen files, which is 5985, the Vanguard of
Pikes B, which are eight squadrons, are 37 files, and ten deep, which are 370
each one, which in all the eight squadrons are 2960, the reareward C are
divided into four squadrons, ^4 files, and ten deep each one, which are 750 a
piece; the total of them four are 3000, the remainder 55. Each of the wings
of Shot which are 120 wings, are 100 a piece, ten square, the Horse D 6000, a
thousand in each Troop.

depiction of military formations.

40000.
The three Squadrons ABC of Pikes, are 4000, 100 files, and forty deep, the
Impalls D also are 4000 a piece, forty files, and 100 deep, the four wings of
Shot in the Forlorn Hope, are 961 a piece, 31 square, the five wings F in the
front of the first Division of Pikes, are 1000 a piece, twenty files, and fifty
deep, the reareward G are 1060, that is 53 files, and twenty deep, the utmost
Impalls H are 5000 a piece, fifty files, and 100 deep, the remainder of Shot
are 96: you may use as many Horse as you please, and place them in the squares
noted with I.

depiction of military formations.

The proportion of a Camp, or Camps.
I Will only at this time set down some few particulars concerning
Encamping; note that you ought not to be ruled by the situation of any place,
but let the situation be ruled by you, by which means you may keep always
one manner of Encamping, which is a great benefit, for thereby the Soldiers by
that means will be almost able, their own selves to know where they must build
their Hutts, especially those that are near the Generals lodging, and those
of the utmost works: note that where the situation wants strength, you must
supply the same with Art and industry: take heed likewise that wheresoever you
encampe, you foresee that there be room enough to range your Bands according
to your own desired Discipline. And because it is wisdom to divide the Armed
from the Unarmed, I would therefore separate the men that be comberd with any
thing from the vncombred. Therefore I would lodge all, or the greatest part of
the Armed men on the side toward the East, and unarmed, and the combred on the
West side, making East the head, and West the back part of the Camp, and
South, and North, the flanks. The Artillery I would dispose a long the bank of
the Trench, and in the space that should remain toward the West, I would
lodge the impedement of the Camp, and note that forthwith with cords and
staves you may ordain every man his lodging, especially if you make (as I said
before) your Camp one way. A General should not so much seek to place his
Camp in seats strong by nature, as to fortify them by Art, as well to keep
his Soldiers from idleness (the only ruin of Armies) as also that due order in
Camps may be maintained: therefore immitate the ancient Romans, the very
Schoolemasters of the Art of War, who never coueted other then the plain to
Camp upon, entrenching themselves nightly in as strong and sure manner, as if
the Enemy had encamped by them, and that even in places utterly void of all
suspicion, to make these Millitary travails familiar unto them, and to avoid
those idle, or rather dissolute effrenate pastimes, that our Christian Camps
are still too much bewitched and sorted withal, to the utter ruin of all good
Millitarie Discipline, and confusion of our Armies. In settling of a Camp,
besides the commodities of Wood, Water, and Forage, you must also consider how
victuals may safely come, and leave no Castles at your back to annoy you, but
that you seek to possess them ere you march forward, for great is the
annoyance that a little pile at the back of an Army may do as well against
Forragers, as to cut off Victualers from the Camp. And thus much for Encamping.

Shape of a military camp.

The strongest and perfects fashion of all other for the building of a Curtain
or Wall of a Town or Fort.
THE Circular fashion is counted the best, so that the Curtains or Walls be
made straight, and of such length, that of the Bulwarks they may be flanked,
which fashion being made of many Corners, is most meet, if it be erected in a
sufficient place, otherwise not, for there it must be builded with few
Corners, else the one Bulwark will hurt the other: Therefore the farther that
they be made distant from the Bulwark (the duelength of the Curtain being
kept) so much the blunter the corners will come to be, which by them must be
defended, and the more of those Corners that are there in the same fashion, so
much the blunter they shall also come to be; likewise the more men they may
have to defend them, and more commodious space within for to retire, with great
and strong fortifications, and the plot forms may be made much further in,
and have the corners of their Bulwarks blunt, with a large back, meet for
defense, and in an assault much surer then the sharp, because the sharp
pointed Bulwark being batterd, defends the Enemy from the platformes, so
that under the same, being covered, he may almost out of danger make an
assault, where against a Fortress, after the fashion of these plots, following
in whatsoever part of such places the Enemy should anproach marching toward
them, to encampe, or in Battle ray to assault them, or with Trenches, and
Artillery to batter them, either high or low, or by Curraine within, or
otherwise, he shall always from many of those flankers of the same place, be
greatly hurt and repulsed, and of the platformes, especially more then from any
other where, because they be most near, and stand higher then any other, and
they shall also hurt him more when he shall be somewhat far off then near
hand, as may be seen by the plain plot, that has the number three; and so
much concerning Fortifications for this time.

Shapes of fortifications.

The manner that is used of Lading and blowing of great Ordnance.
FOrasmuch as if the Gunners should chance to be slain, or otherwise lacking,
to the intent that every Soldier, in the time of need, may know how to serve
in their places, I have thought good to show someting of the manner of Lading
Blowing off, and Disparting of a Piece of Ordnance. Some do take parts of
Powder, some half, and others above parts; but that Piece must be well
fortified that may, or will safely blow out parts of Powder of the weight of
the Bullet. After you know the quantity of Powder, you must put in the soul or
concaue of the Piece the said quantity, with the Ladle, and then when the Ladle
comes to the Coil, turn about your hand, and the Powder will be left behind,
then pull out the Ladle, and turn the other end, and ramm it in softly, then
wadd it afterward, and last put in your Bullet, and wadd him likewise. But
note that before you do any of these things, you get the dispart of the Piece,
which is no more to do then to put a wyre into the touchhole of the Piece, to
the lower part of the concaue, then mark how high the wyre bears upon the
quoile, which marked, pull him out, and place him at the mussell to the bottom
of the Concaue there, and make your Dispart just as high as the notch was at
the touchhole: afterward place the quoile and the top of the Dispart in an
even line to the uppermost mark: Thus have you the true Horizontall line, or
line of Level; now for quick dispatch you may make cartreges of Paper, or
Linen baggs, and put a full Charge of Powder in them: So may you make a hole
with a Gunners gimlett into the Cartrege, then prime with fine Corner powder,
which is more readier to blow him off: and when have requires, you may be the
sooner ready upon any occasion. Also Wine or Vinegar are the best things to
cool any Piece of Ordnance when they are hott.

Questions and Rules concerning Great Ordnance.
IF a Saker at Point blancke convey her Bullet 300. paces, and at the best of
her random shoot 1500. what will that Cannon do, which at point blanke
shootes 360. paces.

Multiply 1500. by 360. and divide it by 300. your question is answered.

If a Saker of 4. Inches Diameter weigh 1600. pound weight, what will a
Culuerin weigh of 6. Inches Diameter

Multiply the Diameter Cubically, then say, if 64. give 1600. what will 216.
give: Multiply 216. by 1600 your question is resolved.

If a Cannon at point blanke range 300 paces, and at the best of her Random
shoot 1500 paces, how far shall she shoot at the mount of one Degree.

Abate 300 from 1500, rests 1200 which divided by 45 the quotient is 26 so many
paces shall she shoot at every degree.

If a Cannon of 10 foot long be shot at a mark 700 yeards from the Piece, the
dispart being planting an inch wide, how far shall the bullet light wide of
the mark.

Look how many times the length of the Cilender or Concaue of the Piece is to
the mark, so many inches shall the Piece shoot amiss, being laid over or
under one inche, if the wind be not to rough to alter it.

If you measure with a pair of Callaper Compasses the greatest height of
metal, at the mossell of the Piece, and likewise at the Coil; abating the
lesser out of the greater, the remainder is the just disparture.

It is a general rule, that look how much a Piece is thicker of metal in any
one side at the quoyle then at the thickest part of the mussell: as also, look
how many times the length of the Piece is to the Mark; so many times that
overplus of thickenesse shall the bullet fly over the mark, being no higher
then the Piece, and the Piece blown off without her disparture.

How to make Granados to shoot in a Piece of Ordnance.
THe Balls of metal must be of the bigness of the Pieces concaue, and a
quarter of an Inch thick, made three parts of Brass, and one part of Tin,
but the Brass ought to be melted before the Tinn be put to it; which Balls
you must fill half full of fine powder, and the other half full of grosser
powder mingled with Rosen well beaten: so that for three parts of gross
powder, there be one part of Rosen, and then putting in the holes some small
Corn powder to make the rest fire, and after they be fired, and thrown, they
will break and fly into a thousand pieces, and both hurt and kill whomsoever
are near them.

How to find out the square Root; of any number by this Table from 16 to 10000.
Number. Root Square Remainder 16 4 16 0 25 5 25 0 36 6 3 0 49 7 46 0 64 8 64
0 81 9 81 0 100 10 100 0 150 11 121 29 200 14 196 4 250 15 225 25 300 17 289 11
350 18 324 26 400 20 400 0 450 21 441 9 500 22 484 16 500 23 529 21 600 24 576
24 650 25 625 25 700 26 676 24 750 27 729 21 800 28 784 16 850 29 841 9 900 30
900 0 950 30 900 50 1000 31 961 39 1100. 32 1024 76 1200 33 1156 11 1300 34
1225 44 1400 37 1369 74 1500 38 1444 31 1600 40 1680 56 1700 41 1681 0 1800 42
1764 19 1900 43 1849 36 2000 44 1936 64 2200 46 2116 84 2400 48 2304 96 2600 50
2500 100 2800 52 2704 96 3000 54 2916 84 3500 59 3481 19 4000 63 3969 31 4500
67 4489 11 5000 70 4900 110 5500 74 5476 24 6000 77 5929 71 6500 80 6400 100
7000 83 6889 111 7500 86 7396 104 8000 89 79^1 79 8500 92 8464 36 9000 94 8836
164 9000 97 94^9 21 10000 100 10^00 0

And so you may proceed infinitely, but now the means to extract the root of
any number, is thus found: Suppose your number to be 200, first you must put a
prick in every odd place, beginning first on the right hand with the first,
third, fifth, and so continue until you come to the end of the number, except
the last, which sometimes has but one.

Secondly, mark the numbers that belong unto the last prick toward the left
hand: Or whether he have belonging unto him one number or two, look the root
of that number if it be square, and that root set by a crooked line, as you
place the quotient in division, and cansell all that square number belonging to
that prick.

But if the number belonging to that prick be not a square number, then take
the root of the greatest square, which is contained in it, and place the root
as I said before, and the square of it shall you abate from the number which
belong to the last and prick, let the rest be set over those numbers cancelled,
as you do in division, and so have you ended that prick, then in the same
manner go forward with the rest. As for example 200, you place your pricks
first on the cipher next your right hand, the next 2 the first figure, then I
ask what is the root of 2, and I find 1, therefore I put that in my
quotient, and substract it out of 2, and there remains 1, then I double the
quotient, and it is 2 that I place still between the two pricks, then I ask
how many times 2 is in 10, and I find 4 that I put also in my quotient, and
substract it out of 10, then remains 2, now I square the last figure 4, saying
4 times 4 is 16, which I substract also out of 20, the remainder is 4, which is
the truest and speediest way of all.

Here I will produce some questions of Arithmetic, which shall be to the
purpose we have in hand, and also to show and make manifest unto you, how
necessary it is for every Soldier, whether he be Captain, Lieutenant, or
other Officer whatsoever that follows the Wars, to have good skill in the
depth of Arithmetic, as in the extraction of roots, and also in the Rule of
Algebra.

1 A Captain General having three great Armies, would cast them into three
square Battles, but he knows not how many men he shall set in the front of
each Battle. The numbers of the three Armies are these: of the first there are
5625, the second are 9216, the third 15129.

Now you must search out the square root by the former rules, so shall you
have the answer.

2 A Prince has an Army very great, with which he passes in a valewe, so that
in marching the Front can be but 18 men, and by that means the flank
contains ^49352. After that the Army has passed that valewe, the King
minding to occupy all the best ground, wills the Battle to be set square.

You must multiply the flank by the front, and then your number will be
8088336, and extract the root, and you shall have 2844 for your square root.

A City should be scaled being double ditched, and the inner ditch 32 foot
broad, and the wall 21 foot high: the Captain commands skalling Ladders to
be made of the just height, that would reach from the utter browe of the inner
ditch, to the top of the wall, as in this figure is partly expressed.

As thus 32 multiplied in it self 1024, then 21 multiplied by it self makes
441, now you must add both these sums together, and there make 146^, then
extract the root which is 3812/76, and that is the just length of the line A C.

Note also this, that if at any time you have occasion to double any square as
a square battle, or a square Camp: you must take the side of that square,
which you would double suppose that battle was before 210: now you have as
many more Soldiers as you had, therefore you must double it, the way to double
either, the ground or men is thus, multiply 210 by it self, and thereof
comes 44100. that must I double 88200, the root of which number extracted,
is the double and just square of that number which you had before 296.^84/296.

And hereby you may perceive the oversight of many men, which being required to
double a square plot, do double the side of it, thinking it easily done.

But if they mark it well, he may perceive that they do make by that means a
square 4 times, as big as their first figure, was as by this figure any man
may see.

A piece of Ordnance of 6 inches Diameter in the soul, does carry a Bullet of
20 pound weight, what weight shall that Bullet be, that serves for a piece of
Ordnance of 14 inches in the soul.

Note that all Globes bear together triple that proposition, that their
Diameters do: So in this example, the proportion of their Diameter being as 14
to 6, or as 7 to 3, I must triple it, and then have I the proportion of their
Globes.

Wherefore I set the three fractions thus 777/333, and there make 34^/27, that
is 1219/27, and so are the proportions of the Globes as well in weight as
bigness.

Therefore I must multiply 20, which is the weight of the lesser Bullet, by the
numerator of the proportion, and divide it by the Denominator, and so shall I
have 25427/2 for the weight of the greater Bullet.

There was a King with a great Army, and his Adversary corrupts one of his
Heralds with gifts, and makes him swear, that he will tell him how many
Dukes, Earls, and other Soldiers there are in that Army: The Herald loath
to loose those gifts, and as loath to be untrue to his Prince, deuiseth this
answer which was true, but yet not so plain, that the adversary could thereby
understand that which he desired, and that answer was this.

Look how many Dukes there are, and for each of them there are twice so many
Earls, and under every Earl there are four times so many Soldiers as there
be Dukes in the field. And when the Master of the Soldiers was taken, the 200
part of them was 9 times so many as the number of the Dukes.

This is a true declaration of each number, quoth the Herald, and I have
discharged my oath, now guess how many of each sort there was, mark the work.

And first for the number of Dukes, I set 1 {powerof1} then will the number of
Earls be 2 {powerof2} that is 1 {powerof1} by 1 {powerof1} multiplied twice,
and the number of Soldiers are 8 {powerof3} that is 2 {powerof2} multiplied by
1 {powerof1} four times, but because the 200 part of the Soldiers are nine
times so many as the number of the Dukes, therefore must 200 part of 8
{powerof3} be equal to 9 {powerof2} and so consequently 8 {powerof3} (...)
1800 {powerof1} and 1 {powerof2} (...) 225 {powerof1} or (...)

For if I set 1/200 and 9 as equal together, and would by the Art of Fractions
bring the same proportion in whole numbers, I shall have for 9. this Fraction
1800/200 and seeing the Denominators be all one in 8/200 and is 1600/200 the
proportion consists between the numerators.

Then to proceed if 229 be equal unto one I shall take the root out of the
225 for 1 and that is 15, which must be the number of the Dukes.

And so have I the first number, wherefore the second number which is the
number of Earls, must be 15 times 15 twice, that is 450, and the number of
Soldiers shall be four times 15, multiplied by 4, 0, that is 27000, and for
just trial of this work, I take the 200 of the Soldiers that 1350, and I
find it to be nine times 15, that is nine times so many as the number of the
Dukes, and so is the question ended.

A Table to discover numbers by hundreds, placed by 3. 5. 7. 9. and so forth to
15, as from 100 unto 1500, as thus 7 in rank, and 34 in File is 102.

Ranks men

Ranks men

Admonitions for the Citizens of London and Bristoll.
ANd since I have waded so far into the Art Millitary, I have thought good to
advertise thus much in general; But perticularly, the Citizens of London and
Bristoll.

There are in these Cities sundry Companies of three hundred a piece, which are
to great by much to observe Ranks and Files, and diverse other Orders necessary
and much useful, unless they are often used to be exercised by Deuisions:
Nevertheless, it was absolutely denied by the ancient Romans, who never
desired more then a hundred in one Company, and therefore they were called
Centurions, as much to say as Captains over Hundreds.

They who were the terror of Christendom, for feats of Arms, be our
Presidents; and let us follow the imitation of the Mightiest, rather then of
others, whose populous assaults are scaled by the very eye of the Enemy, and
repulsed by the disorder of the Multitude. I will similize this to the Husband
man, who says, one Acre well manured, yeeldes more profit then ten ill
tillde; so one hundred well experienced, are able encounter with two hundred
raw Soldiers.

Some will (peradventure) say, nay grumble at this my advertisement, because
they know it may be a greater charge unto them then now it is, by reason of
more Officers that must be used, if you lessen your Companies, and not deminish
your full Muster.

To this I answer; The Cities Lands and Moneys are infinite, and therefore
able to undergo so small a burden for the payment of more Officers, the
ripeness and expertnesse in Millitary skill but lame, and extreme decreped:
Add the assistance of Money to the decrepidnesse of Discipline, and you shall
be sure to have a mean of both sides, the strength of the City will be thereby
much the more enabled, the Honor of it the more renowned, and the fury the more
feared: For what a terror will it strike into the hearts of Strangers, and an
amazement to our neighboring Kingdoms, to see every Man so skillful and
complete, Marching, Trouping, and Standing in Battell-ray, like so many
Commanders, the worst not unworthy the government of a Noble Company, daring
Bellona and her fiercest assaults, ready to encounter the worst of Stratagems?

Now Noble Citizens, the Honor will be your own, the Strength the Kings, and
the Wonder the Worlds, which I hope will be no long time deferred, to the
glory of ^od, the defense of true Christian Religion, and to the general
preservation of your selves.

Also, there is an other matter, which is not so seemly and Soldier like
performed as I have seen it in Forregine parts: That is, your Marching into
the Field, for you observe no manner of Order; therefore mark this: Let every
private Captain repair, to and atend his Colonells Ensign, and so let the
Eldest Colonel march first into the Field, then his Captains, according to
their antiquity: And in coming out, or Trouping in, first the Youngest, then
the next, by which means, you shall be able and ready to join Battle, without
the trauerse up and down of so much ground, before you know your right range;
for you spend a great part of the day in placing your Companies right in their
order.

These things amended, and orderly performed, will add much Honor to your
Cities, and commendations to the Leaders and Officers: and so I rest.

The Authors Farewell to his faithful Friends: Or, his Caueats to his loving
Contrymen.
IT is bad Policy to let Danger knock at the Door. Sollid and grounded
Courses which keep dangers aloof, are better then fine shiffts, and neat
deliverances, when they are near.

Meditation without Practice, is like an vnstringed Instrument, whereon no Man
plays: Practice without the Theoricke, is like a stringed Instrument, but not
well Tunde.

It is a Maxim in Millitary proceedings, that those things determined, should
not be communicated, but to those without whom it can not be effected.

Beware of too long Consultations, least they fly away with the time: Delays
and protractions prove dangerous many times frustrary.

An Army of Sagges led by a Lion, is better then an Army of Lions led by a
Stagge.

In War, nothing can be worse, then to say, Had I Wist.

A General told his excusing Soldier, Thou must not fail twice in War.

The wisest Captains, needs not think it a derogation to their Valor, or a
deminution to their Honor, to rely on Counsel.

Youth are like the first cogitations, not so wise as the second, fitter to
Invent then to Judge; fitter for Execution then for Counsel; fitter for new
Proiects then for settled Business. They in conduct and managing of Martial
affairs, embrace more then they can hold, fire more then they can quench,
stir more then they can quiet, fly to the end, without consideration of the
means.

Old men obect too much, consult too long, adventure too little, seldom drives
business home to the full: Therefore a mixture must be used: Ages Wisdom,
and experimental advise, joined with Youths Valor, and quick dispatch, proves
invincible.

A Postscript to the Reader.
COurteous Reader, I had thought to imposed silence to my Pen, and to have
infused a Period to this my Compendium; But I did think fit to add these
few Lines, as a supplement and Postscript, to show the cause of this my
writing. The Causa mouens, or, Primum mobile of it, is a declaratory
Instruction to my Contrymen in general, but especially to Noble, (though
unexperienced Tyrones) in whom, there is either an inbred, or an aduenticious
desire of Millitary Discipline, or to exositate, or stir up those that are
unexperienced, to a further prosecution of these generous and well beseeming
Qualities. The Terminus ad quem, or, the intentiall scope and drift of this, is
for the beneficial good of my Native Country. From the first of these, I do
desire their courteous welwishings; from the second, their grateful
acceptance; from the third, their loving approbation: As for the last, though
I owe more then I am able, yet when I am able, I will show more; In the mean
time, take this as a depositum.

FINIS.

