THE PEOPLES PLEA FOR THE EXERCISE of Prophecy.

Against Mr. John Yates his Monopoly.

By John Robinson.

1. COR. 14.1. Follow after charity, and desire spiritual gifes, but rather
that ye may prophecy.

Printed in the year 1618.

TO MY CHRISTIAN FRIENDS IN NORwich, and theerabouts, Grace and salvation from
the God and giver thereof.
THat loving and thankful remembrance, in which I always have you (my
Christian friends) provokes me as continually to commend unto God your
welfare, so to rejoice greatly when I understand thereof, and specially that
your souls do prosper. And as the prosperity of the soul is principally
furthered by the zealous preaching of the Gospel, so has it been matter of
unfeigned rejoicing unto me, to hear how God has of late stirred up amongst
you, diverse instruments, whose zealous indevours he has used that way, and
covering in mercy what is evil (of ignorance and infirmity on their parts (I
hope) in their entrance, and ministrations, does bless what is of himself,
to the good of his chosen. But as it falls out in nature, that the pure
waters draw of the tainture of the soil through which they run; so with you it
seems, the pure truths of the Gospel have suffered by some, too great mixture
with sundry Popish errors about the Church and ministry, in and by which they
are propounded: and this more especially by M. Yates, a man of good gifts in
himself, and note amongst you: pleading the cause of the Whore of Babylon,
the Church of Rome, as Christ's wife, and of Antichrists clergy, as of Christ's
ministry. And as this clergies exaltation is not a little furthered by
usurpatio^ on the peoples liberty, which it swalloweth up, and thereby swells
above proportion, so in all his pleading for the one, he does necessarily
implead the other; and as in other things, so specially in the exercise of
Prophecy, or teaching in the church by an ordinary gift; in which every one
that is able brings his shot in due time and order, for a joint feast of that
heavenly repast, the word of God.

The Arguments in his writing (sent unto me by W. E. with his consent, and that
before the Magistrate) I have set down word for word, and answered: and
therewith confirmed what I have else where published in justification of this
exercise against his exceptions and answers: which, In the Justification of
Separation.
being scattered here and there in his large discourse, and diverse of them
diverse times repeated, I have collected, contracted, and set in orderly
oppsition to their contrary Arguments: and that without any the least wrong (to
my knowledge) unto him or his cause; as having left out nothing in his writing,
which might seem to bring advantage to his purpose.

Now if any shall ask me, why I have not rather answered M. Hall his large and
learned volume against me, and the general cause which I profess, my reasons
are, First, because it is a large volume so full farced by him, as it seems,
that he might prevent further answer. Secondly, his treatise is as much (and
more immediately) against the Reformists, and their cause in the maine, as
against us and ours. Thirdly, the truth requires not that persons, but things
be answered: and thing in it know I none not answered in my Defense against M.
Bernard. Lastly, I do put as great difference between him and M. Yates, as
between a word-wise Orator, both laboring more, and being better able to feed
his Reader with the leaves of words, and flowers of Rhetoric, then with the
fruits of knowledge, as also striving rather to oppress the person of his
adversary with false and proud reproaches, then to convince his tenet by sound
Arguments: and between a man sincerely zealous for the truth, and by his simple
and solid dealing by the Scriptures, as M. Yates does, giving testimony of his
unfeigned love thereof. Which truth, my prayer to God is, that he, with my
self, and all other so seeking it, may find, and therein accord in all things.

And for you (my Christian friends) toward whom for your persons, I am minded
even as when I lived with you, be you admonished by me (which I also entreat at
the hands of the Lord on your behalf) that you carefully beware, lest in any
thing you fall from your steadfastness; but, on the contrary, grow in grace,
and in the knowledge and obedience of the Lord Jesus in his whole revealed
will. And let me the more earnestly exhort you hereunto, by how much the
contrary evil is the more both dangerous and common. A man may fall forward,
and in so doing, endanger his hands and face: but in falling backward, the
danger is far greater, as we see in old Eli, of whom we read, that he fell
backward, and his neck brake, and he died, 1. Sam. 4.18. And how common a
thing it is for men amongst you, and the whole land thorough, in their
declining age, to decline in grace, woeful experience teaches: there being few
old Disciples to be found, who in their age do hold the same temper of zeal
and goodness which they had upon them in their younger times: this being one
maine reason thereof, That the means amongst you are far more for conversion
then preservation: and for birth, then nourishment: Whereas they (by the Lords
gracious dispensation in the orderly state of things) who are planted in the
house of the Lord, in the Courts of our God, shall flourish, yea shall sprout
in old age, and are fat and green, to show that the Lord is just, and with him
is none unrighteousness. Psalm. 92. Of this grace he who is the Author and
finisher of our faith, make both you and us partakers always Amen.

John Robinson.

AN ANSWER TO THE ARGVMENTS laid down by Mr. John Yates, Preacher in Norwich,
to prove ordinary Prophecy in public, out of office, unlawful: answered by
John Robinson.
ARG. 1. Mr. I. Yates.
FROM the Commission of Christ Ioh. 20, v. 21, 22, 23 all Prophecy in public
is to remit, and retain sins: and Chr. grants this power to none but such as he
sends. v. 21. and ordains thereunto v. 22. But men out of office are neither
sent nor ordained thereunto, therefore in public ought not to meddle with the
power of the keys. I know the exception will be this, that many out of office
have prophesied, the Scripture approving it. I answer, An ordinary rule is
never infringed by an extraordinary example, but ever by an ordinary. To marry
my sister is incest; yet in Cain it was no incest, because the example was
extraordinary. I may not steal, and yet it was lawful for the Jews to rob
the Egiptians, because that was Gods extraordinary permission. Extraordinary
examples, as they make no rules; so they break none: but ordinary examples
must ever follow the rule: and if they do not, they break it. Christ
therefore laying down a perpetual rule of binding and loosing to all such as
are sent and ordained either by himself immediately, or by such as he shall
point thereunto, it must necessarily follow, that any ordinary example will
break this rule if it be not framed accordingly: therefore I constantly
affirm, that no ordinary prophecy ought to be out of office. As for
extraordinary, that cannot oppose this rule, because it is of another nature,
and therefore is not to be limited within the compass of an ordinary rule.
Secondly, I answer, That all the prophesies out of office, were by the secret
motion of the spirit, which was warrant for all such as had no calling by
office thereunto.

ANSW. I. Robinson.
THat all prophecy in public (and in private also) is for the remitting and
retaining of sins, I acknowledge: but that Christ grants this power to none
but to such as he sends and ordaines by the Commission given John. 20.21, etc.
I plainly deny, and require his proof. He should then grant it to none but to
Apostles; for the commission there given, is peculiar to such, conveyed to them
immediately from Christ, confirmed, by the miraculous inbreathing of the H.
Ghost, and by them to be exercised and dispensed principally toward
unbeleevers; of all which nothing is common to ordinary officers. As Christ
then gives power of binding and loosing sins to the Apostles there, so else
where, to ordinary P^stors. Ephesians. 4.8. Else where to the whole Church gathered
together in one, Math. 15.17.18. 1. Cor. 5. 2. Cor. 6.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And
lastly in other places to every faithful brother confessing Jesus Christ,
Matthew. 16.18.19. etc. and cap. 18.15. Luke 17.3. And since the power of binding
and loosing sins is only by way of manifestation, and declaration of the
word of God, the law, and the Gospel look unto whom the word of God is given,
unto him the power of binding and loosing sins is given, though to be used by
diverse states of persons, after a diverse order: which order does in no sort
abolish the being of the thing, but only preserues it from confusion.

And where he takes it for granted th^^ that the examples for prophesying out
of office in the Scriptures, were extraordinary, as Cains marrying of his
Sister, and the Jews (the Israelites he should say) stealing from the
Egiptians his comparisons are without compass, and his affirmation without
truth. These their practices were against the light of nature, and moral law
(then written in the tables of men's hearts, and afterward written in the
tables of stone) save as there was an extraordinary dispensation by the Lord of
the Law, and God of nature: But what like is there in this, that a man (out of
office) having received a gift of God, whether extraordinary, or ordinary) by
which he is enabled to prophesy, that is to speak to edification, exhortation,
and comfort of of the Church, should so use the same good gift of God, in his
time, and order? What Eclipse is here, of the light of nature, or violation of
natural honesty? If M. Yates had remembered the law which forbad men to plough
with an ox and ass together Deu. 22.10. he would not thus have yoked
together things of so unlike kind.

And for the secret motion of the spirit by which in his second answer he
affirms that all prophesies out of office were, he speaks both that which is
true, and against himself. For what were these secret motions of the spirit,
but the Prophets zeal for Gods glory, and man's good? which also were
sufficient on their part, for the use of the gift whether ordinary, or
extraordinary; whether in men in office or out, it was not material. So that,
for the use eve^ of an extraordinary gift there was required (at least at all
times) no extraordinary motion of the spirit, but only that which was, and
is ordinary to them, and us. God therefore, for his own glory, and the good of
his people, giving the gift, whether extraordinarily or ordinarily unto a man;
he has vvarrant sufficient from his zeal to Gods glory, and man's salvation,
to use the same gift in his time, place, and order. Of which hereafter.

Mr. Yates. ARG. 2.
FROM the execution of a public function in the Church. Prophecy ordinary is
by preaching to bring the glad tidings of peace and good things to Gods people:
and this the Apostle says is not warrantable without sending. Rom: 10.15. We
must feed the flock because we are set over it. Act. 20.20. to prophesy to Gods
people is an honorable caling and none ought to take it upon him, but he that
is called of God as was Aaron. Heb. 5.4. The place of Judas is called a Charge.
Act. 1.20. the Ministers are the light of the world. Mat. 5.14. Stars in the
right hand of Christ. Rev. 1.20. John was a man sent from God. John. 1.6.
Christ sent his Apostles in the midst of Wolves. Math. 10.16. I have not sent
these Prophets, says the Lord, and yet they ran. Ier. 23.2. as many as found
not their Genealogy to be from Levi (from Aaron he should say) were put from
the Priesthood. Neh: 7.64. All these places keep us to an ordinary rule, and
for all ordinary prophesying there can be no exception from it, without an open
breach thereof: as for all your places of prophesying out of office, they are
all of them to be understood of the extraordinary: which cannot be tied to
ordinary rules. For so we should abridge God of his liberty: but we must beware
of imitation, lest we become licentious.

ANSWER.
HERE is a long harvest for a small croppe. All that can be gathered hence
either by reaping or gleaning is no more, then that no man may exercise a
public function, or office of ministry in the Church without a lawful
sending or calling from the Lord, by the means which he has sanctified.
Which as it concerns M. Yates well to consider of especially, reckoning (as
he professedly does) his Genealogy from the Pope of Rome: so does it not
impeach our Prophets at all, who have a lawful calling for the use of their
gift, though not so solemn (neither need they) as they who are to exercise and
fulfill a constant ministry, and charge. But for the word Sending, which he so
much urges, it must be known, that, as all that teach lawfully whether in
office or not, are sent by Christ in respect of their personal gifts and
graces: so ordinary officers are not sent by those who appoint them to minister
as were the extraordinary Apostles sent by Christ, who appointed them. Sending
imports a passing of the sent from the sender to another, and so the Apostles
were sent by Christ to preach the gospel to the Jews and Gentiles: but so are
not Pastors sent by the Church (which calls them) unto others, but by her
appointed to minister to her self. They who were in their time Apostles,
were first called in their persons by Christ to be disciples, that as
Apostles afterward they might be sent to minister: they who are Pastors, are
sent by Christ, first as members, or in their persons and personal gifts, that
as Pastors they may afterward be called to minister. And that M. Yates may
have for the caling of our prophets, whereon to insist, thus we practice. After
the exeercise of the public Ministry ended, the rulers in the Chur. do
publikly exhort, and require that such of their own or other Church, as have a
gift to speak to the edificatio^ of the hearers, should use the same: and this
according to that which is written, Act. 13.14. etc. where Paul and Barnabas
coming into the Synagogue, the Rulers, after the work of the ordinary
ministry, was ended (considering them not as Apostles which they acknowledged
not, but only as men having gifts) sent unto them, that if they had any word
of exhortation to the people, they should say on:

M. Yates. ARG. 3.
FRom the true causes of prophesy in the new testament, which are two, either
immediate revelatio^, or imposition of hands: the first is Act. 2.17. and
10.44. the second Act. 8.17. and 19.6. third cause of public prophesy cannot
be given: therefore ordinary prophesy in public out of office being neither by
immediate revelation, nor imposition of hands, is unlawful. You may say the
contrary, but it will be without all warrant of the word.

ANSWER.
IN this Arg. are sundry errors Logical and Theological And first, why does
he not make Christ's breathing upon the Apostles Ioh. 20. and the descending and
sitting of the cloven fiery tongues upon them Act. ^. causes of prophesy as
well as imposition of hands? Secondly imposition of hands is no cause at all of
prophesy, to speak properly, as M. yates should do, (affecting the name of a
Logitian) It is no natural cause, for to imagine that men took the holy Ghost
in their hands, and reached it to others were ridiculous: neither is it a
moral cause, as in which there are propounded no Arguments, and motives of
persuasion. It is ineeed no more then a sign denoteing the person; not a cause
effecting the thing. Thirdly, if it were a cause, yet should it not be made the
member of a division opposed to revelation, but a cause or means subordinate
unto it as unto the end: since it served to the conveing of the spirit, by
which spirit all revelation is, and by revelation all prophesy: extraordinary
by immediate revelation, ordinary by mediate: both which the^ were in the
Church, as is the latter now even in men out of office, by means of their
study, and Gods blessing upon the same: else could there never be lawful
office, Pastor or Teacher chosen in the Church to the worlds end. The gift of
prophesy comes not by the office, but being found in persons before, makes them
capable of the office by due means.

ARG. 4. M. Yates.
FRO Modistinction of spiritual gifts, 1. Cor. 12.4.5.6. verse; gifts,
administrations and operations. All these are to be referred to that general
verse. 1. Gifts therefore in this place must be but one kind of spiritual
gifts, and be distinguished from the other two. The first then are merely
gifts: the second, gifts and offices together: the third, rather the effect of
a gift then the gift it self: and therefore the Holy Ghost knowing how to speak
aptly, gives more to the effect, then the cause: the work then the worker: for
in truth miraculous works exceed all the virtue that possibly can be imagined
to be in a mere creature: and therefore it is only a passive belief, or faith
whereby man is rather a patient, then an agent in the work. These 3. general
heads are divided again, or rather exemplified by many particulars: first,
verse 8.9.10. all lay down a kind of spiritual gifts first a word of
wisdom, 2. a word of knowledge, 3. of miraclous faith, 4. of healeing. 5.
operations of great works 6. prophesying, 7. discerning of spirits, 8. of
tongues, 9. of interpretation. That some of these gifts are extraordinary no
wise man will deny: yet that I may prove them all extraordinary, consider 3
things. First, the cause: secondly, the effect: thirdly, the subject. The cause
without al doubt is the spirit; yet question may be of the manner, and measure
For manner, whether the spirit alone or the spirit assisting our industry, and
pains. I say alone, because all these effects depend equally upon the same
cause: and I have no reason to say, that prophesy should be more by my pains
and industry, then strange tongues, or any other gift: for then I should
magnify the Holy Ghost in one gift more then another. That which is given by
the sole operation of the spirit is more then that which is come by through
ordinary pains. I Bless God for his ordinary providence where my hand goes
with the Lord in my ordinary affairs: But wherein I find the Lord do for me
where I had no hand, there I ought to magnify him much more: so in these
gifts, if some were ordinary, some extraordinary, then the spirit should not
have equal praise in the^ all. The orator proving Caesar to deserve more praise
for his clemency toward Marcellus then all his famous victories, uses the
manner of the cause to show it. In thy wars, O Emperor, thou had Captains,
and soldiers, virtue and valor; weapons and munition, etc. but sparing
Marcellus thou alone did it, to thee alone it belongs, and all the glory of
it: so if prophesy in this place above all the rest must come in for an
ordinary gift, then may I say, O blessed Spirit, Prophesy is thy gift, yet do I
acknowledge thy ordinary blessing upon my labors in this: but as for strange
tongues, and the rest, I acknowledge they are thy mere gift, without all
pain, and labor of mine, therefore the greater praise I give thee. Were not
this to diminish prophesy in regard of the rest, which the H. Ghost prefers
before them all? and therefore did show as great power in that gift as in any
other. The manner the^ being all one in giving, the second question is whether
they were given in the same measure. I answer, No, Romans 12.6. and hereupon the
Apostle commanded, that one Prophet should be subject to another, and willingly
yield place to him, that had the greater measure. I leave the cause and come to
the effects, which learned men cannot distinguish. I will show you my
judgment, and follow it as you please. To the two first gifts is given a word:
by words we express our meanings, therefore the spirit does not only give a
gift, but an ability and power to utter that gift for the greatest good of the
hearers. Brother, it is the part of a divine, to study for apt, and fit words;
and indeed when God has given us learning by exceeding great pains, yet we
find great imperfection for want of words. Now here I learn that the Spirit of
God did extraordinarily supply this want, by giving unto men excellent
utterance of heavenly things. The first two gifts are wisdom and knowledge:
wisdom is a holy understanding of heavenly things with a prudent application of
them to their several uses. Knowledge, or science is an insight into diverse
heavenly truths, yet wanting that prudent application: these two gifts with a
fruitful uttrance of them could be no ordinary gifts studied out by their own
pains, but such as the H. Ghost did immediately inspire into them. I should be
very glad to hear that your Congregations were full of these wise and
understanding men, then I doubt not but you would the sooner recall your
selves. The three next gifts, of faith, healing, and great works are
undoubtedly extraordinary, and were never to be obtained, by any study of
ours. For the four last I doubt not but you will grant three of them
extraordinary. Discerning of spirits was not by ordinary means but
extraordinary, as you may see in Ananias, and Saphira, Simon Magus, and others,
which were seen by an extraordinary Spirit. For strange tongues, I hope you
will not stand in granting it, if you consider but the first original of them
Act. 2.2.^. and for interpretation of these tongues that was as difficult as
the other: why should you now stick at prophesy, which I will plainly show was
more difficult then both the rest. For how should either you or I come to be
able to prophesy, except there were some skillful in the original tongues, as
likewise the helps of commentaries, and interpretations? You see God appointed
these as means to help us to prophesy and where they are wanting, it is simply
impossible for any man to become an ordinary Prophet: Indeed the H. Ghost can
supply the want of both these: and therefore will you, nill you, it must be
granted that this prophesy was extraordinary. For take way the ordinary means
of prophesy, and then the thing it self will cease. Now you may plainly
understa^d that the Primitive Chur. had not these means of prophesy, that you
see we have: they had not the original tongues translated, and therefore God
gave men extraordinary gifts in speaking, and interpreting them: see then I
entreat you how these two means being extraordinary enforce you to yield the
other of the same nature. Were it possible for you to become a Prophet wanting
the translation of the new, and old Testament as likewise all interpretations,
with which now through Gods blessing the whole world is replenished? I know you
will answer, and say no: then say, Prophesy in the Primitive Church was
extraordinary, because the Gentiles had not ordinary translations and
interpretations of them.

ANSWER.
IF I should follow M. Yates in his course I should rather write one Sermon
against an other then bring an Answer to an Argument. Briefly then, as I can,
omitting other things, to that which concerns directly our present purpose. His
affirmation that the gifts mentioned 1. Cor. 12. are only extraordinary, I do
deny: and answer his reasons as follows. And first, that (contrary to his
unreasonable reason) we both may and ought to magnify the H. Ghost more in one
gift then another; since the same H. Ghost works more excellently and for our
good in one gift, then in another: And secondly (as a further truth and more
contrary to his strange assertion) that in some works of the Spirit, though not
here expressed, in which the Lord uses our industry and care, he is infinitely
more to be magnified, then in any whatsoever the immediate and miraculous work
of the same spirit, wherein he uses it not. For example, in saving faith and
repentance: for the working of which by his spirit, God uses our careful
hearing and meditation of his word, the Law and Gospel. Thirdly, compare we
even extraordinary gifts with extraordinary; we see, that God used the
industry, and pains of the extraordinary Prophets for the reading and
meditating in, and of the Dan. 9.13
Law: and of the latter Prophets of the former Prophets v. 2.
writings: As also of the Apostles in the Romans 4.10. and 4.3. etc.
reading, knowledge and memory of them both: yea even of the very heathen
authors, whose sayings they sometime quote in their prophesies or Act. 17.28 1.
Cor. 15.33. Tit. 1.12. 2. Tim. 4.13.
sermons: the like industry, or care not being required for the gift, or use of
strange tongues: and yet did the Holy Ghost much more excellently utter it
self in their Prophesies, and sermons, then in there tongues, as M. Yates often,
and truly affirms.

Upon verse. 8. he rightly describes wisdom a holy understanding of heavenly
things with a prudent application of them to their several uses: and
knowledge, an insight into diverse heavenly things, yet wanting that prudent
application, with the fruitful utterance of them: but that these could be no
ordinary gifts studied out by their own payns, but such as the Holy Ghost did
immediately inspyre into them, he barely affirms; and I think, singularly;
but am sure, untruly. I maruailed what he would say to these two gifts of
wisdom and knowledge, to prove that they could not be ordinary: and did expect
some special reasons for his so fingular interpretation: but behold a bare
bone of affirmation brought by him without marrow, flesh, skin, or color of
proof. Wherein he is also the more blameworthy, considering that he cannot
be ignorant, how the most judicious both at home, and abroad, do understand
these two gifts as meant of the two special qualifications of the Pastor, and
Teacher; ordinary gifts of ordinary offices: of which ministerius amongst the
rest ordained by Christ the one Lord of his Church. the Apostle speaks verse
5. as verse. 4. of their gifts, by that one spirit. Which ordinary gifts all
lawful Pastors, and Teachers (ordinary offices) then had, and besides them,
many others not in office? and by the grace of God, some amongst us: and that
by the help of nature study and prayer, and the blessing of Gods spirit
thereupon. Which blessing of God I will not deny to have then been for degree
extraordinary upon men's weaker indeuoures, for their furnishing with these
ordinary gifts: which makes nothing against our purpose. That the gift of faith
is undoubtedly extraordinary is said by him, but Doctors have doubted of it.
See for one, Beza in his great Annotations upon the words, both affirming, and
proueing; that by faith is meant an assent unto the doctrine propounded, which
is an ordinary gift of the spirit.

Where he makes no doubt but we will grant, that three of the four last were
extraordinary, he but threaps kindness upon us, as we use to say. That Peter's
gift of discerning was extraordinary in the case of Ananias, Act (...) we
confess: but not so in the case of Simon Magus, Acts. 8. of whom he judges by
his words (as of the tree by the fruit) in which he did notoriously bewray
himself to be in the gall of bitterness, to the discerning of any ordinary
Christian. The gift of discerning both of doctrine and manners, is in a measure
required of every Christian. Phil. 1.9.10. 1. Ioh. 4.1. Heb. 5.14. but is
bestowed by the giver thereof upon some more liberally; sometimes
extraordinarily, as then upon some in some cases: sometimes ordinarily, as both
then and now on all such as had, and have more Christian discretion then other
men.

That interpretation of tongues was as difficult as strange tongues immediately
inspired, is not true. They who Acts 2.^. heard the Apostles speak in their
own tongue, and were able to speak the Jews language then in use, might
interpret these strange tongues unto the Jews, without any extraord. gift: as
M. Yates hearing a glorious Formalist speak much Latin in his Sermon, can
interpret that strange tongue of his unto the people, without any extraordinary
gift of interpretation: and so might it well be in the Church of Corinth with
some, though the tongue were given extraordinarily.

Lastly, it does not show plainly, that prophecy was more difficult then
strange tongues, though all were true which he speaks of the difficulty
thereof. For by all reason and experience a man then might, and now may, become
an ordinary Prophet for ability by ordinary helps; but so neither could, nor
can he speak a strange tongue, as there meant, but by extraordinary
inspiration. That simple necessity of Commentaries and Interpretations which he
requires for a man's becoming an ordinary Prophet, I dare not acknowledge: of
great use they are, but not of simple necessity: that prerogative royal of
simply necessary, I would challenge as peculiar to the holy Scriptures; which
are able to make the man of God perfect, fully furnished to every good work.
2. Tim. 3.16.17. But where he adds, that the Primitive Church had not the
original tongues translated, it is something for his, yea and for the Popes
purpose also, if it be true, and that the Church, especially some good space,
after her constitution, might be without the Scriptures in a known tongue. But
how unadvised, and unskilful is he in so saying? how detracting from Gods
gracious providence toward his Church: and how partial on the Clergies part,
and against the Commonalty of Gods inheritance? For the thing then. The old
Testament was wholly translated by the 70. Interpreters, at the instance of
Ptolemy Philadelphus King of Egypt, Joseph Ant. l. 12. c. 2. Iren. l. 3. c.
24.25.
into Greek the mother tongue of the Corinthians; Corinth being in Achaia, and
Achaia in Greece: in which the same tongue they had also every part of the new
Testament then written, as the most was. Which language was also so
universally known throughout the whole world, by reason partly of the Greek
Monarchy under Alexander, and partly of the Greek learning at Athens, as that
the Apostle could write his Epistle in Greek to the Romans, though in Europe,
as understanding the tongue sufficiently. Besides, the Corinthians had had
Paul's and other Apostolical men's preachings, and conferences amongst them a
long time, which were uncomparably better then all the commentaries in the
world. And for the Corinthians ability for this work, it is but reason we
respect this Apostles testimony of them, which is, that they were enriched in
all utterance, and in all knowledge, 1. Cor. 1.4. In which two gifts as the
ability for ordinary prophecy does properly consist, so to appropriate them
unto extraordinary Prophets, considering the generality of the Apostles speech,
and drift, with other circumstances elsewhere observed, were to fetter them in
unjust bonds of restraint.

And having thus wiped off his colors of reason, that the Apostle, 1. Cor. 12.
speaks only of extraordinary gifts, I will (by the grace of God) plainly show
the contrary, and that he speaks of ordinary also.

And first, in teaching, v. 3. that no man can call Jesus the Lord, but by the
Holy Ghost, he points out a gift and grace of the spirit, ordinary and common
to all Christians.

Secondly, v. 5 he speaks of diversities, that is, of all the diverse and
several ministeries ordinary and extraordinary in the Church under Christ the
Lord, and v. 4. of the several gifts for the same; and so necessarily of the
ordinary gifts for the ordinary ministeries, then and now.

Thirdly, from v. 8. where mention is made of the word of wisdom, and the word
of knowledge, ordinary gifts of ordinary persons, both in and out of office,
now, and then.

Fourthly, v. 12. he compares the Church of Corinth to a body, having Christ
the head, and each of them members for their parts: of whom one had this gift,
another that, given of God, for their mutual good, but by them abused
otherwise: whereupon I conclude, except there were in Corinth no ordinary gifts
in Pastors, Teachers, or others of God given, and by them abused, that he
speaks not of extraordinary gifts only.

Fifthly, v. 28. after Apostles, and Prophets, he mentions Teachers, which
were ordinary officers, and therefore speaks of ordinary gifts and teaching;
as also Helpers and Governors, who what were they but Deacons and Elders? or
take the words as they are, Helps and Governments: then which, what is now, or
was then more ordinary, both in respect of ministry and gift? VVhereupon I
conclude with good assu^ance, that the Apostle 1. Cor. 12. treats of the gifts
of the spirit, both extraordinary and ordinary

Mr. Yates. ARG. 5.
FRom comparison of prophecy and strange tongues which are laid together
through all the 1. Cor. 14. Verse. 1. prophecy is preferred before all other
spiritual gifts, which cannot be ordinary: for no ordinary and common gift is
to be preferred before all extraordinary and spiritual gifts. But you will
say, though it be not more excellent, yet it is more profitable: I answer, it
is both more excellent and more profitable: for the Apostle intends both,
extolling it for the end, which shows how good and excellent it is, as
likewise for the use, making known the profit and benefit of it. That which is
the best object of our desire, must needs be the best: but of spiritual gifts,
prophecy is the best object of our desire, 1. Cor. 12.31. Desire the best
gifts, chap. 14.1. Covet spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophecy.
Secondly, as it is the best to our selves, so is it the best to others, as may
appear by the whole chapter. Thirdly, all other gifts are given for the good
of prophecy, and not prophecy for them. As it is the best gift, so it is the
most profitable, as being especially for edification, exhortation, and comfort.
But it may be you will object; Is not an ordinary gift of prophecy better then
the extraordinary gift of tongues, or at least more profitable? I answer, No:
for the tongues, Acts 2.3.4. were more profitable to the Church then ever was
the ordinary gift of any man: but compare ordinary with ordinary, and
extraordinary with extraordinary, and we grant prophecy the privilege.

I. Rob. ANSWER.
TO this Argument he himself gives a sufficient answer in our name; only he
sets it down something lamely; where if it came in the full strength, it would
easily with stand the force of his Argument. For where he should say for us,
if he spoke out, that ordinary prophesy is more excellent then tongues, because
more profitable; he makes us to stammer thus, though it be not more excellent,
yet it is more profitable: it being most plain, that the Apostle prefers
prophesy before tongues, because it tends more to edification of the Church
according to which respect alone we are to measure the excellency of Church:
ordinances, and so to frame the object of our desire unto them. But what
speak I of more excellent, and more to edification? since the strange tongues
as there used, without an interpreter, were so far from being comparable to
ordinary prophecy for any good end or use, as they were on the contrary most
vain and ridiculous, as appears, v. 11.22.23. That then which he brings for
the commendation of tongues from Acts: 2. is nothing for tongues as used in
Corinth. The former were, as of simple necessity in themselves unto the
Apostles, for the spreading of the Gospel unto all nations, so then, and there
profitably used: but in Corinth ambitiously and pr-ofanely abused, which M. Ya.
should have observed, but has not in his comparison. Lastly I add as a just
answer to whatsoever he has objected, That tongues confidered in themselves,
how rightly soever used, are not comparable for use and so for excellency, unto
ordinary prophesying or preaching considered in it self: seeing that by it as
well as by extraordinary saving faith is wrought Romans 10. which none can say of
strange Tongues in themselves, without a strange Tongue both from truth and
sense: no nor of any other spiritual gift.

And as it does not appear by the Apostles preferring of prophesy before
tongues, that therefore the prophesy was extraordinary; so it appears unto me
by the Corinthians preferring of tongues before it, that it was but ordinary:
and therefore disregarded by them in comparison of the extraordinary, and
miraculous gift of tongues: whereas, had it also been extraordinary, immediate
and miraculous, most like it would have carried with it the like with the
other, or greater regard, in their eyes.

M. Yates. ARGVM. 6.
FROM exemplification verse. 6. if I come unto you etc. I hope you will grant
that the Apostle Paul had all those spiritual gifts, and therefore speaking of
such prophesy as he had himself, he must needs speak of extraordinary:
likewise he had the knowledge of tongues and yet prefers prophesy before all
his languages, though he spoke more then they all. Now the example in his own
person must needs set forth the general; and therefore if in the general he
should speak of ordinary prophesying, and in the particular of extraordinary,
it would prove idle; for an example is of the same kind with the general.
Again in bringing four particulars he puts revelation first, as the cause of
all the rest; which shows plainly he speaks of such prophesy, as came by
revelation for revelation brings a man to knowledge, and knowledge teaches
wholesome doctrine, and prophesy serves to utter it.

I. Rob. ANSWER.
I do plainly deny the ground upon which he builds the whole weight of his
Argument which is, that the example, and the thing exemplified must be of the
same kind. How often does Christ exemplify the sufferings of his disciples by his
own sufferings, and the sending of his Apostles by his fathers sending of him?
were they therefore of the same kind; their sufferings meritorious, and their
sending mediatorious, because his was such? But amongst other evidences against
him (wherewith all writings divine, and humane are stored) see one, fitly
paring with this in hand. The Apostle provoking the Galathians c. 1:6 unto just
detestation of such as preached another Gospel amongst them, takes an example
from his own preaching, verse. 8. But though we or an Angel, from heaven
preach, another Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you,
let him be accursed. As if he should say, I have preached unto you formerly
justification by faith without the works of the Law of Moses: they now preach
unto you justification by the works of the law joined with Christ, etc. He
exemplifieth their preaching by his: were they therefore of one kind both
Apostolical, because Paul's was such? It is sufficient for an example if it
agree with the thing, which it is brought to exemplify in that for which it is
brought. And so the coming of Christ, to judgment, is by the Apostle
exemplified by the coming of a thief in the night. 1 Thessalonians. 5.2
Are therefore their commings of the same kind? or is it not sufficient that
being most contrary in their kinds, they do yet agree in the adiunct of
suddenesse? So is it sufficient, if Paul's extraordinary Prophesying, and the
Corinthians ordinary, agree in the adiunct or effect of profitablenesse, or
edification, which thing alone the Apostle in his exemplification has respect
unto. His observation about Revelation seems true, and good in it self: but
shows not plainly that for which he brings it, no nor has so much as a
plain show for it. For what show has it of proof that he speaks of
extraordinary prophecy, because it comes from revelation, except he takes it
for granted, that there is in the Church no revelation of the spirit for
teaching but extraordinary, or miraculous: which how can I grant, or he
affirm? Of this more Argum. 8.

M. Yates. ARG. 7.
FROM the fruition of spiritual gifts. 1. Cor. 14.26. has a Psalm, that is
some admirable praise of God, or doctrine, that is some worthy point of
instruction; or a tongue, that is, can speak mysteries with admiration, or
revelation of some secrets either for doctrine or prediction; lastly, or
interpretation whether of tongues, doctrines, or Scripture: all these must
needs be had either by the ordinary pains of the Church, or by the
extraordinary gift of the spirit, you say by the one, and I by the other: and
that I agree more with the Scripture then your self, consider but the
distinction of the gifts, and their admirable matter. A Psalm must needs
consist of meeter, which required art to compose it. Secondly, it could not for
the matter of it, but sound forth some worthy praise of God. Do you think the
Corinthians did study the art of music, or likewise read some admirable divine
books to find out sweet matter to make their songs of? Alas, brother, give
God the glory, it was no doubt some sudden motion of the Spirit, that did
inflame the hearts of believers with some worthy matter of praising God.
Doctrine, that is laid down by our ordinary pains, is that which we usually
give unto Doctors, which after long study, and reading the Scriptures is drawn
to some profitable heads pithily proved, and contrary errors refuted by it. I
think in Corinth there were none of these Doctors, and yet I doubt not but
they were as excellent: for such Doctors as delivered these doctrines had them
after a more easy manner, even the immediate work of the spirit. I hope with
out any further dispute you will yield that the having of a a strange tongue
was extraordinary, as likewise the revelation and interpretation.

I. Rob. ANSVV.
NOT to meddle with his description of a Psalm, Doctrine, etc. further then
concerns our present occasion: The first, Psalm was not so undoubtedly, as
he makes it, some sudden to wit, extraordinary motion of the spirit etc. The
scriptures rather insinuate the contrary, and that these Psalms and spiritual
songs were also (besides the Psalms of David) and those then made by
extraordinary motion (which I will not deny) even ordinary and conceived by
ordinary men and motions. Ephe. 5.18.19. Col. 3.16. Iam. 5.13. The scriptures
are to be extended as largely, and to as common use, as may be, neither is any
thing in the^ to be accounted extraordinary, save that which cannot possibly be
ordinary, which these might be. For the findeng out of sweet matter they had
admirable divine books to read, even the wonderful divine scriptures; For
music, as without doubt many in that most rich and delicate City, were expert
in it, so what reason he has to require for the Church singing then in use,
such study, and art, I see not, except it be because he dwells too near a
cathedral Church. He may see for the plainness of singing used in former
times (and before the spouse of Christ the Church, in all her ordinances was by
Antichrist stripped of her homely but comely attire, and tricked up with his
whorish ornaments) that which Austin has of this matter, Confess. l. 10. c. 13.

For the second which is doctrine, thinks there were no Doctors in Corinth. But
he may well change his thoughts, if he both consider how that Church abounded
(in the body of it) even to excess, in all knowledge and utterance, the
Doctors two special faculties, as also how this Apostle in this Epistle: c,
12. v. 28. affirms expressly that God had set in the Church, amongst other
officers, Doctors, or Teachers. Besides that it is enough for my purpose if
there were any in Corinth, though not officer able by ordinary gift to
deliliver doctrine; which (considering the fore-signified state of that Church,
both in respect of Paul's ministry amongst them and testimony of them, being in
that City, which was the chief of all Greece for government, Greece also
being the fountain of learning, and eloquence) can not, I think, be reasonably
denied.

To yield you without further dispute that Revelation, and Interpretation were
(viz. only) the immediate work of the spirit, were in us more courtesy then
wisdom. For Interprecation, I see not, but that either he himself who spoke
the tongue by an extraordinary gift, or any other man that understood it,
having ordinary ability to interpret the matter delivered) both lawfully might,
and in conscience ought so to do, except he would quench the spirit both in
respect of the extraordinary gift of the tongue, and ordinary gift of
interpretation: but that the Pastor or Teacher might not do this by his
ordinary gift (which is yet a fort strong enough to keep us from yielding) were
strange to imagine. Besides, let it be noted how the Apostle v. 13. exhorts to
pray for, the gift of Interpretation: Now how a man might pray for an
extraordinary and miraculous gift, which he wholly wanted, without an
extraordinary motion, or promise, and merely upon the Apostles exhortation
general, I see not, but would learn of him that could teach me.

M. Yates. ARG. 8.
FROM present Revelation v. 30. In the verse going before is laid down in what
order they shall prophecy, even as it was before for strange tongues: yet here
is a further injunction and that is of silence, if any thing of more weight
shall be revealed unto another: why should the other keep silence if it were
known before, that this man should speak after him? if it were ordinary
prophesying, and such as our pains, and study brought us unto, then were it fit
that we should have our liberty to go on and not be interrupted by an other:
but the Apostle upon the Revelation to another even sitting by enioyns silence
to the present speaker, which if his Revelation had been studied before could
not be any motive, or persuasion why he should yield to the other, that is
now upon the sudden to take his place: this were for one Prophet to disgrace
another: but the clear sense is to any man that will not wrangle, that because
it pleases the spirit to inspire one sitting by with some more excellent
matter, either in regard of the same subject or some other, the Apostle enioyns
silence.

I. Rob. ANSVV.
TO his question why the former speaker should keep silence if it were known
before that a 2d. should speak after him it is easily answered: that even
therefore he was to keep silence; that is, to take up himself in due time, as
being to think in modesty, that the conduits of the spirit of God did not run
into his vessel alone, but that others also might receive of the fulness of the
same spirit to speak something further to the edification of the Church;
especially sitting down in some appointed place which it should seem verse 30.
and Act. 13.14. he that purposed to prophecy used to take: and which order I
think the Jews yet observe in their Synagogues. And where he ads, that if it
were ordinary prophecy and such as our study brought us unto, then were it fit
we should have our liberty to go on and not to be interrupted by another, which
he also accounts a disgracing of the former; I would know of him whether it
were not as fit, and much more, that the extraordinary Prophets immediately
inspired by the Holy Ghost, and who could not err, should have their liberty
to go on uninterrupted? Is not this without all compass of reason, that the
extraordinary Prophet immediately inspired, should not have as much liberty to
go on without being interrupted, as the ordinary, who might vvorthily deserve
to be interrupted for speaking untruly or impertinently? although I do not
think that the Apostle requires any interrupting of the former by the later
(which were rude) if not worse) but only a convenient cession, or
place-giving to a second by the first speaker, as has been said. Now the
Exception of disgrace to the former, by the latters speaking, is well to be
minded, that it may appear how evil customs do infect the minds of godly
men, so as they think it a disgrace that one should give place to another to
speak after him further, or otherwise then he has done. But it was not so
from the beginning: but since they, who under Christ should be servants of
the Church, have been her masters, and have exercised this magisteriall
teaching now in use, where ordinarily one alone in a Church (diverse others in
diverse places better able then he, sitting at his feet continually to learn)
must be heard all his life long; thinking it a disgrace to have another speak
any thing further then he has done: which was the very disease in the Church
of Corinth: wherein he that spoke first would take up all the time himself;
whereas he should in modesty have conceived, that a second or third
(especially seeming provided to speak, by seating themselves in the same place
with him) might have something revealed further, or otherwise then he had.

Which Revelation the Apostle does not oppose to foregoing study (as M. Yates
thinks) but unto emulation and study of contradiction: teaching that the
spirit alone must be heard in the Church, speaking by whose mouth soever. And,
that there is in the Church an ordinary spirit of revelation; besides
comfortable experience, these places amongst many other, do clearly prove,
Math. 11.28. and 16.17. Ephesians. 1.17. Phil. 3.17.

Mr. Yates. ARG. 9.
FRom vocation, v. 29, 32.37. these spiritual men are called Prophets, and to
imagine a Prophet without a calling, is that which the Scripture will not
endure: therefore all these Prophets either had immediate calling from God, or
mediate from men; or else they took it up themselves: the two first we grant
lawful callings, but this intolerable. Numb. 11.28. The servant of Moses
says, Forbid Eldad and Medad to prophecy: his reason was, because he thought
they had no calling: which had been true, if they had taken it up without
immediate inspiration: But Moses knowing that it was from God, wished that the
like gift might be upon all Gods people: so that those were true Prophets for
the instant by an immediate call from God: and the text says, They added no
further, showing that as the gift ceased, so did they.

I. Rob. ANSWER.
IT is true, that Spiritual men are called Prophets, or rather, Prophets
Spiritual men: what is it then that makes a spiritual man, but a gift of the
spirit? and what a prophet ordinary or extraordinary, but the gift of prophecy
ordinary or extraordinary? vvhereupon it follows undeniably, that so many
with us, or elsewhere, as have the ordinary gift or ability to prophecy, are
prophets, though out of office. In this Argument he has made a snare
wherewith himself is taken unavoydably. Secondly, we affirm, that our
prophets have a calling, which I have declared formerly, not to make them
prophets by condition or estate, for that they are by their gift, but for the
use or exercise of the same gift before bestowed upon them by the Lord,
through their labor and industry. Of Eldads and Medads prophesying we shall
speak hereafter: only note we in the mean while, how M. Yates, and
rightly, apportioneth their prophesying to their gift, as we do also ours:
according to that of the Apostle, Having then gifts differing, according to the
grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to the
proportion of faith: or a ministry, let us wayt on the ministry, Romans 12.6.7.
They then that have a gift, must prophecy according to their proportion.

M. Yates. ARG. 10.
FRom distinction, v. 37. the Apostle from the whole Church turns himself to
their Prophets, and spiritual men, showing plainly, that these had some
particular place above the rest: and he gives them special charge to observe
the things he writes to the Church: therefore those were in some calling above
others: and to imagine the contrary, is to run wide of the current of the whole
Scripture: to set men in public place without calling, is the same with
confusion and disorder.

I. Rob. ANSVV.
THIS Argument is founded upon the groundless presumption with the former:
viz. that there is in the Church no lawful calling for men able to prophesy,
but by officing them. And for Paul's turning his speech to the Prophets. v. 37.
it shows indeed, that they were above the rest, after a sort: and so they are
with us rightly preferred before others, which want that endowment of the
spirit, by which they are enabled to speak to the edification of the Church.

The Confirmation of the Scriptures and reasons brought in my book to prove
public prophesying out of office by an ordinary gift.
AND before we come to examine M. Yates his Answers to the Scriptures by me
produced, I desire the Reader to observe with me these two things. First, that
I do not affirm in my book, that all the there alleged Scriptures are meant
of ordinary prophesy; but that the same is proved by them. Neither will he (I
presume) deny, but that many things are sufficiently proved from a scripture by
necessary consequence, and just proportion, besides the particular properly
intended in it. 2. That M. Yates so puts the question, as that it is hard to
say, whether he do me, or himself the more injury: namely, whether the places
prove an ordinary gift of prophesy out of office. For, as I do not say, that
they prove the gift, but the use, and exercise of the gift bestowed by God
whether ordinary, or extraordinary, so neither would he have denied (had he not
leaped, before he had looked) but that others besides ministers, have an
ordinary gift of prophecy. Where the Apostle requires of him that desires the
office of a Bishop, that he be apt to teach, 1. Tim. 3.1.2. and able to exhort
with sound doctrine Tit. 1.9. does he not therein most evidently teach, that
the gift and ability to teach, preach, and prophesy, not only may, but must,
both be and appear to be in the person to be called to the office of
ministry? He that is not a prophet, or has not the gift of prophesying or
preaching, (for by his gift he is a Prophet, and by the use of it he occupies
the place of a Prophet) before he be appointed a Pastor, is an Idol shepherd
set up in the temple of God: neither does the office either give, of so much
indeed as increase the gift, but only gives solemn commission, and charge to
use it.

The first Scripture by me brought, is Numb. 11.29. where Moses the man of God
wishes that the whole people of the Lord were Prophets, the Lord putting his
spirit upon them.

This place, says M. Yates in his Ans. speaks of the pouring out of the Spirit
in an extraordinary manner, as may apear by the occasion of the speech v. 24.
etc. Where also in a tedious manner (as his manner is) he proves the gift of
prophesying given to the 70. Elders to have been extraordinary: which as I deny
not, so neither needed he to have proved. But this I affirm, that hence is
proved the lawfulness of ordinary prophesying out of office by men enabled
thereunto. And first, as Moses wishes that all the Lords people were
Prophets, the Lord giving his spirit unto them; so the minister may and ought
to wish that the Lord would so bless the ordinary endeavors of his people
now, by his spirit, as that they all might be Prophets, that is, able for
gifts to speak to edification. The minister which desires not this, envieth
for his own, and the Clergies sake, which Moses would not that Joshua should do
for his. Secondly Moses makes it all one to be a Prophet, and to have the Lord
putting his Spirit upon a man. Now if the Lords so giving his spirit unto a
man, as that he be thereby enabled extraordinarily to prophesy, make him an
exrraordinary prophet, why should not by due proportion, such a gift of the
Spirit given by the Lord to a man, as by which he is enabled to prophesy
ordinarily, serve also to make him an ordinary Prophet? and so by consequence,
if there be amongst us any though out of office so enabled to prophesy, or
preach, what hinders them from being Prophets even of the Lords own making by
his spirits gift, and work upon their study, and endeavors? And if they be
Prophets then may they Prophecy; which Moses also in that place insinuates:
for in wishing that they were all Prophets, he wishes as well the use, as the
possession of the gift. M. Yates may see a very leraned man Io. Wolphius in his
Com. upon 2. King. 23. showing by this place the liberty of private Christians
that are able to speak, and teach not only in ordinary congregations, but even
in most solemn Councels.

The next place is 2. Chron. 17.7. where King Iehosophat sent his Princes to
teach in the Cities of Judah, and with them the Levites etc.

M Yates accounts it a monstrous conceit that the princes should be public
teachers, which says he were only by their presence and authority to back the
Levites: adding that the translation is mended by Iunius and Tremelius etc. but
if the Jews heard him (professing the knowledge of Moses and the Prophets) so
speak, they would marvayle at his ignorance of a thing so frequent and evident
in their writings: with whom it is and ever has been a received truth, that
any of their ((...)) wise men; as they after the scriptures, math. 23.34. 1
cor. 1.20. Ier. 18.18. call them, may and ought to teach in their synagogues
without respect had to office: neither does the translation of Iunius and
Tremelius by any necessity make for him: neither can it be set against me
without violence to the original: from the simplicity where of they do (with
due reverence unto them be it spoken) seem unto me something to turn aside in
the 8 verse. Pagnine, the 70 Interpreters, Ierom, and all our English Bibles
carry it directly to our sense. And if the conceit be monstrous that these
princes preached publicly, it is not bred only in my brain: the very same
Scripture having been alleged very lately by the public Professor in the
University of Leyden in a solemn assembly, as expressly proving it lawful for
others then ministers to teach publicly. And because much weight lies upon
this ground, which yet he thinks very sandy and light, I will make it clear
to all indifferent men's judgments, that these Princes, and so others in Israel,
and Judah (though no Levites, nor Church officers) might lawfully teach and
preach publicly in the Temple, Synagogues, and Cities.

First then, all Princes, Magistrates, Judges, and Governors were bound to
open expound, and apply the Laws by which they governed, according to the
several occasions offered; otherwise they ruled by tyranny, and appetite:
which laws for all the administrations even of the commonwealth were only the
written word of God: whereupon I conclude, that if to open, expound, and apply
the word of God, be to preach, and teach, they then had not only power, but
charge so to do.

2. It may appear what these Princes of Ichosaphat (partaking of his power)
were to do in this case, by that which he himself, and other godly Kings have
done. The sum of his most pithy sermon we have recorded. 2. Chron. 19. unto
the Judges. v. 6.7. and unto the Levites v. 9.10.11. as also his divine prayer
unto God in the public Congregation. c. 20.5.6. etc. Likewise the excellent
sermon of King Hezekiah unto the Priests, and Levites, in the very temple, 2.
Chron. 29.4.5 etc. also of Nehemiah with others, teaching the people the Law of
the Lord. Neh. 8.10: the Kings, and Princes being as shepherds to feed the
people, as by government, so by instruction in the Law of their God. Descend
we down lower to the time of Christ, and we shall see this matter put out of
all question. Do we not read every where how that the Scribes, Pharisees, and
Lawyers did teach publicly amongst the Jews; of whom yet many were no Levits
or Church officers, but indifferently of any tribe, Phil. 3.5. And if it were
not the received order in Israel of old, for men out of office to speak, and
teach in public, how was Jesus the son of Mary admitted to dispute in the
Temple with the Doctors? Luke 2.46. and to teach, and preach in the Synagogues
so commonly as he did? Mat. 9.35. Luke 4.16.17. and how were Paul, and
Barnabas, sitting down in the Synagogue, sent unto, after the lecture of the
Law by the ruler, that if they had any word of exhortation unto the people,
they should say on? Act. 13.14.15.

But if any manshall answer, that these were extraordinary persons, and so
taught by an extraordinary gift, he speaks the truth, but to no purpose. For
what was that to the order received in the Temple, and Synagogues, and to the
Rulers thereof, who did not believe in Christ, nor acknowledge either his, or
his Apostles authority; but only admitted them unto the use of their gift, as
they would have done, and did ordinarily, any other men able to teach: as also
the rulers of the Synagogues of the Jews do at this day.

The third place is mistaken by the Printer, in omitting only one prick, which
was corrected in many Coppies, and might, easily have been observed by the
Reader, For Ier. 50.45. it should be Ier, 50.4.5. M. Yates therefore upon that
Scripture refutes his own guess, and not my proof.

The fourth place is Math. 10.1.5.6. where Christ calling unto him his twelve
Disciples sends them to preach the Kingdom of heaven to the lost sheep of
Israel.

His answer is, that the twelve Apostles were called into office, and had their
calling from the first election of Christ, but had a further confirmation
after, and greater measure of Gods Spirit to lead them into al truth, as a
Justice of peace may be put in office and yet receive a further Confirmation,
yea and greater means to perform his place. I affirm on the other side, (and
shall evidently prove it God assisting me) that these twelve were not actually
possessed of their Apostleship, till after Christ's Resurrection but were only
Apostles elect, as you call him the Major elect, who has not the office of
Major committe^d to him of a good space after. Neither am I herein of the mind
with the Papists (to put M. Yates out of fear) that Peter was not in office
until Christ gave him charge to feed his sheep. Ioh. 21. (which yet I am
persuaded never Papist held of his Apostleship, but of his primacy, and
universal headship, or Bishopric) but of the same mind, whereof himself is in
his first argument, to wit, that his commission Apostolic was actually
conferred upon him jointly with the rest. John, 20.22.23.


1. Now if the Commission Apostolic were but then given, they were but then,
and not before actually Apostles, except he will say they were Apostles, before
they had commission, that is calling from Christ so to be. I would now see how
he can salve the wound, which he has given himself.

2. After that the Lord Jesus had Mat. 11.11. preferred John Baptist above all
the Prophets which were before him, he yet ads in the same place, that the
least in the Kingdom of heaven is greater then he. The least. i. the least
Minister; In the kingdom of heaven. i. in the Church of the new testament
properly called, which began not till after the death of Christ who lived and
dyed a member of the Jewish Church. The Apostles then being officers of the
Church of the new testament, and Kingdom of heaven, and not of the old or
Jewish Church, it cannot be that they were Apostles in act, before Christ's
death; except an adiunct can be before the subject, and an officer before the
corporation in and of which he is an officer.

3. Considering the ignorance of these disciples at that time in the main
mysteries of Christ: of the nature of his kingdom, his death and resurrection,
Math, 20.21. Luke. 24.20.21. etc. John. 20.9. Mark. 16.14. as also, how utterly
unfurnished they were of gifts befitting Apostolical teaching (for which (as
being an extraordinary dispensation, and that in the highest degree)
extraordinary, and infallible revelation and direction of the spirit was
requisite, wherewith they were but first, (as it seems) sprinkled John.
20.22. and afterward more plentifully filled at the day of Pentecost) they
were as fit for an Apostleship as David was for Saul's armor which he could not
weild nor go with.

4. Besides, if they had the office of Apostleship committed to them Math. 10.
how was it that they continued not their ministration in that office; but
returneing after a few days to their master Christ, continued with him as his
disciples till his death. Christ Jesus did not keep a company of non-residents
about him for his Chaplins, as M. Yates insinuates against him.

Lastly, we are expressly taught, Ephesians. 4.8 11. When Christ ascended on high, he
gave gifts unto men, Apostles, Prophets, etc. The Apostles then were first
given actually at the Lords ascension, and were before only designed to
become Apostles, or Apostles elect, but not ordained, nor possessed of any
office: and therefore preached, and that with warrant from Christ, without
office.

The next Scripture is, Luke 8.39. by M. Yates thus opened: Christ having
delivered the man possessed, bids him go, and show what great things God had
done for him: and it is said he went and preached (that is, if it be to their
purpose) by ordinary pains and study, he preached the Gospel. And with pity
upon us poor souls that cannot distinguish the publishing of a miracle, and
the gift (he should say the work, if he distinguished as he ought) of
preaching; he adds, that if Christ had minded to have made him a public
preacher, he would first have taken him with him, and instructed him, and then
have sent him abroad.

First, let it be observed, that the word used by Mark for his preaching, (...).
is the same word which is commonly used for the most solemn preaching, that
is, by the Apostles and Evangelists. Secondly, Christ bids him, Mark. 5.19. Go
home and declare how great things the Lord had done for him, and had had
compassion on him, and v. 20. he is said to have published in Decapolis (Luke
has it, throughout the whole City) how great things Jesus had done for him.
Which he doing, what else did he, but preach, publish, and declare the great
love and mercy of God, in and by Jesus Christ toward miserable sinners for the
curing of their bodily and spiritual maladies? Thirdly, where he makes the
publishing of this miracle and the preaching of the Gospel diverse things, and
pitties us poor souls that we cannot distinguish between them: as Christ bad
the women of Jerusalem, not to weep for him, but for themselves; so surely had
he need to pity not us herein, but himself in his so great mistaking. Are not
the miracles of Christ storied in the Scriptures a maine part of the Gospel?
and the publishing of them a part of the preaching of the Gospel? And when M.
Yates opens and publishes a miracle of Christ's (as this man did) does he not as
well and as truly preach the Gospel as at any other time? Let the wise judge,
who is to be pitied. To shut up this point, it is said Ioh. 20.30. that Jesus
did many other signs, etc. and v. 31. But these are written that ye might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing, ye
might have life through his name. The publishing then of the signs and
miracles which Christ did, is the preaching of faith in his name, to salvation:
which this man therefore did, especially amongst them which were not ignorant
of the Law of Moses, and promise of the Messiah to come: which, by his glorious
miracles done by his own power, and in his own name, he both declared and
proved himself to be. Ioh. 5.36. and 10.37.38. And where he ads, that Christ
gave this man commission to do that which he did, but he admires who gave ours
any such authority, I answer, even the same Christ, as then immediately, so now
mediatly by those unto whom he has given authority under himself, for the
ordering of the gifts of his spirit in his Church. And sufficient it is for the
question between him and me, if it appear (as in this person) that Christ has
given commission to men out of office by an ordinary gift, to publish, and
preach in public the the Gospel of salvation.

I do quote next in my book, Luke 10.1. -- 9. which for that W.E. omitteth,
and leaves out, M. Yates thanketh God; but in truth he has more cause to
thank him, for sparing him in a place which so pregnantly proves the
preaching of the kingdom of God by men out of office: except he can assign
some new found office, and the same but of two or three days lasting, as v.
17. to those 70 there sent.

We are in the next place to come unto Ioh. 4.28.29.39. which he opens and
answers with admiration, as the former place, withpitty and compassion, on
this manner, O simplicity, with contradiction to his own writing. Simplicity
that cannot see bttween preaching of the Gospel, and carrying tidings of a man
that told her (to wit, the woman of Samaria) of al things that ever she did, is
not this (says she) the Christ? But besides simplicity, here is contradiction:
for says M. Robinson, and that truly, a woman is not suffered to exercise an
ordinary gift of prophecy in the Church; and shall the woman of Samaria serve
your turn that it is lawful for men to exercise such a gift?

It is indeed my simplicitte to think that the Gospel (as the word imports)
is nothing else but glad tidings: and that to preach the Gospel is nothing
else but to carry or bring glad tidings of Christ before promised, then come
into the world. It is also my simplicity to think, since by the tidings which
this woman brought, many of the Samaritans believed on Christ in a measure, v.
39. and that without preaching of the word of God, none can believe, Romans 10
14.17, that therefore she preached unto the Samaritans the same word of God in a
measure also, and that as truly and effectually as ever M. Yates did to his
parishioners, though she went not up into a pulpit as he does. And that he may
judge aright of this matter, let him call to mind, that those Samaritans
received the books of Moses, as did the Jews: and as they, looked for the
Messiah, or Christ promised to, and of Abraham: bearing themselves for the
children of the Patriarks, and true worshippers of God, as they had been, v.
20.28. and being so prepared, were easily made as regions, or corn fields
white unto the Harvest, v. 35. And so this woman, by declaring unto them that,
by which this Jesus, the son of Mary, proved himself to be the Christ, or
Messiah promised, preached faith unto them most properly and effectually, even
that main point of faith then in controversy both in Iudaea and Samaria, and
Galilee, and the Countries thereunto adjoining; which was, that Jesus was the
Christ. I suppose M. Yates has not sufficiently thought of these things, and
do hope, that in godly modesty he will suffer himself to be better informed.

And for contradiction, between these two propositions: A woman may not teach
in the Church, and A woman may teach out of the Church, or where no Church is
(as it was in Samaria) it must be by other Logic, then I have learnt: But he
will then demand as he does, how this Woman's preaching can serve my turn? I
answer, very well, by good consequence of Reason, thus: If a woman may lawfully
teach out of the Church to the begetting of faith, as this woman did, but not
in the Church, because she is a woman by sex: then a man, against whom that
reason of restraint of Sex lies not, may lawfully teach both without and
within the Church. Of which consequence more hereafter.

Another Scripture is, Act. 8.1.4. with chap. 11.19.20.21. where it is
recorded, how all the Church at Jerusalem was scattered abroad, except the
Apostles, and that they which were scattered abroad, went every where preaching
the word, etc.

M. Yates answers, that besides the Apostles which were in office, there were
seventy disciples, which Christ before his death had made laborers in his
harvest: and therefore these might preach, or any other that had an
extraordinary gist of prophecy: the one by virtue of his office and gift
together, the other by commission from the Holy Ghost to exercise that gift
which they had received in the day of Pentecost, or any other. But says your
Author, compare this place with Acts 11.19.20.21. and the truth will fully
appear. I answer, it will fully appear against you: for Christ charged both
his Apostles, and likewise the 70. Disciples, that they should preach to none
but the Jews: and therefore it is sufficient that they had so many preachers
in office already by the commission of Christ, to go through all those places:
neither will I deny, that there might be others whom the Holy Ghost immediately
raised up to manifest the excellent gifts that were to be powered down upon the
Church in the primitive times.

His answer is very dark and ambiguous, but in which are contained sundry
errors evident enough. First, he makes those of the dispersio^ which went about
preaching the word, to be of the 70 disciples. Luke 10. and others the like
furnished with an extraordinary gift of prophecy: but seems to allow them for
no officers, in the beginning of his answer, when he thus speaks, Besides the
Apostles which were in office, there were 70. Disciples etc. yet afterward in
these words, and therefore it is sufficient, that they had so many preachers in
office already by the commission of Christ to go thorough all these places,
etc, he bestows some office or other, upon them. Secondly, he misseth in two
Scriptures which in his answer, he points at: the former is Act. 2.4 where
he gathers, that others besides, the twelve, received the gift of prophecy
extraordinary at the day of Pentecost: the second (if I mistake not) is Math.
10.5.6. where he racks the edict or prohibition of Christ laid upon the
Apostles, and (as he says) upon the 70. Disciples, of preaching to any but
Jews, far above the reach thereof; even unto this time of the dispersio^,
whereas it reached only to the death of Christ, when the wall of partition
between Jews and Gentiles was broken down: after which they were by the
express words of their Commission to preach to all people, beginning indeed at
Jerusalem and tarrying there, till they were endued with power from on high,
and so proceeding unto all nations. Luke 24.47.49. as it is also recorded Act.
11.20. that some of this dispersion preached the L. Jesus to the Grecians in
Antioch. Thirdly, it is plain by that which I have formerly said, that neither
these 70 disciples (no nor the 12.) were by Christ possessed of any office
before his death; no nor yet furnished with any extraordinary gifts of
prophecy: the Evangelist (who knew well, and is worthy to be believed) bearing
also witness with me, that the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that
Jesus was not yet glorified, John. 7.39.

Lastly it is altogether unreasonable to imagine that they who were scattered,
and preached abroad, being the body of the Church at Jerusalem (excepting the
Apostles) were all officers: and little more reasonable to think that they were
all extraordinarily endued with the spirit of Prophecy. For first, there is no
circumstance in the text leading that way: and to imagine extraordinary, and
miraculous things without good evidence, is extraordinary licentiousness, and
presumption. 2. the only titles given unto them are; all the Church which was
at Jerusalem, they that were scattered abroad: and again c. 11. they which
were scattered abroad, some of the^ were me^ of Cyprus, and Cyrene, etc.
nothing insinuating any office of ministry. 3. Their preaching here and there
is only noted to be by reason of their scattering hither and thither through
persecution, and not of any extraordinary gift, and dispensation committed unto
them. Fourthly, if they had been extraordinary Prophets immediately, and
extraordinarily inspired, there had been no need of so speedy sending of
Barnabas from Jerusalem to Antioch with supply, though he were a man full of
the Holy Ghost, for so were such Prophets as well as he Ephesians. 2.20. and 3.5. I
conclude therefore as before that these men's preaching was by a gift, and
liberty, common unto them and us.

The next Scripture is 1. Pet. 4.10, 11. As every man has receiud the gift so
minister the same one to another as good stewards of the manifold grace of God;
If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God. If any man minister let
him do it, as of the ability which God gives, that God in all things may be
glorified, etc.

This (says M. Yates) is little to he purpose, only thus much: would the
Apostle persuade, that we ought to be harberous one of another, and that
without grudging, because all that we have is given us of God, who has left us
not as ingrossers of his benefits, but as good disposers to his glory and our
brothers good.

He that but veiweth the place without prejudice, cannot but see, that the
Apostle would persuade more then so much: and that M. Yates does injuriously
enclose the Apostles words, v. 10. to verse 9. which though they ly in common
to both, yet belong much more to the verse following. Verse 9. He exhorts to
hospitality, and verse 10. rises from that particular to the more general use
of all gifts, or graces, and so verse. 11. brings, for example, two
specialties: 1. the gift of prophecy in speaking: 2. the ministering of the
ability which God gives bodily or otherwise in the Church. Neither can the
Apostles meaning without extreme violence be restrained to v. 9. which speaks
only of hospitality: which is but the use or ministering of that one gift or
grace of liberality. He says in the tenth verse. As every man has received
the gift; that is as one has received this gift, another that, and every one
some: so minister the same one to another: that is, so let every such person
mutually in the bond of love, as verse 8. communicate his gift: as good
disposers of the manifold grace of God: that is, knowing that every one what
gift soever he has received, is but as the Lords Steward therein. Is
Liberality alone a manifold grace? and Hospitality alone the ministering of a
manifold grace of God? To the ministering of a manifold grace, the Apostle
persuades, and therefore not only that we ought to be harborous one to
another, which is but the ministering of one grace.

Two other Scriptures from the Revelation follow. The former is chap. 11. v. 3.
I will give to my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand two
hundred sixty days, clothed in sackcloath.

This is meant (says M. Yates) of the two Testaments, and the instruments that
God should raise up to use as faithful witnesses against Antichrist: but what
is this for an ordinary gift of prophecy? Surely in this there is some
extraordinary thing, because it is said God will give power, that is, give them
life again: for Antichrist did kill these witnesses when he stopped the
current of the holy word of God, and shut the mouths of the Ministers, etc.

His exposition I will not deny (nor need to fear) save as with great
partiality on the clergies part, he makes the ministers of the word of God,
that is, men in office, the only faithful witnesses against Antichrist.
Whereas the contrary is most true; and that in Antichrists reign no
Church Officer, as an officer, witnessed against him, but all for him: as both
having their authority by him, and binding themselves to submit their doctrine
to his censure. The persons indeed, that were also officers, even
Mass Priests, Monks and Friars, witnessed some of them against him, but so
did not their offices, or they in respect of them, (which is all one) but
rather with him, as advantaging his state and Hierarchy. Something
extraordinary I do with him acknowledge to have been in them, in respect of
the order then prevailing, and of the bondage spiritual under which all both
things and persons were: as also of the degree of their ordinary both gifts and
graces to put them forth in service of the truth: but that these witnesses
against Antichrist had any extraordinary, or miraculous gift of prophecy
(which he insinuates, and must affirm, if (...) he will draw them from our
part) is merely imagined both against experience and their own plea. But for
the opening of this place, I refer the reader to our learned Countryman M.
Brightman, where he shall find affirmed, and proved, that these two prophets
were the holy Scriptures, and Assemblies of the faithful.

The other scripture is Reu. 14.6. where the Angel flies in the midst of
heaven having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the
earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.

By heaven (says M. Yates) is to be understood the visible Church, and by the
Angel the learned men that God has ever raised up in the midst of popery to
carry the blessed word of God in the midst of heaven, that is, raised from the
earthly corruption of Antichrist, but not as yet at the height of purity, etc.

As I do not conceive of any such mystery in these words, (flying in the midst
of heaven) but only that these Angels should roundly and clearly (specially in
respect of former times) publish the gospel far, and near, as is the flying
of a bird in the airy heaven, or firmament, speedy and evident; so (that
signified) I assent to his exposition, as being also no way prejudicial, but
much aduantageable to my purpose. For if those learned, and Angel-like men were
to publish the gospel in the midst of popery; and that neither by any
extraordinary, or miraculous gift, nor by virtue of their office, then is
public prophesying out of office by an ordinary gift approuable. The first
part I hope he will easily grant; if not, let him name the man miraculously
inspired in the midst of popery. For the latter, the office it self or function
was no ministry of Christ's appointment, as being the office of a Friar, Monk,
or Mass Priest, so their power to administer it was from or by the pope, as
universal Bishop: that is, as Antichrist. In respect then of the Gospel which
they preached, and of their gifts and graces personal, by which they were both
enabled and provoked thereunto, they were Angels of God; but in regard of their
office, and power Ecclesiastical, and Hierarchicall, Angels of Antichrist.
Besides that when they gave their clearest testimony against Antichrist, they
were, for the most part, all excommunicated out of the Church of Rome: and so
being no members, could not be officers of any Church. Whereupon I conclude,
that the witness which they gave to the truth, was but personal, and not
ministerial, so far forth as it was of God, or by him approved. And thus it
appears how in the quoting of those scriptures, we have not offered abuse to
Gods word (as he abuses us) but have with good conscience, as in the sight of
God, noted them as serving to prove lawful, public prophecy by an ordinary
gift out of office.

Lastly, 1. Cor. 14. comes into handleing, with the proofs thence taken: which
what weight they have, shall appear after rehearsal of some more general
considerations premised in my book, in the same place, for the better
understanding of the point. as. 1. that the Church of Corinth above all other
Churches, did abound with spiritual gifts both ordinary, and extraordinary. 2.
that they abused these gifts too much unto faction and ambition. 3. that
therevppon the Apostle takes occasion in the beginning of the 12. Chap. and so
forward, to draw them to the right use of these gifts of God, which was the
employment of the^ to the edifiing of the body in love. 4. and lastly, that
having laid down chapter 13. a full description and large commendation of that
grace of love, chapter 14 and the beginning of it, he exhorts to prophesying, and
to the study and use of that gift; which though it were not so strange a thing
as was the sudden gift of tongues, nor which drew with it such wonder and
admiration, yet was it more profitable for the Church: and though a matter of
less note, yet of greater charity, which must bear sway in all our actions.
VVhereupon I lay down the first reason for brethrens (though no officers)
liberty in these words: Because the Apostle speaks of the manifestation of a
gift, or grace common to all persons, as well brethren as ministers, ordinary
as extraordinary, and that at all times, which is love: as also of such fruits
and effects of that grace, as are no less common to all, then the grace it
self, nor of less continuuance in the Churches of Christ, to wit, of
edification, exhortion, and comfort, v. 3. compared with 1 Thessalonians. 5.11.14.

In answering the former part of the Reason he is very large but more
negligent, as appears in his denying, that the Apostle speaks of a gift common
to all persons) and in more then denying, (for his rude term I will conceal
for his credits sake) that it was common to all persons at all times admiring
how I dare affirm any such thing: adding: that love was enjoined to all but
this gift only of such, as did excel amongst them: whereas the very gift,
which I speak of in that place, or grace rather, as I there call it, was none
other, but the grace of love; as any that will may see in the reason: which
general grace ought to manifest, and express it self in the edifying use of
all the special gifts of the spirit: which by it are set a work and moved, as
the lesser wheels of a clock by the greater: and from which grace the Apostle
provokes the Church to the stirring up of the gift of prophesy, unto
edification, as well now as then. And whereas, to my ground, (as he puts it,
and as after a sort I intended, from v. 3. compared with 1. These. 5.11.14. viz.
that since the end which is edification exhortation, and comfort continues,
therefore the gift of prophesy also continues) he answers; that there are
many means to effect one end, and yet some of them may cease yea all of them,
and other come in their rooms, as, for extraordinary gifts, ordinary; and so
for Apostles, ordinary ministers: instancing further in tongues, which v. 26.
are for edification; he neither speaks so properly, as is meet, nor (all
admitted which he says) takes away the force of the Argument. Strange tongues,
(to speak properly, and pressely, as in disputing) are no means of edifying the
Church; but the interpretation, and application of the matter of the tongues:
neither does the office of the ministry in it self edify, but the use and
exercise of it in teaching, and exhorting; no nor yet the gift of prophesying,
but as it is used in speaking, as v. 3. he that prophesies, that is uses the
gift of prophecy, speaks unto men, to exhortation edification, and comfort.
There being then no other means to edify, exhort, and comfort in the Church but
prophesying, the Apostle (as appears by the two places set together) laying
these duties from the common grace of love as well upon brethren, as officers,
ordinary as extraordinary, and at all times, in the Church, therein gives
warrant to an ordinary exercise of prophecy in the Church by me^ out of office
(to wit having gifts and abilities answerable) to the end of the world.

The second Argument is from v. 21. where the Apostle says, ye may all
prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted, he speaks
of alls prophesying as largely as of alls learning.

This (says he) is absurd: are all the Church Prophets? if all may prophecy
who shall learn? the H. Gh. says all, but that is to be understood of such as
have gifts; all ought to have the gift of hearing, but the like is not of
prophesying: and I say this gift was extraordinary, for how could all men study
the Scriptures when they had them not in their native tongues?

It were absurd indeed, if I thought, that every person in the Church were to
prophecy: but why should he chalendge me, or I purge my self of this
absurdity? whereas the contrary is most evident, both in the words of the
question, which are, that others having received a gif^ thereunto, may and
ought to stir up the same, and to use it in the Church; and every where in the
handling of it. By all then I mean all that have gifts: and so take all for
prophesying as largely (yet in the subject, according to the received rule of
expounding the notes of universality,) as the other all for learning. His
question, if all may prophecy who shall learn? is easily answered. For they
who prophecy at one time may learn at another: It is the disease of the
exalted Clergy to skorn to learn any thing of others then themselves, and
almost one of another. Where he further says, that all ought to have the gift
of hearing, but the like is not prophesying, it is true, and that every
particular person in the Church is not bound to have yt gift; but if he speak
any thing to the purpose in hand, he must go further, and say that no ordinary
brethren out of office ought to have the gift of prophecy: which if it were
true, then ought none to strive for fitness to become officers: neither were
the reproof just which the Apostle lays, not only, nor so much, if at all,
upon the officers, as upon the brethren, Heb. 5.12. that for the time they
ought to be teachers. Of his unworthy mistaking about the Scriptures not being
in the Corinths native tongue, which he makes the only ground of his Answer,
else where. To conclude this Argument. The Apostle writing to the Church of
Corinth, ye may all prophecy one by one, cannot be understood of extraordinary
Prophets, except we conceive that the body of that Church was or might be
prophets extrarodinary, and miraculously inspired: which, considering the
superexcellency of that state by me elsewhere laid down, is a presumption above
my reach, and least of all agreeing with M. Yates his judgment in his answer to
the next Argument, which is, that extraordinary prophecy did then begin to
cease in the Church.

The third Argument is from v. 34. where the Apostle restrains women from
prophesying, or other speaking in the Church with authority, as also 1 Timothy
2.11.12. and in forbidding women, gives liberty to all men gifted accordingly,
opposing women to men, sex to sex, and not women to officers: and again, in
restraining women shows his meaning to be of ordinary not extraordinary
prophesying: for women immediately, extraordinarily, and miraculously inspired
might speak without restraint, Exodus, 15.20. Judge. 4.24. Luke 2.36. Act.
2.17.19* and 21.9.

It is a pitteous thing to see how M. Yates intangles himself about this
Argument, straining all the veyns of his wit, if not of a more tender part (his
conscience) to draw some face of answer upon it: That which has any show of
answer either in that place, or any other throughout his tedious and perplexed
discourse, I will relate and refute: confirming the Argument clearly, as I am
persuaded, to any indifferent judgment.

His first Answer, or Exception is, that it is most absurd to imagine that the
Corinthian women, did follow their study, and took orcinary pains to make
sermons. Secondly that extraordinary prophecy did cease, and that not all at
once, but first in women, and that the Apostle therefore especially aims at
them, as though (to wit in their own judgment the same measure were still upon
them, as well as in former times; when Christ that saues both man and woman,
would extraordinarily manifest himself in both, yet first after a sufficient
manifestation of his grace and goodness, he withdrew those extraordinary gifts
from that sex then afterward from the other. His third answer, upon which he
does most insist, is, that the Apostle forbids two general faults in the
women; the one that they would pray, and prophecy uncovered. 1. Cor. 11.5.
imitating the Pythonisses and Sibilles of the Gentiles in laying aside their
veil, and spreading their hair against decency, and comeliness: the second
is that in their husbands presence, they would be as ready to speak as they:
and therefore the Apostle finding the women to abuse this gift, prohibits the
use of it, whether simply or no, he cannot judge. Fourthly, he admires by what
Logic this will follow; women are forbidden to prophecy, therefore men have
liberty: which (says he) is an ill conseqnence.

In his first Answer or rather exception, he mistakes both the state of the
question, and also the nature of the ordinance. The question is not of the
study, or ability of these women (which yet I think was greater then he makes
account of) but of their forewardnesse to teach^, which was certainly too
great. And what consequence is this? The Corinthian women were not sufficiently
furnished to teach by an ordinary gift, therefore they needed not to be
reltrained from teaching. Nay, therefore they needed much more such bridle of
restraint to be cast upon them; especially confidering their mannish
boldness, and immodesty, insinuated against them here by the Apostle, in
part, but much more c. 11.

Neither (for the second point) are they that speak in the exercise of
prophecy, to make a sermon by an hour glass, as M. Yates gathers; that were
to abuse the time, and wrong the gifts of others (but briefly to speak a word
of exhortation, as God enableth, and that, after the ministerial teaching be
ended, as Act. 13. questions also about things delivered, and with them even
disputations, as there is occasion, being part or apurtenances of that
exercise, 1. Cor. 14.35. Act. 17.2. and 18.4.

For the Prophets gifts and abilities then, as under the Law a bullock or
lamb, that had any thing saperfluous, or lacking in his parts might yet be
offered for a freewill offering: but for a vow it was not to be accepted. Leu.
22.23, so in this exercise of prophecy, as in a freewill offering, according
to the gift of God, that which is less perfect, and exact, may far better be
excepted, then if the same were presented in the Pastors vowed service, and
ministration.

For his second Answer: As it is true, that extraordinary prophecy did cease
by degrees, so is it not certain, but a mere presumption, that it ceased first
in women: but most untrue it is, that the Apostle there aims at all at the
ceasing of that gift in women. Ecclesiastical Histories worthy of credit in
this kind, do testify, that the stream of the spirit was so far from being
near dry at this time, as that it ran a strong current wel-nigh a hundred
years after, for all the extraordinary gifts thereof, as for the casting out of
devils, foreseing and foretelling of things to come, healing the sick, and
raising of the dead, of who^ diverse so raised lived many years after; witness
amongst others Iraeneus adv. Her. lib. 2. c. ^7. whom also for the same purpose
Eus-Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 7. alleges: And ever for women. Evident it is by the
Scriptures that extraordinary Prophecy in a very plenteous manner by them, and
that in the presence of men continued in the Church many years after Paul's
writing of this Epistle. Phillip the Evangelist had four daughters virgins
which did prophecy, Act. 21.9.
and that in the presence of the Apostle. Lo, four extraordinary prophetesses
in one house, and the daughters of one man: so that hitherto the conduit of the
spirit of Prophecy kept his course as well upon their daughters as sons.
Joel. 2. Act. ^. So Revel. 2.20. we read how the woman Iesabell (calling her
self a prophetess) taught and by teaching, seduced the Lords servants in the
Church of Thyatyra. In which place, as the errors and evils of the person is
condemned, so is the formal order of the Church manifested to be, that women
(prophetesses extraordinary) might teach. Lastly, the prohibition of women by
the Apostle is perpetual, and not with respect to this, or that time, as
appears by the reasons thereof, both in this place, and in the Epistle to
Timothy, and such as equally belong to former times, and lattter: and no more
to the latter end then to the beginning, or middle time of the manifestation of
the grace and goodness of Ghrist.

What can be more absurd then to say that these reasons, The woman must be
under obedience, 1. Cor. 14.34. and not usurp authority over the man, but be
in silence, because Adam was first formed, then Eve. And Adam was not seduced,
but the woman, etc. 1. Tim. 2.12.13.14. were not moral and perpetual? Were
not those reasons and grounds for vvomens silence in the Church (without
extraordinary dispensation by miraculous inspiration) of as great force seven
years before, as when Paul wrote this Epistle? It is therefore most clear,
that the Apostle aims not at all, at any ceasing of the gift of extraordinary
prophecy now growing on, but at the universal, and absolute restraint and
prohibition of vvomens prophesying, not extraordinary, but ordinary.

In his third answer he deals worse then in any of the other, in laboring
to smother one truth under another. For albeit the women of Corinth were become
so mannish, as that they would prophecy uncovered, and without their veil,
(the ensign of their subjection) yet does not the Apostle meddle at all with
that malady in this place, but in the 11. chapter of the Epistle, as himself
notes. Here and in Tim. he simply forbids the thing: there the manner of doing
it. Likewise, for their being as forward to speak, as their husbands, and in
their presence, it may be true in part, and in some. But what then? Does the
Apostle in these places only forbid their speaking uncovered, and permit them
to teach so it be veiled? or forbids he only their being as forward as their
husbands, but gives them leave to speak in the Church, so it be with good
manners, and after them, which his answer insinuates? Or is it not evident to
all that will not shut their eyes, that he simply, and that severely, inhibits
them all speaking whatsoever in this exercise? Are not the words plain enough?
Let the women keep silence in the Church, for it is not permitted to them to
speak, but to be under obedience, as the Law says. And again, It is a shame
for them to speak in the Church. And in 1. Tim. Let the women learn in
silence with all subjection. And, I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp
authority over the man, but to be in subjection. For Adam was first formed,
etc. Do not all and every one of the Reasons bind women to all peace and deep
silence in the Church, yea to such and so absolute, as that they may not so
much as ask a question for learning any thing themselves, verse. 35. much less
teach others any thing? I therefore conclude this as a most certain and
undeniable truth, that the Apostle speaks here of such a gift and exercise as
women are simply forbidden to use in the Church; and therefore not of an
extraordinary gift or exercise, which they might use lawfully, and did both
before, and a long time after the writing of this Epistle.

His last answer now comes in consideration, which is, that the consequence is
ill, women are forbidden, and therefore men are permitted to prophecy in the
Church by an ordinary gift.

If the consequence seem not good, why does he so strugle as before otherwise
to make an escape from the Argument? let us consider of the force of it, which
appears to me irresistible in these 3. things. First, the Apostle in, and for
this work opposes the men to the women, sex to sex, and so in prohibiting
women, he permits men. When the H. Ghost opposing faith and works in the case
of justification, denies that we are justified by works, is not the consequence
good, that therefore we are justified by faith. Where he opposes belevers and
unbelievers in the case of Salvation, and teaches that believers shall be
saved, does he not teach consequently, that unbelievers shall perish? If these
consequences be not good I must confess my self far to seek both in logic
and Divinity.

Secondly, the reasons of the prohibition of women prove the consequence, which
are all such as prefer the men before the women, and subject the women to the
men in the Church, and in this very work of prophesy, of which he treats. But
now if in prohibiting women, he gave not liberty unto men, where were the
prerogative of men above women, which is the only ground, upon which he
builds his prohibition?

Thirdly, where verse 34.35. It is not permitted for women to speak but if they
will learn any thing to ask their husbands at home, if their husbands might not
speak neither, nor any more then they, what reason can be rendered of the
Apostles so speaking?

Lastly M. Yates in denying this consequence, shows, that so he might deny
something, he took no great heed what it were. The Apostle in this whole Chap.
takes order for some to prophesy? and debarring women therefrom, either admits
men to the use of that liberty, or else we must have some third kind of
persons thought of, which are neither male nor female.

My fourth Argument is from v. 29. and 32. Let the prophets speak two or three,
and let the rest judge: and the spirit of the prophets are subject to the
prophets. Whence I affirm, that the Apostle speaks not of extraordinary
prophets, or prophesying, since they in their doctrines could not err, and so
were not subject to any such judgment, or censure of others. He answers
roundly, though briefly in this place, that these prophets were not infallibly
assisted: and more largely in another place, that such prophets as have an
infallible assistance are not subject to this Rule: but others that had but, as
the Apostle said, Romans 12.6. meaner gifts were to be examined according to the^
portion of faith, so that extraordinary prophets might mix some of their own
with the extraordinary gifts of Gods spirit, which was to be censured by such
as had a greater measure: for none are to think that all that had these
extraordinary gifts were free from error in their very doctrine. We see the
strange gift of tongues was abused, and so might the rest be.

That one extraordinary Prophet had a greater measure, and proportion of gifts
then another, I acknowledge; but that any one of them could err in doctrine,
or was not infallibly assisted therein by the spirit, I deny, as a most
pernicious error, weakening the foundation of faith, and truth of the word of
God: neither has M. Yates so much as exterprized an Answ. unto the Scriptures
brought by me to prove the contrary: which were Ephesians. 2.20. where the Ephesians
as the household, or Church of God are said to be built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, etc. etc. 3.5. where he speaks of the mystery of
Christ, which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is
now revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by the spirit. Whence it
apeares, that the Church is as well built upon the foundation of the Prophets,
to wit extraordinary, which then were (for of them he speaks) as upon the
doctrine of the Apostles, and they as infalliby (even for the very foundation)
inspired by the H. Ghost, as the other. So that, if the Prophets could err in
doctrine, then the Apostles, and if in doctrine taught why not written? and if
one alone, why not more, or all? and if they might err, how know we that they
did not err? If he say the meaner in gifts might err, but not the greater;
first the same follows also touching the Apostles, how much more touching the
Prophets before Christ (not comparable to those after him:) why then may there
not be errors in the writings especialy of those of meaner gifts, as without
doubt some were in comparison of the rest? what wether this wind will bring who
sees not? Moreover, whereas we propound such interpretations and doctrines,
as we gather from the Scriptures, by discourse of reason, and so may err:
they, on the contrary every one of them delivered doctrine by immediate
inspiration of the spirit, in which by reason of the divine impression which it
made in their hearts (differencing it from all both humane collection and
Diabolical suggestion) they could not err, or be mistaken, but knew
infallibly when, and wherein they were moved by the H. Ghost. Befides there is
not like reason of strange tongues, and prophecy, for the consideration in
hand, since the Church is not built upon the foundation of strange tongues, as
upon the foundation of prophecy; neither was the matter of the speech
inspired, but the language only, except the same persons were Prophets also.

Lastly, if there were the like reason of tongues, and prophecy, yet except
men might err in a tongue, and deem themselves inspired extraordinarily when
they were not (which were absurd to affirm) it could not evince any
possibility of erring in doctrine, by extraordinary Prophets.

The last Argument in my book I take from v. 37. 38. If any man think himself
to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write
unto you are the commandments of the Lord: But if any be ignorant, let him be
ignorant.

M. Yates taxes me for making a Prophet, and spiritual man all one, since by
a spiritual man is meant such as excelled in any spiritual gift, prophecy,
or other. But without cause, since I neither mean more nor need more for my
purpose, then that a Prophet be included in the general of a spiritual man.
But wherefore does he not answer the Argument or mind where the force thereof
lies? which is in the words following; let him acknowledge that the things
that I write are the commandments of the Lord. But if any man be ignorant, let
him be ignorant. The extraordinary prophets, were guided as immediately and
infallibly by the revelation of Gods spirit, as Paul himself, and might as well
have required of him to acknowledge that the things which they speak were the
commandments of the Lord, a^ he of them: neither was it possible that they or
any of them should be ignorant, that the things which he spoke were the
commandments of the Lord. Which Argument is also much strengthened, and made,
in my judgment, unanswerable, by that which we find v. 36. Came the word of
God out from you, or came it unto you only? which words the Apostle does not
direct unto the women (as M. Yates misconceaveth with great error, and
contrary both unto reason, and to the express Greek text which will not bear
it) but to the Prophets; with whom he deals, and that by way of comparison
with himself, from whom, to wit, by immediate revelation, the word of God came
after a sort to the Corinthians. Which plainly proves that they could not be
extraordinary Prophets, from whom the word of God came unto the Church as well
as from himself: they being inspired immediately by the Holy Ghost as well as
he.

The Christian Reader may find, besides these, other reasons from this
Scripture laid down by our worthy countryman M. Cartwright in his Confutation
of the Rhemists, Sect. 5. for the justification of this exercise as ordinary
and continual.

The other Arguments in the same place of my book to the same purpose, though
M. Yates could not but take knowledge of, yet has he not thought good to
meddle with, One of them only I will annex in this place word for word, as
there I have set it down.

It is the commandment of the Lord by the Apostle, that a Bishop must be apt
to teach, and that such Elders or Bishops be called as are able to exhort with
sound doctrine, and to convince the gainsayers, 1. Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1.9. Now
except men, before they be in office may be permitted to manifest their gifts
in doctrine, and so in prayer, which are the two maine works requiring special
qualifications in the teaching Elders, Acts 6.4, how shall the Church (which is
to choose them) take knowledge of their sufficiency, that with faith and good
conscience they may call them, and submit unto them for their guides? If it be
said, that upon such occasion, trial may be taken of men's gifts: he that so
says, grants the question; but must know besides, first that men's gifts and
abilities should be known in some measure, before they be once thought on for
officers: and secondly, that there is none other use or trial of gifts (to wit
in and by the Church) but in prophesying: for every thing in the Lords house is
to be performed in some ordinance, there is nothing thrown about the house, or
out of order in it: and other ordinance in the Church save this of prophecy is
there none, wherein men out of office are to pray, and teach, etc. Lastly, M.
Yates in denying this liberty, besides other evils, reproves the practice of
all reformed Churches, and of the Church of England with them. It is not only
permitted as lawful, but required as necessary where, live, that such as have
bent their thoughts toward the ministry, should before hand use their gifts
publicly in the Church: and intolerable bondage it would be thought by them
to have pastors ordained for them (as all there are unto the places in which
they are to minister) of whose ability in teaching they had not taken former
experience. And not only so, but it has been further decreed in solemn
Synod, that in all Churches whether springing up, or grown to perfection, the
order of prophecy should be observed, according to Paul's institution; and that
into that fellowship (to wit of Prophets) should be admitted not only the
ministers, but also the Teachers, and of the Elders and Deacons, and even of
the very common people (exipsa plebe) if there were any which would confer
their gifts received of the Lord to the common benefit of the Church, etc.
Harmon. Synod. Belg. de prophetica. Ex Synodo Embdana, Can. 1.2. And for
England it self; what will M. Yates say to the Common Places, as they are
called; or Sermons, as indeed they are, in the Colleges, not only permitted
unto, but imposed upon diverse, who never receved order of Priesthood? What to
such as Preach by the Bishops license, without any such order? yea to all such
as are ordained and called ministers, but have not actual charge, and so are
like the Popish accidents in the Sacrament, without a subject? Lastly, it might
be showed, if need were, that greater liberty then he allows, is used by
diverse in the Romish Church, the Spiritual Egypt, and house of bondage for
Gods people: so as the bondage of the very Hagar of Rome is not so great in
this case, as he would bring upon Sarah her self.

The Lord give unto his people courage to stand for this liberty amongst the
rest, wherewith Christ has made them free; and unto us who enjoy it, grace to
use the same unto his glory, in our mutual edification. Amen,

FINIS.

