A Theater of Delightful Recreation.

LONDON, Printed for A. Johnson. 1605.



TO THE WELL-AFFECTED READER.
REtire thy looks, and view with Judgments eyes
Men's vain delights, that pass in posting wise,
Their liking first, and their dislike succeeding,
Their every pleasure, some displeasure breeding:
How out of league with all things loved they fall,
How all their glory is Times tennis-ball:
And this compared, fix Virtue in thy mind,
Which is most stayed, and heaven bred by kind.
No calling back of nimble light-foote Time,
But to repent, is to vnwrite vain rhyme.
What worser pains can any Poet take,
Then rhyme himself to death for Venus sake.
No minute more to Satyrs I will lend,
Nor drop of ink on Epigram I Will spend:
Let Humorists do as themselves think good,
My pen has done with Letting Humors blood:
I Will show no more to each fantastique ass
His pourtraiture in Humors Looking-glass.
Scatter your absurd follies as tofore,
I am resolved to gather them no more.
Deaths Challenge, with I Will stab, has passed the Press,
And so I leave him to his powerfulness:
With Hell broke loose I have no more to do,
Leyden is hanged, and Knipperdulling too.
My idle hours to these I did allow,
But better business I have for them now.
And all the leisure Poetry can get,
Shall pay such lines as are in Virtues debt:
For verse ill used, and precious time misspent,
Poets convert, be truly penitent.
S. R.

To all profane Poets, wearing VENUS wanton Liuerie, with Cupids blind
cognizance.
IDle good-wits that turn the glass of Time
To run for vanity each single sand,
Composing volumes full of wanton rhyme,
Fables of Cupid all you take in hand,
Great are your works, and yet the goodness small,
For Beauties lightness is the worth of all.
Supposedly you raise them to the skies,
Whom you with pen bepaint about the face,
And by the whole sale utter lovers lies,
Yet done (as you imagine) with great grace.
But how can grace concur with such an evil,
Since he that praises pride, commends the devil?
Your graces in this vein no further goes,
But to be counted fine conceited liers,
That commendations all wise men bestows,
Worthless desert a worthless meede requiers:
Your labor's lost, your time's as vainly spent,
It Was errors crooked way Invention went.
One writes a Sonnet of his mistres fan,
Blessing the bird that did the feathers bear:
Another shows himself as wise a man
To rhyme upon the shoo-strings she does wear,
And of her bodkin, scarf, and pair of gloves,
And little dog that she so kindly loves.
Another tells the actions of the gods,
Their heady riots and outrageous strife,
How they have been amongst themselves at ods
About the fairness of black Vulcans wife:
And then what cruelties her son did show,
That wants a pair of eyes to guide his bow.
Oh sacred Muses, you may just complain
Against those heavenly sparks of wit you nourish,
Who their best faculties so much profane,
Which should in every good endeavor flourish:
For those which greatest gifts do that way ow,
Do even the worst and basest things bestow.
How miserable wit's employed, who sees not?
Spent prodigal, in praising Venus pride,
In such sort as with Virtue it agrees not,
On them have naught praiseworthy on their side:
Diuinest arts thereby sustain abuses,
Which were ordained for sanctified uses.
Unto renowned Virtue prove more kind,
Your gifts unto her service dedicate,
And the reward of Honor you shall find,
When Beauty shall lie rotting out of date,
Blasted by death, a stinking under ground,
Consumed in grave, and never to be found.
S. R.

To his loving friend Mr. S. R.
VAnish things worthless, from Invention fly,
You now mistake, not as I was am I,
It is a simple thing, most childish base,
To be a Poet for a woman's face:
I held an heresy, and here recant,
My pen for ever women's pride shall want,
Except their beauty and their fair proceeds
From virtuous, chaste, and civil modest deeds.
This is an argument, that fools they be,
Men flattring them so gross, they cannot see:
But even as fops composed all of pride,
Still love them most which have them most belide.
Unto such devils I held a candle late,
But now, kind friend, I will thee imitate,
My Poetry I Will in a new mould cast,
Verse shall do penance for my follies past.
E. P.

To the Muses.
CAlliope, divine and heavenly Muse,
With all thy sisters on the sacred Mount,
Whom the best spirits do for nurses choose,
Having you all in reverent account:
Receive the Laurel which our Muse resignes,
True penitent for idle passed lines.
Grace not the graceless Poets of our time,
That use you but to serve their needy states,
Such as for daily profit hackney rhyme:
Those Venus brokers, and loues-shifting mates,
That sell you all, to buy themselves their dinner,
Famish the slaves, and make their cheeks look thinner.
Extend your bounty unto free borne spirits,
That imitate your selves (for you are free)
Let them receive their well-deseruing merits,
And to Parnassus ever welcome be:
For they do scorn to lay you out to pawn,
Like such as do on Lords and Ladies fawn.
To his constant beloved friend Mr. S. R.
THy Theater is built of curious frame,
And fixed as firm upon a sure foundation,
All those whose eyes shall entertain the same,
Must come to see diuinest Recreation.
There Is no profaneness in this work disclosed,
But as the name imports it is composed.
All is true action that is presented here,
And every actor credit with him brings:
Upon this stage great monarchs do appear,
Strong Samson steps with bloody wounded Kings:
Some blessed by God, some cursed when he forsook them,
As from truths register the author took them.
R. W.

To his loving and no less beloved friend M. Sam. Rowlands.
THe world commends each joy,
And entertaines it gladly.
What vanity, but this our age
Pursues it strange and madly?
Things worthless much esteemd,
The worthfull most despisde,
And virtue daily counterfeit,
Vice cunningly disguisde.
This makes me, when into
Thy Theater I look,
To hold thee happy, leaving toys,
To write so good a book.
I. G.

To Time.
THou great consumer of huge monuments,
That make stiff Marble turn to cindry dust:
Kingdoms subuerter, whom no power preuents,
With canker fretting brass, iron with rust.
Thou that did bring the powerful Monarchies
To their full height, then ouerthrewst their pride:
Thou that the arched Ilion did surprise,
Whose towns with ten years succors were supplide.
That in the bosom of fore passed age
The fruit of many a noble Muse have found,
And kept till now, in scorn of enuies rage,
When in obliuions gulf great Kings were drowned:
Do thou preserve this work until that day,
When earth shall melt, the universe decay.
Tho. Andrew.

ADAMS PASSION UPON HIS FALL.
Offspring of earth, my ill conditioned race,
With sorrow look upon your parents case,
That by his sin brought death unto you all,
For you have deadly interest in my fall.
I in whose soul perfection made abode,
I that was like my all-creating God,
I being endude with admirable feature,
I that had Lordly rule of every creature;
Oh I to whom all graces did abound,
Of all God made, am most ungrateful found.
Come woeful Eve, as I shared sin with thee,
Bring every tear thou have and mourn with me:
I took the fruit with thee that brought these fears,
Do thou take woe with me, oh join in tears.
We that in grace and glory late have bin,
Are fallen from God by disobedient sin.
Weep thou for harkening what the Serpent said,
And I will weep for being both betrayed:
Weep thou for yielding first to his persuasion,
And I will weep for giving me occasion:
Let both our souls with sorrow be repleate,
Because we both have been seduced to eat.
When in the cool of day Gods voice I heard,
O how my senses trembled! then I feared,
And sought to hide me from his angry face,
(Fool as I was, he sees in every place)
Where art thou Adam, said he? that where art
Was even a hell of horror to my heart:
With fig-leaues wrapped, I to the Lord replide,
For shame of nakedness I do me hide.
Who told thee of thy nakedness, said he?
Have thou not eat of the forbidden tree,
Concerning which, I said thou should not?
Then for my self this bad excuse I got,
The woman that thou gave with me to live,
Why she did of that fruit unto me give.
Then (said he) Woman, why have thou done this?
She said, The Serpent causd me do amiss.
But these excuses no way could us free,
Gods curses were ponounc'd against all three:
Yea even the earth was cursed for my sake,
And I enjoined pains therewith to take,
By toylsome labor, and in weary sweat,
To make my hands the earners of my meat.
Then did my dreadful sin-incensed Lord,
Appoint a Cherubin with fiery sword,
To keep the passage to the tree of life,
Driving me forth of Eden with my wife,
Death at my heels, and Misery beside me,
My enemy the Devil to deride me.
Clothed with a leather coat of dead beasts skins,
Which garment made me mindful of my sins:
And the reward due to me for the same,
My outside death, my inside sin and shame.
Now servile labor for my self I found,
I got a spade, and fell to dig the ground:
For from earths bounty nothing I could gain,
Unless I bought it with the price of pain.
If I in Paradise had never bin,
Far less perplexity I should be in,
My doubts, and fears, and all my sorrows grow,
That I true happiness did taste and know.
To say, I had, to think, If I had known,
Are of themselves torments enough alone.
Yet hope encounters comfort by the way,
Jehovah to the Serpent thus did say,
Betwixt you shall an enmity be bred,
The woman's seed shall break the Serpents head.
This confidence preuents hels friend Despair,
A second Adam shall with grace repair
The ruins that the first has sinful made:
On this foundation let the faith be laid
Of all my offspring: sin from me ensude,
Sin, death and hell by him shall be subdude.
When man was overcome by Satan's evil,
He lost the Paradise where he was placed;
When man by grace shall overcome the devil,
He shall gain heaven, whence that fiend was chased:
He conquering us, did cause Gods wrath increase;
We conquering him, with God shall be at peace.
Caines horror of mind for the inhumane murder of his Brother.
BEhold the wretched heir of all the earth,
Most graceless man, bloody accursed Caine,
The first that in this world has had his birth,
The worst that ever shall be borne again,
In conscience so tormented and distressed,
I have not one calm thought of quiet rest.
If woeful Adam when he fell from grace,
In such a fear of his transgression stood,
That he did hide him from Iehouahs face,
What shall I do, being all imbrude in blood?
Whose blood? My brothers: what? a wicked man?
Oh no, most just, my conscience witness can.
I did present the Lord with my oblation,
My brother offered up his sacrifice,
And that of his was held in estimation,
Mine nothing set by in the Almighties eyes,
Whereat affection from him I estranged,
And unto wrath my countenance I changed.
Why art thou angry? said the Lord to me,
Why does thy looks seem other then to fore?
If thou do well, it will return to thee,
If thou do ill, sin lies at the door.
Unto dominion and to rule aspire,
And Abel shall incline to thy desire.
But what he spoke, my heart regarded not,
Wrath stopped mine ears, and would not let me hear.
For when my brother in the field I got,
I lifted up my hand against him there,
And that same stroke which did his life control,
Killed him a body, and my self a soul.
What heard I then? oh this: Caine, Where Is thy brother?
When desperate wretch I did this answer make,
Am I his keeper? do we guard each other?
What charge do we of one another take?
What have thou done? said God, thy deed is found,
For Abels blood cries vengeance from the ground.
Even from the earth thou art accursed now,
Whose mouth received the blood thy hand has shed,
No profit, though thou till, shall it allow,
The strength of it shall from thy use be fled.
Be thou a vagabond and fugitive,
That never shall in any action thrive.
Then in the horror of my soul I spoke,
As desperate most unworthy wretch to live,
(No suit of mercy purposing to make)
My sin is greater then thou can forgive:
Nothing but vengeance I expect to find,
For there is no room for sorrow in my mind.
Behold this day I am an outcast made,
And from the upper face of the earth I go:
Thy countenance thou likewise have denaid,
One look of favor never to bestow.
And whosoever finds me out, he will
Even murder me, as I did Abel kill.
Fear, and Despair, and I, all three in one,
My woeful heart do into shares divide,
But greedy Fear would have it all alone,
Till I and black Despair grew stronger side,
And then we two together did incline,
That all my heart should be Despaires and mine.
And now I do all that Despair would have me,
Being resolute resolved on evil thus,
For my iniquity God cannot save me,
There is no grace that can do good for us:
Lead on Despair, with sin I will go hide me,
Gods justice comes, his grace can nere abide me.
The dreadful burning of sinful Sodom.
IT was about meridian of the day,
(When Phoebus in his height of burning sway,
Did like unto a giant run his race,
About the sphere of his celestial place)
That Abraham the blessed man of God,
At his tent door for his repose abode,
Where lifting up his eyes, behold, stood three
Of Angels nature, seeming men to be.
With reverence he bowed to the ground,
And said, my Lord, if I have favor found,
Pass not away, but here refresh with me
Under the shadow of this pleasant tree,
Then presently with greatest speed he went
To virtuous Sara being in the tent,
And willed her make some cakes of finest meal,
Feasting themselves with butter, milk, and veale
Under the arbors cool delightful leaves,
Where he the promise of a son receives.
Then rising thence, to Sodome-ward they look,
And as they toward the place their journey took,
Said God, Shall I the thing from Abram hide
That I intend? he fears me, and beside,
He will instruct his children, keep my hest,
And all earths nations shall in him be blessed.
Then said the Lord, because that Sodomes cry
Is very great, and does ascend the sky,
Yea and their sin exceeding grievous is,
I will go see how deeds agree with this.
Then Abram said, Lord shall the righteous fare
In punishment like those that wicked are?
Far be it from the Judge of all men's sight,
To do the thing that were not just and right.
If fifty good therein abode do make,
Will thou not spare it for those fifties sake?
If forty five, or thirty, twenty, ten,
Will thou not spare it for those righteous men?
Yes, said the Lord, if only ten there be,
For all the rest thou shall prevail with me.
With that the Lord departed, moved to grace,
And Abraham returned unto his place.
Then in the evening (suns declining state)
As righteous Lot did sit at Sodom gate,
There came two Angels, which when he espide,
He did inuit them kindly to abide
Within his house that night, and wash their feet:
But they refusing, would remain in street:
Yet he importunate, they did consent,
And in with him those guests of heaven went,
Where he did entertain them with a feast.
But ere the time was come they should take rest,
The Sodomites in multitudes were found,
Both old and young the house enuiron'd round:
And calling Lot, said, Bring unto our sight
Those men that harbor in thy house to night,
Let them come forth to us, we may them know:
Then Lot intreates, My brethren do not so:
I have two daughters, virgins both they be,
Which in affection are right dear to me,
Yet rather them I Will yield unto your will,
Then these men should endure such heinous ill:
Oh let not sin so wickedly incense,
Under my roof they came for their defense.
With that they thrust the holy man aside,
And said, Stand back, for this we will not abide,
Our fury shall the more toward thee appear,
Art thou a Judge that came to soiourne here?
Will thou control in that we go about?
We Will break thy door, our force shall fetch them out.
But pressing forth, they could no entrance find,
For on a sudden all were stricken blind:
Blind bodies now, that had blind souls before,
Tiring themselves in seeking out the door.
Then said the Angels unto righteous Lot,
What friends have here (that we destroy them not)
Besides thy daughters and thy sons in law?
Out of the city all thou have withdraw:
The cry is great before the Almighties face,
And he has sent us to destroy the place.
Lot did advise his children, and the rest,
But to his sons in law it seemed a jest:
They were, as at this day most sinners be
Careless, till vengeance they do feel and see.
When morning did dark nights black curtains draw,
(Last morning that the Sodomites ere saw)
The Angels hastened Lot to speed away,
But as he did prolong the time with stay,
They caught him up, his children, and his wife,
And brought him out, and bad him save his life:
Look not behind, nor in this plain abide,
Least thou do perish: wherewith Lot replide,
My Lords, if favor I have found, take pity,
And grant me to enjoy but yonder city,
How should I to the mountains safely fly?
Some evil may betide, there I shall die,
Only but Soar to thy servant give,
That little Soar, and my soul shall live.
Thou have preuaild (said they) thy suit obtain,
Go thither, and in safety remain.
Now was the Sun new risen on earths face,
And Lot new entered in his refuge place,
When suddenly a shewre from heaven fell,
Made Sodom seem as Sodom had been hell.
It Was no such element as washed the ground,
When all the world (excepting eight) were drowned:
Then waters were the workers of Gods ire,
But now in vengeance he employes the fire,
An element of far more fearful kind,
Did sinful Sodom (turned to ashes) find.
No common fire, fit for needful things,
But flames that dread, terror and anguish brings
Of cruel torments, grievous to be felt,
Of sulphur savor loathsome to be smelt,
Of terrible amazement to the eye,
A flaming city, and a burning sky:
All was destroyed of timber work and stones,
All was consumed composde of flesh and bones,
And Sodom which at evening did appear,
As if a Paradise of God it were,
Seemd in the morning unto Abrams eyes,
As smoke that from a furnace does arise.
Obdurate Pharaoh in his hardness of heart.
MOses, what message do thou bring?
Am I not Pharaoh, Aegypts King?
I will not let the people go,
For all the wonders thou can show.
Not Arons serpent-turning rod,
Shall make my heart obey your God.
My Sorcerers the like can do:
(...) te^ plagues.
Come Coniurers, make Serpents too.
The waters changing into blood,
The fishes dying in the flood,
The frogs through all the land increast,
The lice offending man and beast:
Th'intolerable swarms of flies,
The cattle that in Egypt dies:
The swelling botches, sores and blaines,
The thunder, hail and fire that raines:
Grasshoppers that all green things wast,
The darkness that three days did last:
The striking all the firstborn dead,
To true conversion cannot lead.
Hard is my heart and unrelenting,
It Is unacquainted with repenting:
Moses, even by my kingly might,
I charge thee to depart my sight,
Upon thy life see me no more,
For if thou do, thou di'st therefore.
My trust does in my strength consist,
Put confidence in whom thou list.
On horse and chariot I depend:
Trust in your God, let him defend.
Unto the sea I will pursue
Thy Israelites, that slavish crew,
And there I will them all confound,
Or there let me and mine be drowned.
The mirror of Chastity.
Fair Hebrew, pleasure of mine eyes,
To whom my love I sacrifice,
Thou have found favor in her sight,
Whose love does thy love kind inuit,
To what delights I can afford,
To Putiphar great Pharoes Lord,
Before all loves in Egypt be,
Thy Lady makes her choice of thee,
Why then enjoy, and full possess,
Unto my bed have free access,
Where all the welcomes love can make,
Shall entertain thee for my sake.
Be not so bashful, and a man,
Thou should court better then I can,
Being so lovely every part,
Except thy tongue that wants art;
Yet she that may, bids thee be bold,
If I say seize, presume, take hold.
Why do thou on vain credit stand,
Urging what trust is in thy hand?
In that thy Lord exceeding large,
Commits all things to thy charge,
Excepting me, all things beside
Do under trust with thee abide:
What of all this? I offer more
Then will be sold for Aegypts store.
What Is gold to him that food does need?
The metal cannot hunger feed:
What Is meat to him wants appetite?
Sickness does loath, though health inuit:
But love does choicest welcome bring,
To lowest beggar, highest king.
How often have I emboldned thee
With that kind word, Come lie with me?
Where is thy sense and manly sprite,
That should be ready to requite?
Will thou so ha^shly go away?
My hearts desire, mild Joseph stay:
Do turn thy back? wilt not consent?
By Pharaoes life thou shall repent.
I Will keep this garment to thy shame,
Thy Lord I vow shall see the same.
I Will tell him, if I had not cride
I had bin forced to abide
Foul rauishment, which to prevent
Clamors unto the skies I sent,
And thou for fear that durst not stay,
Leaving thy mantle, ranst away.
This plot the harlot put in ure:
Joseph this slander did endure,
Yet still continude constant chaste,
With lust allured, with lies disgraced.
Sampson betrayed by Dalilah.
WOnder of men, thou great in might,
My hearts chief joy, my souls delight,
Thou only admirable man
Of all the stock and tribe of Dan.
Thou that at Thamnah valiant did
Even rend a Lion like a Kid.
At Askalon in valor tried,
Where thirty by thine own hand did:
That Azah gates with powrefull will,
Did carry up to Hebron hill:
Oh let me crave a boon of thee,
As thou in love shall gain of me.
Thy strength to other men denide,
Great Samson where does that abide?
Oh prove thy self to me so kind,
As tell me but how I may thee bind:
Delude me not, kind sweet, with mockes,
Not withes, nor tying of thy locks
Is ought auailing thereunto:
Dear Samson, tell me what to do.
Thrice by thee I have bin deluded,
Now tell me where is thy might included?
Will thou this small request denay?
Will thou refuse thy Dalila?
Then I resolve thou love me not,
For out of love is all things got.
Thy suit (quoth he) my dear, has sped,
There nere came razor on my head:
I have been from my mothers womb
A Nazarite by heavens doom:
Love, if my head be shaven bare,
I shall be weak as others are.
Then on her lap his head she laid,
And with his curious locks she played,
And so in dalliance did him keep,
Till she had wantond him asleep:
Then sent for one that shau'd him quite
Of all the hair contained his might.
Which done, her sexes nature shows,
Betrayed him instant to his foes
The Philistines, who him despise,
And cruelly put out his eyes,
Then set him in a mill to grind,
This woman-trust did Samson find.
King Saul's despairefull Tragedy.
DAunted with fear of the Philistines force,
Disanimated Saul, where shall I fly?
Of my distress there is no man has remorce,
To answer me by dreams God does deny,
No help by Prophets, all my comfort's fled,
Oh Samuel, that man of God is dead.
I know enchantment is a grievous sin,
And Isreal's God forbids it in his law,
Yet with a witch at Endor I have bin,
To speak with Samuel, whose shape I saw
Appear in's mantle, reverent, grave and old,
Who my destruction and my end foretold.
Wherefore have thou disturbed me he said,
In causing of me to be raised thus?
I answered him, for that I was afraid
Of Philistines, that vex and trouble us:
And God is gone, he answers not at all,
Oh tell what will become of wretched Saul.
Because (quoth he) thou did not God obey,
To execute on the Amalekites:
Therefore he has done this to thee this day,
Thy disobedience thus his wrath requites,
Thy kindome from thee he away has rent,
And given it David, this is Gods intent.
Moreover Israel and also thee,
The Lord will put in the Philistines hands,
And even to morrow shall thou be with me,
Thou and thy sons, thus (Saul) thy kingdom stands,
Thy host subdude, thy self of life bereft,
And thou become the man whom God has left.
With this I fell despairefull on my face,
My strength was gone with fasting and with fear:
O wretched man, deprived of Gods grace,
That mine own end with dread did trembling hear,
To morrow he has told me is the day
That Philistines my sons and me will slay.
Come fatal day, come cursed Philistines,
The men of Israel now are forced to fly,
My three dear sons their latest breath resignes,
Mount Gilboa in thee their bodies lie,
Abinadab, Melchisua, Jonathan,
I Will follow you with all the speed I can.
See harnesse-bearer, th'archers have me found,
I will not have them triumph in my death,
Oh draw thy sword, I do entreat a wound,
Show me the kindness to deprive my breath:
Art thou afraid to shed thy Princes blood?
Why then my self will do my self that good.
This mine own sword the instrument I Will make
Of this my last and bloody sacrifice:
Upon this point the worlds farewell I Will take:
Here the distressed King of Israel dies:
He dies, that least his foes should glorying stand,
Will kill himself even ready to their hand.
The Virgine-sacrifice of Duke Jepthahs daughter.
THe mighty Marshall of the Israelites,
In arms against contending Amonites,
Soliciting the Almighty for success,
And whole depending on his powrefulnesse,
When he toward Gilead in arms did pass,
And thence to Mispah where proud Ammon was,
Vowed if the victory he might obtain,
Against those that held Gods people in disdain,
And home return a conqueror in peace,
His fervor to the Lord should so increase
In gratitude, that in most humble wise,
He to his Majesty would sacrifice
What ere it were that his sight first beheld
Come forth his door at his return from field.
Iephthah in conquest to his hearts desire,
From Aroer a victor does retire.
But here behold the end of Amons slaughter,
Begins the tragedy of his own daughter:
To welcome him, all her endeavors strives,
True love's most joyful when beloved thriues,
With daunces and with timbrels she does meet him,
And all the solace she can make to greet him.
When he beheld his dear and only child,
Surpised with grief, in raging humor wild,
He rent his clothes, and unto heavens cride,
Oh worse then death the sight I now abide,
Thy presence all my fortunes does confound,
Within a sea of tears mine eyes be drowned:
Most loving child, to God my vow is made,
With sacrifice of thee it must be paid.
Wherewith obediently she did reply,
Grieve not so much dear father that it is I:
To Jacobs God be faithful in your vow,
Only kind father, unto me allow
Two months of mourning, to bewail the state
Of my virginity disconsolate:
Even at the mountains will I go and mourn,
And at the time appointed, thence return.
His leave she had, with mournful maids attending,
Each one her grief, and tears, and sorrow lending:
Their virgin tears compassions rules did keep,
They waild for her, she mourned to see them weep.
The time expired of her short stinted hours,
To him that had the guide of Isreal's powers,
She meekly came, and with most willing mind
For virgin-sacrifice her self resigned.
David's combat with the Giant of Gath.
YOu men of Israel, servants unto Saul,
Goliath sounds defiance to you all:
Your Sovereign and his host I do defy,
Base Israelites, a Philistine am I.
Behold my stature, it is six cubits long,
My helmet brass, my coat of stuff as strong,
All likewise brass, five thousand sickles wayde:
My boots are brass, of brass my shield is made,
My spears shaft, look upon it, and confess,
A Weauers beam in bigness, it is no less,
The very head thereof iron and steel,
Six hundred weight, as some of you shall feel.
Bring forth your champion, single me a man,
And I Will confess there is valor in you than.
Give me a man I say, and let us fight,
Amongst you all find one stout Israelite.
When David heard this mighty man of Gath,
With terror breathing out his irefull wrath,
He did entreat a favor of the King,
To combat that huge giant with a sling:
No other weapon but a staff he took,
And five smooth stones of choice out of the brook:
So forth with courage resolute he went:
The Philistine perceiving his intent
To combat him, in stature but a child,
Disdainfully in scoffing manner smild,
And said to David, What seem I to be?
Belike a dog, thou bringst a staff for me.
Now in the name of all the gods I serve,
I curse thee, and as thou do well deserve
Thy flesh for meat, the birds shall present share,
I Will with thy gobbets feed the fowls of the air:
Thy carcass on the sudden I will yield
For beasts to prey upon that are in field.
Thus did the Giant of his valor brag,
While David took out of his shepherds bag
A stone, and slang the same into his head,
That he unto the ground fell groueling dead.
Who when the Philistines beheld to fall,
Dismayed in fearful manner, they fled all,
And then that hand which the Almighty guided,
With his own sword his head from's trunk divided:
Thus did the simple, weak, upright and just,
Subdue the strong that in his strength did trust.
The true Map of a dogged Miser.
FRom Pharan wilderness King David sent
Ten of his young men, that to Carmel went
With kind salute, to an unkind churl there,
Nabal, who at that place his sheep did sheare.
Their Sovereigns message to the wretch they tell,
And how his Majesty did greet him well,
No curious cates they came for to demand,
But what he pleased to give came next to hand.
Nabal on them a frowning look bestows,
And thus with tongue his dogged nature shows:
What Is David, that I should my victuals take,
And give it run-awayes for David's sake?
With Isays son, pray what have I to do,
Have I no use to put my meat unto?
You may be vacabonds for ought I know,
Upon such fellows nothing I Will bestow,
Feed such as you? yes marry twere good reason,
I have mouths of mine own to stop this season:
Work and be hanged, earne it like other men,
Is It prouender you lack? pray labor then:
Shall I take of my bread, my flesh and drink,
And give to every rascal, do you think?
No David's men, your master must provide,
Such hungry sharkes I never could adide:
Want he that will, my shearers shall not lack,
Empty you came, and so I pray go back:
To him that sent you, tell him what I say,
My food must be emploid another way.
This churlish answer did so much incense,
David vowde death should guerdon the offense:
Which when the wife of Nabal understood,
She prudently prevented shedding blood,
And with a present, speedily did meet him,
Falling to ground even at his feet to greet him:
Let not my Lord (said she) regard the man,
At whose offense thy wrath so late began,
Even with his name his nature does accord,
Folly is with him; but, my gracious Lord,
Thy handmaid was not guilty of the crime,
Nor did I see thy servants at that time:
Success attend thee wheresoere thou go,
Perish all they intend thy overthrow:
Accept the present, which my humble thought
In meekest duty to my Prince has brought.
Wherewith the kingly Prophet did reply,
Thou have prevailed, Nabal shall not die,
I do reuerse my doom: a gracious wife
Has saved a churlish, foolish, husbands life.
The dead sleep of Sisara.
REuengefull Iabin, King of Canaan,
Whose anceters great Iosuah had slain,
To vex the Israelites with wars began
At such time as in Hazor he did reign,
His host by Sisara conducted was,
Who did unto the river Kison pass.
Nine hundred chariots under his command,
When with ten thousand men near Thabor hill,
Barac subduing them, had upper hand,
And with the edge of sword his foes did kill:
Sisara in distress constraind to light,
Was forced upon his legs to take his flight.
And as he fled, most fearful of his life,
Disanimated full of cares increase,
He came unto the tent of Habers wife,
(For Habers house with Iabin was at peace)
Iael went forth and met him on the way,
And did entreat him to turn in and stay.
Turn in, my Lord, quoth she, be not afraid,
Repose thy weary limbs in Iaels tent,
For thou art welcome to thy poor handmaid:
Then for a mantle presently she went
To cover him, and such demeanor shows,
That most secure he did himself suppose.
Oh I am tired, said he, and overcome
In weariness, and cares orewhelmed deep,
I thirst for water, pray thee give me some,
And then be centinell while I do sleep,
Stand at the door, and have a special care
That none do intercept me unaware.
If any chance to come enquire of thee
Who thou have here, or what guest is within,
Answer him then that no man thou did see,
For at thy tent there has no creature bin:
Perform this carefully at my request,
And so he very soundly fell to rest.
The sleep of death he slept on Iaels bed,
For she a hammer and a nail did take,
And drive it through the temples of his head,
That never after he had power to wake:
Thus he that from his foes his life did hide,
By his supposed friend a woman, did.
The Tragedy of Prince Absalom.
AMbition, I embrace thee in mine arms,
Scepter and Crown are golden kingly charms,
And have prevailed in my heroike mind,
Unto a kingdoms rule, my heart's inclinde,
To be as high as Majesty can sit,
Is the fair mark my thoughts desire to hit:
Why then ascend to David's royal throne,
Prince Absalom as King will sit thereon,
To fit my head even with my fathers crown,
Keeps filial love and subject duty down:
In Hebron let the trumpets sound proclaim me,
And King of Israel let the Heralds name me:
My ears allow to hear no other sound,
But David is deposde, his son is crowned:
Even in the city gates I Will causes hear,
And steal the hearts of all the people there.
Upon the courteous that obeisance show,
A mild and sweet behavior I Will bestow,
Kindness by art I will accomplish rare,
And how to please, shall be mine only care:
I Will bow, I Will smile, I Will kindly give embrace,
And show a cheerful look, a loving face.
With David's government, dislike I Will find,
Faining much grief and passion of the mind,
For every wronged and oppressed wight,
And wish that I had power their cause to right:
From Gilo for Ahitophel I Will send,
And work that Counselor to be my friend.
With every sort making my faction strong,
Which done, I Will do no right, nor take no wrong.
My father grows already in disgrace,
And Semei has cursde him to his face,
Threw stones at him, and did him thus vpbraid,
Come forth thou man of Belial, he said,
The Lord has brought revenge upon thy head,
For all the blood that of Saul's house is shed:
This does discourage him, animate me,
And tells my soul that I a King must be.
March on brave Isralites, resolved powers,
Victoriously prevail, the day is ours,
Weel pitch our battle in this Ephraim wood,
Here let dead bodies glut the earth with blood,
Here David's crown is either won or lost,
Here in this place it must his kingdom cost,
Here of our lives we will be prodigal,
And that great monarch into question call:
Draw forth your swords, let courage be their guide,
The controversy of a crown decide,
Either a King, and all my foes convince,
Or let me not remain one hour Prince.
Oh cruel battle, fatal bloody day,
Unto my death some mortal wound make way.
We are subdude, even twenty thousand slain,
Our scattred bodies on the earth remain.
What shall I do? or whither shall I fly?
It is no matter, any where to die.
For shelter into this huge wood I Will ride,
Come on Despair, be thou misfortunes guide.
Day turn to darkness, and entinguish light,
And wrap my treason up in vapory night.
Let not a little bird presume to sing:
Wither you trees, and leaves, and each green thing.
Post on poor Mule, and spare no speed to run,
Thy riders race of life is almost done.
My royal birth is now of no esteem,
My rarest beauty will deformed seem:
Vengeance is come, Gods judgment lights on me,
I am caught hold off by a senseless tree.
For my ambition, thus I mount on hie:
For pride, my locks are ropes to hang me by.
Yonder comes Ioab, now my end is near,
He brings my death upon his bloody spear:
Come pierce me, captain, rid this life from hence,
Fearful my end, and grievous my offense.
David's dear issue Absalom the fair,
Hangs without mercy bleeding in the air.
Ahitophels wisdom converted to folly.
HOw is disgrace imposde upon my head,
That for my counsel have been honored?
All Israel have said Ahitophel
Speaks even as does the heavenly oracle:
It Was my advise, none plotted it but I,
The Prince with his fathers concubines should lie,
And he embraced it, and it sorted well,
For as our expectation was, it fell.
And shall I chiefest statesman in the land,
That still in high affairs have had a hand,
Be crossed by Husai the Arachite?
No, first upon my self shall vengeance light,
I said it was best chose out twelve thousand men,
And set on David, weary tired then
That instant night, being ouerworne and weak,
The hearts of all his people this would break:
Upon my life it was the only way,
Yet Husai has crossed it with his nay:
He says that David and his men be strong,
They Are valiant, and have had experience long.
And like a Bear robbed of her whelps they be:
All this the Prince approues, rejecting me,
Thus of my wonted honor I have mist.
But from this day, give counsel he that list,
I Will home and take an order for my pelf,
And then give counsel how to hang my self,
My house shall be in order ere I die,
Then for my life, another course have I:
Though out of order to the world it seem,
Despair and I thereof do well esteem:
Not on my weapons point I mean to fall,
As did the desperate King, resolved Saul:
But to some fatal tree, I will repair,
And hang my breathless body in the air.
Life, I detest thee, thou art almost done,
Time hold thy hand, with me the glass is run:
Honor farewell, and in dishonor now,
I will go hang thee up upon some bough.
It was vain honor did my heart entice,
And now i will sell it for a halters price:
All I have learned in earthly honors school,
Is, worldly wise man proves a heavenly fool.
Salomons censure, in the two Harlots controversy.
TWo harlots striving with each other,
Would both unto one child be mother,
And did to Wisdoms King complain,
That he true justice would maintain:
My Lord (said one) justice I crave,
Says the other, justice let me have:
We both within a house do lie,
She had a child, and so have I,
Between their births but three days space:
(Pray hear me I beseech your grace)
Her child (my Sovereign) in the night,
Of life she has deprived quite,
She smoothred it as I suppose,
And about midnight then she rose,
I being fast asleep (God wot)
My living child away she got,
And thrust her dead one unto me,
(This is as true, as true may be)
When in the morning I did wake,
Intending mine own child to take:
And give it suck, I found it dead,
Which when I did behold with dread,
Viewing it well with weeping eyne,
I plainly saw it was none of mine.
The the other harlot did reply,
An't please your Grace, this is a lie,
I never changed child for child,
Neither will I be thus beguild,
To take hers dead for mine alive:
Would God that I might never thrive,
If that the living be not mine.
Thou lie (said the other) it is not thine,
Thou shall not, dame, delude me so,
My loving babe I well do know,
The very cheeks, the eyes, the nose,
The mothers favor plainly shows,
Thy self (I will be sworn) did say,
It Was wondrous like me the other day,
And now forsooth it is your own,
How shameless (Lord) this world is grown?
My gracious Prince (says the other) hear,
Upon my soul (great King) I swear,
If with this child she have to do,
Then she is mother of them two:
The dead child is her own in troth,
Now this she claims, so she will have both.
I do deny the dead said she,
The living child belongs to me:
Oh God, art thou so void of shame,
Another woman's fruit to claim?
Will thou stand stout in that is untrue,
And say my infant is thy due?
When in thy conscience thou art sure
The pains for it I did endure,
The mothers grief when it was borne:
Fie wicked woman, I would scorn
To bear so bad and lewd a mind,
I grieve thou art of woman kind.
Then said the King, this strife I Will end,
You both for one live child contend,
That child I Will with a sword divide,
And give to each of you a side,
A just division I will make,
And half a child shall either take.
Then spoke the mother whose it was,
Dread Lord let no such sentence pass,
But rather with my heart I crave,
The live child wholly let her have.
Nay, but says the other to the King,
As thou have spoke perform the thing,
Nor mine, nor thine let it remain,
But share it equal twixt us twain.
Then said the King, the babe shall live,
And to the mother I it give,
Which I am sure thou can not be,
Because no kindness rests in thee.
Cruel Queen Iezabel turned unto dogs meat.
WHat terror is my spirit vexed in?
How does Revenge sound doleful to mine ears?
My soul's pursude with that same crying sin
Of murder, Naboth fills my thoughts with fears.
There is no horror like a troubled mind,
As I accursed Iezabel do find.
Revenge for blood, I hear continual sound,
Till vengeance comes, thus will it ever cry,
My soul is lost to get a little ground,
I caused the guiltless man, causlesse to die:
I wrote a letter in my husbands name,
And only I the wicked plot did frame.
By my advice a fast there was pretended,
And Naboth placed, amongst the chiefest then
Being suddenly accused to have offended
By two suborned, lewd and devilish men,
Who to the Elders did avouch this thing:
The Iezralite blasphemed God and the king.
Upon this slandrous false accusing breath,
He sentenced was to die with common voice,
And presently they stoned him to death,
Which I no sooner heard, but did rejoice,
And went to Ahab, saying, Joyful be,
The vineyard now is thine, i will give it thee.
Going to take possession of the same,
He meets with Elias by the way,
Sent from the Lord, who tells him in his name:
Hark bloody purchaser what God does say:
Have thou both killed and got possession too?
For this thy sin, mark what the Lord will do.
Even in the place where dogs did lick the blood
Of Naboth, to whose vineyard thou make claim:
Even in that place, the Lord has thought it good,
That dogs shall with thy blood perform the same:
Evil on thee and on thy seed shall fall,
From thee, to him makes water against the wall.
And for thy wife, thus says the God of power,
Since she has wrought such evil in his eyes:
Dogs shall the flesh of Iezabel devour,
When by the city walls her carcass lies:
In Iezrael it shall be shortly seen,
That dogs shall eat thy proud and painted Queen.
Which punishment revenging Iehu wrought,
In rooting out the house of Ahab quite,
Ioram he slew, and caused to be brought
Unto the plot of ground was Naboths right,
Then to the city did in triumph ride,
Where me most wretched murdresse he spide.
My face was painted, even as pride would have it,
My head attyr'd to vanities content,
Thus at a window I did stand to brave it,
Said Iehu, who is there to my side bent?
With that were chamberlaines at hand looked out,
The instruments to bring my death about.
He bad them throw me down, and so they did,
They sent me with a vengeance to the ground,
My blood dashed out, my life was sudden rid,
Devouring dogs my flesh had quickly found,
And with a Queen they filled their paunches full,
Leaving but palms of hands, my feet and scull.
The measuring of man's life by David's span.
THreescore and ten, the age and life of man,
In holy David's eyes seemed but a span:
For half that time is lost and spent in sleep,
So only thirty five for use we keep.
Then days of youth must be abated all,
Wise Solomon, childhood and youth does call
But vanity, mere vanity he says,
All that does pass us in our infant days:
Our time of age we take no pleasure in,
Our days of grief we wish had never bin,
Then sleep deducted, youth, and age, and sorrow,
Only a span is all thy life does borrow.
Man's Salve, being wounded by temtatio^, Is to remember Christ his passion.
THe wounds that Jesus suffered for my sin,
Are mouths that cry, Oh love him with thy heart:
The thorns that pierced through his sacred skin,
Are tongues, pronouncing Love is his desert:
The torturing whips that did to anguish move him,
Are echoes, sounding, Wretched sinner love him.
There is no loss, that grief can get again,
But loss of grace, sorrow may grace attain.
Salomons good houswife, in the 31. of his Proverbs.
HE that a gracious wife does find,
Whose life puts virtue chief in ure,
One of the right good houswife kind,
That man may well himself assure,
And boasting say that he has found
The richest treasure on the ground.
Who so enjoys such a love,
Let him resolve with hearts consent,
She ever constantly will prove
A careful nurse, want to prevent,
With diligence and painful heed,
Preventing taste of beggars need.
And while she lives will still procure,
By true and faithful industry,
To Increase his wealth, and to insure
His state in all security:
To seek his quiet, work his ease,
And for a world no way displease.
Her household folk from sloth to keep,
She will endeavor with good heed,
At work more wakefull then asleep,
With flax and stuff, which houswiues need
To be employed, her hands also
The way to work will others show.
Her wit a common wealth contains,
Of needments for her household store,
And like a ship her self explaines,
That riches brings from foreign shore,
Ariuing with a bounteous hand,
Dispearsing treasure to the land.
Before the day she will arise
To order things, and to provide
What may her family suffice,
That they at labor may abide,
If she have land, no pain shall want
To purchase vines, set, sow, and plant.
No honest labor she will omit,
In ought she can attain unto,
But will endeavor strength and wit,
Adding the utmost she can do:
And if that profit comes about,
By night her candle goes not out.
A willing hand to the distressed
She lends, and is a cheerful giver:
Come winters cold and frostie guest,
When idle huswiues quake and quiver,
She and her houshold's clothed well,
The weathers hardness to expel.
Her skill does work fair tapistrie,
With linen furnished of the best:
Her needle works do beautify,
And she in scarlet costly dressed,
When Senators assembled be,
Her husbands honor there shall see.
Her spinning shall her store increase,
The finest cloth shall yield her gain,
And daily profit shall not cease,
Which her vnidle hands maintain:
Her clothing shall her worth express,
And Honors years her end possess.
Her mouth shall never opened be,
But wisdom will proceed from it:
And such mild gracious words yields she,
Sweetness upon her tongue does sit:
In age she will her care address,
To eat no bread of idleness.
Her children shall their duty show,
Most reverent to her all their life,
Her husband bless, that he did know
The time to meet with such a wife:
And vttring forth his happiness,
Her virtues in this wise express.
I know it is true that more then one
Good huswife there is to be found:
But I may say, that thou alone
Above all women do abound,
Yea I protest in all my days,
Thou art the first, and thee i will praise.
What thing is favor but a shade?
It has no certain lasting hour,
Whereof is wanton beauty made,
That withers like a Summers flower?
When these shall end their date in days,
She that fears God shall live with praise.
And such a wife of worthy worth,
Due glories lot will to her fall,
And great assemblies will give forth
What virtues she is adorned withal,
Her life's renown to fame shall reach,
Her good example others teach.
Salomons Harlot, in the 2. 7. and 8. chapt. of his Proverbs.
A Harlot of the whorish kind
Described by Wisdoms King,
Whose paths are crooked and whose ways
Unto destruction bring:
That impudent with shameless brow,
Does modest life detest,
And of all brutish filthynesse
Insatiate is possessed,
Is noted to be full of words,
And does the streets frequent,
Not qualited as Sara was,
To keep within the tent.
But haunts the city to be seen
Of all that passes by,
Cal's simple people void of sense,
Her kindness to come try.
Like curled and painted Iesabel,
She at her door will sit,
(...) Without are dogs, whoremungers, murderers,
And whosoever loves or makes lies,
Graceless inchanters, and idolaters,
For entrance unto these the Lamb denies,
They are for horror and eternal woe,
And must with trembling to destruction go.
O sons of Adam, sinful race of clay,
Most miserable blind deceived men,
You scattred sheep that wander from the way,
If this place be your fold, where stray you then?
Why is your pace to heaven so slow and slack?
Or rather, why from thence retire you back?
O foolish lover of vain earthly things,
Why seek'st thou honor and promotion here?
Which only care, grief and vexation brings,
To build, to purchase, and let leases dear:
Join house to house, and pile up gold beside,
Fixing thy thoughts on gain, thy heart on pride.
Thou never can attain ike blessedness,
In the inioying all thy soue can crave,
Nor once come near taste of the happiness,
That the least servant in Gods house shall have:
For in this holy city w^ere they live,
Is treasure, which the world can never give.
Which shall endure perpetually their lot,
The lot and portion in the living land,
A giuers gift, whose purpose alters not,
But for the length of endless time shall stand
In all perfection and security,
True holiness and perfect purity.
When thou with this worlds pomp and dignity,
Which hereon earth did please thy soul so well,
Shall bear that same rich glutton company,
Whose burial's in the dreadful vault of hell,
Excluded from all mercy, comfort, grace,
In that same endless, easelesse, hopeless place.
Times swiftness.
I Run, I fly, I never stand at shy,
There Is no recalling of me being past,
Wise men take hold, and meet me in the way,
Fools first neglect, their late repent comes last:
He that will use me to his endless gains,
Must spend time well while he on earth remains.
Man's neglgence.
I Had a time in youth for learnings treasure,
I had a time to have attaine^ grace,
I spent that time in worlds bewitching pleasure,
And wish for time now time has turned his face.
Time runs before, and instantly forsakes us,
Death posts behind, and sudden ouertakes us.
Deaths powerfulness.
I Make all fear, that am a fearlesse creature,
The world does even tremble at my name,
Ender I am of all begun by nature,
Proud flesh and blood in graves of earth I tame:
Though bitter unto many, sweet to some
That loath this life for love of life to come.
A view of this world the Globe of Vanity.
Look, mortals, on this stage of earthly things,
View well the changes of inconstant time,
Begin at poor men, and go up to kings,
From humble hearts, to such as love to clime,
From innocents, to such as live by crime,
From low to high, from high again to low,
What man is he would worlds delights forgo?
Oh fond felicity that all men find,
On this unsettled pauement of the earth!
Where Is nothing but perplexity of mind,
None proving still the period to our mirth,
Back from our grave to our first hour of birth:
Only this blindness does some fools besot,
They live in sorrow, and they see it not.
For what is a King, or mighty potent Lord,
That like a god, millions of people swayes?
That saues and kills with his commanding word,
Whose will the flattrer sooths, and all obayes,
Pray what is the pleasure of his kingly days?
If he be good (as great men good is rare)
His kingdom then is but his hourly care.
What Is a great conqueror, whose name is feared,
Like Caesar, or the dreaded Tamberlaine?
Who by his sword, Piramides has reared,
With bones and scalpes, and ensigns of the slain,
Look on him well and find him merely vain,
The fitttest Epithet for him is this,
This mighty man, a mighty murdrer is.
What Is a great traveler by sea and land,
That does survey the world with curious eye?
And sees what wonders the Creators hand
Wrought in the deepes, in vales, or mountains hie.
Who does not think this traveler does lie,
Though he tell truth? then what is a greater shame
For man to toil and get a liers name?
What is it to be rich and pile up store,
To build great houses, titling them our own,
To have abundance, yet still covet more,
To rise by many wronged and overthrown,
What is all this when it is truly known?
Misers oppress, build, gather, to this end,
For unthrift heirs to ruin, spoil and spend.
What is it to be great in peoples eyes,
And to be puffed up with their bubble praise?
What is the issue of their vulgar cries,
Their songs and rimes, and high applauding lays?
Here Is only all, it shortens honors days:
Whom the rude greet with shouts and garlic breath,
The mighty hate, and hasten unto death.
What is it to be fair, and so composed,
That being earth, we yet seem angeline?
To have in us all beauties grace enclosed,
And Venus fools account us most divine?
What is the end to be thus goodly fine?
On beauties brow is this inscription placed,
It Is rare to find a person fair and chaste.
What is it to be any thing indeed,
That mortals in their dull conceits commend?
What is it on the worlds delights to feed,
And have each vanity on us attend?
Even nothing all, for here is of all the end,
As we were borne with tears to live in pain,
Death comes with sighs and takes us hence again.
A sum of good desires.
GReat God which have al wisdom at commanding,
Be in my head, inspire my understanding:
Almighty God, the object of true light,
Be thou director of mine eyes and sight:
Dread God, whose word is sacred and divine,
Be in my mouth, and guide this tongue of mine:
Merciful God, the fullness of all grace,
Be in my heart, and purge that filthy place:
Eternal God, on whom I whole depend,
Be at my last departing and mine end.
Times Epigramme.
STep Caesar on earths stage, and act thy part,
Show now what monarch of the world thou art:
Let Alexander in his bones appear,
That worlds commander while he lived here.
Come Nero with a sheet about thine ears,
See who thy tyranny regards or fears.
Achilles rowse thy self from out thy toombe,
And see what man will give thy weapon room.
Hector, with that renowned Hanniball,
What are you now but rotten fellows all?
You had a time of greatness, now it is fled,
And even as such had never bin, you are dead.
I knew you when with dread you made men bow,
Then died, turned dust, and so are nothing now.
Even with the worlds creation I began,
And have seen all the course of sinful man,
His state in Paradise that glorious place,
His disobedience, and his fall from grace,
His banishment forth Eden for offending,
And so from age to age, all times descending,
Until this instant year, six hundred five,
All that are dead, and every one alive
Is in my register, I note them well,
There Is not a deed they do, but Time can tell.
Earth is a stage, and mortals actors be,
That play before my fellow Death and me
All tragedies, for not a day you have,
But some are killed, and carried to their grave.
There goes the King from his imperial seat,
Even with the beggar, for to be worms meat:
There noble and ignoble, fool and wise,
Shall lie and rot till the first dead man rise,
And there all that have bin do certain show,
That all which are to come, must thither go.
What one man likes, another lothes.
Unto himself as each man has his mind,
Several distinguished in his appetites,
So are his thoughts as variously inclind,
One liking these, another those delights:
Some greedy hindes account the greatest pleasure
Only consists in the gaining treasure.
One loves no life, but where the trumpet stern,
Breaths deadly summons to oppressiue arms,
Caring not where, against Spaniard or the Kerne,
So he may live in martial hot alarmes:
He with Tiphous dares to give adventure,
To raise a mount, the frame of heaven to enter.
One being wrapped with foreign admiration,
Of laws, of customs, and of peoples natures,
Longing to know the climates variation,
Of monuments remote to see the statures,
How dangerous so ere delights to range,
Till proof approues the worst in greatest change.
Others to chase the timorous Heart delight,
Cheering the hounds with horns rechanting blast,
When some applaud the towering Faulcons flight,
That now has ceaz'd the moore-bred Mallard fast,
And some account as lost to be that day,
When their estates they hazard not at play.
But thou Calliope my Muse divine,
Make me neglect these fruitless vanities,
Thou do my spirits from gross earth refine,
Making my thoughts at future glory rise,
For when the hind, the soldier, wandering knight,
Starues, falls, clay clothes, shall poesy give light.
The Araignement of the world at Gods general Sessions.
WHen that great day of sinners doleful fear,
The day of judgment for the quick and dead,
Shall bring to doom all deeds that ever were,
With terror, trembling, horror, woe, and dread,
The world shall be reduced to ashes quite,
And all flesh stand amazed to see that sight.
What man by tongue or pen can make it known,
The horror that men's hearts shall then partake?
When the great Judge of men sits on his throne,
And every one a just account must make,
In this distressed state what is to be done?
Which way shall sinners fly, or whither run?
The Prophets do give witness to this day,
And have affirmed it will certain come:
Our Savior warns us to watch and pray,
With preparation for that fearful doom,
When sounding trumpe shall summon to appear,
And yield account what lives we lived here.
Both Death and Nature shall amazed stand,
To see revived humane creatures rise,
The sea shall yield her dead, as well as land,
All those that in her watery bosom lies,
Must make appearance at the Angels sound,
As well as they had graves upon the ground.
Then shall each secret conscience be revealed,
The books of humane life be opened wide,
Not the least thought can pass away concealed,
But all in public knowledge shall abide,
All hidden things obscured within the heart,
And each receive his merit and desert.
What can the sin-defiled creature say?
What advocate will serve his case to plead?
Since the vprightest man that lives this day,
Is debtor unto hell and endless dread,
Worthy of nothing for his best done deeds,
If God in justice against his sin proceeds.
O thou that freely do of mercy save,
Vprightest Judge, whom bribes cannot seduce,
Pardon of thee on my souls knees I crave,
My guilt is great, and I have no excuse.
Remember Lord thou did to earth repair,
Of sinful man thou had such loving care.
Will thou permit (O Lord) thy grievous pain,
Thy hunger, thirst, thy tortures, wounds and death,
Shall all be spent on my poor soul in vain?
Yea that same willing yielding up thy breath
To God thy Father, to procure my peace,
Shall utterly in power and virtue cease?
Suffer not Lord, the true effect to perish,
Of thy most bitter grievous bloody passion,
My fainting sprite thereby revive and cherish,
Thy bitter death's my sweet'st consolation:
Mild Jesus, I most meekly do entreat,
Show mercy on me from thy judgments seat.
Guilty I am, my guilt I do confess,
Therefore I sigh, and unto thee retire,
Refuse me not, thy mercies are not less,
Then when the thief obtained his desire,
And sinful Magdalene did favor find,
Thy pity is the same, thou still as kind.
For in a danger so extreme as this,
To whom for succor might I safely fly,
To find assured comfort, and not miss?
But unto thee thou supreme of the sky,
Worthless my prayers to come before thy face,
Unless thy mercy sit in justice place.
Direct my feet that stray and wander wide,
And shadow me with thy protections wings,
Set me from goats, upon the right hand side,
And place me where thy Saints and Angels sings,
To speak thy praises with a heavenly voice,
Where soul and body endless may rejoice.
FINIS.

