HIS MAJESTY'S APprobation of the Acts underwritten: At Holy-rude-House the 3.
day of November, 1629.
FORSOMEEKLE as diverse Complaints having been made unto the Kings Majesty,
both by His Counsel and Clergy of this Kingdom: Anent the great increase and
grouth of Popery and insolences of persons popishlie disposed: His Ma. was
pleased out of his Religious Princely and Fatherly care, which he has ever
had of the flourishing of the Gospel and true Religion, the good of the Church,
and Peace of this his ancient Kingdom. To appoint a meeting to be kept at
Holy-rude-house in the Month of Iulij last by past: His Ma. Counsel, the
Archbishops and Bishops, and such Commissioners of their Dyocies, as they
should think fittest, for resolving upon such solid and good courses, to be
prosecute against the aduersars of Religion, as should be thought meet for
reclaiming of the tractable and obedient, and for censuring and repressing the
stubburne and refractarie sort. Which meeting being accordingly very
solemnly kept: And diverse good acts and ordinances being made and set
down for the furtherance and advancement of that good cause which his Ma. so
earnestly affectes. And the same acts being presented to his Royal
consideration. It has pleased his Ma. after due perusal thereof, to give his
Royal approbation and allowance thereunto in the form and tennour as they are
here conceived and set down in order. And therefore the Lords of secreit
Counsel according to his Ma. express warrant and direction in write, sent
unto them in this matter. Ordaines publication to be made of the said Acts
by open Proclamation at the marcat Crosses of the head Borrowes of this
Kingdom, and others places needful. Wherethrough none pretend ignorance of
the same. Of the which Acts the Tennour follows.

Commission against Jesuits, Seminary and messe-Preasts, and others.
FFORSOMEEKLE as although all Jesuits Seminary and mess priests and
excommunicate traffiquing Papists are found and declared by diverse Acts of
Parliament and secreit Counsel to be most pernicious pestes in this
commonweal and avowed enemies to Gods truth and all Christian Gouernament, and
that therefore they were by diverse Acts and Proclamations made and published
heretofore expresselie commanded and charged to have departed forth of this
Kingdom within acertaine space now of a long time bygone, under the pain of
death. Yet partly upon occasion of the comfort and countenance which they
find among numbers of his Majesty's Subjectes of good quality being
popishlie affected. And partly by the negligence and oversight of these. To
whose charge the execution of the saides Acts and apprehension and punishing of
the saides persons appertained. These Jesuits Seminary and mess Priests
has taken the boldness and encouragement from time to time to repair to this
Kingdom where they busy themselves to corrupt and pervert the simple and
ignorant people, both in their Religion and alledgeance.

And some of these Jesuits and mess Priests being crafty and politic heads
and Traffiqueres in materes of state. They bend their whole endeuoures by
surmissing and forging of lies and dispersing of brutes and Rumors of foreign
projectes and Resolutions among his Majesty's Subjectes of better sort to
distract them in opinions and affections, and to raise and Intertaine factions
and sedition in the state. To the trouble and disturbance of his Majesty's
peace. For preventing of whose Treasonable courses and preserving of his
Majesty's good Subjects from the snaires and dangers wherein these wicked
politic and bussie headed people will not faill to Inuolue them to their
utter wrack and vndoeing.

The Lords of secreit Counsel being assisted with a number of the Clergy and
Commissioners from the several Dyocies of this Kingdom whom his Majesty
(Out of his most Religious and pious disposition toward the propagation and
aduanceing of the Religion and suppressing of these pernicious and wicked
Pestes by whom the Religion and Peace of the Kirk and Country, is so mightily
disturbed) Ordained to be Conueined, has given and granted and by the tennour
hereof. Gives and grants full power and Commission express bidding and
Charge to the persons Particularly vnderwrittin within the bounds following.
They are to say, To James Earl of Murrey his Majesty's Lieutennent for the
North parts of this Kingdom within the whole bounds of his Lieutennentrie,
And to John Bishop of Caithnes, Iobn Sinclar of Rattir, Williame Inneis of
Sandside, and David Sinclare of Din, cunjunctlie and seueralie within the
bounds of Cathnes, And to Colline Earl of Seafort, Donald Lord of Rae, Sir
Robert Gordoune, Knight Barronnet, John Gordoune, of Embo, Murrey, of
Spainzidaill, James, Sutherland, Tutour of Duffus, Sutherland, of Clyne, John,
Mackey, of Dillirait, and Angus, Mackey, of Boghous, conjunctlie and severally
within the bounds of Sutherland, and to the said Coline, Earl of Seafort,
Archebald, Lord of Lorne, John Bishop of the Yles, Sir Donald Medonnald, of
Slaite, John Mackclaud of Hereis, Hector Mackclaine, of Dowart, John Campbell
appearand of Caddell, Sir Lauchlane Mackinoun, of Strathordaill, Mackclaine of
Coill, Mackclaine of Lochbowie, Lauchlane Mackclame of Moruerne, Stewart Tutor
of Bute, and Mackneill of Barra, conjunctlie and severally within the bounds
of the Dyocie of the Ylles. And to the said Coline Earl of Seafort, Simion
Lord Fraser of Lovat, Patrik Bishop of Rosse, John Vrquhart Shiriffe of
Cromartie, Rosse, of Pitcalnie, John Gordoun of Buckie, and Mr. Angus Mcintoshe
Minister at Kingussie, And to the P^ouest and Baillyes of Innernesse,
conjunctlie and severally within the bounds of the Dyocie of Rosse, and to Sir
John Grant of Freuchie, James Brodie of that ilk, Dumbar of Grange, Robert
Inn^s of Balvenie, Rosse Barron of Kilrauack, Leslie of ^inressie, and Patrick
Grant of Easter Elchies, and to the Prouest and Baillyes of Elgine Forresse,
Narne and Bamfe, conjunctlie and severally within the bounds of the
Shirifdomes of Elgine, Forresse, Narne and Bamfe. And to James Lord Deffurd,
Alexander Master of Forbes, Alexander Irwing of Drum, Sir Alexander Gordoun of
Cluny, James Crichtoun of Fendraucht, Burnet of Leyes, John Forbes of Leslie,
Sir James Gordoun appearand of Lesmore, Andro Fraser of Muckalls, William
Forbes of Tolquon, Thomas Fraser of Streachin, and Abercromie of Birkinbag, and
to the Prouest and Baillyes of the Burgh of Aberdene, conjunctlie and
severally within the bounds of the Shirifdome Aberdene. And to John Earl of
Kingorne, David Lord Carnegie, Sir John Scrimgeour of Duddop, Constable of
Dundie, Lindesay of Edyell, Harie VVood of Bonnitoun, Grahame of Fintrie, Sir
Coline Campbell of Lundie, Haliburtoune of Pitcur, Thomas Fothringhame of
Powric Crichtoune of Ruthuens, Alexander Arskeine of Din, Carnegie of
Dinnechin. And to the Prouest and Baillyes of Dundie, Forfar, Brechin, and
Monrose, conjunctlie and severally within the bounds of the Shirfdome of
Forfar. And to George Vicount of Duppline, Lord high Chancellor of this
Kingdom. VVilliame Earl of Menteih, President of his Majesty's Counsel* John
Earl of Atholl, James Lord of Cowper, Moungo Mr. of Stormount, Coline Campbell
appeirand of Glennorchie, Sir James Cambill of Lawers, Ogiluie of Inchmartine,
Moncreife of that ilk: Sir VVilliame Stewart of Gairnetullie, Blaire of
Batheyock, Mercer of Aldie, Campbell of Crounane, Mr. James Stewart of
Lady-well, Commissar of Dunkeld, and Rattray of Craighall. And to the Prouest
and Bailyes of the Burgh, of Perth conjunctlie and severally within the bounds
of the Shirefdome of Perth and Stewartries of Stratherne and Menteith. And to
John Earl Mare Lord high Thesaurer of this Kingdom, the said VVilliame Earl
Menteith Alexander, Earl of Linlithgow, Sr. Archibald Stirling of Keir, Murrey
of Poumais, and Drumond of Carnok, and to the Prouest Baillyes of Stirling,
coniunctlie and severally within the bounds of the Shirefdome of Striuiling.
And to John Earl of Rothesse, John Lord Weimes, Lord Burly, Robert Lord
Melvill, Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall, Knight Baronnet Sir John Scot of
Scotstarbit, Sir George Erskeine of Innertill, Sir Alexander Gibson of Durie,
Sir James Learmonth of Balcommie, Leslie of Newtoune, James VVeems appeirand of
Bogie, Spots-VVood of Dairsie, Lindesay of Balcarrasse, and Sandelands, of St.
Monnans, and the Prouest and Baillies of the Borrowes and Towns within the
Shirefdome of Eyfe, conjunctlie and severally within the whole bounds of the
said Shirefdome. And to Thomas Earl of Haddingtoune, Lord priuie-seale John
Earl of Lauderdaill, James Lord Dalkeith, Thomas Lord Binning, John Lord Hay
of Yester, John Lord Torphichine, John Lord Cranstoune, Lord Ramsay, Sir Patrik
Hepburne of VVauchtoune, Sir George Dundas of that ilk, Sir John Hamiltoune of
Prestoune, Master Patrik Hepburne of Smetoune, Sir James Richartsone of
Smetone, Sir James Mackgill of Cranstoun, Sir John Dalmahoy of that ilk, Sir
George Forrester of Corsterphine, Sir John Sinclare appearand of Hermistone,
and Sinclare appeirand of Rosling, and the Prouest and Baillyes of the Borrowes
of Edinburgh, and Haddingtoun conjunctlie and severally within the bounds of
the Shirefdome of Edinburgh, and Constabularie of Haddingtoune. And to
Alexander Earl of Galoway, William Vicount of Drume-lanerke, the Shireffes of
Dumfreis and Vigtoune, Hew Vicount of Airdes, his Eldest son John Gordoun of
Lochinvare: Sir John Chartres of Amisfield, Sir Robert Grier of Lag, James
Iohnstoune of that ilk, Sir John Mackdowgall of Garthland, Vaus of Barnbarroch,
Athaunay of Sorbie, Hew Gordoune of Grange, and Archibald Dumbare of Baldune
and the Prouest and Baillyes of Dumfreis and Kirkcudbright, conjunctlie and
severally within the bounds of the Shirefdomes of Drumfreis and Stewarties of
Kircubright and Annerdaill, and to William Lord Kilmares, James Lord Rosse,
Sir George Elphingstoun of Bliths-wood, Justice Clerk, Sir William Cuninghame
of Caprintoun, Sir Walter Stewart of Minto, Ludovicke Haustoun of that ilke:
William Simple of Fowlewood, Steward of Castlemilke, Archibald Stewart of
Blackhald, Mure appearand of Rowalland, John Birsebane of Bishoptoun, Craufurd
of Kilbirnie Porterfeild of Douchen, Malcolme Craufurd of Newtoun, and Boill of
Kelburne, and the Prouest and Baillyes of Air, Irwing, and Renfrew,
conjunctlie and severally within the bounds of the Shirifdomes of Air and
Renfrew. To pass, search, seek and tak all and sundry Jesuits, Seminary
and messe-Priestes, and excomunicat traffiquing rebellious Papists, where ever
they may be apprehended, and whose names shall be given unto them by the
Bishop of the Dyocie Moderator of the Presbytery or any of the Ministers of
the Presbytery, or whose names shall be sent unto them by his Ma. Counsel or
of whom they have certain knowledge themselves. And to put hold and detain
them in sure firmance and captivity, aye and while order and direction be
given for their punishment as accords. With power likewise to the saides
Commissioners conjunctlie and severally, to have a special care and regard
within their several bounds and offices, that the superstitious going in
pilgrimages to Chapels and Wells, which is become so frequent in this
Kingdom: To the great offense of God, scandal of the Kirk, and disgracee of
his Ma. Gouenament, be restrained. And for this effect that they cause diligent
attendance be given at all such parts and places where this idolatrous
superstition is used. And to take and apprehend all such persons of whatsomeuer
rank and quality whom they shall deprehend going in pilgrimage to Chapels
and Wells, or whom they shall know themselves to be guilty of that crime. And
to commit them to Ward, and to detain them therein, till ordour and direction
be given for their trial and punishment conform to his Ma. Laws and acts of
Parliament. And if it shall happen the said Jesuits Seminary and mess
priests and excommunicat Traffiquing and rebellious Papists, or any of them
for eshewing of apprehension to fly to strengthes or houses. With power to the
saides Commissioners conjunctlie and severally. To do therein according as is
prescriued by his Ma. Laws in the case of rebellion. And generally with power
to the saides Commissioners conjunctlie and seueralie to do exerce and use all
and sundry others things which for apprehension of the saides Jesuits
Seminary and mess Priests excommunicat rebellious papists, and persons
superstitiouslie going in pilgrimages to Chapels and wells by Law and
consuetude of this Realm, may lawfully be done: Firm and stable, holding and
for to hold all and whatsomeuer things shall be lawfully done herein. And
ordaines letters to be direct charging Officers of Arms. To pass to the
market Croces of the head Borrowes of the Shirfdomes Particularly
aboue-writen. And there by open Proclamation. To make publication hereof and
to command and charge all and sundry his Ma. Leiges and Subjectes. To
Reverence, acknowledge, and obey, rise concur, fortify and assist the saides
Commssioners conjunctlie and severally in all and every thing tending to the
execution of this Commssion. And for this effect, To conueene and meet with
them at such days, times and places, as they shall be advertised by their
missiue Letteres or otherwise. And that effauldlie and truly they concur
and join with them in the execution of this Commission. And do nor attempt
nothing which may imped or hinder the same or linger and delay the execution
thereof. As they and every one of them will testify their affection and good
disposition to the true Religion, and punishing the Aduersars thereof. And
under the pain to be repute holden esteemed and persued as fauoreres,
suppliers, and showeres of counetenance and assisttance to the saides Jesuits
Seminary and mess Priests* and excommunicat rebellious Papists, and to be
punished for the same accordingly. And to command and charge the said
Commissioneres to axcept this Commssion in and upon them, and faithfully,
carefulle, and duetifullie to execute the same. And to be ready at all times
as they shall be required or advertised of the being of the said Jesuits
Seminary and mess priests and excommunicat rebellious papists, in any
part or place within the bounds alloted unto them. To riase and go forewarde
for persute and apprehension of them as they will approve themselves worthy
of the trust reposed in them and will answer upon the contrary at their
perrill.

COMMISSION AGAINST Resetters of Jesuits, Seminary and mess Priests.
FOrsomeekle as although the resette, supply, and intercommoning with
Jesuits, Seminary and mess Priests, who by diverse Acts of Parliament were
found and declared to be professed and avowed enemies to all Christian
Gouernaments, has been very straightly prohibit and discharged by many good
Acts of Parliament, Conuention and secreit Counsel under certain pains
mentioned and contained therein. Notwithstanding it is of truth, that the
resette, supply and comforting of these wicked and unhappy people, is of late
become to be very frequent and common in this Kingdom, partly upon
occasion of the bypast connivence and ouer-sight given to persons offending in
that kind, and partly because particular Commssiions has not been granted
for trying and censuring of the saides Resettes. And the Lords of secreit
Counsel finding that the said resette is the chief and special cause
whereby these Jesuits and mess Priests, are encouraged to repair to this
Kingdom, and to take the liberty to corrupt his Majesty's Subjests, both in
their Religon and alledgance: Whereas if these resets and starting hols were
denied unto them, the Country would not be so far infected and poisoned
with their treasonable projectes and insinuations. Therefore the Lords of
secreit Counsel according to an Act of Parliament made in the month of Iunij
1609 years. Ordaines and commands all and sundry Archbishops Bishops and
Presbyteries within the Kingdom. And with that, gives and grants unto them
full power and commission: To call and conueene before them all and sundry
persons resetters of Jesuits, Seminary and mess Priests, and excommunicat
rebels for popery, and all sayers and hearers of Mess, at such days and
times as they shall appoint. And for this effect, to fence and hold Courts, and
to create Officers and members of Court needful: And the person or persons
guilty of the crimes aboue-written, or any of them, to call and accuse, and to
deduce and lead probation thereupon. And to take cognition and trial of the
same, either by oath of party, or by witness. And incase any person resetter
being lawfully summound, to compeare and answer upon the said resette, will
not withstanding wilfully absent himself and shune his trial, and so take
the crime upon him, that in that case they hold him as confessed: Providing
always that the name of the party resette be specially condiscended upon,
and the resette to have been within the space of a year. And the said trial
or probation being taken, that they report the same to his Ma. privy Counsel
or Aduocat, to the intent the persons guilty may be called to their answer,
and accordingly punished. With power likewise to the said Archbishops Bishops
and Presbyteries every one within there own bounds and offiice. To call and
conueene before them all and sundry persons who against the tennour of the Act
of Parliament made in the 1609 year of God. Refuses to communicate and to take
trial and Cognition of their refusal. And if upon due trial it shall be
found that they are none Communicants that they decerne them in the particular
fynes and pains mentioned and prescriued in the said Act of Parliament. And
that they report the process of their proceedings against the saides none
communicants to the Lords of his Ma. privy Counsel. To the intent that the
saides Lords upon Consideration of the process, may direct letters for
vplifting of the said fynes to his Ma. use. And that they may modifie the
pains to be imposed upon Burgesses, seeing the same are left by the
parliament to the modiefication of the said Lords. And recommendes to the
saides Archbishops Bishops and presbyteries, to have a special care to put
this Commission to execution.

A PROHIBITJON TO PERSONS under process for popery to repai^r to Court.
FORSOMEEKLE as diverse persons under process for popery very frequentlie
resorts to his Ma. Court and importuns his Ma. with their petitions. Therefore
the Lords of secreit Counsel prohibits and disharges all persons whatsomeuer
being under process for popery, to resort or repair to his Ma. Court without
license had and obtained from the saides Lords to that effect. Unless his Ma.
by a express warrant send for them or any of them under the pain to be
called persued accused and punished. As coutemners of the directions of his Ma.
Counsel.

A VVarrand to Judges of the circuit Courts to proceed against sayers and
hearers of mess.
FORSOMEEKLE as by express warrant and direction from the Kings Ma. some
circuit Courts are to be holden in the several Shirefdomes of this Kingdom
by some of the Senators of the College of Justice, and the Lord Chief
Justice of this Kingdom. And whereas the hearing and saying of mess is now
become very frequent and Common within this Kingdom. To the great offense of
GOD scandell of the true Religion and disgrace of his Ma. gouernament.
There-the Lords of secreit Counsel, Ordaines and cammandes that all the
saides hearers and sayeres of mess shall be cited and warned to the saides
courts to abyd their trial and punishment for the said crimes.

And that the probation to be used against them, shall be by their own oath
or by witness at the discretion of the Judge according to an Act of Counsel
made to this effect. And that the punishment to be inflicted upon them shall
be by fyning and confining. Conform to an Act of parliament holden at
Edinburgh in the month of December 1567 years. Or otherwise according to the
Act of Counsel.

An act anent the rents, living and goods of excommunicat and rebellious
Papists.
FORSOMEEKLE as diverse Petitions have been given in to his Ma. and his
counsel by excommunicat persons for popery, and who are denunced Rebels for
that cause, humbly craving a competent allowance to be modified unto them
forth of their estates and living for their intertainnement abroad during
their banishment forth of his Ma. dominions or during their remaining in Ward
within this Kingdom. And his Ma. having considered of their petitions. And
being careful to reclaim them from their errors to the truth. His Ma. out
of his gracious bounty and clemency toward them and upon hope of their
timely reclaiming, has ordained and by this present Act with the advice of
the Lords of his Privy counsel. Ordaines that the Rents and goods of all
Papists who will not conform themselves to the true professed Religion, shall
be divided in three parts. Whereof two shall wholly belong to his Ma. and
shall be intrometed with and vplifted to his Ma. use. And the third part his
Ma. does freely bestow upon the saides persons. Notwithstanding that by the
Laws of this Kingdom their whole Rentes and goods do absolutely belong unto
his Ma. And the Lords of secreit Counsel being careful to understand the
true worth of the said persons their estates Living and goods. To the intent
the two parts thereof forsaids may be intrometed with and vplifted to his Ma.
use. Therefore the said Lords decernes And ordaines all and sundry persons
Papists who will not conform themselves to the professed true Relgion. To give
up to the saides Lords an inuentar of their goods and Rentall of their lands.
With this special Declaration and provision always, that they find a
responsall person to be answereable to the saides Lords that the inuenter and
Rentall so to be given up and exhibit by them are just and true. And if any
part thereeof shall happen to be concealed or omitted. That the portion so
concealed shall be irrecouerablie lost to the person concealer during his
none-conformitie wherein notwithstanding his Ma. Royal pleasure is such as
immediately upon their conforming to the professed Religion discipline and
ordoures of the Church, that they shall enjoy their whole Rentes and goods from
the dait of their said conversion in all time thereafter.

An act ordaining the Husband to be answereable for the Wife, if she reset
any Jesuits, Seminary or mess Priests.
FORSOMEEKLE as albeit the resset of Jesuits Seminary and mess priests has
been often prohibit and discharged by the Laws of this Kingdom. Yet the
execution of the saides Laws is and has been illuded by the Wyfes of persons
repute and esteemed to be sound in Religion, who pretending misknowledge of
the Actions of their Wyfes in these cases, thinks to liberat themselves from
the danger of the said resset. As if they were not to answer for their wyfes
doings. And under this color and pretext, Jesuits and mess Priests are
hoorded and fostered in diverse houses of the Kingdom, and occasion thereby
offered to corrupt the Children and servants of the said houses in their
Religion. For remeed whereof it is hereby declared and ordained that the
husband shall be answereable to his Ma. Counsel and Justice of this Kingdom,
that his wife being a professed papist under process for the same, shall not
resset supply nor intercommon with Jesuits nor priests. And that he nor she
shall not be served with papists and that none shall be admitted to their
service, but such as have a Testimonial from the Minister where they dwell,
that they are sound in Religion, under the pain contained in the Acts made
against the ressetters of Jesuits Seminary and mess priests, providing
always that if she do any thing to the contrary hereof the husband shall
acquaint his Ma. Counsel therewith wherein if he faillyie he shall be liable to
the said censure.

An act against excommunicat persons warded for Popery.
FOrsomeekle as diverse persons excommunicat and Rebels for popery has been
and are presently in Ward for that cause. And daily importuns his Ma.
Counsel for their relief. Therefore it is hereby declared and ordained that
no excommunicat Rebellious papist presently in Ward or who hereafter shall be
Warded for his Religion, shall be relieved out of Ward, but upon conformity
or else upon their voluntar offer of banishment out of his Ma. dominions unless
his Ma. give his express warrant in the contrary.

An act anent the education of Children.
FOrsomeekle as there has been diverse acts of parliament made in the time of
our late Sovereign Lord of blessed memory one thereof in the parliament
holden at Edinburgh in the month of October 1579 and the other in the
parliament holden at Edinburgh in the month of Iunij 1609 anent the education
of children. Which acts has been neglected, and has not received execution
these diverse years bygone so as through neglect thereof diverse youths als
well the sons of Noblemen as others, has been very far corrupted in
their Religion. Therefore the Lords of secreit Counsel, the Clergy and others
asisting at this meeting. Ordains the said acts of Parliament to be put to
due execution in all points conform to the tennour thereof, and they recommend
to the Bishops and Ministers to make a report to his Ma. Counsel of all such
Noblemen, and Barons children, whose parents are suspect in Religion, and
where they are bred in suspect places

A Charge against the Earl of Nithisdaill for exhibition of his Son.
FORSOMEEKLE as there has been diverse acts of parliament made by the Kings
Ma. his dearest Father of eternal memory, anent the Religious education of
Noble-mens children. Lik as the Kings Ma. himself has by diverse letters
written to his privy Counsel, recommended the same unto them. And whereas
Robert Earl of Nithisdaill is vehemently suspected in his Religion, and that
the remaining of his Son in his company may prove very dangerous to the
Youth, and now in his tender years infect and poison him with opinions
wherefra it will be difficill thereafter to reclaim him. Therefore ordaines
letters to be direct, charging the said Earl of Nithisdaill to bring, presute,
and exhibit his said Son before the Lords of privy Counsel upon the day of
to the intent ordour and direction may be given for his breeding and education
in the true Religion presently professed, and by Law established within this
Kingdom, under the pain of rebellion and putting of him to the Horn, with
certification, etc.

A Charge against the Earl of Sutherland for removing of Sir Alexander Gordoun
from the Shireffe Deputrie of Sutherland.
FOrsomeekle as there has been some acts of Parliament made by his Ma.
dearest Father, of blessed memory, whereby persons excommunicat and at the
Horn for popery, and who does not truly profess the Religion now
established within this Kingdom, are secluded from bearing of any public
office or charge within the same, as the said acts, especially an act of the
Parliament, holden in the month Iunij 1609 bears. Nothwithstanding whereof is
it of truth that Sir Alexandar Gordoun of Neather-deane, an excommunicat
papist, and his Ma. rebel, and at the Horn for that cause, is perferred by
Earl of Sutherland Shireffe principal of Sutherland, to be his Depute of
that Shirefdome, like as the said Sir Alexander has most unlawfully against
the Law accepted that office upon him, and sits and gives decreits and
sentences, as if he were a lawful Subject and Judge, abusing thereby the place
of justice, and vvronging his Ma. poor Subjectes, whose decreits and
sentences recovered before him, are reduceable, and are like to be brought in
question. Therefore the Lords of secreit Counsel with advice of the Clergy
and others conueened at this meeting: Ordaines letters to be direct, charging
the said Earl of Sutherland and his Tutours and Curators, if he any has to
nominate and appoint some discreit and lawful person of sound Religion to be
his Depute in the said office of Shirefship, and to debar and seclude the
said Sir Alexander from all further using and exercing of that office within
fifteen days next, after the said Earl his Tutours and Couratours being
charged thereto, under the pain of rebellion and putting of them to the Horn;
and if they failyie therein, the said space being by past, to denounce them
rebels and put them to the Horn. And such like to command, charge and inhibit
the said Sir Alexander, that he on no ways presume nor take upon hand to use
nor exerce the said office of Shireffe Depute at any time here after, under
the pain to be called, persued, and censured as an usurper of our Sovereigns
Lords Authority: And such like to command, charge and inhibite all and sundry
his Ma. Leiges and Subjects by open Proclamation at all places needful, that
none of them presume nor tak upon hand to acknowledge or obey the said Sir
Alexander as Shireffe Depute of Sutherland, or to give suit and presence before
him or to pursue or defend in any actions or causes before him. Certyfiing them
that faillyes or does in the contrair that not only shall all the decreetes
and sentence to be pronunced by him in these matters, be decerned and declared
to have been and to be from the beginning and in all time coming null, but
with that they shall be punished as wilful acknowledgers of an unlawful
Judge.

Charges against the Earl of Cathnes, and Sir Alexander Gordoun.
Forsomeekle as George Earl of Caithnes, and Sir Alexander Gordoun Knight,
being both excommunicat papists and denunced rebels and at the horn for that
cause, they not only continues under the fearful sentence of excommunication
but most contemnandlie lies still at the horn continuing thereby both his Ma.
Authority and the ordoures and censures of the Kirk. To the Encouragement of
others to do the like. Therefore the Lords of secreit Counsel ordains letters
to be direct charging the said Earl of Caithnes and Sir Alexander Gordoun. To
compeare personally before the said Lords at an certain day to be insert in
the said letters. To answer upon their excommunciation and rebellion and to
underly such ordour as shall be taken theranent. With certification to them
and they failyie that letters of treason shall be direct against them for
randering of their houses, and entering of their persons in ward and that they
shall be thereafter persued with all extremity and rigor.

An Act ordaining the names of the excommunicat Papists to be affixed upon the
Tolbuith of Edinburgh.
THe Lords of secreit Counsel ordains the names of all the excommunicat
papists given in at this time in an catologue and roll to be affixt upon the
Tolbuith of Edinburgh. To the intent the Lords of Session and others his Ma.
Judges and Commissars upon the objection of a party and inspection of the
Catologue, may refuse process to the party therein contained.

THe Lords ordains a missiue to be written to the Earl of Murrey recommending
unto him the execution of the Commissions against Jesuits Seminary and mess
Priests and excommunicat rebels within the bounds of his Commission.

An Act against the Merchants of Edinburgh possessed with the Earl of Catihnes
Living.
FOrsomeekle as the Lords of secreit Counsel are surely informed that some
Merchants of Edinburgh are entrusted possessed with the estate and living of
George Earl of Caithnes and William Lord Berridaill his Son with reservation
of a certain proportion and part thereof allowed unto the said Earl and his
Son for their own intertinement which they peaceably vplift at their pleasure.
And whereas they are rebels and at the Horn at the instance of diverse his
Ma. good Subjects, and continues in their rebellion, as if they were not
subject to King, law, nor Justice. Therefore the said Lords declares and
ordains that if the said merchants who are entrusted and possessed with the
estat and living of the said Earl of Caithnes and Lord Berridaill will not
undertake to make them to compeare before the said Lords betwixt and the
first day of March nixtocome. That then a commission shall be given to the
Earl of Seafort or any other whom his Ma. shall think fit for to persute of
the said Earl of Caithnes and his said Son.

A direction to the Lord Gordoun concerning his Son.
THe Lords ordaines and commandes George Lord Gordoun that with all convenient
and expedite diligence he send his Sons with a Tutour approuen by the
Archbishop of Saint-Androes and his ordinar to be sound in Religion, to
Saint-Androes or Cambridge as it shall best please the said Lord: To the intent
he may be there bredde and brought up in the true Religion:

A direction to Bishops and Presbyteries anent persons suspect of Popery.
THE Lords ordaines all the Bishops and Presbyteries within this Kingdoms, to
proceed against all ranks and conditions of persons suspect of Popery with
the Censures of the Church without exception, under the pains contained in
the Acts of Parliament.

Anent citations and charges to be used against excommunicat Papists.
THE Lords ordaines all Summonds and Letters of Horning to be direct against
excommunicat persons dwelling on this side of Dee for their comperance before
the saides Lords, shall be execute upon ten days warning, and against these
benorth Dee, upon fifteen days warning

Anent charges to be direct against Ministers at the instance of excommunicat
Papists.
THE Lords of secreit Counsel Ordains that no letters be granted against any
Ministers at the instance of any excommunicat or rebellious Papist, but upon
caution for payment of the Ministers expenssis, in case he succumbe in proving
of his complaint.

An Act ordaining all Bishops to reside in their Dyocies.
THE Lords of secreit Counsel ordaines and commands that all Bishops none
residents with their Families in their own Dyocies shall repare to their said
Diocies with all convenient diligence. And there remain and attend their
charge. As they will answer upon the contrare at their perrill.

FINIS
EDINBVRGH Printed by the Heirs of Thomas Finlasone His M. Printer. 1629.


