A Table of good Nurture: Wherein is contained a Schoolmasters admonition to
his Scholars to learn good manners the Father to his Children to learn
virtue: and the Hous-houlder to his Servants to learn godliness.
To the tune of, The Earl of Bedford.


GOod Children, refuse not these lessons to learn,
The pathway to virtue you here may discern,
In keeping them lively, you shall be most sure,
The praise of all people thereby to procure.
Let God first be served, who all things does give,
That by his good blessing thou long time may live:
And then to try Parents thy duty unfold,
Who keeps thee daily from hunger and cold.
To all men be courteous, yea and mannerly both,
For fear lest thy betters thy presence do loath:
For youth without manners no man can abide,
Much like a poor Beggar possessed with pride.
Thy garments vnbutton's delight not to wear,
L^st sl^uenly nickname fall unto they share:
Thy Hose vngartered deserves like shame,
Whereby thou wi^^ purchase thy Tutor much blame.
Be comely and decent in all thy array,
Not wantonly given to sport and to play:
But labor by virtue, in youth to obtain
The love of thy betters, their friendship to gain,
I likewise command thee this lesson to keep,
No longer than due time delight not to fleepe;
Lest sloth in thy bosom such harbor do find,
As will cause thee be termed a sluggerd by kind,
The morning appearing rise thou with speed,
Wash hands and face cleanely before thou go feed,
Let shoes be fast tied both close to thy feet
The better to travel all day in the street.
Thy shirt-band most comely about thy neck wear,
Have handkerchiefe likewise both cleanely and fair:
With hat ready brushed, that people may say,
There goes a child cleanely in all his array.
Go never untrussed, for fear of the cold,
For it does endanger both the young and old,
Thy Girdle forget not, I put thee in mind,
No Girdle, no blessing that day thou shall find.
If thou be a Scholar, to School make good haste,
For he is a Truant that comes there last,
For if thou do loyter and play by the way,
Be sure with thy Master it will cause a fray.
But being their placed, I charge thee to look
Thou lose not thy Inkehorne, thy Pen, nor thy book*
Thy Garters, they Girdle, thy band, nor thy Hat.
For fear left thy Parents be grieved thereat.
Swear not, nor curse not, delight not to steal,
Thy master obey thou, his secrets conceal,
Take heed of false lying, set no man at strife,
Nor be thou too desperate to strike with a knife.
Amongst thy Companions be Gentle and kind,
If that thou their favors do look for to find.
For gentleness gains thee love from a foe,
And gets thee glory whereeuer thou go.
Play not, nor laugh not, thy Master to fret,
When thou amongst Scholars art orderly set,
For silence is virtue, and virtue is grace,
Which ought to be used, thy betters in place.
Thus you good Children and Scholars each one,
Here in good order you follies are shown:
In following these precepts you purchase always,
The love of your Parents, and Schoolmasters praise
But if that in idleness you do delight,
Refusing these Lessons here plainly in sight,
Look for no kindness no favor nor love,
But your Masters displeasure, if you him move.
Therefore be wary you do not offend,
Your Parents, your Master, nor iniure your friend,
Lest stripes do reward you, and make you to say,
Your Precepts I Will follow, your words I Will obey.
And now to conclude bear this well in mind,
A diligent Scholar much favor shall find:
But such as will loyter, and lazy will be,
Shall for their labor be brought on their knee,
FINIS.
The second Table of good Nurture;
To the tune of, Troy Town.


THen learn to honor God aright,
let love and fear thereto provoke:
Obey thy Prince with all thy might,
submit they self to prudence yoke.
Embrace the good, eschew the ill,
This is the sum of wisdoms skill.
To know thy self do thou apply,
first try thy friend before thou trust:
Love him that deals faithfully,
let word and deed be alwaes just,
Strive not to swim against the stream,
Account not of a drousie dream.
Faint not though fortune favor fools,
fret not at others good success:
Delight to sit in learned Schools.
thy former faults seek to redress.
Spurn not at him that tells thy crime,
Mend it against another time.
Acquaint thy self with some grave man
mark well his talk and trade of life
His word of wit see that thou scan,
within thy mouth let them be rife.
Desire to imitate his trade,
By use like him thou shall be made.
Wish for no wealth by parents death,
a friend far passes worldly good:
And whilst the body yields breath,
seek not for to exceed in food.
For great excess of meat and drink,
Will cause thy soul in sin to sink.
If fortune smile be not too prove,
for why she has a frowning face:
If in her love they self thou shroud,
make much of her while thou have space
Her whirling wheel does turn full often,
Some lie full low, some fleet aloft.
Think not thine own wit to be best.
keep not the crew of cogging mates,
To swear and lie do thou detest,
for thereby credit often abates.
Beware of brazen face past shame,
And love to live in honest fame.
Where too much courtesy is used,
take heed of frawd and subile guile,
Good nature often times is abused,
in simple sight with subtle wile,
When all is said and all is done,
Yet craft lies under clowted shoone.
Report not on the present time,
but mark also what may ensue,
For crack of credit is a crime,
change not an old friend for a new;
The secret council of thy heart,
Take heed to whom thou do impart,
Praise no man till thou do him know,
dispraise not rashly any wight
Lest shame thereby to thee may grow,
fair words are best place thing aright
To wisdoms school thus must thou go,
And say experience taught thee so.
FINIS.
Printed at London for H. G.


