A merry balade, how a wife entreated her Husband, to have her own will.
IN May when flowers swetely smell
The people romyng abroad full ryfe
A merry tale I shall you tell
yt then was herd, but no great strife
In close, a young man and his wife
Sat reasonyng sore, but for none ill,
She said, I am weary of this life
Good husband let me have mine own will.
Wife (quoth he) then must I needs know
What is your will then for to have,
At me you must neither mock nor mow
Nor yet loute me, nor call me knave:
Nor VENUS game upon me crave
Nor yet your honestye for to spill,
And make me neither boy nor slave
But do good, and therein take your own will.
Tush (quoth she) sir as for that
I will be honest, to dye therefore,
But husband husband, wot ye what?
I have been your wife this month and more:
And have not gone but to the door
Such keeping in, my heart does spyll,
By house kepers, neighbors set no store
Good husband let me have mine own will.
Wife (quoth he) be you content
You shall to Church and to market go,
And to neighbors to, at time convenient
But not to gossip, the truth is so:
Tauernes to haunt? no wife, no no
Nor yet alehouses, with Jack nor Gyll,
You know my mind for friend or fo
Do good, and therein take your own will.
Husband (quoth she) you be to blame
To keep me in, and so plain withal,
Me think I should be a fine dame
Whereby great praise to you might fall:
I being fair, nice, and small
If I had gay clothes my body to hill,
Then gentlewomen for me would call
Good husband let me have mine own will.
No wife (quoth he) it will not be borne
For you to go fine, and gayly clad,
To go as I will have you, think ye no scorn
That is, comely and clean, sober and sad:
Wherefore, be you neither sick nor yet mad
Because ye may not your mind fulfill,
For your desire is wicked and bad
Do good, and therein take your own will.
Not mad (quoth she) alas good man
What woman culd your words abide?
I entreatyng you, as fair as I can
And yet my words you set aside:
Though I be fair, I love no pride
For I serve your swyne with draffe and swyl,
Unto my friends I would feign ride
Good husband let me have mine own will.
Wife (quoth he) what needs all this?
You crave a great deal more then need,
Your friends have no need of us I wis
Wherefore be stayed good gentle Beede:
Now let us plow, and sow our seed
Our winter land is yet to till,
How to thryue, let us first take heed
And do good, and therein take your own will.
Oh husband (quoth she) I am but young
Wherefore I pray you grant me one thing,
At liberty let me have my tongue
Either to chyde, or else to sing:
To dance, to kiss, not over workyng
But once a weke to go to myll,
My time is short, my death is cumming
Good husband let me have mine own will.
No wife (quoth he) I am your head
Wherefore I pray you, my counsel take,
And let such tricks in you be dead
Least that for it, your bones do ache:
Therefore learn betime to brue and bake
And live no longer in idleness still,
Wherefore for your own ease sake
Do good, and therein take your own will.
Alas (quoth she) what chance have I
To couple my self with such a one,
That had rather to see me dye
Then to deck me gay, as I would have gone:
To chyde, nor sing, nor to dance alone
I would I had married John Goose quyll,
Then need I not to have made this moan
For by him, I might have had all my will.
No more of these twain culd be hard
But home they went together plain,
But let no wives, this wife regard
For her request was all in vain:
And yet with shrewes some men take pain
And abides the job of the Deuylles byll,
From the which all good wives refrain
God give us all grace to do his will. Amen.
FINIS.
quod T. VV. T.
Imprinted at London by Alexander Lacy.




