An excellent Song wherein you shall find
Great consolation for a troubled mind.

To the tune of Fortune my Foe.


Aim not too hie in things above thy reach,
Be not too foolish in thine own conceit,
As thou have wit and worldly wealth at will,
So give him thanks that shall increase it still.
Be ware of pride the mother of mishap,
Whose sugared snares will seek thee to entrap,
Be meek in heart, and lowly minded still,
So shall thou Gods Commandments fulfill.
Cast all thy care upon the Lord, and he
In thy distress will send to succor thee,
Cease not therefore to serve him every day,
Who with his blood thy ransom once did pay.
Dri^e from thy heart ill thoughts that may offend,
Desire of God his holy spirit to send,
Which will direct thy life in such a sort,
As thou ther^by shall find joy and comfort,
Except each day and hour when Christ shall come
With power to judge the world both all and some:
Be ready then, and with the Bridegroom Christ,
Receive reward in heaven among the highest.
Fear to offend his heavenly Majesty,
Faith does confirm true love and loyalty:
Without which faith, as holy Scriptures say,
No man to heaven can find the perfect way.
Great is the Lord and merciful doubtless,
To those that with true zeal their faults confess,
But unto those in mischief daily runs,
He lets alone to cast what after comes.
Hope in the Lord, on him repose thy trust,
Serve him with fear, whose judgments are most just
Desire of him thy life so to direct,
That to thy soul he may have good respect.
Iniure no man, but love thine enemy,
Though to thy hurt, yet take it patiently,
And think the Lord, although he suffer long,
When time shall serve, will soon revenge thy wrong
Keep thou no ranckor hidden in thy heart,
Remember well the word Christ did impart,
That is, forgive offenses ouer-past,
As thou thy self wilt be forgiven at last.
Lay not thy treasure up in hoarding sort,
But there withal the poor feed and comfort,
If thou cold water give in Christ his name,
Thrice double told he will reward the same.
Misorder not thy self in any wise,
In meat and drink let reason still suffice:
Moderate thy mind, and keep thy self content,
So shall thou please the Lord Omnipotent,
The second part
to the same Tune.


NO man can say that he is void of sin,
For if he do he is much deceived therein:
The Lord does say, the just seven times a day
Commits sin, and runs often astray.
Obey his will, who to redeem thy loss
Did shed his blood for us upon the Cross,
Such was the love that Christ did show to man,
Why should we be ungrateful to him than?
Pity the poor with such as God has sent,
And be not proud with that which he has lent,
Remember well what Christ has said to thee,
Do this as though thou did it unto me.
Quench fond desires and pleasures of the flesh,
Fly gluttony, the Mother of excess,
For whoordome is the very sink of sin,
In which the wicked daily wallow in.
Root from thy heart malicious thoughts be sure,
Which are a means Gods judgments to procure
For he assured when envy bears sway,
The fear of God departs soon away.
Subdue thy self, let wisdom be thy guide,
Suppress ill thoughts, beware of hateful pride,
Despise the world, a veil of vanities,
Lest hedlong thou runst on in miseries.
Turn unto me, our Savior Christ does say,
And I will hear they prayers every day,
If any thing thou ask in Christ his name,
Be well assured thou shall obtain the same.
Vain exercise abolish from thy sight,
Desire of God his faith and holy Spirit,
Who will direct thee in the perfect way,
That leads to life, as holy Scriptures say.
When Satan seeks to tempt thee any way,
Call upon God thy only strength and stay,
And he assured from out his holy hill
He will preserve thy life from danger still.
Experience of his love that lends thee life,
Must make thee seek to live deuoyd of strife,
Let his love be thy rule, who so loved thee,
That death he underwent to set thee free.
Young men and maids, old men and babes repent,
Lest for your sins you at the last be shent:
Be wise, that heed, do not the time delay,
For Christ must be our Judge at the last day.
Zeal like to fire our good works let make bright,
That others thereof may behold the light:
Light up your Lamps, and with the Virgins five
Have oil in stoore to keep your Lamps alive.
FINIS.
Printed at London by the Assigns of Thomas Symcocke.


