MEDITATIONS for the Passion Week Following the order of the Time and Story.

By N. TAYLOVR.

1. Pet. 2.21. Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye
should follow his steps

Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the Tree, that We
being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness, by whose stripes ye were
healed.

Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE. MDCXXVII.

To the Right Worsh. Mr. Doctr. MAW Master of Trinity College in Cambridge.
Right worthy and Worshipful,
I Have no better way to show my thankful remembrance of your love and care
over me, then by sending you my thoughts, that is, a few of my better
Meditations, written for mine own use, and perhaps not worthy your acceptance:
yet such as they are, I hope they will find the same favor with you, that my
self have done: which though it be too much for me to expect, yet I can hope
for no less, in regard of the gentleness of your nature, and forwardnes to
respect me, before I had time to deserve of you. The thing I aimed at in them,
was to make the Story they belong to, as orderly, as it is perfect: so that if
they have no other use, they may stand in stead of an harmony to right any
doubt about our Saviors sufferings. As for Devotion, which I desired to stir
up in my self and others by them, it could not be bestowed upon a better
subject: howbeit, if having the best I have failed, or my affections want heat
of zeal; I hope nevertheles, that my spark may kindle a greater fire, where
it finds sewell, by the light of which, many may both see, and be warmed. And
now I have brought my work to the fire, you may do to it as you please; for I
put it into your hands, desiring pardon for my boldness, and so ending, with my
daily prayers for your daily increase in all things that may make you an happy
Governor of the Society you are in, or may rise to.

Your Worships in all duty, NATH. TAYLOVR.

Meditations for SUNDAY, Being the first day in the week, by the Jews
account.
Every Day has his Night, every Summer his Winter, every Spring his Fall, and
every Life his Death: And as some Nights are darker then other, some Autumnes
more unseasonable, some Winters more sharp; so are some Deaths more, yea much
more cruel then other be: Some men fall like fruit, other are cut down like
trees; some are plucked up in the flower, other by the root; that is, some men
die only, Suet. Aug. Non aliter quam simplics morte puntit.
other with torment, which is two, or more deaths in one. Yet one thing,
nevertheless, this diversity finds to agree in, That all men die with pain:
for two such friends as the soul and body are, cannot be parted without
grieving: or, to speak more to the quick, Two, which Nature, nay GOD himself
once joined together to make but one Person, cannot be severed again without
cutting: neither is it an ordinary pain that divides these two, but such an
one as can but once be suffered, and has a name by it self, as it has also a
nature different from other pains; for we call it, The Pang of Death: which
pain though we cannot learn what bounds it has, because it is a pain that
comes not to his height till we be past telling where it holds us: yet can we
easily discern, that it is not alike in every man: for the struggling in some,
and the quietness in other, show either the pain to be more, or the patience
less: and yet a strong patience will often outbeare a grievous extreamitie,
with little appearance of grief: so that this Fit has many mervailes in it,
if any one could come again, like Lazarus, to tell us them.

But among all Deaths, in it, both pain and patience met in their extremities:
so that pain did her worst to overcome patience, and patience her best to
overcome pain; and yet neither pain had the upper hand, though it killed, nor
patience lost though Christ died: because he that suffered, suffered but at his
own will, and his suffering besides was the pain of Pain; yea, the death of
Death it self: yet howsoever it prevailed not, so great nevertheles was this
Passion, and so grievous, as it has nor can have, none to sample it: for
Christ's pain was such as never Creature felt, neither can do: and on the
other side, his patience so great, as for all the sorrow he suffered on the
Cross, he is not read to have uttered a groan there. So that it may be easily
discerned, that Patience had the victory: because pain could neither make her
leave the field till she list, nor bring her to any conditions but her own,
which were most honorable.

This is but one occurrence; but the Death I have named, contains (further) a
Story, that may take up (Reader) thy whole intention: for in it thou shall see
(wonder at it) a Cross set up to crucify GOD on, Life condemned to die,
Righteousness to suffer: and, which is more, all this effected, yet nothing
done to advance the contrary party: for through Christ's Body, Death slew it
self, and Sin and Satan took their deadly wounds. See again (and again
wonder at it) Patience exalted upon her Throne the Cross, and crowned with
Thorn, whereof every point is deadly; yet still unmooved, and like her Self.
And as thou readst these things, written with blood in stead of ink upon the
wide-open Book of the Cross, if thou apply them to thy self, and weigh them
in thy heart as Marie did, they were for thee all suffered, and Christ's
victory is become thy hope of glory, his Cross is thy Crown, his suffering
thy salvation, his death thy life.

Here is now a Book, acknowledged, thou must read every word contrary over
again: so that then, shame is glory, suffering is victory, death is life,
both to him that bore them, and to thee that beleevest. And now thou have the
secret of this strange Character, ply thy book hard, and take out of it as much
as thou can for thy learning: especially this week thou must do it, because
this is the very time, in which these things were first written, not with ink
(as I said) but with his blood that died for thee. Read then, and learn, and
meditate, and apply: which all thou may do though thou be no scholar; for
he that never saw book before, may know his Christ-Crosse, though he can
read no other letter.

When thou hear me thus speak of a Cross, and suffering, thou can look
for nothing in such a book but Tragical: and so it is a Tragedy, even the
wofullest argument that ever was acted. The Actors in it are all great men, as
in Tragedies: Herod a King, Pilate the Roman Deputy, the Rulers of the Jews,
the chief Pharisees, the High Priests: all High, thou see, yea the most High
himself, for GOD has a part in it. The Protasis, or first part, contains the
Life of Death, that is, the fury of Christ's enemies: the Epitasis or second,
the Death of Life, that is, of Christ, who is Life in the fountain, even The
Life: the Catastrophe, or last part in it, is the Death of Death, which by
Christ his dying was utterly destroyed, in regard of efficacy to hurt any of
those that belong unto GOD any more. The beginning of this Tragedy (as it
falls to be) is joyous, but the end was bitter. The first Scene of it, was
Christ's riding, as upon this day, into Jerusalem in triumph. The bravery of
this show was not outward, and yet it is a wonder to see how it affected the
multitude: Christ has enough followers when he comes riding in Triumph; but
etc.
the whole City was moved: Men, and Trees too, stripped themselves to strew the
way as he went: every mouth was full of Hosanna, That is, Hear us O Lord.
even the childrens also: and if they had held their peace, the very stones
would have spoken. And who would have thought, when he saw and heard these
things, that Christ should have needed to have wept over this City, or these
should have bin the men that should betray him? But follow on thy Savior into
the City, and thou shall see what entertainment he finds there, not for his
own, for he had none; but for thy sins, that thou may learn to bewail
them. For,

When thou come into the City, Christ; but it is the multitude, even the
variable unconstant multitude: so that among so many followers of Christ, only
his Disciples were his true followers. Thou shall see again, while the City
is moved with joy, the Pharisees on the other side as much moved with anger,
and asking even our Savior himself, of the Children which cried Hosanna,
Hear thou what these say? When thou come into the Temple, thou shall see
the house of his glory, which he had chosen of old to put his Name there,
filled with buyers and sellers, whom there is no way to drive out, but with a
whippe. Therefore he makes one, and burning in zeal, rests not till he have
driven out all these ungodly prophaners out of his Sanctuary, throwing down
their tables, and overthrowing their seats, and not suffering so much as a
vessel to be carried through the Temple: neither had they all any power to
resist him.

Now all these things are written for our example: thou may follow him the
better: yet is he that is thus meanly seated, the King not only of Zion, as the
Prophet calls him, Zach. 9.9.
but of Heaven and Earth: This thou may learn, even of the children that
follow him; for their cry is Hosanna, that is, Hear us O Lord: and again they
say, Blessed be the King that comes in the Name of the Lord: Take thou up
this cry together with them, else thou must not join with this company: for
from the aged to the children, all had these two voices in their mouth,
Hosanna, and Blessed be the King. The one is the voice of prayer, the other of
praise: two works that peculiarly belong to this Day, among us, which is
Sunday.

Amongst other things, S. John tells us of certain Greeks, Proselites, Ioh.
12.20.
that coming to worship at the Feast, desired as this day to see Jesus:
neither does he put them back, but upon this occasion, as it seems, begins to
speak of his suffering which was to follow ere many days were over. Be thou
ashamed that any strangers should press nearer to hear, or see him then thou:
and be not afraid he will reject thee, if thy desire be to learn; for he
does not so unto these. Especially take heed thou be not left out, when he
goes into the Temple: for by his behavior in that Temple, thou may learn
how to behave thy self in the Temple of thy Body: that as he with a whip of
small cords, whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, overthrew also
the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold Doves; so must
we make us a whipp of cords, the smaller the better, and whip out of the Temple
and City too our corrupt affections; neither let them so much as once look
again into the Sanctuary of our Souls, no not though they come to sell Doves
for sacrifice, or would change our money into gold. At least, let them never
have power to sell our Souls, which only Christ was able to buy: but let us
throw down their tables, overthrowe their seats, scatter their merchandise,
and not suffer any vessel that is not hallowed to come through our thoughts.
Thus shall we be fit to sanctify this Day, when we have thus hallowed our
hearts anew by cleansing of them: otherwise, we shall justly hear the same
which was spoken to these prophaners, My House shall be called a house of
Prayer, but ye have made it a Den of Thieves.

Meditations for MONDAY.
FRom Bethany comes our Holy Lord this Morning to Jerusalem again; from his
friends that had entertained him, to his enemies that would crucify him; and
that to save them, if they would have been saved. This was the town of Martha
and Marie, whom Christ loved: therefore he honored it with a miracle, in
raising up Lazarus their Brother, and with making it his retyring place. And
well it was, howsoever, that Christ had any place to retire to so near
Jerusalem: howbeit his own City owed him a better, if it had done him right:
yet for all that, he must go to Bethanie to seek his lodgging, if he will have
one, and pay dear for it too: for he satisfied his Host to the full, both for
his cost, and courtesy, in that he raised him out of his grave, after he had
lain in it four days. It goes hard with our Savior (me thinks) when he
must be glad to raise his host out of his grave: yet it is well that he found
one, though he opened the earth for him. For a man may dig in many places,
and not find gold; and Christ may often call at the graves of Mankind buried in
Sin, and find never a Lazarus to hear him. Holy Lazarus! thou could hear
Christ when thou were dead; but well are we if we can hear him while we are
alive: yet this we may do if we will, and now is the time; for this Week
Christ has many things to say, that concern our souls health: yea, words he
has to speak, which may put Life into thee, if thou were dead, so thy heart
be fit, as Lazarus his house was, to receive him: only draw near, and bring
thy Will with thee, and thou shall hear him.

By this time Christ is on his way coming to Jerusalem: Jews accused him) and
espying a Figtree a far off, he goes to it, yet not to satisfy hunger; for
the time of figs was not yet come; but to give us a Lesson, how he hates
spiritual unfruitfulnes. When he came to it therefore, and saw no figs,
though by the year time it should have been so, he cursed the Tree, and anon
it withered. If this be done to the green Tree, (for S. Mark has noted,
Mar. 11.13.
that it had leafes, though it had no fruit) what will become of us, the dry
and wild one? And if Christ require figs of it before the time, may he not
require fruit of us whenever he comes, yea gather where he scattered not? yet
let no man accuse him of injustice: for he sowed once, but we let it be rooted
up; he scattered once, but we let the Enemy gather it: that is, he gave grace
to Man, before the Fall, that would ever have been bearing fruit; and to the
trees, a perpetual Autumn for our sakes; therefore he might call on the
Fig Tree in Winter, and not be unjust; and may look for good works of the
Reprobate, ere they receive Grace: but much more may he of us, who boast to
have the life of Grace in us. Fear then, and fail not to bring forth thy
fruit in his season, and GOD can, and will put difference between thee and a
Fig Tree. He cares not for Oxen, and it is no great matter if a figtree
wither: but his sight is better then to see men walking like Trees; he will
spare thee therefore, and give thee an example out of them: only thou must not
be a stock, or barren wood, but thy fruit must appear in his due time. This
use thou may make of this story. Howbeit our Savior makes another himself;
namely, by example of his own faith, which had so soon wrought this miracle,
to stir up Faith in his Disciples, especially in prayer. But this belongs to
the next day.

What our Savior taught this day in the City, S. Mark sets down the Story
of our Saviors whipping the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, as if it had
happened this day: either because they were so impudent as to come into the
Temple this day again, and so our Lord was enforced to renew the action: or
else it is the same that the other Evangelists speak of, but (according to the
custom elsewhere observed in holy Writ) order is not strictly kept in the
circumstance of time. For the Holy Ghost meant to deliver a rule for Faith,
rather then for Chronology. And yet we should not have wanted that neither,
but that, partly, GOD would sometime leave order unexprest, to punish our
disorder toward him: partly, because he would try our Faith, whether we
would believe him on his Word, or condemn him when we saw the least
appearance of contrariety. Appearance, I say, for so it is only: neither is
there any dissidence in matter, or circumstance, in any place of Scripture, but
it may be reconciled.

Well then: S. Luke reports, that he taught daily in the Temple. Also his
prolixe, and continued Parables, uttered on other days, make it credible, that
he would not be silent upon this. Yet this one days labor amongst other we
have not, because he has left us sufficient for our souls health in that we
have; so that we need not look for more. Also, the less we have, the less
we have to learn. Again, the want of that we have not, may stir up our
affection to that we have. If thou have but a little ground and a little seed,
till it the better; for thou have better leisure, and it may yield thee an
hundred for one: howsoever, it cannot but yield thee more, then all the great
field of the sluggard. If all that Christ spoke and did were written, I
suppose, says Saint John the Divine (or the Devine Saint John) the world could
not contain the books that should be written. His meaning is, either to show
Christ's diligence in teaching, which was such as would have wearied the hands
of all writers to have followed him: or else, if all that Christ spoke had
been written, the Comments upon his Text would have been numberless. Either
of these are easy to believe; for we see daily that the tongue of the teacher
goes so quick, as no hand can follow it, but by Brachygraphie; and the
Comments upon our Saviors words that we have, are so many, as the world is
already full of them: so many Comments there be, so many Volumes, so many
Treatises, that they require more then a man's life to read them all, as they
should be. Be content then, and praise GOD for that which thou have, read it,
lay it to thy heart, and meditate how thou may practice it; for that thou
learnest of Christ, is never truly thy own, till thou bring it into practice:
and thus thou may here understand the meaning of that Proverb, that says,
No knowledge is like that, which a man has at his fingers ends, that is, which
he has ready for practice.

Now that this Day is done, if thou will walk back with thy Lord again to
Bethanie, thou shall do more then we read the whole multitude did yesterday,
that were at first so dutiful about him. That he lodged this Night again in
that little village, it appears (as I take it) by the Figtree, which he cursed
as he came by it to day, and to morrow passes by again, and speaks of what
had happened to it, as will appear better out of the next days story. Well
then: if thou will follow thy Master thither, the journey is but short; some
fifteen furlongs as I remember, or there about. If thou doubt to want lodging,
because the village is little, yet hope better, because it is hospital: or if
thou should watch one Night with thy Savior, or about him, thou should
not loose thy labor, and so it would be worth thy pains also. For who would
not want one Nights sleep to be so near Christ, to hear his last words, and
see his last actions; which as they were always gracious, so now certainly
were most affectionate: for it is the Nature of Love, to show it self most
loving, when it is a leaving. So have I seen two friends, that having kept
their countenance till they were to part, yet then could hold no longer, but
burst out and wept, of mere affection.

If thou ask how thou should get so near thy Savior, as tosee, Prayer, by
Fasting, by Thankfulness, by Repentance; meditate of him all the day long, and
of the price, and Love of his Passion: and, when thou have done thus on the Day
time, at Night lay the same thoughts under thy pillow, and rest upon them, or
rather upon him, sleeping, and waking. Thus shall thou both follow him to his
lodging, and Inn with him too. And if thou do this every Night, thou do
but thy duty; for this is a week that should thriftily be divided into hours
and minutes, by hearing, reading, prayer, or meditation; which at Night should
be laid up within thee to digest, and ere the Morning they will be a part of
thee, as thy nourishment is. And one thing let us observe to this purpose ere
we leave this Day, That the matter which Christ uttered this day was not
written, that we might have one day, at least, in this week, free for
meditation.

Meditations for TUESDAY.
RIse up with thy Savior (O my soul) and put on him for thy garments, that
thou may follow back this morning to Jerusalem. Cleave to him also as he
goes, and listen what he says; for this is a day, in which the double door of
his lips is open, to pour forth the treasure of his heart; even the riches of
his wisdom, and mercy, unto those that have ears and hearts to receive them:
for this day he not only teaches his own, but puts his enemies to silence, by
the evidence of his wisdom, and utterly convinces them. His Disciples give him
the first occasion of speaking, by showing him the fig tree, which he had
cursed yesterday, this Morning withered up by the roots; which whilst they
beheld with admiration, they are bold to make him also acquainted with in these
words, How soon is the fig tree withered? A marvel was this, nay a miracle
too, and that in this tree above other Trees: for the fig tree is called
Sapiens arbor, that is, the wise tree, because it never puts out till the
Spring be confirmed, and Winter utterly over; therefore of all trees it is
least subject to blasting. Iud. 9.11.
For this cause (among other) the figtree in the book of Judges (it may be) is
put among those wise trees that refuse the Kingdom over the other. But there
is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord: if Christ
command, the poor fig tree must wither, have it never so well provided against
weather, in his late, and deliberate budding. This is the very use that our
Savior makes of this accident: for hence he takes occasion to show his
Disciples, what miracles their faith should work, if it were true, and settled;
that it should not only have Trees, but the Earth, and Sea obedient to it, so
that mountains should remoove, and the Sea stand still at their faith, were it
not wavering. This is much: but the next privilege is greater; namely, that
they should obtain of GOD whatsoever they asked in Christ's Name, observing but
one condition, that is, to forgive as they would be forgive^. Me thinks this is
something like man's state in his innocence, who had but one condition to
observe to keep himself happy; even as Mankind here, in the person of the
Disciples, has but one rule prescribed, to restore it to GODS favor by
forgivenes; that is, to forgive others, who repent toward them. Mankind, I
say, not the Disciples alone; for, in other places, our Savior makes both the
duty and condition general. Therefore look to thy faith whosoever thou art,
for thou art warned as well as the Disciples: and, if thou look thy prayer
should find entrance by it, to obtain forgivenes in Christ; believe this one
thing ere thou begin to pray, That Faith is not faith, unless Love go with
it: thou must forgive therefore, and that from the bottom of thy Heart, thy
repentant Brother, (which is a work of Love) or else thou can never be
forgiven.

With the end of this doctrine we are come now with our Savior into
Jerusalem, Bethanle, that Christ might have the readier entrance into his own
house. There he has not been long a teaching, (says S. Matthew) and that as
he was walking (says S. Mark) because he would loose no time, but the
chief Priests, and Scribes, and Elders of the people, all men of authority
(and therefore the Pharisees, who were a kind of Monks, were not with them)
are upon him to know his authority. It was a part of High Treason, if they
would have considered it, for them to call him to account for his authority,
from whom they held theirs: for, if they were High Priests, he was their King;
if they were Scribes, he was their High Priest; if they were Elders, he was
from everlasting. For this cause he pleases not to answer them directly, but
by another question, touching the Baptism of John, whether it was from Heaven,
or of men? This was a question that they were sure to be taken in, whatsoever
they answered: for, if the said it was of men, they feared the people, least
they should stone the^, because all men held John for a Prophet: if they said
from Heaven, they condemned themselves for not believing John, nor Christ
neither, whom John had taught, and pointed at, when he said, Behold the Lamb
of God: and again, when he said, This is he who comes after me, but is
greater then I, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to unloose. Therefore when
they would not speak truth, for shameing, and durst not speak falsehood, for
endangering themselves, they (unfitly for men of place, and learning) put the
question off, with We cannot tell: and because they would not confess the
truth that they knew, neither therefore will our Savior instruct them who are
already enform'd, yet, contrary to their conscience, deny to know that which
they knew well enough. For they had evidences enough, not only to teach, but
enforce upon them also, that our Lords authority could not but be from GOD; but
Pride would not suffer them to acknowledge him. For this cause, he, who
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble, cared not to give grace to
them who were not humble enough to stoop to his authority, but leaves them to
the hardness of their hearts, even till they come to that height of malice, as to
crucify him who sought their Salvation. This teaches us to take heed how we
oppose our selves to the known Truth, least we be left to our selves, as
these High Priests, Scribes, and Elders were, to crucify again the Lord of
life, and make a mock of him.

That they were left to themselves, one denies to work in his Fathers
Vineyard, yet after repents himself, and goes; the other promises to go, in
fair and forward terms saying, I will Sir, but goes not. Secondly, in the
Parable of the houshoulder, who let his Vineyard out to ill husbandmen, who
both denied him his Rent, beat his servants, and slew his Son, all whom he
had sent, one after another, to demand it. Thirdly, in the Parable of the
wedding dinner of the Kings Son, to which they that were bidden, that is, the
Jews, who were first called, Matthew. 10.6.
both in the time of the Law, Romans 1.16.
and of the Gospel, of any nation, refused to come. In which Parables how
careful is our Lord to set the Sin they were to commit, before the eyes both
of Priest and People, in his right colors? therefore he describes it once,
twice, and thrice over, that they may take the better notice of it. And them,
by this means, he left inexcusable: so shall we be also, unless we take
warning by their example. For our duty is, as well as theirs, first, to work
in his Vineyard, when he calls us; for, though we be his Sons, he will not
allow us to be idle: Secondly, to pay him his Rent, for our Farm, or Lease of
life he trusts us with; for, though we be his Farmers, we hold not of him in
Cornage, or for a Rose in winter: Thirdly, when he calls us to his Table, to
come like men, having on our wedding garment; for it is neither for his honor,
nor our credit, that we should come in our old rags. In a word: we must come
to GOD, as laborers, in our course outside, when he would have us to work,
but like Holy-day-men, as if we had not wrought at all, when our labor is
done; that is, not making show of, or trusting in any thing we have performed.
For this is GODS manner of entertainment; Thou must first come to him in thy
rags, that is, such build as thou have, and work out thy freedom after that
thou must put on Christ for thy Garment; by expressing him to thy power in thy
outward actions, whom thou have laid up for thy righteousness in thy heart, and
then thou art a guest for GODS Table. Yea, thus thou must pay him thy Rent, by
sorrow for thy sin, and a broken heart, and then thou shall be bidden, or
called in to the wedding among those whom GOD will receive to his Dinner: and
thither also thou must carry thy humility with thee, not striving for place, as
if it were thine of due, or merit. Humble thy self, and thou shall be
exalted; exalt thy self before GOD and thou shall be brought low.

These admonitions, which, Christ's enemies, on the contrary fretted them to the
gall: so that, to be avenged, they set the Herodians first, to entrap him in a
question of State, that he might be brought within the compass of Treason:
next, the Sadduces, with a question of their Law, that he might come within
compass of Heresy: after that, a Lawyer to tempt him, if he could entrap him
of Ignorance, and so disable his Teaching: but when he had put the^ all off
with wisdom, fit for Wisdom to speak, at length he is so bold as to ask
them a question, (seeing they will needs, be so bold with him) concerning his
Divinity. The question is taken out of the book of Psalms: In which, the holy
Prophet David calls Christ his Lord, in the Spirit (of Prophecy) who was his
Son according to the flesh, so long before acknowledging his Divine Nature,
for Christ that was his Son, in the flesh of his Manhood, was his Lord, in
the Spirit of his Godhead. This if our Saviors adversaries would have
acknowledged, they durst not have gone about to entrap him; and then the
question had been easy also: For it was no more but this, How does David in
Spirit call Christ Lord, seeing he was his Son? An easy question, if they
would either have believed David on his Prophecy, or Christ on his word, or the
miracles which confirmed them both. For Christ his miracles were such, as
evinced both the prophecyes that had gone of him to be true, and him to be
the Messiah that was prophesied of, for they were all done in his own Name,
which showed him evidently to be GOD; because none can say of himself I
charge, or I command, but he that is highest: therefore the Apostles said
ever, In the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, or some such like words. For this
cause, when Christ taught in this form, I say unto you, all men marvailed: and
when he said, Thy sins are forgiventhee, the Pharisees murmered, because they
said (and faid truly) none could forgive sins after that manner, but GOD
alone. These things might have taught these captious posers, that Christ was
GOD, if they would have laid them to heart: and on the other side they might
know as well, that Christ was David's Son, according to the flesh, by his
Mother, the Blessed Mary the Virgin, who was both of David's Tribe, and family.
David therefore might well call him Lord, as he was GOD, who was his Son as
he was Man. But their pride having taken the right answer from them, they had
not one word to reply; which struck them with such a confusion that they
turned their backs, like men vanquished, neither ever durst any after that Day
ask him any question.

Now are their mouths stopped, the story of his taking, in S. John, John. 18.6.
where he strikes his enemies backward to the ground with a word; he could
therefore have long ago stopped their mouths, but he would not: yea, he
could easily have put them all to silence, but his pleasure was they should go
on; partly, because he would have his wisdom and theirs compared together to
the full, that it might appear which was the true one; partly, because he
would have it seen, what fury he had to strive with, what hatred to overcome.

As Soon as these foulers are gone with their nets, our Lord warnes the people
at large, of such false Teachers as they be. Especially, he denounces woe upon
woe, against the Pharasies, who were a sect much like the Jesuits now a days,
for austerity, and strictnes of Discipline, and therefore did more hurt then
any other: and Statesmen they were too, like unto them, as may appear out of
their story in Josephus. That they were such people as with great violence, and
heat of corrupt Zeal followed their intents, and woefully prevailed by that
means, our Savior himself expresses of them when he says, THEY compass
Sea, and Land to make one Proselyte, and when they have him they make him
twofolde the child of Hell more then themselves. These false Teachers our Lord
is more earnest against, because they misled his own, one, only chosen people
at that time, in regard of visible, or humane knowledge; for GOD had no Temple
then, nor Church visible in all the world, save in Jury. Which makes him so
tender over it, that howsoever it was, or had been bent against him, yet he
cannot but pity it, and greive at their destruction: therefore he ends the
Chapter in which he denounced so many woes against the wolves that destroyed
his flock, with a pitiful lamentation over Jerusalem. For hear him, thou
that passes by, how deerly he bewailes his own Cities woeful madness, that
forsook him to take part with Murderers; Jerusalem, Jerusalem, (says he)
thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent to thee; how
often would I have gathered thee as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not? Much like unto David's affection to, and mourning
over his dead Son Absalon; Absalon, Absalon, (says he) my Son Absalon,
would God I had died for thee. Thus holy David, as a father, laments his dear
Son, and Christ, as a Savior, his dear City. But our Savior exceedes: for
his sorrow was both more deep, (though it have not so many words of repetition
to express it) and more seasonable also; for Absalon was past recovery when
David mourned; but Jerusalem had time to repent, when our Lord wept over it. It
had time, I say, but it would not: nay Christ says so, but they knew not the
time of their visitation; therefore he prophecyes of it, Behold your house shall
be left unto you desolate: which prophecy was fulfilled in the Emperor
Vespasians days, and continues so unto our time. The lesson we have here to
take out is, for Teachers, that they be not like to these Priests and
Pharisees; for Hearers, that they be not like Jerusalem, least both Priest and
People do perish together.

By this time now began night to draw on, and Christ therefore leaves the
Temple for this day; For the Treasury was at the going out of the Temple, 2.
Chro. 24. S.
which may appear, first, by the Story of the poor widow, whom he commends
for casting her whole substance (which a poor widow might soon do) into the
Treasury. Secondly, Which must be, on the outside.
by his Disciples showing him the buildings and stones of the Temple, and his
Prophecy upon that occasion, That there was not a stone, upon a stone, which
should not be thrown down: which two Stories teach us two excellent lessons:
First, that Christ accepts of the Heart more then the Hand, and of the givers
affection, then the riches of the gifts (for the poor widow gave but two
mites:) Secondly, that there is no work so glorious, (no not building of
Temples) which can stand before GOD, when it fails either in substance, or
affection; for even GODS own Temple could not please him, neither might it
stand, after the Ceremonial Law, under which it was erected, was once abrogated.

Form the Temple as soon as Christ is come to the mount of Olives, Jury only,
but the whole world in general (whose fate depends upon the fate of the Church
whatsoever it otherwise imagine) whose destruction (therefore) is figured in
the destruction of Jerusalem. And that he may prepare all men for his second
coming, the time when these things shall happen, he joins for this cause, to
the prophecy, a Parable of the ten Virgins, whereof five were wise, five were
foolish. The wise brought oil for their Lamps; but the foolish neglecting
this part of providence, after they have assayed, in vain, to borrow, in their
absence the Bridegroom coming, enters into his house, makes the doors be
shut, and so they are excluded from the Marriage of their Souls unto GOD. This
Parable that it may be better understood, there follows it a most plain and
express description of the last Judgment, and the rigor of it, which shall be
when the world shall have an end: in which Judgment, the godly shall be
received into everlasting Joy, and the wicked cast into utter darkness, to
inherit eternal pain, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels. There is
another Parable by Saint Matthew mixed with these; and that is, of the increase
of the Talents, which the Lord gave forth to his servants, at his going to his
Travail: but this in order of time, belongs to the week before, when our Lord
first had a sight of Jerusalem, as may appear, Luke. 19.12.

Now is Night already come, and Christ, Bethany; but from this time forward he
never returns thither, nor comes in any bed, till he be laid in the Rock by
Joseph of Arimathea, to sleep his three days sleep; from which cold, and
hard bed, he rose but once, to lie down no more. This Saint Luke has
observed, Luke 21.37.
who tells us expressly, that in the day time Christ taught in the Temple, but
at Night he went out and abode in the Mount that is called Olives: which words
seeing they cannot be understoode of the Nights that are past (in which he
lay in Bethany) it remains that they belong to this Night, and those that
follow, to the time of his Passion. It was but a cold lodging that Mount Olives
could afford our blessed Savior: A field-bed, without any other Canopy but the
vault of Heaven, (GODS high Starrechamber;) or any, either Pillow, or Rugge,
but the green Earth: yet thus he chose to be an example unto us in watching,
as it may be he was at the same time in praying also; both in regard of his
own commandment, Watch and Pray, which joins prayer with watching; as also
of his Practice, at other times, in which these two are not severed. The same
duties that he might stir up his Disciples unto also, he foretells them of
his Passion, Maath 26.2.
after he has finished the sayings before mentioned, to let them see what
need they had to watch, and pray with him also. It is not likely, but that
this desire of our Saviors took effect in his Disciples. Let us suppose that
it did so; and then we have a band of spiritual Soldiers watching here, or
else a company of Saints praying, such as all the Earth (I had almost said
Heaven) cannot show the like. If ever we will pray then, let us do it now;
for we cannot have better company: and if we watch too, so it destroy not
Nature, we shall be like Christ, in whom only we hope to prevail. And thus
let us take our leave of Christ, or rather attend on him, for this Night time.

Meditations for WEDNESDAY.
NOw begins the Catastrophe of this Tragedy to come in; for this Morning all
Christ's enemies meet together, and take bloody counsel together against him
to destroy him. And to help them on, Judas Iscariot, (whose bloody mind was
never pleased with Christ, since he blamed his coveteousnes, for grudging at
Mary's pouring her precious ointment on his head, John 12.3.
the Saturday last past,) he like a covetous wretch, to make up his loss,
comes in with his, What will ye give me, and I will betray Christ unto you?
The word was no sooner spoken, but the bargain was driven, money promised,
hands stricken, and Christ sold. But for what think ye? Even for thirty
pieces of silver. A goodly price to value him at, whose blood, even the least
drop of it, was of worth to purchase Heaven and Earth. Thus ungodly men, like
prodigalls, make away their wealth, for nothing: but let us by their example,
be brought to be more wary, and thrifty of our spiritual riches, least we
fall into extreme misery: and that the rather, because GOD is austere, and
will one day have an account of all our spendings.

In the mean time, teaching: yet what he taught this Day, the Evangelists be
all silent in; belike the Holy Ghost meant to leave us time enough, for conning
yesterdaies long lesson. And yet this Day, for a need, will afford a man
matter enough for meditation. For he that can but endure to take a view of the
cruel malice of Christ's enemies, may find what will give him sufficient
occasion to bewail his own sins, and wonder at theirs, who were actors in
so bloody a design. Or if these seem too dismal to settle our thoughts on,
let us but cast our eyes upon our Saviors patience, who was not moved with
all that was devised against him, no not so much as to break off his ordinary
exercise of preaching, by that means, even then seeking to win them, that
sought to destroy him; it will a little sweeten the bitter of that which went
before.

And if we stay a little, worth the copying out. Tertullian he describes
Patience on this manner. Vultus illi tranquillus and placidus, frons pura,
nulla moeroris aut iraerugositate contracta, remissa aequelaetum in modum
supercilia, etc. i. Her look is quiet, and gentle, her forehead plain and
smooth, without ever a wrinkle of anger, or sorrow; her eylids let down
equally with Joy, and her eyes cast upon the ground, of humility nevertheless,
but not of grief; her color confident, such as they have who are guiltless
and secure; her mouth sealed up with silence; often shaking her head at the
Devil, and scorning him with a threatening laughter; her attire white, neither
strait to her Body, nor loose and fluent, but plain and seemly; her place is
above the Clouds, where neither storm, nor tempest can shake her; the Holy
Spirit himself lends her his Throne, to rest her in, where she sits as a
Queen, be the Earth never so unquiet against her. Thus he describes this
virtue excellently, as if she had put off her veil, that he might take a
true pourtraict of her face.

Yet a better description of Patience may be had, nevertheless, Well then:
let our Savior be unto us the true picture of Patience, The Comlines of his
person, I take to be evidently proved out of the place of Saint Luke, Luke.
2.52. And Jesus increased in wisdom, and stature, and favor, with God, and
men. This is by some assigned for the cause, why the women wept so fast for him
when he went this execution.
and let us take the description of it from him. His countenance was fair, and
full of Majesty, as some think, and as Lentulus his letter describes him, even
as the face of Patience is Heavenly, and reverent: according unto others, (and
so the Scripture seems to make him) not outwardly lovely or beautiful, no more
is Patience a pleasing virtue to look on, but winns by inward worth, rather
then by outward beauty: never was he seen to laugh, (for Patience has little
time to be merry in this world) but often to weep; yet not much neither, but
so as might show his affection, rather then give way to it: his hair long, as
Sampsons was, and his whole person far stronger made then he, to bear: his
feet all bare save his sandalls; a fit foundation for Patience to build on:
his garment woven whole, from the top to the bottom, not one seame to divide
it; much less is it rent upon him, by impatience: his speech full of grace,
yet not much, but always seasonable; in all his sufferings not once heard to
revile, or complain, no not on the Cross; and which is more, not once to
utter a groan there: but, on the contrary, he prayed even then for his
persecutors, saying, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do:
whilst he knows, as upon this Day, the High Priests, and their accomplices to
be plotting his Death, yea buying and selling him, he is laboring to save
them; who within two days after, he knew, would prefer a murderer before him,
even then when it stood upon his life: when Judas returns from his bloody
bargain, even from selling his Masters head, he never once reviles, or rates
him, or casts him off, yea when he goes actually to betray him, and outright,
he says no more to him but this, That thou do do it quickly. If this be
not the perfect picture of Patience, I know not where we shall have it.

Now these actions are our instructions, Christ's sufferings are but a pattern
for us, to take out the perfect work of patience by. So says Saint Peter:
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example to follow his steps; who
did no sin, neither was there any guile found in his mouth; who when he was
reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed his cause to him that judges righteously. We have all need of
patience, that after we have done the will of GOD, we may inherit the promise,
for yet a little while and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.
Let us hear therefore the word of exhortation, as it is laid down for us in
Saint James: Be patient, my Brethren, until the coming of the Lord: behold
the husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long
patience for it, until he receive the former and latter rain: be patient
therefore and stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. The
same Apostle ascribes to patience, the means to make us perfect, James 1.2. My
Brethren, count it joy, when ye fall into many temptations, knowing that the
trial of your faith works patience: and let patience have her perfect work,
that ye may be perfect, and entire, wanting nothing. This virtue whosoever
would have, he is now at the fountain: for from Christ we must have it, or
not at all. Let us then seek for it in him, or to him for it, and so we may
come to find it: and the rather let us do it, because our souls are not our
own (in this troublesome world) without patience; for in patience (says
Christ) ye must possess your Souls.

Meditations for THURSDAY.
A Little lightning before death, as on this day, has our Blessed Savior, and
but a little neither, even while he is preparing and eating the Passover: all
the rest of the day he is teaching, as may be probably conjectured. But ere he
begin to do that, he gives direction first, where he will have the Passover
made ready for him, by sending two of his Disciples to a certain man that
should meet them with a pitcher of water; by which, and other signs that he
gives, they should know him to be the party, whose house he had chosen for
the purpose. This man, whom our Savior sent thus to, is observed (further) to
have been a Disciple; for when the two who were sent from Christ, meet with
him, they say, The Master says: which is noted to have been the name that the
followers of Christ called him by among themselves; as it may appear to be by
Martha's words to Mary her sister, The Master is come, and calls for thee.
This being granted, that this man was a believer, it will rest uncertain,
whether Christ had bespoken a room of him before this, or no, for, if he was a
Disciple, he might ere this time have made it known to him, by word, as well
as by revelation, that he would eat the Passover in his house: and it helps
the conjecture a little, because his room was so ready. But howsoever that
might be done ordinarily, or otherwise, certain it is, that Christ's
foretelling, they should meet him, bearing a pitcher of water, was
prophetical, to confirm the Disciples faith, and ours. Also, in that his
room was ready dressed to receive Christ, besides that it commends decency unto
us, both in the man, and in it self, it serves also, to show us how we should
have our hearts prepared for our Master; namely, that we must cleanse them,
dress them, trim them, and always have them fit to receive him: if we give
him the upper room in them also, we do but follow our example. Only let us
take heed when he sends his Disciples, that is, his Ministers, that they find
us not without our pitcher of water, that is, without tears of true penitence
in our eyes, that we are no better prepared to entertain him.

The next thing the holy Evangelists lead us to, John has noted unto us, that
our Saviors Passover was two days before the Jews; (for theirs was on
Saturday, Ioh. 19.14.
his on Thursday) it may be the less marveilous to him, that considers, how
far Christ was before them in preparation. And that might well serve for an
answer, were it not that the law of GOD is so strict in appointing the day on
which the Passover should be kept. Exodus 12.18.
But the undoing of this knot, is to be learned out of a custom which the
Jews had taken up, ever since they came from Babiloa, and to gain credit to
it, ascribed it to revelation from GOD, which was this. That if the Passover
fell near the Sabbath day, it should be deferred until the Sabbath, that the
people might not have two holy days so near together, and so the commandment
(belike) be endangered; Six days shaltthou labor. This was the reason why
the Jews deferred their Passover until Saturday, which our Savior kept upon
Thursday. For Thursday was the legal day. Therefore Christ, who best knew the
meaning of his own commandment (which they by scrupulousnes mis-understood)
kept that day, neither would give the least example to make the law of GOD of
none effect, by man's traditions. This keeping of the Passover, was the last
Ceremonial act, that ever our Savior performed.

Now, Christ's penmen, let us come unto that the evening affords us, which is
full of many strange occurrences. The first thing in it, is the abrogating of
the Sacramental Supper of the old Testament, the Passover, and instituting
that of the New, which we call, by Saint Paul's direction, the Supper of the
Lord. And there are not many circumstances to observe in the first of these: As
first;

That Christ abrogated the Legal Ceremonies, and the right time of the day,
the evening, and the right company, his Disciples, and of those, no more the^
the twelve, who were his household servants, and ever with him: as for his
sitting, whereas some think it is legal he should have stood, it appears out
of Exodus, Exodus.11.10.
that it was a circumstance not perpetual, but proper to the time when the
Israelites were to leave Egypt: and that he observed the feast in an other
man's house, the reason is ready, because he had not (more shame for mankind)
one of his own, no not a place to hide his head in.

Secondly, Christ's desire he had to eat this Supper with his disciples: which
himself expresses most expressly, when he says, desiderio desideravi, etc.
that is, I have vehemently desired to eat this Passover with you, before I
suffer. As for a third circumstance which some gather, that he took the cup
in the time of the Passover, and gave it his disciples to go among them, after
the same manner that he did, when he instituted his own Supper; it is by the
learned observed to be spoken by Anticipation, and the action to belong to the
Sacrament following, in which it is of the essence of it: therefore by the
other Evangelists it is only mentioned in that place. To let pass that then;
these two, that we are certain of, have their use to usward: the first, to
show Christ's strictnes in doing the will of his father, and fulfilling the Law
for us, that we might be free from the burden of Ceremonies: the second,
both to show his affection to mankind in general, in that he desired so much
to come once to the eating of his last Supper, that he might make an end by
it, of the bondage of Rites, and bring in Evangelicall freedom; as also his
love to his Disciples in special, for whose cause he desired the Passover so
earnestly, that he might have them at his own table before he left them, and
let them see how lovingly he parted from them: for this cause it is noted,
that our Savior had other meat besides the Paschall Lamb, that he might
receive his Disciples the more liberally; for he had a dish of meat with a
sweet sauce to it, which he dipped a sopp in, and gave it to Judas: and that
this could not be the Paschall Lamb it is evident, because that had a sauce
indeed, but it was made of bitter herbs, not fit to dip bread in, signifying
the bitter affliction, which their forefathers were delivered from in Egypt.

Presently after the eating of the Passover, Abraham washed the Angels feet:
and the widows, in Timothy, must be such as had washed the Saints feet yet it
may have also a Spiritual signification; namely, to show how clean they are to
be, that come to the Supper of the Lord: also, that Christ must wash us
himself, or else all our washing is nothing worth: because of which
signification, this washing was put off, till after the Passover, and before
the Lords Supper; otherwise, by the custom, and fashion of the country, it
should have been before them both, as may appear out of Genesis. Genesis 18.4.
After the washing ended, Christ sits down again, and having expounded what
he meant by his last action, namely, to teach his Disciples humility and
mutual love; having also given a touch at the Traitor Judas, whose feet among
the rest he had washed, but his heart he could not; he proceeds to institute
the Sacrament of his Supper. The intent of this Sacrament he himself in part
expresses; namely, that by breaking of bread, there should be a remembrance of
the breaking of his body, and by pouring of wine, the shedding of his blood,
continued until his second coming. A remembrance only, I say, for so says
Christ himself, Do this in remembrance of me. Therefore they alter the nature
of the Sacrament, that will have it, not a memorial, but a corporal
exhibition of the body of Christ, according to the literal sense of the words,
This is my body. To answer whom, we may here note, that Christ distributed
this Bread, which he calls his body, and this Cup, which he terms his blood,
with his own hands, before ever he had a Spiritual Body; so that his
Disciples could not receive his body after such manner as the Papists would
have it received, because it was yet a natural one, and not after that manner
communicable: unless we will say, that the Apostles received the Sacrament
after another manner then we do; and they indeed, could not receive Christ's
Spiritual Body, which yet was not, but we do.

After this Sacrament ended, is not yet taken away, nor any one risen, our
Savior begins to be troubled, and to express more plainly the treason that
Judas had conceived against him. Yet this complaint, it is a wonder to see how
sweetly he carries: for, though he knew the Traitor, and had most just reason
to have disclosed him with utmost detestation, yet he never detects him to
any, but his beloved disciple John, and that upon inquiry. For whereas it is
read how Judas asked, with the rest of the Disciples (like an impudent wretch)
is it I Master? and Christ answered him, Thou have said it, it is noted, that
he spoke these words so softly and secretly in his ear, that the Traitor only
heard them. And when as Saint John, Christ's beloved Disciple, at Peter's
request, asked him who he meant, it is observed also, that he received the
sign in private, He it is, to whom I shall give a sop: for, if these things
had been done openly, the Disciples could not afterward have been ignorant of
Christ's words which he spoke to Judas, That thou do, do it quickly: which
nevertheless it is manifest they were; for they thought Christ had sent him to
buy something. And therefore, whereas it is supposed also by some, that the
Traitor was then opened, when it is said, He that dippeth his hand with me in
the dish, shall betray me, it cannot be true; for (besides the former reason)
it is but the same phrase which David used in the like case: He that ate bread
with me has lift up his heel against me.

And certainly this was a miraculous, reaching the soppe, was an action of
love, as Carving is among us, and so understood by all the Disciples, except
Saint John, to whom it was a private sign: so that if Judas could have taken
it so, he had then been recalled; and in that he did not, he was left more
inexcusable.

That he took it not so, the sequel shows, Judas, as good Physic does upon
corrupt bodies, which makes them worse affected, and the disease more deadly.
So was it with this Murderer; for no sooner has he taken the sop, but he goes
forth, to accomplish his cursed malice. But cursed be his malice, for it was
cruel, and therefore into his secret let not our Souls enter. Better it is to
admire Christ's divine moderation, and imitate it, then excuse Judas his fact,
or lessen the greatest sin, that the nature of man is capable of: better it
is to stay with Christ in the chamber, then follow Judas to the High Priests:
better, in a word, to suffer with Christ, then betray him with Judas; and if
any man believe not this, let him but look to the end that Judas makes the
next morning, and no longer to it.

If I should make use of every thing that was done after this, in it self, not
only for it self, but also for a man's whole life. I will therefore run over
things, with what brevity I am able.

The next thing, Luke 22.24.
is the Disciples striving for superiority; an untimely ambition: after that,
ver. 27.
Christ's exhortaton to humility, and unity; a friendly admonition: the next, is
the foretelling of Peter's fall; ver. 31.
a prophetical prevention: after that, an arming of his Disciples in general,
ver. 35.
against persecution; a loving premunition: which is followed with a promise of
rest in heaven, John. 14.1. and 16. ver. so to the end of the Chap.
and a comforter on earth, even GOD the Holy Ghost himself; an endless
consolation.

After these speeches, Christ rises from Table, to go unto the place where
he was to be surprised: yet entering into a new discourse, he tarries within
doors, notwithstanding, so long, till he has made an end of that excellent
Sermon, (his Swans song) which is left us in the fifteenth, and sixteenth
Chapter of Saint John: which Sermon he ends with a prayer, John 16.
his prayer with singing an hymn, Mat. 26.30.
(whence, perhaps, our custom of ending Sermons after that manner arises,) and
so goes out to the Mount of Olives. Some are of opinion, that the Sermon before
spoken of, was preached by the way, as Christ went to Gethsemane, according to
the saying of the wise man, Wisdom cries in the streets: but it is again
answered, that the way is not long enough for it, unless he should make stops
in it, which is unprobable: neither is it likely, that on the night (for so it
was now) Christ would stand and teach in the streets, and sing also an hymn;
which Saint Matthew tells us he did upon his going out into the Mount of
Olives. Mat. (...).


Through this Mount Olivet, Gethsemane; and that Garden is the end of our Lords
journey for this time. Into which as soon as he is entered, then begins the
bitter cup of the Passion to be reached unto him, figured by the bitter herbs
in the Passover. The very sight of this Cup, ere ever it came to his lips, was
enough to bring a deadly heavines, even upon his Soul. It was now high time,
then, for Christ to pray; which he does once, again, and again, in these
words, Father, if it be possible, le this Cup pass from me. Yet are we not to
think, that Christ would have this Cup pass from him indeed; for he says
himself, Shall I not drink of the Cup that my Father has given me? But he
prayed thus, to let us see what resolution Gods justice is of; it will not be
moved, when GOD has once absolutely decreed to punish sin, not though
Christ pray for it; nay though he himself, in our person, be the patient.

The whiles Christ is a praying, sharply for their drowsines. It was a pitiful
weight of sin, that made our Savior Souleheavy unto Death, and the Disciples
Bodies, to a deadly and unseasonable sleep. But this was not all: for it wrung
a bloody sweat (O the deadly weight of sin!) out of our Savior, such as
never man sweat the like in all points; and besides that, laid him upon the
ground grovelling, in a most grievous agony, such a one, as an Angel came down
to comfort him, from heaven; for earthly comforters failed, and all they could
have done, had been little worth.

Scarce is this agony over, Judas comes to apprehend him: which though he
could not have done without Christ's permission, for all the High Priests
authority, (which was made manifest, when our Lord struck down them that came
to take him, with a word of his mouth,) yet he accomplishes, John 18.6.
nevertheless, his cursed intent: so that though Peter resist, and smite of
Malchus his ear, yet Judas prevails, and Christ is taken: neither can they be
entreated to let him go, though he plead his innocence, and heal his enemy
with a touch, (even Malchus) to let them see how far he was from hating
them, notwithstanding all their injury. But their hearts were hardened;
therefore Christ must needs suffer.

Next unto this, Christ's examination before the High Priests, full of injustice
and subornation. In the time of which ungodly proceedings, falls out a pitiful
accident, which is, Peter's denial of his Master: which though it might seem
to admit of some excuse, in that the temptation was strong, even such as, not
long since, had made all Christ's followers forsake him and flee; yet being
thrice -- over committed, and that, after having been forwarned of it, we
must needs confess, that it was a grievous crime, especially, in that Christ
was now (even as S. Peter's faith was) upon his trial. Yet this wound, though
it was the harder cure, Christ heales more easily then he did that which
Malchus received; for, that was healed by a touch, this only by looking back:
for as soon as Christ looked back, Saint Peter came to himself, went out, and
wept bitterly.

As the Devil in his limbs, Peter, so is he himself, the while, against
Christ; for he stirs up his good children, the High Priests, and their
company, to vex him, not only, as before, by trapping interrogatories, but
also by reviling him, spitting upon him, buffetting him, and mocking him. And
now their malice is risen to an height, it is time to make an end for this day,
or rather this night, and so they do: or rather the time it self does for
them, because their malice had no end. For having sit up all night about a
work of darkness, they are not ashamed to prosecute it the next day; to which
we are (GOD assisting) the next to proceed: but let us take heed we do it
with another affection then they did; for if Saint Peter fell, that followed
indeed, but a far off, what will become of them that draw near to persecute?

By thine Agony, and bloody Sweat.

Good Lord deliver us. Amen.

Meditations for FRIDAY.
NOw begins the dismallest Morning to appear, that ever saw the Sun: it is
no marvel if she blush when she rises, to see such bloody practices go on,
as the High Priests, and their ungodly Fraternity make her conscious of. Yet
one joyful Spectacle she has, nevertheless, to cheer her self with, and
that is the death of Judas the Traitor; who repenting himself, (for he had
been of hrists company, and therefore had some touch, though not of grace, in
him) comes and restores the money he had taken for his Lord and Master, to the
High Priests (if he had stayed here, there had been some hope: but) after
falling into despair, he is not at quiet, till he has avenged Christ's
quarrel on himself, with his own hands, which had taken the Money; for he
went a way, and hanged himself. Yet does not Gods justice stay here neither;
for, as he was hanging, his body broke in sunder, and all his bowels gushed
out, because he had no bowels of compassion toward his Master. As for his
Soul, as soon as ever it left his execrable body, it begun presently to
inherit those curses which the Psalmist had laid up for him of old, Ps. 109.6.
Set thou a wicked man over him, and let Satan stand at his right hand: when he
shall be judged let him be condemned, and let his prayer become sin: let his
days be few, and let another take his office, etc. Thus is GOD just upon his
enemies, that we may learn to fear him.

It will not be amiss, Judas brought back to the High Priests, for the
strange quality of the field that was bought with it: for it is reported, that
the nature of that ground is such, as if a strangers body be laid in it, (for
it was bought to bury strangers in) it consumes it to the bone in four and
twenty hours, which it does not to any other Body, save those it was
appropriate to when it was bought. And to confirm this, Adrichom.
mine author tells, that Helena, the famous Queene-Mother of Constantine,
causing certain loades of this earth to be brought to Rome, into the field
that is now called the Holy field, it retains the virtue there also, and
consumes only strangers bodies, refusing the Romans. which if it be true, it
seems, GOD would have the earth thus marked to preserve the memory of the
bloody money by which it was purchased; and therefore he gave it a virtue, to
consume strangers bodies ere they could corrupt, refusing the Jews, to show
how they had lost their privilege to their own land, by crucifying their
Lord, and strangers began to be possessed of it: also to teach us that his hope
is nearest incorruption, who is the greatest stranger from the sin of the
Jews, that is, crucifying Christ.

But let us return to our Savior again, this while stood loose, though he
had been brought bound to the High Priests; belike they had loosed him to try
if they could make him belly himself by fair means: which when they cannot
prevail in, first they bind him again, and then carry him so bound to
Pilate, not privately, or with a few, but the whole multitude of them together,
to make the action more notable. When he is come to Pilate, first they accuse
him of Treason against Caesar; though it was enough known, that he had
publicly in the Temple taught of late, that Caesar should not be denied the
things that were Cesars. next, they lay sedition to his charge, as if he
stirred the people to rebellion; though they knew as well, that he refused the
peoples offer when they would have made him King: yet thus shameless are
Christ's accusers, to appeal him of matters that were evidently untrue: and
this Pilate may be found also to have taken notice of, therefore he tried more
ways then one to deliver Christ: for, first he would have put him off to the
High Priests and Rulers, who he knew could not put him to death because that
authority was taken away from them: after, being driven to examine him
himself, he protests openly in Christ's behalf, that he could find no fault
in him: upon that, Christ his accusers beginning to be more vehement, and
alleging that he had wronged both Caesar and Herod, in stirring up the people
against them, as soon as ever Pilate hears Herod named he seeks to put off
the matter to him, and therefore sends Christ unto him, as belonging to his
Jurisdiction: when Herod could find nothing worthy of death in him neither, but
sends him back to Pilate untouchtin his body (except a garment of scorn that
he had put upon him) Pilate tries a policy to free our Savior, A white
garment. Adrichome Th. Terrae Sanctae.
by comparing him with the most grievous malefactor that had long been in
Iayle, one Barrabas; which he did on hope to deliver him by virtue of a custom
the Jews challenged at Easter, which was, to have one set free to them, whom
of two they should choose. But when against his hope, and all probability, they
refuse Christ, and choose Barrabas, yet here he leaves not to strive for him;
but first he calls for water, and washes his hands, protesting by that
Ceremony, that he would not have any of Christ's blood cleave to his hands, but
it should all be upon them, if they shed it: when that would not serve, he
tries yet an other policy, unlawful indeed, yet nevertheless the most
effectual in humane worldly wisdom he could devise, as the case then stood;
namely, to give our innocent Lord to be most cruelly whipped, crowned with
thorn, and clothed with purple, having a reed in his hand, for a Scepter, to
be mocked of his Soldiers, spitt on, smitten on the head, and saluted on the
knee in mockery: who being by them thus dressed in double purple, (whereof one was
of his own blood) torn with whips, and pierced with thorns, he brings him
forth to the Jews, to moove them to compassion, hoping that a little blood
would have contented them: but when no blood would please the^ but his
heartblood, Pilate, like a false worldly Politician, thinking it better to
yield to the death of one innocent, then to endanger a tumult, delivers Christ,
against his own conscience, to be crucyfied.

Concerning the time wherein our Savior was crucyfied, Evangelists: for Saint
John says, John 19.14.
It was about the sixth hour when Pilate delivered him to be crucyfied, Saint
Mark says, Mark. 15.25.
It was the third hour and they crucified him. To reconcile these two, we are
to carry with us, that the Jews reckoned their Day by two sort of hours, the
one greater, the other the less. The greater were called the hours of the
Temple, and divided the Day into four Quarters, whereof every one contained
three hours a piece, which Quarters were reckoned under the name of the first,
second, third, and fourth hour; for so many there were and no more; and then
begun again: on the Night, they are by David called the Night watches, as it
seems, where he says, Mine eyes prevent the Night watches. The lesser hours,
reckoned from one till twelve, after the manner that we do, save that they
begun not at the same time that ours do; for both their greater and lesser
hours, begun at six a clock with us, whether you begin to reckon them at
morning or evening: for the Jews day begun at evening, as appears both out of
divine and profane Scripture: so that begin to tell at six in the evening, and
twelve will end at six in the morning, and begin again at six in the
morning, and your twelve will end at 6 in the evening, by our account. Which
kind of reckoning was of Gods appointment, who says in Genesis, Genesis 1.5.
The Evening and the Morning was the first day, beginning the day with the
evening: and it is a more natural kind of reckoning then ours which begins
at midnight, both for day and night: for it begins when they begin, and ends
when they end, going orderly on with them both; so that the first hour when
they began to work was the first hour, the second the second, etc. and so on
in order: whereas the hour that we hear when we rise, is six or seven, (for
about that time men generally begin to work) and therefore to us the first
hour is not the first hour, but under another name. These things will best be
brought together by a Table.

The Greater hours, or hours of the Temple. I II III IIII The Lesser hours.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Our hours as they agree with them both. 7 8 9 10 11
12 1 2 3 4 5 6

This figure shows, that the Jews first hour, in seven; so that when our
Dyall points at seven, theirs pointed at one, showing that the first hour
was over, and the next begun; when theirs pointed at two, ours at eight, and
so on, till you come to twelve. In the greater hours, it must needs be
otherwise; for their first greater hour was not ended, till our nine, which
was their three, the next, not till their six, which is our twelve; and then
begun the third hour which lasted till our three in the afternoon, as the
fourth did also, which ended at our six at night. According unto this
computation do the Papists yet name their Canonical hours: The Third Hour.
for their Hora Tertiarum, is in the morning at nine, their sixth is at noone,
and their nine, at three a clock after dinner, according to the account of the
Jews lesser hours.

These things being thus explaned, Evangelists give to the same hour: for they
are but two names, signifying one thing; the one reckoning the same time by the
greater hours, the other by the less. For Saint Mark, who divides the day by
the greater hours, he says, it was the third hour, beginning by their
greater hours; that is, six a clock newly over, by their lesser hours; that
is, full twelve, and past, with us, when our Lord was crucified. If any one
object, This cannot be; for, if Christ had been crucified within the third
greater hour, he must not have been so till one with us, for then in the
Table, begins the third Quarter, or the third hour rather, in the greater
hours: I answer, that one a clock, is all the space between twelve and one,
which hour is ended when one strikes, and so the third hour begins at
twelve newly over, which is the sixth hour in the Jews lesser hours: and this
he will easily grant to be true, who considers, that the first hour that ever
time measured, was not, or could not be one, or the first hour, till an hour
was run, and then that might be called the first hour, or one, not before:
and as that took his beginning with time, running on till it made a twelfth
part of the day, and then took his name, according to his order: so must the
third greater hour needs take his beginning at twelve, and end at his time
appointed.

Now Saint John, Therefore the beginning of the third greater hour with S.
Mark, must needs be the sixth lesser hour with S John; because no sooner this
done, but that begins. And this the rather, because Saint John reckons from
our Saviors condemnation, which must needs be a little before the third
greater hour, in which he was crucified; for he was condemned a good pretty
while before he suffered; therefore it could not be so forward as S. Mark
setts it, but within the sixth hour: yet, that is not full, or at least but
twelve with us, when Christ was condemned: but before he came to Golgotha, it
could not but be past their six, that is our twelve (at which time Saint John
says he was condemned) and so it must needs be the third hour, or quarter
of the day, as Saint Mark reckons it, which to Saint John, was the sixth hour.

One thing more also we may note out of the former figure: whence their error
had his beginning, who think that our Savior was crucified in the morning at
nine, and dyed not till three: whereas indeed, he was crucified at twelve, and
so hanged but three hours upon the Cross; for he was dead at the ninth
hour, by the Jews lesser hours, which is our three in the afternoon. This
error rise, because they thought Christ to have been condemned at six a
clock, by the Roman account, which is all one with ours, and crucified at
three, by the Jews common reckoning in the little hours, which is our nine,
and so they reconcile the times. But this opinion, (be it spoken with
reverence of their persons) cannot stand; for Saint John speaks not of our, or
the Roman hours, but of those which went for common amongst the Jews,
Besides, the story of Christ's sufferings, which were after the day was abroad,
I mean his arraigning before Pilate, his whipping, araying with purple,
crowning with thorn, mocking, and beating by the Soldiers, after he was
examined: also his sending to Herod, in the other side of the city, his stay
there, and his return: again, his second trial, and final condemnation
before Pilate: all these, and other I name not, could not possible be done,
betwixt day and nine a clock. Lastly, it is hardly agreeable to reason, that
our Lords Body should be six hours together in pain so unsufferable, being
of so feeling and tender a composition: for though his Godhead could have
upheld it, yet his humane nature had our infirmity upon it; See Mar. 15.44.
Where it is said, Pilate marvailed he was dead so soon.
and therefore, he is known to have shortened his time upon the Cross, at
least not to have held out till nature was spent, by his loud cry upon the
Cross, which showed that he dyed not fainting, or through weakness, as other
men do, who die because nature can hold out no longer: therefore I rest, yet,
rather with them, who think his passion on the Cross was but three hours
long: the rather also, because the death he suffered was so shameful, being
upon the Cross, and his body naked, laid open to the scorn of all his enemies
for our sins, which might be a principal cause why his passion was no
longer.

Many things there are to be observed in the time of our Saviors going to,
Jews by the way, in that they made him carry his Cross till he fainted: next,
the women's tears that were shed for him, when he went to his execution: upon
that, the loving care he had to requite them, by letting them know their state
was more woeful, and fit to be bewailed then his. Therefore he bids them,
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves. At his
coming to the place of execution, Golgotha, or Calvary, that is, the place of
a skull, their offering him wine mingled with myrrh, which was so sour and
bitter, that one of the Evangelists calls it vinegar mingled with Gall, which
he refused: upon that, his crucifying between two thieves: Pilates Title
nailed above his head: his prayer for his enemies: the parting of his garments
by the Soldiers: the reproaches of them that stood by: the Blasphemy of the
unpenitent Thief: the conversion of the other Thief that repented: his last
words to his Mother, and his beloved Disciple: the darkning of the body of the
Sun, ere liee dyed, to whom it owed his light, as his Creator: his complaint to
GOD that he had forsaken him: his thirst, his Iowd cry when, he gave up the
Ghost, that it might appear he dyed not of necessity, but willingly laid
down his life, being in his full strength, and having power to have retained
it if he would: his commending his Soul into his Fathers hands: and lastly
his death, after the CONSUMMATUM EST, that is, It is finished, was pronounced,
in which the work of our Redemption had his full period, so that there
remained no more either to do or suffer.

And now this Tragedy is at an end: Plaudite, it wants not that neither, and
such a one also as is best fitting for so dreere a Story; for Saint Luke tells
us, Luke 23 48
that All the people who saw this sight, smote their breasts, (which was
fitter for a Tragedy then clapping their hands) and returned. The use of these
things in general is this.

To give us a sight of our sins,

To teach us patience when we are called to suffer for them of desert,

To be thankful unto GOD for the suffering of Christ, appointed to be the
satisfaction for their sins that believe in him as their only Redeemer.

To stir us up to true sorrow for sin, Christ for remedy, that we may be
healed by his stripes, afterward to serve him in newnes of life, till we come
to be changed into a state of incorruptible purity, never to sin any more:
which estate, the merit of Christ's passion, by his inestimable value, has
bought for all, that truly seek to, and serve him.

Many things more might be noted out of the things that fell out, either when,
or after our Lord suffered: as, the darkning of the body of the Sun, (for an
Eclipse it was not) because the body of Truth even the Sun of Righeousnes
suffered: the renting of the veil of the Temple, signifying the abrogating of
the Legal types or shadows; for the veil was a figure of the Spiritual
covering, which was before the eyes of the Church, till Christ's coming: the
cleaving of the earth uncer the burden of Christ's suffering, and the weight of
our sins, making a way for them to descend to Hell, from whence they carne:
the rising of the Bodies of the Saints out of their graves, showing that the
heart strings of death, which before bound them in their Sepulchers, were
braken by the death of Christ: lastly, the burial of the pure and untainted
Body of our Holy Lord, and after his sleep in the grave for a time, his rising
again in power, to confound his enemies: all, yea every one of these might
furnish for a large discourse. But my purpose was to speak only of the passion
of Christ, and those things that belong to his own person, rather then the
things that are but accidental to them: as for the doctrine of the
Resurrection, it falls under another head, and belongs to an affection of Joy,
not of Sorrow: of which two passions, the latter only is proper to this week;
which here I would have ended, but that the week ends not with us till to
morrow be done; something therefore for that I must find to say: which if it
will not build, yet it may serve for filling, or Rubbish in thy building. Now
rest thee with Christ, until the Morning.

By thy Cross and Passion, Good Lord deliver us.

Amen.

Meditations for SATURDAY
WHere our Saviors Passion takes an end, there should ours begin, for so
must we fulfill, as S. Paul calls them, the after-sufferings, or the remainder
of the sufferings of Christ: Which though they were perfected when he dyed,
and needed no more, yet he will have us to cast our mite into this Treasary:
Therefore, not because he needs we should sorrow for him, let us take up our
Cross this day, and follow him, but because we need to sorrow for our selves,
as Christ taught the Daughters of Jerusalem.

Now, this day, Joseph of Arimathea, To whom our Land owes her first conversion.
an honorable Counselor had as honorably laid him. Which action, though it
happened yester night, yet the effect of it reaches unto this day; in which our
Saviors body enjoyes the secret, which this worthy Councellor had bestowed on
him. In this burial many things might be observed that are worth the marking:
As, 1 Holy Joseph his courage, who durst venture to offer to do this, after he
had seen what had happened to his Master: for this cause the Holy Ghost has not
left that part of his praise out of divine story, to stir up others by it;
Mar. 15.43.
for Saint Mark has noted, that he went in boldly to Pilate, and craved the
body of Iosus. 2 That he yielded Christ his own room, even the grave he had
dug for himself, Matt. 27.60
for Saint Matthew has observed, that it was his own Tomb in which Christ
was laid. 3 That it was a new sepulcher, in which never man had layen, as being
fittest for that body-virginall, or Maiden-corps, untoucht, and untainted. 4
That it was in a Garden, John. 19.41
hard by the place where Christ had been crucified; that as man first fell in
a Garden, so out of a Garden he might, in Christ, be raised up again. 5 That
there was no cost awanting, that could readily be purchased; for Joseph bought
a fine linen cloth: Mar. 15.46.
and linen in those days, was not eath to come by; for they were not shirts
ordinarily, as we do, which was the cause of their erecting Bathes in every
town, in which they washed so often: so that a hankerchiefe among, even the
Roman riotors, was a rich token, as appears out of the (...) Fabullus and
Veranius.
Poet. To help which cost, blessed Nicodemus brought also an hundred pound
weight of Mirrhe and Aloes, to enbalme him: and more would have been done, but
that it was evening, and spices then were not ready to be bought. Out of these
things, much might be noted for this day, but that they were done the last
Night, and so are not proper for this time.

The first thing we have on this day to observe, our it is so cruel, but
survives, to show it self against his dead body. Therefore they come to
Pilate, and say, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet
alive, AFTER THREE DAYS I WILL RISE AGAIN: Command therefore that the
sepulcher be made sure until the third day, least his Disciples come by Night,
and steal him away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead: so the
last error shall be worse then the first. Upon which entreaty Pilate answers
them: Ye have a watch, go your way, and make it as sure as ye can: So they
went and made the Sepulcher sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch. S.
Mark adds to this, that it was a great stone, which could not easily be
remooved, without strength: and therefore when they come in the morning the
women say, Who shall remoove us the Stone? So that now, sure, Christ's body is
sure enough: a great stone, and sealed, and a watch by it, were enough to keep
down a dead body. But all this is to their greater shame; for it makes but the
evidence of our Saviors resurrection the greater, which otherwise might have
wanted witnesses from his enemies: but now it has even his enemies for
witness that he rose again, (and that both to their cost, and trouble,) to
convince them. So let them watch this day as merrily as they will, to morrow
will be a heavy morning with them, come it as soon as it will, or can come,
which to us is the beginning of our joy.

It is to us the beginning of our joy, Christ's blessed Mother, sitting with the
sword thorough her heart, Luke 2.35.
which Saint Simeon had fore-hight her, should not have needed any other
pourtraict to set forth the true passions of Love, Hope, and Faith, under a
cloud of sorrow; for if any one wavered in doubt of Christ's resurrection, she
believed, because she knew him to be GOD: and, on the other side, if any one
mourned for his death, she mourned the most, for she was his Mother. Thus
must thou do to; Mourn; but for thy sins, that crucified Christ: yea thou
must set thy self among his Murderers, as Saint Peter sets thee, saying, Act.
2.23.36.
I am one of those, LORD, that crucified thee: Stand here fast now, for this is
the safest place for thee at first; for thou must come to joy through this kind
of sorrow, or else in Christ thou can not have it.

Next to this, Christ's resurrection, how to wait for his rising again in thy
heart; for they waited with their sweet odours, and so must thou do too. What
these odours are, Saint John tells thee in his Revelation, where he says, The
odours that are offered in heaven, are the prayers of the Saints: Now thou must
be as holy, that is, as Saint-like as thou can; therefore thou must not want
thy odours, such as thou can get: which if they be not for enbalming, as the
women's were, but for burning, it is the better; for it was a fault of love in
them, to provide that Christ's Body should not see corruption. Pray thou then,
and let the heat of zeal send out thy sighs, and thy servent devotions, in a
smoke up toward heaven: thus shall thou cense thy soul. that Christ may come
the next day to thee, and thou may be received of him at his Table.

And now I have brought thee where I would leave thee; Christ: and blessed art
thou when he comes, if he find thee so doing. For as he rose, that thou
might rise; so from that place, if from any, he will raise thee up, yea lend
thee his hand to set thee on thy feet, that thou may stand before him for
ever. Wait thus then, and power out thy prayers unto GOD, to prepare thee for
his coming: and if thou remember others in thy prayers, (as thou art bound to
the language of heaven in them, which runs upon OUR, and US) put me in among
them, (yet of need I beg it rather then desert) and I have a better reward of
my pains from thee, then I can look for. Now I must leave thee: for I know
thou will shut thy door when thou prayest, as Christ bids thee. Matthew. 6.6.


SO GOD SPEED THEE.
Tu autem DOMINE Miserere Nostri.
THe love that LOVE had last to show,
The life that LIFE had last to spend,
The pains unto Gods justice due,
Suffered by God in manhood true,
The price which bought us God to Friend,
The tree on which salvation grew,
The merit which shall never end,
But does to infinite extend,
In one week, though the days be few,
This book would seem to comprehend,
Think you it can? Yet if it has not won it,
Read but your Christs-Crosse, and there God has done it.
FINIS.

