A GODLY AND FRVITFVLL EXPOSITION ON THE TWENTY FIVE PSALM, THE SECOND OF THE
PENTENTIALS. Serving especially for the Direction and comfort of all persons,
who are either troubled in mind, diseased in body, or persecuted by the
wicked. By Mr. A. SYMSON, Pastor of the Church at DALKEITH in Scotland.

LONDON, Printed by W. I. for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the two Greyhounds in Cornehill, near the Royall-Exchange. 1622.

TO THE TRVLY RELIGIOUS NOBLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY, MARY COUNTESS OF Mar,
prosperity in this life, and eternal happiness in the life to come.
MAdame, seeing your sincerity in religion is such that it makes every one to
admire you, and your love to such as are truly religious is so great, that it
makes them to honor and respect you, and seeing my brother M. Patrik Simson of
good memory, was that happy instrument of God, as a spiritual father to
beget your Ladyship in Christ Jesus, and has dedicated all his labors to your
Ladyship as the chiefest seal of his ministry, I could find none so fit as
your Ladyship to whom I might dedicate this ensueing treatease, on the five and
twentieth Psalm, and therefore as a testimony of my service, and duty which I
owe unto your Ladyship, I am bold to present the same to your Ladyships view,
beseeching God, that it may redowne to the advancement of his glory, and the
good of the Church in general, and of your Ladyship in particular. Thus
praying for the increase of your faith, and continuance of your days, together
with outward and inward blessings to your Ladyship, your noble husband and
hopeful posterity, I rest.

Your Ladyships servant A. SIMSON.

A GODLY AND FRVITFVLL EXPOSItion on the twenty fifth Psalm, the second of the
PENITENTIALS.
The substance of this Psalm.
DAVID being oppressed by his enemies, in this Psalm desires, that God would
deliver him from shame, and sin the cause of all his evils; and that he would
direct him to walk in his ways: as also confirms himself by many arguments
in the assurance of Gods goodness: and finally prays for delivery to himself
and to the Church.

This Ode of David's is set down in 22. Sections or Verses, after the number
and order of the Hebrew Alphabet, at least very neer^, as are the
34.111.112.119. as also the Lamentations of Jeremiah, and the 31. of the
Proverbs. Those who seek a reason of this, let them read S. Jerome, Epist.
155. and in Lament. Ieremiae, and Eusebius. de praepar. Euang.

For he alludeth to the signification of every Letter of the Hebrew Alphabet,
which has a spiritual meaning. But in my judgment these Psalms are so framed
for our memory, that keeping in mind the Letters, we may the more easily
remember the matter. Man has need of many helps.
For we have need of many helps to confirm our memory in goodness.

These Verses are called Acrosticki, as were Sibyllaes verses of (...) which
signifies a Fish: (...) Sedullius in like manner made an Hymn, A Solis ortus
cardine, Beatus auctor seculi, Castae parentis viscera, etc. As also Nazianzen.
I would not wish men to be too curious in the searching of the causes hereof;
but rather be diligent in the confirmation of their memories by these 22.
Alphabeticall Letters.

The Division of the Psalm.
THis Psalm contains a Prayer to the eight Verse: a Confirmation to the
eighteenth: and a Conclusion petitory to the end.

In the first seven Verses he craves three things at God. First, that he may
not be ashamed. Secondly, that he may learn Gods ways, and be taught by him.
Thirdly, that he may be delivered from sin.

Then there is contained a deprecation against sin and shame, and the mean
by which he may escape them both, that is, by the word of God, which may direct
him in such a way wherein he may not fall under shame and sin.

Shame proceeds of sin.
There are two things which we may lawfully crave of God, to eschew sin and
shame: sin as the mother and cause, shame as the daughter and effect. And as
we desire to fly them, so especially we should crave of God that only mean
by which we may shun them, even that we submit our selves to be governed by
his word, The word of God freeth man both of sin and shame.
and frame all our actions thereto, by which we may persuade our selves that we
shall escape both.

All pray, Lord keep us from shame and sin, when as many contemn the mean
by which they should be preserved, even that blessed word of God.

VERSE 1. Unto thee O Lord lift I up my soul.
To whom God is Jehovah he is also Elohim.
THe names which he gives God are Jehovah and Eloim: the first taken from his
nature, the other from his power; and he applies them to himself, My strong
Gods, including the persons of the Trinity.

He leads us to God in our prayers, Psalm. 73.23.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? Heb. 11.6.
He that comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is able to save
such as come to him. God appeared in sundry names to others, Exodus 6.3.
but to Moses in his essential name Jehovah. Claim first to his nature, and
next to his power. First, he must be thy God Jehovah, Note.
and then thy strong God. First he must love thee, and then he will defend
thee. Ps. 144.15
Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord. Those are foolish who seek his
protection, not first having assurance of his love. If he be to thee Jehovah,
then shall he also be to thee Eloim.

Three arguments to move God to hear him.
The arguments by which he would move God to hear him, are taken from three
persons. First, from his own person. Secondly, from the person of his
adversaries. Thirdly, from the person of the godly.

1. From his own person, because he believes in him.
In his own person first his prayer is signified by this circumscription, I
lift up my soul to thee: and his faith, I trust in thee. What is prayer but a
lifting up of the heart to God, for the heart must first be affected, and then
it will frame all the members of the body, and draw them up with it. Simil.
As the Magnes draws the Iron after it, so will the soul draw the cold and
lumpish flesh where it is, where the ^oule is, there is the body also, and
where the soul is, there is the man.

Whereby it appears that there is no prayer or spiritual service acceptable
to God, Doct. No spiritual service but that which proceeds from the heart.
Pro. 23.^6. Isay 29.13.
but that which comes and is derived from the heart: My son give me thy
heart. This people seek me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
Ye are praying, but your heart is as the eye of the fool, every where.
Sometime ye are thinking of the earth, sometime of your pleasure, sometime
sleeping, sometime ye know not what ye are thinking. At preaching, ye hear
the voice of a man speaking, but say not Amen. And sometime your voice is
repeating some idle and deaf sounds, your heart no whit being moved: Simil.
but as a Parrat or Pie, uttering incertaine sounds; or a Bell, sounding it
knows not what: so are ye with your mouth praising God, your heart being
absented from him.

Faith only fixed on God. Lifting up of the heart presupposes a former
deiection.
Next, his faith is not carried about hither and thither, but only fixes it
self upon God.

Thirdly, the lifting up of the heart presupposes a former deiection of his
soul: The soul of man is pressed down with sin, a (...) with the cares of
this world, which (as lead does the net) draws it so down that it cannot
mount above, till God send spiritual prayers (as cork to the ne^) to exalt
it, Simil.
which arise out of faith, as the flame does out of the fire, Heb. 12.1.
and which must be free of secular cares and all things pressing down: which
shows unto us that worldlings can no more pray, Simil.
than a Moule is able to fly. But Christians are as Eagles which mount upward.
Simil.
Seeing then the heart of man by nature is fixed to the earth, and of it self
is no more able to rise therefrom, Simil.
then a stone which is fixed in the ground, till God raise it by his power,
word, and workmen; it should be our principal petition to the Lord, that it
would please him to draw us, that we might run after him; that he would exalt
and lift up our hearts, that we might raise them up to heaven, and not lie
still in the puddle of this earth.

Here the future tense used for the present.
In the Hebrew it is, I will lift up, by a common phrase using the future time
for the present; but he says not, I lift up my voice or my hands to thee,
which both he did, for these are in vain without the heart, (So Anna the
mother of Samuel says, 1 Samuel 1.15
I poured forth my heart in the sight of the Lord,) as a body without the soul.

VERSE 2. My God I trust in thee: let me not be confounded: let not wine
enemies rejoice over me.
THe second argument that he uses is taken from the person of his
adversaries, 2. Argument taken from the person of his adversaries opposing his
faith to their fury. Mat 10.13 Psalm 20.7.
who albeit they were furiously bent against him, yet he only runs to God,
without whose permission they were not able to cause one hair of his head fall
to the ground. Some seek for the help of men, some trust in horses and
chariots, some go to Beelzebub and devils by witches, 2 King. 1.2 1 Samuel 28.8
but let a true Christian (with David here) have his refuge to God,

I trust in thee: Doct. Faith is the ground of prayer.
] Here is faith the root and ground of prayer: When Christ bestowed any benefit
upon his patients, he asked them, Do ye believe? Mark 9.23. Mat. 8.13. Simil.
and then answered, Be it (...) thee according to thy faith.

It is a natural dependence that all creatures use this argument to their
superiors and masters, As my trust is in you, help me. And should not we use
this same to our Lord, and say, My trust is in thee O Lord, therefore help^ me.
He stands upon the points of his honor will he then cast off his dependants? No
truly, Faith in God a strong argument whereby God is moved to defend us. Mark.
9.23 24.
there is no stronger argument to mou^ God to defend thee, then if thou allege
thy faith in him; there is nothing impossible to him that believes. Let us
therefore crau^ the augmentation of our faith, and say, Lord increase our
faith; and then we need not to doubt but God will give us all things.

His prayer is grounded upon faith: 1 Cor 4.13 Prayer grounded on faith.
Paul says, I believed, therefore have I spoken: therefore such prayers as
proceed of an incertaine faith, are abomination in the sight of the Lord, and
scorning of his Majesty. Do ye not think, Words without faith and feeling
unprofitable.
that if we conceive words in our own language (if we want a feeling of them)
that they will be acceptable to God? no indeed: but much less will they
please him, Doct.
if in an uncouth language we repeat vain words, Shame, the daughter of sin.
we know not what.

Let me not be confounded:] Shame is the laughter of sin, and a condign
punishment for sin, Romans 6.2^
What fruit had ye then in those things wherewith now ye are ashamed? For the
and of those things is death. But no shame can befall to a Christian, Qui
credit non erubesce^, He that believes shall not be ashamed, Doct. Repentance
blotteth out the memory of sin. Heb. 11.31. 2 Pet. 2.7.
for ^f he fall in sin, it will by Gods blessing turn to the best to him,
and his repentance will blot out the memory of his sin. Rachabs faith has
blotted away the remembrance of her whoredom; David's repentance and Manasses,
has blotted out their sins; Lots righteousness is remembered; their sin is
not shameful, for God honored them with such virtues as took away the
filthiness of their sin. Simil.
If a gold ring should fall in the mire, the price of the gold remains, and
the dirt may soon be wiped away. Albeit Jacobs thigh made him to halt, Genesis
32.3.
yet the strength of his arms who wrastled with the Angel, his revelations
that he got, and his holiness, made not that to be thought a deformity in
him, Simil. Doct. The afflictions of Gods children are honorable.
what the worse is a Captain for a scarre in his face, whose valorous arms
have been so well tried.

Next, his afflictions and persecutions cannot be shameful, but honorable,
for the Apostles themselves thought it great honor to be beaten, (...) 3.41.
to be beaten, yea to be scourged for Christ's sake. They now are crowned with
martyrdom, who to the worlds opinion have suffered as evil doers.

Let not mine enemies rejoice over me: The devils rejoice at evil. Luke 15.10
] The wicked do imitate the nature of the devil, for he is never glad but at
the destruction of sinners, as the Angels rejoice at their conversion: whereby
ye may try if ye be a true Christian, The trial of a Christian by
compassion. 2 Cor. 11.29.
if ye lament with those that lament, and have compassion on them, and say with
the Apostle Saint Paul, Quis affligitur, and ego non vr^r? Who is afflicted,
and I do not burn?

Gods children have many enemies, he is not one of Gods lambs if he have not
a Lion or a dog to pursue him: Doct. Gods children have many enemies.
some are secret, some are open: but who are they? none but the Devil and his
children; the Dragon pursues the seed of the woman. Reu. 12.17


Next, observe their malicious nature, they rejoice at the evil of Gods
children, Simil.
and do leap for gladness. The Flies and Eagles live on the sores of beasts;
so do the wicked rejoice at the evil of Gods people, Doct. The wicked always
rejoice in evil.
Rejoice not over me, my enemy, I have fallen, I will rise again.

Thirdly, he would not feed their eyes with his losset: The joy of the wicked
is ever in evil, either in their own or other men's sins, they sleep not
till they sin, they eat not but in sin with gluttony, they sleep in
whoredom, they go to murder, oppression, or stealing.

VERSE. 3. So all that hope in thee shall not be ashamed, but let them be
confounded that transgress without cause.
Doct. The benefits of Christians are common.
SO all that hope in thee.] He so draws his delivery that the benefit thereof
may redound to the rest of the members of Christ, for their evils and their
goods are common; neither should we seek any thing to our selves, but so
far as it may redound to the good of the Church, and her comfort.

For as a ring on the finger adornes the whole body; Simil.
and as the hurt of the finger anoyeth it all: Doct. Shame sent to the wicked
as to the right owner.
so does the good of one member rejoice all, and the hurt of one offend all.

But let them be confounded that transgress with out cause.] Now shame is
sent to the right owner, the wicked, 1. They transgress
who are described by two marks; first they are perfidious, and forsworn, no
bond can bind them, they are a false generation, trust them not, when they are
with Judas kissing thee, then are they betraying thee: ^uk. 22.47.
Ioab said to Abner in peaceable manner, Sam. 3.27
how do you my Brother, in the mean time had a dagger privately wherewith to
kill him. Without cause.
The next mark is, without cause; they are not able to qualify any injury
that ever they have done: What has the righteous done? Psalm. 11.3.
says David. They live upon suspicions, apprehensions, and judge others after
their own false nature.

Note a great comfort to establish thy conscience in thy sufferings, Doctr.
thine innocence, Innocence a great comfort in time of trouble.
which makes thy afflictions light, and thy burdens easy.

VERSE 4. Show me thy ways O Lord, and teach me thy paths.
Show me.] This lets us see how that naturally we are ignorant of the
ways of God, Doct. We are natur^lly ignorant.
and therefore David would be taught of God. He craved in the first three
verses to be freed of shame, and now he craves the means by which he may
be d^liuered, even Gods word, which ^s the only preservative from shame. And
therefore it often comes to pass, that when men are brought to be open
spectacles of shame, Doct.
they do confess it was not the present accident wherein they are taken, The
contempt of Gods word the cause of shame.
but the contempt of Gods word. And this should teach us to love that word and
follow it, to the end we may be kept from shame: which makes greatly against
the Atheists and Papists of our Land, Use. Against contemners of the wor^ of
God. Simil. Ioh. 3.20. The Par^^.
who contemn the blessed word of God, they are as Owls flying the light of
the day, Qui male facit, odit lucem: he that does evil hates the l^ght.

In this verse are contained, 1. the person whom he implores, Jehovah whom he
describes, leading him, teaching him, receiving him in favor, and nourishing
him, 1
in the 4.5.6. and 7. verses. 2. What he seeks, God^ ways. 2
3. By what means, Teach me and lead me. 3
4. the reason, 4
Because thou art my God and I trust in thee.

David, a King and a Prophet craves to be directed by God, to the effect and
end he may direct the course of his life well, and of all his Subjects, which
was Solomon's choice: 1 Kin. 3.9.
Lord give me wisdom to go in and out wisely before thy people.

So should Pastors do. Who would be a good Master, Doct.
let him be a good Apprentice, and this same should all private Christians
desire, All should desire to be taught by by God in his ways. Two contrary
ways
that God would teach them that way which will please him best, even his own
ways.

Thy ways:] This presupposes that there is another way, which is the way of
sin, as there are two places and ends, heaven and hell; so are there two
persons sheep and Goats, two ways, the broad and narrow, two words, Ios.
24.15.
come and depart. I, with Joshua, set before you life or death, the right or
wrong way, choose or refuse. All men are going, but there is only one Gods way,
the Kings hie street, many by-ways. All think they are going to Heaven,
Jews, Turks, Papists, Atheists, but try if thou be going thereto by that way
which God has set down to thee, try which is the ancient way, the true and
living way. Brigands and false guids may deceive you, and lead you to Samaria,
but the way of God is set down by Christ, 2. Kin. 6 19. The wrong way as the
Prophet led the Aramites. Ioh. 14.6. P^. 119.35.
I am the way, the truth, and the life, no man comes to the Father, but by me,
even through the vale of his flesh: thus he steps through Christ. David prays
unto the Lord, that he would direct him in the path of his commandments, for
therein was his delight: and Isaias says, God will teach us his ways, Isai.
2.3.
and we will walk in his paths.

Faith and Love, two feet whereupon we must walk.
There be two feet whereupon we must walk, even Faith and Love, which two
will carry us to heaven, without Faith thou art lame of thy right foot, without
Love thou art lame of thy left foot: let Faith work through Love. Believe in
Jesus Christ and live a Godly life, and assure thy self thou art in the way to
heaven. Note.
If thou believe and live evil, thy one foot is in the way to heaven, thy
other to hell: so if thou pretend a good life, and casts away the word, thy
left foot is to heaven, and thy right to hell. Concerning Love, ye need not
that I write unto you; 1 These. 4.9.
for ye are taught of God to love one another.

Moreover, this (way) in the Scripture is surely set down, and the word is so
called many times in the hundred and nineteenth Psalm. Such great commendation
has Christ given to the word, Ioh. 5.39.
that he desires us diligently to search it. Patres ex Scripturis didicerunt,
nos ex iis discamus viam: the Fathers learned of the Scriptures, A desire to be
taught presu^poseth an ignorance. Simil.
let us learn of them the way.

Teach me thy paths:] this presupposes that men are ignorant by nature; for
even as strangers put in a Wilderness, where there is no straight way, could
very hardly discern what way to take, but would be a prey to Beasts and
Brigands: so are men by nature ignorant of God. Act 8.31.
The Eunuch said to Philip, How can I understand without an Interpreter? Nature
may teach thee vvayes to maintain this life; but the way to heaven, there is
no reason that can persuade or teach, it comes by divine inspiration. Mat.
16.17.
Blessed art thou Simon son of Iona, flesh and blood has not revealed it
unto thee, but my Father that is in heaven.

The Philosophers and Astrologians who were quick in judging things
natural, were but blind in grace. I thank thee (Father) thou have hid it from
wise men, Mat 11.25.
and revealed it to babes. The Scripture is as the Star that leads us to
Bethleem. Mat. 2 9.


This is a great humility in David, that being a King and a Prophet, yet he
would learn this Lesson, to serve God: let Preachers ever be learning.
Socrates said at his death, Hoc vnum scio, me nihil scire, I know this one
thing, that I know nothing: Note.
a conceit of knowledge is a mark of ignorance.

He repeats this word teach me, often; whereby he acknowledges, that the
chief lesson he vvish^^h to learn to make him wise, is to know how to serve
God by his word: and of this wisdom in the 119 Psalm he affirms, that it
will make him wiser then his enemies, then his masters, then his ancients.

By the word teach, Doctr. Preaching of the word of God is the ^^dinarie ^eant
of Sa^^ation. Luk 4.
he would teach us that the ordinary means of Salvation and knowledge is the
word preached, How can they believe without preaching? not by reading, mumbling
Masses, etc. but by lively preaching. Christ preached so in the Temple, when he
took the Book from the Reader. Brethren have ye any word of exhortation for
the people? Preach in season and out of season. Act. 13.1^
The repetition of the words, show me, teach me, lead me, teach me, declares
the instancie that he used to hear the word, more sweet then honey, Ps.
119.10^ Ps. 88.10
yea better then his appointed food, so that he desired that he might be
but a doore-keeper in the house of the Lord. This his affection to the word he
declares by repeating it in the 119 Psalm 175. times. The great ignorance
which is among us springs from a want of desire to hear. Ignoranc^ springs
from wan^ of desire to be tought. Luke 24.31.
The two Disciples said, Did not our heart burn within us, all the time l^^
spoke to us?

VERSE. 5. Lead me forth in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of
my Salvation, in thee do I trust all the day.
He craves not only to be taught the truth and the way, Act
Doct.
but to be led and directed in the way, It is not sufficient to be taught the
way unless we be led into it.
Ma
that God may not only point it out to him, but conuoy him thereunto, and
keep him from going out of it: for albeit we be entered in the way of grace, if
God would not perfect that work, we would fall every moment; therefore he
works in us to will and perfi^e: and he who began, Ma
can crown also the work, he is the staff to which we must lean, M^
and of which we must take hold: knowledge is not sufficient without practice.
God must make us to walk in the way we know. Our knowledge will be a dittay
against us, if we walk not in the way we know; Luk 12 47
for he that knows the will of his master and does not the same, shall have
double stripes.

For thou art the God of my salvation:] The Argument by which he would move
God to teach him his ways, is taken from the person of God, whom he calls
the God of his salvation, and his own person who is saved in that he believes
in him, and the adiunct of faith, which is constancy and perseverance, all the
day.

The Argument is taken from the Office of a Savior, to guide them whom he
has delivered and saved: but thou have saved me, therefore guide me.

Doct. All in condemnation without Christ.
First, in that he calls him the God of his salvation, he would let us see
that we are all in condemnation without Christ, all are enclosed under sin,
that God might be merciful to them.

Rom 11.32 Doct. No man or Angel can save us but God. Psalm. 3.8. Psalm. 71.19
Psalm 136.11.13, etc.
And where he calls him the God of his salvation, he imports, that it was
not in the power of Man or Angel to save him, but in Gods, who behooved to take
it upon himself, to deliver him from temporal and spiritual dangers.
Salvation only belongs to the Lord; What God is like our God, who delivers
us from our enemies, as he brought the Israelites out of Egypt, led them
through the red Sea, fought all their battles, rebuked Kings for their sakes
What ever delivery comes to us, comes by God, whateuer instrument he uses in
the same; he saues us, and not we our selves, neither chariots nor horses.
Note.
The consideration of this should move us to be thankful to him. Moses,
Joshua, Sampson, etc. were typical Saviors, but God was the great Savior,
who saved his people.

Next, if God be the only and sole Savior of our bodies, in saving them from
diseases; and of our lives, in saving them from our enemies, should any seek
salvation to his soul but from him? for if a temporary delivery cannot come
but by him, what deuillish doctrine is it to teach, that salvation can come by
any other? Seeing then salvation only belongs to the Lord, let us run to him
and seek it at his hands, who is only able to perform, and bring it to us.
Seek it not at Saints, but at the King of Saints.

In thee do I trust:] There is described the powerful instrument,
apprehending Gods mercies, even faith adorned with his chief quality,
Constancy crowns all our v^rtues.
constancy: for (all the day) signifies as much as continually: for there is
no virtue in man which can be responsable to God, if it be not joined with
constancy. Ye must wait patiently, believe confidently, seek, knock, ask,
hold up your hands without fainting, strengthen your weak hands and feeble
knees. Genesis 32.24
He abode with Jacob the heat of the day, and the cold of the morning, God
and shrinked not, till the Lord came at last; and we must abide to the end of
the day of our life.

Many begin in the morning of their youth to seek God who forsake him in the
evening of their age.
The day has a morning, a noone, and an euening-tide; so has our age, a youth,
a middle age, and a declining time; blessed is he that perseuers to the end,
and till his later breath constantly depends on God, and leaves him not: for
certainly that man shall have the crown of eternal glory.

VERSE 6. Remember O Lord thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindness: for
they have been for ever.
IN the preceding words, David first prayed that God would deliver him from
shame and contempt: next, that he would teach him his ways: Doct.
and now he desires that God would have mercy upon him, and pardon him his
sins. No assurance of the remission of sin, till God put his law in our
hearts*
Mark by this his order in prayer, how first he desires that God would teach
him his law, and then that he would put away his sin; for we can never get
assurance of the remission of our sins, till God put his law in our heart.
After these days, Note
says the Lord by Jeremy, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And
they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying, Know ye the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the least to the
greatest of them, says the Lord. For I will forgive them their iniquity and
remember their sins no more. Which the Apostle to the Hebrews recites word
by word. Doctr.
For God first by his word and Spirit works in the mind of a sinner a light
and sight of his sins, Knowledge of sin comes before remission of sin.
and in his heart a sorrow for it, and then he puts it away and forgiues it.
Therefore let us try what sight and sense of sin the word of God has wrought
in us, that we have a certificate to our conscience of the remission thereof.
Ps. 107.20.
He sends his word and heals them. He sent Nathan to David, and then
pardoned him.

In these two verses he thrice repeateth the word (remember,) not that there is
any memory or forgetfulness in God, as in man, for time makes man to forget,
but God changes no time; absence makes us forget, but all things are present
to him; memory has a seat in man's brain, which being perturbed it fayles, God
is all memory. But he is said to remember or forget, How God is said to
remember. Genesis 8.1. and 19.29. Genesis 30.22.
when by visible tokens of doing he shows his favor or displeasure to man.
As he remembered Noah when the flood diminished; Abraham, when he saved Lot and
brought him out from Sodom; Rachel, when he made her conceive; and Anna, 1 Samuel 1.19
when he granted unto her her petition.

Thy tender mercies and loving kindness:] First he craves at God that he would
remember his mercies, which is the first thing we should seek at God; for if
we get it (as said Jacob) we get all things. Genesis 33.11 Mercy against merit.
And hereby it is clearly seen, that he disclaimes all merits; for albeit he
fought the Lords battles, governed his people by the word and sword, in
executing justice, prayed and praised God continually, fasted, and bestowed
alms on the Saints; Psalm. 16.2.
yet he confesses they cannot extend to God: Use.
which refuteth and damneth the foolish Papists, who pretend merits, Of
confutation of the Papists merits.
but commit murders and adulteries, and yet with open mouth they cry, merits,
merits.

He amplifieth Gods mercies by three names, mercies, benignities, goodness;
benignity twice repeated; see how highly he does esteem of Gods goodness,
when he cannot find terms sufficiently to express them.

A lively representation of the Trinity.
But these three lively represent unto us the Trinity: the Father the fountain
of goodness, yea goodness it self; the Son, mercy supplying our misery;
the holy Spirit, benignity and bountifulness, graciously working and bestowing
these things which the Father and Son give. The goodness of God is the
fountain begetting mercy, and mercy brings forth benignity. Let us learn by
this, that whateuer comes to us, must either come out of the fountain of
Gods mercy, or else it is a curse, not a benignity, but a malignity. Many say,
Who will show us any good thing? Psalm. 4.6.
but David says, Lord lift up the light of thy countenance on me.

We should imitate the three properties of the Trinity.
These three properties of the Trinity all Christians should imitate; the
goodness of the Father, the mercy of the Son, and the bountifulness of the
Spirit; that in so doing they may have society with the Father, Son, and
Spirit. I know thee to be a good man, because thou art not cruel but
merciful; I know thee to be merciful, in that thy hand is bountiful, thou
gives and distributes to the poor, Psalm. 112.9
thy righteousness endures for ever.

The word (...) Rachamim signifies bowels, which are the seats and places of
the fatherly and motherly love, and therefore the children are called parentum
viseera, the bowels of the parents; which phrase the Apostle writing to
Philemon both in the 12. and 20. verse, expounds spiritually: Thou therefore
receive him that is mine own bowels: and in the 20. verse, Comfort my bowels
in the Lord. Esaias 49.15
Can a mother forget her child, etc, yet the Lord cannot forget Israel. Ps.
103.13.
And as the Father pitties his children, so the Lord has pity on those that
fear him. So we see hereby how dear and near we are to Gods very heart, that
we have a place in his innermost affections.

But when he speaks of mercies and benignities, Infinite miseries have need of
infinite mercies.
he speaks in the plural number, because as our sins and miseries are
infinite, so we have need of infinite comforts and pardons, he is called the
father of mercies

For they have been for ever:] 2 Cor. 1.3. Gods mercies are eternal.
A fair commendation of Gods mercies, from the eternity thereof. His mercies
had no beginning, as himself had none, and shall have no end; From everlasting
to everlasting thou art our God. For as the Ocean and maine Sea, Psalm. 100.
Simil.
can never be exhausted, but it would furnish water to all the world, if every
one should bring vessels to draw water there from: So if we had faith and
prayer to seek grace from God, he is all-suffici^nt in himself to furnish us
all: which makes David to cry in one Psalm twenty and six times, Psalm. 126.
thy mercy endures for ever: Mat. 16.18
Therefore we may build our faith on it as on a strong Rock, that the gates of
hell cannot prevail against us, for every thing earthly on which we repose is
subject to mutation and change: All things change, God only immutable.
But herein is our comfort, that he is an immutable God on who we depend, and
in whom we trust: then as long as God stands, our salvation cannot fail. Woe
to them who put their trust in any other, following lying vanities, and
forsaking mercies. Jonah 2.8. Psalm. 119.
I have seen an end of all perfection, (says David) but thy word is very
large.

VERSE 7. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my rebellions: but according
to thy kendnesse remember thou me, even for thy goodness sake, O Lord.
HE conioynes these two, Doct.
memory of mercies, When God remembers mercies he forgets sin.
and forgetfulness of sins, the one destroys the other; when God remembers
mercy, he forgets sin; when he remembers sin, he forgets mercy: when God
will plague the Whore of Babel, it is said, He will remember her sins. and
in Hosea, Now will he remember their iniquity, and visit their sins, Hos.
8.13.
they shall return to Egypt.

He craved mercy before at God, Doctr. If sin had not been, Gods mercies had
not been known. Romans 8.28.
now he lets us see the object of Gods mercy, even sin; and here appears the
great wisdom of God, who can turn all things to the best to those that love
him; so that he does make their sin which they did commit, to manifest his
glory, and work their own salvation. All the properties of God (his justice
and mercy excepred) might have been known to the world by the creation; his
wisdom in framing the world so artificially, his power in maintaining it, his
goodness in making man so excellent a creature; but if sin had not been,
neither Gods mercy would have been manifested in pardoning it, neither his
justice in punishing it: For where sin abounded, Romans 5.20.
there mercy superabounds.

Remember not the sins of my youth:] He makes mention of his sins, for
when he speaks to God who is most just and righteous, that he should remember
his own unrighteousness; as the brethren of Joseph, when they sought favor
of him, they remembered the wrong they did to him: as if one seeking the help
of his friend, he would confess the faults he did against him; Luke 15.21
as the forlorn son did to his father. So, seeing sin is the principal wall
which druides us from God, so that he does not hear our prayers, David here
takes away this impediment. Doct.
Therefore if we would have our prayers acceptable to God, We must confess
our sin if we would be heard.
let us begin at an humble begging of pardon and remission (at which allour
pra^ers should begin) that having assurance of Gods favor, we may boldly suit
what we please. But if we begin not our prayers at craving pardon; Simil.
we become like foolish Physicians, who neglect the causes of the disease, and
only study to mitigate the present dolor, and apply outward somentations for
the curing thereof.

Object.
But how is it that David specially nominates the transgressions of his youth?
did he not commit other sins? and are the sins of his age of no moment?

Answ.
I answer, He does not extenuate his presen sin, by remembering the sins of
his youth, but rather aggrauates and aggredges the same, while he repeats from
his childhood, how many ways he had kindled Gods wrath against him.
Confessing that he had heaped sin upon sin, and so by process of time was
loadned and ouercharged with it.

Next, if God should deal with him by extreme rigor, he should not only
call to mind the faults which he did yesterday, but whatsoever sins he did
from his youth. The word (...) includes all the faults either of commission or
omission which he did. Note.
Therefore so often as the Lord terrifies us with his judgments, let us not
only remember our last oftence, but let our former transgressions make us be
ashamed, and bring new sobs and sighs in our heart. Let old men call to mind
their former offenses which they did commit in their youth. Saint Augustine in
his confessions reckons out all the follies which he committed in his
childhood, infancy, youth, and age, calling them to mind even from the
beginning: Psalm. 51.5.
for we are conceived in sin, and a child of one day is not clean before
God. As we grow in years ye grow in sin: as a Lions whelpe is borne with a
savage nature, and as it grows in age so the cruelty thereof increases, so
does man. Solomon in the Proverbs says, It is hard to know the way of a young
man with a maid. Pro 30.19.
So young men have need of sure custody, that their parents, masters and
Preachers, should take heed diligently to them.

Saint Ambrose in a Sermon at the Funeral of the Emperor Valentinian the
younger, brings in that place of the Lamentations, Blessed is the man who
bears his yoke in his youth. Lam. 3.27.
God is merciful to that youth whom he corrects.

David he deplores the sins of his youth, which were secret from the world
and perchance to himself, yet he craves pardon for them. Now the smallest
sins trouble him, which before were but sports to him; and so it will befall
to us: those offenses now which we account no offenses, after we will esteem
them great sins; Prou. 5.3.
now they are honey in the mouth, but after in the belly they will be bitter as
gall.

There is no time of man's age which is free from sin, ^world^ time of ^^ns
life ^^^t of sin. ^2. ^^d. 22.
but the youth is not only first, but most subject thereunto; for a youth is
like an untamed Calfe, like a wild Ass which will be taken in her month.
^^il.
The first borne should be sacrificed to God, the first fruits should be
offered to him, yea the beast if it had not been redeemed, (...). 3.10.
the neck of it behooved to have been broken. Think ye not that God has
more respect of the first fruits of our life, then he has of the first fruits
of Bullocks. Thou shall consecrate thy beginnings to God with Josias, 2 King.
22.1
who in the morning of his life, even early, began to seek the Lord. We should
in our life keep such dyets as did David in his prayers: Morning, Psalm. 55.17
noone-tide, and at even he sought the Lord. Remember thy Creator in the days
of thy youth, Eccles. 12.1
before the years come wherein ye shall say, I have no pleasure. Eccles. 11.9
Job 20.11.
Be assured O young man ye shall come to judgment: yea, thy old bones shall
inherit the sins of thy youth.

To what sins youth is most inclined.
The sins of youth whereto they are most inclined, are first, pride, and a
contempt of their elders: the vile do contemn the honorable, and youth
despise age. Such was the pride of Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.9
whose punishment should terrify all youths.

Next, lust is natural to them, as the Prodigal child spent his time in riot
and luxury. Luke 15.14


Thirdly, hypocrisy; they can very well dissemble their doings: and when, with
the Whore in the Proverbs, they are intending sin, then they pretend they
were offering their peace offerings: and with Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.7
pretending their vows in Hebron, but intending to stir up rebellion.

And finally, all youths are subject to inconstancy* they are compared to
dreggy wine not settled, Simil.
so that experience has taught us to say, It is lost which is done to them.

If thou have escaped from judgment in thy youth, and have passed the dangers
thereof, thou may greatly praise God. I read of a man, Simil.
who being drunk in the night, passed a very narrow bridge, which considering
in the morning, d^ed incontinently: so we should admire when we remember what
dangers we have escaped.

If sins of his youth and ignorance be grievous, how much more those of
knowledge.
Then if the sins of youth now trouble him in his age, what do ye think of
the sins which ye do against knowledge and conscience in your old age? Should
ye not confess them and be ashamed of them? If a child blush it is thought
good, verecundia; but if an old man blush it is thought evil, because he is
bound to do nothing whereof he should be ashamed. But many are like to the
false Elders that lusted after Susanna, and to them appertains shame and
confusion, for their example incourageth young men to do wickedly. Yea they
are very rare who have escaped the perils of youth, either by one notable sin
or other.

Now David of these his own sins does make a special confession, and does not
infold himself under the mantle of generality: A simple confession needful.
albeit many are taught naturaly to dissemble their sins, to excuse them, to
extenuate them, or else to inuolue them under a common necessity of sinning:
but this will not please God, unless we freely say with David. I have sinned:
Simil.
for as a Patient must needs discover his sore and wound to the Physician; so
must a sinner uncover his sin to God, which is an evident token of a
penitent.

Moreover, he desires not only that God would forgive his sins, but more,
Doctr.
that he would forget them: When God forgiues sin he forget^ it.
wherein God differs from men; men may forgive, but they will remember, for
malice and anger takes such impression in our hearts, that it is hard to raze
out the memory of our received injuries, although we pardon them with our
heart: But God as he remits, so he forgets, Number. 23.21
he sees no iniquity in Jacob; and because the children of God are imperfect,
and in this can never be like to God, so long as they carry about with them
this sinning sin, as may be seen in David, 1 Kin. 2.8.
who in his Testament remembered the injury done to him by Simei, to be
punished by Solomon, although in his time he did dissimulate it: yet let this
be some comfort to us, that if the wicked motions of injuries done to us come
in our minds, let us resist and control them, which shall be sufficient
before God.

Nor my rebellions. Sin and rebellion are conjoined.
] Sins and rebellions are joined together, the mother and her daughter, sin
if it grow and increase it turns into rebellion and disobedience; which is
like to the sin of witchcraft and Idolatry: 1 Samuel 15.23.
and as a Serpent by eating a Serpent becomes a Dragon, Simil.
(...), so sin feeding upon sin, becomes at last rebellion. There are
degrees of sin, Nemo repent factus est turpissimus. David prays to God to
forgive him his secret sins, and he desires that God would keep him from
presumptuous sins; slay sin in the cradle, if ye let it come to maturity
it may turn into rebellion.

The word also imports ignorances, which agrees very well with this youth, to
declare that the sins of youth commonly springs forth from ignorance, Youth
is ignorant, albeit it think the it self wise
for they are blind through lack of knowledge, for they have no natural
judgment, they lack instruction, they want experience, and such like: by
nature we are all borne fools, nature has taught the bea^^s to know things
profitable and hurtful to them. The Swallow knows her time, the Ox his
crib, Isa. 1.3.
but man knows not his owner, neither the time when he shall turn to the
Lord.

And this ignorance makes youth to be rebellious to the^^ parents; whereof the
Lord complains by his Prophet, Isa. 1.2.
I have brought up children, says the Lord, and nourished them, and they have
rebelle a against me.

A profitable ^esson for Parents to train up their children in virtue.
This should teach Parents to remedy the ignorance of their youth by instruction,
that their minds being enlightened by the knowledge of God and learning, they
may fear God in the morning of their youth, and have the eyes of their
understanding opened to know the true God and fear him, that it may be
fulfilled that is spoken by the Prophet: Joel 2.28.
And in the last days I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh, and your
sons and your daughters shall prophecy, and your young men shall see
visions. We may complain most justly with that holy Father S. Augustine, of
the neglect of education of our youth, where he says, Gods just recompense to
Parents.
O flores vere non frondium, sed veprarum: O truly they are flourishes not of
branches but of briers, and so the Lord does recompense the Parents in their
age, that as they were negligent in training them up in the knowledge of God,
so they become crosses to their Parents in their age. ^lutarch.
Among the Lacedaemonians there was a Law that children were not obliged to
maintain their Parents in their age, who were careless of their education in
virtue when they were young.

Moreover, Doct.
let us assure our selves that the sins of Ignorance will not excuse us,
Sins of ignorance will not excuse us.
albeit they may extenuate our pains, and make us to be punished with fewer
stripes.

I will not insist in this point, because I have spoken sufficiently thereof in
that Sermon on Christ's first word spoken on the Cross, Father forgive them,
for they know not what they do.

But according to thy kindness remember thou me, even for the goodness sake,
O Lord.] The fountain he runs unto is the mercy of God, where he plainly
disclaimes his own merits. Lorinus the Jesuit against merits.
Lorinus a Jesuit here brings in sundry passages of Scripture to qualify
the mercy of God against merits: Psalm.
6.8.51.3.69.14.86.5.15.106.45.119.156.130.7. Dan. 9.18. Isa. 55.7.

VERSE. 8. Gracious and righteous is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners
in the way.
IN this second part of the Psalm after his Petition, Doct.
he sets down the props to the which his faith does lean, Gods truth and
mercy preps of a Christians faith.
to wit, the mercy, truth, and righteousness of God, He believed, therefore
he spoke: so our Prayers except they be grounded on faith, and an assurance
that God will grant them, they are offensive to God, and not profitable for us:
He who prays without faith. says S. James, is like a wave of the Sea, Iam.
1.6.
tossed of the wind, and carried away. The proof of this is in the sixth Psalm,
wherein after his prayers, with a constant assurance he concludes, all mine
enemies shall be confounded. Psalm. 6.10.
After he had prayed for mercy, he falls out in a meditation, consideration
and proclamation of Gods goodness, in the eighth, ninth, and tenth verses,
Simil.
as it were to stir up himself up to Prayer again: as a man finding a fire
almost consumed, does put thereinto more coals to kindle it.

Gracious and righteous is the Lord.] First in his own nature, he is good and
righteous (...) rectus: next, he is good to us in teaching us his way. God is
not only good but goodness it self: but how does his goodness appear? not in
showing mercy on Abraham, Isaacke, Jacob, Moses, and the righteous, but on the
most miserable sinners, (as Manasses says in his Prayer) the Prodigal child,
harlots, and such other.

Therefore will he teach sinners in the way.] In this common benefit of
remission of sins, Mat. 6.11.12.
he inuolueth himself with the rest of the Saints, and so should all our suits
be common, that we desire nothing alone, but that whereof our brethren may
participate. This is the communion of Saints which we believe. Our daily
prayers are for all, Give us this day our daily bread, for give us our sins,
and lead us not into temptation. Note.
Who seeks any thing for himself of God, and not for the rest of his
brethren, shall be repelled, and receitie nothing.

The persons to whom mercy appertains are called sinners, Doct.
as though he would make sin the only object of Gods mercy, Sin the only
object of Gods mercy. Romans 5. 20
as indeed it is: for Gods mercy would not have been manifested, if sin had not
been known, that so where sin abounded, there grace might superabound: the
whole have not need of the Physician, Luke 5.31.
but the sick. Think not that the multitude of thy sins will exclude thee
from Gods grace.

Christ at the well was found of the Samaritan woman; Ioh. 4.
mercy and misery met together in the Pharisees house even Christ and the
Magdalen: Luke 7.36.
Mat. 20.31.
in the field he met with the blind, who cried, Luke 18.14
Son of David have mercy on us; in the Temple with the Publican; John ^2.
at the Poole with the Paralitique; for, Luke 5.32.
He came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

But what teaches he? His ways: He tea^heth Gods ways not man's traditions.
Jonah 2.8.
not the tradition of men, of Popes, of Councels, who could and have erred, but
Gods own ways, his statutes, so often repeated in the 119. Psalm. Woe to the
Papist, who follows lying vanitie^, forsaking their own mercy.

The great Doctor and teacher is God himself, who hau^ng the key of the heart,
must open it himself. Doct.
Therefore the conversion of a sinner is not a work of nature, The conversion
of a sinner is not a work of nature. 1 Cor. 3.6.
Therefore the conversion of a sinner is not a work of nature, but it is Gods
principal favor, who must give increase ^o Pa^ls planting, and Apolloes
watering. We should therefore fervently pray to God for the Preachers, that he
would so bless them, that by their labors many may be converted to himself.
The Israelites under the Law being terrified by Gods voice, said, Let not God
speak any more unto us, Exodus 20.1^
but Moses. But we under the Gospel being comforted by his voice, say, Note.
Let Moses and Paul be silent, but let God speak to us.

The work of conversion of sinners, David draws to the fountain, even Gods
grace and free favor: whateuer comes to us, does proceed out of his grace.

But this is wonderful, Doctr.
how grace and righteousness, Mercy and justice meet in the salvation of man.
which seem so opposite in the salvation and conversion of a sinner meets
together, and kisses one another. I answer, In the work of our redemption they
accorded, when Gods justice was fully satisfied by the death of Christ, and his
mercy was clear by full pardoning us, Simil.
when we escaped with the Scapegoat to the wilderness, Leu. 16.8.
and he died; the suerty paid the debt, and we were freed. In the conversion
of a sinner he uses both, he vvounds and humbles, cures and exalts again.
Deducit ad inferos, and reducit; He cast down Paul, Acts 9.4.8.
made him blind, rebuked him, and then converted and comforted him, and sent
him to teach the Gospel, and convert others.

VERSE 9. Them that be meek will he guide in judgment, and teach the humble
his way.
HE sets down in this verse to whom the former benefit does appertain; and
what sort of sinners shall participate of mercy; to wit, the meek and humble;
whom God has so prepared by afflictions and crosses, Doct.
that he has made them to give an open way and place to the Gospel to work in
them. Afflictions teach humility. Who are humble.
For as the wax first is by labor and by fire, made soft and pliable before
it can take stamp and impression of the Kings image and superscription; Simil.
yea clay must be made soft and pliable before (...) be made a vessel: so
must God humble us, before he put his image in us: so the gold, Simil.
silver, etc. must be battered, before it be stamped. It is good (says David)
that thou have humbled me, Ps. 119.71.
for thereby I learned thy Commandments: If he had not been first humbled,
he had never learned Gods Commandments. He desired children to come to him,
for of such is the Kingdom of heaven: yea except we become as these, Mat.
19.14.
we shall never enter thereinto. God resists the proud, Iam 4.6.
and gives grace to the humble. On whom will the Spirit of the Lord rest? on
the contrite heart.

The Palace of Heaven is very ample, Simil.
but the entry very narrow, let us then humble our selves under the mighty hand
of God, and learn of Christ that he is meek and lowly, Mat. 11.29:
and we shall find rest to our souls.

The word meek, Who are meek. Mat. 5.3.
is in Latin mites, of which our Savior speaks, Blessed are the meek, or
mansueti, quasi ad manum venire sueti, accustomed to come under the hand; so
God so mitigateth the fury of our nature and tameth us, that we become so
obedient, that as a child comes under the hand of his Parent, Psalm. 123.2
or as a handmaid is directed by the eye of her mistress, so do we attend
upon God.

Will he guide: Doctr.
] God who teaches the meek, he also guides and directs them, Whom God
directs he also protecteth.
and leads them through the way. For as children are ignorant, so are they
impotent; they are taught by their parents and led by them; whom God directs he
also protects, and guides to heaven, or else we should soon perish. He must
order the actions of out whole life rightly, which is the second grace that God
will bestow on his children, when they submit themselves obediently to bear
his yoke. This docility will never be till our proud heart be subdued.

what Gods judgment and his way is.
His judgment and his way, is nothing else but his government, whereby he
declares himself as a loving Father, careful to provide for the salvation of
his own children, that he may relieve them that are oppressed, raise up those
who are cast down, comfort those who are sorrowful and grieved, and succor
such as be in misery. And because in the former verse he spoke of sinners (he
will teach sinners his ways) he expounds of what sinners he meant; God
teaches sinners, but not all.
he will not teach every sinner, but those whom he has received into his
favor. First, he beats down our pride and contumacy, and humbles us, First
God will have our p^ide beaten down, then he will teach us.
but being cast down he will not forsake us; and being humbled by the cross,
he directs all the actions of our life in his holy obedience; of which
Apollinarius:

(...),
Viros iustitiae diriget mansuetos,
He will direct righteous men that are meek. Humility the first, second, and
l^st gift of a Christian. August. Epist. 56.


Wherefore ye may clearly see, that the gift of modesty and humility is so
necessary, as without which we can never be capable of the mysteries of Gods
kingdom: Which made Augustine to say (borrowing the allusion from Demosthenes
the Grecian, August. Epist. 75. ad Auxilium Episcopum.
who being demanded what was the chief thing required in an Orator, answered
thrice, pronunciation) thrice, that the chief virtue required in a Christian
was humility: and in another Epistle; Ea adsum senex a iuuene coepiscopo,
Episcopus tot annorum, a collega nondum anniculo, paratus sum discere; I am
here an old man ready to learn from a young man my coadiutor in the ministry,
and so old a Bishop from a young man who scarce has been one year in the
service.

VERSE 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his
covenant and his testimonies.
ALl the paths, etc.] An (...) or exclamation, whereby he explaineth what he
would show, even the ways of the Lord; a most comfortable saying: such as Paul
has another, Romans 8.28.
To those that love the Lord all things work together for the best: Sickness,
poverty, infamy, yea death, which is the greatest mercy, when we are separate
perfectly from sin and the world, and conjoined to Christ. So that God is
ever accumulating mercies, and heaping them on our head, Lam. 3.22.
that whateuer befalls us, certainly comes from his mercy, and it is of
his mercy that we are not consumed and daily brought to confusion.

He comprehends the paths of the Lord in two words, Doct.
mercy and truth, All Gods ways are mercy and truth.
or (as others expound) justice. These are the two pillars which vpholdeth a
King and his kingdom. M^rcy and truth preserve the King, Pro. 20.28*
for his throne shall be established with mercy. Whateuer we hear or read of
the ways of God, is either mercy or truth: mercy in pardoning sin, truth in
performing his promises. Doct.
Other qualities that are in God may tend to the reprobate, Mercy and truth
belong not to the wicked.
but with none of these two have they any thing to do, for they have no
repentance, therefore no remission of sins; they have no faith, and therefore
they depend not on his truth. But the godly are not to be afraid of his
justice, because mercy interuenes: his power maintains them, his wisdom
foresees their relief. Romans 8.33.
Who shall intend any thing against the elect of God? Christ justifies, who
can condemn? But with the wicked he will deal very hardly, Psalm. 18.25.26.
with the godly he will show himself godly, with the upright man he will show
himself upright, with the pure he will show himself pure, and (...) the
froward he will show himself froward.

To such as keep his covenant:] But to whom will he show this mercy? To those
who keep his covenant. Of this covenant which God made with his Church, read
Genesis 17.2. Exodus 24.7. Josh. 24 16. Ier. 3.31. and in many other places.

This is the third name which he gives to those who shall be partakers of his
mercy. Three names given to the chosen.
First, they are sinners; next, humble and penitent sinners; and thirdly, their
repentance is declared by their life, in that they keep Gods covenants.

What a covenant (...). A covenant must be mutual.
A covenant is a mutual band between two persons, having mutual conditions.
God humbles himself, so far, that he covenants with man to be his God, and
promises to be their Father; we again oblige our selves to be his children
and people, if we forget to honor our Father, then he will not account us his
children. He craves that we should keep his Commandments and covenants,
Doct.
not the traditions of men; Man's traditions cannot bind the ^onsci^^ce.
which can never bind the conscience: yea oftentimes it falls out* that those
who are too curious in observing these idle and vain rites, are careless in
keeping these things which are absolutely commanded by God. Note.


VERSE. 11. For thy names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto mine iniquity, for
it is great.
FOr thy names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto mine iniquity:] What before he
spoke generally of Gods mercy promised to all humble and penitent sinners, Doct.
that in this verse he particularly applies unto himself; Particular
application of mercy needful. 1 Cor. 9.27
showing us hereby how necessary the application of mercy is to a Preacher,
lest preaching to others he become a Reprobate himself.

He runs ever to mercy pretending no merits, and craves pardon to his
iniquity, which before he called sin, for he sinned against God, and did
iniquity to Vrias: Doct.
where observe that sin and the forgerfulnesse of God, Who sins against
God hurts his neighbor. 1 ^oh. 4.20.
causes us to do iniquity and wrong to our neighbors: how can we love God,
whom we see not, and hate man made to his Image whom we see.

For it is great: Doct.
] A true mark of a penitent sinner, to aggrauate his sin. To aggrauate sin,
a true mark of a penitent.
Some use to extenuate their sins, by comparing them to others whom they
think sin more then they do: others excuse them, as Adam did when he said,
Genesis 3.12.13.
The woman which thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the Tree, and I
did ^ate: she again excused herself, The Serpent beguiled me and I did eat:
Doctr.
But let the children of God search and find out the greatness of their
sins, When man remembers sin God forgets it.
and aggrauate them, that God may extenuate them, and so forget them. Are ye
loadned with sin, remember it, and God will forget it, and ease you; if ye
have it before your eyes, he shall cast it behind his back: but if* you
think nothing of sin, God will bind it on your back, so that it shall
press you down as a millstone.

But he craves this for Gods names sake: his name is his honor, Doctr.
showing us that God purchases his chief honor by his mercy: Gods chiefest
honor is his mercy.
It is the honor of the King to try sins, but the honor of God to cover
them. Pro. 25.2.


VERSE. 12. What man is he that fears the Lord, him will he teach the way
that he shall choose.
IN this and the other two verses following is contained another quality which
God craves in his penitent, humble, and obedient sinner, to wit, that he have
the fear of God, who is rewarded with temporal and spiritual blessings in
his soul, body and posterity: So godliness is great gain, having the
promises of this life and the life to come. 1 Timothy 4.8.


What man is he.] By this form of interrogation he would note the raritie of
those that shall find mercy, and this indefinite speech answerable to an
universal, declares, that whatsoever they be, of whatsoever estate and
condition, who fear God, shall be sure of these after following blessings.
Doct.


God directs them whom he forgiues.
Next observe that God he directs all these in the course of their life whom
he has pardoned; therefore those who are not reconciled to God, need not look
for Gods direction, he was a Pillar of fire and Cloud to the Israelites, for
they were under the Covenant. Exo. 14.19.


The fear of the Lord is the chief virtue, Pro. 15.33. What the fear of God
is.
even the beginning of wisdom. It is a secret reverence bred in the heart of
a Christian proceeding out of the sense and feeling of Gods love, whereby a
sinner is afraid that he neither think, speak, or do any thing which he
supposes may offend Gods Majesty. This secret fear if it be once planted in
the heart will direct thee in all good actions acceptable to God, and correct
thy evil doings. Note.
The love of God has a constraining power, The two properties of Gods fear.
whereby it compels and forces us to serve him: the fear of God has a
restraining power, by which it restrains and stays us, Simil.
and keeps us back from offending him; this is like a bit, the other like a
spur. Abraham feared that the fear of God was not Genesis 20.11.
in the place whereto he went. Joseph being enticed by his Mistress to commit
wickedness with her, answered, How can I do this great wickedness and so sin
against God? Ge^. 39.9.
the Lord plant this fear in our hearts. This is a filial fear which he
craves, coming from love, and not a servile fear which comes from a fear
of punishment.

How the fear of God is preserved.
The preserver of this fear is a continual nourishment in thy mind of the
presence of God, to who^ thou presentest all thy actions. When thou co^mittest
any thing unworthy of his presence, be ashamed of it, fly from it, crave mercy
for it, and make the quiet Cabinet of thy mind the Chamber of his presence,
wherein thou dare admit no lewd thought, no filthy thing. And because it is
impossible to fray thy heart and mind from the conceptions of that sinning
sin in thee; Note.
yet have this testimony, that it is no sooner conceived, but as soon repented.

Will he teach the way that he shall choose.] He promises four benefits to
the man that fears God, he heapeth upon him grace upon grace: before he
pardoned him, and now he directs the man whom he forgave: for no sooner
receives he any man in his favor when he immediate^y takes the protection and
direction of him.

But out of these words we see three things. First there are diverse, yea
contrary ways, as there are contrary ends, the broad and the narrow, the Kings
way and by-rodes, the way of life and of death. Many promise to themselves a
Kingdom not being in the way leading thereto.
This is against such as dream to themselves that whatsoever religion they
profess, or howsoever they live they shall go to heaven; but they are
deceived; for if thou be not in the way to the Kingdom, thou shall never
attain to the Kingdom: many, yea the most part are not going but riding, not
running but posting to hell; whom if ye demand whither they go? they will
answer, to heaven: yea and they will brag they shall be nearer God then the
Preacher himself, even as if one would dream of life at the point of death.

Next we see that a man cannot of himself choose the right way to heaven;
Doct.
for the natural man cannot apprehend those things which pertain to Gods
Kingdom, Man of himself is ignorant of the right way.
neither yet can he see them, for they are spiritually discerned. Whereupon
follows the third, 1 Cor. 2.14
that is, how man shall choose the good and refuse the evil way: Non est
currentis, nec volentis, sed miserentis Dei: Romans 9.16*
It is not in him that runs, nor in him that wills, but in God that
shows mercy. Heb. 11.25.
Moses choosed rather to suffer with the Church then to be called the son of
Pharohs daughter. Ios. 24.15.
Joshua and his house choosed to serve God, though all the people should serve
Baal. Psalm. 4.6.
David the King choosed the light of Gods countenance to shine on him. 1 Kin.
3.9.
Solomon made his choice of wisdom. Luke 10.42
Mary choosed the better part. Paul thought all things to be dung in respect of
the excellent knowledge of Christ. Phil. 3.8.
The Church of Laodicea was counseled to buy gold. Apoc. 3* 18.
But all these their choyces were of God, who put it in their hearts to choose
good things. Wisdom cried in the streets that all that were destitute of
understanding should come to her, Pro. 8.1.
but the fool heard the voice of the harlot, Go to our daliance, Pro. 7.22.
says she, and he went like a sheep to the slaughter. So by nature we
choose the way to destruction; Nos. 13.9.
Thy perdition is of thee O Israel, thy salvation of me.

VERSE. 13. His soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the
Land.
What the peace of conscience (...).
HIs soul shall dwell at ease.] The second promise and spiritual blessing,
the peace of conscience, which is the tranquillity of the soul, flowing from
the assurance of Gods favor in Christ wrought by the holy Spirit. This is that
white stone in the Revelation, wherein a name is written, Revel. 2.17
which none can read but he that has it. Thy good life may be a mark to
others of thy salvation, but thy inward peace is a token to thy self, that
howsoever thy outward man be afflicted; yet thy inward man has that peace
which passes all natural understanding: of which Christ says, My peace I
give you, Ioh. 20.1^.
not as the world; and he commanded the Apostles to give their peace.

The giver of this peace is called the Prince of peace; the wicked cry peace,
Ier. 8.11.
when as sudden destruction is approaching, as the travel of a woman: But
there is no peace to the wicked, Esa. 48.22.
says my God; they may sometimes lie in careless security, not wakened by the
sight of Gods judgments, but sleeping in the bottom of the Sea, having no
true rest: for the worldlings have three worms which ear them up, care, fear
and dolor; Care, fear, and grief, are three worms which eat the worldlings.
care to conquest the things of this world so excessiuely, that they are eaten
up by it, fear lest it be taken from them, and commonly God as he threateneth
by his word, the thing they fear shall come on them, and then follows an
excessive sorrow for the loss of them, they despair and oftentimes are the
cause of their own death: but the godly cast their care upon the Lord, they
have a reasonable care of their Family, but with measure, they fear nothing
but the offense of God, all other fears are swallowed up in the gulf of that
fear; for they assure themselves that God will maintain their Lot; and
finally, at the loss of any creature the godly have a natural sorrow, albeit
not out of measure, Job. 1.21.
but with Job, saying, The Lord has given and taken.

The third benefit.
And his seed shall inherit the Land] The third blessing temporal, he
promises wealth to the posterity of the righteous, that their days shall be
long in the Land that God has given them. First in this promise ye see the
constancy of Gods favor toward them, that fear him, their death does not
withdraw Gods love from their posterity, 2 Samuel 19.38.
as David after Barzillai went home, remembered his kindness in intertaining
Chimham, and on Mephibosheth he showed the mercy of God for Ionathans sake: 2 Samuel 9.3.
so Gods love dies not with the Parents, Doctr.
but reuiueth in their posterity, Gods love dies not with the Parents, but
reuiues in their posterity. A note for Parents.
as the Lord promised to David, 2 Samuel 7.12. Here is a promise to the godly who
fear him, of a sure and perpetual maintenance to their posterity. The
consideration hereof should abate that excessive care that Parents have of
their children, whereas the best care they can have of them is, that they fear
God themselves, and labor to bring them up in that fear. Kings have not such
surety of the continuance of their crowns to their succession, neither
Noblemen of their Lands, as a godly man has of Gods provision: I was young*
says David, and now am old; Psalm. 37.25.
yet I never saw the just man nor his seed to beg.

Moreover we see that Lands are at the disposition of God, Doct.
who will give them to whom he pleases, and alters Dominions, All changes
come of sin.
as the Monarchy of the Babylonians, Perfians, Grecians, and Romans, the
cause of this alteration was their sin: and do we not see amongst our selves
within these thirty years, Example of our time
many and strange alterations of Lands and houses, translated from the right
owners thereof to others neither of their name, nor any way belonging to them.
Should not this teach us all to fear God, and make our houses as Sanctuaries
to him, lest he be forced (as he extirped the Canaanites for their sins) to
root us out, and sweep us away as with a besom.

VERSE. 14. The secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him: and his
covenant to give them understanding. 4. Benefit and promise, revelation of his
secrets.

THe fourth benefit which the Lord will bestow upon the godly men, he will (if
they fear him) reveal to them his secrets.

First, Doct.
ye see the word of God is called a secret, Gods word is a secret. Reu. 5.5.
a mystery, and hid treasure, a closed book which none is able to loose but
the Lamb. For all the natural wit of man is not able to attain to the
understanding of the meanest Article of faith. All things which we believe are
above the compass of reason, or flat against it.

The Gospel comes by revelation. Mat. 16.17.
The Gospel comes by revelation: Blessed art thou Simon, the Son of Jonah,
flesh and blood has not revealed this to thee, but my Father: where he
manifestly testifies, that the confession of Christ is a hid matter, which
must be revealed to us by himself. The wit of man can search the profundities
of nature (albeit it is not able to attain to the hundredth part thereof, as of
Physic, Astronomy, Geometry, etc.) but it cannot scanse upon Divinity without
inspiration, which must come from above. It is no marvel therefore that so
few believe the word, for faith is not of all men, it is the gift of God: as it
is a secret, so are they called his secret ones to whom he reuealeth it.

But men may think, Object.
that it being a secret, why should it be made common to all, and God has
closed that book.

I answer with Augustine, Answer.
it is a flood on which a Lamb may swim, and an Elephant may walk. Mat.
3.11.
To the children of God it is plain; to those it is given to understand, but
to others they are parable, Esaias 6.9.
That seeing they should not perceive.

But to whom does he reveal it? Doct.
To them that fear him, No true service without conscience.
and to these he gives understanding, as in the 15. and 119. Psalm he
testifies. By which I see there is no true service without conscience, and
none can profit in the knowledge of the Scripture but such as fear God; and
the more they fear him, the more they grow in knowledge. True piety and
godliness is the nourisher of knowledge, for the fear of God is the
beginning, growth, and perfection of all wisdom. And therefore Athiests and
profane persons have not learned Christ aright, they are learning, but do
never attain to the power of godliness and his covenant to give them
understanding.

His covenant is specially mentioned, Doct.
because the Jews brag of the covenant made to Abraham their Father. Gods
covenant belongs to such as fear him. John 8.33.
But here he declares to them that they have no title to the covenant except
they fear God. The Jews bragged that they were descended of Abraham, but
Christ sends them to their father the devil, because they follow his manners,
and are murderers. Therefore there is no part in the covenant to those who
have not the true fear of God.

VERSE 15. Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord: for who will bring my feet out
of the net.
NOw he does apply the benefits of God (which generally were propounded to the
Church) to himself, and as he began the Psalm, so he ends it with a prayer
for his delivery from his enemies.

In this Verse he persuades himself by faith that God will set him free, for
(as says the Text) his eyes are ever toward the Lord; that is, he depended on
God, as the eye of the handmayd is toward her mistress. This he testifies
when he says, Psalm. 123. Psalm. 121.
And I lift up mine eyes to the mountains, my help comes from thee O Lord,
for thou will deliver me who trusts in thee. Note.
Men may look for help at the hands of men, but in vain. But God will not
frustrate the expectation of his own; which should make us not to turn our
eyes from him, seeking help from Aegvpt. We cannot at one time look up to
heaven, and down to hell or the earth, no more put our confidence in God and
man.

Next, ye see that if we desire to get delivery, we must in all our actions set
him before our eyes, direct all our actions to glorify God, and edify his
Church. Psalm. 16.8.
I have set the Lord always before my face, for he is at my right hand,
therefore I shall not slide. Will God defend an unrighteous man, who aims not
at Gods glory, but his own designs? Note.
If thou have him before thine eyes, then will he stand at thy right hand to
maintain thee.

He will bring my feet out of the net:] Comparison.
He compares his estate to a bird ensnared in the fowlers net: for his enemies
were fowlers, their engines were nets, himself was the poor bird circumnened.
The Churches enemies using subtilties to entrap her.


The Church has many enemies, but none are so crafty as these fowlers: fraud
and craft is a mark of Gods enemies; they imitate their father the devil, who
is a wily Serpent, and more subtle then any beast of the field. Genesis 3.1. Let
Christians have their conversation in heaven* God will break the snare


Thirdly, let Christians be birds, that as they have their chief abode in the
air, so we may have our conversation in heaven; as they fill the air with
their sounds, so let us praise God.

Fourthly, Gods children may be ensnared, but God will break their nets and
deliver them, as Paul, Silas, and Peter out of prison; Acts 16.26.
for that which seems impossible to men, is possible with God. Psalm 124. Simil.
Man is as the bird escaped out of the snare of the fowler; for as the bird
compassed cannot deliver it self, no more can man escape their attempts by his
own strength, but only by Gods power.

VERSE. 16. Turn thy face unto me: and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate
and poor.
HE thinks in adversity that God turns away his face, Doct.
whose presence to a creature is as the turning of the Sun unto the earth.
Adversity makes me^ fear Gods absence.


He craves mercy oftentimes in this Psalm, acknowledging that to be the
fountain from which all blessings flow to him: Doct.
this argument is taken from God himself. Gods mercy the fountain of all
blessings.


The next argument from his misery, For I am desolate and poor. This is the
object of Gods mercy, Doct.
upon which it must work; as the vvounded Jew was an object of the Samaritans
mercy. Misery the object of Gods mercy.
How would Gods mercy be known, if man had no misery? How would the Physicians
skill be tried, if not by the patients diseases? Luke 10.33.
How would the liberality of Princes and their Justice be notified, Simil.
but by the poverty of their subjects, and their distresses.

VERSE 17. The sorrows of mine heart are enlarged: draw me out of my troubles.
THe sorrows of mine heart are enlarged:] Doct.
God has many means to humble the sons of men, God multiplieses sorrows,
because we multiply sins.
and namely he turns their joy of sin into sorrow; the right sorrow, whereof
the Lord send us. God multiplies sorrows because we multiply sins. David found
a cause of sorrew in every thing he gat from God: for his brethren envied him,
1 Samuel 17.28. and 18.9. 2 Samuel 6.20. and 15.31.
his father in law Saul persecuted him, his wife mocked him, his familiars and
companions deceined him, his children pursued him, the Ziphims and the Lords of
Keilah betrayed him, 1 Samuel 23.12. and 26. 1. and 29.4
the Philistims rejected him. The ioies which God propineth us with, are as so
many roses; but in the bottom of them are enclosed as many thorner to prick
us: Simil.
As Paul was pricked with the messenger of Satan, 2 Cor. 12.7.
lest he should have been exalted through the great revelations. So if we
found not some discomfort in every creature, we should be bewitched with the
delight thereof, that we could not settle our affection on God: And therefore
God peppers every pleasure, and gives us some sour sauce thereto, Exodus 12.8.
as he gave sour herbs to be eaten with the Paschal Lamb.

Draw me out of my troubles: Doct.
] Many are the tribulations of the righteous, If the pleasures of this world
were not painful we would too much delight in them.
but the Lord will deliver him out of them all. God uses to draw them, by
which he would testify that it is a work of Gods power to deliver the
innocent; as David delivered his fathers sheep from the Lion and the Bear,
and the vessels out of the hands of a strong man.

VERSE 18. Look upon mine afflictions, Psalm. 34.11. 1 Samuel 17.34.
and my travel, and forgive all my sins.
THere he acknowledges the root of al his troubles to be sin: Doct.
for which he craves mercy at God. The root of all our trouble is our own
sin.
Ye may see here that sin touches him so near the heart, that he cannot find
ease but in the remission thereof. Sin is sweet in the mouth as honey, Simil.
but it is in the womb as gravel. Pro. 20.17
There is no venom in the affliction but sin, so being quit of sin, he
esteems nothing of the affliction. Sin is the noisome humor; purge the
humor, and save the patient. The goodness and wisdom of God, which makes
affliction a bitter water to eat up the rust of sin. The affliction is not
profitable which has not made some diminution of sin. When Gods anger was
quenched, Genesis 8.1.
then the floods were abated, so as thy sin decreases, thy affliction
diminishes daily.

VERSE 19: Behold mine enemies, for they are many, and they hate me with cruel
hatred.
THis ends as the sixth Psalm; Doct.
for triumphing above sin his spiritual enemies, The subduing of sin is the
triumph over our enemies. Acts 9.3.
he triumphs above all his bodily foes, he preuailes with God, he prevails
also with men.

He uses no imprecations against them, but that God would look on them either
mercifully to convert them with Saul, who was called Paul, or to confound them,
1 Samuel 31.4
as the first Saul who killed himself. His enemies are described from their
multitude and number; next, from their malice and cruelty. Always Gods honor
is so much the more greater that he is one for all, and his love preuents their
cruelty. He complained of their craft, before they had spread nets for him, and
the devil who before was a Serpent and could not prevail, now becomes a
fiery flying Dragon, Genesis 3.1. Apoc. 12.3.
to devour the seed of the woman: so craft disappointed, becomes cruel: he
was first a Serpent, and yet he is more dangerous when he is a serpent, Doct.
cheaping, then when he is roaring as a Lion; Craft disappointed, becomes
cruelty.
when he roares he is heard far off and is eschewed, but who can shun a Fox and
a Serpent: therefore craft is always cruel. Since then we have to do with
malicious enemies and crafty deceitful men, let us inarme us against them by
the brestplate of righteousness, to strike by their darts, and by patience to
suffer their wrongs.

VERSE 20. Keep my soul and deliver me: let me not be confounded, for I trust
in thee.
HE ends as Christ ended his life, Doct.
In thy hand I commit my spirit. The soul is well kept when God keeps it.
Luke 23.46. Mat. 6.19.
By the soul he means also the life, for it is well kept when the Lord
keeps it: no earthly place so sure, but the thief may come in, or rust
consume, but if thy soul be bound up in the bundle of life, and treasured with
God, no violence or co^sumption can attain thereunto. And he uses that same
argument in the end which he did in the beginning, For I trust in thee.

VERSE 21. Let mine uprightness and equity preserne me: for mine hope is in
thee.
LEt no man claim the patrocinie of God, Doct.
unless he maintain a righteous cause and quarrel, God will not patronize an
unrighteous cause. 1 Sa^ 26.17.
for what fellowship has the Lord with the throne of iniquity? This he speaks
because of his enemies to whom he never did injury, and the more ungrateful
were they; yea these he benefited: as Saul, with whom in the field he pleaded
his innocence, when Saul said, Psalm. 143.2.
My son David thou art more righteous then I. But when he came before God he
cried, Enter not in judgment with thy servant; but recountering with men he
braggeth of his innocence: Our eyes are sharp sighted and bright enough to
behold the earth, but when we look to the Sun they will be dim.

For I trust in thee:] Ye see albeit he claims to his innocence, yet he
retireth him to faith and hope in God. Our righteousness is not such as that
we can altogether stand by it: there are some slips and faults in the best of
our actions, Note.
therefore we are forced to retire to God, who can supply them all in his
al-sufficiency.

VERSE 22. Deliver Israel O god out of all his troubles. Doct.

THis last verse contains a prayer for the Church, so that he is not
contented to enjoy any private benefit from God, himself, Atrue note of a
Christian to be affected with the state of the Church. Psalm. 51.8.
unless the Church of God be partaker thereof; whose welfare he promises to
procure, and desires others to pray for the peace of Jerusalem: Doct.
and this is a mark of a feeling member of Christ, The Church subject to
infinite troubles.
who remembers not his own sorrows without regard of the tribulations of
Gods Church.

Next, ye see that the Church is subject to infinite tribulations, she is a
Lilly among thorns, Exodus 3.2. Mat. 14.24. Genesis 8.1.
there musthe a fire always in that bush. is no marvel to see the ship of the
Disciples tossed in the seas, and the Arc of Noah in the deluge, but indeed it
were a marvel to see the Church not persecuted. Doct.


God will in the end deliver his Church.
Finally he prays for delivery to her, letting us see two things: First, that
the Lord will compass his Church with joyful deliverances, and not let the
rod of the wicked lie always on the back of the righteous, but as they have
many crosses, Doct.
so they get many comforts from God. The Churches deliverance is Gods
prerogative.
Next, God commonly takes that honor to himself to deliver his Church, when
Princes persecute the same to their own ruin and shame. Let us pray unto our
God to deliver his Church in Europe this day, which is fearfully assaulted by
wicked men, and to give his Saints patience and perseverance in the truth to
the end. Amen.

FINIS.
A GODLY AND FRUITFUL EXPOSITION ON THE LI. PSALM, the fifth of the
Penitentials.
THis Psalm is most memorable amongst the seven Penitentials: so that
Athanasius that learned and divine Doctor instructs Christian virgins, Tract,
de Virg.
when they awake in the midst of the night to repeat the same; and the ancient
Church made great use of it. And justly may it be called the sinners guide. For
as David by his sin led them to error; so by this his repentance he leads
them to grace.

This Psalm consists of a Title and Supplication. The Title contains the
argument, The division of the Psalm.
substance and occasion of the Psalm. The Supplication contains sixteen
arguments, which he uses to move God to have compassion on him; and a prayer
for the Church in the end.

The Title. To him that excels on Neginoth. A Psalm of David when the
Prophet Nathan came unto him, after he had gone in to Bathshebah.
The Title bears four things. 1. the Author and penman of this Psalm,
David; Gods Spirit no doubt being the inditer. 2. To whom it was committed to
be sung, To the chief Musician on Neginoth. 3. At what time, when Nathan had
reproved him. 4. The occasion of the reproof, his going in to Bathshebah.

David is not content verbally to utter his repentance, or to leave it in the
perishing books of the records of his kingdom, His repentance is committed to
the eternal monument of Gods book.
but he commits it to the everlasting momuments of Gods book, where of one
jot cannot perish, but shall endure for ever, in despite both of the Devil
and Antichrist the Pope his first borne.

A Psalm of David.

He puts to his name, prefixing and subscribing it himself, neither will
suffer any to publish it but himself: as he was not ashamed to sin, he is not
ashamed to repent; as he was not ashamed to sin openly, Let not those be
ashamed to repent for sin, who have not bin ashamed to sin. Theodosius his
repentance.
he is not ashamed publikly to declare his repentance.

Theodosius the Emperor is renowned in all the world for his humble repentance
before Saint Ambrose, after the slaughter at Thessalonica, where in the place
of the penitents he fell down on his face, and said, Agglutinata est terra
anima mea, My soul is glued to the earth. None are ashamed to sin, but all
are ashamed to repent; and so God powers shame upon many, because they will
not honor him whom they have dishonored.

To the chief Musician, or, to him that excels on Neginoth.

This same is the title of the 4. Psalm. La^menatzeah oftentimes in the
Scriptures is taken for the Presidents who are chief in any thing, as 2.
Chron. 18. and 34.18. The sweet singer of Israel gives it to a sweet singer.
I think it to be best translated, To him that excels. Neginoth was an
instrument of music, upon which they played. So they did not only read the
Psalms, but also sing them; yea so distinctly, that the people easily might
understand them: not so much addicted to t^^ note or tune, as to the matter; as
our Savior did sing after the Communion; Mat. 26.3^
and Paul commands it, Col. 3.16.

Music is an Art very pleasant, delectable and profitable, to stir up the
affections of man to Gods service, The commodities of music. 2. Kin. 3.15
or to restrain the anger and perturbations of our nature, as was in Elizeus,
who sought for a minstrell to appease him.

But first we have to see, that this excellent Psalm is committed to an
excellent person, who has great cunning to put it forth to the use of the
Church; teaching us hereby, that spiritual exercises are not to be put into
the hands of ignorant dolts, who have no wisdom or skill to set forth the
glory of their God. For the subject being most glorious, why should it be
concredited to such as have neither learning nor wisdom? And if that singing
should have so worthy instruments, what do ye think of the preaching of the
Gospel? of which the Apostle says, Who can be sufficient for those things?
Happy then is that Church when learned men are promoted to good places,
whereby the word may be further advanced. And in a miserable case are those who
are committed to the charge of ignorants, Against ignorant and idle preachers.
idle bellies, and such like, who are unfit to take the care of Gods people,
for whom they shall be countable to God at the great day, and Gods vengeance
shall be upon them in this world.

David he aduanceth music very much, as Solomon also after him; 1. Chron.
15.16.
and the Musicians were distributed into certain classes and orders. Col.
3.16. 1: Cor. 14.15.
The antiquity and ancientie hereof makes much for its commendation, for God
did invent it. This is a principal science, and yet it has few aduancers.
Men's deafned ears betoken their beastly ignorance, who will not suffer
themselves to be wakened and roused up from their security and sleep.

There are some good Christians challenged, Object.
who being of a melancholious nature, are thought to abhor all music and
musical instruments. Solut.
But men are deceived herein: if music be free of profanitie and
superstition, there is no good man of religion who cannot but like it well, and
delight greatly therein. But the avarice of our age, as it has bin the decay
of many sciences, so likewise of this. Nota.
The Church being spoiled of her rents, is not able to entertain this science
as it should be; which God supply when he thinks time. And this I say not,
that I do like either the profanitie of beastly men, that in stead of heavenly
songs sing bawdie ballads; or of such superstitious Papists; who sing and tune
Latin words in their Masses, thereby mocking God, and making religion a sport.
But the abuse of that science I disallow; the use I allow and approve, as most
necessary to Gods glory. And seeing it will be perpetual in the heavens, why
should it not begin on earth? There shall be a natural, not artificial song;
of which we shall sing for ever the song of Moses the servant of God. Apoc. 15.3
Let us therefore begin on earth, learn of our Gamma, and enter into our
Alphabet here, Nota.
that we may be perfect Musicians, when we become perfect our selves in glory.
Here let us sing with grace in our hearts to the Lord, Col. 3 16.
rejecting vain, idolatrous and profane ballads, and sing spiritually unto the
Lord.

When Nathan the Prophet came to him. David (as is thought) lay a year almost
in this sin asleep, till God wakened him by Nathan, Jonah 1.6.
as he did Jonas by the Pilot. It is certain we would sleep unto death before
we awake from sin, if God did not put upon us, Man is lying asleep till God
waken him
and stir us up. We are so benumbed by the spirit of slumber, and possessed
by a lethargy, that all our senses are stupefied till Nathan come and awake us.

Next, God sends him that which he prayed for, even a faithful admonisher.
Psalm. 119.
One Prophet comes to another: yea a greater then himself; 1. King. 13.18.
not as the old Prophet came to the young at Bethel to deceive him, but as a
father to admonish his child.

Pastors should freely rebuke the vices one of another
There should be an holy freedom and liberty among Preachers, each one should
freely rebuke another when they see them doing wrong. One should not wink at
an other, as most part do; and others being reproved, rage mightily, saying
with Zidkiah, When went the Spirit of the Lord out of me to thee? They rebuke
the rebuker, 1. King. 22 24. Esa. 30.1^
They say to the Prophet, Prophecy not.

Observe moreover, that Nathan comes first to David, not David to Nathan: the
Physician to the patient, not the patient to the Physician. Christ himself
came to the sinners and Publicans, and called them to repentance.

This is against the pride of some, Mat. 9.13. Against the pride and laziness
of Preachers
and laziness of others, who will not come or take the pains to visit weak
Christians, yea will scarce admit them to their presence when they come, as
though they were Princes. Woe to their pride who come not to the sick, and
heal not the broken, (as says the Prophet) but feed themselves with the fat
of the sheep.

Let none of higher gifts despise those of lower. Acts 9.17.
God uses Nathan a Prophet, inferior to David both in Prophecy, wisdom and
other gifts, to be an instrument to warn David. Let none then of greater gifts
despise those of lesser. Ananias taught Paul, and here Nathan David.

After he had gone in to Bathsheba. Albeit David thought he had hid himself
well enough, yet God found him out by Nathan. Adam hid himself among the
bushes, but God called to him. Genesis 3.8.
Where art thou? Let us not then dream, that God does not see us, and
whatsoever starting holes we seek to hide our selves in. The woman lights
the candle, Luke 15.4.
and finds the lost penny; and our Shepherd will seek his lost sheep, and
bring it home again. No whither can we go from the all-seeing eye of God.

Gone in to Bathsheba. As David was an example of the frailty of man's nature,
and Nathan of a faithful Preacher; so David sets down what evils do come of
the beauty of women, which is conjoined with impudency and leuitie. For if
she had not washed her self naked before the palace, and consented so readily
to the King, Against the impudency of women.
that he should come in to her (a filthy action spoken in clean terms, as
Christians should do the like) there had not bin such abominable crimes
committed. She represents many women in our days, shamelesly haunting such
places where they may give occasion to me^ to suit after the^, Genesis 38.1^
as Tamar sitting by the high way when Judah came by. This does not disgrace
honest women, but rather gives them matter to glorify God, who has not
suffered them to be deborde in their filthy affections. As the wise mariner
seeing others by throwing themselves in danger suffer shipwreck, Simi^
thanketh God who kept him from the like; so honest women may praise God that
he has preserved their honesty, which was not in their own hand.

Beauty a blessing of God, if not abused.
Beauty is not to be evil thought of, being a benefit and blessing of God: but
the abuse of beauty, by the tentation of the devil and deceitfulness of our
own nature, when Satan allureth us to dishonor God, and destroy that goodly
piece of workmanship which God has made up in us, by that which should have
bin an instrument to provoke us to Gods service. Pro. 31.3^
Beauty is deceitful. Absoloms beauty deceived him, 2. S^. 14.15
and many with him have beauty, but have no grace to use it well.

Finally, I see both the persons are noted by their names, and not obscured:
wherein the Spirit of God in his word, as in a true mirror and glass,
represents every ones natural face, either in their beauty or in their
blemishes. So John Baptist spoke particularly to Herod, Math. 14.4.
and the Prophets to their Princes. They closed not up their reproves under
generalities, that they might interpret them any way which pleased them best;
but called black, black, sour, sour, and sweet. whosoever sin openly,
ought openly to be rebuked.
sweet. For particular applications to eminent persons is most requisite; and
those that sin openly, should be openly rebuked, that others may stand in awe.

Verse 1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness:
according to the multitude of thy compassions put away mine iniquities.
Have mercy upon me, O God. The thing he craves most of God is mercy: for
God has many qualities which are essential to him, but none of them could do
v^ any good without his mercy; his power would destroy us, his wisdom
confound us, his justice condemn us, his majesty affright us, but all these
by it turn to our good.

To beg for mercy is the first word of a supplicant. The first word of the
forlorn son to his father, was, Luke 15.18.
Father, I have sinned against heaven and against thee. This Christ in his
prayer has taught us to pray, Math. 6.1^
Forgive us our sins. So in every prayer we should begin at have mercy upon
me O God. We sin daily, and unless we offer up at the door of the Sanctuary
a sin-offering, we cannot offer an offering of thanksgiving and the sweet
incense of praises. Thus prayed the woman of Canaan, saying, Mat. 19.22.
Have morcie upon me, comprehending under that the cure of her daughter: and
the two blind men cried, O Son of David have mercis; Mat. 9.27.
as also did many others.

The greatest comfort that Christians have in their trouble, is, that they have
to do with a merciful God, and not rigorous, nor one who will chide with us
continually, Psalm. 103.2.
but one who is slow to anger, ready to forgive, whose name is mercy, whose
nature is merciful, who has promised to be merciful, who is the Father of
mercies. ^. Cor. 1.3.
The earth is full of hi^ mercies, they are above the heavens and the clouds;
his mercy is above all his works, extending to a thousand generations, Exo.
20.6. Psalm. 100.5. Hos. 6.6.
whose mercy endures for ever. With the Lord is mercy and great redemption.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. His mercies are often repeated in the
Scriptures, as Psalm. 5.6. 12.16.17.20.22.23.24. thrice, 25.30. thrice. 32.
twice. 35. thrice. 39. twice. 41. thrice. 47.50.56.58. thrice. 60.61.62.63.68.
twice etc. Joel 2.13. Mica 7.18. Math. 12.7. rich in mercy, 1. Tim. 1.2.
Ephesians. 2.4. etc. The Apostles salutation is Grace, mercy and peace. Since so i^
is, As a garden i^ replenished with flowers, so is the Scrip^^res with ^^^cie.
that this herb of mercy grows in every corner of the garden of holy
Scriptures* and all the Prophets and Evangelists by plucking thereof have
nourished themselves; let us also in our greatest distress run unto it,
p^^^^^ding our selves that God will as soon deny himself unto us, as h^ will
deny his mercy, if we come with p^^nitent hearts, and beg it with such
humility as becomes supplicants, such faith as believers, such hope and
patience as becom^meth the elect; we need not doubt, he i^ faithful who has
promised.

The Papists, Bellarmine and Lorinus i^ their translations, following the
Septuagints, and not Saint Jerome, as they confess, Lorinu^^ Bellarm^^ add to
the Scriptures.
do add magnam, great, giving greater credit to their own translation, then
to S. Jerome, who was known to have bin a godly and learned translator, or to
the Hebrew verity. They confess the Scriptures in the original language to
be the best, and yet do not spare to add or pare therefrom as pleases them;
and therefore that curse must fall upon them in the 22 of the Revelation, that
God will add all the curses of the law upon those who add to the Scripture
and the words of this book and put their name out of the book of life who
diminish any point of them. What need have they to put in magnam, great, as
though the multitude which follows, did not include the greatness.

O God. The person to whom he prays, Object. Against invocation of Saints.
is God. But in regard of his baseness and un worthiness, why does he not
make suite to Abraham, Moses, Samuel, Job, or some other holy men, only
contenting himself with God. For I think the sinners of old time had as much
need of the suppliment of the old Patriarchs and Fathers of the Church, as we
have now of the help of our Apostles and Saints. If they had not mind of such
Mediators, but fled only to God, I think we should follow their footsteps.
When God is deficient, then let us go to them: and when the Sun of
righteousness does not shine, it is time to light our halfe^ penny candles.
Paul says, O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you? Gal. 4.3.1.
and I say, O foolish Papists, when will you leave off your folly? If Christ's
intercession, being God, who knows all our necessities, and pitieth them,
were not perfect, then we might claim some subsidies; but it is vain to seek
others, when he has all; for that does greatly derogate to his glory, as I
have spoken in another place.

He uses the word Elohim, representing the holy Trinity; He inuocateth the.
whole Trinity.
of which some of the ancients have this conjecture: because he failed against
he Fathers omnipotency, when he abused his regal power in slaying Vriah;
against the Son, being the wisdom of the Father, using deceitfulness and
fraud in this murder; against the Spirit, when he by his filthiness abused his
holiness who is the Spirit of sanctification. Therefore (say they) he now
prays to Elohim. Judge of this nomination as ye please. Elchim represents
the Trinity, as Jehovah the unity; of both which Saint Augustine in his
Confessions admonishes us: We should (says he) never remember the unity of
the essence, but we should as soon remember and dissolve our mind upon the
trinity of the persons; and not so soon think upon the trinity of the
persons, but to gather in our minds the unity of the nature, which albeit they
be unspeakable and incomprehensible to us, it is enough that we speak with the
Scriptures, believe with the Scriptures, and pray at the direction of the
Scriptures, whose direction if we follow we cannot err; in whose paths (as
being the undoubted writs of God) if we walk, we cannot fall.

According to thy loving kindness. The thing which he reposeth and rests
upon, Against merits.
is not his own deserts, but Gods good will. Judge ye if this overthrows
merit or no. For if any man might have pretended goodworks, it was he. I give
(says he) my goodness to the Saints. Psalm. 16.
I am companion to all them that fear thee. I wash my hands in innocence, and
compass thine altar. Look the 101. Psalm concerning the government of his
family and his own person. Of his upright life he says, Judge me according to
my righteousness. While he has to do with men, there was no man more pure in
life and religion: but when he has to do with God, he renounceth all, and
takes him to Gods kindness and favor. While we look down to the earth, Simil.
our sight is sharp enough, and we may see far and clearly; but when we look
to the Sun, then our sight is dazzled and blinded: so before men we may brag
of our uprightness and honesty, but when we look up to God, we are ashamed
of our selves, yea of the least thought of our hearts. The Lord of his mercy
keep us from presumption, that we presume not in any good thing we do, seeing
that it is Gods work in us: let him take the honor of his own work, and let
us say with David, Shame belongs to us, but glory to thee. Our best actions
are contaminate with such imperfections and spots, that we have cause to stop
our mouths, and blush, and be ashamed of them, we are conscious of the
manifold faults and defects which are in them.

According to the multitude of thy compassions put away mine iniquities. He
exagge^ateth the weight of his sin, in that it has need of many mercies;
whereby he testifies, that his sins were many, passing the number of the
heirs of his head, and like waters that had gone over his head. So, Gods
mercies are more then man's miseries.
many sins require many mercies. Men are greatly terrified at the multitude
of their sins; but here is a comfort, our God has multitude of mercies. If
our sins be in number as the heirs of our head, Gods mercies are as the
stars of heaven: and as he is an infinite God, so his mercies are infinite;
yea so far are his mercies above our sins, as he himself is above us poor
sinners.

By this that he seeks for multitude of mercies, The godly account one sin to
be many.
he would show how deeply he was wounded with his manifold sins, that one
seemed a hundred: where by the contrary, so long as we are under Satan's
guiding, a thousand seem but one; but if we betake our selves to Gods service,
one will seem a thousand.

Again, we may admire the wonderful largeness of the mercies of God, the
breadth whereof extends over all the world, the height to place us in heaven,
the depth to draw us from the lower hell, the length betwixt hell and heaven. O
the breadth, length, deepnesse and height of the mercies of our God, Admire the
mercies of God.
the multitude of whose compassions neither man nor Angel is able to
comprehend. Why then do thou despair thereof O man? though thy sins were
never so many, his mercies exceed them; and although thou sinnest seventy
seven times a day, Mat. 7.
he can pardon and forgive thee.

Thy compassions: the word in the original signifies an ardent and earnest
affection of the heart, compassionating that which it pitieth, as it were the
commotion of the bowels (as I noted before,) that his very bowels are moved
toward his children, as Paul writes to Philemon. Philem. 12 Luke 15.20 2. Sa.
18.33 Psalm. 103.
This compassion was demonstrate in the father of the prodigal son, and in
David to Absalom, much more in God toward his dear children. Look what pity
parents have to their children, greater has God toward us. Are not parents
touched at the very heart, when they behold the miseries of their children?
yea, would they not hazard their lives and estates, as many times they do to
deliver them? and will not God be moved toward us, if we considering his
compassion and meekness, would but pity our selves by confessing our
iniquities unto him?

Put away. He borrows a similitude from Merchants, who have their debts
written in their account-booke, and at the payment thereof they score out that
which before they have written. Therefore since our sins are written with a
pen of iron and a point of a diamond, we must pray to God to blot them out, and
that the hand-writ may be nailed to the cross. It is God that puts away
iniquities, he can remove them as a cloud. Daniel prophesying of the Messiah,
says, Dan. 9 24.
Seventy weeks are determinate upon thy people and upon thy holy City, to
finish the wickednesses, and to seal up the sins, and to reconcile the
iniquity. All our sins shall be washed away by the streams of his blood, so
that they shall never be read, or brought to an account, either in this world
or the world to come.

Mine iniquities. He committed iniquity against Vriah, whom he killed, for
which he is so charged in his conscience, being summoned before the bar of Gods
justice, that he can get no rest, until he get pardon; and none could give him
pardon and rest in his mind, but God whom he principally offended, in killing
and destroying one formed to Gods own image. So, when we do wrong to men, In
wronging our neighbor we do most injury to God.
let us not think it enough if we be reconciled to the party wronged, but by
repentance and an humble confession of our sins, let us seek to be at one
with God, who is the party whom we do most wrong to.

Verse 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.
HE expresses by similitudes taken from washing and cleansing, the mercy
which he craved in the former verse, that is, Similitudes are much used in the
Scriptures.
remission of his sins. Similitudes are very common in the Scriptures, and in
the ancient Fathers. The Prophets spoke by similitudes, Christ spoke by
parables; the Epistles of the holy Apostles, and Sermons of the Fathers, are
full of them. So earthly objects should serve us to this end, that in them we
may see heavenly things: and there is no creature, There is no earthly thing
which may not be applied to some spiritual use.
which does not represent to thee the Creator: and if we had spiritual eyes,
we would apply every earthly thing to some spiritual use. The dust teaches us
whereof we came, and what we are, even dust. The grass admonishes us to seek
a dwelling elsewhere; for here we are as grass, which soon fades. The worms
will us not to be proud, for we are meat prepared for them. The Sun when it
begins to shine, puts us in mind to beg for the Sun of righteousness to
shine in our souls. Every bird after his kind praises God, so should we.
When we behold bread, we should remember that of our Savior, Labor not for
the meat that perishes. Ioh. 6.27.
So God has set all his creatures to be as so many masters to teach us our
duty. The Lord sanctify our sight, that we may look attentively, and
consider God in his creatures, and that they may be as steps of a ladder to
draw us up to him.

Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquities. There is nothing can make men appear
filthy before God, but only sin: Sin makes man to appear filthy before God
as natural Philosophers through the light of nature have bin forced to
confess. And therefore, says Seneca, Seneca.
Si scirem homines ignoraturos, and deos ignoscituros, non peccarem tamen
propter peccati vtilitatem: If I knew (says he) that the gods would pardon me,
and men would not see me, yet would I not sin, because of the filthiness of
sin. It blacketh the body with shameful ignominy, burdeneth the soul with an
evil conscience, The eu^ls of sin.
disgraceth the gifts of the mind and defaceth them, blotteth them out, makes
them stink, and seem nothing. Virtue in a profane man, is as a gold ring on a
swines snout. The vomit of a dog seems filthy to us, and a sow wallowing in
the puddle is loathsome, albeit not so in the sight of God; A man polluted with
sin, of all creatures the most beastly.
but more loathsome is a man defiled with blood, whoredom and drunkenness,
and such like, of all beasts he is the most beastly. Man was in honor, but
became a beast; and when he is drunken, he is then inferior to a beast, which
will drink no more then is necessary and having drank can discern the right way
home. Alas, men now make no end of drunkenness, they add drunkenness to
thirst, The evils of drunkenness.
whereby they weaken their nature, exhaust their money, impouerish their
posterity, become infamous to the world, make shipwreck of their conscience,
and so destroy body, soul, conscience, riches, name, and all. A woman though
she were a Princess, and never so gallant a Lady, if she be known to be like
Herodias, Psalm. 15.
she is to be contemned in all godly men's eyes, and to be esteemed of as
Mordecai esteemed Haman.

Let us be ashamed of sin in any, and blush at our own filthiness, because
of it. But alas, we are fallen in such a time, when sinners are become
shameless, and women not of the meaner sort, Nota.
delight as much to be harlots, and defile their bodies with whoredom, then as
honest women to be obedient to their husbands, and keep their bodies holy and
clean vessels.

Sin is filthy to think of it, filthy to speak of, filthy to hear of,
filthy to do; Sin altogether filthy.
in a word, there is nothing in it but vileness. What can we see in a botch
but filth? in a wound but filth? and look to sin, nothing in it but sin,
which is more filthy, then if the filth of all worldly diseases were contracted
in one heap. And therefore David seeing his own filthiness, craves at God
to be washed therefrom.

He desires to be washed. No element so fit to wash away filth as water; which
serves for many uses, but especially for that. And as God has appointed that
element to take away our outward uncleanness, The blood of Christ a fit
element to wash away sin.
so he has appointed his Sons blood to be the only Jordan to wash and take
away the leprosy of our sins. This is the fountain of David for remission of
sins. Unless a man be borne again by the Spirit and water, Ioh. 3.5.
he can not come to the kingdom of heaven, which is our regeneration. This was
prefigured in the Leuiticall law, when there was frequent washing. The high
Priest Aaron himself and the rest of the inferior Priests presumed not to
offer sacrifices till they were washed. The vessels were in the Tabernacle, and
the great Sea, for continual purgations and washings, not only to prefigurate
the fountain of justification, by which all those who are consecrated to God
must be once washed, but also the Spirit of sanctification, by which they must
be sanctified. And he that is once washed, Daily sins have need of daily
purgations
has not need to be washed again. Yet our feet and affections must be daily
washed. We sin daily, and therefore have need of daily purgation. We contract
daily guiltiness, for which we are commanded to pray daily, Mat. 6.12.
Forgive us our sins. This is signified by the holy Sacrament of Baptism,
wherewith God has commanded us to be washed, assuring us thereby of his
favor, if we believe the remission of sins, which the Apostle calls lauacrum
regenerationis, Tit. 3.5.
the lauer of regeneration. Those who seek to be washed by any other mean
then this, do as those qui luto lutum purgant, as Erasmus has in his Adagies,
wash one filth by another.

Against the Papists merits. Simil.
Those foolish Papists who think by their foul merits to cleanse their filthy
sins, do as those who having their clothes berayed by dirt, take dirtie clothes
to wipe the former dirt away, whereby they make them filthier then before. Yea,
their hypocrisy and superstition, whereby they think to appease Gods wrath,
shall double their guiltiness before God and man.

The word in the original includes a multiplication of washing: whereby he
acknowledges a multiplication in sinning* and his earnestness, that every sin
may have some particular assurance of grace. For this is the hungring and
thirsting after spiritual graces, that the heart cannot be satisfied till it
be filled with them; neither will be content of a bare crust and outward show
of pardon, unless the assurance thereof be doubled.

And cleanse me from my sin. The second similitude is taken from cleansing;
which is respective to the Leprosy under the Law, Le^it. 13.
for which God appointed purgations and cleansings.

Why sin i^ compared to leprosy
Sin is compared to a leprosy. Frst, because it is hereditarie, being in the
blood; so we are conceived in sin; and the more dangerous, because by no
natural means it can be helped, but by God alone. Sin is from the descent of
our parents; we are conceived therein. Who can bring that which is clean, out
of a thing unclean?

Secondly, as leprosy is ignominious and disgraceth man above all other
diseases, that men who are infected by the plague, are not so much shunned as
those that are leprous: so sin disgraceth man. The leprosy of Miriam made her
to be separated from the camp; Number. 12.14
and the leprosy of Vzza made him to be shut out of the Temple: so sin
depriueth us of the society of man and Angels.

Thirdly, Leprosy makes men's flesh senseless; so sin makes men insensible of
the judgments of God.

Fourthly, Leprosy is incurable with men, (...) are the frenzy, heresy, and
jealousy, God keeps those cures to himself: so sin can be purged by none
but by Gods own cunning. As Abanah and Pharpar rivers of Damascus, 2. King 5.12
were not of force to cure the leprosy of Naaman, and leprous might have died,
if according to the Prophets direction he had not washed himself in Jordan: so
are the merits of men, or holiness of Angels, Apostles, yea of the blessed
virgin Marie, so much set by by men, vprofitable to purge us from our sins,
only that blessed blood of Jesus will do the turn, wherein if we be washed,
our flesh shall be as the flesh of a child, even as though we had never sinned.

But to the end thou ma^st be assured whether thou art cleansed from this
leprosy or no, I will give you some infallible tokens and marks, whereof some
are secret and only known to thy self, others are seen by others.

The secret marks be these: First, if thou art ashamed of those things which
thou have done. Private tokens whereby thou may know if thou be washed. Romans
6.21. Job 42.6.
What profit have ye of those things (says the Apostle) whereof now ye are
ashamed, and cannot remember them without blushing? if thou abhorrest thy self
when thou call them to mind, and repentest with Job in dust and ashes
Secondly, if thou have faith in Christ's blood, do desire to be purged by
these clean and clear waters, not running to others, or digging unto thy
self cisternes of rotten waters. External notes whereby others may know if
thou be washed.


The external mark, is sanctification of thy person; being washed, thou go
not to defile thee in the puddle. And thy thankfulness to God, ^* Kin. 5.15
as Naaman returned to Elisha, and not only offered a great reward unto him,
but promised to be a worshipper of God all his days. Be not like unto the nine
lepers, who outwardly cured, abode in the leprosy of sin, of the two the worst
and most dangerous: Luke 17.17
but with the tenth return to Christ with thankfulness. For if thou be
unthankful to God, and art not diligent and earnest to celebrate praises unto
him for his mercies, it is an evident token thou art not yet cured.

Finally, thou must go to the Priest, and offer according to the law; receive
the absolution from Gods mouth, out of the mouth of his servants, and show thy
thankfulness in obedience to God all thy life.

Verse 3. For I know mine iniquity, and my sin is ever before me.
THe first argument which he used to move God to pardon his sins, was taken
from God himself, and that great mercy whereto he is inclined. The next, from
his great filthiness and uncleanness, whose misery was an object of Gods
mercy, desiring God to purge and cleanse him from the same. Now follows the
third argument, taken from his acknowledgement of his sin, and true confession
thereof. As though he would say: Lord, I know I have sinned, I confess my sin
to thee, therefore pardon me. What force, think ye, this argument would have
in a guilty man's mouth, if he came before an earthly Judge, and would say: I
have committed murder and adultery, I confess it? Surely the Judge would
answer, Ex ore tuo te iudico, I judge thee according to thine own confession;
as David commanded him to be killed, 2. Sa. 1.16. An humble acknowledgement of
sin, a good argument to obtain pardon from God.
who reported that he had killed Saul. But before the heavenly Tribunal, such
an argument has only force. There is no mean to acquit us from Gods justice,
unless we come to him, humbly confessing our sin, and accusing our selves, for
then he will pardon and excuse us. Our condemning of our selves, makes him to
absolve us: our remembrance of our sins, makes him to forget them; and our
repentance brings his pardon.

But how comes it to pass, that thus he lamenteth, Object.
seeing before Nathan had assured him that his sins were forgotten and
pardoned? I answer, Solut.
the godly albeit they be persuaded of mercy, yet for the love they bear to
God, they cannot but be displeased with themselves, so often as they remember
how unhappily they have offended so gracious a majesty: The wicked forget the
evils which they do, and remember the good which they have done, if they have
done any; whereas the godly remember always their sins. 1. Cor. 15.9 2. Tim
1.13
but the wicked forget their sins most easily, and if they have done any show
of good, they remember it continually. The godly by the contrary forget their
good, and remember their sins, and the evil which they have done, as the
Apostle Paul says. I am the least of all the Apostles, and not meet to be
called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church. And again, When before I
was a blasphemer, a persecuter and oppressor, but I was received to mercy. And
again, Christ died for sinners, among whom I am the chief. They account
themselves the least among the godly, the greatest among sinners. So it is good
to us to nourish a continual remembrance of our own sins, that it may humble
us before God, and make God so much the more pity us, that he sees us
unfeignedly displeased with our selves that we have offended him by our many
many sins.

For I know my sin. The knowledge of his sin (doubtless) came by Gods word
out of the mouth of Nathan For albeit by a general notice he knew he had
done wrong, and the particular punctions of his conscience forced him to think
so, yet the true knowledge came never unto him, until God said by his Prophet,
Thou art the man. So the word of God serves us to this use, that it opens
our blind eyes to see what is evil in us. And therefore woe to that people who
have not the word, and faithful Preachers, who may let them see their sins.
For when they know not sin to be sin* they die in their sins. By the law, says
the Apostle, is the knowledge of sin: Rom 7.7.
for if the law had not said, Thou shall not lust, I would not think
concupiscence to be sin. Ye may see how great an evil is ignorance, when men's
eyes are blinded, whom the god of this world has blinded in so great a light.

The most part of the world couers their sin, by translating the cause over
unto others, as Adam upon Euah, Euah upon the Serpent. But the Scripture says,
Genesis 3. Pro. 28.13.
He that hides his sin shall not prosper. Non mediocre est (says Ambrose) vt
agnoscat peccatum suum vnusquisque: It is not a small thing to every one to
know and acknowledge his sin. So says David, Delicta quis intelligit, Who
understands his sin? He who knows them, may the sooner avoid them. If any
knew a danger, he could easily fly from it* and go by it. Our Savior wept,
because they knew not the day of their visitation.

That a man may know his sin, it is necessary he be admonished and rebuked; and
he who desires to attain this knowledge, must be content to receive rebukes
kindly, How to attain to an acknowledgement of sin.
He must resolve before God to shun the occasions of sin, and such evil
company as allureth him to folly; that he do call to mind what a gracious God
he has offended, what good things he has lost, how many he has offended by
his example; and to address himself henceforth to lead a holy and religious
life according to Gods word.

The Philosophers thought it most necessary for every man to know himself; and
in their precepts had this ever, He who knows not himself, can never know God
Nosce teipsum, Know thy self. Then much more it becomes a Christian to know
himself; for otherwise he can never know God in any of his properties. For if
we know not our sin, how shall we either know Gods justice pursuing us, or his
mercy pardoning us. Oh that we knew our selves.

But Satan does with us, as the Raven does with the Lamb, Simil.
it first pulls forth the eyes, then deuoureth it: first he blin^eth us, then
we follow him. Therefore we should labor upon our souls, that the darkened eye
thereof may be clear, the dimnesse removed, Acts 9.
the scales which lie upon them (as upon Saint Paul) may fall to the ground;
that seeing our selves and our nakedness, we may crave to be covered; seeing
our wounds, we may desire to be cured. As also it is the principal part and
duty of Pastors to deal in their Sermons with people, that they may see their
sins. Son of man (says the Lord to Ezekiel) make known to Jerusalem their
abominations. Pastors ought to exhort the people to a sight of their sin.
We flatter the people in their sin, and use conniuence to their wickedness.
We are afraid, and belike dare not light the candle of the word and bring it to
them being lying in darkness, lest they put forth the candle or smite us, who
by the light thereof let them see their misbehauiour.

And my sin is ever before me. When Satan does present his baited hook of
sin to us, Satan's policy in presenting the greatness of our sins, after we have
sinned, to us
he never lets us see the hook of Gods judgments, but ever the bait of
pleasure: but when we have swallowed the bait, he never lets us see any
comfort of God^ mercies, but proposes to us a troubled conscience, the flames
of God^ wrath, and the terrors of his judgments; as the Prophet says, Our
iniquities are multiplied before us.

And yet we must take heed of the devils craft, who obscureth from many their
sin, so that they can never repent, for that which they never see or feel. And
yet on the other hand, he lets some see the mountains of their sins, and
hugeness of them, that they see nothing else in God but his justice, thereby
to lead them to despair, as he did with Judas. But we must not look with
such fixed eyes upon our sins, that we lift not up our eyes to Gods mercy,
which is ready to pardon, and to apply to our heart all the sweet promises
which we read in the Scriptures; so that as fear bears us down, faith may
uphold us that we fall not. They must ever be before us in this world, and be
purged by unfeigned repentance, not that our repentance can expiate them, or
pacify Gods wrath, or (as the foolish Papists think) that we can do penance
for them. For what satisfaction can thy humiliation do, which is imperfect, to
satisfy the wrath of an infinite God? Unless his Son had intervened by hi^
satisfactio^^ Gods wrath could not have bin appeased. The more we repent for
sin, the more we are eased.
The more we remember our sin, and lament for the same, the more ease get we to
our afflicted minds and consciences, and the more sensibly shall we feel the
mercy of God pardoning our offenses. Therefore we cannot be better exercised
then in an humble confession of our sin, and by bitter tears with Peter weep
for our offenses; which I pray God the Lord may work in our hearts, that we
may find that blessing upon us, which Christ pronounced, Math. 5.
Blessed are they who now mourn, for they shall be comforted.

Verse 4. Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy
sight: that thou may be just when thou speak, and pure when thou iudgest.
THe ancients have so far differed in expounding this verse, some running forth
on Allegories, others on far sought interpretations, that Lorinus the Jesuit
numbreth twelve diverse interpretations hereof; of which, The diverse
interpretations of this vers^
two are most agreeable to the words and meaning of the text. The first
expounds it this way: Howsoever (say they) David did wrong to Vriah, yet it was
hid from all men, and only known to God; and these sins are only done
against God, whereof none is witness but he only. And surely albeit we would
cover our sins from the sight of the world, there is one witness, whose sight
we cannot flee.

Plato affirms, that we should do nothing in secret, whereof we would be
ashamed in publik. And Cicero, Ne siquidem deos omnes celare possumus, albeit
we could keep it secret from all the gods.

The other, whereto I rather incline, is thus: Albeit (say they) David had
offended man, yet it touched him more nigh at the heart the sin he did against
God, in breaking of his law. For so Nathan said unto him, Why did thou
contemn the word of the Lord, 2. Sa. 12.14
that thou should do evil in his sight? As though David would say: Though
all the world would absolve me, this is more then enough to me, that I feel
thee my judge, and my conscience cites me before thy tribunal. Let us have
our eyes and our senses fixed on God, and not be deceived with the vain
allurements of men, who either extenuate or conniue and wink at our sins. For
God, Nota.
as he (...) witness to our sins, so is he sole and only Judge, Admire the
love of God.
who can punish both soul and body in hell fire; of whose wrath we should be
more afraid, then of all ^he kings or tyrants of the world. As also we should
be sorry that we have offended so gracious a God, who when he might have damned
us, yet has pleased to pardon us, and takes no other satisfaction at our
hand, but repentance for our sin, and faith in his Son Jesus Christ. Who will
not give us to our enemies hand to be destroyed, but will set us free from
prison, out of his free love. Therefore O sinner in time be reconciled with thy
Judge, and take no rest till thou have surety of his favor. Say with David,
Peccaui, I have sinned; 2. Sa. 12.13
and God shall say with Nathan, Peccata tua remissa sunt, thy sins are forgiven.

Against thee against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight.
The ingemination of the word (against thee) signifies the deepnesse of his
feeling and grief, who is the more wounded, the more he finds the greatness
of that majesty and goodness whom he has offended. So it were happy for us,
that we could be deeply moved with a conscience of our sin, that out of the
deep places of a contrite heart we might redouble our sighs, which would pierce
that fatherly heart if we could shoot up such arrows to heaven: but we laugh
over the matter, not remembering that our laughter shall be turned to mourning.

This also serves to convince such miscreant Atheists, who can generally say,
God forgive us, we are all sinners, as it were excusing their sins, whenas they
are never touched at the heart with a sorrow for them. They feed their foolish
humors with a cloak of the multitude that sins, quasi patrocinium error is
sit multitudo peccantium, as though the multitude of sinners should be a
patrocinie and defense of errors, says Augustine. Hell is spacious and large
enough, having all the dimensions, which will contain all the devils and their
children, if they were more in number then they are.

That thou may be just when thou speak, and pure when thou iudgest. By
this it is clear, that the justice of God shines most in men's souls, and his
truth in their lies. As though he would say: Because I have sinned so
grievously, and have committed such wickedness, that thou can not be blamed
of unrighteousness, though thou should punish me most rigorously, for I have
deserved worse then I have suffered.

But because the Apostle Paul, Romans 3.4. would seem to turn this text to
another sense, A reconciliation betwixt this place and that of Romans 3.4.
we shall reconcile them easily. For the Apostle seeing the Jews to bring the
testament and covenant of God in slander, as though he had bin the cause of
their ruin, by casting that upon themselves, he freeth God of their fall. But
David here vindicateth Gods justice, laying all the cause on himself. Whereof
we gather, that if any evil come to man, the cause of it is to be found in
himself; we need not cast it on God.

But out of this, that David confesses God to be just when he judges, we
learn first, Genesis 18.29.
that God (as Abraham said) is the just Judge of the world: and albeit he has
reserved a general judgment after this life, God has a particular judgment
in this world.
as Augustine says, yet he has a particular judgment upon men in this world,
both elect and reprobate; iudicio non semper manifesto, semper tamen iusto, not
always by a manifest, yet always by a just judgment. He erecteth a tribunal
in men's conscience, he summoneth the party, accuses and co^uicteth him. This
judgment is by his word and Spirit. For every man's work shall be manifest as by
the fire. For the fire both lets them see their faults; and burns up their
dross. As also he punishes them in the sight of the world, and in their
posterity, as he did as well to David as to Saul; 2. Sa. 12.10
for he said, that blood should not depart from his house, and so it was.
Therefore let not men, although the best Christians, think to escape the
censure of his justice; yea, what ever he does, Psalm. 143.17
we must say, God is just in all his works

Next, he is pure when he judges or tries. We may be assured, God will put
men to trial.
God will put us to trial, by affliction, persecution, sickness and poverty.
Then men will be made manifest, the hypocrisy of many will be detected. For as
the wind is appointed to try the corn, Simil.
the fire to try the gold, the floods to try houses builded upon the rock
and sand: so shall the day of the Lords trial discern those who have but a
shadow of religion, and shall appear ere it be long, as it is begun already.
Always God is pure in his trial, he knows the one from the other already,
but he will have men trying and knowing them. Genesis 22.12
Abraham was tried in the slaughter or offering of his son, and his faith was
approved; Jonah 2.
so was Jonas tried, and Jobs patience, and Peter's weakness. In all these
trials God was pure and free of any injury done to any of them; for they were
known to be but men, although Prophets and Apostles. And it is no marvel
though ^t this time in the trial of the Church, Nota.
ma^y be found to be but men, God is not to be blamed, he is pure when he
tries.

And seeing trial is prophesied to be not only the Church of Philadelphia,
Reu. 3.10. 1. Pet. 1.7.
but also in all the earth, which is called the hour of tentation, or a time
of fiery trial, either by heresies, schisms, or defection from the truth of
God, or by bloody persecutions of Gods Saints and his Church, (as all Europe
has experience this day;) what shall we do but keep Gods word, Nota.
possess our souls in patience, suffering the reproaches, calumnies, cruel
dealings, yea all that the devil and his children can do to us. If we be tried
by fire, let us be found gold; if by water, let us abide in the Arc and in the
Apostles boat; let us be found sure builders upon the foundation which the
Apostles laid, even Christ: 1. Pet. 2.
if by the air and winds, let us be as wheat and not chafe. If finally by
the earth and earthly allurements, let us be found to have our conversation
above, the time of trial is come already.

We learn also out of this, that in all our trials, whether inward in our
conscience, or external in our bodies, yea though our bodies were given to the
beasts and fowls of heaven, In all our trials, external or internal, God is
pure
yet God is pure and without fault. In the best of us all there is cause why we
should be tried.

Verse 5. Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived
me.
THis is the fourth reason, by which he would move God to forgive him. That our
nature from the very original is corrupted, from the seminary and fountain of
our conception. For from our mothers womb, we bring nothing but sin. And
surely we cannot thoroughly acknowledge our sins, unless we condemn our whole
natural powers and faculties of uncleanness. So the knowledge of this one
sin, brings him to the examination of his whole life, Actual sins are as
streams which proceed from original sin which is the fountain.
till he find nothing in himself but sin. For if the fountain be poisoned,
what will the streams be that flow from it. If we would look back to our
original sin, we might have cause the more to lament our actual sins, as
poisonable streams flowing from such a fountain.

So soon therefore as our conscience accuses us of any one sin, we should
call to remembrance the whole course of our life, Let the remembrance of one
sin put us in mind of all the sins we have committed. Simil.
that it has bin nothing else but a continual sinning against God; that thus
the last putting us in mind of the first, we may not be content to repent and
ask pardon for one, but for all. A sick man having obtained health, does
remember how long be was sick, whereby for the present he both considers his
own frailty and Gods mercy in delivering him, as also encourages and
inanimateth him in time to come, by remembrance of former mercies obtained.
Happy were we if we would begin to remember our miseries and Gods mercies.

Lorinus the Jesuit to ecce adds enim, which he confesses is not in the
Hebrew verity, and that Saint Jerome has forgot it, yet maintains that it
is rightly put in, to give force to the words of his sin. See the Sophist, who
grants the Scriptures, and yet would empaire their credit: as though Gods
Spirit were not wise enough, and the sense could not hold without enim. The
like do they in these words, Hoe est corpus meum, they add enim, and say, Hoc
est enim, which is not in the Scriptures, and were altogether vngrammaticall.
In a word, they alter and change the Scriptures as they please, bringing in
their enim as a particle of reason, which carries with it no reason.

Ye see then what the miserable corruption of our nature is, so soon as we
take life, Man no soouer begins to live, but he begins to sin. Genesis 6.5.
we begin to sin. An infant of one day, is not clean before God. The mass
whereof we be formed, is filthy and sinful; and so much the more filthy,
seeing it is possessed with a soul unclean and polluted. The cogitation of
man's heart is only evil continually. God knows our mold. Psa 103.14
We err from the womb. And albeit marriage be a bed undefiled, Heb. 13.4.
by reason of the institution, yet the concupiscence and lust polluteth the
ordinance which is most holy.

Children have of iginall sin.
Then children are not free of original sin: for then why should they be
baptized; and why should they die, as many do daily?

But it may seem wonderful and strange, Object.
that ch^ldren who can neither do, think, or speak evil, should be
culpable? I answer by another question; what is the reason that a young fox new
whelped, Solut. Simil.
does not slay a lamb? is it not because it lacks strength, and is not come
to that maturitie to execute their inclination, which is naturally cruel. So
are infants naturally inclined to sin; and therefore so soon as they can think
any thing, speak or do any thing, it is evil, as daily experience teaches
us. Parents should take care to amend by good education that which is deficient
in their children by nature. Simil. Original sin is sin.
And therefore it becomes Christian parents to take pains to amend that which
is deficient and imperfect by nature in their children, by art, instruction and
correction. That as wild beasts are tamed by the industry of men, and barren
grounds have become fruitful by laboring and manuring; so evil natures may be
corrected by good education.

Ye see also out of this, that original sin is sin, and offensive to the law
of God, and the root of all others: that the most secret thought of our heart
is sufficient to condemn us, if God would deal extremely. Which impugneth
that devilish and erroneous doctrine of some, who think that the first
intentions and thoughts are venial, if consent come not with them. Our Lord
says, that whosoever sees a woman, and lusts after her, commits
adultery, Mat. 5 28.
and is as culpable before God as if he had sinned with her. But that
concludes not, that the motion is not sinful, to which such a wicked consent
is added; the greater sin cannot excuse the lesser. Therefore we must go with
Elizeus to the countaine, and cast in salt in those rotten and stinking waters,
2 Kin. 2.20
that they being purified, all the streams flowing therefrom, may be also
cured.

This parentall sin, hereditarie, radical, the leven of the primitive
corruption, the law of the members natural and general to all mankind, Nota.
cannot be taken away, but by the conception and nativity of Christ.

But here arises a question, how parents, both being Christians and received
in the covenant, Object.
can beget sinful children? I answer by a familiar similitude; Solut. Simil.
the seed, ye see, when it is sown, is made as clean as the art and industry
of man can do, and yet arises with a root, stalk, blade and beard; the cause
is not in man, the force lies in the seed: so in that the parents are
purified, they have it of God; what the child has, he has by nature, which
either must be repaired by grace, or he must perish. Adam, Noah, Samuel, Eli,
David, etc. although they were godly and religious men, yet had naughty and
wicked children; which shows unto us, that religion and godliness comes not
by nature, but by the free grace of God.

Godliness comes not by nature but by grace.
I omit those vain and idle questions de originali peccato, which the Papists
too curiously propound, and may be very easily answered, lest it should breed
errors in your mind, which ye never dreamed of.

And in sin has my mother conceived me. The word iechematin, signifieih
properly Calefacit, warmed me in her womb, fed or nourished me, referring it
to the action of heating and feeding the child in the womb nine month.
Wherein the greatness of Gods work is to be seen, who so miraculously can
preserve the infant in such an obscure place, so compassed with the interior
parts. Always even there in that poor creature there is sin, albeit he be
ignorant of it. So he has a burden when he feels it not, and lies wrapped
with all miseries, and thinks himself then to be in a best case; for when he
comes out of the womb, with great pain to his mother, and difficulty to
himself, he weepeth poor soul because he is come to sorrow.

Ezekiel makes mention of a child newborn, whose nauill was not yet cut,
Ezech. 16.3.4.5.6.
neither salt put in it, nor washed, lying miserably in the pollution of
nature; which represents to us our natural filth in sin, that neither are we
cutted away by the knife of the Spirit from our original corruption, neither
washed by the blood of Christ from our natural uncleanness, neither salted by
the salt of the word; and if it were not by Gods grace, and care of our
spiritual parents that we were helped, we would never live, but die and perish
in the filth wherein we have bin conceived and borne. There is no beast which
nature has not taught some means to help it self, Man were utterly undone, if
he were not supported by the grease of God.
as some have naturally skins, or hair and wool to defend them from injuries,
we have none. In a word, man were undone if he were not supported by the grace
of God. We may weep, we have no more; and would God we could spiritually cry
and mourn, that the Lord hearing our weeping might pity and help us.

But because so many worthy writers, both ancient and modern, Papists and
Protestants, have written largely of this place, and I must say, Sum minimus
omnium, I cease to write any more hereof, lest I should repeat that which they
have already observed.

Verse 6. Behold, thou love truth in the inward affections: therefore have
thou taught me wisdom in the secret of mine heart.
THis is the fifth argument which he uses persuading God to forgive him, taken
from the sincerity of his repentance, that it was not counterfeit or
dissembled, which is very acceptable to God. Yea in all the actions of religion
and parts thereof, there is nothing more pleasing to God then sincerity and
uprightness. He cannot abide hypocrisy and dissimulation, and to put over
with fair words and an outward show. It is a mocking of God to look up with
our eyes to the heavens, Hypocrisy in religion is a mocking of God
to bow with our knees, to fold our hands, to knock on our breasts, if we
want uprightness and soundnes of heart. We must serve God in faith, love,
repentance, humility, unfeignedly from our heart, as true Nathaniels, Ioh. 1.47.
in whom there is no guile.

The parts of this verse are these: 1. who loves, Thou. 2. where and what he
loves, truth in the inward affections. 3. the consequent following upon this
love, therefore have thou taught me wisdom in the secret of mine heart.

Behold. Before he enter to any of these, he uses the particle of admiration
Behold; which he never uses but in some remarkable matter, thereby the more to
raise us up to the contemplation of such great matters to be told, as, Behold
how good and how comely a thing it is, Psalm. 133.1
brethren to dwell even together. And, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world. Ioh. 1.29.
And this he does, that he might move God, that as he beheld his misery, being
conceived and borne in sin, so he might behold his sincere and unfeigned
repentance. And this is the happiness of man, when God beholds him mourning,
as he beheld him sinning. This second sight is as delightsome to the Lord, as
the first was tedious. So, God sees all our sins, No^^.
as he sees our repentance. Sin not because he sees thee, but repent
unfeignedly, that he may take pleasure in beholding thee.

Thou love. The person who loves, is God. The Creator becomes a lover of
the creature; even God becomes a lover of his image in him. Does he then love?
Above all things let us seek to depend upon this his lone. In our religion we
should travel to know what he loves most, God above all things loves
sincerity.
what he respects most, what best pleases him; for otherwise we los^ our
time in his service: he loves sincerity best, and that we should present to
him. We enquire what every man loves best, and we frame our selves to seek
after it: then I beseech you, among the rest, search out what God loves best,
seek after it, and present it to him; and if there were no other argument to
move us to sincerity, this may be sufficient, because God loves it. Love that
which God loves, hate that which he hates; love sincerity, that he loves;
hate hypocrisy, that he cannot abide.

Truth. By truth is meant sincerity and uprightness in his Majesty's service;
that we do not gloss him by fair words and shows: he loves not shadows but
substances, no colors or couerts, but the body it self. For he pierces with
his eye to the lowest part of man's heart, and stays not upon the outward
picture of man-actions, howsoever plausible to man, God looks not as man
looks.

In every action of religion, let us remember to keep sincerity. Who would
desire to be called rich, if he want riches; esteemed valiant, if he have not
strength? and shall we think it sufficient to be called religious, and not to
be so? Better to be religious, then to be thought religious.
Better to be rich, then to be called rich; better to be religious, then to be
thought or called religious.

God loves truth as he hates all falsehood; for he is truth. Ego sum veritas,
via and vita. Ioh. 14.6.
He loves truth in our profession, truth in our civil life: truth in our
profession, is that which he has commanded in his word; truth in our civil
life, is that which agrees with duty of civil conversation, without fraud,
deceit or guile, which is different from Gods nature, and resembles the devil
who is a deceiuer.

In the inward affections. It is not a superficial or scroofe-worship which
God regards. For Cains sacrifice outwardly was as pleasant as Abels; Genesis
4.4.^
but God looked to their hearts, accepted the one, and rejected the other. God
above all things craves the heart: My son give me thine heart. God will be
worshipped in spirit and verity. Pro. 23.26


Therefore have thou taught me wisdom in the secret of mine heart. He
amplifieth his sin by this circumstance, that he did it not as an ignorant, but
as one who was enlightened with knowledge; and besides he had private
informations and intelligence from God in his heart, and tasted of the heavenly
doctrine, yea it was rooted and fixed in his heart, yet like a brute beast he
was carried to that filthy lust, and so was inexcusable, and suffocated the
light of the Spirit which he had received. He had informations given by God,
but he had not grace to follow them, which so much the more made him
inexcusable, that he was taught, Christians perish not for want of informatio^,
but for contemning the warnings they get. God must teach us.
and would not obey. So Christians shall not perish for lack of information, but
because they do not obey the warnings which they get. This age has heard many
lessons, and God has manifested his whole will unto them; but because they
obey them not their knowledge shall augment their pains. God he must be our
great Doctor and Teacher, we must be Theodidactoi, taught of God. Neither
nature, learning, experience, practice or age can teach us wisdom, only Gods
word must teach us.

Nature prevailed among the Philosophers, but that never led them to God. For
all the principles of our faith are contrary to nature, sense and reason. What
is more against natural reason, then these points of our religion: God was
made man; a virgin has borne a child; a crucified man saved the world; a dead
man arose, etc. in these and such we must be taught from above by God.

God teaches by the ministry of his word
God he teaches by the ministry of his word, which whosoever contemns,
refuses the means of his salvation; but that ministry will not be sufficient
without divine inspiration. 1. Cor. 3.6.
Paul may plant, Apollo may water, but God gives the increase.

Bellarmine translateth the Hebrew word (which he grants signifies
abscondita) incerta, and so does Lorinus; those doubting Doctors would have the
mysteries of the Scriptures uncertain and doubtful. Not^.


There is great diversity of judgments among men what is true wisdom; These
are of the Lord is true wisdom. Eccles. 1.2.
but if ye would enquire at the wisest man that ever lived, he will tell you
that having examined all things under heaven, he found all things to be but
vanity and vexation of spirit; and that true wisdom consisted only in the
fear of God, and keeping his commandments. The fear of the Lord is the
instruction of wisdom; Pro. 15.33
all other wisdom is foolishness.

Verse 7. Purge me with hyssope, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be
whiter then snow.
HE is not contented simply to crave pardon once or twice, but many times; yea
he multiplieth his suites by metaphors, allegories, and such borrowed speeches,
signifying how deeply he was wounded with his sin, that he would have himself
assured and confirmed in the remission thereof: and now he borrows a
similitude from the washings and purgations used in the Leuiticall law,
desiring that God would look on his miseries, who was a leprous man by sin,
and a filthy polluted sinner, that he might be washed in the blood of Christ,
prefigured by the Mosaicall washings.

Purge me with hyssope. Three times made mention of hysop. Exo. 12.22
There is made mention of hyssope, where it was used, in three places: first,
in the 12. of Exodus, at the institution of the Passover, where the blood of
the Lamb was appointed to be sprinkled upon the door checkes with a bunch of
hyssope bound with a scarlet lace. The blood signified Christ's blood, the bunch
of hyssope the saving, and the scarlet lace his blood died, which bound the
bunch; all having their spiritual significations. For the blood no doubt
signified the blood of that undefiled Lamb, shed from the beginning of the
world. The hyssope, the instrument applying his blood by faith. The scarlet
lace, the communion of the Saints, who are bound by love the bond of
perfection, and sprinkled with that same blood to the remission of sins. And so
the blood which washes, faith which applies, and the lace that coupleth, are
all one; Christ by faith and love received to the purgation of all Christians.

The second place, Leuit. 17. is the purgation of the Leper, wherein the blood
of the sparrow, the bunch of hyssope and the scarlet lace are likewise
mentioned, and differs nothing but in this, in the first was the Lamb, here
the Sparrow, which is all one: for even as the Lamb is among beasts, so is the
Sparrow base and simple amongst fowls; to which David compares himself, I am
as a sparrow on the house top sitting aloue: Psalm. 102.7.
so we must be sprinkled with his blood, which being contemptible to men, was
acceptable to God.

The third was, Numb. 19. about the red Cow, which must have hyssope dipped in
the blood thereof. And Christ is compared ^o the Cow or fat calfe, which being
in so great a price with the Father, was given ^o death for the salvation of
our fowls.

The hyssope has many things wherein ^t represents Christ very nigh: Wherein
hysop represents Christ. 1. Kin. 43^
for first it ^s obscure, humble and abject; so that Solomon is said to have
written of all trees, from ^he Cedar the highest tree, opposed to the hyssope
springing out of the wall, that is to be basest and most common growing amongst
stones, not standing of man's indu^trie to plant them, as other trees do. So
Christ in whom we believe was contemp^ible, a worm, not a man, despised, Psalm.
2^.
in him was no beauty, riches or earthly honors, which makes men to come in
credit and account.

Next. the hyssope is bitter and four, ^ot pleasant to the drinkers: so the
cross of Christ, by which our affections are mor^ified, is very odious to the
flesh, and agrees not with its taste. His cross is therefore (...) ^tumbling
block to the Jews, and folly to the Gentiles.

Thirdly, albeit it be sour, yet it is most wholesome: so albeit the doctrine
of repentance be irksome and unsavory to the flesh yet it is wholesome to the
soul. Natural men esteem this doctrine to be an enemy to them, Simil.
which would slay their corruptions and lusts. Medicine, which at first seems
bitter, afterward becomes more comfortable: so the doctrine which is salted
with salt and hyssope, is fitter for us then that which is sweetened with honey;
for honey was never appointed to be used in the Lords sacrifices, but salt omnis
victima sale saliatur.

An observation of Cyrillus concerning hysop.
Cyrillus observes in the hyssope an hot operation, whereby it sharpneth the
gross humors, and purges the concretion of the priuitie; so grace makes us
fervent in the spirit.

Moreover, hysop purges the lungs, phtiriasis, rests, The property of hysop.
Plin. lib. 20. cap. 4.
nourishes the native color of the body, kills filth and vermin growing
on man, cures the bites of serpents, provoke appetite, sharpneth the sight,
is enemy to fevers; of which it is written. Parua calens, pectus purgans,
petrosa streatrix
Ius sapidat pleurae congrua, spargit aquam.


So grace is hot by charity, purging by contrition, spitting forth by
confession, seasoning the body by temperance, saving the soul and inward parts
by application of Christ's blood, which being drunken purges our plurisie and
bloody eyes.

The hysop of Christ's blood a medicine for all our corruptions.
Then seeing all these diseases are in the soul of man, are we not much
beholden to God, who has made one salve to cure all our sores; the blindness
of our mind is removed by the water of his blood; the foul cor^uptions of our
heart are euacuate and dissolved, that we spit them forth; our coldness is
warmed, our fiery fevers and in flammations quenched, our spiritual vigor and
color is restored, which we lost by sin.

Wash me, and I shall be whiter then the snow. What meant by washing.
He acknowledges that none in heaven or earth is able to purge him, but God
only: He has that fountain in his own garden; he will communicate the
glory of our redemption to none but to himself. For by this washing is meant
the washing of justification and remission of sins; that as creation belongs
only to God, so does redemption by Christ's blood. Woe to them who leaving the
waters of life, go to any other, to seek water out of these rotten cisterns.

Then seeing it is the proper work of God to wash us, let us go to the lauer of
baptism, that there we may be once washed; and after daily pray, that he may
wash our feet by sanctification.

And I shall be whiter then the snow. He persuades himself of a full
purgation by Christ's blood. Though I were as black as the Moore, yet shall I
be white as snow. Nothing can blot out our sins but this blood. If we would
wash our selves with snow waters, our righteousness shall be as a menstruous
garment. Esa. 64.6.
What is all the righteousness of man, but an abomination before God. Yea
Christ himself if he had bin only man, could not have bin able to satisfy
the justice of an insinite God; he must be God himself, and therefore it is
called the blood of God.

But how shall we be whiter then snow* I answer; Act. 20. Object. So^^^.
our estate is more perfect and surer by Christ, then it was by nature in Adam;
forasmuch as we have our perfection by Christ, which cannot fail or alter; and
it is the perfection of God which belongs to us: so that we stand not before
God as men, but as gods before God, being covered with his perfect obedience
who is our Redeemer, blessed for ever. So there is no cause why we should fear
or despair, seeing we are cleansed perfectly, if we believe and be sanctified.
Let us put on Christ, whose garment is white as snow. Mat. 17.2.
And his Church is made white in him. Who is this that comes up white? (...),
Cant. 8.5. Apoc. 7.14
And the Bride has white garments, made white in the Lambs blood.

The proper office of the holy Spirit is to wash us, and purify our conscience
by Christ's blood, lest our filthiness keep us back from access to God. And
this ye were, says the Apostle, but ye are washed, 1. Cor. 6.11
ye are sanctified, ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. And again, speaking of the Church, that he may sanctify
her, purging her by the washing of water, by the word, that he may make the
Church glorious to himself, not having spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27.
or any such thing, but that she may be holy and blameless. So, it is the
only work of God to sanctify his children and make them clean.

Finally observe, that justification and sanctification are undivided
companions; Doctr. Iustificati^ and sanctification go together.
whomsoever the Lord washes by the hysop of his Sons blood, he also
sanctifies by his Spirit. Study therefore to get holiness, without which
none shall see God. Let holiness to the Lord be written on your breasts. Exo.
28.36 Leuit. 20.7
Holiness becomes the house of God. Be holy, Manystudy to attain to knowledge,
but not to sanctification*
as I am holy. For what fellowship can the most holy God have with unclean and
profane people? This miserable age studieth to a^taine to knowledge, but not to
sanctification. Let Atheists call you what they please, study you to purity
of life. A true Christian will make more conscience of an idle word or filthy
thought which will arise in their hearts, Nota.
and will correct it more sharply, then those lend miscreants will do for
adultery and the worst actions they commit.

Verse 8. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.
Having craved before remission of sins, now he beggeth the fruit which
follows upon the same, that is, joy and gladness, which is one of the fruits of
the kingdom of God, and marks of Gods children.

Joy proceeds of sorrow.
This joy which he suiteth, must of necessity presuppose a sorrow which he had
for his sin. For as repentance can never want sorrow, no more can remission
want joy. So that joy springs out of the bitter root of sorrow. And the
greater sorrow we have, the greater shall our joy be. The deeper thy grief be,
the higher shall thy comfort be.

He doubleth joy and gladness both of soul and body; he will not be
contented with some one or two consolations, but will have them to be
multiplied; that as his tribulations did increase, so his comforts in Christ
Jesus might be enlargad,

Of all men a Christian has most cause to rejoice.
As a Christian is the most sorrowful man in the world, so there is none more
glad then he. For the cause of his joy is greatest: in respect his misery was
greatest, his delivery greatest, therefore his joy greatest: from hell and
death is he freed, to life in heaven is he brought. What can make men more glad
then this, if he will believe. No offers can satisfy the mind of a prisoner
appointed to death, unless his remission be proclaimed and given him: Simil.
so all the joys in the world will not satisfy a conscience, till he hear
that his sins are forgiven him. Psalm. 4.8.
This joy David compares with the joy of worldlings who rejoiced in their
corn and wine, and says, that he had more joy then they had, and more peace
of conscience.

This joy eats up all false joys that men have in sin, True joy eats up
false joys. Exodus 7.12
as the rod of Aaron did the rods of the Egyptians. For it is not possible that
men can have both joy in God and godliness and in sin; for the one will ever
quench the other, as water does fire.

Nothing can alter this true joy.
All other joys will alter, whatsoever they be; but nothing can take this joy
from us. Not tribulation; we rejoice in the midst of tribulation. Not death; no
pain, no hatred of men, no persecution, all these rather increase it. Acts
5.41.
We rejoice with the Apostles, that we are thought worthy to suffer for the
word of God.

Why do worldlings call us melancholious persons, and too precise, that we
cannot do away with an idle word, Ioh. 4.32.
let be an idle action; let them say what they please, we say as Christ said to
his disciples, he had meare they knew not; so we have joy that they know not
of. That which is thy joy. O hypocrite, that is my sorrow. I laugh with
Democritus at that, Democritus always laughed, and Heraclitus always weeped
Iam. 5.1.
for which thou weepest; I weep with Heraclitus at that, whereat thou
laughest. Woe to them that laugh for they shall weep. Howl ye rich men, says
the Apostle.

Make me to hear. The person from whom he seeks this joy, is God: make me to
hear, says he; whereby he would teach us, Doctrine. Spiritual joy proceeds
from God.
that this joy comes only from God; it is he who is the fountain of joy and
all pleasure, for all good things come from above. Natural joys proceed from
a natural and fleshly fountain, spiritual joys spring only from God: so he
who seeks these joys beneath, seeks hot water under cold ice. Can any good
thing come out of Nazareth? can any grace come from a graceless ground? Ioh.
1.46.^


The instrument by which he seeks joy to be conveyed to him, is, the hearing
of that word, Thy sins are forgiven thee. There is none other ordinary means
by which God will work or ever has wrought joy to the troubled heart, then by
his word preached by the mouth of his servants, and believed by Christians. The
word of God is the cause of this joy. Act. 16.14
Faith comes by hearing. God opened the heart of Lydia. He that has ears to
hear, let him hear. I have given eyes, and they do not perceive, ears to
hear, and do not understand, their ears are heavy, etc. Preaching of the
word is a necessary instrument by which spiritual gracesis co^veied into our
hearts. God craves this often in the old and new Testament, that we should
hear his voice. And David confesses, that God had prepared his ear. Psalm. 40.
God from heaven said. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased,
Mat. 3.17.
hear him. If then ye give an obedient ear to Gods word, ye may be assured of
this joy wrought in your hearts, after ye have believed the comfortable
promises of salvation in Christ's blood.

What think ye then of Atheists, who will not hear the word but for fashions
sake, Against Atheists and Papists lothing the word.
calling those too holy who will hear two Sermons on one Sabbath; or of
Papists, who will no ways hear the word, which may be the means of their
conversion. Woe to the one and to the other. And because they have refused to
hear him, of whom they may receive comfort and instruction; therefore the Lord
shall refuse to speak to them any longer, unless betimes they repent.

That the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. The effect which he hops
to receive of those glad tidings, is a restitution of his first estate; wherein
he found himself wonderfully broken by his sin and affliction, and hops to be
restored by remission and pardon thereof. Where he speaks of the bones, he
would let us to understand, that there is no strength of nature able to resist
the stroke of Gods justice. No strength in man able to resist the stroke of
Gods justice
For if he beg^n to fight with us, we are unable to resist. The bones are very
hard, and the strength of man stands in them; but if God bring the ^ammer of
his wrath, it shall be as iron and steel to crush them in pieces, being but as
potters vessels.

God cures none but those whom he has wounded.
Which thou have broken. The form of Gods curing: he first wounds, and then
heals. He cures none but those whom his hand has pierced; and he who
wounds, can best cure the wound. And in this God differs from man: Man
wounds, but has no care to cure; God wounds and seeks to cure.
for man wounds, but has no care to cure; but when God inflicteth a wound on
his children, he has a present remedy appointed to cure the same. Let us
therefore be content to be under his hand, who for sufficient causes crossing
us, is ever ready to comfort us in Jesus Christ.

May rejoice. By this he lets us see, what would be the effect of his
delivery, even to burst forth in the praises of his God, by his words, by his
actions, Let thy desire to be delivered from trouble be to glorify God.
by his writings. Which should teach us, that in troubler either spiritual or
temporal, we ever have this the principal end for which we desire to be
delivered, that we may praise and glorify God.

Verse 9. Hide thy face from my sins, and put away all mine iniquities.
NOw he renews his former suite of the remission of his sins, showing how
earnestly he desired the same. He is not content once and again to cry for
pardon, but many times. For he thought otherwise of his sin, then we do of
ours, it touched him at the very heart. In this verse he uses two similitudes;
one, that God would turn away his face from his sins; next, that he would
blot out all his iniquities.

Hide. The first similitude is taken from men, God cannot see sin in his
children.
who will hide their face from that which they desire not to see. And it is
certain, God is in every place, and sees every thing, but he cannot see the
sins of his elect children; for that intervenient righteousness of Christ will
not suffer him to see any filthiness in his children. He sees no iniquity in
Jacob, Nu^. 23.21. Simil.
says Balaam. For as a red or blue glass being set before our eyes, what ever
we see thorough it, seems to be of the color of the glass: so God looking
thorough Christ to us, all his righteousness seems to be ours, and we are of
his color.

In the mean time, Use.
let us not sin because he hides his face from our sin: for if we abuse the
riches of his bounty, we shall appear in our own colors.

And put away all mine iniquities. The blotting away, presupposes an hand-writ
of the law against him, wherein his name was put in the count-booke, which must
be scraped out, and taken away, which cannot be done away but by the blood of
Jesus Christ.

All. Ye see that one sin calls to mind many thousands: and he is not
contented to be acquitted from one, unless he be acquitted from all. Call to
mind all the sins of thy life; be not at quiet till thou gettest a general
pardon for them all, which is to be purchased by Jesus Christ. Be afraid to
add new sins to thy old. Pro. 28.19. Ezech. 8.8.
Blessed is he that fears continually. Do as Ezekiel did to the wall of the
Temple, dig once, twice, thrice, and try thine heart; the more thou diggest,
the more abominations shall thou see in that place which should have bin a
Temple to God.

Verse 10. Create in me a clean heart, O God: and renew a right spirit within
me.
David has prayed already for the remission of his sins, and has doubled
over that petition eight times; now he craves new benefits, of sanctification,
of the holy Spirit, of joy, etc.

In all his petitions he prays for spiritual things; he seeks first the
kingdom of God. He prays not for the health of his body, Those are
senseless of troble, who seek to be freed of the pain, though not reconciled to
God.
but for the health of his soul; he craves not to be rich temporally, but
spiritually in God. Those are sensual, who being fallen in trouble, crave no
other thing then to be delivered from their present pain, never seeking to be
reconciled to God.

Next, he seeks great things; for he is a great God, who according to his
greatness can bestow ample gifts, God as he is a great God, bestows great
gifts.
as the Ocean plenty of water. It stood not with Alexanders honor to propine
Diogenes with a small gift. We bring small vessels to God, a weak faith,
although we have great need; we think that he is not able to give great
things. Our Savior Christ could work no miracles amongh them, Mat. 13.58 2.
Kin. 7.17
because of their infidelity. The Gentleman on whom the King ^eaned, died and
was trodden under foot, because he believed not the Prophet.

Thirdly, he suiteth importunately; and beggars ever speed best at Gods hand.
The Prophet Elizeus reproved King Ioas that he shot only three arrows forth
of the window; for if he had shot six or 7 times, 2. Kin. 13.19.
he might have utterly subdued the Aramites. Let us then pray instantly and
importunately unto the Lord, and we may be assu^ed he will hear us.

Sanctification follows remission.
He prayed before for remission of sius, and now he prays for the Spirit of
sanctification, an inseparable companion with the other. For you can never be
assured that you have received pardon for your sin past, unless Gods Spirit
has given you a care ^o live holily in time to come. Shall you be washen even
now, and after puddle your self in the mire? Not possible that ever Christ
will bestow his blood to wash any, whom he denies to sanctify by his holy
Spirit.

Create in me a clean heart, O God. The worker, God; the workmanship, in me;
the work it self, create; the subject, a heart; the quality, a clean heart.

O God. As in the first creation a man is a mere patient, and has no part of
it, but God by the parents works it: God must work our second creation.
so God works the second creation by his Ministers. There is no freewill or
prepation to grace, or foreknowing godliness, as these heretical Jesuits do
affirm. Work the work thy self, and take the praise to thy self, O Lord.

Create. A man must be twice borne before he can enter into heaven. As he is
mad^ to the similitude of the first Adam, Man must be twice borne:and his
second creation is more excellent then the first.
so mus^ he be made to the similitude of the secon^ Adam; and the re-creation
or regeneration is more excellent then the former. For in the first, man was
wrought out of clay^ but in the other, God works grace out o^ sin. What
harder to work upon then the dust? Next, he breathed in the dead bodi^ a
soul; but here he breaths in the hol^ Spirit in man's heart. Thirdly, in the
creation he made man perfect in all his members; so in the regeneration, all
the members of the body and powers of the soul^ must be renewed; and if thou be
deficien^ in the one, thou disgracest all the workmanship. Nota.
If thou haft in thy new birth the eyes of knowledge, and lackest the bowels of
mercy, and art maimed of the hands of bountifulness; or if thou be dumb and
cannot praise God, or deaf and cannot hear his word, thou art not a perfect
man. A greater work in the second birth then in the first. Nota.
A greater work to raise up a dead man in sin, then to raise Lazarus out of
his grave. Blessed are they who are partakers of the first resurrection, for
the second death shall have no power of them. Reformation should begin at the
heart. Satan is an unclean spirit. As a fly is bred in filthiness, and
leaves ever filth behind it; so does the devil defile every place whereinto
he comes.

Our hearts are as open Tauernes ready to receive all passengers. Now having
tried sin and Satan to be so noisome to us, we should remove them, shut the
door of our hearts, harbor them no longer; yea if any unclean thought arise,
let us not entertain it, nor consent thereto, lest it bring worse with it.

The subject upon which he must work, ^s the heart, the most noble part, the
most secret part, which none can know but God; the seat of all the affections,
by which man is ruled and led.

Reformation must begin at the heart.
A reformation which begins at the members and external actions, is neither
true nor constant. As if a man intending to dress his garden, and purge it
from thistles and such like weeds, would cut off the upper part, and leave the
root, which would spring up again: so if thou would chastise thy body, and
let thine heart remain luxurious, it is nothing. The heart is the fountain,
wherefrom springs all evil, the roo^ wherefrom all sin grows.

He speaks not of the substance but o^ the affections and qualities of the
heart. N^ honest man will lodge in a filthy house, o^ drink or eat except the
vessel be mad^ clean; Simil.
and God cannot abide in a foul^ swinish heart. Pro. 4.23.
Keep thine heart diligently says the Spirit. Since God then will be thin^
hearts guest, Genesis 15.7.
thou must guard it diligently that others enter not in, neither lewd
cogitations: but as Abraham chased away the fowls from the sacrifice, so we
must chas^ away corrupt and evil cogitations from our soul, as vagabonds
should be expelle^ from the Kings palace.

The heart in Latin is called cor, ^^ta.
note by three letters, to signify (as some think that it is the seat of the
Trinity; and therefore the pourtraiture of the natural heart is of three
corners, answerable to the same. As a vessel of gold or silver being through
long use wasted and broken, Simil.
is sent to the Goldsmiths to be renewed; so our hearts worn by sin, must be
sent to God, that he may put them in the fire, and cast them in a new mould,
and make them up again. Alas, that we are careful to renew every thing,
clothes, vessels, and all, only careless to renew our hearts.

Many are careless of the best things.
Renew a right spirit within me. He doubleth his suite concerning his soul, as
his principal desire. There are many who desire earnestly at God for earthly
things, but few are serious in seeking that best thing, a new soul. Many are
careful of the outward man, and careless of the hid man of the heart, that
inner man.

The spirit is right, when it is set upon the right object, which is God; but
when it declineth to the world or to sin, then it is wrong and goes astray.

David craving first that he might be purged from his filthiness, craves now
strength of God to his spirit, that he may not wander again, but abide
constant in the right way of Gods commandments. For we must not only pray for
a renewing grace, As we pray for renewing grace, so pray for accompanying and
following graces.
but for an accompanying grace, and a following grace to keep us in the way of
Gods obedience. The crooked and broken backed were not admitted to the
Priesthood; no more are crooked or perverse souls meet for Gods kingdom.
Try of what spirit ye are, whether of a right or a crooked; try whether it be
of God, or not. Every man's ways are right in his own eyes, but the Lord
pondereth the hearts. God must cast down the old building, and build up in
thee a new building for himself, that thou may be one of the stones of that
new Jerusalem, which shall be inhabited by God.

Verse 11. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit
from me.
IN this verse he craves two evils to be auerted from him; one, that he be not
cast out from Gods presence: the other, that the holy Spirit be not taken from
him. God cast off Saul his predecessor, and took his holy Spirit from him, 1.
Sa. 16.15
and gave him over to be led by an evil spirit; David here craves at God to
be free of those two judgments. The chief thing which he seeks after, is
Gods favor; from which nothing debarreth us more then sin. If any Courtier
for his oversight were put out of his place (as Pharaohs butler) and out of the
Kings sight, Exodus 40.3
would they not think hard thereof till they recover his favor? We have
sinned against God, should we take any rest till we be restored to his favor?
Seek Gods favor.
Should we not be afraid to be exiled and cast forth from his favorable
countenance, in whose presence is fullness of joy? Psalm. 16.12.


The face and presence of God is as the Sun, Simil.
which in Summer looking favorably on the earth, quickneth all creatures, man,
beasts, the earth, whatsoever grows, the fishes of the sea, and the birds of
the ^aire; and by his absence all are discouraged, comfortless, and lose their
vigor: so while we have Gods favor, we are in good case, we have light,
heat, comfort, pleasure, and all things; if he hide his face, all things goes
wrong; and therefore our Poet says well,

Tu si me placido lumine videris,
Cedent continuo caeterae prospere. Buch. Psalm.

But do you think that God can cast away his elect child? No verily, God cannot
absent him self foreues
totally and finally he will not do it, he cannot do it; though we our selves
and others beholding our crosses, may esteem so. The Sun may seem not to
shine, Simil.
when it is covered with clouds, although it be shining: so God may seem to
leave us, when he crosses us, but it is not so. With an everlasting love have
I loved thee. He loved his own who were in the world, to the end he loved
them. Ioh. 16.27.
The gifts of God are without repentance. Romans 11.29
False Christ would deceive the very elect, if it were possible. Mat. 24.24
Again Christ says, No man shall take them out of my hands. Romans 8.30
And Paul, Whom God predestinateth, he calls, justifies and glorifieth;
therefore they cannot fall away finally. Which is against that damnable
doctrine of the Papists, Against the Papists, who think the elect may be
reprobares, which is repugnant to the whole Trinity. Against God. Against
Christ.
who think the elect may be reprobates. This doctrine is injurious to the
whole Trinity: for the Father is greatly wronged, in that he is thought to be
impotent or inconstant; who has ordaned us before the world to glory, and
that his work could be hindered or altered by any intervenient fault or sin in
us, as though he would or could not remove and pardon it. And our Savior
gets no less injury by them, that one of his members can perish, and so he
should have a defective body. For if any who once has bin a member of his
mystical body fall away or be cut off, of necessity his body by want of
that one member would be disgraced. And the ho^y Spirit who is the pledge of
our adoption, Against the holy Spirit.
sealing up Gods grace in our hearts, and giving us that full persuasion of
Gods promises, causing us to cry Abba, Father, Romans 8.15
is greatly wronged, when his work is accounted nothing of, as frivolous, light
and uncertain. So to speak the truth, the Papists do what in them lies, to
disgrace the holy Trinite, and advance Angels and men, in plain contempt of
that glorious God head, which we ought so much to advance in our doctrine and
writings. This is a great comfort to us, The graces of the Spirit can not be
taken away.
that the graces of the Spirit which we have once gotten, cannot be taken away
again. For howsoever we do not feel them alike at all times, yet we have
them: sin may take away the seeling of grace, but not the possession thereof.
Albeit God be angry by correcting his best children, yet whom he chastises he
loves. Heb. 12.6.


But David says, Blot them out of the book of life. Object. Psa. 69.29. Solut.
It is not to be thought that David supposed they were written in the book of
life, but because they seemed to fear God, and were in the visible Church, but
not of her, he prays that God would make it known, they were never written
in it. And in praying that the holy Spirit may not be taken from him, he
doubts, yea he stands in fear of the loss thereof. Blessed is he that
fears continually. He doubts, but does not despair. The Spirit may be
grieved by us, and so cease to work in us good things, or to let us feel good
motions, but he cannot go away; for when he has brought us to our selves, and
letten us feel our sins, then he purges his dwelling place, and makes it
more meet, to work in such divine operations as it pleases him to inspire in
us.

Verse 12. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy
free Spirit.
IN this 12 verse David craves another necessary gift and effect flowing from
the remission of his sins, to wit, the joy of his conscience. For the
kingdom of God stands not in external things, ^^m. 14.17
as meat and drink, but in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost,
says the Apostle. For being made righteous by Christ, and peace made with God,
there arises a wonderful tranquillity in our consciences, from which finally
^riseth a joy unspeakable. For all the joys of the earth could not make us
joyful, vn^esse God were at one with him: neither can all the troubles that
can fall upon our outward man discourage us, if we find the joy of God in our
hearts.

Nothing spoileth us of this joy and pleasure that we have in God, but only
sin. Pleasure in sin takes away our joy in God.
For once del^ghting in sin, we can have no pleasure in Gods service; for these
two can never stand together. Therefore we must loath sin, that we may
rejoice in God.

Next, Christians have joy and sorrow intermingled. 2. Cor. 12.7
ye see the estate of a Christian is not always one; joy and sorrow is
intermingled: he has a Summer of joys, and a Winter of griefs. Saint Paul
had the messenger of Satan to buffet him, that he should not be exalted above
measure with his great revelations. After a Christian has mourned, he will
rejoice. He who never sorrowed for sin, will never rejoice for grace. He that
never mourned for the affliction, never rejoices for the consolation of
Joseph. Mourn with them that mourn, and rejoice with them that rejoice, says
the Spirit.

The substance and ground of this joy, is the salvation of God; so God is the
matter of it: and this salvation is purchased by God only. Psalm. 3.8.
Salvation is the Lords. Whereby he lets us see, that the first grace will
not do the turn to us (of initiation,) but we have need of the second grace of
confirmation, which is the accompanying and perseuering grace.

Stablish me. This stablishing is to make us sure: whereby he would advertise
us of our instabilitie and vnsurenesse, if we were not yet supported. Samson
was strong in grace; but being left to himself, he fell. Peter bragged
presumptuously in his own strength, Mat. 26.33
Though all the world would forsake thee, yet I will not; yet being left to
himself he fell, according as Christ had prophesied, Before the cock crow
twice, thou shall deny me thrice.

Let us now take heed unto our selu^s, the time is come to try all Christians
what is in them, and I fear our weakness will appear to the world to our
shame and the dishonor of our profession. And I never saw any, who presumed
above others of their own strength, Nota.
but they have proved the weakest soldiers, who by Thrasonicall confidence in
their wisdom, holiness, constancy, and other of their virtues, bragged
above their neighbors, yea contemned them, but in the end they prove cowards,
presuming in pride and falling with shame.

This is one of the most certain marks of Gods Spirit, that as he is free in
himself, so he gives liberty and freedom to all his children whom he
possesses. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.
For where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. They are not bound
with the chains of sin, they are not bound with men's traditions, but they
freely serve God, as the children of the house are free. The Romans were free
men; as citizens brag of their freemen, and there is great difference between
them and other free men, that they may use their trades of merchandise without
controlement; so is a Christian, of all men, the most free. Our Savior said to
Peter, Who should pay tribute, children or strangers?

But I pray you, Mat. 17.25 Object. Solut.
is a Christian who braggeth of the Spirit, free to do what he pleases? God
forbid; he is only free to do Gods commandments, and to stand in the liberty
which God has given him. He is bound to keep the commandments of God, to be
free from the traditions and vanities of men. So a man needs not to brag of
the Spirit, that he may say and do what he pleases, and always pretend the
Spirit and the liberty purchased by Christ's blood to every one of his follies;
no, but that liberty has her own bounds and circumscriptions; for the Spirit
gives us no more liberty, but that which is bound by his word.

No true joy but in the salvation of Christ.
The word jasha imports either Savior or salvation, as Ier. 3.18. To declare
that there is no true joy but in the salvation by Christ. This joy Marie had in
God her Savior, Luke 1.47. and John in his mothers womb leaped for joy, Luke
1.44. Zach. 5.9. Isa. 60.5. Rejoice daughter Sion. This joy makes us rejoice
in tribulation, by the comforter who eats up all our sorrows and
perplexities, as fire eats up the rust of iron. Other joys be but toys.
Quicquid non est in Domino, non tam intus recreat, quam for as: What joy is not
in the Lord, refreshes not so much within as without. This is the wine which
Solomon commands to be given to the grieved in heart. Pro. 11.6.
And surely this joy is a foretaste of that future joy which we shall have in
heaven, where there shall be no interchange of joy with sorrow, but a perpetual
joy, wherein the creature shall rejoice in the Creator, and daily find new
causes of pleasure. Psalm. 16.12
At thy right hand is pleasure for evermore.

But where he desires a restoration of this joy, it is certain that he once
felt and tasted of the sweetness of Gods favor and the life to come; Those
who abuse the favor of God, shall feel the want thereof
and this sense failing him for a while, he desires that it may be repaired
and restored to him. And God justly deals this way with men. For when they
abuse the time of his gracious visitation, he lets them feel themselves
what they are without him. Therefore he is glad to seek now with the prodigal
son, a restitution of the thing losed.

Stablish me. He craves now the gift of confirmation; as though he would say:
Albeit thou would bestow all the former benefits, of remission of my sin, of
sanctification, and joy proceeding therefrom, yet I am likely to lose them,
unless it would please thee to confirm and strengthen me to the end.
Therefore he craves to be stablished by the Spirit; and he adds an epithete
to that Spirit, calling it his free Spirit.

Our Lord was reproched for his frequencle with sinners; they called him a
drunkard* because he drank with them; Luke 2.16.
and a glutton, because he eated with them. Who would reprove a Physician which
frequenteth with patients; and who would reprove a Preacher who haunteth and
conuerseth with penitents, Simil.
not to pervert, but convert them.

Thy free Spirit. He lets us see, that this stabilitie comes by no other
means but by the Spirit of God; as oftentimes he does make mention in this
Psalm. The title which he gives to the Spirit, is a free Spirit. The Spirit
is free in himself, neither can he be limited: so those who have him cannot be
bounded by any humane device or presumption. The Spirit is free in himself.
The wind blows whither it pleases; and shall not the Spirit have liberty
to blow whither he pleases. N^ man sees the wind, yet it blows and
overthrows great houses and trees: and ye^ they will bind the word of God.
This (...) speak not, that I would wish any to pretend the Spirit, and allege
for whatsoeue^ thing they say a warrant of the Spirit: thu^ keeping that
liberty to be a pretense an^ sauegard of their imaginations; as the
Ana^baptists say; but there is no warrant for such riot; for the Spirit seeks
nothin^ ^ut by the word.

Christian liberty is to serve God.
Neither can this Christian liberty be a ^retence for Atheists, who under
covert of Christian liberty do what they please, ^pend their time in all
manner of riot. Our ^ibertie is to serve God, not sin, from the ^ondage
whereof we are made free.

Verse 13. Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be
connerted unto thee.
NOw follows his promise; 1. that he will be a Preacher: 2. to whom, to the
^icked: 3. what shall be the effect of his la^ours; sinners shall be converted
to God.

Then shall I teach the wicked. He minds ^ot to hide his talent, but to put
it forth to ^is masters advantage. So this is a sure mark of one who has Gods
mercy, that he will ^ot keep it private, but publish it, and make (...) known
to others. Which is a duty ne^essarily craved in us, Doctrine. Every Christian
should co^municat their gift for the profit of the Church.
that we should be digent to communicate our gift to the vtitie of the Church.
Worldly men put out ^eir money for their own advantage; and ^ould not
spiritual men put forth the ^ords gifts for his advantage?

David a Kiing, is not ashamed to be a teacher of repentance and mercy, which
he felt himself. So, none in all the world should be ashamed of the holy
ministry* Saint Paul says, None should be ashamed of the holy ministry. 1.
Cor. 9.16 No^.
Vae mihi si non praedicauero* Woe be to me if I preach not the Gospel. Those
who are ashamed to preach and publish their sins, let them be ashamed to sin.

Thy ways. But what is his text he teaches, thy ways, not men's traditions,
which can in no wise either assure or pacify the conscience. David was not so
bold, to put in his ways with Gods ways. Gods ways are the ways prescribed
in his word.
God^ ways are the ways prescribed in his word^ which are perfect, just and
holy ways. Bu^ when men will bring in the altar of Dama^cus, opposing it to
the true altar, they remember not that God brought lepros^ on the Kings face,
2. Kin. 16.13
till he was expelled ou^ of the Temple. This is a rule to Prince that they
teach the people, and make the^ to be taught only the ways of God; an^ bring
not in men's traditions, and make mixture of them with the holy Scripture which
here David shunneth.

But whom teaches he? The wicked, si^ners. those who are in the very bonds an^
hands of the Devil, these be the proper m^er upon which Gods word works.
Hypocrites set not by such lessons, but poor miserable creatures, who see by
the word that they are worthy of hell, then they are touched with a remorse,
and would be very glad to go to heaven. So the physic is lost, which is not
bestowed on such as are sensible of their own sores.

And sinners shall be converted unto thee. He persuades himself that his
doctrine shall be effectual, forasmuch as it shall work ^he conversion of
sinners. The word can do more then any thing Esa. 53.1. Romans 1.16.
O the wonderful ^ower of Gods word, that it can do that which all the world
could not do. It is the ^rme of the Lord: To whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? says Isaias. It is the power of God to salvation, says Paul. No
doctrine ^an work faith in man, but the work whereto it persuades him, not
forces ^im.

Conversion presupposes auersio^
Conversion prefupposeth auersion. The ^se of the word is to convert them that
are ^uerted or perueted; as the shepherd brin^eth home the wandering sheep.
Which ^eerly argues the necessity of the word and teachers thereof; so
profitable, as without which, sinners cannot be converted to ^od: for no other
instrument can convert them; and they cannot convert themselves. This teaches
Ministers to be diligent in their calling; if they would shine as stars in
heaven, Dan. 12.3.
they must labor to convert sinners.

Verse 14. Deliver me from blood, O God, which art the Gods of my salvation:
and my tongue shall sing joyfully of thy righteousness.
Having before so often begged pardon for all his sins in general; he now
particularly confesses which of all his sins grieved him most, The shedding of
innocent blud David's greatest sin
which he sets down to be innocent blood; and therefore he craves to be
delivered from the burden of it, from the terrors of an accusing conscience,
the cries which it sends up to God.

This verse has a petition and a promise. In the petition two things: 1. of
whom he beggeth this petition: 2. what he seeks to be delivered, from blood.

O God, the God of my salvation. His doubling and repeating the name of God,
shows unto us, that he takes hold on God with both his hands; and it
declares his vehemency and earnestness in his suite at God, that he might be
delivered from that blood. And all his suites he directs only to God.
Foolish Papists, God help you.

When he calls him the God of his salvation, he clearly shows to us, that
he has no salvation either of his body or soul, but only of God, who will
not give his glory either to man or Angel.

When he says, My salvation, he applies salvation to himself, and does not
imply and infold his salvation in generality, thinking it presumption to
certify himself of his salvation, We can have no comfort unless we be
persuaded of Gods mercy. David's petition.
(as the Papists say.) For what comfort can we have in life or death, if we be
not persuaded of Gods mercy and favor: not that we presume of our merit, but
persuading us of his majesty's constancy and truth.

Deliver me from blood. His petition is to be delivered from blood, both from
the guiltiness which he had contracted by his murder, as from the terrors of
his conscience, as also from the punishment threatened by Nathan, that blood
should never depart from his house; and finally from future blood, yt he never
fell into it again: 2. Sa. 12.10
as God delivered him from the blood of Nabal by Abigail. And this is a great
delivery, 1. Sa. 25.33
that we do not evil; as we ate commanded to pray, Deliver us from evil, Mat.
6.11.
that we commit no sin; and when we have done evil, it is a great deliverance
when God freeth us of the guilt of it, the condign punishment. But ou^
greatest comfort is, when we are kept from doing of it, as Joseph and Susanna;
and it is Gods greatest honor when we are delivered from the punishment which
we have deserved for committing such evils.

From blood. He both committed adultery and murder; but he is more touched for
the one then for the other. Adultery is eui^ because it defiles and defaceth
Gods imag^ in man; Murder wo^^e then adultery.
but murder destroys his image* And there is no sin more odious in the
sight of God then blood: for which caus^ he banished Cain from his presence;
Genesis 4.14. Genesis 6.5.
he destroyed the first world. which was full o^ cruelty; he removed Saul from
his kingdom, 2. Sa. 21.1.
who slew the Priests and the Gibeonites; he removed the Crown from the house
of Ahab and dogs licked his blood* Kings should pray with David, 1. Ki. 21.38
to keep^ them from the blood of innocents; for bloo^ shall be in their house.
Nota.
And often those wh^ live in blood, die in blood, and make (...) bloody
testament; according to tha^ of the Poet: Ad generum Cereris sine caedet and
sanguine,
Discedunt reges and sicea morte tyranni.


The word in the original is bloods, in the plural number. Why called bloods
in the plural number.
For such is the atrocitie of that sin, that one is weightier then a thousand
weights of Lead. So soon as it is shed, so soon does it defile the shedder, as
the purple dies the cloth. It seems well co^oured when it is shed, but
within a little time it becomes so thick and black, that a man would abhor
to behold it; therefore it is called bloods. Leu. 7.27.
The Lord in the Leuiticall law forbad his people to eat any flesh with the
blood; Nota.
that the detestation of beasts blood might make them so much the more to
abhor the blood of man, wherein his life stands. Blood has a cry: Genesis
4.10. Genesis 4 10.
The voice of thy brothers blood cries. Who so shedeth man's blood, his blood
shall be shed, which is either by the justice, or by revenge and repaiment. The
auengers of blood are admitted by the law.

Now men's hands are full and foul with blood. The earth is drunken with blood.
In her wings there is found blood. Polluted with blood. Lam. 4.14. Full of
blood, Ezekiel. 9.9. 22.2. 23.27. Blood has touched blood. Hos. 4.2. Joel 3.19.
Mica 7.2. Nah. 3.1. Hab. 2.12. Mat. 23.35
Joel complains of them, that they shed innocent blood. Micah, Nahum, and
Habakuk, pronounce a woe to them that shed innocent blood. And Christ brings
together all the blood shed from Abel to Zechariah. Mat. 27.8.
The Jews bought Aceldema, a field of blood. Reu. 8.8.
Their feet are swift to shed blood. The third part of the sea shall be blood.
God will revenge the blood of the Saints. So I see from the beginning of the
world to the end thereof, Innocent blood is, has bin, and shall be shed
innocent blood has ever bin, is, and shall be shed, but namely the blood of
Gods dearest children.

Sanguine fundata est, Ecclesia sanguine creuit,
-- sanguine finis crit.
Let us then think it no uncouth thing, when we see innocent blood shed so
abundantly, that the streets of Jerusalem are filled, and like to be more
filled with the blood of Gods Saints.

And my tongue shall sing joyfully of thy righteousness. He promises to be
thankful unto God: for it becomes righteous men to be thankful. Psalm. 33.1.
Sin took away, the use of his tongue, now grace restores it.

The tongue is a noble instrument, and as it were a bell hanging in a high
place. It is a shame it should not be occupied in sounding; and much more shame
that it should be ill occupied in sounding evil things. It is best used when
it sounds Gods praises, Nota.
who formed it. The tongue is best used when it praises God.
As the golden bell of Aarons garment sounded, so should our tongues sound Gods
praises, if we be his Priests.

This condemns two sorts of persons; Simil.
one, Those are to be condemned who do not speak for God.
who never speak any thing to Gods honor, thinking they are well discharged
when they do not openly blaspheme, or speak vilde speeches out of the filthy
groves of a polluted heart, although they hear others, and cannot open their
mouths to rebuke them, being ashamed to speak for the Lord, and glorify him
by maintenance of his truth.

Those are to be condemned who speak against God.
The other sort is more to be condemned, who open their mouth daily to lies,
blasphemies, slanders. But be assured, that if for every idle word we are to be
countable, much more for every wicked speech we shall be answerable to God at
the last day. Mat. 12.36


Shall sing joyfully. He is not content to say, shall speak. For the more
vehement intention of the mind kindled up with joy, makes the tongue to burst
out in Psalms, hymns and spiritual songs, to stir up thy self, and provoke
others with greater delight and pleasure to praise God.

This sweet singer of Israel answers to his name, when he sings sweet
songs and ballads to the praise of our sweet God. So much in this are those to
be condemned, Against those that sing profane balads
who sing profane baudie songs, to the dishonor of God, and offense of his
Church.

Of thy righteousness, that is, not of his justice in punishing him, but of
his righteousness in covering his iniquity. For which Christ is called, God our
righteousness. So he would be unrighteous and deny himself, if he should
deny us mercy: so sure is our salvation, which is our great comfort. We must
praise God for all his benefits, whereof we are less then the least; and if
for the smallest, much more for the greatest, even that work of our redemption
by Christ, that he is made our righteousness to save us, when we had nothing
of our selves, and knew not our danger, he prepared a salve for us before we
were wounded, and the remedy before our danger. If we were sick, and had
received health; poor, and were relieved, would we not thank God, and think
our selves obliged to him, as we are: Nota. The greatest benefits deserve the
greatest praises.
but seeing he has delivered us from our sins, and from hell, have we not the
greater cause to be thankful; for the greatest benefits deserve the greatest
praises.

Verse 15. Open thou my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
HE promised in the former verse to sing joyfully of Gods righteousness; now
he bethinketh himself that this is not in his own power, but it must come
from God. That as his faith and repentance was of him, so his thankfulness
must also proceed from him. There is no temporal or spiritual gift which does
not come from God. Phil. 2.13.
So there is no temporal or spiritual gift, which does not come from God. He
works in us velle and perficere, to will and to do.

The tongue was consecrated before to God; now he presents his lips, another
instrument; and at last the mouth it self, which contains both. Seeing God
has given to every member the own faculty and power, Every member should
sound God^ praises.
it is good reason it should be used to his glory. God has given thee a
tongue, mouth and lips, for no other end but to proclaim his praises. And
cursed is that man (if he repent not) who sounds any thing with his tongue,
but Gods honor.

We see further, that we are all close an^ bound up by nature, except the God
of nature enlarge our hearts with his love, and fi^ our mouths with his
praises; God has the key of his lips; he can make infants and sucklings
proclaim his praises; Psalm. 8.2. Nu^. 22.28. In Soliloq.
yea he ca^^ open the mouth of Balaams ass to utter his praise. Augustine
thinks non posse laudare Deum sine ipso, qui non ipsum habeat, qui se
adiu^et, that God cannot be praised without himself, he who has not him to
help^ them.

Moreover observe, Doctr. Sorrow for finne will break open the dumb mouth to
speak for Gods mercy.
how sorrow for sin will break forth the dumb mouth to speak for Gods
mercy. I ^eade of Croesus his son, who seeing a traitor going about to
murder his father, though before he was always dumb, began to speak and cry
pitifully: why should not we when we see that God is wounded with our sins,
once at last begin to cry.

But there arises here a question, whether by our praises Gods name may be
more amplified? Object.
I answer with that worthy servant of God, Solut.
M. Robert Rollock a holy man writing on this Psalm, Deum in se ^sse
perfectissimum, that God is most perfect ^n himself, without the work of any
crea^ure. The Father glorifying the Son, and ^he Son the Father, the Father
and Son ^he holy Spirit, the holy Spirit the Father and ^he Son. But yet will
be glorified by the creature. Because he is just, his righteousness craves,
that the creature should acknowledge the Creator, whose felicity stands in
this, that he should reverence his Maker with all dutiful service; he craves
it more for our weal, then for himself. Think ye that God can be either
worse or better for our praises; but we our selves are then best, when we have
grace to praise him.

Philip finding Nicanor detracting him, Plut.
relieved him from his necessity, and then he began to praise him; wherefore
he said, Videtis esse in nostra potestate and been and male audire: Ye see it
is in our power both to be well and evil thought of. But God is not so, he
cares not for our praises, and our obloquies do not touch him, he is so f^rre
from the one and the other. We can neither augment nor impair his dignity,
speak what we will or please, we may do our selves evil, him we cannot
offend.

Sin takes away the benefit of our tongue, Sin makes a man d^^ that he can
not praise* God.
that we become dumb, and cannot praise God, till he forgive us our sins, and
then we shall speak; and although we would speak, God thinks nothing of our
speeches, until we be reconciled to him. What have thou to do to declare mine
ordinances, Psalm. 50.16
and to take my name in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed? But w^ to
the tongue, mouth and lips, which are not employed in the service of God that
made them, to proclaim his praises: and double woe to them who employ them to
his dishonor; for they shall say, would God they had bin rather dumb, Nota.
and could have spoken nothing, then to have spoken to the dishonor of that
Majesty which made them.

Verse 16. For thou desire no sacrifice, though I would give it: thou
delightst not in burnt offering.
NOw toward the end of the Psalm he is bursting forth in thankfulness,
setting down the sacrifice which the Lord would not have, to wit, external
sacrifices; and declaring that which he would have, a contrite heart.
Sacrifices of old comprehended all Gods worship. For the burnt offerings and
sin offerings represented Christ's blood. The thanksgiving offerings, The use
of the legal sacrifices.
peace offerings, the incense, the thankfulness of the Saints for his benefits;
and what of all these, he was wearied with them, when they were not mixed with
faith and repentence. Nazianzen says, Vna Dei est purum gratissima victima
pectus.

Then if God delight not in sacrifices which were commanded by himself, Nota.
what cares he for trifles invented by men, of which he can have no pleasure.
His delight is not in outward sacrifices at any time, if they be alone. Hos.
6.6.
I will have mercy (says he) not sacrifice; much less does he respect the
sacrifice of the Mass, having no warrant in his word; neither yet of our
prayers and praises, when we do but pretend religion, not serve God unfeignedly.
Away with all our offerings, if we offer not to him that which he craves
chiefly, to wit, a penitent heart.

Lorinus obserueth^ well, Sacrificia non operari per se peccatorum remissionem
posse^sed ^antum representare and praefiugare sacrificium ^llud vnicum
redemptoris: that is, that the sacrifices of old could not work by themselves
remission of sins, but only did represent and prefigure the only sacrific^
of our Redeemer. Then, as he says truly, their sacrifices ex opere operato, by
the external working of them, cannot give remission of sins. What reason then
has he to affirm that the Sacrament of the new Testamen conferreth grace by
the very external giving thereof; Lorinus against himself.
seeing that same thing wa^ prefigureted by their sacrifices which is
represented by our Sacraments, that is, Christ^ blood both in Baptism and in
the Lords Supper.

Verse 17. The sacrifices of the Lord are (...) contrite spirit: a contrite and
broken heart, O God, thou will no^ despise.
WHen he has removed that which God misliked and refused; now he places that
which God likes and receives, that is, the sacrifice of a contrite spirit. In
the plural number called sacrifices, that is this one for (...).

A broken heart, is such a heart which is humbled through a sight and sense of
sin. What a broken h^ar^ is.
For it is needful, that as we have worn our heart by finne, so our heart
should be worn again by repentance and sorrow for sin, and that we should
take pains to subdue our hearts and all the thoughts thereof, and bring them
captive to Gods obedience.

That is that poor spirit of which Matthew speaks, Mat. 5.3. Esa. 66.2.
and Isaias speaks of the spirit that trembles at Gods word. Why sacrifices
in the plural number.
This cause d David to put the word sacrifices in the plural number, that he
might express the better, that one contrite heart which is the sacrifice of
repentance alone suffiseth for all legal sacrifices. If he had said that a
contrite heart, is a sweet smelling sacrifice, they might have excepted yt so
are many others, as the papists do mix their works with the grace of God. But
David excludes purposlie all sacrifices, and shows, that what ever
sacrifices God respects are comprehended under a penitent heart, believing in
Christ's blood, and seeking mercy for the same.

This sort of people are called mourners in Sion, who mourn to God for their
own sins, and the sins of the people, who power out their heart with their
tears to God, who do lament for the affliction of Joseph. Oh, what cause have
we to lament this day for our sins, and to break our hearts for the
persecution of the Church in every place. Let our feasting be turned into
fasting, our laughter in tears. Mourn with Jeremiah for the desolation of
Sion. Nota.


A contrite and broken heart thou will not despise. Here he encourages the
penitent sinner; who may be affraied to appear before the Tribunal of God, in
regard of the conscience of his sin, and be feared that God will not accept
him, howsoever he be humbled. Him here he encourages, God will not despise a
troubled heart, yea rather he will like it and manifest his skill in healing
and comforting it. God likes a troubled heart.
To which agree all those places in Isaias which comfort the Church, those
sweet inuitations of Christ to the laden and weary, to come unto him, and to
those that were athirst, and he that calls upon us, will not reject and cast
us away.

The Lord is nigh to them that be of a contrite spirit. Psalm. 144.8. Who speak
to him in the bitterness of their soul. Job. 10.1. Crying like the Dragon or
Ostrich. Mich. 1.8. Who cry wonderful being ouercomed by the Elephants. As
Saint Jerome says, who slay their affections, and offer them as a sacrifice
to God, as the Magdalen, Peter, other Saints, who forsake their former lusts,
and say with a certain young man, who being temped by an harlot, and seeming
to be ignorant who she was, she said ego sum, it is I, he answered, ego non
sum, it is not I, for he was converted by repentance.

If thou would prevail with God, Pro. 23.26.
give him thine whole heart, if thou do any thing for God do it with thine
heart, 2. Chro. 31 21
seek him with thine whole heart, love him, fear him, pray to him, turn to
him, obey him with thine whole heart. Deuteronomy. 10 12. Romans 6.17. Ier. 32.40. Joel.
2 12. Psalm. 119.145. Their heart is divided says the Lord of host, now shall
they perish. Hos. 10.^
God is one and undivided, and craves an heart, one, and whole in affection,
and rent only by de^ection, nothing can break God but a broken heart. The
string can bow the bow, the fire can temper and molifie the steel, the goats
blood the adamant, and the heart contrite can move God says Mantuan in these
verses.

Virga recens Zephyris, neruo curuabitur arcus
Igne chalybs: adamas sangnine, cord Deus.
Finally, observe that albeit repentance does make a contrite heart, and as I
said before we should take such pain on our contrition, that we should not let
any thought of our heart escape unrepented and mourned for, yet, the only
hammer which must burst our souls is the word of God, The word of God bruseth
the heart.
which bruseth the rocks of a stony heart, Simil.
and makes an heart of flesh. And as out of rags being bruised is brought forth
fine paper, so is a troubled heart bruised with sorrow for sin turned into a
gracious subject, whereinto God may work and write his law. And as the poole
of Bethsaida being troubled, Ioh. 5.4.
brought health to men's bodies: so does the conscience afflicted by God, bring
certain health and salvation to soul and body. Saint Ambrose says that
repentance is so difficult and hard a matter, that he has oftener found mo who
lived innocently, then who did truly repent. It is written of Augustine, that
he caused the psalms of repentance to be put on the wall over against him,
before he died, and reaped abundantly reading them ten days; at which time
none came to him but either the physicians or his refreshment. Seeing therefore
God likes this sacrifice of a contrite heart, without which none other thing
will please him, let us take the bests of our affections, separate them from
their old pleasures to God, bind them by the coards of the word, lay them
down at his feet, and slay them, and that sacrifice shall please him, offer
thy self a living sacrifice, and be assured God will accept of thee; and never
reject thee not thine offering, other sacrifices die being offered, Nota.
but we by offering our selves to God yet live.

Verse. 18. Be favorable unto Zion for thy good pleasure: build the walls of
Jerusalem.
HE has prayed for mercy to himself, now he prays for the Church, which he
has offended by his sin, and upon which he had brought such evils, that it
would please God to be merciful to her, ^uild up her walls, and repair her
ruins.

No man can truly pray for himself unless he pray for the church.
No man can truly pray for himself, ^nlesse he pray for the Church also; as
Da^id does in many Psalms. If a man be a ^ensible member of the body, it is
not pos^^ble but the evils which befall to any one ^ember (let be all) touch
not him to the heart, as it were done to himself.

In this verse are three things contained, first, for whom he prays, for Sion
and Jerusalem, secondly, what he suiteth, Gods favor, thirdly, out of what
ground, for thy good pleasure. But before we enter to any of these particulars,
we have some generals necessarely to be marked.

The chief care of princes should be for the Church.
First, that the chief care of Princes should be the weal of the Church.

The Church is as the heart in the body, which being troubled, of necessity
the body must be in danger: if ye love your head, keep your heart. The Church
nurisheth the heart blood of Christ in her bosom, The Church is as the heart.
the rest of the members have also their own offices, but she has the
chiefest office, being the most noble part; and who should maintain her more,
then the head, who has all the senses infixed therein, and from which all the
members, sinews and veins take their life. And what grea^er honor can they
have, then to be nursing fathers of the Church. If a king concredite his child
and his first borne to be nourished by any of his subjects, may not that
subject think he has gotten great honor, Simil.
and may expect for his travel great commodity: and when a king has received
Gods first borne (for Israel is his first borne) in his custody, may he not
think he has gotten great glory; and if he neglect his first borne, shall he
not receive great infamy. Those who are greatest officers in a kingdom, as
Chancelour, Chamberlane, President, Secretary, and men of estate, are in
greatest estimation and credit; and shall not great men think they are
greatly obliged to God, who has made them administrators of his kingdom,
whose standing is the weal of the Church, the principal e^tate of their
Commonweal; if it stand, then they stand; if it fall, they fall, for their
subjects obey them more for conscience, then for any terror or fear of their
laws.

Then it is best for them to be religious, and to propagate holy religion, for
their own standing.

The Romans wrought more by religion then the sword.
The ancient Romans, Lacedaemonians and Athenians were most careful of
religion, because they affirmed that they wrought more by devotion, then they
were able to ^oe by the sword. This was their good po^cie, as Plutarch amply
recites in his History.

Then when Princes invade religion, and draw the people to atheism, see if
they be not gratest enemies to themselves, to their estate and posterity. The
Turk and other polititions may give Christian princes sufficient proofs of
this my assertion, as also if examples of David, Let princes follow David's
example.
Solomon, Josias, Ezechia, Constantine, Theodosius, may move them, whose
posterity has brought eternal renown unto them, and if not, let Julian
affray them, and wicked princes like unto him.

The care of religion a princes chiefest safeguard.
The care of religion, and to be a religious prince, is the greatest safeguard
to a prince. For religion has Gods maintainnance; and God has shown his
mighty hand for Ezechia against Senacherib, and for David against all his
enemies; for Queen Elizabeth who died in peace notwithstanding all the
maginations of her enemies; and for our dread Sovereign Lord King James,
Princes religious bring wealth to their subjects.
against all the horrible and monstrous designs of his enemies.

Princes maintaining religion, bring great wealth to themselves and to their
subjects as Solomon did, when gold was as dust, and silver as the stones.

Next, 1. King. 10.21.
the Church being under continual danger should be helped by princes. The
Church being troubled should be helped by princes.
Since the Church is the princes depositum, which God gave to their custody,
they ought to have a chief regard of her. The fatherless widow and orphans
are concredited to them, much more they should defend the Church, because the
devil and his instruments and her fight against her, and who should maintain
her but princes, who are set in authority only for her cause, to debate and
take her part against all the world. Her enemies are more then notorious, she
was never at rest, her enemies are assaulting her continually; hell has broken
loose against her in these latter days; princes have put their diadems on the
horns of the beast; people are rageing. And seeing that eternal spouse of God
is so hated of the world, should not princes with David procure her welfare
even to their uttermost.

Princes who would fight well must pray well.
Princes must by prayer and power support the Church. Prayer has more power
then armor. Therefore princes who would fight well, must pray well. Moses did
more with his hands lifted up to God, then Joshua did with his sword. Exo. 17.11
Gen: 32.28.
Israel wrestled with God, and gat his name by prayer: for otherways he could
not have prevailed with such a majesty. Therefore princes who be athiests, can
never be good to the Church: and no marvel, because they know not what prayer
is. Wicked princes cannot abase themselves so low as to pray to a superior;
but David who will be renowned for ever, not only prays, but bids the
people pray for the peace of Jerusalem. In a word, the chief armor of the
Church, and all Church wardens, and Church defenders are spiritual. Arma
militia non sunt carnalia: The weapons of our warrefare are not carnal, but
spiritual.

Be favorable unto Zion. He prays for Sion and Jerusalem, this is a
novelty, should the king pray for the Church, I think the Church should pray
for the king. Yea, but this king thinks that all his prosperity stands in
the weal of the Church, and therefore he, as the most principal member
thereof, prays for her.

What Sion and Jerusalem were, and what they signified.
The Church is represented by the names of Sion and Jerusalem. Sion was the
mountain upon which the fort and Temple were builded; Jerusalem was the
city. But these two have spiritual interpretations, being shadows of
things to come, as all the Fathers confess, Sion was a mountain in the holy
land, which the Lord loved more then all mountains. He might have chosen
Olimpus for height, Basan for fatness. And what was Sion, it is to be seen
yet, there are many bigger, stronger, and fairer mountains in Scotland, then
was Sion. (I will compare it to Authur-seate, at Edinburrough) how comes it
to pass that the Lord chooses it before all mountains? What, but because he
loved it, and made it a place of his habitation; there he built a Church, out
of it he will let the law, yea the Gospel came to all nations, mount Sion is a
place so firmly fixed by Gods providence, that it shall never be moved. So is
the Church a number indeed obscure and base in comparison of other people; but
so sure by his power, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against her,
for Sion is a watch tower, specula, and the watchman of Israel stands on the
top thereof, and who can take it or do it wrong, she seems weak in
comparison of mighty mountains, who leaped and scorned her, yet she stands
and they are all fallen: for they exalted themselves by their pride and power,
but she abides strong, by the strength of God, and the arm of the Almighty.

We have now left mount Sinai which is in Arabia where was earthquake and
thunder, and are come to mount Sion, the Church in the Gospel, where is peace
and grace. So our estate is better then theirs was, firmer then theirs, for God
has chosen it to be everlasting. What do ye then think of those persecutions
and nouations in the world; nothing for the Church but extremity; her enemies
are seeking to root her out: but let these murders of Caines seed, beware of
themselves, let God root out their seed. Our mountain is fixed by God, which
cannot be moved, and that little stone which came out of the mountain without
hands, shall bruise that golden image in pieces. Therefore let us build our
selves upon mount Sion, and not on the sand of man's inventions, that we stand
in the evil day, and be approved of God, rejoice therefore daughter Sion, for
thy foundation is in heaven; they shall invade heaven, and pull Christ from the
right hand of his Father, before they overthrow thee. Let them build up their
tower Babel, but God will confound their languages, when the gates of hell
cannot overcome her, the sword of princes, shall destroy her.

Jerusalem. The name Jerusalem imports a vision of peace, a vision or a
sight, Jerusalem a vision of peace.
for there is neither sight nor light in all the world but blindness and
ignorance, as there was no light in Aegipt for three days, but a palpable
darkness, except among the Israelits in the land of Goshen: Exo. 10.23
so there is no knowledge of God, or Christ the light of the world to be found
in all the earth, but in the true Church of Christ. Then as there is a great
difference betwixt a blind man who sees nothing and a seeing man, as great
difference is there betwixt one who knows Christ, and an ignorant.

These ignorants, blind leaders of the blind, do not see this peace of
Jerusalem; This peace is only in the true Church, ^t grows where grace
grows, which two are inseparable, Gal. 1.3.
grace and peace was the ^alutation of Saint Paul, which he wished to ^ll the
Churches, this peace is first with God, by the peacemaker Jesus Christ: next,
^n a tranquillity of the conscience after reconciliation: and last, with all
men. There (...) no, peace to the wicked, says my God. Esa. 48.22.
Therefore dwell in Jerusalem, and ye shall see peace.

Be favorable. 2. What he craves to the Church; even that God would be
favorable to her, and that he would build up her walls, as he says in the 132.
Psalm, Peace be within her walls, and prosperity within her palaces. The
Church can neither prosper in peace or war without God bless her.
The Church have palaces, for peace, and walls for war, he prays the Lord
to bless her in both, for neither can the Church of God flourish in peace,
neither be victorious in war, unless God bless her in both estates.

To be favorable to Sion, is to give her tokens of his good will and of his
comfortable assistance. A special token of Gods favor when the Church has
good governors.
This is a token of his favor when he gives her good governors and heads,
both in Church and policy. And again, a sign of his wrath when he gives her
such as Saul and Achab, wicked and evil governors.

The next token of his favor is prosperity, when the Gospel has free
passage, When the Gospel has a free passage.
the worship of God is enlarged, heretics are put away, true teachers are
diligent and vigilent.

Thirdly, when unity is in the Church, and all are in one mind, When unity i^
in the church.
then God is among them; but when God has casten them off, all are rent and
spoiled, religion decays, heritiques increase. Satan has gotten the upper
hand, Gods Church is miserablely spoiled by wolves and foxes, troublers of the
Lords vine.

Build the walls. The second part of his prayer is for the walls, that they
may be builded, for Jerusalem is not only a city for peace, but to be
prepared for war; she has not only palaces, but castles, towers,
fortresses, and walls; and therefore David craves that these might be built
up again.

First see, what are these walls. Secondly, whereof they are builded: Lastly,
who is the builder.

What are the walls. The Church of God is a fortefied town, which must have
defenses to resist the enemy, for the devil and ^ll evil men, princes, wise
men, gentiles, ^ewes are conspired against the city of God: therefore God
fortifieth his city with all necessary defenses which may hold ^ut the enemy.

The Church has walls invisible and visible.
The walls are too fold: invisible, the protection of God, which the world
sees not, for the Lord is a wall of brass about his Church to repel her
enemies, and a wall of fire to burn them, also he has his Angels who pitch
their tents about his holy and chosen ones, 2. Kin. 6.7.
there was horses of fire compassing Elizeus.

The outward and visible walls are made of a number of lively stones,
compacted together by the mortar of love, strongly resisting all the enemies of
the Church, for that unity of the Saints strengthen them by the power of their
God. Boni enim ciues mania ciuitatis, good citizens are the walls of the
city. And upon these walls compassing them on all sides be bulwarks,
whereupon are set the canons of the word of God, mighty in operation,
destroying the enemies; and the censures of the Church, namely excomunication,
which being lawfully led, is of greater power to subdue the enemy and resist
him, then all the power of civil authority.

The sins of princes and people make great gaps in the walls, at which the
devil and enemies of the Church and wolfes enter and destroy the Lords vines.
They with Tobias and Sanballat stay the building of these walls, Neh. 42.
and are striving to build the walls of Jericho, which were forbidden by
Iosuah to be redefied under a great curse, 1. Ki. 16.34
which lighted on Hiel the Bethelite in the days of Achab; pity is it to see
the princes of this world so much enfeebling Jerusalem to strengthen Jericho.

David cries to God that he would build them, whose power is greater then all
the worlds, who as he has invisible walls of his protection, so he has
outward defenses to maintain his Church, he is master of it, yea master
builder, and sends forth servants whom he strengthens for the building of
his work. I see many pulling down the walls, yea with Edom in the destroying
of Jerusalem, crying sack, sack, Psalm. 137.7.
raze, raze up the foundation. Few with ^^chemiah mourning for the ruins of
Gods house in all parts, and helping to restore them. Let us therefore go to
the God of David; who albeit he was king of the town, and began to build the
city and walls, and laid materials to the Temple, yet he knew that the
laborers wrought in vain, unless the Lord of heaven builded the city, Lord
repair the decaies of thy Church, for thy Christ's sake.

For thy good pleasure. He finds the ground of all that perfection to be in
God himself and his good favor, and not in men or their merits: for as the
whole building of the Church is the only work of God; so is the reparation of
her ruins only belonging to himself. It belongs to God to build the Church.
Men might have builded with stone and brick the exterio^ walls, but it is
proper to God to build his spiritual Church. And this is a token that God has
pleasure in his Church, when he is building it, sending good builders*
materials of spiritual graces, fortifiers, as Cyrus and Darius good Princes,
Nehemiah, good governors, Esdra and good Priests. And our obedient and
careful people; who do take the sword in one hand and the instrument of
building in the other, that the Lords Jerusalem may be edified. But when his
favor is departed, then in his wrath, he gives Princes, Governors, Nobles,
Preachers, and people who strive either to hinder the building, or to pull
down the building, to build up Jericho, and cast down Jerusalem. David he
craves that God may be favorable according to his good pleasure, for the
building of the Church depends upon Gods good will and pleasure; who when he
likes his Church, can advance her, and when he is displeased with her cast her
down. It appears evidently now that God is angry with his Church in all
parts of Christendom, when he is pulling down, and not raising up his Church,
we have provoked his wrath against us; and his soul abhors our
hipocriticall profession, and our wicked conversation.

Verse. 19. Then shall thou accept the sacrifices of righteousness, even the
burnt offering and oblation: then shall they offer calves upon thine altar.
THis is the promise of thankfulness to God, wherein is set down a
correspondence or restipulation betwixt the people who shall offer sacrifices,
and God who will accept them. And Gods service then goes well, when we offer
willingly, and God accepts gladly.

Then. Mark the time, If our sins be forgiven us, God will hear our prayers
Genesis 4.5.
when God has been favorable to his Church in forgiving her sins, then he
will accept the offerings. For pray what ye please, and distribute to the
poor, if God do not like of it, all is in vain. Caine offered sacrifices,
but the Lord accepted them not, because he hated his cruel heart. Abel offered
i^ faith and was accepted.

But how shall ye know if your offerings be acceptable to God, seeing there is
no fire to fall down from heaven, as that which burnt up Elias sacrifice? ^.
Ki 18.34
Ye shall know that albeit an elementarie or material fire falls not down,
yet the fire of the Spirit falls on our hearts, Nota.
the fire burning up the dross of our corruptions by unfeigned repentance,
warmeing our hearts with the love of God, kindling our hearts with a zeal of
Gods glory. This is the fire which will fall down from heaven upon our
souls; which sensibly we feel, if the Lord hear our prayers.

The sacrifices of righteousness. Some expound these offerings to be such as
agree to his will. I reverence their judgment; but I see not how that
exposition can agree with the text. But it may be expounded of that
righteousness which we ought to do to our neighbors, as we offer a sacrifice
of a contrite heart, the calves of our lips by praises, and these are the
sacrifices of righteousness by our hands, so that heart, tongue, hand, should
be all offered to God, for God likes well of righteous dealing^ (...) our hand
be not defiled with thirst, co^^ousnesse, oppression, which if we sacrifice to
Satan by sin, let us not lift to God by prayer, but lift up pure hands, wash
our hands in innocence and then compass Gods altar.

It would seem to be some differenc, Object.
where God said, he would have none of their sacrifices, and now they promise
sacrifices? Indeed if the sacrifices be only external, Solu.
what accounts God of them, if they want mercy and righteousness, for he
will have mercy and not sacrifice. Therefore let external and internal
worship be conjoined, and then God will like best of it: but being separated
from spiritual offerings, it is abominable and a burden to the Lord.

Which be the sacrifices of righteousness. The alter Jesus Christ by whom we
must offer our prayers to the Father.
The sacrifices of righteousness are those which be lawful and are commanded
by God.

They shall offer calves upon thine altar. The calves are the calves of the
lips; the alter Jesus Christ, who was both represented by the brazen altar,
and by the golden ^^lter. For no sacrifice or prayer could ever ^^e acceptable
to God, unless it were offered upon Jesus Christ, for he is sacrificium;
sacerdes, et altar; Augustine says, he is the Priest, the Altar, and the
Sacrifice; the offerer, the thing offered, and the altar upon which it is
offered.

(...)
All the mosaicall altars are abrogated, because the sacrifice is made. The
heathnish altars have no place; The popish altars are abominable, after the
apish imitation of the Jewish altars, they would offer that incrementum
sacrificium missa; without any warrant of Gods word. It is enough for us to
offer, not Christ to the Father, but our prayers by Christ to the Father, who
will smell a sweet savor of rest, of all our peticions and thanks which are
presented upon Christ, and for thirst of him. Lord keep us from the altar of
Damascus, and let us offer all our offenses upon Jesus Christ, with whom we
shall be very heartily welcome to God Amen.


