DAVID'S BLESSED MAN: OR, A SHORT EXPOSITION UPON THE FIRST Psalm, directing a
Man to true Happiness. Wherein the Estate and Condition of all Mankind is
laid down, both for this life, and that which is to come. The second Edition
profitably amplified by the Author SAMVEL SMITH, Preacher of the Word of God at
Pritwell in Essex.

1. TIM. 4.8. Godliness has the promise of the life present, and the life
that is to come.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, and are to be sold by SIMON WATERSON, at
his Shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Crown. 1616.

TO THE HONORABLE SIR ROBERT RICH, KNIGHT OF THE BATH, AND SON and Heir to the
Right Honorable ROBERT Lord RICH: and to the Honorable and virtuous Lady, the
Lady FRANCIS RICH his wife, S.S. wishes all true comfort in this life, and
Eternal happiness in the Life to come.
HONORABLE,
IT is reported, that when one presented unto Antipater, King of Macedon, a
treatise of Happiness, that he rejected it with this answer, I am not at
leisure: your Honor shall find this a treatise tending to Happiness, and
showing the way to everlasting blessedness, yet I assure my self it shall
find better intertainement at your hands, and that you will find leisure at
your leisure to peruse it. J must ingeniously confess, that many have, many
times, handled many points of doctrine delivered in this treatise: yet I have
done it after another method. Jf the water I have drawn from this Well shall
delight you, J hope it will not taste the worse being brought unto you in this
vessel. I offer here unto your view the Anatomy of David's blessed Man: or, a
short Exposition of the first Psalm, directing a man how he may be truly
blessed. It is not without desert that Jerome does call this book of the
Psalms, The Treasury of learning: for out of it most frequent testimonies are
brought by our blessed Savior himself. And this first Psalm is a Compend, or
an abstract of the whole book of Psalms, directing the way to true
happiness. The text J am sure is excellent for the purpose, but for my manner
of handling it, I leave it to the censure of Gods Church. In Preaching I have
ever counted plainness the best eloquence, and the carriage of matters so,
that those of the lowest form may learn somewhat, the soundest and the surest
learning. For surely we are so fallen into the dregs of time, which being the
last, must needs be worst that Security has so possessed all Men, that they
will not be awaked: but if at any time the word of God, or any good motion of
Gods Spirit has met with them, presently Security whispers them in the one
ear, that though it be fit to think of such things, yet it is not yet time.
Youth pleades a privilege, though many millions of young men are in hell for
want of timely repentance. And Presumption warrants the^ in the other ear,
that they may have time hereafter. And thus men spend their days, until at
last their houre-glasse be run, and time then is past. Now if your Honor shall
lay this to heart in the strength of your years, it shall be your chiefest
wisdom. And if to be religious in all ages has been held to be true honor:
how much more honorable is it in so impious an age? It is religion and
godliness that shall embalme your name and make it shine before men, and
glorify your soul amongst Angels. Mary her box of Ointment shall never be
forgotten: for Godliness has the promise of this life, and that which is to
come: and without it there is no internal comfort to be found in conscience,
nor external peace to be looked for in this world, nor eternal happiness to
be hoped for in the next. Now, how can Religion but promise to herself a
zealous patro^ of your honor, being the son and heir of so gracious and
religious a father, who has showed himself a faithful Dore-keeper in the
house of his God? Let his godly example teach you not to drink of those stolen
waters, or rather indeed the blood of souls, wherewith too many in these
gold-thirsty days do purchase Acheldama unto them and theirs. The Lord keep
this ever from the purpose of heart in his servants, who have so honorable and
weighty a trust committed unto them. Let that exhortation of David to his son
Solomon be ever in your honorable mind: And thou Solomon my son, know thou
the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing
mind: for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts: If thou seek him he will be found of thee, but
if thou forsake him he will cast thee off for ever. The God of heaven so
vouchsafe to water you and yours, with the dew of heaven, that with the godly
man in this psalm you may prosper as trees of his planting: and so bring forth
fruit in due season in this

(...) A Table of the Principal Doctrines contained in this Book.
VERSE. 1.
DOctrine 1. The godly man alone is blessed. page 21. Doct. 2. The occasions of
sin are to be avoided. page 46 Doct. 3. We must shun the company of wicked
men. page 53 Doct. 4. Wicked men are ever devising of mischief. page 61 Doct.
5. To give evil counsel is a horrible sin. page 67 Doct. 6. The falls of
godly many. page 74 Doct. 7. A godly man does ever walk with God. page 79
Doct. 8. Wicked men described. page 84 Doct. 9. A godly man sins not with
deliberation. page 88 Doct. 10. Wicked men proceed by degrees to be exceeding
sinful. 99 Doct. 11. The mark of a lewd and wicked man. page 107
VERSE. 2.
Doct. 1. Not to do evil is not sufficient, it is damnable not to do good.
page 115 Doct. 2. A godly man performs godly duties cheerfully. page 122 Doct.
3. The law of God is a godly man's chief delight. page 134 Doct. 4. A godly man
sets some time a part every day for Gods service. page 140
VERSE 3.
Doct. 1. Ministers duty to instruct the simplest. p. 158. Doct. 2. A double
use of all the creatures of God. page 162 Doct. 3. All men that are not
ingrafted into Jesus Christ, are miserable. page 170 Doct. 4. Only the
regenerate man is happy and blessed. p. 176 Doct. 5. Members of Jesus Christ
are ever fruitful. p. 189 Doct. 6. A true note of a godly man to wait all
opportunities to do good. p. 207 Doct. 7. Perseverance required in each child
of God. p. 213 Doct. 8. By our union with Christ we are made sure of
perseverance. p. 222 Doct. 9. God does ever bless the godly endeavors of his
children p. 228
VERSE. 4.
Doct. 1. The estate of the wicked most miserable. page 243 Doct. 2. The estate
of the wicked exceeding changeable. page 258 Doct. 3. The destruction of the
wicked is vnreuokable. page 269
VERSE 5.
Doct. 1. The certainty of the day of judgment proved. page 275. Doct. 2. All
mankind divided into two ranks. page 286.
VERSE. 6.
Doct. 1. A great comfort to the godly, that God does approve of them. page 294
Doct. 2. The Lord hates a wicked man and all he does. page 298 A Prayer for
the Morning. p. 301 A Prayer for the Evening. p. 309
A Plain and Familiar Exposition upon the first Psalm; first Preached, and
now published for the benefit of Gods Church. The first Psalm.
VERSE. 1. Blessed is the man that does not walk in the counsel of the
wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the
scornful.


CONCERNING the Book of the Psalms, Quid est, quod non in Psalmis? August.
Psalm.
it is an Epitome of the whole Bible, teaching us what we are to believe and
do both to GOD and man: in which we may, as in a glass, clearly behold the
natute of GOD, his Wisdom, Goodness, and Mercy, toward his Church and
Children; as also most notable spectacles of his fearful wrath and vengeance
against the wicked and ungodly.

If men would learn to pray unto God, and crave for any mercy and blessing at
his hands: Lo here be excellent plat-formes of true, Idem. Nonne omne quod
potest dici bonu^ and quod ad vtilitate animae pertinet procedat ex ipsis.
hearty, and earnest prayers: If men would give thanks for blessings received,
or for judgments escaped, or for deliverance from wicked and ungodly men,
here be most worthy examples and directions. Again, if men would find
comfort in temptation, trouble, and affliction, and learn with patience to
bear them, there is no part of the Bible more sweet and comfortable, then
this Book of the Psalms: And therefore it should be our delight and study,
and we ought to spend the more time in the reading and in the meditating of so
excellent and worthy a Book.

This Psalm is set down before the rest, This Psalm is a preface to the whole
Book of Psalms. John 5.39.
as a Preface to stir up every faithful Christian, to the dilligent and
careful study of the holy Scriptures, and the blessed Book of GOD as our
Savior says, Search the Scriptures, etc. Because that will bring a man to
true happiness in the end; namely, to know GOD to be his GOD, to know JESUS
CHRIST, to know himself, and to direct him in the narrow way that leads unto
life.

This first Psalm is set down without any inscription, As Athanasius and
Hilar. affirm.
and therefore it is uncertain by whom it was penned; whether by David, as
most like it was; or by Esdras, who is rather thought to have gathered them
together, and joined them thus in one Volume or Book as now we have them.

This Psalm does teach us these two worthy points; namely, how the godly man
lives and walks in this world, Sum of the Psalm.
what manner of life he leads on earth, and also what happiness and
blessedness is reserved for him in the life to come in heaven, v. 1.2.3 The
second part shows the contrary life of the wicked and ungodly, as also what
fearful vengeance and eternal judgments are prepared for them. ver. 4.5.

And the parts of this Psalm are two: In the former part is a description of
the contrary estate of the godly man and the wicked man; namely, that the godly
man is certainly blessed, and the wicked man cursed, in the five first verses.
The other part shows the chief cause of the happiness of the one, and the
misery of the other, verse the sixth: Because GOD knows; that is, likes,
loves, and allows; yea does bless and prosper the way of the one: but he
hates, abhorres, and dislikes the way of the other, and GOD does curse it and
make it most unhappy and miserable unto them: So that we see the sum of this
Psalm is this; that those are blessed whose way, that is, whose life and
conversation the LORD loves, likes, and allows of, so as he does direct and
bless it: But the LORD allows and takes care of the way of the righteous and
godly man, therefore the godly man is blessed.

Now seeing this is the maine Proposition of this Psalm to prove that the
godly are blessed: Therefore the Prophet does first show who be truly godly,
as verse 1.2. and then wherein their blessedness does consist, v. 3.

The godly man is described two ways: First, Negatiuely, showing what he does
carefully shun and avoid, v. 1. Secondly, Affirmatively, showing what he
does carefully embrace and follow, v. 2.

Concerning the things which the godly man does ever carefully shun and avoid,
they are here laid down to be three in number, by a most excellent kind of
speech, laid down by way of graduation, wherein the Prophet shows how men
proceed by degrees to be wicked, for there is an increase and proceeding in
sin, Three sorts of wicked men.
as we may see in every step of this graduation; first, in the persons,
secondly, in the manner, and thirdly in the sin it self.

And indeed there is a variety and multiplicity of sins, and as they are
diverse and of diverse kinds, so the variety of number causes a diversity of
names: The counsel of the wicked; the way of sinners; the seat of the
scornful. For as one says well, there is a fruitful crop of sin, Peccata
frugifera seges, etc. Cypri. ser. de morta.
and there is none of the sons of Adam but may say with Manasses in his
prayer, I have sinned above the number of the sand of the sea.

First (He does not walk in the council of the wicked) where we see the
persons are said to be wicked; the original word signifies a man that is
never quiet, but ever thinking or doing something that is evil, like the
raging sea, whose mind is ever troubled and tempted with evil thoughts and
perturbations. By Counsel he understands here the crafts and subtelties
of the wicked, by which they push themselves forward, and labor to draw others
to the like, according to that of Solomon: My son, if sinners intise thee
consent thou not, Pr. 1.10.11 Prou. 4 14.
if they say come let us lay wait for blood, etc. So that the Prophet means
here, that he is blessed that joins not himself to commit sin with the
ungodly, nor by himself does commit the same as sinners do.

The second sort of evil men, whose company he does avoid are called
Sinners; the word signifies such as not only are of a naughty heart, and being
seduced by bad counsel, live in sin; but such as delight in sin, and have in
them a constant and settled purpose to live in sin.

The third sort of evil men, whose company he does avoid, are called
Scorners: And they are such kind of wicked men, as being hardened in heart, do
still confirm themselves in their wicked life, and get such a habit and
custom in sin that they shame not to make a mock of GOD and all godliness,
and even to bleare out the tongue at Religion and Christian piety, so that as
they are wicked in heart, and lewd in life, so be they also hardened and
confirmed in both of them, for by Seat, he notes the fellowship and society
with the ungodly. Psalm. 26.4.


Their actions described.
Secondly, concerning the action, the first is, to walk in the counsel of the
wicked: To walk, is to live and frame his life, to affect and approve of the
ways and counsels of wicked men, neither will he once listen or lend his ear
to the perverse and naughty counsel of ungodly men, much less will he be
brought to frame his life after their wicked ways.

The second action or proceeding of a sinner is Standing; as the former is in
heart to like, love, and approve of the ways of the wicked, this is to obey
them and follow them into the same excess of riot: So that the meaning of the
Prophet is, that a godly man does not like, love, nor follow, that kind of
life, or conversation, which wicked men do use, and such as be given to sin;
according to that of the Apostle, Romans 12.2.
Fashion not your selves like unto the world: but does by all means possibly
shun and avoid it.

The third evil which the godly man does most carefully avoid, is in these
words, and has not sit in the assembly of the scorners: that is, will not be
familliar, and have acquaintance, with such as be mockers of God, and all good
duties; he will not be their companion, nor keep them company, who do openly
profess impiety, who make a scoff at all Religion, scorn the word of God,
and contemn the Servants of God: These be the three evils which the godly man
does most carefully shun and avoid.

In the whole we may observe the wonderful growth that sin has in the
heart of a sinner, it stands not at a stay, but is ever growing, and never
suffers any wintertide of blasting, but ever prospers: It first begins in
the heart of the sinner with a doubtful walking, wandering, as it were, up and
down, as being uncertain what to do; the next step that it makes is from
Walking to Standing, which signifies a determination after the former
uncertainty, and where sin is not stayed neither in the conception, nor in
the birth, Iam. 1.15.
When it is finished it brings forth death, ever ending in hardness of heart,
obstinacy of mind, and obduracy of both. Oh that all wicked and ungodly men
would lay this to heart, that making once shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience, and wounding their souls by sin! this spiritual disease of
sin grows daily to be more incurable, and the more sin grows to be a
head, the more the Spirit of God is quenched in a man, and the work of grace
is diminished. It behoues us all therefore to keep a dilligent watch over our
own ways, to cut off the occasisions of sin, and to stay the beginnings of
iniquity; for a fire new kindled may easily be quenched; when the Ship
begins to leake it may easily be stopped; and at the first sin and satan
may easily be resisted, and we may with the less difficulty withstand the
force of it; whereas the more it is practiced, the more the heart is hardened,
and sin grows stronger, and the sinner himself weaker, according to that of
the Prophet: Ier. 13.23.
Can the Blackmore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, then may ye
also do good, which are accustomed to do evil. And therefore to this end the
Lord labored with Cain to stop his sin in the conception, or at least in
the birth, when that he saw that his countenance was cast down, and that he
had conceived some evil against his brother, the Lord tells Cain, If thou do
well shall thou not be rewarded, if thou do evil, sin lies at thy door:
q. d. Cain, Cain, be warned betimes ere it be too late, there is a reward that
will follow thy righteous dealing, but if thou go on to kill thy righteous
brother, thou shall find that thy condition will be far worse then now it
is. This is the woeful and miserable condition of those that run from evil
to worse, as it were, adding drunkenness to thirst, and may be a warning to
us to take heed least at any time we give any entertainment to sin: And so
our last end be worse then the first. Mat. 8.


In the second Verse the Prophet describes a godly man affirmatively showing
what he does most carefully embrace and follow: The godly man's description
affirmatively.
As if he should say, He is a blessed man that abstaines from evil, if so be
withal he delight to do good; so he do willingly yield himself to
perform obedience to the will of God, and conform all his thoughts, words,
and deeds, to the will of God.

Now the good things which he must do are contained in two words: First, His
delight must be in the Law of the Lord: Secondly, He must meditate therein
day and night.

But his delight, that is, the godly man, who is truly happy and blessed
indeed, does wonderfully love the Law, that is, the word of God, and that
heavenly doctrine, wherein is revealed the will of God, whereunto all our
thoughts, words, and works, must be conformed, and which makes known unto
us the way to eternal life and salvation.

Secondly, In this Law he meditates day and night: That is, the godly man does
set his heart and mind upon the word and doctrine of God, so as he does think
often, and much muse upon it; it is his daily meditation, so as he sets some
time apart every day to study it; Both to learn out of it how God must be
purely worshipped, his own life ordered, as also to learn thereby how to
mainetaine and keep faith and a good conscience before God and man. And thus
the godly man is described by both parts of his life, his eschewing of evil,
and his careful and religious performing of good duties.

Secondly, as we have seen a godly man described, so now follows wherein
the happiness of this man consists.

This happy man is described two ways.

First, by a similitude.

The happiness of a godly man, wherein it consists.
Secondly, by the prosperous and good success of all he does.

The happiness of the godly man is described by a similitude, whereby a godly
man is compared to a tree, which tree is described.

First, by the place; namely, that it is a tree planted, not of it own growing,
By the waters side; Even by the fresh and springing rivers, which is a
resemblance of our ingrafting into Jesus Christ by faith, and the Spirit of
God; so as we receive and draw juice and nourishment from him continually.

Secondly, it is described by an effect; namely, That it brings forth fruit in
due season: And this is a resemblance of our regeneration, or of our obedience,
because the godly man being ingrafted into Jesus Christ, Psalm. 92.12 Math. 7.
does by virtue of his Resurrection bring forth the fruit of faith and
obedience both to God and man; In due season, that is, in time convenient, when
it may best seem for the glory of God, and the good of our Neighbor.

Thirdly, by a contrary property, that her leaves do not fall: that is, in
time of Winter and storms her leaves fall not: And this is a sign of our
perseverance, that the godly man is not offended nor daunted with crosses,
persecutions, or afflictions, or any other calamity whatsoever, but does by
patience possess his Soul, and by faith wades, as it were, throughout all
these dangers.

Secondly, the happiness of a godly man is described by that blessed success
that God gives to all his affairs he takes in hand, It shall prosper, because
he takes them in hand according to Gods commandment, and in his fear, with
prayer and calling on the name of the Lord, Ioshuah 1.8. to the glory of God,
and the good of his Neighbor.

Wicked described.
In the second part of the Psalm, the Prophet descibeth the most miserable and
cursed estate of the wicked and ungodly, verse 4, 5. That it is clean
contrary, that as their ways and lives be contrary, so their reward and end
is contrary.

The Prophet describing the cursed and miserable estate of the wicked says
first, It is not so with them: that is, the wicked and ungodly men are in a far
contrary estate and condition; they cannot in any case be compared to a tree
that is planted by the rivers of waters, that brings forth her fruit in due
season, and whose leaf does not fall, neither do they prosper in their
actions, neither does GOD give success unto them.

But he sets out the cursed and wretched estate of all wicked and ungodly
men, by a contrary similitude, comparing them to Chafe, which the wind drives
away; That is, even as chafe has no root in the earth, and wanting all juice
and norishment, must needs be fruitless and dry, so as the wind does most
easily scatter it away: Even so the wicked are not rooted nor grounded in
Christ, whereby it comes to pass, they being utterly void of all grace of Gods
Spirit, that they can bring forth no fruit of good works, neither can they
persevere in time of temptation, whereby again it comes to pass, that they be
carried away with every blast of vain doctrine, and with the least storm of
temptation, and blast of adversity they are tossed to and fro; And when the
wind of Gods judgments shall blow upon them, they are clean scattered away.
This is their estate and condition here in this life.

And for their estate and condition in the life to come, the Prophet lays it
down likewise, verse 5. in these words; They shall not be able to stand in
Judgment: That is, they shall not be able to stand with comfort before the
face of the Judge, Reu. 6.13.
but shall tremble and quake, as not being able to endure the angry countenance
of the Judge.

Neither is this all, but they shall likewise be severed and secluded from the
blessed company of the godly; That as here in this life they could not abide a
godly man, but did hate him, persecute him, and shun his company; So at the
last day (so just shall their reward be) that they shall be separated from
them; And as Goats cast on the left hand, Mat, 25.34
there to remain for evermore in torments, which are easelesse and
remediless. Neither the sinners in the company of the just; that is, in the
company of those that be justified and reconciled to GOD in JESUS CHRIST,
which shall then inherit the Kingdom prepared for them.

Hitherto we have opened the first part of the Psalm, containing the estate
and condition of a godly and a wicked man, here in this life, and in the life
to come.
The second general part of the Psalm.
NOw follows the second part of the Psalm, in the last verse, containing the
confirmation of that doctrine; And that our Prophet does by showing the
efficient cause both of the happiness of the one, and the misery and
wretchedness of the other.

The first efficient cause of the happiness of the godly man is in these
words: Because the Lord knows the way of the righteous: That is, he likes,
loves, and approues of it, so as he does direct and bless it: And therefore
it shall prosper.

And the cause why the estate of the wicked is unhappy, and their way shall
perish, is, because the Lord does not know their way: that is, he takes no
delight in the way, or the life of a wicked man; he loves it not so as he
should direct and prosper it: And therefore it shall perish.

And thus much for the meaning of the words: now let us come unto the Doctrines.

VERSE 1. Blessed is the Man that has not, etc.

BLessed is the man, or Oh the Blessedness of that man, or as it is in the
Original; Oh the blessednesses of that man! They seem to be the words of a
man, musing and meditating with himself, wherein man's blessedness should
consist. As if he should say: some pronounce him blessed that is in honor:
some count them blessed, that have abundance of riches: some that live in
pleasure: some place it in one thing, some in anothe. But, Oh the blessedness
of that man! that fears the Lord, that is truly religious, of the godly and
righteous man.

Hence we learn rhis Doctrine, Doctr. 1. The godly man alone is blessed.
That of all men under Heaven, the godly man alone is blessed, and the ungodly
and wicked man is cursed: The righteous man a happy man in the sight of God,
when the wicked is wretched and miserable. This doctrine is very apparent in
the word of GOD: It is the scope and drift of the whole Scriptures to prove
this one point, That the godly man is blessed, and the wicked man is cursed.
Psalm. 112.
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord and delights in his Commandment.
Psalm. 119.1
Blessed be they that be upright in their way, and walk in the Law of the
Lord. Psalm. 32.
Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and seek him with their whole
heart. Again, Psalm. 37.
Blessed is the man whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.
Blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes no sin, and in whose spirit there is
no guile. Read the seven and thirty Psalm which seems to be penned, of
purpose, to confirm the everlasting truth of this Doctrine, That the godly are
blessed, and the wicked are cursed: and this blessedness of theirs does not
reach only to this life, but also to the life to come, according to that of
the Apostle; Godliness has not only the promise of this life, but also the
life to come. 1. Tim 4.8
Yea, if we observe the course which the Spirit of God takes in the course of
the whole Sciptures, it shall make this Doctrine so much the more apparent unto
us; that is, That wheresoever there is a comfort laid down in the Word, the
same comfort is still restrained to the godly. As that of the holy Apostle
Saint Paul in the eight chapter and first verse of his Epistle to the Romans;
There is no condemnation: A marvelous comfort to hear, that we are freed
from that heavy and grievous curse which we had incurred by reason of sin: yet
lest the wicked should presume hereby, and take it unto themselves, unto whom
in no wise it does belong: The Apostle restrains the comfort in the same
Verse, to them that are in Christ Jesus: and lest men should deceive
themselves, to take this comfort to themselves, unto whom it does not belong,
he marketh them out, as it were, in their foreheads, saying; They are such as
walk not after the flesh; but after the Spirit. The like of David, Lord who
shall enter into thy holy Tabernacle? Psalm. 15.
etc. He that has clean hands and pure heart, etc.

Besides, none are blessed but such as be in the favor of God, as the Prophet
David says, In thy favor is life, such as be reconciled to God in Jesus
Christ. As for such as be out of his favor, they be cursed and miserable, be
they what they will be: Now only the godly man that is humbled, that is
sanctified, that is borne anew, is he alone that is in the favor of God;
therefore only the godly man is blessed.

Object.
Wherein stands the blessedness of Gods children, of a godly and a righteous
man?

Answ.
I answer in this, that a godly man that is humbled for his sins, is now
reconciled to God, so as God the Father becomes his Father, Wherein the godly
man is blessed.
adopts him to be his Child, loves him, and delights in him as his Child;
Behold what love the Father has given us, that we should be called the
Sons of God: Cant. 5.2. Psalm. 105.12.13. Deuteronomy 7.6 Psa. 91.1.2.3.
Open unto me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled; Great are the
affections of fervent love that parents bear toward their Children, which
none can express but they that feel; and yet all their love is nothing in
comparison of the love of God toward his children; this the Prophet teaches,
Can a woman forget her child, Esa. 49.15
and not have compassion on the Son of her womb, yet will not I forget thee.

Another part of the happiness of a godly man does consist in this, that he
has assurance of the pardon of his sins, that they are all done away, and
shall never be laid to his charge, but are washed away in the blood of JESUS
CHRIST, according to that of the Prophet David, Psalm. 32.1. Acts 3.26
Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven.

He has all his sins original and actual, Rom 8.1. 1. Pet. 2.24 Romans 4 5.
2. Cor. 19.
with the guilt and punishment belonging unto them, freely and fully forgiven
unto him: And all the righteousness of CHRIST freely and fully imputed unto
him, and so GOD is reconciled unto him, and approves him as righteous in his
sight: And thus the Apostle reasons; Romans 8.33.
Herein was that love of GOD made manifest amongst us, because GOD sent his
only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him: Herein is
that love not that we loved GOD, but that he loved us and sent his Son to
be a reconciliation for our sins.

There is no peace to the wicked says my God: Esaias 57.
But the godly man that is reconciled to God in Christ Jesus, has the free
pardon of al his sins, he has sweet peace of conscience, Romans 4.17
which does not accuse, but excuse him to God, yea he has exceeding joy in
the HOLY GHOST that he knows his sins are pardoned, Pax est hereditas
Christianorum. Aug. Sermon. de temp.
according to that of the Apostle; The kingdom of God stands not in meat
and drink, but in righteousness, peace, and joy in the HOLY GHOST. And
indeed whom should he fear, Perfecta and absolata uiusque exusatio
testimonium conscientiae suae. Bern.
or whereof should he be afraid, God is become his Father, the Angels are
become his attendants, they pitch their Tents round about them, and have a
charge of them, the Saints of Heaven and Earth are their fellow Brethren, the
Creatures of Almighty God are their friends, yea their servants to do them
good al their days.

The devils, nor all the powers of darkness shall not hurt them: Psalm 37.25
Psalm. 34.7. Psalm. 91.11 Hosea 2.18 Col. 2.15.
For Christ has spoiled Principalities and Powers, and has made a show of
them openly, and has triumphed over them upon the Cross; yea, that which is
more, the Lord Jesus Christ (to whom all Judgment is committed) is become
their Lord and Savior: So that they shall never come into condemnation but
shall pass from death unto life. Ioh. 5.24.


Lastly, the godly man is assured Non arrogantia est, sed fides, etc. Aug.
Sermon. 8.
and this assurance in the godly, is no presumption, but Faith, for every
godly man has in him the Spirit of Grace and Adoption; and he that has the
Spirit of Adoption, knows that he has it, and is able, through the same
Spirit, to say; Gala. 2.20 2. Cor. 13 5
I live, and Christ lives in me: This was in Job when he said, I know that my
Redeemer lives, etc. This was in Saint Paul, Rom 8.
I am persuaded that neither height nor depth, etc. In these and the like
Privileges stands the happy and blessed estate of Gods children.

1. Pet. 1.18
nodding at them with their heads, hissing at them with their tongues, and
every way most contumeliously reproaching them with their words; yet we see
here how dear and precious they are with God, and in the reputation of Jesus
Christ, who bought them at a price, and redeemed them even with his own blood:
1. Cor. 3.21
Behold what love the Father has given to us that we should be called the
Sons of God: And for this cause the world knows you not, because it knows
not him. God is become their Father, the Son their Redeemer, and the Holy
Ghost their Sanctifier, the Angels their attendants, the Scriptures their
Evidences, and the Sacraments, Seals unto the same: This the Apostle teaches
when he says. All things are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ Gods, they are
blessed then that are thus reconciled to God in Jesus Christ: they are blessed
that have their sins pardoned and not imputed unto them, they are blessed
that enjoy this sweet peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost: they are
blessed that have attained to this assurance, that the kingdom of Heaven,
eternal life and salvation shall be their reward: But the godly man is
partaker of all these, what then shall hinder his happiness?

Three sorts of men confuted.
This serves then to confute three sorts of men: First the Voluptuous man, who
places his felicity and happiness in delights, pleasures, 1 Voluptuous.
sports, and pastimes, he loves and likes them above all other things, and
most eagerly does hunt after them: Luke 12.
This appeared in that rich man in the Gospel, who bad his soul eat, drink,
and be merry, as if there were nothing else to be looked after, or as if man's
chief felicity did consist in these things. Rom 14 17 Eccles 2.
And this was the case of Solomon in the days of his vanity, until he saw
that all was but vain. Let us then be careful that we be not deceived with
these sinful pleasures of this life, as to think therein we are happy, but
let us take heed unto this hook of Satan least we be taken within his snare.
It is written, to the everlasting commendation of Moses, that he refused to be
called the son of Pharaohs daughter, Heb. 11.24
and chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches
then the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of reward.

The second sort of men here reproved, are the ambitious, 2 Ambitious
that makes honor and preferment his God, as if man's chief felicity did
consist in that: this is their care and study, how to climb up to preferment,
like Absalom that sought to steal the hearts of his fathers subjects. And
Achitophel, that was so proud that he could not endure a man in favor but
himself, and therefore when he saw Hushaies counsel received and his
rejected, went and hanged himself. Hest. 2.3.
So proud Haman was so vexed with Mordecay, that he could not be quiet till
he had wrought his own destruction, and the reason of all is this, prosperity
puffs up and steals away the heart of man, 1 Timothy 6 9.
making a man both to forget God and himself, and therefore prosperity is a
very dangerous and slippery estate, and howsoever it be much desired and
admired, yet it is full of dangers, and hedged in with many perils, and
howsoever many are drawn away from God through persecution and affliction, yet
prosperity is more dangerous, for by it many more are drowned in sensuality,
and even lulled asleep in carnal security.

3 Covetous.
The third sort of men here reproved, are the covetous Cormorants of the world,
such as make gold their God, love it, and delight in it more then God, as if
their chiefest happiness did consist in the multitude of their riches, Coloss.
3.
whereas indeed godliness alone has the promise of this life and that which
is to come. And of all other sins our Savior gives this caveat against this
sin, Luke 12.15
saying; Take heed and beware of covetousness, and this is that which the
Prophet David does pray against when he says; Ps. 119.36.
Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness. 1. Ioh. 2.15
Hereunto agrees that exhortation of the Apostle, Mat. 6.24.
If any man love this world, the love of my Father is not in him. So then,
whether we consider that covetousness is the root of all evil, or that
there is a flat opposition between God and the world, we must hold this as an
evident truth, that there is no blessedness to be found in them.

This may seem to reprove that man is as an Owl amongst Birds, whooted at,
and poynted at, men reproach him, and of all men he is most contemned: But as
Paul says, thus it must be, we are brought upon the stage, we are made a
gazing-stock to wicked men, and accounted as dung for Christ's sake.

Malachie, It is lost labor to serve the Lord, Mal. 3.14.
and what good comes there by serving of GOD? So in these days it is clear,
men think it is in vain to be religious, to live godly, and in all things to
labor to keep faith and a good conscience before God and men, But it is
manifest here that it is not in vain to serve GOD: Note.
nay it is that alone that brings a man to happiness and true comfort here,
and an eternal measure of glory in the world to come: and withal this may
serve to comfort every poor child of God against all the discomforts and
discouragements of the world by satan and his cursed instruments: namely, that
whatsoever thy estate be, never so poor in this world, and subject to never so
many afflictions, yet if thou be a godly man, certainly then thou art Blessed:
Heb. 11.24 12.23.
Thou that art in Gods favor, thou that art reconciled to God in Jesus Christ,
and have thy sins pardoned, eternal life belongs unto thee, and therefore
fear not, be not any whit discouraged, hold out unto the end, certain it is
thou art a Blessed Man, and in so doing thou shall have a crown of life.

Hence we learn, that as many here in this life, and hereafter in the life
to come, would be assured that thou art the child of God, in his favor,
reconciled unto him in Jesus Christ, would thou be assured of the salvation
of thy soul? Oh labor then to become a godly and a religious man, repent of
thy sins past, amend thy life, walk before God in new obedience, labor to
keep faith and a good conscience, hate every evil way, cleave unto the Lord,
delight in his word, let it be the joy of thine heart, then certainly thou
shall be Blessed and happpy for evermore.

Moses unto the Israelites, Deu. 28.15
If thou will not obey the voice of the Lord thy God, as indeed Obedience is
far from a wicked man, howsoever he may come with Saules painted Sacrifice,
Ps. 119.21
what follows: Thou shall be cursed in body, and cursed in soul, etc.
Again, Thou have destroyed the proud, and cursed are they that err from thy
Commandments. And this misery of a wicked man does consist in these things
especially.

First, Wherein the wicked are cursed.
that he can have no assurance that he is the child of God, that he is
reconciled to God in Jesus Christ, or in his favor; nay he may assure
himself, that he is out of his favor, and that God hates him as his enemy,
and that he will manifest his wrath and displeasure upon him, by plaguing him
here in this life, and by damning him for ever in the life to come.

Yea the Lord begins that condemnatory sentence in the heart of within him
given out against him presently after he has committed sin, there is a
sentence within him gone out against him, by themselves judgment is gone out
against themselves; which sentence albeit the wicked man do not mark, yet the
voice of his own disordered affections crying out so loud, that he cannot
hear ths voice of his own conscience accusing and condemning him: (yet many
times in this life affection is silent, as to Balthazar and Judas, Dan. 5. Mat.
27.
and then conscience does pronounce sentence against him with a shrill voice.
1. Ioh. 3.20
Now if a man's conscience do condemn him, God is greater then his conscience,
and will much more condemn him.) But assuredly in the day of judgment it will
cry aloud in the ears of the Lord, against the sinner for judgment and
vengeance. And this is not the least misery under which the wicked man remains
being out of Christ.

Secondly, he can have no assurance that his sins be pardoned, Reu. 20 13
and that he shall be condemned for them. For it is that prerogative which
belongs only to the godly man to have his sins covered. Even the Blessed
Man: Ps. 32.1.2.
but as for the wicked and ungodly, the Lord is far from justifying them, but
their sins remain yet in Gods book of account, and shall assuredly one day
be laid to their charge, when the book shall be opened, and their horrible
sins made manifest to the whole world, even to Men and Angels, even these
their most secret sins, which now they have committed never so closely in the
dark, shall then come to light, and they shall not have so much as one
figge-leafe to cover their nakedness, or one friend to speak so much as one
word to the LORD Chief Justice of Heaven and Earth, but their own consciences
being as a thousand witnesses against them, they shall then be held even
speechless: and the Lord will manifest upon them the fierceness of his wrath
in that day.

Esaias 57.
For there is no peace to the wicked, but always carries about him an evil
conscience, that will never give him rest, but is as the flashings of hellfire
unto him; or else he has in him a dead and sleepy conscience, scared, as it
were, with an hot Iron, that he feels not the weight and burden of his sins;
Which judgment is no way inferior to the former. Mal. 3.5. Ioh. 5.45. Iosu.
24.27 Iam. 5.3.
Oh miserable then is the state and condition of the wicked, that have no true
peace in life nor death, nor after death: for the LORD himself at the last
shall be a judge and a witness against them. Moses and the righteous servants
of God shall be a witness against them, yea the dust of their feet that brought
the glad tidings of peace shall witness against them, the stones of the field,
the posts of their houses, their mote-eaten garment, all shall come in against
them to hinder their peace with God: and their own consciences, will they,
nill they, shall cry aloud, and say, Righteous art thou oh Lord, and true are
thy judgments.

Fourthly, he can have no hope nor any assurance that he shall be saved, but
is either carried away with a carnal persuasion or presumption, (which will
deceive him in the end) their consciences being seared: or else most justly
fear that they shall be damned, their consciences being awake. Now then if
this be the fearful, and most woeful estate of all wicked men that live in
sin without repentance, Who then would live in such an estate of life to
gain a Kingdom, in so great danger of eternal death and damnation every day
they arise? why do not such repent and turn unto GOD that so they may be
saved?

Fifthly, and lastly, if a man be out of Christ unregenerate, let him abound
never so much in wealth, live in honor, bath himself in pleasures, yet
remaining still in his sins he can take no sound comfort in any of these:
Tit. 1.13.
For to them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their
minds and consciences are defiled: Their sweet savors and pleasant smells are
stinch, their meats and drinks are gall and wormwood, their delicate fare is
poison, their costly apparel as menstruous cloth, and their life a death, and
they shall one day answer for every bit of bread they have eaten, as thieves
and usurpers of those things that are none of theirs, for of proper right they
belong unto the godly man: and thus have we briefly seen wherein the wicked
man is cursed and miserable.

That does not walk in the counsel of the, etc. THe godly man's virtues be
here first set down by a Negative contestation in these words, He walks
not in the counsel of the wicked: Out of which we may observe that there is a
counsel of the wicked: And this is either private amongst themselves, or else
public with others.

The counsel of the wicked which is private in themselves is a rumination,
Doctr. There is a counsel of the wicked as of the godly.
or some other preparation in every wilful and intended sin: And hence it is
that the Schoolmen affirm that consilium, actus, exitus, must concur in
every wilful intended sin: And this is very apparent by the example of
Iesabel, 1. Reg. 21.8.
that when she perceived the King to be so heavy for that he could not get the
vineyard of righteous Naboth, she counseled with her self what she might do
to the end she might obtain it, and at last determined to write to the
Governors of the City in Ahabs name, to proclaim a fast, 2. Sam. 12.
and to cause Naboth to be brought forth before the Assembly, and stoned to
death. This is clear again by the example of David, when he walking upon the
roof of his Palace had cast his eyes upon the beauty of Bathsheba, he did
first take this counsel within himself concerning an enquiry what she was;
secondly sent messengers unto her to move her to lie with him; and lastly
committed the act it self. This might be further cleared by the example of
Cain, Judas; and all to confirm the truth of this point unto us.

Besides this private there is a council of the wicked public with other,
Mich. 6.16.
as in the days of Omri, when cruel and wicked Statutes were made against the
Lord and his people. 1 Reg. 12.28.
So in the days of Jeroboam how did he take counsel, and at last concluded to
make two Calves for Divine worship, the one whereof he set at Bethel, the other
at Dan? And in the days of Nabuchadnezar what a Decree was gone forth by the
King, the Lords and Nobles, Dan. 3.1.
touching the worship of the golden image that was set up in the plain of
Dura, in the Province of Babylon? So in the time of our Savior CHRIST, John
9.22.
under the new Testament, the Jews had agreed together, that all that confess
CHRIST should be excommunicate; Acts 4.18.
and forbad the Disciples from Preaching any more in his Name. And also in
their Council was our Savior CHRIST condemned to death. Mat. 26.66


And the reason is clear for the further manifestation of the truth of this
point: Reason.
for as no man does gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles; so what
other fruit can be expected from such an unsavory root, whose very Minds
and consciences are defiled, Tit. 1.13.
but that all their whole consultations and actions should be impure unholy and
unclean.

That General Counsels can not err. But we have cleared this before, that
they may err and do err: for what should I speak of the second Nicene
Council, which set up Idolatry, and gave bodies to Angels, and the souls of
men: Counsels therefore have been misled, and may err.

Now the Prophet proceeds further to show who is a godly man, and what be his
properties, and teaches us in these words, that the first step and entrance to
the leading of a godly life is to renounce the counsel and company of lewd,
wicked, and ungodly men: whence we observe this doctrine.

Doctr. 2. The occasions of sin are to be avoided.
That he that would preserve himself from sin, must carefully avoid all
the occasions thereof: The Wiseman teaches this Doctrihe, That he that
walks with the wise, shall be wiser, But a companion of fools, shall be
worser. This does appear by the example of Jonathan, who by the friendship and
familiarity which he had with David, changed his life to better: Pro. 1.13.
whereas Solomon by society and conjunction with the idolatrous wives fell
into idolatry: 1. Reg. 11.
and Rehoboam by walking with his young Councillors, and following their
advice, became worse and worse: If then we would avoid evil, we must beware
of all occasions, and no occasion more dangerous then evil company, every man
therefore must take heed to himself, and beware how he joins himself with
acquaintance with all men indifferently, lest by their means he be corrupted.
For every man by nature is like dry wood, which is apt to kindle so soon as
fire is put to it: so, give a man the least occasion, and presently he
yields to sin: Mecum est quicquid mihi nocere potest. Bernar. med. 11
There needs not indeed any Devil to tempt us, but let the least occasion
that is be offered unto us, and straitway man becomes a tempter unto
himself: And this is that which the Apostle says, Iam. 1.14.
Every man is tempted when he is drawn away and enticed by his own
concupiscence. The enemy by which we are overcome, is in our own bosom, that
is, man's natural corruption, Genes. 36.
which is fuel for the kindling of the fire of Satan's temptations: This
appears in Euah the Mother of us all, in the first transgression: first, she
saw the fruit; secondly, she conceived a liking of it; thirdly, she desired
it; fourthly, she eat of it: Dinah the daughter of Jacob wandering abroad,
laid her self open unto sin, and so fell, which might have been prevented,
had she avoided the occasions thereof.

And David, a man after Gods own heart, having set open the casements of his
soul, his eyes, (by the which the Devil did easily wind himself into his
heart) and beheld Bathsheba washing her self, 2. Sam. 11.
but by and by he lusted after her, sent for her and lay with her: So violent
is man's corrupt nature in apprehending every occasion that may draw him to
sin. It is therefore a point of great wisdom to discern between the
deceit of sin, and the fruit of sin before it be committed. O flattering
enemy! In the action of committing it is as sweet as poison, after it is
committed a biting serpent: It comes to a man with a smiling countenance, as
Ioab to Amasa, Art thou in health my friend, but with all it strikes to the
heart, and wounds unto death.

This doctrine serves for the reproof Joseph till they be tempted by others,
but they seek all occasions and watch all opportunities to tempt others: Never
ravenous beast did more eagerly pursue the prey, then some do hunt after the
occasions of sin: which is madness with a witness, as if the flesh were not
prove enough of it self unto that which is evil, but that pains must be
taken to help it forward to sin. Oh then, how careful ought we to be to
watch over our ways, and to avoid all the occasions of sin! Countergard thy
heart (says Solomon) and keep it with watch and ward; Prou. 4.23.
look unto the casements of thy soul, thy eyes and thy ears: Ps. 119.37.
Eccl. 9.4.5.
Pray with David, Lord turn away my eyes from beholding vanity, make a
covenant with them with Job. Job 31.
What folly, nay what madness is it then in them that dare come into any
company, that dare look and pry into the beauty of a woman, as though they
were so strong that they were out of all danger to sin? But art thou more holy
or strong then David, Peter, etc. if not, thou may fall?

take heed, let them fear themselves and doubt the worst, Blessed is the man
that fears always but he that hardens his heart shall not prosper: We
must at all times have especial regard to the heart or else we cannot stand;
Such and so many are the assaults that satan does lay against our souls, this
is that wholesome counsel that the Apostle Peter does lay down unto us, who
was both acquainted with the frailty of man's nature, and the malice of satan,
when he says, 1. Pet. 5.8.
Be sober and watch, for your adversary the devil, etc. Where he joins
unto Sobriety, Watchfulness, for though a man be never so sober, yet if he do
not watch withal, and that against the occasions of sin, he is easily made a
prey to Satan; And for want of this care and watchfulness, many of Gods
children have been overtaken, and have fell into many horrible and grievous
sins, which they could not so easily have done, had they been watchful over
their own affections. And thus much for the first Doctrine in the description
of a godly man, he must carefully avoid all occasions of sin.

That does not walk in the Counsel of the wicked, etc. HEre the Prophet David
shows who is a godly man, and what be his properties. First (as we have heard)
he auoides all occasions of sin: so now in the second place, the counsel
and company of lewd, wicked, and ungodly men: A godly man, and such a one as
shall be truly happy and blessed indeed, does distaste and dislike, yea
utterly renounce and abhor their society and company, their counsels and
consultations, so as he does shun and avoid them as dangerous and
infectious; from whence we gather a second point of Doctrine.

That men must carefully shun Doctr. 2. We must shun the company of wicked
men.
and avoid the company of the wicked, it is very apparent; Number. 31.16 2. Sa^.
10.3. Mat. 16.22 Acts 13.8. Psalm 15 Tit. 2.12 2. Cor. 6.14
if they themselves will not be defiled with their abomination: for that rule
of Solomon will stand, He that touches pitch shall be defiled: Bad company
is exceeding pernicious and hurtful, either to dissuade from that which is
truly good, or to persuade to that which is naught and wicked. David makes it
a mark of a true member of the Church, That in his eyes a vile person is
contemned. And the Apostle wills all Christians, who look for glory through
Christ; that they would have nothing to do with the unfruitful works of
darkness. And again, This indeed is pure Religion and undefiled, to keep our
selves unspotted of the world. This the Apostle S. Paul urges, Be not
unequally yoaked with infidels, for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? It is the exhortation of Solomon: Forsake the wicked and ye
shall live. Joseph living in the Court of Pharaoh, had quickly learned to
swear by the life of Pharaoh: and we know that it was in the common Hall,
amongst the servants of the high Priests, that Peter had learned to curse and
to swear. It were no less then treason in a subject to live in friendship
with one that is a professed enemy to the King; much more is it treason in the
subjects of the King of heaven to have society with the wicked: and this is
observed to be the fault of Iehosaphat, That he would help the wicked, and
love them that hate the Lord. Such are even odious unto God, Psalm. 5.5.
as David says, Thou hate all them that work iniquity. Besides, their
company is exceeding dangerous, for the wrath of God hangs over the head of
the ungodly. This we may see in Lot, who for the fruitfulness of the place was
drawn to live in Sodom where the men were wicked: Genesis 19.
So when they were taken prisoners, Lot was taken prisoner with them; And, had
not the^ Lord been exceeding merciful unto him, he had perished with them in
the general overthrow of that City. And this was the voice of God from heaven
concerning Babylon, Reu. 18.4
Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues. And this was the cause why the Lord gave so
straight a charge to the people of Israel, that they should have no dealing at
all with the Inhabitants of the land of Caanan; Thou shall make no covenant
with them, nor with their gods: Ex. 23.32.
Neither shall they dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me.
Deuteronomy. 7.2.
Neither shall thou make any marriages with them, neither give thy daughter to
his son, nor take his son to thy daughter, for they will cause thy son to
fall away from me, and to serve other gods. And how true this threatening from
the Lord was, the event makes it manifest; for they neglecting this
Commandment from God, We are mingled amongst the heathen, and learned their
works, Ps. 106.35.
as David says; and woeful experience does prove this to be true of many who
have sometime been indifferently conformable to good duties, afterward
falling into wicked and lewd company have been corrupted and grown dissolute:
Oh what stumbling blocks are such unto a man from the performance of any good
duty. This did David know full well when he said, Away from me ye wicked,
Ps. 119.115.
I will keep the Commandments of my God: Insinuating thereby, as it may easily
be gathered, that he could not set himself to the performance of any holy
duty, as he ought, so long as such wicked company were about him. Yea it has
been a grief unto the godly to have been in the company of ungodly persons.
As Lot living in Sodom where he saw their filthy abominations, 2. Pet. 2.7.
It vexed his righteous soul: And this was it that made David bemone his
estate in the time of his banishment, when he was constrained to abide amongst
the uncircumcised people, Woe is me that I remain in Mesech: and to dwell in
the tents of Kedar, My soul has long dwelt among those that be enemies unto
peace. By all this that has been spoken, it does appear, That the godly man
who shall be happy and blessed indeed does carefully shun and avoid the lewd
company of the wicked.

This Doctrine, in the first place, does serve to reprove all such as Esau, he
is notwithstanding for their company, but by this means they do little think,
that they do hazard both faith and a good conscience, and cause the godly
themselves to suspect them, that they are but profane. And indeed it cannot
otherwise be, but if they themselves did make any conscience of sin, they
would likewise make conscience of the occasions of sin, whereof what can be
worse then lewd company who are ready to make a mock at every good duty, and
whose nature is to have other men to run into the same excess of riot with
themselves? 1 Pet. 4 4.
yea when a man or a woman has some good things in them, as to love the word
of God, to like of Gods faithful Ministers, to delight in prayer, etc. In
comes a wicked man and breathes out his poison, seeking by bad counsel, and
lewd persuasions, to dissuade them and draw them back, Oh you love the
Minister too much, he will make you precise, you need not to take such pains,
but take your liberty! what need you be afraid of them? Oh when such wretches
step in, and thus pour out their lewd counsels and persuasions, what do they
else but draw men to perdition, especially when they do deal with such as be
young Christians, but coming on in the ways of godliness. And when they
speak that to great Personages, who by nature are most inclined to liberty, O
what lets are these to a young Christian in the ways of godliness!

And when the Lord leaves a man or a woman to listen to such cursed counsel,
Note.
it is a great sign that the Lord loves them not. So it is said, that the Lord
left Absalom, that he should not receive the good counsel of Achitophel,
because the Lord would destroy Absalom. So it is said of Rehoboam, that he
listened only to the counsel of his young men, because the Lord would bring
his judgments upon the house of Solomon.

This should admonish all men to take heed of such kind of men, as the of our
Souls, and the messengers of the Devil, seeking to pervert and poison our
poor souls, to put our mouths out of taste, and to make us dislike those
that are sent of God, who ought to be most dear unto us. Object.
It will be here objected, whether it be not lawful upon some occasion, to be
in their company, or to have dealing with wicked men? Respons. Answ.
In some case it is lawful, as thus: First, that it be only for necessity:
as that we cannot avoid it in ordinary matters of this life, unless we should
go out of the world: secondly, that we have a due calling thereunto: thirdly,
that we be not silent at the committing of sin, but that ever we show our
dislike of their vain courses; and lastly, that we labor with out selves to
be grieved at their sins, as Lot was at the Sodomites.

In the counsel of the wicked, etc. THe original word signifies such wicked
men as are never quiet in their minds, but evermore musing and devising some
mischief: which they may utter and practice as occasion serves.

And in this note the very property Doctr. 3. Wicked men are ever devising of
mischief.
of a wicked and graceless man: He is never at rest, but still plotting and
devising some mischief against God or good men: This we may see by diverse
examples. 2. Sam. 16.
Achitophels counsel was esteemed like as one had asked counsel at the Oracle
of God: The like we may see in Herod when he heard of the birth of Christ,
Math. 2.7.
as of a newborn King, what policy did he use to destroy the Savior of the
world? The Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 26.
how carefully did they consult and take counsel together against Christ, to
put him to death; yea they brake their sleep about it. Ier. 18.18.
When the Jews could not endure Jeremy to preach plain, and to tell them of
their sins, they therefore by and by say thus, Come let us devise and imagine
some mischief against the Prophet of the Lord, Let us smite him with the
tongue, Let us take no heed, nor give any ear to his preaching. Hest. 3.
So Haman deuiseth how to put Mordecai and the Jews out of favor, by devising
a most vile accusation. So Deog, that black mouthed Dog, 1. Sam. 22.9. Dan. 3.
deuiseth how to accuse David to Saul. So those wicked Rulers did devise to
invent some mischief against Daniel. And the Prophet Michai shows, that it
is an old practice of wicked men, to devise wicked things. In the Primitive
Church the enemies of Gods children, that persecuted the Christians, devised
this shameful slander, That they worshipped an Asses head, etc. So in these
days it is manifest, that the Devil stirs up wicked men to accuse Gods
children, to devise slanders, and false accusations against them: The Devil
has one Doeg or other to accuse David to Saul, to thrust him out of favor,
and to bring him into disgrace: And when as they can say nothing justly against
them, then they begin to devise how they may raise up some false report or
other, to smite them with the tongue.

And the reason of this is, because they are foolish and ignorant: For they not
knowing the Lord, nor understanding his ways aright, but being in this respect
worser then the Ox that knows his owner, And the Ass that knows his
masters Cribbe (as the Lord does complain of them) they cannot but do as S.
Paul did in the time of his ignorance, Esaias 1.3.
even oppose themselves against God and his children. And for this cause the
Lord does make his moan for the foolishness and ignorance of his people, as of
the wel-spring of all their rebellions against him, in these words; For my
people are foolish, they have not known me, they are foolish children, and
have none understanding: They are wise to do evil, but to do well they have
no knowledge.

Mat. 10.16
and as innocent as Doves, to the end we may stop the mouths of
gaine-sayers, and cut off occasions from them that seek occasions. And to this
end we must evermore be mindful in our prayers, to pray unto God to be
delivered from them: for unless we be armed from above, we shall easily be
overtaken by their assaults, and through the corruptions of our own hearts,
which are prone unto all sin, they deal warily and circumspectly, they work
by all means to pervert our ways, and to make us twofold worse then
themselves the child of Satan. How much more careful ought we to be to
prevent them? which we shall do the better by shunning the occasions of sin.

Secondly, we are taught here, Zacheus way when he went forth to see Christ.
Luke 19.3.
If thou be once in Gods presence, and do begin to call upon him for
mercy, Luke 18.39
they will rebuke thee as they did the poor blind man in the Gospel. If thou
be sick, yea dead in trespasses and sins, and Christ does begin to come
home to the house of thy Soul to heal thee, and to raise thee up from the
death of thy sins, they will stop his passage and entrance in, if possibly
they can: As they did when Christ came to the Rulers Daughter that was dead.
Matt. 9.23.
But as Christ turned them out of doors, saying, Get ye hence: So must thou
shake them off, and not communicate with flesh and blood, in matters that
concern eternal life, and the salvation of thy soul; For if thou do, thou
can never be saved: Neither must we look after the love and liking of the
world, nor hang upon men for their applause and favor; for where there is not
the fear of God, surely such men are most unconstant in their ways, turning
upon every small occasion, yea and the love and favor of such men must needs
be bent toward the worst, seeing themselves are bad, and set themselves in no
good way: Remember what Christ said unto his Disciples: Ioh. 15.19.
If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: But because ye are
not of the world: But I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you. Wherefore, as they that run at tilt, look not to the vulgar people
what they say, but to the Judges; so care not thou for the world. But look
ever what the Judge of heaven and earth does allow and approve of.

That has not walked in the counsel of the wicked. By Counsel he here
means the subtilties and crafts of the wicked, by which they push themselves
forward, and labor to draw others to be like unto themselves, according to
that of Solomon, My son, if sinners entice thee, Prouer. 11
consent not unto them. From whence we gather a fourth point of Doctrine.

Namely, that it is a most horrible Doctr. 4. To give evil counsel, is an
horrible sin.
and grievous sin to give evil counsel. To commit sin, is that which highly
offends the Majesty of God, and draws down upon us all punishments both
temporal and eternal; but to counsel others to commit sin, is the very
height of sin.

This is noted in the Scripture to be the sin of Iezabell, who was a
furtherer of Ahabs winkednesse, 1. Reg. 21.7
for when he could not by any lawful means attain the Vineyard of Naboth,
she said unto him, Do thou sway the Scepter, rule the Kingdom, and manage
the State? Arise and eat bread, I will give thee the vineyard: This was the
counsel of Achitophel unto Absalom, 2. Sam. 16.21.
fearing his reconciliation to his father David, and therein his own just
confusion, he gives such counsel whereby he might take away all hope of
agreement: Go into thy fathers Concubines, which he has left to keep the
house, and when all Israel shall hear thou art abhorred of thy father, the
hands of all that are with thee shall be strong. This is likewise set down by
Solomon in the Proverbs, where he expresses the sin of seducers; Prou. 1.11.
saying, Come with us, let us lie in wait for the blood of the innocents, we
will swallow them up alive, like a grave, even whole, as those that go down
into the pit: Cast in thy Lot amongst us, we will all have one purse, their
feet run to evil, and they make have to shed blood. And this does appear in
the brethren of Joseph, when they purposed the overthrow of their brother: Genesis
37.10
Come (say they) let us slay him and cast him into some pit, and we will say a
wicked beast has devoured him. And this appeared to be the malice of the High
Priests and Elders of the people, who moved the people to desire that Barrabas
might be delivered rather then CHRIST, Mar. 15.11
and persuaded Judas, for a sum of money, to betray him: Mat. 28.12
Enticed the Soldiers with a great sum of money to noise it abroad that his
Disciples came by night and stole him away while they slept. All these
testimonies, and many more, may serve for the confirmation of this doctrine,
that it is a most horrible and grievous sin to give evil counsel.

Seeing that it is a most great and unto them: It is not enough for a man to
say, Alas, I devised it not, neither am I the first that have committed the
like; for this shall excuse no man, that he was not the author of an evil:
For surely, if it be so great a sin to seduce, it is no less sin to be
seduced, and GOD will one day find them no less guilty, but shall partake
with them of the same punishment: if a man should have about him a great sum
of money, or other treasure, and should willingly, and wittingly, put himself
into the company of thieues, and will be drawn by them out of the way, were
this man to be pitied, if he should loose all that he had? Even so is it with
a Christian, that does carry daily about with him a rich Treasure, his Soul
and conscience, which he must keep unspotted of the world: If he listen to
the charms of the wicked, and will be drawn out of the way of Gods
commandments, to commit sin, and so make shipwreck of faith, and a good
conscience: is it not just with God, that this man should perish for the same?
So then we see it stands us in hand to beware of consenting to sin, and
counselling others to commit sin: For if we give our consent unto them, we
are partakers with them in their wickedness, and shall be sure one day to have
share with them in their punishments.

Secondly, seeing the giving of evil Pro. 13.20
for with the upright thou shall learn to be upright: This Solomon teaches
us, He that walks with the wise, shall be wiser: It is indeed a rare thing
to find a man that will counsel others to follow godliness, and therefore
such as do are much to be respected: love him as the dearest friend that will
direct thee in the ways of salvation, and be a guide unto thee in the path
that shall lead unto life. Let it be far from thee to be ashamed to follow
the counsel of such as are discreet and godly; it is not material who they
be, whether our superiors or equals, or our inferiors, for the Counselor
is not so much to be regarded as the Counsel. If it be holy, just, and good,
receive it as from God, who thus speaks unto thee by his servant; If it be
evil, reject it, as coming from the Devil, who speaks by his instruments.

That has not walked, etc. THe last thing that we have now to consider out of
the first part of the description of a godly man is this, He has not walked,
etc. By walking, the Prophet David here means (according to an usual
metaphore in Scripture) a common usual course of a man's behavior, or their
ordinary trade of life. And the word which is here used is rendered in a Tense
or Time, which in the own tongue notes a continuance of walking even all the
days of their life: for otherwise who can say his heart is free, but that at
some time or other the Counsel, or bad example of the wicked has prevailed
with him: but that is not meant here in this place; when a man has
with-drawne himself from their lewd conuersations, and betaken himself to the
ways of Gods Commandments. From whence we gather a twofold Doctrine:
First, that the falls, slipps, and infirmities of Gods children are many and
great, which many times they fall into, and yet cannot properly be said to
walk in them, because they rise daily out of the same: And secondly, That to
walk, it is said of the godly, in respect of Gods Commandments, because as it
is in the second Verse, Therein is their delight.

Doctr. 5. The falls of the godly, many.
It is most true, that there are the seeds of all sin whatsoever, naturally
rooted and inbred with us, which if they be not prevented, are ready to break
out upon any occasion that shall be offered: and howsoever the godly do desire
to please God, and endeavor to serve God in truth and sincerity of heart, yet
do they often stumble in their race, through the burden that presses down,
and the sin that hangs on so fast. This truth is confessed by Solomon in
his worthy Prayer at the Dedication of the Temple: If any man sin against
thee (for there is none that sins not) if he turn again with all his
heart, 1. Reg. 8.46
Job 15.14.
etc. Again, what is man that he should be clean: and he that is borne of a
woman that he should be just? Psalm 14
Again, All are gone out of the way, they are all corrupt, there is none that
does good, no not one. Psalm. 14. Most woeful and fearful was the fall of
David, as the Scripture has recorded it. It may seem very strange that a man
as David was, 2. Sam. 11.
even after Gods own heart, could possibly fall so far as he did: For if
we consider the circumstances and degrees of his sin, it will appear, that
(final impenitencie excepted) a Reprobate could scarce commit a greater: For
first be committed adultery with Vriah his wife, when this was done, he
glauereth and flattereth with the VVomans husband, and bade him go home to
refresh himself with his wife, thinking thereby to father the Bastard on him:
when this succeeded not, he went further, and unto his adultery he added
murder, that he might bear, as the grief of it in his heart, so the shame of
it in his forehead; And in this he wrought worse then Iezabell, for he makes
Vriah the messenger, to carry the letters for his own execution. What shall I
say of Noah, of Lot, of Peter, etc. I need not to stand on this doctrine,
seeing woeful experience in all the godly does prove it too true.

Peter he goes out of that sin, and weeps bitterly for the same. And
therefore as Saint James says, chap. 4. verse 12. who art thou that iudgest an
other man? We may not set bounds and limits to Gods mercy, to say that any
shall finally be damned. Howsoever a man may be in the state of damnation for
a time, this were to sit in Gods Chair: Let us all acknowledge our selves to
be but men, and let none usurp the authority of Gods judgment, Let us
therefore consider what we our selves are, before we cast our eyes upon other
men, for they are the most sharp and severe Judges of their brethren, that
forget their own infirmities: and I doubt not but all the Children of GOD do
know by experience in themselves, how hardly sin is subdued and maistered in
them; How many sighs and groans it requires, how many prayers and tears it
does cost them? What a striving and struggling they have within themselves to
keep it under, and yet for all this it is very hardly subdued: So that the
knowledge of our own weakness, and unworthiness, must arm us with
meekness toward our brethren.

By the rule of this Doctrine we David fall, did Lot, Noah, Peter, etc. fall?
Oh! whither shall we fall if God do but a little leave us to our selves? who
dare presume of his own strength and worthiness, when such worthy Pillars
as these have been shaken? yea the lamentable shippewracke of such men as
these, may make us to fear a tempest before it do come. It is the Devils
crafty counsel, and subtle policy, to make us ouer-weene our selves, and
to make us boast and presume of our selves, For the Devil does know full well,
that this lifting of a man up, is the very next way to tumble and throw him
down, as Solomon says, Pride goes before destruction, and an high mind
before the fall: Proverbs 16. ver. 18. And therefore acknowledging our own
want of strength, and our own inability to stand without the assistance of
Gods Spirit, Let us not be high minded, but fear: Roman. 11.20. And thus we
have seen that the falls and slips of Gods children are many and great, which
notwithstanding cannot hinder their happiness, because they walk not in them,
that is; they make it not their continual practice, to live and delight in
sin.

Now we are to come to the second, Doctr. 6. A godly man does ever walk with
God.
which does note unto us that the godly man, who shall be truly happy and
blessed indeed, is so far from making his life a life of sin, as that he
does rather in the whole course of the same, walk with GOD in obedience.

For therefore indeed is our course of new life compared to a way, to show that
the godly must always be walking in it, from the beginning of their course
unto the end of the same. It was the commendations of Enoch and Noah, Genesis
5.22.6.9.
that notwithstanding the days and times wherein they lived were dangerous:
Yet They walked with God: That is, they considered more the Commandments of
GOD, what he had appointed then what was practiced; and desired rather to be
approved of GOD through their obedience, then through their disobedience to
purchase the favor of men: Genesis 17.1.
It was the charge given by GOD to Abraham, Walk before me: That is, let it
ever be thy care, that seeing I am present every where and privy to all thy
courses, that thou walk as in my sight, And this was the best testimony that
Solomon could give of his father David, 1. King. 3.6
That he walked before GOD in truth, and in righteousness. Yea, this did
minister comfort to godly Ezechias, Esaias 38.3.
when he thought he should die: Remember, O Lord, that I have walked before
thee in truth: And to this agrees that of the Apostle Paul, Who forgot that
which was behind, Phil. 3.13.
and endeavored himself to that which was before, and followed hard toward
the mark, to the prize of the high calling of GOD in JESUS CHRIST. He was not
like unto a vain and foolish man, who running in a race, will be ever and
anon looking back to see how much ground he has rid; but his eye was
always upon the mark or goal, to consider how much he had to run, Math.
24.
how far off he was from perfection, and what he had more to do in his
Christian course, that he might finish the same with joy. It is the end that
makes all; He that shall endure to the end shall be saved. 1 Cor. 9 24 Reu.
2.7. Romans 13.11 1. Pet. 1.9.
Our Savior says not there, that he that endures for a season, but he that
continues to the end; not every one that fights, but he that overcomes,
shall receive a Crown of life: These examples do show us how the godly have
walked. And these and the like precepts teach us we should walk so as in the
end we may be blessed.

Hence we are taught this lesson, of sin, and then with the Israelites, 2.
These. 3.13. Ps. 92.13.
and with Lots wife, look back to the Sodom of their sins, but remember
that thou owe unto GOD all thy days: The Trees planted in the Lords house,
Mat. 3.10.
bring forth fruit in their age, And they which do not so, shall be hewn
down and cast into the fire. It was the commendation of the Church of
Thiatira, That her works were more at last then at first. Reu. 2.19.
A reproof of their folly, who having kept the path of righteousness for a
time, do after walk in no good way, but think with one iumpe to leap into
heaven with a Lord have mercy on me at the last: But know, O thou vain man,
that thou must walk in the way; that is, thou must use all good means for the
attaining of life and salvation, thou must hear the word diligently and
carefully, pray, read, etc.

I doubt not but the serious thinking upon this, that God challenges every day
at our hands, yea all the days of our life to be spent in his service, will
reform many corruptions in us: For alas! the care of the most is, how they may
keep credit with men, though they purchase Gods displeasure, which will then
stand such in little stead, when all things shall come to receive their due
trial: Even every work done in the body, whether it be good or evil: 2.
Cor. 5.10.
And thus much for the first part of the description of a godly man Negatiuely:
He does not walk in the counsel of the wicked.

Nor stand in the way of sinners. THat is, The second part of the description
of a godly man negatiuly.
a godly man does not settle himself to live as wicked men do, nor frames his
life after their lewd example: where we are to observe two points: First, that
there is a way of sinners, in which the ungodly stand. Secondly, that the godly
stand not in it.

First then, that there is a way of sinners, in the which they stand and live,
it is very apparent, called in the Scriptures by diverse names; as by the name
of the way of the ungodly, The Lord knows the way of the righteous, but the
way of the wicked shall perish.

Doctr. 1. Wicked men described.
It is termed an evil way. The way of lying, A wicked way, etc. And by these
ways we are still to understand the course of life and conversation of the
wicked; wherein we are taught this Doctrine, that notwithstanding all the
means that God and Man does use to the contrary, the wicked man will still
persist and go on in sin, which is here understood out of the word Stand.
This appears in the example of Cain, Genesis 4.6.
albeit he were admonished and reproved of God for his wrath and malice
conceived against his brother, yet for all that Caine will please himself in
his own way, and never rest till he have shed the innocent blood of his
own brother. This is seen likewise in the example of the old World, when the
Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great, and all the imaginations of the
thoughts of his heart were only evil continually, and how they pleased
themselves in this way, the Lord stirred up Noah, Genesis 6.5.
the preacher of righteousness, who warned them from God; yet they would
continue still in their own ways, giving themselves to nothing but eating and
drinking, and all excess, till the flood came and swept them clean away. This
is clear likewise by the example of Pharaoh, Exodus 9.10
upon whom all means were assaied for his conversion: for what could the Lord
do unto him that he did not? He sent Moses and Aaron unto him, warning him from
God to let the people of Israel go, and to that end sent judgment upon
judgment, one upon the neck of another, even ten in number, yet for all this,
Pharaoh chose rather to continue still in his own way, and would none of the
Lords. So true is that saying of Solomon: Bray a fool in a mortar, Pro. 27.22
yet will not his foolishness depart from him. And no marvel, for the spirit
of slumber has so covered their eyes, that they cannot see; and their hearts
are so possessed with spiritual fornication, which makes them thus to go a
whooring from God, even haled with the fury of their own affections, snared of
the Devil, and taken of him at his will: Acts 7.51. Esaias 63. Eze. 13.3.
Oh miserable and unhappy condition! Fearful is the woe that lies upon all
those that thus walk in their own ways. For most certain it is, that they
that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, so
far, as that they have made choice of the Lords way, howsoever many times they
may stumble, and fall, in walking therein. But of the wicked it may truly be
said of them, the way of peace have they not known.

upon him. Yet to say of some, that they are in the state of damnation, and
(unless they repent) shall perish for ever, doubtless this is not unlawful:
for as love bids me not to determine too soon, so not to be abused too late.
God bids me look upon the tree, and judge of the fruit, I may say thou art in
the state of damnation, for I see thy heart through thy hand: But whether thou
shall finally be damned, there I leave thee: for God may have mercy upon thee
upon thy last repentance. I may come to a tree, and say, Here is little fruit:
or, Here is no fruit: or, Here is bad fruit; but I cannot say, Never fruit grow
on it more. But alas, alas! this is not all, this is not all that wicked men are
thus discovered to men, but that the Lord will find them out, and give them
their portion in the lake of fire. And indeed this is that that ought to be a
terror to all the wicked and ungodly to consider, that as their hearts are
hardened, and their consciences seared, so the plagues and punishments of God
attend upon them. If thou walk stubbornly against me, Leuit 26.
and wilt not obey me, I will bring seven times more plagues upon thee,
according to thy sins. Let us all then, as we tender the salvation of our
own souls, take heed unto our paths, that we stand not in the way of
sinners, that we sin not with delight and deliberation, it is the very brand
of a reprobate, and such a one as God has forsaken. Take heed therefore that
there be not in any of you an evil heart to depart from the living God. And
thus much for the first point of Doctrine, that there is a way of sinners, in
which the wicked walk which leads unto death.

The second point of doctrine that Doctr. 2. Godly man sins not with
deliberation.
does now offer it self to our consideration, is this, That a godly man does
not settle himself to live as the wicked do, nor frames his life after his
lewd example, which is here meant, when the Prophet says: He does not stand
in the way of sinners. Yea it is, altogether impossible for a godly man, and
one that is truly regenerate, to have in him a full purpose to sin, and to live
in sin with deliberation, and to delight in the same. For a purpose to live in
any known sin, is a sign of a wicked man, and a graceless heart, as when a
man is told of his sin, of his ignorance and carelessness in Gods service,
praying, hearing, etc. yet still he will be careless and negligent in the same.
So when a man is reproved for his swearing, yet still will swear, when a man
is reproved for profaning the Sabbath, yet will profane it: when a man is
reproved for his uncleanness, drunkenness, malice, etc. and yet for all that
will continue in those sins. Surely this purpose to stand in the way of
sinners, is a fearful sign of a wicked man, and is far from a godly man,
and one that is truly sanctified, which shall be blessed for evermore. It was a
cursed speech of a cursed wretch, Exodus 5.12
I know not the Lord, neither will I let the children of Israel go. This was
the case of those rebellious Jews spoken of by Jeremy: Ier. 44.16.
we will not hear, nor do, but as we lust, and as we have done. And this was
that that made the case of Herod so fearful, Mar. 6.20.
that notwitstanding he heard John Baptist willingly, and did many things at
his request, all which were good things in him, yet for all that he would not
leave his adultery, but continue in it; which purpose to sin, of all things
is far from a godly man, 1. Ioh. 3.9
as Saint John says; He that is borne of God sins not: that is, with whole
consent, but in part, and man being partly flesh, and partly spirit, as he is
regenerate, sin proceeds not from him, but as he is flesh. As for the
wicked, it is not so with them: for it is meat and drink to a wicked man to
do the works of the Devil. It is worth even our best consideration what is
said of the Apostle Paul, that he once Breathed out threatenings and slaughter
against the Disciples of the Lord. Acts 9.1.
But when was this? Even in the time of his ignorance: but afterward he
preached the same Gospel which before he persecuted, and labored ever after
all the days of his life, to build up the Church of God which before he
labored to pull down. And this appears in David, in Peter, Luke 7.
in Mary Magdalen, etc. who after they had once escaped the snares of the
Devil, dedicated ever after their whole life to the service of GOD. This
exhortation does the Apostle give to the Ephesians: Col. 3 7. Ephesians. 5.8
Ye were once darkness, but now are light in the Lord; walk as children of
the light. By these and the like examples it does appear, that the godly stand
not in the way of sinners; that is, take no liberty to themselves to live in
the custom and practice of any known sin.

This may serve in the first place, blaspheming of the name of God, he will
answer, that he hops he may swear so long as he swears nothing but the
truth; tell the covetous man of his covetousness, he will answer for it he
must make the best of his own, and he must be a good husband; so tell the
drunkard of his drunkenesse and fearefulll abusing of the good creatures of
God; his answer is, It is in kindness and good-fellowship: tell the proud
man of his pride, and strange attires: his answer is, It is the fashion, and
he does but as others do. Is not this, To stand in the way of sinners? Is not
this to commit sin with delight, and to say as Pharaoh, Exodus 9. Mark 6.
Ierem. 44.
Herod, and the Jews, we will not repent, we will not leave our sins? but
continue in them, let God and man say what they will: yea, this is but to pay
one debt by another, and as the Apostle says, Heap up wrath against the day
of wrath, Romans 4.

we love our own souls, to take heed of this, that we never sin with an
high hand against God, wittingly and willingly: But if we hear sin
reproved, let us leave it, be it never so pleasant or profitable, let us be
like that good King Josias, 2. Kings 22. who hearing the Book of the Law read
unto him, his heart melted within him, and he wept for his sins, for so long
as we have in us a purpose to live in sin, it is impossible that we should
ever fear God, or truly repent, let us pray with David, Lord, Psalm. 19.12.13.
Prou. 8.9.
keep thy servant from presumptuous sins! And let us know, that if we
regard, that is to say, love wicked men in our hearts, and have a purpose to
live in sin, God will not regard our prayers: nay, all we do is
abomination to the Lord. Say now therefore unto Laughter, Thou art mad:
Pronounce the ways of the wicked to be but vain, say unto thy own Soul, I
will have nothing to do with the ways of iniquity: And this will give thee
courage when thou shall come to look CHRIST JESUS in the face, when thou can
say with the Apostles, Lord I have forsaken all to follow thee: Mat. 19.27 Mat.
24.46
Oh blessed is the servant whom his Master when he comes shall find so
doing.

Paul, Romans 7.15.
the evil that I would not do, that do I: That is, I am drawn, through the
corruption of Nature, and the temptations of Satan, to do that evil which I
hate and condemn. But the wicked man sins with full consent and purpose. I
sin and would not sin, says the godly man: I sin and will sin, says
the wicked man. Yea, what service soever the regenerate man does give unto
sin, it is like that service which Israel gave to Pharaoh in Egypt, compelled
and wrung out from them by oppression, which made them sigh and cry unto GOD to
be eased of the same. But the service which he does give unto the Lord is
voluntary and cheerful. Well, to end this point, this is the sum: know this
whosoever thou art, that if thou Stand in the way of sinners: that is, take
liberty to thy self to live in any known sin, thou can have no assurance
that thou art yet within the covenant of Grace, Blessedness is no part of thy
portion: He must become a New Creature that shall enter into New Jerusalem.
And thus much for the second part of the description of a godly man,
Negatiuely; He does not stand in the way of sinners.

Nor sit in the seat of the scornful. The third part of the description of a
godly man negatiuely.
BY Seat of the scornful: he means here, the fellowship and society of
the ungodly: So that the meaning of the Prophet David here in this place is,
that the godly man, who shall be this Blessed Man here spoken of, will not
converse with those men, nor be familiar with those that make a mock of all
Religion, and openly profess all impiety: and the word sitting, does impart
such an habit and custom in evil, that a man means not to change his
mind: In which words, as in the former we are to consider these two points:
First, that there is a seat of the scornful, in the which the wicked sit:
and secondly, that the godly do not sit in it.

A threefold seat.
For the first, the Scriptures discover unto us a three-folde Chair, or Seat,
first of Justice, and such a one may that Throne seem to be which Solomon
erected. 1 Reg. 10.18.


The second is of Doctrine, as our They sit in Moses Chair, Matthew. 23.2.

Thirdly, we read of a Seat, or Chair, of the scornful, spoken of in this
Psalm.

This sin of Scorning has it first being from the root of Pride, which is
the root from whence this sin of scorning does spring: and indeed it is the
fruit of Pride, and it is the nature of men who are tainted with this sin of
pride, to suppose that they are better then others, and therefore in regard of
themselves they do contemn and despise an other. If they have wealth, they
despise an other that is poorer then themselves. Honor makes them swell in
disdain of their poor brethren, their wisdom, learning, strength, beauty,
friends, eloquence, all these lift men up with pride, and makes them to scorn
those that are under them: and this comes to pass, not in respect of riches
themselves, or honor, or beauty, or the like, but in respect of our corrupr
nature, which is so ready to abuse them to our own condemnation. But (O man)
why art thou thus puffed up with pride? thou wast but earth, thou art but
flesh, thou shall be but Worms meat: what cause has earth, or flesh, or
worms meat to be proud? We were all borne in sin, we live in misery, and
we shall die in corruption. What cause has sin, or misery, or corruption to
be proud, but to be humble? Besides the manifold infirmities that we are
subject unto here, and the innumerable diseases that are ready to happen unto
us: All teaching us this lesson, To be humble and lowly of mind.

And in this fear, the wicked and ungodly, do ease themselves and take their
delight, as sometimes Babylon did, who vaunted so much that she did sit as
Queen, and should see no mourning: as it were in scorn of all that God could
do unto her.

And this was the case of cursed Pharaoh, who seemed to mock God to his face,
when he said, I know not the Lord, neither will I let the children of Israel
go, Exodus chap. 9. So then the doctrine that we gather hence from the Text,
is this: That evil men Doctr. 1. Wicked men proceed by degrees to be exceeding
sinful
do not usually make a stay in sin, when at first they have committed it,
but they proceed by degrees to be worse and worse, Falling from one mischief
to another. First, the Devil will suggest evil thoughts into a man, his evil
thoughts do tole on consent, consent breeds action, action brings custom,
and custom begets a necessity in sinning, which is the forerunner of
death; This appears in Caine, in Pharaoh, and in Judas, who by steps, and
degrees in sinning, came at the last to be hardened in sin. Mat. 26.8. John
12.5. Mat. 27.5.
As in Judas, who was at the first a cunning Dissembler; secondly, a secret
Thief; thirdly, a bold Liar; fourthly, a Traitor; and lastly, a Reprobate:
And thus a wicked man, as it is in the Psalm, They fall from one wickedness
to another; And as we see it clear here in the words of this Text, from
walking, to standing, and from standing stock still in sin, at length,
through custom, come to lie down and wallow in sin. Oh happy then is that
man that sins least! next, he that returns unto God soonest: but most
woeful is the estate of him that goes on in sin, that with Ahab, Has sold
himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord: Psalm. 69.17 Iere. 13.23
Heb. 10.26 Heb. 12.17 Roman. 2.
For mark what follows: Can the Blacke-Moore change his skin, or the
Leopard his spots? Then may they do good who have accustomed themselves to
do evil. Where the Prophet shows, That custom in sinning is almost an
incurable disease. This is a lamentable estate, and this is a fearful
judgment of God, for a man thus to be left over to himself, to fall thus from
one evil to an other, and to heap together a great measure against the day of
wrath: Psalm eighty one, verse eleauen: And the cause of all this in a man, is
his disobedience toward his God: For this does the Prophet make clear when he
says, My people would not hear my voice, and Israel would have none of me:
So I gave them up unto hardness of heart, and they have walked in their own
counsels: Where the Prophet David shows, That seeing they would not be
reclaymed and reformed, as in mercy toward them the Lord vouchsafed them the
means of reformation, his word, therefore the LORD gave them over to the
hardness of their own hearts, that so they might fill up the Measure of their
iniquities, 1. Thessalon. 2.16. and that the just wrath and vengeance of the
Lord might then fall upon them.

Hence we are taught, how dangerous and greediness: custom in sin takes
away all sense of sin, so as by custom men come to judge of sin to be no
sin, yea it makes it very natural to a man, so as such men who at first
would have been ashamed to have been seen amongst lewd company, yet by
custom have gotten such an habit of sin, that they have grown to be very
impudent and shameless, like Thamar, who at the first did play the whore with
a veil, as being ashamed to be seen, but afterward grew more impudent:
Iere. 6.15.
so many a man would have blushed to have been heard swear, to be seen
drunk, to be found in unchaste company, but through custom, have grown so
impudent, that afterward would blush at nothing. And when a man takes the
chair of sin, and sits down in it, and has got a custom, and taken
delight in sin, how hard a thing is it for a man to leave that sin? Iere.
13.25
He that has got an habit and custom of swearing, as he grows shameless
in it, so how hardly does he leave it? even so of drunkenness etc. A nail
knocked into a post with many blows is hardly pulled out, and sin often
committed, and grown familiar with a man, through custom, is hardly left:
Custom is like a strong stream, it carries a man into all sin with
violence: And as a man by continual labor so hardens his hand that it
becomes senseless: so custom in sin so hardneth the heart, that a man's
conscience becomes senseless. This must teach us to repent betimes, not to
suffer sin to come to such an head, that it is more likely to master a man
then a man it: For if thou do not repent this day, thou will find it harder
to repent to morrow, thy self growest weaker, Note.
thy sin stronger: and Custom is a tyrant which will hardly be resisted:
therefore it shall be thy wisdom to repent with speed, to delay no longer,
but while it is called, to day, to break off thy sins, and to turn to God
for mercy.

1. Pet. 2.3.
but they draw nearer and nearer their destruction: yea, the judgments of
almighty GOD follow them at the heels, and in the end will overtake them.
Thus it was with the old world. What an heap of sins had they gathered
together, adding sin unto sin, as drunkenness unto thirst? Genes. 6.
But when the measure of their iniquity was full, the Lord God was at hand with
his judgments, and they could not escape. This was the case of the sinful
Sodomites, Genes. 18.
whose sins cried up to Heaven for vengeance, howsoever they might glut
themselves with sin, and drink down iniquity like water: it was but for a
season, the Lord would be no longer provoked by their wicked and sinful
lives, but sent down fire and brimstone from Heaven upon them; every sin
does help somewhat to increase the weight, and to fill up the measure of a
wicked man's iniquity: Mat. 12.36
And that God which keeps a Register of the works of all men, Reu 20.12
will one day give unto every man according unto his works: And when they
shall go the way of all flesh, they shall then say, what has pride profited
us, and what has the pomp of riches brought us to? 2 Cor. 5.10
When they shall see, that all the days of their life, they have vvearyed
themselves in vain, and then shall be plunged into irreuokable and
intolerable torments.

This may serve to reprove such, are perverted by them to their own
destruction. And no less worthy of reproof are those kind of men or women,
that lincke themselves or their children, in marriage with such as be vile,
wicked, profane, and irreligious: Alas! what agreement is there between
CHRIST and Belial, God and the Devil, Light and darkness, 1. Cor. 6.
a Believer and an infidel, to have such near conjunction and fellowship with
them? How can such escape and not be polluted with their sin? And because men
and women in this match make no better choice, but marry for love of money,
beauty, or the like, rather then for Religion, Virtue, or the Fear of God, it
comes to pass, that they live together most uncomfortably, and in great
coffeehouse.

Nor sit in the seat of Scorners. BY Scorners, in this place, are meant such
wicked men as are both hardened in sin, and live a wicked life; such as are
become stubborn and rebellious sinners, professing all impiety, contemning
God and man, such as being confirmed with the long practice of sin, and a bad
life, have got a habit of sin, and can do nothing else but sin, and
despise all good duties, and make a scoff at all Religion.

Hence we learn this doctrine, Doctr. 2. The mark of a lewd and wicked man.
that this is the property of a notorious lewd and wicked man, to make a mock
of all piety and godliness, to make a mock of all Religion, and every
Christian duty: And such a man is come to a wonderful height of sin, and is
notoriously wicked and ungodly; So it is said that cursed Cham mocked his
father Noah, Genesis 9.22.
and Ismael mocked godly Isaac; because, as it is like, Ismael seeing godly
Isaac performing some duty of Religion, Prayer, Thanksgiving, or the like,
he laughed him to scorn: The Athenians mocked Paul, Acts 17.
what will this Babbler say? So the Scribes and Pharisees mocked our Savior
CHRIST, saying; Mat. 26.68
Hail King of the Jews: The Jews mocked Saint Peter's Sermon, saying; Act.
2.12.
These men are full of new wine: The children of Bethel mocked Elizeus the
Prophet, saying; Go up thou Bald-head: 2. Kin. 2.22
This was the complaint of godly Jeremy, O Lord I am in derision daily, Ier.
20.7.
every one mocketh me. And as it was, so is it still, and will be; the world
is full of such lewd and wicked men, such Mock-gods that mock and mow at all
good duties scoffing and scorning all Religion, flouting and mis-vsing Gods
faithful Ministers, rail upon them, and revile them: yea if any man fear
God, make conscience of good duties, to hear the word of God diligently and
carefully, to read, pray in family, etc. And will not swear with the swearer,
drink with the drunkard, and run with wicked men into all excess of riot:
this man shall be mocked and poynted at, and called by the name of Puritan,
and precisian, and I know not what, and can very hardly endure their company.
Now these kind of men, these scoffing Ismaels, and cursed Chams, though they
seem to be never so honest and ciuell, yet the word of God paints them out in
their colors, as the most vile and wicked men that live in the world, because
they contemn and despise, they mock and scorn Gods word, and those that be
most dear unto God.

Let all such scorners, and scoffing Pro. 3.32
so they seldom or never escape unpunished. Look on that cursed Cham,
scoffing Ismael, behold Gods vengeance upon those two and forry yonkers that
mocked the Prophet Elizeus: What became of them that mocked and mis-vsed the
Prophets of the Lord? What became of those that mocked and mis-vsed our Savior
Jesus Christ?

And let men but observe it, and mark it well, Esaias 37
and they shall clearly see some token or other of Gods vengeance upon the
heads of such scoffing wretches: yea, let all such wicked men know that they
be too much their own foes, in that they hate the godly, mock Gods Ministers,
rail upon his servants, they fare the better for them every day they rise,
whatsoever wicked and ungodly men have and enjoy, it is for the godlies sakes;
for if it were not for them, and their sakes, the Sun would scarce shine upon
them, the heavens would fall upon them, the earth would open her mouth and
swallow them, the fire would burn them, the water would drown them, and all
the creatures of God would arm themselves against them: And therefore the
children of God (as one says) are like a piece of Cork cast into the Sea full
of Nails, the Cork bears them up, which otherwise would sink of themselves
one by one. Now then what a folly and madness is this to hate them, to mock
them, and to mis-vse them by whom they fare the better every day they rise?

Seeing wicked men are so ill affected He despises a vile person, Psalm. 15.4.
and makes much of those that fear the Lord. Again, 1 John 3.
Hereby we know that we love God, if we love the brethren. Again, All my
delight is in the Saints, and such as excel in virtue. Such as be religious,
fear God, and live a godly life: These be to be beloved, be they never so
poor. It is lamentable to see the course of the world, let a lewd man come
into company, that is notorious wicked, an Atheist, a blasphemous wretch, one
that laughes at God, and all goodness, a drunkard, or the like: this man shall
be too too welcome, and we will eat and drink, and be merry with him. But let
a godly man, a Prophet of the Lord, a faithful and zealous Minister come into
our company, we are weary of him, we cannot endure his company, he marres
all our mirth, we cannot be merry for him. Thus men say. Oh Hel-hounds, and
wicked wretches! thou may as well say thou can not be merry when God is
present: He that despises you, despises me. These men only delight in the
Devil, and his cursed instruments.

And thus much for the first part of the description of a godly man, negatiuely
described: He does not walk in the counsel of the wicked, He does not stand
in the way of sinners, nor he does not sit in the seat of the scorners.

The first Psalm.
VERSE. 2. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law he does
meditate both day and night.


HITHERTO we have heard a godly man described: First, The description of a
godly man affirmatively.
negatiuely, showing what euilles he does most carefully shun and avoid.
Now he comes to his description affirmatively, showing what good things he
does most carefully embrace and follow.



Secondly, the object of his Study, Law, that is, the heavenly doctrine which
shows the will of God and his worship, what man must and ought to believe and
do to eternal life.

daily to serve God, some time to read, some time to hear, and some time to
meditate: yea oftentimes he bestows some part of the night, when some be at
rest and sleep, and bestows it on Gods service, setting his mind on heaven
and heavenly things.

First, in that the Spirit of almighty God describes a godly man, not only by
leaving and avoiding lewd company, and the counsel of the wicked, but also by
living well, and framing himself to study the Scriptures, and to lead his
life thereafafter.

Hence I gather this doctrine, that Doctr. 1. Not to do evil, is not
svfficients it is damnable, not to do good
it is not sufficient for the leading of a godly life, which may both please
God, and bring comfort to a man's own soul, to abstain from evil, but he
must also do well: not only not to do evil, but to do good: it is not
enough to prove a man to be a godly man, and a sound Christian, that he
carefully shun and avoid the lewd counsel and company of wicked men: but
he must also be as careful to meditate in the Law of God day and night: And
therefore, as in this place, so usually in the holy Scriptures they are both
joined together: cease from evil learn to do well: Esaias 1.16. Psalm 34
Matt. 3.10
eschew evil and do good, and thou shall live for ever. The Axe is put to the
root of the Trees, every Tree that brings not forth good fruit. Mark,
Christ says, not only every Tree that is barren, and brings forth no
fruit, good or bad: nor every one that brings forth evil fruit: But that
brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire: Mat.
25.41
And at the last day the Lord will say to the wicked, Depart ye cursed; not
for robbing the poor of meat, drink, or apparel, or casting them out of
doors, but for want of showing mercy unto them. A Christian life does consist
of two parts, so set down by the Apostle Paul, Abhor that is evil, there
is one half, And cleave to that is good, Romans 12.9. there is the other half.
If any want the former or the latter, he is but half a Christian, and so shall
at last come short of a reward: And therefore this is a privilege to all the
Commandments of God, that where any vice is forbidden, the contrary virtue is
commanded: and where any virtue is commanded, the contrary vice is forbidden.
The owner of an orchard is not contented that his trees bear no naughty fruit,
but if they bear not good fruit, he will hew them down as fuel for the
fire: It is not enough for Zacheus, that he be no more an extortioner: But if
he will become a true convert indeed, he must make restitution of that he
has wrongfully gotten. Luke 19.8 James 2.25
These and the like examples make this Doctrine apparent unto us, That for the
leading of a godly life, it is not sufficient, that a man do no evil, Not to
walk in the counsel of the wicked, not stand in the way sinners, nor sit in
the seat of the scornful: but he must do good. His delight is in the Law
of the Lord, and in his Law he does meditate both day and night.

But meditate in the Law of God, not only cease from evil, but do good:
Look on the places of Scriptures before named. Matt. 3.10 Mat. 25.41 Judge. 5.23
Deborah pronounces a heavy curse against Nerosh, not for hurting or hindering
the people of GOD, but because they did not help them against the enemies of
GOD: and so the axe and curse of GOD shall be upon all those that be not as
careful to do good, as to eschew evil. S. Paul professes that he was a man
of an upright life, and one that was unrebukable to the world, and yet
professes that all this was but as Dung without the righteousness of CHRIST.
Philippians 3.4. It were good, if our civil honest men (as we call them)
would consider this: they stand upon this, they defy all the world, who can
say, black is their eye? they say no body harm, nor do none: well, grant that
they say, (which is impossible) though they could abstain from all outward
evil, as swearing, lying, drunkenness, whooring, pride, envy, etc. So as no
man could lay any of these to their charge, yet here is but half a Christian,
but one part of his life, for he must not only not do evil, but do good:
Not only to bring forth evil fruit is damnable, but not to bring forth good
fruit. And in the day of judgment CHRIST will proceed against men, not only
for doing evil, but especially, for nor doing good.

If these things be done to the green tree, what shall become of the dry
tree? In a word, if the not doing of good shall be punished so severely, as
we have heard: Oh! what will then become of those whose lives abound in all
manner of sin and impiety, whooredome, drunkenness, etc. Where shall such
sinners as these appear? If the others which have seemed to have been just
and righteous men shall not be saved: O consider this ye that forget God,
Psalm. 50.22
lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none that can deliver you. Psalm
50. and verse 22.

But his delight is in the Law of the Lord. THAT is, the godly man, who is
truly blessed and happy, does wonderfully love, and is greatly affected with
the word of Almighty God, and has exceeding delight and joy in the doctrine
of God, because there is revealed the will of God, whereunto men must be
careful to frame and conform all their desires, thoughts, words, and deeds,
because herein is chalked out and declared, the very highway to eternal life
and salvation.

Doctr. 2. A godly man performs godly duties cherefully.
Hence then we are taught this doctrine, that it is a special note and
property of a godly man, to perform Christian duties to God willingly and
cheerfully, and to make them his delight and joy.

Indeed it is worthy, yea thrice worthy to be delighted in, both in regard of
the Author of this Law, which is God, as also in respect of the authority of
it, which is manifold. In regard of God the author of it, it is to be delighted
in, who is the only true and everliving God, 1. Cor. 8.6.
of whom are all things, and we in him. Secondly, in respect of the authority
of the same, containing in it perfect wisdom, truth, justice, wisdom, mercy,
goodness etc. It is called by the Prophet David, Psalm. 19.7. Reu. 22.18
a perfect Law, to the which if any man shall presume to add any thing, God
shall add to him the plagues written in this book, and if a man shall diminish
any thing, God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life, and from the
holy City. Here, and no where else is to be found the true VRIM and THVMMIM,
the VRIM that is, Light, and the THVMMIM, that is, Perfection: and the Saints
of God in all Ages have esteemed highly of it.

Thus did Job, Job 23.12.
I esteemed thy word more then my appointed food: Thus did David when he said,
Lord, what love have I to all thy commandments, Psalm. 119.
all the day long is my study in them. And David shows his wonderful love and
account of it, by the names that he does give unto it, calling it Doctrine,
Testimonies, Commandments, Fear, Judgments, Way, Statute., Word, etc. And
in another place he says, That it is more to be desired then Gold, Psa.
16.10 Mat. 22.37 Romans 12.8
yea then fine Gold: that it is, sweeter then the honny, and the honny-combe.
And this is that which the Lord him self does require, when he says: Leuit.
1.3.
Hear O Israel, the LORD thy GOD is LORD only: Deuteronomy. 6.5.
And thou shall love the LORD thy GOD with all thy heart, with all thy soul,
and with all thy might. And so the Prophet David prays, O Lord, I beseech
thee accept of the free offerings of my mouth, and teach me thy judgments.
And this is the rule which the Apostle Saint Paul sets down when he says:
2. Cor. 9.7.
As every man wishes in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly? or of
necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver. Now that which the Apostle
speaks of Charity and Alms, may truly be understood of every Christian
duty: when we pray, we must pray unto God chearefully, when we give thanks
to God, we must do it cherefully, Genes. 4.5
and so of all other duties of Gods worship laid down in his Word. And
indeed this is it which does put the difference between the godly and the
wicked, the service of the one, and the service of the other. Caine will come
with his Sacrifice as well as Abel; but he brought of the worst, thinking any
thing to be good enough for God, and this he did very grudgingly: Whereas Abel
brought of the best to sacrifice to God, and this he did willingly and
cheerfully. And all those duties that are not thus performed, they have no
life nor virtue in them, to give them any grace or acceptance with God. So that
we see that outward profession is not enough to assure us of our salvation, if
it be not joined with sincerity of heart.

Now where it is said here, Reason.
that the godly man's Delight is in the Law of the Lord, there is great reason
why the children of God should be thus affected to his blessed word and
heavenly Doctrine above all things in the world, that it should be Sweeter unto
them then the honny and the honny-combe. Tit. 2.11.


First, because it is the bread of life, it is the power of God to salvation.
Romans 1.16
And therefore is called, the Gospel of the Kingdom, and the Kingdom of
Heaven. Mat. 13.44
because it is that whereby men are brought to eternal life, and the kingdom
of Heaven.

Secondly, it is the effectual means and instrument which the Lord uses and
has appointed to beget all saving grace in the hearts of his children, To.
10.14. 1 Cor. 1.21
namely, knowledge, faith, humility, obedience, and the like.

David says, I had perished in my trouble, had it not been for thy word:
Psalm. 119. And, thy Rod and thy Staff does comfort me, Psalm. 23.

David says, Thy word is a Lantern unto my feet, Psalm 119.
and a light unto my paths: And without this we can not live well, but shall
wander up and down as blind men in the dark.

Matthew. 4.4
whereby we must put to flight all the temptations of the Devil, so as we
cannot repel them, or withstand them, unless we be skillful and cunning to
use this weapon.

This Doctrine may seem to reprove unto whom should I speak and admonish that
they might hear: Behold, their ears are uncircumcised, and they cannot
hearken unto it, the word of the Lord is a reproach unto them, and they have no
delight therein, Jeremy 6.10. Now that men have no delight to the word of God,
which is the very power of God to salvation it may appear.

First, because men and women take no delight in Hearing, Reading, and
Meditating on the word of GOD, you shall find a great number that will buy
other profane books, that will hardly buie the Book of all Books the holy
and sacred Bible: And if they buie it, yet they spend no time in perusing of
it, in reading and meditating of it: Other Books are delightful and pleasant
to flesh and blood: and this is the reason they do so much desire them, but
withal, this shows that they be carnal, not borne anew, for if they were,
then would they bestow less time in reading and perusing those profane and
unprofitable Books, and would bestow more time in reading and meditating on
this blessed Book of God; yea, and the small account men make of Gods
Ministers, whom the Lord calls his Messengers and Ambassadors; yea, the
Angels of the Church.

that every action is accounted of by God, not according to the work it self,
but according to the affection of the doer. This the Lord himself does teach,
when he says, This people come near me with their mouth, and honor me with
their lips, but their hearts are far from me: Esaias 29.13. And therefore
were their Sacrifices abomination to the Lord, as he again says in another
place. I can not away with your new Moons, And this was it made the poor
Widows mite commended above the rest that offered of their superfluity, Luke
31.3.4. He that shall give a cup of cold water to a Disciple, Mat. 10.41
in the name of a Disciple, he shall not loose his reward. Alas! what is the
bestowing of a mite, a brazen token? or what is a cup of cold water? are they
in themselves any thing worth to merit any thing at Gods hand? No, no, but
God accepts the manner more then the matter, how they are done, more then
what is done.

Which may teach us to labor to have our affections tried, that whatsoever we
do in the service of Almighty God, may be done in truth and sincerity of
heart. This was Jobs comfort when he said, O Lord, I have esteemed thy word
more then my ordinary food! This was the Prophet David's comfort when he
could say, Oh, how do I love thy Law! it is my meditation continually, Psalm
119. verse 97. And this shall be our comfort, when we shall go the way of all
flesh, that we can say with good King Ezechias, Remember O Lord, that I have
walked before thee in truth, and with an upright heart: That we have not been
painted sepulchers, desiring to be accounted righteous before men, but within,
full of all rottenness and corruption, but have labored rather to be
approved of God.

Oh how ought our hearts and souls to be inflamed in a holy and godly zeal
toward the word of God, the law of the Lord here spoken of, yea we ought
more earnestly to long for the waters of this well of life, then ever David did
for the waters of the well of Bethlem: and when we have tasted how sweet the
Lord is, never, oh never to deal with the Lord, as the people of Israel did,
Io. 4.15.
which loathed the Manna that was sent them from heaven. But much better shall
it be for us to cry out with the woman of Samaria, Lord give me to drink of
these waters: for these waters being once tasted of, will keep a man that he
thirst not again, but shall ever be refreshed by the same to eternal life.

Lastly, let us herein labor to That they hear his voice and follow him: And
again, John 10.
Hereby shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, and love me, if ye
keep my Commandments. So hereby shall men know that we love the Law of
God, if we study to keep it, to obey it in heart and life: But if we have
in us no care to live thereafter, but break the Law of God continually, and
rebel against his Commandments: how can we be said to love the Law of God?
If a man should say he loves the Kings Laws, and likes them well, and yet
should every day break them wittingly and willingly, and be ever playing the
Traitor, would not all men condemn him as an hypocrite and a liar? So, though
most men do say they love the Word of God, and delight in his Law, yet seeing
they do daily break it, and rebel against it wittingly, and willingly; by
swearing, lying, profaning of his Sabbath, drunkenness, swilling, pride,
uncleanness, etc. It is manifest they have no love unto it.

Thus much of the first part, showing that the godly man is well affected to
the heavenly Doctrine of the word of God, it is the delight and joy of his
heart.

Now in the second part of the Verse, the Prophet David shows the exercise of
a godly man, that as in his heart he loves and likes the Word and heavenly
Doctrine of the Law of God, so in his life he is conversant in the same, his
Meditations are much spent therein, he is said to meditate therein day and
night. That is, the godly man does much muse and meditate, often exercising his
mind with calling to mind and remembrance the heavenly Doctrines, comforts,
and instructions of the word of God, and this he does not slightly and
carelessly, but seriously and with good advice, and to this end does evermore
set some time apart every day, morning and evening, two times a day at least,
for the performance of this godly duty.

Does meditate day and night. Doctr. 3. The Law of god is a godly ma^s chief
delight.
Here we see still, that a godly man, and one that shall be truly blessed,
the Lord requires that he be no stranger, and such a one as seldom, or never,
searches the Scriptures, but that he be much and often exercised in the holy
and serious meditation of Gods Law, in the diligent searching, perusing, and
particularly applying of the heavenly doctrine of the word of God. And indeed
this is here set down as a true fruit of our love to the word, as the love of
the word is made a true fruit of a godly man: for as it is impossible a man
should be truly religious, and fear God, and yet have no sound love nor
delight in the word of God; so is it likewise impossible a man or woman should
truly love the word of God in their heart, that seldom, or never, bestow any
pains in the serious and earnest meditation of the same. David calls God to
witness, that the love he bare to the law of God, was exceeding great, when he
said, O how do I love thy Law! Psa. 119.97
And in the same verse he seems to prove the same to God, it is my meditation
continually: which indeed is a note of true love, to be ever thinking of the
thing beloved.

And in very deed, the careful and diligent study, the often and earnest
meditation of the word of God, is the very life and strength of all our worship
and service of God: for if men should read much, and never meditate, it would
do them no good: if men should hear much, and often, and never meditate, they
should be little the better. If men should pray much and often, and never
meditate, they should find small comfort. If men come often to the Sacraments,
and do not before and after meditate of the Covenant of grace, they should not
receive much good thereby: so that you see that Meditation is all in all, it
puts life to our reading, hearing, praying, receiving; and without it, al our
reading, hearing, praying, and receiving, will stand us in small stead.

For without this Meditation this Law, that is, the word of God, will either
in time be forgotten, whereby we shall become unmindful of it; or else it
will prove as a Talent hid in the ground, utterly unfruitful unto us: for
this Meditation indeed is the third step of a true convert. The first is to
hear the word of God readily: the second, to remember it diligently: and the
third, to Meditate on it seriously, and this is compared to the Chewing of the
Cud, Deuteronomy. 14.6.7, which is never found in the unclean, but in the clean
beasts.

True it is, that hearing and reading the Word, will beget knowledge, but
Meditation is the special means to work upon the affection, for else all our
knowledge shall only be in general, idle and swimming in the brain, which
may well be called braine-knowledge, but no heart-knowledge: but by serious
Meditation we do apply that we hear, to our own selves in particular:
laying the Doctrine to our own hearts, applying it to our selves, to comfort
our sad souls, to humble them for our sins, and to square our lives thereby,
that we may in all things keep a clear conscience before God and man. The
Lord gives Ioshuah a straight charge to do thus: Let not the Book of the Law
depart out of thy mouth: But meditate therein day and night: That thou may
observe and do according to all that is written therein, for then shall thou
make thy way prosperous, and thou shall then have good success, Joshua 1.8.
and Deuteron. 6. verse. 6.7.8. And thus the servants of God have been much
exercised in meditation, and thereby have grown wonderful, not only in
knowledge, but in practice, as we may see in David, Psa. 119. who took great
delight in Gods Law, and made it his meditation continually. And of Isaac it
is reported, that he went out into the fields in the evening to meditate,
Genesis cha. 24.

This reprooues the common fault this they care not for. For if men did
carefully meditate of the things they heard and read, how could they be so
ignorant in Gods word as most be? So void of knowledge, faith, repentance,
humility, zeal, patience, and the like gifts and graces, which accompany
godly and holy meditation? For books of Statutes men will not only have them
in their houses, but at their fingers ends: but Bible they have none: And if
they have, it lies upon the deske or table, and they read it not. And if
sometimes they read, yet they never meditate thereon.

This may admonish all men, as only in the clean beasts, whereas they which
chewed not the Cudde, Deuter. 14 6.7.
were unclean: This is the mark and property of a godly and Blessed man,
whereas the not doing it, is the mark of a wicked and ungodly man. Let us then
remember that we make the word of God our Meditation continually. Many men
meditate much, some in one thing, and some in another, as they are led by fond
affection: some think of honors, some of pleasures, some of riches, some of
one thing, and some of another. And of these they doat and dream, talk, and
speak continually. But here we are taught another lesson, namely, that our
minds must especially be set upon the word of God, that must be our delight,
and the joy of our heart.

3. Point.
The last point in this Verse, is the circumstance of Time, namely, not by
fittes: But the godly man keeps a continual course in the study and
meditation of the word of God, so as he sets apart some time for the
worship and service of God, at least twice a day to meditate and study in Gods
Book.

Hence we learn, that every one Doctr. 4. A godly man sets some time apart
every day for Gods service.
that will live a godly life, and so please God, that he may find comfort to
his own soul, and be blessed in the end, must set some time apart every day
for the worship and service of God, to read, pray, and meditate: and at the
least twice a day to call upon his Name, to read the word of God, and to study
therein. This is that the Lord commands his people to offer unto him every
day, the morning and the evening sacrifice, at the least twice every day, they
were commanded to worship God: and so the holy Patriarchs were wont to
worship God morning and evening. So we read in Genesis 24.63. That godly Isaac
went out into the fields in the evening to pray or meditate, to make himself
fit to pray. And, Job 1.5. Acts 10.2.
Job rose up early to offer sacrifice, and called his family together: and
this did Job every day: and David in many Psalms shows that he did set some
time apart every day, to worship God, in praying, reading, meditating, etc.
Cornelius worshipped God continually, 1 The. 5.23
that is, every day, according to the rule of the Apostle, Pray continually.
And that we should not be weary of well-doing, Christ spoke the parable of the
unjust Judge and poor widow to this end, that we ought always to meditate,
pray, etc. and not wax faint and weary, Luke 18.1. The meaning is not that
men should leave their callings and other business altogether, to attend upon
hearing, reading, meditating, etc. but that we should be much and often in
meditating, in prayer, in reading, etc. and in performing these blessed duties
unto almighty God. And at the least, three times a day, to pray and call upon
the name of God: In the morning when we do arise, to give unto God hearty
thanks, for keeping us the night past, and to crave for a blessing at his
hands over the day following: At noone again, when when we receive his good
Creatures: And at night when we go to rest: And this godly practice the word of
God prescribes us, and the examples of the godly do teach us: Dan. 6.10.
Daniel prayed three times a day upon his knees unto God and praised him, as
his manner was, though the King had made a strict Law against it. Evening,
morning, and at noone, will I pray unto thee, Psalm. 55.17. And again, Seven
times a day will I praise thee, Psalm. 119.164. That is, many times. For the
morning, Early in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee: Genesis 22.2.
Job 1.5.
And thus did Abraham, Isaac, Job. Secondly, at noone or midday: so did Peter,
Peter went out to prayer about the sixth hour, Acts 10.9. That is, about
twelve of the clock, or noone-tide. Thirdly, at night in the evening when we
go to bed to take our rest, Genes 24. Psa. 139 11 Psalm. 19.5. Mat. 13.23.
Esa. 28.3.4
we must then remember likewise to render the Lord thanks for the comfort of
the day, and to crave his blessing for that night. Neither is this all, but in
the night time when sleep is departed from a man, and Nature is sufficed with
rest, he does even then call to mind the heavenly Doctrine of the word of God,
and does muse and meditate therein, as the Text says here, even day and
night. For God which has bounded the day with the night, has set no bound to
a godly man's meditation. It is nothing to be, first, one that hears the word:
secondly, one that receives it: thirdly, with joy: if fourthly, it shall be but
for a time only, if he shall not also continue, and constantly persevere to
meditate therein day and night.

So as we see this is our duty, to set some time apart every day to worship
God, as to hear, read, pray, meditate, etc. We see men do set apart, depute,
and ordain some certain time every day, for the food of the body, at the
least twice a day, to eat and drink, how much more then should we be
careful for our Souls, every day, to read, meditate and to pray? Of all the
time we spend in this world, none will be more comfortable unto us in death,
when we shall go the way of all flesh, then that which we have bestowed in
the service and worship of Almighty God.

There is not now one hour spent in the service of God, but will then minister
cause of joy and rejoicing; neither is there now one hour spent in the service
of sin and of Satan, but the remembrance thereof will then be a terror unto
the soul, Oh that men would be wise, then would they understand this: they
would consider their latter end, Deuteronomy. 32.29.

This seems to reprove the common carelessness of the world, most never open
their books to read one chapter in the Bible all the Week long: How many be
there that never spend one quarter of an hour in Meditation, which never call
upon GOD from Sunday to Sunday: does not this prove men to be carnal and
ungodly? Do not these men do nothing of conscience, or with delight and love to
GOD and his worship, but all for fashion sake, or fear of the Law? What
difference is there betwixt those men, who seldom, or never call on the name
of GOD, and the beast they ride on? The beast arises in the morning out of his
den and streakes himself, goes to his meat, and so to work: Even so do they,
never call on the name of God. In this thing wherein do such men differ from a
very beast? How can such look for any blessing from God upon their labors?
Yea, how can they choose but fear some fearful judgment and curse of God to
overtake them? And no doubt the cause why many ride and run early and late
(and do not call on God for a blessing upon their endeavors) cannot prosper and
thrive in the world: No, God sends sometimes judgments, plagues, and
punishments upon them, and all for the neglect of this godly and Christian
duty, it is just with God both to cross and to curse both them and their
labors. Psalm. 14.


Again, by the rule of this doctrine they are no less to be reproved, Note.
who can be content now and then to Hear, Read, Pray, and Meditate, etc. But
this must be at their leisure, when they have nothing else to do; bur to keep
certain times Mornings, Noones, euenings, to leave all sports, pastimes,
delights, and business to go to GOD, and serve him, and call upon his name,
they cannot abide that, they will not be so tied and restrained; but as the
man in the Gospel, when CHRIST called him, first he must go bury his father:
and him that would go Bid his friends farewell. So many could be content to
serve God, and to pray unto him, but they must keep their friends company: or
as those that were bidden to the feast; One has his oxen and gain to hinder
him, an other his wife, his pleasures and delights, which he is married unto,
and so can find no time to serve God, even the least thing in the world is
matter sufficient to hinder them from serving of God, these men show that they
find no comfort at all in the service of Almighty God, no good, no fruit, no
benefit: for if they did, they would not be such strangers unto it.

Let every one be exhorted and David and the rest. Let us set some time apart
every day for the word and prayer, else we shall never prove our selves good
Christians, else we should never find true comfort, else we can never look
for Gods blessing upon us: let us then set apart some of our idle time that we
bestow in talking, in walking, in playing, in vain delights, or else idly,
and bestow it on Gods service and worship, in hearing, reading, praying,
meditating, etc. David early in the morning prevented the day light, yea at
midnight would he be so busied. The Eunuch in his journey was reading the
Scriptures. Let us then never arise in the morning, or go to bed, but as
duly let us ever be mindful of this duty. Let us not mis-spend our precious
time. Let us (I pray you) consider why we live here in the world, not to
spend and consume our time in toys and vanities but to serve God, and to seek
for comfort and salvation unto our own souls: Let us therefore so spend it as
we may have comfort in the end.

Last of all, we are here exhorted to persevere and to continue in the same,
Day and Night, even unto the end; not only in the daytime of prosperity, but
in the nightime of adversity, for unto GOD The day and night are both alike.
Ps. 139.12.
Many make a fair beginning, but the end is very fearful and dangerous: Many
lay their hands to the Lords Plow, Luke 9.62
but in the end they look back. Lots wife seems as forward as her husband:
she goes out of Sodom as well as he, she takes her journey with her
husband, but she did not continue and hold out to the end, but looks back,
contrary to the commandment of God, and so was turned into a pillar of Salt:
And she being made a spectacle to all back-sliders, our Savior puts us in
mind of her, when he says, Remember Lots wife. Luke 17.32
And Paul, when he had Preached the Resurrection of CHRIST, Agrippa said unto
him: Thou perswadest me almost to become a Christian, Act. 26.28.
But there he stayed and rested and would proceed no further. These are
fearful examples, It had been better for such, They had never known the way
of righousnesse: 1. Pet. 2.21
for indeed in a Christian race there is no standing at one stay, for not to go
forward in Religion is to go backward.

And thus much for the description of a godly man affirmatively, showing what
he does carefully embrace and follow: But his delight is in the Law of the
Lord, etc.

The first Psalm.
VERSE. 3. He shall be like a Tree planted by the Rivers of waters, that will
bring forth her fruit in due season, whose leaf shall not fade, so whatsoever
he shall do, shall prosper.


HItherto the Prophet David has described unto us a godly and righteous man,
such a man as is truly blessed: both negatiuely showing what be the evils he
must carefully shun and avoid, as also affirmatively, by those virtues and
holy duties which he does carefully embrace and follow.

Now in this Verse the Prophet proceeds to set out the happiness of a godly
man, Wherein the godly man is blessed. Parts of the verse.
or wherein his happiness does consist. And this does he, first, by a
similitude, comparing him unto a pleasant, fruitful, and flourishing tree:
secondly, by that blessed success God gives unto a godly man in the end of
this verse.

The precedent part of the verse, the similitude it self, it has in it these
parts.

First, whereunto the godly man is compared, to a Tree.

Secondly, the nature of this Tree is described, not every common or triuiall
Tree, but such a Tree, which for the original of it, planted: secondly, for
the situation of it, By the rivers of waters: thirdly, for the property of it,
that will bring forth her fruit in due season: fourthly, by a contrary
property, whose leaf shall not fade.

First then, observe by this Similitude, that man is compared to a Tree, and in
three things especially, the Shape, the Growth, and the State of a Tree. Man
like to a Tree.


1 In Shape.
Man may well be compared to a tree in respect of his Shape. For as a Tree
consists of the root, the stock, and the boughs, or branches, even so does man
this mystical tree. He has his head which is the root, and hair as small
roots, his body as the stock, and his arms and legs as so many boughs, and
fingers and toes as lesser twigges: Only the difference between the natural
tree, and man this Mystical Tree is this: The natural tree is rooted in the
earth, Genesis 27.28.
receiving as Esaus blessing the Fatness of the same; but man, this Heavenly
Plant, deriues not his juice and nourishment from the fatness of the earth but
from heaven above, according to Gods wise disposing of his root, which is
above not below: and therefore are we exhorted by the Apostle to set our
affections on heavenly things, and not on things here below, for we through
Christ, 2. Pet. 1.4.
are made partakers of the Divine Natute, in heaven therefore must our
conversation be.

Secondly, 2 In growth.
man may be said to be like a Tree in respect of his growth; for a tree at
first is flexible by nature, and so by degrees, a little and little, grows to
be stronger and stronger, till it come to perfection, and then again begins to
wither and to dry up; so fares it with man this Mystical Tree, while he is
in the state of infancy, he is as a tender twig, and his mind is as flexible as
a twig: easily inclined to virtue if he be accordingly educated, or else to
vice if the same be neglected: an excellent caveat to all parents and
governors of youth, that they take a due time of correcting and educating of
these tender plants; namely, to bend the tree while it is a twig, for if it be
suffered it will grow to be curelesse: And as man is like to a tree in respect
of his infancy and tender age, so in respect of his decrepit old age: for when
the Tree is once come to his perfection in growth, it then decaies and
declines: so fares it with man, let him seem to be as tall and as straight
as a Cedar Tree, he must become a shrub again, and stoup to age. For man's
life is well compared to a day, whose evening will most certainly follow his
morning, until the night of death cause him to sleep in the grave: For as
there is a time to be borne, Eccle. 3.1.
so there is a time to die. Be it, that now thou seem to be as strong as
the Oak, and as tall as the Cedar, as flourishing as the Bay Tree; yet at last
rottenness will creep into the strongest Oak, and strength and tallnesse will
be abated in thee, when the keepers of the house shall tremble, Eccl. 12.3.
etc.

3 In State.
Thirdly, man may be compared to a Tree in respect of the State of a Tree, and
that diverse ways.

honor, or the like, Loca quae alijs celsa, ipsis prerumpa videntur. Seneca.
is most subject to the assault of Satan, and the rage of wicked men: And men
of such excellent places in Church, or Commonwealth, are more subject to
changes, disfavors, to envy, insurrections, poysonings, murtherings, as to so
many raging winds, whereas those that with little David, Tend the Ewes great
with young, are free from these assaults.

Secondly, it is commonly seen which are ever fruitful and as the Psalmist
says, Stand thick of Corn: For humility is the ground work of Christian
virtues, and pride the root of all evil, and the queen of all vice.

Thirdly, and lastly, the end of every tree is to become either timber for
building, or fuel for burning: So fares it with man this Mystical tree;
when death comes, which is Gods Axe by the which he does cut us down, he
becomes either timber for the Lords house, when this earthly tabernacle shall
be destroyed, 1. Pet. 2.5.
to be a building, not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens: or else
alas but fuel for the fire of Gods wrath, Esa. 30.33.
even in Tophet, where there is fire and much wood, and where the Lords wrath,
as the bellows, shall never cease blowing and kindling the same.

Doctr. 1. Ministers duty to instrct the simplest.
It is here first of all to be noted that the Spirit of God sets out the
happiness of a godly man, by comparing him to a goodly green Tree. Hence we
learn, first of all that it is not only lawful but a commendable and
profitable kind of teaching for Gods Ministers to illustrate points of doctrine
by similitudes and comparisons, so that they be familiar and fit to make the
people conceive what they teach; and to raise comparisons from the Plow and
Plowshare, to that end, that even the simplest in a Congregation may understand
what is said, and what is taught. This was the course of the Prophets from time
to time in their Sermons to the people. This was the course of our Savior
himself, John 15. Math. 13. John 10.1.
who in all his Sermons uses both Parables and Similitudes, comparing good men
to good Trees, bad men to bad Trees, Mat. 3.10. Luke 8.4.
comparing Himself to a Vine, the Father to a Husbandman, us to Branches;
Himself to a Shepherd, we to Sheep, and the word to twenty things: as
Seed, Mustard Seed, etc. to teach all those that are Gods Ministers, that when
they preach unto their people, that they lap not up their speech in a mist of
words, but so to deliver it as that the meanest and shallowest amongst the
hearers may understand it. Thence came the profession of Paul, we preach not
our selves, but Christ Jesus our Lord, 2. Corinthians 4.5. And hence came that
worthy resolution of his, I had rather in the Church to speak five words, etc.
that I might instruct others, then ten thousand words in a strange tongue, 1. Corinthians. 14.19. In which words, by strange tongue, we are not simply to
understand Hebrew, Greek, Latin, etc. but by speaking of the mother-tong in a
strange manner. Preachers are fitly compared to a Nurse; a Nurse does half chew
the meat to the little one, and does babble unto them in their own stammering
tongue: so must Preachers proportion their Doctrine to their hearers capacity,
and fit his tongue to their understanding.

This may serve to reprove such kind of Preachers, who seek not to preach
CHRIST crucified, but preach themselves, even such as in handling the word of
God, and preaching the Gospel, seek to show their own learning, wit, art, and
memory, and so indeed preach not Christ, but themselves, like the old
Pharisees, Loving the praise of men more then the praise of God: But what,
shall David the Prophet of the Lord, or rather, the Spirit of God in him,
stoop so low as to speak to the understanding of all men, by similitudes,
comparisons, and the like: And shall sinful man, a worm of the earth, exalt
himself above God, to seek only to tickle itching ears with the words of
man's wisdom?

Seeing Gods Ministers must be esteeming it foolishnes. What is this but to
stint the Spirit, 1. Cor. 1.21
and to teach the Lord to speak? prescribing the Minister what he shall say,
and restraining our hearing what we will hear? What then will follow but that
we shall hear without fruit, and the word to be unto us only a savor of
death unto death.

Doctr. 2. Double use of all the creatures of God.
Hence wre observe here a second point of Doctrine, that seeing the Prophet
compares a godly man to a Tree; That of all the creatures of God there is a
double use, one Natural, the other Spiritual. As a Tree in nature signifies
such plants of the earth as bring forth fruit according to their kind. Now
besides this natural signification, it serves to put us in mind what we
ought to be; Math. 3.10
namely, friutfull trees in the Lords orchard, lest if we be barren, or bad, we
prove fuel for the fire. A man having a tree in his Orchard, if it bring
forth nothing but leaves, he will cut it, and prune it, and dung it; but if
after all this cost and labor it remain still barren, he will then hew it
down as good for nothing but fuel for the fire. Hereby we may see how God
will deal with us: We be all Trees here planted in the Lords orchard, he
does water us with the preaching of the Word, he cuts us and prunes us. Esaias
5. Luke 8.4.5.
Now if after much cost and labor we shall remain barren still, if the Lord
come three or four years, and still no fruit will be found, He will then
bethink him to stub us up that we cover not the ground. So by Sowing of corn
into the ground to mainetaine man's life, our Savior leads us to consider of
another thing: for as the Sower casts his Seed abroad into sundry sorts of
ground, and they according to their nature, bring forth fruit accordingly: Even
so the Minister of the Word, scatters and sowes the seed of Gods word into the
ground of men's hearts, and as they be prepared, so they bring forth fruit: So
by a Weauers shuttle we see the shortness of man's life, gone in a moment.
Do thou see how the wind drives the chafe and dust of the earth about,
giving it no rest until it be clean dispersed away? Oh! consider then how the
curse of God shall follow and torment the wicked, Verse 4. of this psalm
and never let their souls be at rest, till it consume them. Do thou lie
down into thy bed every night? oh! remember that thou must shortly lie down
in thy grave, be covered with dust, and therefore prepare to die in the Lord.
Do thou see the beautiful grass and herbs of the earth cut down and
wither away? Esaias 60.
so thy beauty and riches shall fade and perish. When thou see a stinking
carrion, there behold a picture of thine own self, for no carrion is so
loathsome to man, as a rebellious sinner to God. Do thou put on thy cloths to
cover thy nakedness? Oh labor for the precious robes of Christ's
righteousness, That thy filthy nakedness do not appear. Reave. 3.18
Do thou but wash thy hands in water, oh labor for the blood of Jesus Christ
to wash away the spots of thy sins? Psalm. 51.15
Do thou but sit down to eat and to drink to nourish thy body, without
which it could not live: Oh consider that thy soul does much more stand in
need of the bread of Life, the food of thy soul? Do thou see sometimes
brimstone burning: oh consider and quake for fear of the dreadful judgment
of God upon Sodom and Gomer, that were burned with fire and brimstone; and how
all sinners shall have their portion in the Lake of fire and brimstone? Genesis 19.
Do thou but take a book into thy hand, and open it leaf by leaf: Oh
consider, that the time will come when the Books of thy conscience shall be
opened, Reu. 20.
wherein all thy sins are written one by one, and thou shall then receive
according to thy works. And thus we see that of all the creatures of God,
there is a double use to be made of them: The one Natural, the other
Spiritual, one Temporal, the other Eternal.

He shall be like a Tree planted by the Rivers of water. THIS part of the
similitude, does signify unto us our implanting and ingrafting into JESUS
CHRIST his Mystical Body, by the work of GODS Spirit, and by the means of a
true and lively Faith.

This word Planted, it is a Metaphorical speech and borrowed from the practice
of Husbandmen, who first take up their plants out of the nurcery or place where
they first spring up, and then Plant them in the Orchard or Vineyard: So fares
it with man this Heavenly Plant. And the comparison holds good in diverse things.

time when the plants of the earth are thus removed, and that not usually in
Summer, when the heat of the year is up, and the sap is gone up into the
plant, but in the winter time this is usually to be seen for the most part.
Even so, the time in the which the godly man is planted, it is in the winter
time, that is, the time of sorrow and sore affliction; not in the Summer of
peace, when all things outwardly may seem to go well with a man, and he says
peace, peace; but when God does give unto a man the sight of his sin, and
lets him see the reward of sin, even eternal death: Oh, Romans 6.
when a man's sins do thus muster themselves before us, and against us; Oh this
winter time, this time of affliction and sorrow: now is the season of the
removing of this heavenly Plant Man.

Secondly, as a Plant is removed, planted and ingrafted into Jesus Christ, for
till then we bring forth nothing but bitter and unsavory fruit; but we are
planted to that end we may be fruitful, and being once in Christ, we shall
then as living Plants of that lively Stock, bring forth fruit incontinently.

In particularly, this Planting has in it two things 1 Plucking up. 2 Setting
down.


The plucking up shadows out unto us three things in the conversion of a
sinner.

First, our separation from the world, he cannot be in Christ that has his
rooting still in the earth, amongst the men of the world: and therefore, as we
have heard before, we must be careful, that we walk not in the counsel of
the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the
sconnefull: They are as so many noisome shrubs that will be ready to fret the
tender Plants of the Lord, and to annoy them, and therefore we must be
removed from amongst them, that is, must have no secret society with them.

Secondly, it signifies our deliverance from the power of original sin thus:
For as a Plant once removed receives no more juice nor nourishment from the old
earth, from which it is removed, but from that soil into the which it is
planted: So fares it with this heavenly Plant, being regenerate and ingrafted
into Jesus Christ, there will follow such a change of will, affection,
understanding, and the like faculties of soul and body, that whereas before
they were altogether earthly, carnal, and vain, so now they mind heavenly
things, being sanctified by the Spirit of Grace; and the power of Nature, Romans
6.
that is, that old sap of sin, being done away.

Thirdly, it signifies a Christian man's sorrow for sin: for as no Plant can
be removed from one place to another, but the axe, and other instrument, of
the Husbandman, must be laid unto it, and many a root must be cut off before
it can be removed: So fares it with man this Heavenly Plant; the Lords
Husbandmen, which are his Ministers, they must bring the Axe of Gods Word, and
lay the same to the root of our consciences, and we must have many an
unprofitable sprout of nature cut off, before we can be taken out of nature,
and ingrafted into Jesus Christ; the roots, that is thy affections, that have
taken such deep rooting into thy profits, into thy pleasures, and the like;
All these must be cut off before thou can be planted into Christ.

Doctr. 3. All men that are not ingrafted into JESUS CHRIST are miserable.
Hence mark, in that the Prophet David, compares a godly man thus to a Tree,
not wild but Planted, and that by the Rivers of water, and that this is a
sign of our insition or ingrafting into CHRIST his Mystical Body whereby we
are made Members of the same. Hence I say, we are taught that all men out of
CHRIST are miserable, only they be blessed that be united unto JESUS CHRIST,
and ingrafted into his mystical body. Our Savior speaks of this when he
compares his Father to a Husbandman, himself to a Vine, and all of us to
Branches: Now he shows, that those that be not ingrafted into him, that they
be but dead and withered boughs, and therefore they must be burned in the
fire. We are all by nature wild Olives, Ioh. 15.1.2 Romans 11.
that bring forth nothing but sour and unsavory fruit till we be
transplanted by the Spirit of God, and ingrafted into the sweet Olive Jesus
Christ. We see this plain by common experience, take a sciene from a Tree,
and unless it be ingrafted into another Stock, it will die and never bear
fruit: So, unless we be grafted into Jesus Christ by faith, Ephe. 2.1.2.3.
John 5.6. John 8.35. Romans 3.13. Ephesians. 4.18.
and the Spirit of God, we must needs wither and come to nothing, but prove
fuel for the fire of Gods vengeance. And Paul showing the estate of all men
by Nature, out of Christ, says, that we are all dead in trespasses and
sins; The children of wrath; Ioh. 3.3.5. 1. Cor. 4.4. 2. Tim. 2.26. Ioh. 8.33.
yea the very vassals of the devil, and limbs of Satan, heirs GODS
vengeance and eternal damnation, we are without GOD in the world, strangers
from the commonweal of Israel, in a cursed and damnable estate. Unless a man
be borne anew he can never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Yea, the Devil
is called the God of this world, because all men, by Nature, are his vassals
and slaves, he reigns and rules in them. Romans 7.23. Exodus 1.11 Colos. 2.3.
We are in the devils claws, and taken in his snares to do his will. This is
the common slavery of all, high, low, rich, poor, noble, and simple. Let men
boast never so much in outward respects, as sometimes the Jews did, we were
never bound to any; yet until the Son of Righteousness Christ Jesus do make
them free, this is their captivity. We read in what an intolerable bondage
the people of Israel were in, in Egypt under Pharaoh: But it can no way figure
out unto us the miserable slavery and bondage that every man is in under the
spiritual Pharaoh Satan: for here the soul, the will, the affection, and
all are captiued and held in his snares To do his will.

The use hereof may serve to humble out of the state of Nature into the state
of Grace, and to be by faith ingrafted into this true Stock Christ Jesus.

Ioh. 3.3 5. Ephesians. 2.1.2.2.
and that all by Nature are the children of wrath, as well as others, high,
low; rich, and poor; old, young; learned, and unlearned: This is that our
Savior says, Unless ye repent ye shall all perish. Luke 13.5.
And again, If any man abide not in Me, he is cast off as a withered branch,
John 15.6.
and men gather them and cast them into the fire, and they burn: Oh! how
should this admonish all men to look about them: It is wonderful to see how
men go on from day to day, securely in their sins, and neither think of
heaven nor hell, but persevere and continue in their ignorance, unbelief, and
hardness of heart, in swearing, contempt of the Word, profaning the Sabbath,
in lying, stealing, adultery, etc. Psalm. 50.
O consider this ye that forget GOD! Oh consider the woeful and fearful
estate of all such as live and die out of Christ in the estate of nature, they
must needs perish and for ever be damned: Oh think of this, and the LORD give
thee understanding in all things, that every day thou risest thou art in danger
to loose thy own soul, and therefore lay this doctrine to heart, and know
that it is not good to dally in such points, God will not be mocked: And
therefore now begin to repent and turn unto God while it is called to day:
Defer no longer, but repent and seek to be reconciled to God while it is
called to day.

The second part of this doctrine is, that as all those that be out of Christ,
are miserable and cursed, and if they live and die in the state of Doctr. 4.
Only the regenerate man is happy and blessed.
Nature, cannot be saved: So on the other side, all those that are Regenerate,
and borne anew, that be ingrafted into Jesus Christ by Faith and the Spirit of
God; so as they be the true and lively Members of Christ his Mystical Body,
they are blessed and happy. Now that these are blessed it may appear in that
blessed prayer Christ made a little before his passion; He begs this at his
Fathers hand, John 17.
That all the Elect might be one in Him, and He in them: And this He begs
often and earnest unto his Father for; which shows, that it is a matter of
endless moment and great importance. Now that such as be one with Christ, are
truly blessed, let us consider a little what great and incomparable benefits
we receive by this our planting and ingrafting into Christ his Mystical Body.

First, hereby it comes to pass that every true Believer has sweet union and
communion with God the (...) hour, and which shall one day as certainly be
executed upon the wicked, as now they live.

Now in Jesus Christ, by being united to him, and being members of his
Mystical Body, we have three wonderful remedies, against these three
fearful miseries.

First, for the bond of obligation against us, He has taken it away, Col.
2.14.
and nailed it to his Cross, and crossed and canceled the same with his own
Heart Blood.

Secondly, for the stinking filthiness and corruption of sin, Christ has
both perfectly obeyed the Law for us, Romans 8.1.
and also covered us in his own righteousness, as Jacob in Esaus garment.

Thirdly, for the most just and intolerable punishment, Esaias 53.5. Gal. 2.20.
Reu. 1.6.
He stood in our steed upon the Cross, and paid the full price and punishment
for our sins: for when Christ suffered in our steed, it was as much as if we
had suffered.

The fourth maine benefit which every godly man has, by being one with Christ
is, Sanctification: which is a wonderful and supernatural work of Gods holy
Spirit, whereby every godly man, that is a true and lively Member of Jesus
Christ, is freed, both in mind, will, and affection from the bondage and
slavery of sin and satan, and is by little and little enabled and strengthened
by the Spirit of God, to will, desire, and approve that which is good, and
holy, and to walk in it.

And this Sanctification has two parts, Mortification, and Vivification: by
the former is sin every day more and more mortified, weakened, and consumed:
by the later, inherent righteousness is put into them, whereby they walk with
God in newness of life.

Now both these parts of Sanctification are wrought after this manner. First,
after the Christian man is united to Christ, planted into him as into a Stock,
and become a living member of his mystical body, Christ Jesus then by his
Spirit works in him two blessed works.

First, the godly man ingrafted into Jesus Christ, receives power and strength
from the death of Christ to die to all sin: So as the power of Christ's death
and passion does kill sin, and mortify their corruptions, For as many as are
baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized into the similitude of his death. Romans
6.4. So as the death of Christ is as a corrasiue to eat up and to consume all
rotten flesh, and the corruptions of our hearts, it eats out sin and frets
it away by little and little, till it be utterly abolished by death when our
Sanctification shall be perfected.

Secondly, every godly man receives power and strength from Christ's
resurrection to rise out of the grave of sin to newness of life to walk with
God in holiness and righteousness. Even as we see all the parts of the body
being joined to the head, receive life and motion from it: Even so every
Christian, as so many parts and members of Christ Jesus the Head, receive from
him spiritual life and motion, whereby they walk with God in new obedience.

Man, must be planted, he can not plant himself. Indeed man at his first
creation had free will in himself, but since his fall, that blessing is now
fallen away and utterly lost in man. And the proof of this point may appear
unto us, if we will rest upon the testimony of God himself, who professes
thus of man, that The imagination of man's heart is evil, Genesis 8.21.
from his youth up. Now what good can be willed of him who is first evil?
Secondly, whose heart is a fountain of all evil. Thirdly, whose imaginations,
as streams of that fountain, are evil, and that not for a time, but ever
from his youth up. So that now since the fall of man, the freedom of man's will
to goodness is so inthralled and eclipsed, as that of our selves we cannot
plant our selves into grace, or into Christ: for we are as Trees, not planting
our selves, but must be planted by God, For he shall be as a Tree planted.

This magnifieth the free grace of Lam. 5.21.
as it appears by the Text, we are planted. It is the Lord that must work
in us both the will and the deed; he must turn himself unto us, before we
can turn unto him. This is acknowledged by the Prophet Daniel in that worthy
prayer of his when he says, Dan. 9.9. Romans 6.23 Ephesians 2.8. Luke 12.32
Compassion and forgiveness is in the Lord our God, albeit we have sinned
against him. This is taught by the Apostle when he says, that Eternal life
is the free gift of God. Yea our Savior Christ himself does confirm the
truth of this when he says; Mat. 15.13 Ephesians. 1.6. 1. Pet. 2.10
Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up. Yea
it is worth our best observation, That the whole work of man's salvation is
called by the name of the work of Grace or of Mercy. And therefore on what
part soever we cast our eyes, we shall see the free grace and mercy of God:
Begin we at the foundation of all Gods eternal election, and come from
thence to the period of all Man's glorification, and still ask the question
from what root each part springs? The answer must be, From the free Grace
and Mercy of God: It was the free grace and mercy of God, that he should elect
us: It was the free grace and mercy of God, that he should send Christ to
redeem us: It was the free grace and mercy of God that he should call us, that
he should justify us, that he should sanctify us; and what can it be but the
free grace and mercy of God, that we shall be admitted to an Inheritance
immortal and undefiled? 1. Pet. 1.4.
So that we see here in the whole work of man's redemption by Christ, There is
no footing left for humane merit: For the free grace and mercy of God and man's
righteousness cannot possible stand together, they will never admit any
composition, and therefore we must conclude for the whole work of man's
Redemption, and say; Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the
glory.

Lastly, seeing all men out of John. 3.6. Romans 1.16. 1. Cor. 1.21
none but such as do repent and believe in Christ Jesus, and be the true and
lively members of his Mystical Body.

And to the end that we be not deceived in so weighty a matter, but that we
may assuredly know whether Christ dwell in our hearts by his Spirit, and we
dwell in him by faith, so as we be true and lively members of his mystical
Body; let us try it by these two ways. First, by the power of Christ's death:
Secondly, by his resurrection. If thou be a member of Christ, thou shall find
the power of Christ's death, daily crucifying the old man, and eating out the
corruption of thy nature: for as we see in a man's body, when there is much
dead flesh in a wound, they lay corzie medicines to it, to eat it out: so the
death of Jesus Christ applied to our hearts by faith, does fret and eat out as
a corzie, the corruption of Nature, Romans 6.1.23. Romans 6. and 7.8.
our dead flesh: So as Christ by his death makes all his members die unto
sin, so as they can not live in the bondage and slavery of sin.

Now then prove your selves, you hope to be saved by Christ Jesus: But be not
deceived, Christ died for none but such as be united to him, his true and
lively members: And none are his members but such as find and feel the power
of his death, to mortify, kill, and weaken the power of sin, and natural
corruption. Do you then find sin to die in you? Do you find the strength
of your corruption to be abated, the heat of it to be alayed? Do you feel
Christ's death fretting it out, so as you can say; I hate sin, I abhor
sin? It is as bitter as Wormwood unto me. Do you find this change in your
lives, that you leave your old sins, laboring to get out of ignorance, to
leave swearing, lying, stealing, drinking, whooring, etc. then your case is
good, it is an evident token that you are ingrafted into Jesus Christ. But if
on the contrary part you find that sin is as strong now as ever it was, and
that you are the same now that you were seven years ago, now dying to sin,
and rising to newness of life. Oh deceive not you own souls any longer!
your case as yet is fearful, you be not the lively members of Jesus Christ;
but wild Olives, dead branches, good for nothing but fuel for the fire.

The second property of this tree
Which brings forth her fruit in due season. This Tree whereunto the godly
man is compared is most like to be the palm tree Maler. in Psalm. 1.
THis is the second property of that Tree whereunto a godly man is compared:
namely, as it is well planted and seated by the Rivers side, where it has
continual juice and nourishment, and is well watered: Even so likewise it is
fruitful, and yields sweet and pleasant fruit to him that planted it. And
that In due season. Even so the godly man being ingrafted into Jesus Christ,
Palma gaud^^ rignis totoque animo bibere gaudet. Pli. lib. 13.4: Psalm. 92.12
as by a rivers side, and being a lively member of his Mystical Body, he
brings forth much good and pleasant fruit, and that in Due season: When as
it may best stand for the glory of God, and the good of man.

Here we see then who are the true and lively members or Jesus Doctr. 5.
Members of Christ are ever fruitful.
Christ, who is a true godly man: and who is planted as this good Tree in Jesus
Christ the true Vine. Namely, such as be careful and endeavor themselves
continually to bring forth the blessed fruit of a godly and Christian life;
Every Tree is known by his fruit: A Tree is not known by his rhinde, nor
bark, nor branches, nor yet by his leaves, But every Tree is known by his
fruit, Matthew the twelfth chapter and the four and thirty verse: a good Tree
cannot but bring forth good fruit, and a bad tree cannot but bring forth bad
fruit: So every man is known by his fruit: He that is a godly man, and a
true and lively member of Jesus Christ, can not but bring forth good fruit,
even the fruit of good works, and a godly life: so a wicked man cannot but
bring forth bad fruit, the works of darkness, of a wicked and ungodly life.
We see if a grift or sciene be set into a good Stock, and take aright, it will
appear by the yielding of fruit. But if it do not prosper, then it withers
and dies, and is good for nothing but the fire. So if any man seem to be a
Christian, and to be a member of Christ Jesus, and yet bring not forth good
fruit; Surely his estate is fearful; while he is unfruitful, he must be
pulled away as a withered branch, and to the fire he must go. Mat. 21.19
A true Christian must not be like the tree which Christ Jesus cursed, which
had leaves and no fruit, but he must be like to the Tree planted by the rivers
side, that will bring forth fruit in due season. Yea that which is more, They
bring forth fruit in their age. Psalm. 92.14. whereas evil men, as the Apostle
S. Paul says. 2. Tim. 3.13 wax worse and worse, and fall away from God daily
more and more: this was the sum of the Doctrine of John Baptist to his
hearers, that they would Bring forth fruit worthy amendment of life. Mat. 3.8.
And the like is used by the Apostle, Let your conversation be such, as
becomes the Gospel (...) thing else but that grace of God in a man's heart
whereby he believes the promise of salvation and the promises of the Gospel,
and applies them to his own soul, and therefore Saint James says; James 2.
Show me thy faith by thy works: Do thou delight in the Law of God, and
love his Word? Do thou delight in his worship, and calling on his Name? Do
thou find thy faith to Purify thy heart? Acts 15.9.
This is some part of that fruit which God requires of thee: This fruit
Peter brought forth, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God: Math. 16.16.
This was the fruit that the Disciple John brought forth: Ioh. 6.69. Ioh. 11.27.
We believe and know that thou art Christ the Son of the living God, And
indeed this is the first stone that is to be laid in the building up of a
Christian, and therefore very fitly called a Foundation: and the Collossians
are said to be Rooted, and Built, and Stablished in the Faith; Col. 2.27. And
indeed, this is that sure foundation that shall bear up the whole frame of our
souls against all winds, and weathers. It is the first work of change in the
heart, and the first difference betwixt man and man, when God by faith
purifieth the heart: Act. 15.9.
It will suffer no unclean thoughts, unlawful lusts, Note.
or wandering motions to harbor there, it guides the affections, love, hatred,
sorrow, etc. Such a man loves nothing more then God, hates nothing more then
sin, rejoices in nothing more then in doing the will of God, and sorrows
for nothing more their that he should offend so good and gracious a God.
Again, it is the foundation of all our obedience; For without faith it is
impossible to please God: Heb. 11.6.
And without it we can neither pray, hear, or perform any duty that shall
be acceptable with God.

2 Of repentance.
The second is the fruit of Repentance, whereby a man is humbled for his
sins past, and is afraid of sin in time to come. This fruit of Repentance
is of absolute necessity to salvation, according to that of our Savior, Except
ye repent, ye shall all perish. Luke 13.5. And only godly sorrow must work
this true repentance in a man: Godly sorrow causes repentance in a man to
salvation: 2. Cor. 7.10
And therefore in the Scriptures are recorded the mournings of the godly in the
days of their humiliation. David's Fainting: Psalm. 6.6. Ezechias chattering
like a Crane: Esaias 38.14. Job abhorring himself in dust and ashes. Peter
weeping bitterly. Math. 26.75. Mary Magdalene washing Christ's feet with her
Tears: Luke 7.38. And Paul crying out, O wretched man that I am! Romans 7.24.
We must mourn with these here, Psalm. 126.5
if we will rejoice with them hereafter: And surely if there were neither
heaven nor hell, neither reward nor punishment, yet the godly would sorrow for
sin; for offending their good and gracious God and loving Father. Besides
this sorrow in a godly man for his sins past, he is exceeding afraid of sin in
time to come: as David was, who prayed unto God so earnestly, that he would
Stablish him with his free Spirit: Psalm fifty one, and the tenth verse: That
seeing he had such woeful experience of his own weakness, he prays unto
the Lord that he would give him his preventing grace that he might never fall
into the like sin again. So the godly Israelites in Ezra his time, Ezr.
9.10.3. when they had with grief of heart bewailed their sins unto God, they
resolve to make a Covenant with God, and solemnly to bind themselves to put
away their strange wives, whereby they had so much dishonored him. And so it
is with all the faithful, even as a good child having by his untowardness
vexed his father, is careful afterward to please him again by all means
possible. Well then, do thou find these fruits of true repentance in thee?
art thou grieved, and even payned at thy heart for thy wicked life, for thy
ignorance, unbelief, hardness of heart, thy neglect of prayer and calling on
Gods Name? Art thou grieved for want of reverence in Gods worship, for thy
abusing Gods Name by swearing, cursing, and banning, for contempt of his Word
and Sacraments, for profaning of his Saboaths, careless governing of thy
Family, for thy malice, unbelief, unclean, proud, and covetous thoughts,
drunkenesse, uncleanness, and the like? Again, do thou find in thee an
earnest desire to walk with God, in obedience to all his Commandments, to
live in no known sin, but in all things to please God to the utmost of thy
power. These be the fruits of righteousness whereby we are known to be of
God.

The third is the fruit of New Obedience, or of a godly life, 3 Of Obedience.
both in the obedience of Gods Laws in the first and second Table: Christ
makes this the eare-marke of his sheep, To hear his voice and follow him.
Ioh. 10. And we are willed by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, to
cast away every thing that presses down, Heb. 12.1.
and the sin that hangs so fast on, and to run with patience to the race
that is set before us. This was godly David's resolution: I will run the way
of thy Commandments; Psa. 119 32
and David describing the true worshippers of God, Psa. 119.1. Psalm. 15.2.
says; They go on from strength to strength, serving God in truth of heart,
without hypocrisy: And it is said here, That the fruit of a godly man does
never fade: And howsoever the work of mortification is never perfected in this
life, but that the remnants and relics of sin will still remain even in
the godly themselves, yet they ever sin with grief of heart, and CHRIST'S
death does set such a worke-against all sin, that the regenerate man can
truly say; It is not I, but sin that dwells in me: So then, if thou
desire to please God in all his Commandments, at all times, and in all
places, and to do all duties of love unto men required in the Commandments of
the second Table, showing thy fruits in doing good to the poor distressed
Members of Jesus Christ, feeding, clothing, and comforting them in their need:
In thy general calling to bring forth the fruit of godliness, to be much and
often exercised in Prayer, Hearing, Reading, Meditating, etc. As also in thy
particular calling to do thy duty with faith and a good conscience, without
fraud, guile, deceit, etc. These be the fruits that are required in all those
that are the Members of Jesus Christ, and ingrafted into his mystical body.

This Doctrine does flatly condemn good Christians, who should? And if they
be not saved, I know not who should go to heaven: Well, every good Tree
brings forth good fruit; Math. 7.17
Where be your good fruits? No fruit of faith, no fruit of repentance, nor
new obedience; but in stead thereof the fruits of infidelity, hardness of
heart, and disobedience: Alas! that poor souls should thus go blinde-folde
to hell, to think that such should be saved; what then should become of hell?
As though a man might be a true member of Jesus Christ, and ingrafted into his
mystical body, and yet be barren of good fruit: No, no, it cannot be: for
there is such a lively power in this stock of life, Christ Jesus: That they
who are once ingrafted into him, bring forth fruit incontinent; As we may see
in the Thief upon the Cross, Luke 9.
what fruit he bare in an instant of time: confessing first his own sins:
secondly, reproving the sins of his companion: Thirdly, clearing Christ to be
innocent; Lastly, praying that Christ would remember him when he came into his
kingdom: And this we may see in Zacheus, Lydia, etc. Math. 22. Acts 16.
Who were no sooner converted, but brought forth fruit incontinently: And yet
we see how many dry, fruitless, and barren trees deceive the world, as the
fig tree Christ: Oh he is a very honest man, keeps a good house, Math. 3.10
does no body harm, a very kind and evil honest man, etc. Well, is this all?
This will not serve to prove him a good Christian: John. 15.6. Esaias 5.
For now is the Axe put to the root of the tree, every Tree that brings not
forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. We know what became
of the fig tree that had goodly leaves and fair shows, was it not accursed?
And the tree that the Husbandman dug, and pruned, and watered; was it not in
the end hewn down and reserved for no other use but fuel for the fire; and
this will be the end of many of our civil honest men (so called) whatsoever
they think of themselves, or others conceive of them.

Oh then how fearful a thing is it to be trees bringing forth leaves and no
fruit, as is the condition of all hypocrites: For they shall find at last
what it is to be as a barren Tree in the Lords Vineyard; For that shall be
taken away from them which they seem to have, as proud Iesabell and her
painted face shall both of them perish together: On the other side, the elect
of God that bring forth fruit as well as leaves, they shall both be preserved
together, and grow in grace and knowledge here in this life, and at the last,
when these days of sin shall have an end, they themselves shall be gathered
into the place of rest, the Syon of the Lord, and their works shall follow
them: Reu. 14.13. And howsoever works justify not a man, being the best of
them weak and imperfect here, yet by our works, as the evidence of our
virtues, we shall be judged at the last.

This shows that their estate is Consider this ye that forget God; ye that
live in continual practice of sin; you that bring forth no other fruit but
horrible Oaths, Blasphemy, Drunkenesse, Whooredome, etc. That by the Axe of
Gods vengeance, ye shall be hewn down and to the fire ye must go. If Trees
as be barren and bring forth no fruit shall be destroyed and cast into the
fire, how much more, such miserable wretches, Math 3.10 and 25.41. Heb. 6.7.
whose whole life is nothing else but a heaping of sin unto sin, and all
profaneness against God, and man? If the rich man were damned that did not give
of his bread to poor Lazarus, good Lord what shall become of those that take
away and (as it were) grind the faces of the poor? In a word, if the not being
fruitful in good works shall be punished so sharply and severely, what
shall then become of those that even abound in all manner of most abominable
sin and iniquity? Oh! consider this ye that forget God, least I tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

Well, the Lord will not always stay and wait for fruit at thy hands: Luke
the thirteenth chapter and ninth verse: But will say to the Vinedresser, Cut me
this fruitless and barren Tree down, why does it cover the ground and keep it
barren? as it is in the fifth chapter of Esaias. The ground that receives the
rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth fruit meet for him that
dresses it, receives a blessing: But that that brings forth Thorns and Briars
is sentenced with a curse, whose end is to be burned. Hebrews the sixth
chapter, and the seventh and eigth verses. If ye have not yet begun, begin
now to bring forth fruit, I mean the fruits of Faith, the fruits of
Repentance, and the fruits of Obedience, of a godly life and conversation: If
ye have begun already, oh labor then to do it more, bring forth more, and
more better fruit to abound in good works: such trees as these are, shall be
spared, and not destroyed: Deuteronomy the twentieth chapter and the ninteenth
verse: But such trees as bring forth no fruit, Hew them down, why cumber they
the ground?

In due season. The time described when a godly man does bring forth fruit
THat is, in time convenient when it may most serve for GODS glory, and the
good of our Neighbor. So that here we have a further condition of this Tree
set out by the circumstance of the time: That it brings forth fruit in due
season; And we know it is a commendable thing in our grounds, and so in our
trees, that they bring us out their fruit in their season. If our Corn should
not be ripe till the Summer were over, or our Trees begin to bud in the
Spring before Summer come, men would look to reap but small fruit: Well, as
this is commended in our ground, and in our Trees; so is it no less
commendable in our selves, and a true note of a godly man, and a blessing
proceeding from his ingrafting into Jesus Christ, that he likewise bring forth
fruit in due season.

In this observe the godly care, Doctr. 6. True note of a godly man to wait
all opportunities to do good.
and the heavenly wisdom of a godly man, and one that is the child of God:
that he waits and watches his time, and then readily takes the occasion to
do good. Every thing has his time and season: Seek the Lord while he may be
found, and call upon him while he is near. Esaias. 55.6.7. Out of which words
we gather that as there is a time when the Lord will be found of them that
seek him (which time is a godly man's Season, for now does he seek the LORD)
so there is a time when the Lord will not be found, and that a blessing cannot
be obtained at his hands; though a man seek it with tears, as Esau did, for so
says the Lord: Because I have cried and called unto you and ye would not
hear: Therefore the time shall come, that ye shall cry and call unto me and
I will not answer, Prou. 1.24.28. Again, Exhort you one another daily, while
it is called to day. Heb. 3.13. For our Hearing, for our Reading, Praying,
Singing, and meditating, etc. There are times for each of these, which the
godly man does in no wise omit. And of this there is great reason: for shall we
not be as careful of the performance of our duties herein, as we are in our
own affairs? In our plowing and sowing, our reaping and gathering in, our
putting off of our cattle, and tilling our ground: men know their times, and
take their opportunities, even then when it shall stand with their best
advantage: Oh that we could be as wise for our souls, to purchase the true
treasure which will make us rich unto salvation, as we are for these temporal
things which do last but for a time? surely it is the care of the godly man:
Esaias 1. Genesis 43.
as the mariner watches for the wind, and when it comes, hoyses up sail: as
the Captain and Soldier in the field wait their time: yea, and as the Birds,
Swan, and Crane, the beasts, Swallow, and Pismire, wait their times, and then
take the occasion and season offered; so the child of God does in his heavenly
wisdom wait the time, and take the occasion to do good. As Joseph in the
seven years of plenty, provided for the seven years of dearth; so the godly
man brings forth fruit in due season, that is, in time convenient. As when
the Lord calls man to repent, he repents; when occasion is to pray, he will
pray; when the season is to hear, he will hear; when to reprove, he will
reprove; when to give to the poor, he has his hand ready: so as when
occasion is offered he takes it. Yea he waits and watches for it, as Lot did
to entertain strangers at his Tent door, Genesis 17. and as that poor man in
the Gospel, who lay at the poole of Bethesda, waiting for the moving of the
water. Ioh. 5.

This reproues the folly and carelessness of most men, who neither wait the
time, nor yet take the occasion offered; The Lord calls men to prayer, to
calling on his Name, they make light of it; the Lord calls men to hear his
Word, men contemn it; the Lord offers occasion to reprove sin, they will not
open their mouth to reprove the swearer, blasphemer, cursed speaker, etc. The
Lord offers occasion to relieve the poor, they shut up the bowels of mercy
against them. In the matters of the world, Oh men are wise to take their time,
the merchant, the mariner, the Husbandman, etc. But in the matters of God,
which concern the salvation of our souls, we are like that sick man that let
every man step in before him. Well, if we belong unto God, it will grieve us at
the heart, that we have not done our duty, that we have omitted our
occasions of doing of good; whether to hear, read, pray, reprove, or to give
unto the poor: Well, let us now seek the Lord while he may be found: let us
not with the slothful servant, defer till our Masters coming. How many
be there that say, that they will now live in ease, in joy, and will take
their pleasure, and follow their sports, and when they be old, then they will
repent and serve God, and give themselves to prayer; but let none think, if
they do spend the flower of their youth in lusts and pleasures, Eccl 12.1.
in the service of sin and satan, that God will accept of their rotten old
age: no, the devil shall have the dregs as well as the wine.

Hence we observe in the second but it is not so with the godly men, which are
planted by the rivers of water in Gods Church; for even in their old age, they
bring forth abundance and store of friute, albeit they be never so old, yet
whenever the Season requires some fruit of a godly man he is ever ready to
perform the same, being that he is continually watered by the working of his
Spirit: and this is confirmed by that of our Savior Christ, Ioh. 15.1.2
I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman, every branch that bears
no fruit in me he takes away, and every branch that bears fruit he
purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit: So that being once Planted by
these Rivers of waters, we shall then incontinently bring forth fruit.

The third property of this tree whereunto the godly man is compared.
His leaf shall not fade. THis is the third point of the description of this
Tree, to the which a godly man is compared; namely, by the flourishing estate
of it, That her leaves do not fall: They wither not, nor dry not, but always
flourish and are green: of this sort is the Olive tree, the Bay tree, the
Laurel tree, and the Box tree, they are always green and flourishing, the
heat of the Summer, nor the cold of the Winter, does not parch or wither them,
but they keep their vigor and color at all seasons. Now this does signify
unto us the constancy and the perseverance of the godly: Psalm. 92.12.
For as the Tree planted thus by the fresh springing waters does always
flourish, and is ever green, neither is it nipped either with the heat of
Summer, or cold of Winter: So the godly man that is truly regenerate, he is
constant and does persevere even unto the end.

Hence we learn that it is not enough Doctr. 7. Perseverance required in each
child of God.
for a man or woman to begin well, or to take some liking of Religion, to have
some good motions, as to reverence Gods Ministers, to desire to hear them, to
join with the people of God in prayer, to bring forth some good fruit in
outward reformation of life, etc. unless he persevere, persist and go on unto
the end. Mar. 24 13
He that indures to the end shall be saved: Reu. 2.10
And, Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life.
Eze. 18.24
If a righteous man leave his righteousness, etc. He that puts his hand to
the Lords Plough, Luke 9.62.
and looks back, is not worthy of the Kingdom of Heaven. Again, 2. Pet. 2.21
it had been better for them that they had never known the ways of
godliness, then afterward to fall away. And therefore in the Scriptures such
as have had some beginning, and after fallen away, are noted to have been
exceeding wicked men: As we see in Judas, first a Preacher and an Apostle,
Math. 27.
a man well esteemed, that had excellent gifts to Preach, Pray, and cast out
devils, afterward an hypocrite, a thief, a traitor, a reprobate: Mar. 6.20.
Herod had many things in him at first, reverenced John Baptist, heard him
gladly, did many things at his request, 2. Tim. 4.10.
yet afterward a bloody persecutor. Demas once a sound professor as it seemed,
and one that was dear unto Paul: but afterward left his profession, and fell
in love with the world, Reu. 2.4. Col. 2.6.
like the Church of Ephesus, lost their first love, and grew worse and worse.
So that let all men know, that though they have many excellent gifts and graces
of Gods Spirit, Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Zeal, Patience; yet all is
nothing worth, unless they hold out in faith, repentance, and obedience, and
maintain faith and a good conscience, even unto the end. If a soldier should
be cunning and skillful, knowing how to fight and handle his weapon well, and
yet should turn his back and play the coward, he is but a cowardly soldier,
and not worthy of the Crown. And therefore it, is a special duty required of
every Christian to continue steadfast; Be thou faithful unto the end, Reu. 2.26.
and I will give thee a crown of life.

Hence we see that it is a dangerous our first love; it is a fearful sign
of a Reprobate and Castaway, when men slack hand, and slip neck out of
collar, grow careless in the service and worship of God: for a man to grow
there is some hope, though he do but creep on in Religion: But for a man to
go backward, or to stand at a stay, is dangerous: For it is certain, not to
go forward in Gods matters, is to go backward; not to increase, is to
decrease; not to grow better, is to wax worse. It is a hard matter to make a
good beginning, we are not easily brought to set foot forward in the ways of
godliness, but then to trippe while we are in our journey, and to wax weary
of well-doing; this is a fearful sin. Well then, lay this Doctrine to
heart, examine your selves, see how ye grow, whether as good trees in Gods
orchard, Ezech. 47.
being so watered with the rivers of water of the Sanctuary, and fed in the
green pastures. If a child go to School and do not increase in knowledge,
learning and education: all money and pains is ill bestowed. If a Tree be
planted, and do grow worse and worse, it is time to cut it down: Well, we be
trees in Gods orchard, The Lord has planted us by the. Rivers of waters; when
a great number about us be in a barren soil, and have no means: And for us
not to grow, but rather to decay, it were the next way to provoke God to bring
his Axe and to hew us down: And therefore prove how you hold your own, how
you grow in knowledge, faith, repentance and obedience. And above all things,
take heed that you decay not in grace, go not backward, loose not your first
love. I fear me it may be said of us, as Christ said sometime to the Church
of Sardy, Thou have a name that thou live, take heed thou be not dead,
Revelation chap. 3. verse. 1. Repent therefore and amend, that the things in thee
ready to dye may be recovered.

Here is a notable means to try hypocrites from good Christians, he that is
sound-harted, and truly humbled, and regenerate, will persevere, and grow in
grace, hold out to the end, so as their works shall be more at last then at
the first; yea the godly man is like the tall Cedar, the more it is shaken with
storms and tempests, it takes the deeper root, and grows the faster, like
the Camomile, the more it is trodden on, the more it grows; or like some
precious stones, never shine brighter then in the darkest night; or like
perfume, never so sweet as when it is rubbed and chafed; or gold, never
brighter then when it is fined in the fire. The word of God is plain, for this
Abraham in all his iourneyes and travels, though he met with many and dangerous
enemies, yet he was most constant in his faith. David in all his troubles, yet
still was religious. The children in the fire, most glorious conquerours.
Daniel in the Den, a blessed man: Job in his greatest extremity, a patient
man. Paul, Peter, and the rest of the Apostles never showed themselves more
worthy men then in great trials, and storms of persecutions: so that you see a
godly man is well compared to a strong Oak, or Cedar, or rather a Palm Tree,
that never loses his leaves, fruit, and greenenesse, no not in the bitter
storms and blasts of Winter. So the godly man does not shrink in the wetting
like unto a piece of sale-cloth, but does persevere, and is constant even unto
the end, His works are more at last then at first.

But come to an Hypocrite, a counterfeite Christian, a false professor of the
Gospel, you shall see they be like painted Sepulchers, fair without, but
foul within, like to empty vessels, which make great noise, and have no
liquor in them, like a piece of sale-cloth, which being drawn out, and set on
the Teinters, will quickly shrink in the wetting: they be like to false
friends, that will hang on like burres, while there is some gain to be gotten,
but they will fail a man when he has most need of them: so long as it is
fair weather, and there is no danger in professing of the Gospel, they will
seem forward, and very zealous, as though they were the only men in the
world: but if there come any matter of danger, if the Sun grow hot, or if
storms or tempests do arise, that is, troubles and persecutions for Religion
sake, and the Gospel sake, they will then hide their heads, and profess no
longer. All the goodly leaves and shows they made will wither and come to
nothing, then they will appear in their kind. Such our Savior Christ likeneth
unto Corn in the stony ground, which makes a fair show for a time: But when
the Sun arises it withers away: Luke 8.
Even so these kind of Professors, if any trial or trouble do come for the
Gospel sake, or that for their profession they should loose the favor of some
great men, Oh! then they think it the safest way to sleep in a whole skin;
then they wither away, and then they show they did profess the Gospel, not
in truth and syncerity for love to the Gospel, but for some other respect,
namely, for some hope of gain, or honor, and favor of men, or for praise of
the world.

Let this admonish us all, as we Mat. 24.13 Reu. 2.10. Luke 24.26 Math. 7.26
2. Chron. 24.17.
to labor for Constancy and Perseverance, that we may hold out unto the end,
that our works may be more at last then at first; that we cast our account
aforehand what it will cost us to be religious indeed, that we be sure to
dig so deep, that we lay the foundation of our Faith upon the Rock Christ,
and for want of this godly care and circumspection aforehand, many have at the
first given their names to Christ, who afterward when they were to take up the
Cross of Christ, have gone out and turned their backs upon Christ. Saul
began well, but afterward he waxed worse, and in the end became an open
persecutor. Ioash behaved himself uprightly all the days of Iehoiadah, and
repaired the house of the Lord; but after his death he fell to idolatry. What
did it profit Lots wife to go out of Sodom, insomuch as afterward she looked
back, and was turned into a Pillar of Salt? So then we see here, that it is not
enough to purpose well; it is not enough to begin well, neither is it enough to
proceed well, it is required of us to persevere well, and to continue in a
constant and settled course even unto the end.

Doctr. 8. By our union with Christ we are made sure of perseverance
Last of all, in that it is said here, that the Leaves, that is to say, the
faith of a Christian, shall never fall. Hence I gather, that no elect Child of
God, that is truly regenerate and borne anew, and a lively member of Christ's
mystical body can perish and finally fall away. For whom God predestinateth,
him he calls, whom he calls he justifies, whom he justifies, he
glorifieth. Romans 8.30. The gift and calling of God is without repentance. My
sheep hear my voice, and follow me. And I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any man take them out of my hands, Ioh.
10.27, 28.29. And the reason is, We bear not the root, but the root bears
us. Our salvation does not depend upon our selves; for then indeed we were in
danger to fall away every moment of an hour; but it depends upon him,
because we are in him: and through him we grow and increase: yea, the older we
be in Christ, the more do we fasten our root and flourish. They which are
planted in the Courts of the Lord, shall flourish in their old age, and bring
forth much fruit.

And whereas other Branches are many times pulled from their stock either by
the violence of the wind, by the hands of men, or at the least consumed by
length of time; It shall not be so with them that are in Christ: for they are
kept by him, as the root bearing branches. Because I am not altered nor
changed, therefore are you not consumed, Oh ye sons of Jacob! And therefore
right happy is the state of that man who is in Christ Jesus: For neither life
nor death, things present, nor things to come, shall separate him from the love
of God. Romans 8.38.

And this comfort is confirmed to us by most sure Arguments. Arguments to prove
a Christians perseverance. Phil. 1.5.6
The first is taken from the Nature of Almighty God: He is faithful which
has promised. And, I am persuaded, (says the Apostle) that he who has begun
this good work, will perform it until the day of Christ.

The second is taken from the nature of that life which Christ communicates to
his members, Romans 6.5.
We know that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more: this life of
Christ is communicated to us, so that it is not we that live now, but Christ
that lives in us.

The third is taken from the nature of that seed whereof we are begotten: 1.
Pet. 1.23
We are borne anew, not of mortal seed, but of Immortal: Now as the seed
is, so is the life that comes by that seed, our life therefore must needs be
immortal.

This confuteth a damnable Doctrine 2. Pet. 1.10 Psa. 15. vlt. Romans 8.1. and
8.36.
but we see here the Word of God tells us this cannot be: For what shall
separate us from the love of God in Christ: Nothing?

saved: For if thou belong to God thou shall in time be Called and Sanctified:
And where this work is not as yet already wrought, that man is as yet in the
state of damnation.

Here is matter of endless comfort There is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ. Romans 8.1. The gates, that is, all the power of hell, shall not
prevail against us: Math. 16. If ever thou foundest the sound work of grace
in thee, foundest Jesus Christ to dwell in thy heart by faith, so that thou
hate all sin, and desire in all things to please God, though satan rage
and storm, and all the gates of hell rise up against thee, yet thou may
comfort thy self in the Lord, and say with Paul, There is no condemnation to
me that am in Christ, which walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit:
Thou may triumph with Paul and say, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods chosen? And if God be with us, who can be against us? And a gain, I am
persuaded nothing can sever me from the love of God in Christ Jesus: No not
sin, nor death it self. Oh happy then, and blessed, is the estate of that
man who is in Christ! Neither life nor death, things present, nor things to
come, shall separate him from the love of God.

And whatsoever he does shall prosper. Doctr. 9. God does ever bless the
godly endeavors of his children.
Here is described another part of the blessedness of a godly man, containing
the mercy and goodness of God to him, in the lawful things wherein he has
to deal, that God does of his infinite mercy and love direct and prosper (...)
soul to the day of slaughter.

This should admonish all godly Job, Jeremy, David, and Asaph, who wondered and
were much grieved at this to see the ungodly flourish, and to abound in honor,
dignity, wealth, authority, the only men of the world; and on the contrary
part, the godly inmiserie, trouble, etc. But when they went into the house of
the Lord, Psalm. 37.35 Job. 21.13. Psa. 37.1.7
then understood they they the end these men; namely, that God did set them in
slippery places, and that their end was fearful. And as Job says; They spend
their days in pleasure, and suddenly go down to hell. Let us then consider
well of these things, and not to grieve at the wicked because they prosper, or
to be drawn hereby to think the better of them, or their vile courses, because
they flourish a while; or the worse of the godly, because they endure some
trouble, but consider their latter end; and in the mean time to possess our
souls with patience, notwithstanding the iollity of the wicked, for it is but
for a time, like a great thistle, which starts up in the Summer, and at the
coming of Winter is gone, or the poor estate of the godly, for in the end
they shall be exalted.

Abraham, Joseph, 1. Tim. 4.8 Deuteronomy. 28.1.2. etc. Josh. 1.7.8 Psalm 127.
Joshua, David, Job, etc. may persuade us hereunto. We see many take great
pains night and day, toil and moyle all the year long, even wearing out
their bodies early and late, and yet do not thrive, do not prosper and come
forward, but rather go down the wind. The reason is, God does not bless
them and their labors, because they be wicked, and live in the practice of
some known sin: And therefore if thou would find Gods blessing upon thee
and thine, upon thy soul, body, goods, good name, wife, child, corn,
cattle, etc. The best way is to serve God, to call on his name, to lead a
godly life, and then certainly thou shall find that God will bless thee, and
make thee to prosper.

The first Psalm.
VERSE. 4. The wicked are not so, but as the Chafe which the wind drives
away.


The second general part of the Psalm.
HItherto we have heard the description of a godly man, and of his blessed and
happy estate wherein he stands. Now he proceeds to a description of a
wicked and ungodly man. And he sets out his estate by a general speech
opposite to that which has been spoken of the godly: The wicked are not so.
Then by a similitude, comparing him to Chafe, and then the property of Chafe
is noted to be light, vain, and unconstant, carried away with the wind.

In the general description, or the Introduction into the Description of a
wicked man, The wicked are not so, the speech is negative, and excludes the
wicked from all that which the Spirit of God has spoken of the godly, both
concerning their virtues themselves, as also concerning the recompense of their
virtues.

The virtues of a godly man were described two ways, first negatiuely, They
walk not in the counsel of the wicked, stand not in the way of sinners, sit
not in the seat of the scorners. Now this negative in the godly is affirmative
in the wicked; Because they walk in the counsel of the wicked, they stand in
the way of sinners, and they sit in the seat of the scorners.

The other description of a godly man is affirmative, verse the second, But his
delight is in the Law of the Lord, etc. But this affirmative in the godly is
negative in the wicked; For their delight is in nothing less then in the Law
of the Lord. Neither do or will the wicked meditate therein, either day or
night; So that in respect of the virtues of a godly man it may well be said,
The wicked are not so.

And last of all, for the recompense of the virtues of a godly man, the wicked
are also excluded: the godly man is compared unto a Tree that is planted by the
rivers of water, that brings forth fruit in due season, whose leaf does never
fade, and whatsoever he does shall prosper. The wicked are not so. But as the
chafe, etc.

Where by the way we may observe the care that God has, that every man should
have his part in that pertains to him, he would not that the wicked should
encroch upon the portion of the godly, or that the Saints should be dismayed by
the judgments of the wicked, but he labors as to a lot and allow to one
their part, so to exclude the other from their portion, Psalm. 37.34 Esa.
3.10.11 Mala. 4.2.
to show that they have no interest in their Blessedness. And so it is a
usual thing in the course of the whole Scriptures, that where the Holy Ghost
sets down the blessings and promises pertaining to Christians: In the same
place he sets down the judgments that belong to the wicked and ungodly.

Out of the general Description, Doctr. 1. The state of the wicked most
miserable.
or the Introduction into the Description of a wicked man, in these words The
wicked are not so. We gather this Doctrine, That the estate of all wicked men,
be they what they may be, never so great, glorious, rich, wise, beautiful, and
learned in the world, yet their estate is woeful, cursed, miserable and
wretched; he is cursed in his soul, cursed in his body, cursed in his goods,
good name, wife, children, corn, cattle, etc. Thou have destroyed the proud,
Deuteronomy. 28. Psa. 119.21 Psalm. 5.5 Tit. 1.13. Acts 7.51 Esaias 63.
and cursed are they that do err from thy Commandments: The foolish shall
not stand in thy sight, for thou hate all them that work iniquity. Now,
what though a man should abound in wealth, live in honor, bathe himself in
pleasures, yet if he be not a godly man, that is, truly sanctified, Pro. 8.9.
Pro. 11.7.
he can take no sound comfort in any of these; For, to them that are defiled,
is nothing pure. But even their prayers are abominable; he that turns away
his ears from hearing the Law, even his prayers shall be abominable. And as
Solomon says, The hope of the wicked shall perish. Wherein the wicked are
accursed.
But it will be asked, Wherein stands their misery and cursed estate? I answer.
First in this, that they be out of Gods favor, God hates them and all they
do; And is not this a misery of all miseries, to be cursed and miserable
indeed, to have God our enemy, to have Jesus Christ the Judge our enemy, to
have all the creatures in heaven and earth against us? For as those be truly
blessed that God loves, and be in his favor; So they be most cursed and
miserable that be out of his favor, whom his soul abhors; and such are the
wicked, according to that of the Prophet, Psalm. 5.5.
The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, for thou hate all them that work
iniquity.

Secondly, they have no pardon of their sins, Luke 13.5
and so lie under the curse of God, in danger of eternal death every day they
rise, without repentance there is no pardon. But the wicked cannot repent,
being hardened in sin, and delight in sin: yea all their sins stand in
account against them, the Lord keeps them in remembrance, and one day he will
bring out his Book of reckonning, I will reprove thee, Psalm. 50.17 18.
and set before thee the things thou have done. Oh full little do wicked men
think of this, that their secret sins in hugger-mugger in dark corners
committed, shall one day come to reckoning, and they called to a reckoning for
the same: and then their own consciences, will they, nill they, shall cry out
and say, Righteous is the Lord, and true are his judgments.

Thirdly, they have no peace of conscience, Esaias 57.
There is no peace to the wicked, says my God, but a Hell in their conscience,
having in them either an Accusing Conscience, like Cain, Achitophel, Saul,
Judas, and the like; or else a dead and sleepy conscience, like Nabal, which
judgment is no way inferior to the former: This fearful judgment of God upon
the wicked is nothing else but a forerunner of those pains which are prepared
for the wicked, and are as it were the smoke of that fire, which hereafter
shall torment them.

Fourthly, a wicked man is the heir of vengeance, and the firebrand of hell,
and shall as sure be damned as if he were in hell already: and therefore
CHRIST says, that The wicked are damned already: Ioh. 3.18.
and that five ways. First, in Gods counsel before all worlds. Secondly, in
the Word, wherein their sentence of condemnation is read already. Thirdly, in
their own consciences, which is a forerunner of the final judgment.
Fourthly, by the judgments begun already upon them, as hardness of heart,
blindness of mind, hatred of the light, and the like means of salvation.
Fifthly, by the horrible torment of the soul, which it does assuredly expect
when the full vial of Gods wrath shall be powered upon it. O miserable and
unhappy condition! woe worth the time may such say, that ever they were borne.

Who is a wicked man? Answer. A wicked man described.
(in general) He that lives and lies in sin without repentance: But such a
man is a wicked man, as Does walk in the counsel of the wicked, that does
stand in the way of sinners, that does sit in the seat of the scorners. For as
he is a godly man that is careful to shun and avoid the bad counsel and
lewd company of wicked and ungodly men: so he is a wicked man that loves and
likes their bad counsel and lewd company. And as a noble man's servant is known
by his livery; so we may certainly judge of men by their company. A good man
loves good company, a godly man makes much of them that fear the Lord. Psalm.
16.3. Psalm. 101.6 7. Genesis 37.2.4.
My eyes (says David) shall be upon the faithful in the Land. This we may
see in Jacob, who loved Joseph above all his brethren, because he had grace in
him; All my delight is upon thy Saints. But wicked men are like Birds of a
Feather which fly together, and like will to like. So that if you would ask a
certain rule how to judge of men, whether they be good or bad, godly or
wicked, I know not any rule more sure for a man's outward life, to judge of him,
then by his company. And therefore as S. John makes it a mark of Gods child,
and a certain sign of the love of God to us, If we love the brethren: 1. Ioh.
3.14
so on the other side, it is a fearful note of a wicked man, when he has no
delight in the company of Gods children and faithful servants, Psalm. 50.17 18.
but delight only in the company of the wicked and ungodly.

David said to the ungodly; Psa. 50.16.
unto the ungodly said God, what have thou to do to take my covenant in thy
mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my word behind thee?
When thou saw a thief thou consentedst unto him, and have been partaker
with the adulterer, etc. These things have thou done, and I held my peace, and
thou thoughtest that I was like thee. But I will reprove thee, and set before
thee the things thou have done. Oh consider this ye that forget God, lest I
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you. Oh that the wicked and
ungodly of the world would consider in what a cursed state they stand in, what
extreme danger to loose their own souls, clean out of Gods favor, so as
he hates and abhorres them, and all they do: Now as Solomon says, if the
wrath of the King be as the roaring of a Lion, how much more the wrath of the
eternal God, who is able not only to kill the body, but to cast both soul
and body for ever into hell fire? Oh then be admonished! say you had a far
warning, repent in time, live no longer in sin, turn to God with all speed,
while it is called to day: Say with David, Away from me ye wicked, I will
keep the commandments of my God. And this remember, that as bad company, and
the society of wicked men is a fearful sign of a wicked man, so it is most
dangerous; for sin is as a spiritual plague or leprosy, it is of a spreading
and contagious nature. Prou. 6.
Can a man touch pitch and not be defiled? Then may a man keep company with
the wicked, and not be corrupted. Genesis 41.15.16.
Joseph living in the Court of Pharaoh, how soon had he learnd to swear, by
the life of Pharaoh? Besides, we shall be compelled to wink at the sins of
those whom we love, and so consenting to them, are guilty of them. 2. Pet.
2.8. Psalm. 12.5
Again, we cannot but be vexed with them, and grieved at the heart, as Lot
was; yea, and in danger to be punished with them, as Lot in Sodom was taken
prisoner, and all his household: and therefore as men do shun a house
infected, so let us shun such company as most dangerous, pernicious, and
hurtful.

And here we are to wonder at and ride and run night and day to find ease
for it, but few complain of the stone in the heart, men have hard, stony and
flinty hearts: And neither love of heaven, nor fear of hell, neither mercy,
nor judgment can move them, or make them to repent. Well, to conclude this
point, let men take their courses, run on in sin, walk in the counsel of
the wicked, stand in the way of sinners: and sit in the seat of the
scornful. Let them refuse the counsel and the company of Gods servants, and
when they have done all that they can, they are but cursed caitifes; and the
time will come that they will curse the day that ever they were borne, and say,
Woe worth the time they kept bad company: Wised. 5. Reave. 6.13
Oh what fools and mad men were we! When they shall wish the heavens to fall
upon them, and the rocks to crush them in pieces, for fear of the anger of
God. And thus much for the general description of a wicked man in these words,
The wicked are not so.

But as the Chafe which the wind drives away. THe Prophet David having showed
the difference betwixt the godly and the wicked by a general Introduction, It
is not so, comes now to set out their estate by a Similitude and Comparison,
where he compares the wicked to Chafe, And it is all one as if he should
say: The wicked and ungodly man is not like a tree well planted and watered,
that bears good fruit, and always flourishes, but like unto Chafe, which
has no root at al in the earth, no juice nor sap, but wants all kind of good
fruit and greenenesse, so as it is easily scattered and dispersed with every
blast of wind: Even so the wicked are not rooted nor grafted into Jesus
Christ, and are altogether void and destitute of all fruit of good works,
and of all saving grace, have no juice nor sap of goodness in them, and in
time of trouble and temptation, they fall away; yea, every blast of false
doctrine, every storm of temptation, trial, or persecution, yea the least
blast of Gods anger drives them hither and thither, they know not which way to
turn them.

So that in this Similitude or Comparison there are two things to be
considered of us.

First, the matter whereunto the wicked are compared, unto Chafe.

Secondly, the condition of Chafe, which the wind drives away.

In the former of these we are to consider how the wicked resemble Chafe,
naturally, and accidentally.

Wicked compared to Chafe, How?
Naturally Chafe is light and unprofitable.

First, it is light, containing in it, no solid and weighty matter, but a very
slight and frothy substance, 1 Light.
subject to many alterations; even so the wicked are not solid in their
purposes and enterprises, and weighty in their carriage and courses, but as
Chafe, light, easily tossed, and blown away.

It may appear unto us, that the wicked are as Chafe, light, because they be
light of their words, Ecclesiastic. 12.26.
they have not their mouth in their heart, like a wise man, but they have their
heart in their mouth, like a fool. Do they promise any thing? their words are
as wind, as the Proverb is. Do they vow any thing? they keep their vows, like
those that vowed Paul's death. Do they swear any thing? they are but as belles
and bubbles in the water, broken in a moment of time: So that the wicked, in
respect of their words, vows, or oaths, may well be compared to Chafe, light.

Again, the wicked may well be compared to chafe, light; because they are
light of their minds, entertaining and excluding, one while admitting, another
while rejecting, infinite purposes and thoughts of heart. Again, they are
light of their bodies, by committing many fornications. Yea, let their virtues
be compared with their vices, it will then appear, That they are lighter then
vanity it self.

Secondly, as the wicked are like Chafe, light; so are they unprofitable, and
that two ways. First, in matters temporal concerning this life, wherein
though they have ability, as they have for the most part; yet they want will to
do good with the same. Secondly, in matters spiritual, wherein though they have
a will, which is a rare thing to be found in the wicked, yet they want ability.

Unprofitable.
First, the wicked are as chafe, unprofitable, in regard of matters temporal;
For, who does regard the afflictions of Joseph? For either their will is wholly
bent upon Covetousness, or Prodigality. This is an evil which the Preacher
saw under the Sun; Eccl. 6.2.
A man to whom God has given riches, and treasures, and honors, and he
wants nothing for his Soul, of all that he desires, but God gives him no
power to eat thereof: but a strange man shall eat it up. Yea, such is the
case of many a man, that where he locks up his riches from others with one
lock, he locks them up from (...) all power is of God: He does bring down
the mighty from their seat. Yea he has all creatures at a beck, and at a
call, to humble man; yea, and the least of all creatures, when it is armed and
sent of God, is sufficient to destroy the wicked, as Frogs, Lice, Flies, and
the like creatures did Pharaoh and the Egyptians; Exodus 10.
and as the Palmer-worm and the like kind of Caterpillars did the men of Judah
and Israel: Joel. 1.3.4.
And therefore this must needs be a terror unto the wicked, who are no
stronger then the chafe to resist the wind of Gods judgments. This may teach
them humllity, and pull down the haughtiness of their hearts, when they shall
hear the irreuokeablenesse of their destruction.

Secondly, seeing the destruction neither give your selves to security, but be
careful and circumspect that we be not suddenly overtaken. This is that charge
which our Savior gives: Math. 24.
watch therefore, for you know neither the day nor hour in the which the Son
of Man will come. The judgments of God are threatened to come upon thee
suddenly, as the Wind: thou know not whether thou shall have an hour, or a
moment of time given thee to repent, thou may be smitten with sudden death:
When thou risest out of thy bed, thou know not whether thou shall lie
down again; When thou lie down upon thy bed, thou know not what may
happen unto thee ere it be day. Prou. 27.1
Boast not of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth. And
therefore while it is to day let us repent and labor to be reconciled to God
in Christ, that when his judgments shall come as the wind suddenly, the
destroyer may pass over us, and we remain safe under the shadow of the
Almighty.

Hitherto has the Prophet described the woeful estate and condition of the
wicked here in this life. Now in the next verse by way of prophecy, or
threatening, he sets our their estate and condition in the Life to come.

The first Psalm.
VERSE. 5. Therefore the wicked shall not be able to stand in the Judgment,
nor Sinners in the Assembly of the Righteous.


The description of a wicked man in the life to come.
Here the Prophet describes the wicked and ungodly man by his fearful end,
and that which shall befall him hereafter. And that he draws into two phrases
of speech. First, They shall not stand in Judgment. Secondly, They shall not
be assotiates with the just. So that we see, that howsoever now the wicked
bear it out, and seem to be the only men in the world, yet in that great day
of the Lord, when we must all appear before his Bar, that will judge justly
without respect of persons; then these wretched men shall not be able to
stand, that is, to endure the sentence of the Judge, and his angry countenance,
but shall receive the fearful doom of eternal death, Depart from me ye
cursed.

Well then, by this we learn, that Doctr. 1. The certainty of the day of
judgment proved. Malac. 4.1.
there shall be a judgment, wherein men must stand to appear before God, to
give account of their work; and this we acknowledge in that article of our
Faith when we say, We believe that he shall come to judge both the quick and
the dead. Behold (says the Lord) The day comes that shall burn as an Oven.
And all the proud, and all the wicked shall be Stubble: Mat. 25 41 Acts 17.31
2. Cor. 5.10 2. These. 1.7 8.9. Reu. 20.12 1. Pet. 3.3.
and the day that comes shall burn them up. And our Savior aluding to that
day says, Then will I say to them on my left hand, etc. Again, He has
appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness. Now if
there were no places in the Scriptures but this Text, it might suffice to prove
that there shall be a day of Judgment.

But besides these Testimonies, there be certain reasons that prove the same,
taken from the Nature of God and his principal Attributes, his Mercy and
Justice: which we must needs confess, he is most true in both, he is most
merciful, and most just.

And therefore having promised it shall go well with his Children, that they
shall be happy and blessed. And that the wicked shall be miserable and cursed.
In these two respects it must needs be, that there must be a day of Judgment.
For in this world who endure more misery, grief and wrong then Gods Children?
who are contemned, mocked misused, Luke 16.
and by all means abused by wicked men. They are in want, sickness,
persecution, in poverty, and a thousand miseries besides. But the wicked
flourish, live in wealth, and ease, and all things that heart can wish. Now
then seeing this is the estate of Gods children in this world, full of troubles
and miseries, and the wicked live at ease, according to their lusts: It must
needs follow, that there must be a day of Judgment; when God shall show his
mercy in blessing and crowning the virtues of his children: and likewise in
executing Justice upon the wicked and ungodly.

O that men and women could often think of the time of the last judgment!

There is no man so wrethed and desperate but he can wish with Balaam Oh that I
might die the death of the righteous, and that my last end might be like one of
theirs! Labor now then in time to become a new creature, walk with God in
obedience, labor for sanctification: and this will cause thee to stand out in
this judgment.

Now that the wicked shall not stand in this judgment, some may here object
and say, This is that which we desire, that we may not appear before the face
of that angry judge, whose presence is so intolerable.

But alas, this is not all: for then the wicked might seem to be blessed, if
they might here delight in sin, and drink down iniquity like water, and
never be called to account for the same. Therefore the wicked shall appear in
Judgment: In four respects the wicked must appear in judgment.
and yet not any whit contrary to this Text, which says, The wicked shall not
stand in judgment, and that in these four respects.

First, in regard of their appearance there, Iere. 35.21
The Lord will enter into judgment with all flesh: if with all flesh, then
chiefly with such kind of flesh as are species of that genus, So flesh, as that
they are nothing but flesh, that have not the seed of the spirit remaining in
them.

Secondly, they must arise and appear in this judgment, in respect of the
sinners araignment at Gods judgment bar. For we must not only appear in
judgment, 2. Cor. 5.10
but before the judgment seat of Christ.

Thirdly, they must arise and appear in this judgment, to be indicted: for God
will bring every work of theirs into judgment, Eccl. 12.14
whether they be good or evil.

Fourthly and lastly, they must arise and stand in this judgment, to hear the
sentence of the Judge of heaven and earth pass against them, Mat. 25.41
Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. A thundering Sentence indeed, able (if it were possible) to wound
to death the hatrs of the wicked, but they shall after death never die. Yea,
every word of the sentence seems to be most fearful and terrible.

First, what they shall do; Depart.

Secondly, how they shall depart; Cursed.

Thirdly, from whom; From me.

Fourthly, whither; Into fire.

Fifthly, into what fire; Everlasting fire.

Sixthly, by what right; Prepared.

Seventhly, with what company; The Devil and his Angels.

Hitherto, and thus far the wicked must arise, and stand in Judgment: but
after this sentence is once given, they shall never rise up to appear in
Judgment any more. But where it is said, They shall not stand in Judgment:
This is meant only in respect of Gods favor. For this is proper only to the
godly, thus to stand in judgment, who are bold in respect of Jesus Christ
their elder Brother, in whose righteousness they appear.

Oh that all men would consider That no wicked man shall stand in judgment,
but shall hear the fearful sentence of eternal vengeance, Depart from me
ye cursed. O how ready are men to put from them this day of reckoning! They
seem to have made a league with Death, Esaias 28.15
and to be at an agreement with the Grave. But the Lord will disanull this
their agreement, and the time will come when these wicked wretches will be
glad to put their heads in an awger hole, when they shall cry unto the rocks
and hills to fall upon them to hide them, and to cover them from the wrath of
God, the angry Judge, whom they are not able to endure. Who would buy gold at
such a rate, or pleasures so dear, to loose his soul in hell fire for ever,
for the pleasures of sin for a season here?

Secondly, we are taught here, that So at the day of Judgment their estate is
much more fearful: for it is said here, They shall not stand in judgment,
but shall quake and tremble, as not being able to endure the angry countenance
of the Judge: Reu. 20.14
For now they shall see the books brought forth, and their sins laid open. O
good Lord! what shall ungodly men do then? which way shall they turn them?
when they shall see the Judge stand above them with a naked sword to cut them
off; and the devils ready to execute Gods eternal judgments on them: poor
souls, what shall become of them? How can they stand? how can they endure it?
And yet they must undergo it, and endure it.

But more then this, they must receive that fearful sentence of eternal
vengeance, Depart ye cursed, etc. So as now they must remain in perpetual
prison, in the dark dungeon of hell for ever; where the pains are endless,
easlesse, and remediless: They shall have no ease, no not one drop of water to
cool their tongue: And this word, everlasting Torment does even kill the heart
of the damned: for if a man in hell torments might lie in torments so many
thousand years as be Stars in the firmament, or sand on the Sea shore:
Esa. 30.30.
it were some comfort to a damned soul, that once there might be an end
thereof. But alas, when he has suffered torments so many years, the number to
suffer still will ever remain infinite. God give us grace that we may become
righteous, that so we may stand in judgment.

The second part of the misery of a wicked man in the life to come, is: He
shall not stand in the assembly of the Just.

IN these words is noted out unto us a second branch of the judgment of the
wicked in the life to come. That they shall be severed and secluded from the
company of the Just.

Heaven is called the New Jerusalem, wherein enters no unclean thing; only
this is the place where the just do abide: Here are all the holy Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; here are the Apostles, here are the holy Martyrs,
and constant witnesses of CHRIST'S truth; here are all the Saints that sleep in
Christ, here they rest and sing continually, Praise, honor, and glory unto
him that sits upon the Throne: here they enjoy the presence of God, and see
his face continually. Now to be deprived of this place, and to be severed from
this company, it is a misery with a witness. And this is that misery here
pointed out in this second place, They shall not stand in the Assembly of the
Just.

The Church is to be understood two ways, Militant and Triumphant, and from
both of these the wicked are excluded: for howsoever the wicked live amongst
the godly, as Tares amongst the good Wheat, as Cain, and Esau, and Judas did
amongst the godly, yet they were not of the godly; They went out from us,
because they were not of us: But this is not directly intended in this place.

But of the Church Triumphant in the kingdom of heaven, where the godly enjoy
Jesus Christ, Psalm. 16.12
In whose presence is the fullness of joy, and at whose right hand is pleasure
for evermore: here the wicked shall not stand in this Assembly: Exodus 3.
For if Moses might not stand upon the holy ground, before he had put off his
shoes: Oh how much less shall sinful wretches stand in the presence of the
everliving God, having on the shoes of their sinful affection! Yea it is now
most just with God, that such should be shut from Heaven, the Church
Triumphant, seeing they never warred in the Church Militant.

Neither the sinners in the assembly of the just. Doctr. 2. All Mankind
divided into two ranks.
Here then we learn, that there are two sorts of men in the world, Good and
Bad, Sheep and Goats, Elect and Reprobate: and here in this world they live
together, but after death in the last judgment, there shall be two places
appointed for them; Mat. 25.34
one on the right hand, another on the left; one in honor, the other in shame;
one in joy and comfort, the other in fear and horror. And as wicked men in
this life could never abide the company and society of the godly, but did mock
and scoff at them, and shun their company as much as they could; so in the
great day of account, in that great and general separation. The sinners shall
not appear in the assembly of the righteous, but shall be severed and sundred
by the great Shepherd of the sheep, the Judge of the whole world.

Now that wicked men shun and avoid the company of the godly, and do desire and
seek the company of the wicked, it is plain by experience, and therefore it
is just with God, that at the last day they should be severed and secluded
their company: and as they loved and delighted in the company of wicked men,
and such as have no fear of God before their eyes, so now they shall have
their belly full of their company. How did Cain hate Abel? Pharaoh, Moses and
Aaron? Saul, David? the Jews our Savior Christ? Elymas the company of Paul?
And on the contrary part, how one wicked man does love the company of another
like himself, Psalm. 50.
common experience does prove it.

And here wicked men be noisome and troublesome to the godly, as Goats to
sheep, they tread down their pasture, they trample in their water, Ezekiel. 34.
and they push them with their horns: Christ's sheep now sustain sundry wrongs
and injuries, and are much annoyed and vexed by those stinking and unruly
Goats. But there will come a day of separation, Mal. 3.18.
to the horror of the wicked, and comfort of the godly.

Further, in these words we may consider the estate of the righteous at the
last judgment: that is, of the elect of God, such as have truly repented of
their sins, by faith, believe and embrace Jesus Christ, and are justified
through his obedience in the sight of God; surely their estate shall be
blessed and happy, and so great, that the very wicked shall be ashamed and
astonished to behold it. First, they shall be set on Christ's right hand, which is
no small honor and joy for poor silly souls to be advanced to sit on the
right hand of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and the great Judge of the world.
Secondly, they shall hear the blessed sentence, Come ye blessed, etc. Mat.
25.34
Thirdly, they shall be put in real possession of eternal salvation of the
kingdom of Heaven, and live in the blessed presence of God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, Revel. 21. and 13.14.
the elect Angels, and blessed Saints, where there shall be no sorrow, pain,
sickness, etc. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from
their labors: So then after death they have a sweet quietus est; and a
general discharge and freedom from all enemies of soul and body, from all
trouble, pain, and grief. Whereas the wicked and ungodly shall be in a
clean contrary estate and condition; for they shall not come into the company
of the righteous, nor shall have no part in that place of their Comfort,
Honor, Joy, and Dignity, but shall be set on Christ's left hand, a place of
exceeding sorrow and grief, shame and confusion, horror and trembling.

This might admonish all wicked this world, and to make much of them. But if
they will still proceed to hate them, to set themselves against the godly, to
shun their company, and to hate them above all the things in the world: Well,
yet remember the time will come that ye shall think it the greatest misery in
the world, that they shall be severed and sundred from their company, and in so
being they shall be severed and sundred from the company and society of Jesus
Christ himself, of God the Father, and all the blessed Saints and Angels of
God in heaven: Wis. 5.1.2.3.4.
Then in that day shall the righteous stand in great boldness before him that
persecuted him, etc. Thus ye see the madness and extreme folly of wicked men,
they hate them whom they ought most to love, and love them whom they ought most
to dislike.

partake with them, and after at the last judgment shall be joined with them.
He that now is familiar and a companion of ungodly men, Athiests, Papists,
Swearers, Drunkards, Scorners, etc. certainly in death he shall be punished
with them, and after death have his abode with them for ever. Reu. 18.4.
So he that is now a companion with all those that fear God; surely, he shall
have a part with them in death, and at the last judgment shall be placed with
them in joy and happiness for evermore. Heb. 11.25.26.
It is thought to be a matter of little or no moment what company a man keeps,
to live amongst Swaggerers, Swearers, Drunkards, Athiests, Papists, etc. But
the truth is, it is a fearful sign of a reprobate; and he that is now a
companion with them in their sins, shall after death take part with them in
their plagues.

The first Psalm.
VERSE. 6. For the Lord knows the way of the righteous; But the way of the
ungodly shall perish.


HItherto the Prophet has described the wonderful blessed estate of a godly
man: The second general part of the Psalm.
As also the fearful and cursed estate of the wicked: Now in this sixth verse,
which contains in it the second general part of the Psalm, is laid down a
reason, both of the happiness of the one, and also of the misery of the other.

The godly man is a blessed man, why? Because the Lord Knows, that is;
approves of the way of a righteous and godly man, he likes it and directs it,
yea takes care of it, and does bless the way; that is, the life and
conversation, the actions, studies, and endeavors of the righteous.

Secondly, the wicked are cursed and miserable, why? Because the Lord does not
thus Know, that is, the Lord does not like nor allow of the wicked man, he
does not love nor approve of his life nor dealings; but rather dislikes him and
all he does, yea he hates and abhorres his vile and abominable and wicked
life: And therefore both he and his ways, that is, his studies, labors, and
enterprises, shall perish, and come to destruction.

In that the Lord is said to know the way of the righteous; that is, to like
it, to love, and to be well pleased with it, so as he will direct and bless
Doctr. 1. A great comfort to the godly that God does approve of them.
it. Here is matter of exceeding comfort to every poor child of God, to every
godly and righteous servant of God, that being justified by faith in Christ
Jesus, and sanctified by the Holy Ghost, live well, and lead a godly and
righteous life, that howsoever the world contemnes them, scoffs and scorns
them, mockes and mowes at them, revile, and rail upon them, and esteem them
as base and vile; yet here we see that the Lord loves them, and esteems highly
of them, approues them as his, delights in them, to bless them and prosper
them: Touch not mine Anointed, 2 Cor. 4.13 Mat. 23.37 Psalm. 105 Psalm. 17.
Ps. 142.3.4 Nah. 2.7. 1. Tim. 4.8
and do my Prophets no harm; yea, he that touches them touches the apple of
Gods eye, and no assaults whatsoever shall be able to hurt them: For
godliness has the promise of this life and that which is to come: And
therefore let us labor to plant godliness in our hearts, and store them with
the true fear of God, and in so doing the Lord will both bless us, and our
poor endeavors.

This may serve to reprove the cursed practice of ungodly men,

And as this may serve for the terror of the wicked, so it serves to comfort
every poor child of God: What though the world hate thee so God love thee? Oh
remember that the Lord loves and allows of thee. Now then if God approve of
thee, what though all men in the world, did refuse or condemn thee? If the
King should grace a man, and honor him, what would this man care for the
contempt of a Scullion boy? Well, let this be a comfort and encouragement unto
us, that God knows and allows of us, For what were the favor and approbation
of men, if this were wanting.

Object. How a man may know whether Christ approve of him.
But how shall a man know whether God knows him thus with his special
knowledge or not? I answer.

First, if God know any man for his, by his special and effectual knowledge,
Answer.
then he begets in him the Ioh. 10.
I know my Sheep (says Christ) and they know me.

1. Ioh. 4.9.
and in love unto him is loath to offend him, and most careful to please him.
And therefore if we would know whether we be thus known of God, let us
labor to find our hearts thus enflamed with the love of him.

Thirdly, whom GOD knows

Thus you see how a man may know whether God know him with this special and
effectual knowledge which is proper to the Elect alone; namely, by these
fruits and effects in our hearts: For as we see, though every man cannot come
to see the Kings Broad Seal, yet can discern the picture of it in wax, and
say, This is the Kings Broad Seal: So though men cannot ascend to Heaven to
know the secret counsel of God, yet by these fruits and effects of his
knowledge, men may know his will, whether they be his or not.

Well, to conclude: seeing the Lord thus knows and acknowledges, yea loves
and likes of the life of a godly and righteous man: let us be encouraged to
go throughstitch, and to resolve of this, never to be daunted, or discouraged
with the hard measure of ungodly men. All our care should be to please God,
and to be approved of him, and therefore so long as he does approve of us,
let us not care what man can do against us.

But the way of the wicked shall perish.
The Lord hates a wicked man, and al he does Esaias 1.11.
Here we learn that the whole life of a wicked man, and whatsoever he does,
is abominable, the Lord hates him and all he does. What have I to do with the
multitude of your Sacrifices, says the Lord. And again, Esaias 66.3.
The Sacrifices of the wicked are abominable unto the Lord. Now if the best
actions of a wicked man, his Hearing, Reading, praying, Ier. 7.8. Prou. 15.8.
and Receiving, be abominable to the Lord; how much more their swearing,
cursing, banning, profaning the Sabbath, drunkenness, uncleanness, lying,
stealing, etc. Again, without faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11.6.
Now no wicked man can have true faith, because Faith purifies the heart, Acts
15.9.
and is never severed from true repentance and amendment of life. And therefore
the way of the wicked, seem it never so goodly and glorious in the world, all
their studies and endeavors shall perish and come to destruction in the end.
Pro. 20.17
Job. 20.29.
This is the portion of the wicked man, and the heritage that he shall have
from God for his works.

This shows the state of most men to be miserable and unhappy. of most men,
whose whole delight and study is in sin and wickedness, in all kind of
lewdness and prophannesse, have no care to please God, but even obstinately
rebel against him, surely the Lord hates them and all they do. O woeful
condition of such sinful men, that betake themselves thus unto the way of
sin. Not as though they walk therein but for a time, but as such as purpose
to tread therein for ever. From this woeful estate the Lord deliver us for his
Christ's sake. Amen.

A Prayer for the Morning.
O LORD, and our good GOD, we thy poor unworthy servants, according to our
bounden duty, are here assembled together in thy Name: O LORD, it is thy
own Commandment that we should call upon thee in all our necessities, and it
is likewise thy promise, that thou will hear us, in assurance whereof we are
bold now to come unto thee; acknowledging first of all, that we are altogether
unworthy of our selves, as of our selves, to request for any favor or mercy
at thy hands, for from our cradles unto this present there has been in us
nothing else but Apostasy and rebellion; yea Lord, we have so added sin unto
sin, as if there were no other end why we were sent into the world, but to
provoke thee to wrath, and to heap up a great measure of iniquity against our
own souls, against the day of wrath. Our sins of omission, our sins of
commission, o Lord they are many and great, and if thou should call us to a
reckoning even for the least of them, we are not able to answer thy Majesty
for one of a thousand; yea Lord we confess that it is thy mercy that
endures for ever, and that has been the cause that we have not long ago
tasted of thy judgments. O Lord be thou merciful unto us still for thy Names
sake, separate our sins as far from thy presence as the East is from the
West: Bury them in the grave of thy Son Christ, that they may never rise up
again in this world to accuse us, or in the world to come to condemn us.
Teach us to consider (...) good, much less to perform it: open therefore the
eyes of our minds, that we may see what is good, put thy good Spirit within us,
give us fleshly hearts, and pliable affections; draw our minds from the love of
this present world, teach us to use it, as if we used it not, that we have
here no continuing City, but to seek one to come, that so we may seek for
that kingdom that cannot be shaken, but eternal in the heavens. Lord teach
us to do thy will, knit our hearts unto thee, that we may fear thy name, o Lord
hear, o Lord forgive, o Lord consider the complaint that we make unto thee,
and give a gracious answer unto our prayers for the Lords sake. And now o Lord
we thank thee even from the bottom of our hearts, for thy inestimable
blessings wherewith in Christ Jesus thou have blessed us; for our Election
before the foundation of the world, for our Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification and Preservation; and for that thou have put in us a hope of
Glorification in the life to come. We thank thee more especially for that thou
have defended us this night past from all perils and dangers, and have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day. Now Lord we humbly pray thee, keep
us, and all that belong unto us, this day from al evil that may hurt us; set
thy fear before our eyes, and let thy spirit so rule our hearts, that we may
not sin against thee. As for outward things, we submit our selves to thy wise
and fatherly providence; only we beseech thee to give us this day whatsoever
thou know needful and behouefull unto us; let us not want those things
without which we cannot serve thee; bless us in our going out, and our coming
in, and grant that whatsoever we shall think, speak, or do, may tend to thy
glory, the good of our brethren, and the comfort of our own consciences, when
we shall come to make before thee our last accounts. Bless thy whole Church
(O Lord) and build it up more and more in perfect beauty, disappoynt the hope
of the Papists, let them perish, as many as have evil will at Syon: comfort them
that mourn; especially such as mourn for sin: fulfill the desires of all that
truly long and sigh after thee. Bless this good land in which we live, make
thy glorious Gospel to shine more and more until it be perfect day; Lord send
it where it is not and bless it where it is, that Babylon may fall, and never
rise up again: and to this end strenthen the hand of thine anointed servant,
and our dread Sovereign James, Lord make him to see and know every day more
and more what belongs unto thy glory, what belongs unto his own peace and
safety; and Lord give him a heart, that he may duly practice the same. Bless
likewise our gracious Queen Anne, Prince Charles, and the Count Palatine of
Rhine, with the Lady Elizabeth his wife. Assist with thy spirit and grace, all
that are in authority: sanctify all those whom thou employest in the
Ministry. Be merciful unto all that we are bound in duty to pray for, as if
we had named them in particular unto thee. Hasten the coming of Jesus Christ,
make us ever mindful of our last end, and of the reckoning that one day we are
to make unto thee. And in the mean time, Lord make us careful to follow
Christ in the Regeneration, during this life, as that with Christ one day we
may have our portion in the resurrection of the Just, when this mortal life is
ended. These graces, and all other blessings which thou know to be needful
for us, O Lord we humbly beg and crave at thy hand, in the name, and for the
sake alone of Jesus Christ thy dear Son, and in that form of prayer which
he himself has taught us, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O Lord God, by whose gracious providence the night succeeds the day, and the
day the night, we acknowledge thy wonderful power therein: forasmuch as day
unto day utters thy goodness, and night unto night teaches knowledge: O Lord
amongst other thy mercies, with which thou do even follow us (most
rebellious wretches) we must needs acknowledge that this is not the least,
that we have this liberty to come into thy presence, O Lord we come not now
to excuse our selves, but to accuse our selves; yea and to acknowledge, that we
are worthy of all those judgments which thy justice might most justly inflict
upon us, our sins they make us seem vile in our eyes, how much more
loathsome in thy sight? O Lord we must needs confess that we are so far
unworthy to be called thy sons, as that we are not worthy to be reckoned
amongst thy servants; yea were it not that thou were a God of mercy, and that
thy mercy were over all thy works, and does extend it self even to poor
sinners; we should utterly be discouraged in coming unto thee, considering
that our whole life has been but a life of sin, and that we have drunk
down iniquity as it were water, ever pouring in, but never pouring out our
filthiness. O Lord teach us to value this mercy of thine aright, that thou
have spared us so long, and given us so large a time of repentance; that thou
have not prevented us with death in the time of our ignorance, and hardness of
heart, as many have been before us: O Lord it is thy mercy not our
worthiness. Thus have thou showed thy self to be a God of mercy, one that
delights in the prosperity of thy servants. Now Lord we humbly entreat thee
that thou would pardon and forgive us all our sins and offenses, bathe them
in the blood of thy Son, nail them to his Cross, bind them in a bundle, and
throw them down into the bottom of the sea, that they may never rise up
against us, either in this world to accuse us, or in the world to come to
condemn us. O Lord we are heartily sorry that we have abused thy blessings,
profaned thy Saboths, despised thy word, and quenched thy Spirit: For these
and the like (blessed father) we condemn our selves, do not thou therefore
mark them; nor deal not with us as we have deserved, but teach us to rise up
against our sins, that our war with them may assure us that we have peace
with thee: O Lord we abhor our selves, for to us belongs nothing but shame
and confusion of face for ever: and we do humbly entreat thee to look upon us
in thy Son Christ Jesus, O let the chastisement of our peace be upon him, and
heal us through his stripes: Lord let us ever remember our latter end, and the
straight reckoning that we must render unto thee one day: and in health and
prosperity to think of a time of sickness and adversity; and especially good
Lord deliver us in the hour of temptation, that when Satan his assaults shall
be greatest, as his policy is when we are weakest, and least able to resist
him, that thy power may then appear in our weakness, that these things may
not overtake us as a snare, but that with the wise virgins we may in some sort
be prepared for the coming of Christ Jesus the sweet Bridegroom of our
souls. And to that end we may have comfort both now and at that time, go
forward we humbly pray thee, with the work of our new birth, that thou have
begun in us, and never take away thy hand until such time as thou have made an
end of it. And now O Lord having in the first place sought thy kingdom, and
the righteousness thereof, give us leave in the next place to seek thy favor
in outward things: First, according to our duty, we give thee hearty thanks
and praise for that thou have this day preserved us from all evil and danger:
we humbly pray thee take care over us this night, and defend us from that
roaring Lion, who night and day goes about seeking whom he may devour: Take
thou us this night into thy blessed tuition: we know that thou do neither
slumber nor sleep, keep us even in our sleep from being unmindful of thee,
that whenever thou shall call for us by the general Alarm of thy judgment,
whether at midnight, at Cocke-crowing, or at the dawning of the day, we may
be found ready to accompany the Bridegroom into the Marriage-chamber. And to
this end Lord sanctify our sleep unto us, that by it we may be the better
enabled to perform the duties of the next day; and night and day being guided
by thee, they may fit us and prepare us for that day of thine, that shall never
give place to night. And we beseech thee O Lord to be merciful likewise to thy
whole Church, hear the cries of thine elect; hear the mourning of all such as
mourn in Syon, let the cries of thy children cry down the cries of the sins
of this land: and be reconciled unto us O Lord our God in the multitude of thy
mercies, that so thou may continue still a merciful God unto this Land, the
Vineyard which thy own right hand has planted. Preserve our gracious King,
bless and prosper the Queen, the hopeful Prince Charles, Princely Palsgraue
of Rhene, with the Princess Elizabeth his wife. And as thou have crowned them
with worldly honor upon earth, so direct them unto that more glorious Crown
in heaven. Bless the Nobility and Magistracy of this Land. Prosper the work
of thy Gospel in the hands of thy Ministers. And good Lord give us all grace
to be one of those wise virgins, that our hearts may be prepared like a lamp
furnished with Faith and good works, like Oil, to meet the Lord Jesus Christ
the Bridegroom of our souls, there to see the felicity of thy chosen, and to
rejoice with the joy of thy people; To whom with thee O Father, and thy blessed
Spirit be all Honor, Glory, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, henceforth for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

