A CONFERENCE OF THE CATHOLIC AND PROTESTANTE DOCTRINE WITH THE EXPRESS WORDS
OF HOLY SCRIPTVRE.

WHICH IS THE SECOND PART OF THE Prudentiall Balance of Religion.

WHEREIN IS CLEARLY SHOWED, THAT IN MORE then 260. points of controversy,
Catholics agree with the holy Scripture, both in words and sense: and
Protestants disagree in both, and deprave both the sayings, words, and sense of
Scripture.

WRITTEN FIRST IN LATIN, BUT NOW AVGmented and translated into English.

ACTS IV. VERSE. XVII. IF IT BE JUST IN THE SIGHT OF GOD, TO hear you rather
then God, judge ye.

S. Athanasius Apol. de Fuga. WHAT MVST WE STICK TO, TO GODS words, or these
men's Fables?

AT DOWAY, By the widdowe of MARK WYON, at the sign of the Phoenix.

M.DC.XXXI.

The argument of the first book.
Who in more then 260. points of controversy, speak with the holy
Scripture, in the very self same or equiuale^t words, when it speaks of
those matters expressly and of purpose, and in that sense also, which the
words of Scripture of themselves, without any exposition of man do afforde,
and in which sense such words use to be spoken and understood of men, they,
touching those points, agree both in words and meaning with the holy
Scripture: And who speak of those points both in such words and sense, as are
contrary to the foresaied words and sense, they in those points disagree both
in words and sense from the holy Scripture. But Catholics do that, and
Protestants, this. Therefore etc. The Mayor seems to be manifest by it self,
and is largely proved in the second book Cap. 1. The Minor is showed to the
eye in all the first book.

The argument of the second Book.
Who not only in more then 260. points of controversy disagree from the
foresaied words and sense of Scripture, but also are forced openly to reject
some of the words thereof, to blot out some, to call others in question, to
change the order of others: to change almost all kinds of the Scriptures
speeches, to expound her words by quite different and plain contraries, to
reject the unanimous exposition of holy Fathers, to confess that some of
their opinions were long since condemned for heresies, that some are
blasphemous and plain contrary to Scripture, such contradict not only the
words, but also the true sense of Scripture. But Protestants do thus.
Therefore etc. The Mayor is manifest by it self: and the Minor showed to the
eye in the second Book.

APPROBATIO.
HOc opus, cui titulus: Collatio doctrinae Catholicorum ac Protestantium cum
expressis sacrae scripturae verbis, duobus libris comprehensa, Latino sermon one
olim editum, and a duobus S. Theol. Doctoribus Parisiensibus approbatum: nunc
vero auctum and in Anglicum sermonem fideliter conuersum, nihil habet fidei
Catholicae aduersum, aut bonis moribus, sed plurimum valet ad confutationem
doctrinae haereticorum praesentis temporis, and proinde recte praeli beneficio
in lucem edetur. Datum Duaci die 2. Ianuarij 1631.

GEORGIUS COLVENERIVS S. Theol. Doctor and eiusdem Regius, ordinarius ac
primarius Professor, insignis Eccl^siae Collegiatae S. Petri Praepositus and
Canonicus, Duacen sis Academiae Cancellarius, and librorum Censor.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER, WHEREIN THE SCOPE, MANNER OF PROCEEDING, AND PROFIT
OF THIS BOOK IS DECLARED, REQVISITE TO BE READ BEFORE THE BOOK.
THERE are now diverse years (Gentle Reader) since I published the first part
of the Prudential Balance of Religion, in which, by the weights of Prudence and
Right Reason I weighed together the Catholic and Protestant religion according
to their first Founders in our English nation, to wit, S. Austin and Martin
Luther: which book has never since been answered by any Protestant albeit
diverse ministers, and superintendents have carped at it both in Pulpits and
printed books, showing thereby that they wanted no will to answer it, if they
could have performed it. In the preface thereof I promised a second part, in
which I would after the same manner weigh the forsaied religions according to
their claims to the holy Scripture, and the express words thereof, which
here now I offer unto thee. The causes why I have so long differred the
publishing of this second part, are well enough known to them who know me,
and not needful to be known of them who know me not. And therefore I will not
trouble thee with the rehearshall of them, but here propose unto thee the
scope, manner of Proceeding, and Profits of this second part.

2. As a man consists essentially of a Soul and Body, and can neither be,
nor be imagined without them both: So the true Church of Christ essentially
consists Two things wholly necessarieto Christ's Church.
of his true Doctrine, which is the form, and (as it were) the soul of his
Church, and of lawful Pastors and People, who teach and embrace his Doctrine,
which Pastors and People make (as it were) the body of Christ's Church. And
without both these parts, to wit, Christ's true Doctrine, and true Pastors
teaching, and People embracing it, Christ's true Church can no more be, or
imagined to be, then a true man can either be, or imagined to be, without both
the true body and true soul of a man. And albeit the manifest need of both
these parts to the true Church of Christ, does enforce Protestants to make
some clame to them both, and to pretend that they have alvaies had both true
Pastors who taught, and People who believed their Doctrine; yet their pretense
to this part of the Church is so weak and slender, as but seldom and upon
mere necessity they insist thereon. But their greatest pretense and claim is
to the true Doctrine of Christ; and think thereby to prove, that they have
always had true Pastors and People who taught and believed their Doctrine, as I
have showed in a Book of the Author of the Protestant Church and Religion;
wherein also I have convinced by ten Demonstrations, (all taken out of the open
Confessions of the best learned Protestants both of England and other
Countries) that they never had any one Pastor who taught, or man who believed
the very fundamental and most substantial points of their religion, before
Luther arose; but that he was first Author, Inuentor, and Father thereof, as
some of them in plain terms do call him.

3. And although this Book have been now these many years published both in
Latin and English, and does by the open confessions of the best learned
Protestants overthrow the very foundation of their Church, or rather show, that
it has no foundation at all besides their own imagination; yet hitherto no
Protestant has made any show of a solid answer unto it. I say, no show of a
why D. Prideaux lecture is no answer to the Author of Protest. religion.
solid answer, because that flourish which Doctor Prideaux the Kings divinity
Reader in Oxford has made in a lecture, deserves not the name of show or
shadow of an answer. First, because he nether mentions the laws of answering
my said book, which I set down, and Doctrine, would prove that they have
always had true Pastors and People who taught and believed it, and so
pitifully replieth to the said answer, as he plainly shows him self to be
a true Heretic, that is, convicted in his own judgment, as I think every
one, that compares his lecture with my Book, will clearly perceive.

4. But since the Protestants chief and almost whole pretense of the truth and
ever being of their Church, is the pretense of the truth of their doctrine by
the Scripture, I will evidently show, even by the light of Reason and Prudence,
that they have no reasonable or colorable pretense of Scripture: but that it
makes expressly, clearly, and directly against the^, and for Catholics, almost
in all points of controversy. For whereas there be twoe ways to show, Twoe
ways to prove that. the Scripture is against Protest.
that the holy Scripture is plainly against Protestants; the one by
conferring of diverse places together, by bringing the exposition of the holy
Fathers, decrees of Councels, and tradition of the Church: the other, by only
comparinge Protest. Doctrine as clearly contrary to Scripture as yea is to no.
express words of holy Scripture touching the same matter; I take not the
first way, which hithertoe Catholic writers have followed, because it is not
so fit to the capacity of commun people, for whom especially I compose this
work; but the second, which is as clear, for every one that has reason, to
see, as it is clear to see, that Yea and Yea, of the same matter agree, and
that Yea and Nay do disagree.

4. This perhaps may seem strange, nay impossible to simple Protestants, whose
ears have been still accustomed to hear their ministers vaunt, and brag of
the word of God, of the Scripture, and Bible, and to avouch that Catholics have
nothing to allege for the^ selves but traditions and word of men: But I
beseech such to suspend a while their judgment, and since they will have the
Protestants doctrine to be tried or judged by nothing but by Scripture only,
let them grant me these two conditions Two conditions to prove the Scripture to
be against Protest. 1. Touching the letter. 2. Touching the sense.
of trying their doctrine by the Scripture, which the very light of reason, the
authority of holy Fathers, and the Confession of the best learned Protestants
will enforce them to grant. The first condition is touching the words or
letter of the holy Scripture; The second, is touching the sense or meaning of
the said words or letter. For as the holy Scripture consists of two parts,
whereof the one is the word or letter, the other, is the sense thereof, so I
require one condition for the word, and an other for the sense.

5. The condition touching the word or letter is, that the words of holy
Scripture be taken as they be in the The 1. co^ditio^ to^ching the letter,
proved.
Bible or book of God, without any addition, subtraction, or transposition:
breefly without any chopping or changing whatsoever. This condition is so just
and reasonable, as I think no reasonable man will deny it; and nevertheless I
will prove it. First, because where God alone is Iugde, there Let us hear Lib.
1. peccat. c. 20. De unit. c. 13 Sermon. 27. de verb. Apo.
(says S. Austin) our lord, and not ghesses or suspicions of men. Again: I
believe that which I read in holy Scripture, not that which vain Heretics
say. And other where: There is a controversy risen, let is go to the Judge,
let the Prophet judge: yea let God judge by the Prophet, let us both hold our
peace. And yet again: let us not hear: This I say: This thou say, but let
us Lib. 6. cont. Iul. c. 4. In Confutat. Latomito. 2. fol. 234.
hear, This our lord says. Yea Luther writes: That man's word added unto
Gods word is a cover, nay man's dung, wherewith pure truth is hidden. Moreover,
seeing Protestants impose silence to the Church, Counsels, Fathers, and all
Catholics in that the Scriture is the only, and professed rule of faith; that
they will hear Beza cont. Heshus. Daneus Cont. 3. 6. 7. Hospin part. 2 Calvin
cont. versipel. and cont. Cathalon.
nothing besides Scripture; that nothing is to be taught but the pure written
word; nothing to be believed but that which is expressly contained in the
Scripture. Let them hear therefore in these twoe hundred and sixte points, in
which I will compare their doctrine with the Scripture, mere Scripture, only
Scripture, and let them harken to nothing but Scripture; let all their own
words whatsoever be set aside: let the Scriptures pure and only words show and
judge, whether Catholic or Protestant doctrine in these 260. points here set
down, be agreeable or disagreable unto it.

6. The second condition touching the sense is: That The 2. condition touching
the sense, proved.
the pure written word of God may judge betwixt us according to the pure sense
thereof, which (when it is spoken clearly or of purpose to tell: us what Gods
meaning is) of it self and according to the usual acception of men it does
afford, and this is evident also especially, if the Church must not be
admitted to be the infallible Interpreter of the true sense of Scripture. But
nevertheless I prove it. First, because Protestants cannot set down any A
judge must be able by himself to declare his mind.
not fit to be the only judge of controversies, as Protestants would have
her. For who will say, that she alone is fit to be judge, who alone and by
her self is not able to utter clearly her mind? Besides, if the pure word of God
Sermon. 14. de verb. Apost. Tractat. 2. de Cant. c. 17. L. 6. cont. Julian. c. 5.
L. 2. de Baptismo c. 6.
judge of controversies? Let men's ghesses (says S. Austin) give place for a
time, let us take in hand divine weapons. Again: This is humane inference, not
dinine authority. The arguments which you bring are humane, these are divine
munitions. And otherwhere: let us not bring false scales, with which we may
weigh what we will and how we will, and say as we please: This is heavy: This
is leight; But let us bring the divine scale of the holy Scripture, and in
that let us weigh which is heauiest, or rather let not us wheigh it, but let us
aknowledg it weighed of God. Let us set aside a while men's ghesses or
imaginations of the conference or exposition of this or that place of
Scripture, let us not bring deceitful scales of man's conference, inference or
exposition of Scripture, with which we may weigh what we will, and how we will
saying according as we please: This is the meaning, That is not the meaning;
This follows, That follows not; This is true, that is false, again all
which we may oppose those words of S. Austin: This is man's inference, man's
conference, man's exposition, man's guess, not divine authority, and let us
bring the divine and sure scale of the pure meaning of Gods pure word, and in
that let us weigh the doctrine of both parts, or rather let us acknowledge that
which is weighed and allowed by God him self in this his scale. Moreover, if
man's help be necessary to Scripture for the Protestants must be tried by the
native, and usual sense of he words, or thy no sense.
that sense of Scripture which is no way partial, to wit, which the Scripture
it self, by it self, without any conference or exposition of man, gives, they
can name no sense of Scripture which both parties may admit for their judge:
and to refuse all sense of Scripture whereupon both parties may reasonably
agree, is plainly to refuse all reasonable trial by scripture. For seeing the
soul and kernel of the Scripture is the sense thereof; and that the letter or
words is but the shell or bark of it, as is evident and both holy Fathers and
Protestants agree, manifest it is, that whosoever will not reasonably agree
upon any sense of the Church, Counsels, or Fathers) where it is spoken of set
purpose to declare Gods meaning, of it self without any man's exposition, and
according to the usual understanding of men, it does afford, rather then the
quite contrary sense, which by the wresting of Protestants it is compelled to
carry. Let but this right reason and true prudence lift up this Balance,
wherein I weigh the Doctrine of Catholics and Protestants according to holy
Scripture in more then 260. points, and I nothing doubt, but it will clearly
see and judge the Catholic doctrine agreeable to Scripture and the Protestant,
quite opposite and contrary. And this is my purpose, Scope, and butte in this
1. The Scope of the first book And of the second.
book, to which I add a second, wherein I manifestly show that Protestants
Doctrine is not only quite opposite in more then 260. points both in words and
meaning to the holy Scripture, but also, that they are forced to reject many
and great parts of the Scripture; to alter that part which they admit, to
weaken all force of Scripture; to say that much of the Scripture was not spoken
of certain knowledge, or not according to the meaning of the speaker; to
teach, that most weighty sentences of the Scripture were spoken ironically,
mimetically, and hyperbolically, to change the most universal propositions of
the Scripture into particulers, to limitate speeches not limited by the
Scripture; to alter absolute speeches into conditional; to make causall
propositions not causall, to expound words in some sort, which were spoke
simply; The contents of the second book.
which were spaken of one time, to interpret them of an other, to make one
saying, of many; to understand words that signify the doing of a thing, of an
endeavor to do it; which signify working a thing, of the way or mean
thereto; which signify that a thing is, to expound that it ought to be: words
which signify a true thing, to expound them of a show or apparent thing: to
expound the words of Scripture of different, yea wholly diverse, and contrary
matters; to devise improprietes and all figures of speeches; to feign
frivolous and never before heard of distinctions; to reject the exposition of
the Fathers, Counsels, and Church: to confess, that they teach Doctrine damned
in old time for heresy: to frustate the ends of the incarnation and passion
of Christ: to take out of the world all virtue and give free scope to all vice:
and finally, to confess, that much of the Protestant doctrine is contrary to
holy Scripture. All which clearly show, that Protestant leaders do not only
teach doctrine contrary to the Scripture, but also do in very deed mock and
contemn it.

8. The manner of my proceeding is this. First I divide Manner of proceeding in
this book.
the matters which are in controversy according to their order, and in every
matter I distinguish many articles which I propose in form of question:
After, I set down the express words of Scripture: Next I bring the decrees of
the Council of Trent, or the Instructions of the Catechism of that Council:
And where I find not their determinations, I allege the doctrine of S. Thomas,
or of D. Stapleton, or Cardinal Bellarmin. Against these, I produce the
assertions of one or many famous Protestants directly opposite to the doctrine
of the Scripture and of the Catholics. Lastly, I gather together a sum of the
words of the holy Scripture, together with a sum of the sayings of
Protestants, that thereby the opposition between the doctrine of them both may
the better appear. As for the words of Scripture; Plessie of the Church c. 5.
p. 145. Let them bring one text that is clear and evident and we are ready to
yield unto them.
I bring not all which might be brought of every article, because nether is
that necessary to my purpose, since God is as much to be believed in one word
as in many, nether (as the Council of Arausica says truly) will many
testimonies of Scripture avail any thing with him, to whom few are not
sufficient, but I bring those only testimonies which to me seemed most
opposite to the words of Protestants, Nether do I prove, that the words of
Scripture, which I cite, be clear, and uttered of purpose to declare unto us
Gods mind of that matter whereof they treat, or do of themselves and according
to their accustomed acception amongst men, manifestly afford that sense in
which Protestants gain say them; because al thief points are manifest by them
selves, and the shifts which Protestants use to delude them, do manifestly
prove them. Nether also do I prove, that Protestants can not at least (touching
the most of these Articles) produce any such testimonies of Scripture, which,
in express words may seem directly, and without any inference, conference, or
exposition of theirs to speak for them, as in these 260. points the
testimonies which I bring, do speak for us. First, because this being a
denial, it is of it self sufficiently proved, unless the Protestants can
demonstrate their contrary affirmation. Secondly, because this is evident to
every one who See Tertul. l. de Resur. c. 3. Luther de verb. Caenae, fol. 389.
considers the testimonies brought by Protestants, which in very few and
almost no matters at all in controversy betwixt us and them are such, as of
them selves without the addition of some humane principle or illation, they
may, so much as seem, to be directly opposite unto us. Which if Protestants
would consider, they should easily see, almost in all controversies, as much
difference between our proofs out of Scripture and theirs, as there is betwixt
the express word of God and humane discourse. Nether may they say, that they
are not bound to prove Why Protest. are bound to prove their negative points
of doctrine.
those points wherein they contradict us, because their denial needs no proof;
Both because in some controversies they are the affirmers, and we the deniers;
as when they say, that God will and works sin, tempts and predestinateth to
sin; That Christ was truly a sinner feared See Tertul. de Corona. c. 2.
Scripture, and to auouche the denial as a truth taught by Scripture; For
albeit a simple denial or not belief need no proof, yet such a mixed denial,
as denying the opposite affirmation, affirms it self to be avouched by
Scripture, and the affirmation to be condemned thereby, has as great need of
proof out of Scripture, as any other affirmation whatsoever. Moreover, these
denials are articles

9. As for Catholics, for the most part, I produce the Why one Cath. saying is
alleged.
words of one only of the foresaied Authors; because the agreement of
Catholics in matters of faith is well enough known; I might, if I would, have
my self set down the Catholic doctrine in every article in the same words in
which the Scripture delivers her doctrine of the same: or perhaps have found
the Catholic doctrine proposed by some Catholik^ Author in the very same
words which the Scripture uses: But that Protestants should not say, that it
was no marvel if the Catholic doctrine be delivered in the Scriptures words by
any Author whatsoever; or when it is done of purpose, I would not set it down
but in the words of some famous Catholic writer, and those spoaken not of
purpose to accomodate their speech to the phrase of Scripture; but spoaken to
declare and express the Catholic doctrine. And here by we may see that when the
Catholic doctrine is to be set down most plainly and distinctly by the^ who
best know it, of it nature it requires to be delivered with the very same or
the likewords which the Scripture uses. Whence we may also gather (as I shall
herafter) that the Catholic doctrine is in very deed one and the self same with
the doctrine of the Scripture.

10. For the like cause I have alleged the words only Why many Prot^stants
saying^ alleged.
of famous Protestants, such as almost all were not only writers but also
Professors of Protestant divinity, lest any should attribute their words to
ignorance. And some I make of their words, or, by the notes in the margent,
choose which are fittest to his purpose. And thus much for the manner of my
proceeding in this book.

11. The profit of this work is manifould. First, because by it a short and
easy way may be taken to make an end The profits of this work.
of all controversies, and that out of Scirpture alone, as Protestants desire:
to wit, by mere rehearsal of the express to order of their matters, which in
260. articles directly and in their proper and usual sense do approve the
Catholic doctrine, and condemn the Protestant. A third The Authors fidelity in
citing Protetestants sayings.
to take the pains to look upon the books and places by me alleged, and
then to believe their own eyes. For I not only gathered their sayings out of
their own books, but also, after I had my self gathered them and caused them
to be fair copied out, I diligently conferred them with their books, and
admitted none which he, that read their books, did non find to be truly cited
out of them. Wherefore I say for my self as Calvin said for him self against
Gentilis: There shall be no color for them to complain that they are slandered,
seeing I request that judgment be made of their impiety out of their own mere
words. And they, who have had to deal with Protestants either by word or
writing, know well how important a thing it is, to be able to convince them,
that they teach that which in in very deed they teach; which may clearly be
done by their sayings here rehearsed.

12. The fourth commodity of this work is, thar hereby also to keep the very
letter thereof, and not to reject it and to use the contrary: as also because
the Apostle commands to avoid profane novelties of words, and to keep the
1. Timoth. 6. 2. Timoth. 1.
form of wholesome words which we have learned of him: which commandment they
do not follow, who forsake the Scriptures form of speech, and embrace the
contrary: and finally, because not only the sense, but also the words and
form of speech used by the Scripture, did proceed from the holy Ghost, and
therefore it is sacrilegious audacitie to reject Gods words and Gods form of
speaking, and to bring in man's words and fashion of speaking quite contrary.
As if these new Ghospelers should teach God how to deliver his mind, or he meant
to speak otherwise by them, then he did by his Prophets, Apostles, and
Eua^gelists, wherefore their impiety is not to be borne withal who when the
Scripture most often and most plainly calls the belief of wicked men or
reprobats, faith, and never denies it to be faith, yet dare say, that it
Calvin 3. Instit. c. 2.. 10.
is unworthy the name of faith: When the Scripture often times and most
directly calls the Eucharist the body of Christ, and not once directly
denies it to be his body, yet dare say, it is not his body. And the like
they do in many other matters, wherein if they control not the meaning of the
holy Ghost; at least they correct his speech, and reform it according to the
square of their new doctrine. Far otherwise proceeded the holy Fathers, who
would not suffer so much as a letter or syllable of the holy Scripture to be
altered: And as S. Austin gravely aduertized. Philosophers may speak as they
please, but we speak according Lib. 10. de Ciuit. c. 23.
to a certain rule, lest licencie in words breed impious opinions of the thing
which they signify. Yea Protestants them selves some times will seem to be
very careful of the words and phrases of Scripture. For thus speaks Luther:
If the In Confutat. Latomi. f. 227
Scripture term any thing sin, beware thou be not moved by any words of
theirs, who (as if they could speak better) deny it to be sin. And Calvin:
There is to be taken out of Scripture a 1. Instit. c. 13.. 3.
certain form of thinking and speaking, by which all the thoughts of our mind
and words of our mouth are to be examined. Beza Ad defens. Castle.
also: I see that all godly and learned Divines have ever taught, that the
holy Ghost governed not only the mind, but also the tongue and pen: in so
much as concerning the wonders of God, not only nothing can be said of any
man more truly or more habily, but also nether so gravely nor so properly.
Likewise Bucer: Prefat. in Math.
No wisdom of the flesh can reach to these mysteries of the kingdom of God.
Therefore, then we speak most plainly most perspicuously and most surely of
matters of faith, when we speak according to the rule and form of Scripture.
And otherwhere: we In Hospin. part. 2. Histor
must learn of the Scripture and the holy Ghost, how to speak and think of
every matter. Wherefore the holy Ghost his forms of speaking ought not to be
corrected according to the judgment of our reason. Thus they, which if they and
theires had followed, we should not have had so much speech contrary to the
Scripture.

13. The fifth, and that no small, commodity is, that by this In c. 1. Galat.
In Assert. art 2.
thereby draw the simple people to follow them. The Pope (faieth Luther) having
no Scripture wherewith to defend himself, uses this only and perpetual
argument against us. The Church, the Church. Again: Our opinion is delivered
by these words of God, the contrary, by the words of men. And otherwhere. All
the Scripture stands an our sides through all letters and tittles. Calvin:
Papists find no weapons in Scripture, yea they In Actor. 9. v. 22. In Antid.
sess. 6. c. 8.
see it wholly against them. Again. I have the whole Scripture on my side. And
Sadeel: Our doctrine does rely upon the express word of God? And in an other
place: we professed in the fifth article of our French Confession, that our
faith is only and wholly, and expressly grounded upon the word of God as it is
contained De vocat. Ministr. Ad art. 1. abiurat.
in the Scripture. Fulk in Joan. 5. note 2. Papists can not find a jot of
Popery allowed either by express words of the Scripture, or by necessary
co^clusio^ out of the same. And the like most vain pretense, this most
impudent boast is most Apol. Anglic p. 20. Pareus praefat lib. de Great. Calvin
epist. 193. Whitak. praefat. ad Demonst.
manifestly refuted in this book, wherein is clearly showed, that the Catholic
doctrine, in more then 260. points denied by Protestants, is in express terms
and most directly taught and delivered, by the Scripture, and in the same
points the Protestants doctrine condemned: and that these in very deed do rely
upon their own inferences out of Scripture, their own conferences of places
of Scripture and oppose their own expositions, glosses, tropes, and figures,
against the express words and thunders of almighty God.

14. The sixth commodity is, that though some obstinatly Catholics advantage
over Protestants. For words of Scripture.
use the very same or equivalent words with the Scripture: what she calls
faith, we call faith: what she calls the body of Christ, we call the body
of Christ. And so in others: whereas Protestants do the quite contrary, as
has been touched before, and shall appear in the whole book. And as for the
form of speech, where the Scripture For phrase of Scripture.
affirms, we affirm; where the Scripture denies, we deny: And contrary
wise the Protestants affirm, where the Scripture denies; and deny, where the
Scripture affirms: as shall be most evident to him that will read this book.
Besides no part or parcel of the Scripture forces For parts of Scripture.
Catholics to deny it, but they hold all that Protestants account for
Scripture and some what more: whereas Protestants are compelled to reject many
books of those which Catholics and the holy Church heretofore has believed
to be Gods word, and foully also to mangle and corrupt these books which they
admit. Moreover Catholics refuse no authentical edition or translation of the
For translations of Scripture.
Scripture: but Protestants will sland to no translation. And thus much
touching the words of Scripture. As for For the sense of Scripture.
the sense thereof: Catholics in all these 260. points do admit that sense,
which the express words of Scripture, and they spoaken of purpose to declare
Gods mind do of them selves proporse: which sense Protestants reject and force
the quite contrary. Again, scarce in any of these 260. articles Catholics are
driven to any answer which has any show of a shift or evasion, because in
them (as I said) they embrace the native and proper sense of the words of
Scripture: but Protestants in every one of them are driven to sundry and
foul shifts, because they refuse the natural and plain sense of Gods word.
Besides, Catholics in all these 260. points dare stand to the judgment of the
express word of God according to that sentence which of them selves with out
all help, force or pressing of Catholics they do pronounce: Protestants dare
not in these articles stand to the judgment of Gods express word, unless they
may wrest, wring, and interpret it as they think best. Finally, Catholics in
none of all these questions reject that sense of Scripture, which is delivered
by unanimous consent of the holy Fathers, Counsels, or Church. Protestants
refuse it in many. Seeing therefore Catholics have the advantage over
Protestants, not only for Fathers, Counsels, Church, miracles, the like, but
also that they have such and so great advantages over them in more then 260.
points of controversy, both for the express word, and plain sense of the
Scripture, it is plain willfulnes and carelesnes of salvation to leave
Catholics for to follow Protestants. I would to God, that Protestants would (as
they pretend) follow the express word of God, and embrace that Religion Note.
which the express word of God most favors, reject that which it most
disliketh; and enquire diligently whether the Catholic or Protestant religion
can in more points of controversy prove her doctrine by the pure and express
written word of God without the mixture of any word of man, and by the pure
sense thereof, which of it self it affords without any help or exposition of
man, when it is spoaken of purpose to declare Gods meaning unto us. Let that
religion flourish and be embraced, which in this conflict ouercomet: let that
perish and be rejected, which is ouercomen. And what more reasonable then to
prefer Gods pure word before that which is not pure, mixed partly of Gods
words, partly of man's. What more reafonable, then to prefer Gods direct
speech, before man's inference or collection out of his speech? What more
reasonable, then to follow rather Gods express words, then man's glosses,
tropes, and figures? And finally, what more reasonable, then to follow that
religion which in more then 260. points of controversy is grounded upon the
pure word, the direct word, the express word of God, and has against it
nothing but man's mixed word, man's inference, man's glosses: rather then that
which in all those points is condemned by the pure, direct, and express word
of God, and supported only by man's mixed word, man's inference, and man's
glosses? For example: That the Eucharist is the body of Christ, we have for us
in four places of Scripture the pure, direct, and express word of God,
saying: This is my body: and against us there is not so much as once any pure
word of God, saing directly and expressly: This is not my body. But only men's
inference out of a mixed word, to wit: Christ's body is in heaven, and can not
be in two places; which word is mixed, partly of Gods word, for the former
part, and of men's word, for the latter. And shall we think that in a matter
of faith, which we can not know but by Gods teaching, his pure and express
word is not to be preferred before men's inference out of a mixed word, which is
in part men's word? What else can we think unless we will even in Gods matters
prefer men before God.

15. The seventh commodity is that in this word are discovered all or the
most usual shifts wherewith Protestants use to delude the testimonies of holy
Scripture. Which surely is no less profitable, then to know the deceits of
enemies with whom we are to fight. And as Tertullian says: VVoe be to him,
who whiles he is in this life, knows not De resur. c. 19.
the secrets of Heretics. And these are the especial profits and commodities
which may be reaped by this work; Now let us remove certain scruples or
hindrances of the reaping of them.

16. The first scruple may be about the vulgar Latin translation, Objections or
difficulties removed.
which I follow in citing the words of Scripture. But to omit all which
Catholics produce for to prove that translation to be authentical (because
this is no place to treat of that matter) Protestants co^fessions hereof may
suffice, which may be seen in the Protestants Apology for the Romans Church
Treat. 1. Sect. 10. subd. 4. to which I add, that Casoubon writes. I
acknowledge the Latin translation of the bible to be holy Scripture, and I
account an vnperdonable fault to so much as doubt thereof: That Iuel. art. 17.
sect. 4. says: It has been ever more generally received in the Church: That
Beza in Luc. 1. confesses: That the ancient interpreter did most religiously
translate the Scripture. And in Luc. 8. v. 54. That him self had twoe ancient
Greek copies which meruailously agreed with the vulgar Latin. And Prefat. in
Testam. That the vulgar interpreter had a truer Greek copy then theirs now
are. Whitaker also Cont. 1. q. 2. c. 7. grants, that the Latin Fathers
commend it and justly. Hounfrey l. 1. de Rat. interpret. affirms. That the
old Interpretor seems enough addicted to the propriety of the word. Moreover
Luther and Protestants commonly confess, that Catholics have the word of God
that the Fathers used the Latin translation in their disputes for maintenance
of the Catholic faith and confutation of Heresies. Besides Fulk in his preface
to the Testament, says, that none of them calls the vulgar translation of
the new testament, Papisticall, as though it were translated by Papists, or else
made so greatly for Papists when it is rightly understood. Finally the vulgar
Latin translation differs not from the original Hebrew or Greek text, but in
very few of those places which here I cite; and therefore it will be but vain to
cauil here about this matter.

17. The second scruple may be, that some times the very why Protest. can not
excuse them selves by the Scripture.
Scripture contradicts it self in show of words, and nevertheless in sense and
meaning is never repugnant to it self. And therefore it is not so great meruail
if Protestants some time contradict the words of Scripture, nether can it be
thereof inferred that the contradict the sense. To this whatsoever. But of this
more in the second book cap. 1.

18. The third scruple may be, that perhaps also Why they can not excuse them
selves by Catholics.
some Catholic writers have in show of words contradicted the Scripture. But to
this I answer that this is to accuse others, not to clear them selves: Let
them first answer for them selves, before they recriminate others. And if any
of them will go about to lay the like fault upon Catholics, let him keep these
most just and equal conditions. First, let him not meddle with other matters
Thou must prove (says Tertullian) as evidently as we prove. Give me a proof
which I demand like to Cont. Prax. c. 11. De unit. c. 6. 24.
mine. And S. Austin: Produce as clear testimonies as these are which we
produce to you. We demand some manifest place which needs no interpreter.
Thirdly, let him show that the Council of Trent contradicts as directly so
many and of which (as they say) they make almost as great account of, as
Vorstius praefat. Antilpraefat. Syntagm.
we do of the Council of Trent. Fourthly, let him show, that so many and so
famous Catholic writers have in so many and so great controversies contradicted
the expres propositions or assertions of the holy Scripture, as we have
Propositions, or Assertions, because it is a far greater matter to contradict
the proportions of Scripture, in which it pronounces a thing to be, or not to
be; to be such, or not to be such, then to vary only from some of the words
wherewith here or there it signifies this or that thing. As for example, it is
a far greater matter to deny the Eucharist to be the body of Christ, which
the Scripture often times and plainly affirms, then not to call it bread as
some times the Scripture does, but never directly says that it is bread:
Whereupon Spalatensis l. 5. de repub. c. 6. writes thus: It is one thing, for
a seeming thing to be called by the name of the true thing, which the
appearence does show; An other, to be said, This is that. The first may and is
borne withal in all equivocal terms, but not the latter. Wherefore let him
omit these kinds of matters. Fifthly, let him show, that Catholics Why all
Co^tradictio^s here related may be abiected to the Prot. Church.


19. The fourth scruple may be, that all the Co^tradictions against holy
Scripture, which are here rehearsed out of Protestant writers, were not made
nor allowed of all Protestants, or of their Church, and therefore all of them
are not to be imputed to all Protestants or to their Church. I answer. First,
that very many of the Contradictions

But whether the Contradictions of Scripture made by And though they could not
yet that would suffice.
many and famous Protestant writers, and not condemned but dissembled by their
Church, be to be objected to their Church, or no, these points ensuing will
suffice to my purpose. First, that the commun fairh of Protestants is in many
and weighty articles directly contrary to the express word and clear
meaning of holy Scripture, as is evident by that which in diverse articles I
recite out of their Confessions of faith and other their common writings. The
second is, that touching many other matters, Apol. Anglic Cont. 2. q. 5. c. 8.
L. 3. de Eccles. c. 42.
doctrine of Protestants, as well as any who now will deny or reject that
doctrine. The fifth is, that Iuel, Whitaker, Field, and diverse other Protestants
avouch, that there is no material difference in doctrine amongst the chief
Protestants, which either they must confess to befalse, or maintain Note.
260. points of controversy quite opposite to the express words of holy
Scripture. For thereby every one may see, that the first and cheifest
Protestant preachers, did not teach the word of God, but the word of the Devil
quite contrary there^o: were not ministers of the word of God, but ministers
of the Devil: not Reformers, but Deformers: not sent of God, but thrust on by
the Devil: not lightened from heaune, but blinded from hell: not Apostles, but
Apostatas: not Pastores but wolves: who under a most false pretense of the word
of God, did most directly impugn it, drew Cristians from Gods truth to the
Devils lies, from the lap of the Catholic Church to the den of thieves, from the
assured path of salvation to the open way of damnation.

Finally I advertise the Reader, that if at any time I use any sharp words
against Protestants, I intend them only against their teachers and leaders,
yet use I the common name of Protestants, that the rest may know that the
crimes which I object unto them, proceed of their doctrine, and thereby fly and
reject it, lest they become partakers of the crimes. I show them the gulf of
impiety, into which their guides do lead them: let them not be offended with
me, that I set before their eyes the impiety of the doctrine which they are
tought, but let them be angry with their teachers who under the most false
pretense of Scripture and Gods word, have thaught them such impious doctrine and
so contrary to Gods words. And I heartily pray God, and ever shall, that he open
their eyes, that they may see the most imminent and greiuous danger wherein
they stand, and avoid it, and lighten with his true light that zeal which
they have to his word, Romans 10.
lest they perish for ever with them who had zeal but not according to
knowledge.

Whether Catholics or Protestants be the true owners of the holy Scripture?
FIRST CHAPTER.
BECAUSE this question of the true owners How important this question is.
of the holy Scripture is of such moment, as by it may be decided all
controversies, as shall hereafter appear: and withal the decision thereof is
so easy and clear, as every one may perceive it: and notwithstanding has
not as yet to my knowledge, been particularly handled of any, albeit (as we
shall see out of Tertullian) it should have been handled before any question
of Scripture, I will begin first with it. And because Protestants avouch them
selves to be the true owners of the Scripture, I need not prove to them that
either Catholics or they are the true owners thereof (which the very question
does suppose) but it will suffice against them that I show, that according to
all reason, Catholics are to be judged the true owners of Scripture rather then
they.

The first proof hereof I will take from the actual The first title for
Cathol. actual possession.
possession of the Scripture, in which Catholics peacably were, when Luther and
the Protestants first began to challenge the Scripture for theirs. For reason
teaches us to judge the Possessor of any thing to be the true owner of the
same, and possession to be a sufficient title of houlding it, unless the
contrary be manifestly proved and convinced, as we see daily in lands and
temporal goods: and otherewise the dominion of things would be uncertain
amongst men. Whereupon the law teaches the Possessor to plead possession as a
sufficient title, and to say possideo quia possideo: I possess because I
possess. But Protestants can not manifestly disprove, no nor yet colourably
impugn the right of the Catholics possession of the holy Scripture, as shall
hereafter appear. Therefore according to all reason Catholics upon this title
of their possession are to be judged true owners of the Scripture.

The second proof I will take from the Catholics undoubted Second title,
peacable possession.
possession thereof, and unquestioned by Protestants for many ages. That
Protestants did not for many ages call the Catholics possessions of the
Scripture into question, is manifest, by the many and plain confessions of
Protestants, that their Church was invisible before Luther for many ages,
which I have related in my second book of the Author of the Protestant Church
c. 4. And reason teaches us to accounte him the true owner of a thing, who
without all question or clame of any, has hold it peacably for many ages
together. Whereupon the law allows prescription of certain years, after
which time expired, it permits not the possession to be called in question.
Besides, it is no way likely, that the true Church of God would suffer her
self to be bereaved of so heavenly a treasure, as is the holy Scripture, and
yet not once in any corner of the world, for many ages cry after the thief,
or challenge her treasure, which she did see was held of others. Will men every
day venture their lives for saving or recovering a little land or goods, and
would not the Church of God (the only true owner of the Scripture) for many
ages once open her mouth to challenge so heavenly a treasure; especially, the
Scripture being (as Protestants teach) the only Martyr in disput. oxon. p.
143. Pareus Coll. Theol. 3. disp. 2.
external infallible mean to attain faith, and as necessary to the
salvation of the Church, as meat is to the life of man? what care had the
Church offo great a treasure left unto here by Christ, what account made she of
faith and salvation, if for many ages she would not so much as challenge the
only external infallible and necessary means to obtain them? Would the
primitive Church suffer so many torments and cruel death (as we read in the
Ecclesiastical History) rather then loose the holy Scriptures, which the
Heathens would have taken from her, and would she afterward suffer Papists to
take it from her without muttering one word, or laying clame to it for many
ages together. Moreover how had she faith, how obtained she salvation, if for
maine ages she lost the only external, infallible, and necessary means to
obtain them?

The third proof, is that the Catholics possession of the Scripture is far
more ancient then the Protestants possession Third title, ancientest possession.
thereof. For evident it is, that that Christian Church which is the first and
ancientest possessor of the holy Scripture, is the only true owner of the
same: because the Apostles and Evangelists left their writings first and Qui
prior est tempore, potior est iure. Reg. iuris.
only to the true Church, and gave her the testament and last will of Christ
her sponse, so that the true Christrian Church had the Scripture, before any
false Christian Church had it, and likewise certain it is, that she never lost
it since it was delivered unto her, but as she is the pillar of truth, so she
has faithfully kept this heavenly truth delivered unto her in writing: and
consequently is ancienter possessor of the Scripture then any false Christian
Church can be. And this reason the ancient Christians used against Heretics, as
appears by these words of Tertullian lib. de Praescript. c. 37. It is my
possession. I possess it of old. I possess it first. I am the herie of the
Apostles. And lib. 4. cont. Mart. c. 4. I say my Bible is true: Marcion says,
His. I say Marcions (Bible) is corrupted. Marcion says, Mine is corrupted
what shall end our controversy, but order of time, giving authority to that
which is found to be ancienter, and rejecting that which is later. For in that
falsitie is a corruption of truth, truth must needs be before falsitie. Thus
by their greater antiquity of their possession of the Bible, and also by the
greater antiquity of the Bible it self did the ancient Christians prove
against Heretics both that their Bibles were the true Bibles, and also that
they were the true owners of them. But manifest it is, that Catholics are
ancienter possessors of the holy Scripture then Protestants be, in so much as
we shall see Protestants confess, that they had the Scripture of Catholics.
Therefore Catholics are the true owners of the Scripture.

The fourth proof is taken from that there can be no 4. title no beginning of
possession named.
place or time named, where or when Catholics first began to take possession of
the holy Scripture, besides the very time of Christ and his Apostles, who
alone could give true and lawful possession of the Scripture. Whereas See
Author of the Prot. religion l. 2. c. 13.
we can name the place and time when Protestants first began to Usurp
possession of the holy Scripture. Which is long after the time of Christ and
his Apostles. And all reason binds, us to accounte them the true owners of a
thing, the beginning of whose possession can not be found, but at the very time
of the first giuers thereof, rather then those whose possession began many
hundreds of years after.

The fifth proof I will ground upon that the Catholics 5. title the integrity
of Scripture.
have conserved the holy Scripture incorrupt. For thieves and wrong possessors
use to disfigure the thing they have stolen as much as they can, that it may
not be known. Besides, the Scripture must needs be contrary to the usurpers,
and agreeable to the true owners, therefore necessity forces usurpers to alter
the Scripture, as false heirs are forced to alter the will or testament if
they get it into their hands. Whereupon we see, that scarce ever there were
any Heretics, who have not saught to corrupt the Tertul. de prescript. c. 17
38.
Scripture, albeit Catholics cried out against their sacrilegious impiety. How
much more then would Papists have corrupted the Scripture (especially whiles
for many ages there were no visible Protestants to reprove them) if they had
not been the true owners of the Scripture? But Catholics have not in all these
ages, in which Protestants were invisible, corrupted any part of the
Scripture, as is evident by that Protestants confess, that Scripture which
they had of Catholics, to be pure and incorrupt. Nether do Protestants object
to Catholics any corruption made by them in the Hebrew or Greek text, and the
vulgar Latin they will have to be ancienter then Papistrie it self. But
contrariewise, Catholics have ever since the beginning of Protestancie charged
Protestants with many and greiuous corruptions of holy Scripture. Wherefore
thus I argue. All reason teaches us to judge them to be the true owners of a
testament, who are the freest from corrupting it. But Catholics are far more
free from corruptinge the testament of Christ then Protestants: Therefore etc.

The sixth proof I will take from the Protestants grant, Sixth title: grant of
Protestants.
that they had the Scripture from Catholics. Luther in 16. Joan. to. 4. Germ.
witenb. fol. 227. There is an argument which can very hardly be wrested from
the Papists, and which I my self can very hardly answer and refute, especially
since we are forced to give and grant them so many things, which are true, to
wit, that in Popery, is the word, the Apostleshippe, and that we received the
holy Scripture, baptism, the Sacraments and office of preaching from them,
otherwise what should we have known of all these things? And to. 5. in 1. Gal.
fol. 293. we had indeed the Scripture and the Sacraments of the Papists.
Schusselburg to. 8. Catal. Haeres. p. 439. We deny not, that Luther says,
that in Popery is all Christian good, and from thence came to us. D. Daue of
Recusancie. p. 13. We hold the Creed of the Apostles, of Athanasius, of Nice,
of Ephesus, of Constantinople, which the Papists also do hold, and the same
Bible which we received from them. Whitaker Cont. 2. q. 5. c. 14. Papists have
the Scripture, Baptism, Catechism, the articles of faith, the ten
commandments, the lords prayer, and these things come from the^ to us. James
Andreas li. cont. Has. p. 316. We deny not, that we received the Scriptures
from you. The like has Spalatensis lib. cont. Suar. c. 1. n. 34. and others. A
question proposed to Protestants.
Wherefore I ask the Protestants, how they had the Scripture of us? Did we
give it them? Did we sell it them? Did we change it with? Did we relinquish it
as a forlorn thing. No one of all these can they prove or affirm with any
appearance. How then get they the Scripture from us, but as thieves get the true
men's goods, and as Turks and Jews get the same Scripture from us? If any say
as Andrews and Schusselb. do intimate, that Protestants had the Scripture of
Catholics, as Christians had the old testament of the Jews, I answer, that
Christians had not the old testament of the Jews, if by Jews they mean such
as remained Jews. For Christians had the old testament of the Apostles, and
they of Christ who was lord of the old and new testament, as they had from him
the Sacraments, and all other goods of the Church. Besides, every Heretik may
pretend this as well as Protestants. Wherefore thus I argue: They whom their
adversaries confess to have had the Scripture before them selves, and can tell
no lawful means by which they had the Scripture from them, are according to
all reason to be held the true owners of the Scripture, rather then their
adversaries; But such are Catholics in respect of Protestants. Therefore etc.

The seventh proof I will take from the open and manifould Seventh title: other
confessions of Protestant.
confessions of Protestants. For first they confess, that Catholics are the
true Church of Christ, as I have showed at long in my foresaied book of the
Author of the Protestant religion lib. 1. c. 2. to which I add these few.
Spalatensis lib. 5. de repub. c. 6. n. 236. The Romans Church is not gone so
far from the foundation, as that she is to be put wholly out of the members of
the Churches of Christ. lib. cont. Suarem. c. 1. n. 20. I think (as I have
often said) that the Romans Church with those that follow here, are the true
Church of Christ. D. Featlie in his Refutation of Fisher p. 82. The Romans Church
we acknowledge to be a member, though a sick and weak one, of the Catholic
visible Church. The like has D. Hall in his book of old religion: and his
twoe defenders Chalmeley and Batterfeild, whereof the latter in his preface
says he will demonstrate that the Romans Church is a true Church. Now certain
it is, that the true Church is the true ower of the Scripture. Secondly, they
confess, that Catholic Pastors are true pastors, as is showed in the said
book c. 2. cit. and Calvin in Ezechiel. c. 3. v. 9. says, that Papists
challenge the name of the Church, because they pretend a continual succession.
And indeed (says he) we are forced to confess, that they have the ordinary
ministry. And who can deny, but the true Pastors of Gods Church are true
owners of Gods word, which they have authority to preach? Thereby, they
confess, that Catholics are true possessors of the holy Scripture. For thus
writes Luther to. 2. Germ. fol. 279. cited by Scarpius in Eccles. c. 6. We
confess, that under Popery are many Christian goods, yea all Christian good,
and that it came from thence to us. Namely we confess, that in Popery, is
true holy Scripture, true baptism, true office of preaching, true Sacrament
of the altar, true keys to forgive sins, true Catechism. Nay I say that in
Popery is true The kernel of Christianity in Popery.
Christianity, yea the very kernel of Christianity and many great Saints:
And Hall, Chalmeley and Batterfeild grant that Luther wrote thus and seem to
allow it. Luther also to 6. in c. 28. Genes. says: we confess, that Papists
have the Church because they have baptism, absolution, the text of the
Ghospel, and there are many godly men amongst them.

The eight proof shall be from the Confession of such 8. title. Confession of
strangers.
as nether are Catholics nor Protestants. For as Vorstius writes in Antibell.
p. 181. Jews, Turks and Pagans do think, that the Christian religion
consists chiefly in Popery. And Whitaker Cont. 2. q. c. 2. No other famous
Church can be named in these latter times, which was thought to be the Church,
and was called the Church, but the Roman Church. Nether let any think, that
such as want faith, can not be sufficient judges in this matter. For albeit
they be not sufficient judges in the question of the truth of doctrine, yet are
they sufficient in question of fact as this is. And in this Joseph. lib.
Antiq. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 24.
sort, the Heathens in the time of the old law judged between the Jews and
the Samaritans: and in the time of the Ghospel, between the Catholics and the
Samosatenians. And as Christians can judge, what kind of Mahometans are the
true owners of the Alcoran, though they think not the Alcoran to conteyne true
doctrine: So may Infidels judge, what kind of Christians be true owners of the
Ghospel though they believe not the Ghospel to be the word of God.

The ninth proof may be taken from the agreement of 9. title: Agreement with
Scripture.
the Cath. doctrine both in words and sense with the holy Scripture, as shall
appear in this book. Which proof though taken alone do not convince that
Catholics are true owners of the Scripture: yet in conuinceth that they are
true owners rather then Protestants, who so far disagree from the Scripture
both in words and sense.

The tenth proof shall be, that Protestants against these 10. title weakness of
Protest. Proofs.
so many and so forcible proofs for the Catholics, can bring no other proof
for their right to Scripture, then that they have the true doctrine of
Scripture. Which argument taken alone, is (as I showed at large in my said
book De Authore, etc. lib. 2. c. 15.) a fond Sophisme or Foularie. First
because Schismatiks have the true doctrine of Scripture, as I there proved by
reason, by the testimony of holy Fathers, and the confession of Protestants,
and yet are no true owners of the Scripture, because they are no true members
of the Church, as I there also proved. Secondly, for Protestants to prove that
they be true owners of the Scripture, because they have the true doctrine
thereof, is to prove one unknown and false thing by an other as unknown and
false. Which is not to prove at all, because all proof must be from a thing
more known. Thirdly they nether prove that they have the doctrine of the
Scripture by express words of Scripture, for these are quite against them as
shall be showed in this book: nor by plain inference out of the words of
Scripture, as appears by the Catholics answers unto all their proofs, nor
finally they have proved any thing before a lawful judge: but all their
proofs are such as every Heretic makes. Besides, if truth of doctrine do
prove true right to Scripture, it far more makes for Catholics: and no more
for Protestants, then for any other Heretics.

Out of all which has been said in this Chapter, it is most evident, that if
the light of reason may be judge in this matter, Catholics must needs be
counted the true owners of the holy Scripture, because they have all the
foresaied Titles, then the which both fewer and weaker would make a claim to
worldly matters out of all question: of all which Protestants can pretend none
but the last. Secondly it is evident, that if Catholics be the true If Cath. be
true owners of the Scripture, all controversies are ended.
owners of the Scripture, the sacred testament of Christ, they are also true
owners of the holy Sacraments, of the keys of heaven to bind and loose
sins, of the means of salvation, and of all the goods which Christ has by
his will and testament bequeathed to his Church. For undoubtedly all these
things pertain to them, to whom Christ's testament does belong. Thirdly it is
evident, that if Catholics be true owners of the Scriptures, Protestants be
unjust usurpers of them, as Jews, Turks, and Infidels are, and have no more
right to keep or use them against Catholics, then thieves have to use true men's
goods or weapons against them. For clear it is, that Catholics and Protestants
are opposite Churches, as I have showed in the foresaied book. De Authore lib.
1. c. 2. and lib. 2. c. 6. and that one of them is a false Church, whereas the
Scriptures were given and belong to one only Church. Wherefore we may well say
to Protestants, as Tertullian de Prescript. c. 37. said to Heretics of his
time: Who are you, when and whence came you, what do you in mine, being not
mine? By what right Marcion (Luther) do thou fell my woods? By what license
Valentin (Calvin) do thou turn away my water? By what authority Apelles
(Zuingle) do thou charge my bounds? It is my possession, what do you
strangers here sow and feed at your pleasure? And the same say we to
Protestants. Let them first show, what right they have to Scriptures, before
they argue out of them; let them render us our weapons, or show what just title
they have to them before they fight with them against us. For as the same
Tertull. says. c. 15. Here we first stop them, that they are not to be
admitted to any dispute of Scriptures. We must see whether they may have them
or no, to whom belongs the Scripture, that he be not admitted to it, to whom
it appertains not. And c. 19. The order of the matter did require, that to be
first proposed, which alone is now to be disputed? Fourthly whose is the faith,
whose is the Scripture? Fourthly it is evident, that if any Protestant will
(notwithstanding all that has been said) judge, that Protestants are the
true owners of Scripture, rather then Catholics, he will give that judgment in
a matter of such great moment, which he would be ashamed to give in a question
of the least trifle in the world. For who seeing that one has nine titles to a
piece of ground, of all which titles his adversary has no pretense, and that
he has as good (if not far better) show also of the tenth title, as his
adversary has, would not be ashamed to adiudge the land to his adversary,
and cast him out of possession, who was actual possessor when the matter came
first in question, was peacable possessor for many ages, was the ancienter
possessor, and of whose possession no Note this.
beginning can be found but from the true lord, and from whom his adversary
has whatsoever he has, whose lawful possession thereof all kind of
adversaries do some time confess, and put his adversary in possession who can
pretend no title but that which alone suffices not, and which also for better
agrees to the ancient possessor? If any say, that in wordly matters reason
would give judgment for the ancient possessor, but not in heavenly or divine
matters, as the Scripture is, I demand, what Scripture, what word of God
teaches us to check the light of reason concerning the true possession of the
Scripture? If none, why then do we not follow reason in this matter of fact
concerning the true possession of Scripture, as well as in others? Besides,
this were to grante that the light of reason is in this matter with Catholics
against Protestants: and consequently that to be a Protetestant, one must first
cast away reason, even in a matter which is under the reach of reason, as is,
who are the true owners of the Scriptures. Moreover, the very end of this
Balance is no other, then to show, that if we will follow the light of reason
and true prudence, we ought to embrace the Catholic religion and reject the
Protestant, and that to do otherwise, is to cast away reason and prudence, and
to become unreasonable and imprudent men, and to say, that Christ has given us
a Religion, which is not only above reason, but even contrary to reason, and
that also in matters subject to reason: and that we can not become faithful
men, but we must first become unreasonable men, not receive his light of faith,
before we put out his light of reason, wherewith he has made us like to him
self and superiors to beasts. Thus we see, how far, in all reason and
prudence, Catholics are above Protestants, for the right claim, or just
possession of holy Scripture: Now let us see in the rest of this book how
far also they are above them for the letter or words of Scripture: and in
the second book how far they are above them for the true sense thereof.

A SVMME OF THE MORE MANIFEST CONtradictions between the express words of the
holy Scripture and of Protestants, with the Chapter and Article where they may
be read more at large: which will much serve to understand and remember better
those which follow.

CHAPTER II. OF GOD.
SCRIPTVRE: Thou are not a God that wills iniquity. God wills not
iniquity. He wills iniquity.


Protestants. God will have iniquity to be committed. God wills iniquity
with a hidden will: He wills sin: He wills sin to be done: He would have
Adam to sin, to fall, to reuoult. See more c. 2. article. 1.

Scripture. Our just lord in the mids thereof, will not do God does not
iniquity.
iniquity.

Protestants. God works evil in us: The evils of sin are He does iniquity.
done by the effectual working of God: David's adultery is properly Gods
work, Judas his treachery is his proper work as the vocation of S. Paul:
Pharao his cruelty is attributed to Gods counsel in no other sense then the
Egiptians favor toward his people: God procures sin it self. Se more c. 2.
art. 4.

Scripture: He (God) has commanded no man to do impiously. God comma^deth not
to sin. He commands to sin.


Protestants: God bids Satan go to be a lying spirit: By Gods commandment
Satan is a lying spirit: God gives him a plain commandment to deceive:
Satan was sent to deceive by the express commandment of God. See art. 6.

Scripture. God is not a tempter of evils, and he tempts no God tempeteth not
to sin.
man.

Protestants. God is the author of temptation: God moves He temp^eth to sin.
the offenders to sin: pushed the Jews to kill his Son: stirs up the
theefs will to kill: drives to sin by tempting: inclines the wills of wicked
men into grievous sins. See more art. 7.

Scripture: Thou hate all that work iniquity.

Protestants. God is angry with the elect when they sin, but God hates all
that work iniquity. He hates not all such. God justifies not the impious.
He justifies the impious.
never hates them: He hates all iniquity, but not all in whom iniquity is.
See art. 9.

Scripture. He that justifies the impious, is abominable before God.

Protestants. Seeing God forbids to justify the impious Prou. 17. can he be
said to do that rightly, which him self forbids? Rightly: Albeit we be
wicked, yet are we accounted of the lord for just. A wicked man may be
pronounced just according to the Gospel: Christ can justify such as are
impious and want all good works. See more art. 10.

Scripture. Against Aaron (God) being exceeding angry, God is angry with the
faithful when they sin. He is not angry with the^. God is pleased with good
works. He is not pleased with them. God is served with good works. He is not
served with them.
he would have destroyed him.

Protestants: God always withouldeth his anger from the faithful: God is not
angry with sinners. See art. 11.

Scripture. We do these things which are pleasing before him: with such
hosts God is pleased.

Protestants. God cares not for works: we foolishly feign, that God is much
delighted with our works: There is no such God which is delighted with our
good works: To wash dishes and to preach is all one, as for pleasing God. See
more art. 13.

Scripture. By fastings and prayers serving (God) day and night.

Protestants. The true God is not served with works: There is one only worship
pleasing to God, to wit true faith. God is served by faith only. Faith is the
only true worship of God. See art. 14.

Scripture. Phinees stood and pacified, and the slaughter ceased. God is
pacified by good works. He is not pacified by the^. God will have his
comma^dments kept. He will not have the^ kept.


Protestants. There is no such God that can be pacified with our good works:
The works which I do according to Gods law, do not pacify his wrath but
provoke it. See more art. 16.

Scripture. This is the will of God, your Sanctification that you abstain from
fornication, etc.

Protestants. God testifies that he will not that his comma^dments be kept:
will he have the promises of the law performed of us? Nothing less. He
commands some thing which he will not have done: Properly speaking God will
not have his commandments kept of us. See art. 17.

Scripture. God has concluded all into incredulity, that he God has mercy
on all.
may have mercy on all.

Protestants God has concluded all (the reprobats) under He has not mercy on
all.
sin, that he might justly destroy them: God nether would nor will have mercy
on all. See art. 18.

Scripture. Thou love all things that are, and hate nothing God loves all.
of that which thou have made.

Protestants. God cannot be said to love all: Albeit he created He loves not
all.
all in Adam, yet be loves not all: God loves only the elect in Christ, all
the rest he justly hated from all eternity and will for ever hate. See more
art. 18.

Scripture. God will all men to be saved: Not willing that any God will all to
be saved.
perish.

Protestants. God will not have all saved, not every one He will not all to be
saved
saved: It is not true, that God would have all saved by Christ. God will not
have those that are reprobates to be saved. See more art. 19.

Scripture. Live I, says our lord God, I will not the death of God will not
the death of a sinner. He will the death of a sinner.
the impious, but that he be converted and live.

Protestants. God wills the death of a sinner with his unsearchable will: God
creates some to death, to perish, to destruction: God predestined to death
whom he would and because he would. See art. 22.

Scripture. God made not death. God made not death. He made death.


Protestants. God is the Author of death: Gods will is the first and
unavoidable cause of the perdition of them that perish: The hidden will of God
works death in all. See more art. 22. cit.

Scripture. Impious men are not necessary for him. God needs not the
impious. He needs them. God da^neth men for sin. He damneth not them for sin.
God can de all things. He cannot do all things


Protestants. It is false, that God has not need of a sinner. See art. 22. cit.

Scripture. Get ye away from me you accursed into fire everlasting; for I was
an hungered and you gave me not to eat.

Protestants: God for his mere will damneth men: He damneth them that deserve
not: There is no other cause of man's damnation, then Gods mere pleasure. See
art. 23.

Scripture. With God all things are possible.

Protestants. That saying: All things are possible to God, has some exception:
God has no absolute power. See more art. 24.

CHAPTER III. OF CHRIST.
SCripture. Who (Christ) was predestinate the Son of God Christ, predestinate
the Son of God. Not predestinate. Christ made laws. He made none.
in power.

Protestants. That Christ was predestinate the Son of God: is Arianisme. See
art. 2.

Scripture. Teach them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.

Protestants. Christ is no lawmaker; no lawgiuer who gave any new law to the
world. See art. 7.

Scripture. Bear ye one an others burdens, and so ye shall fulfill Christ's
Gospel a law.
the law of Christ.

Protestants. The Gospel must not be called a new law. Art. No law.
7. cit.

Scripture. And he has given him power to do judgment, Christ a judge.
because he is the Son of man.

Protestants. Christ is not judge: He shall not exercise the last No judge.
judgment as man. See art. 8.

Scripture. For these are the twoe testaments. Twoe testaments.


Protestants. There are not twoe testaments. See art. 9. Not twoe. Christ
learnt nothing.


Scripture. How does this man know letters, whereas he has not learned?

Protestants. Christ was so ignorant, as he learnt, and was He laernt.
taught as men are. See art. 10.

Scripture: It was seemly, that we should have such a high priest, Christ no
sinner.
holy, innocent, impolluted, separated from sinners. Who did not sin.

Protestants. Christ was a sinner and that truly: we must not He was a sinner.
imagine Christ to be innocent: He confesses his delicatenes, overwhelmed with
desperation he gave over calling upon God. He needed baptism. See art. 11.

Scripture. This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. Christ
beloved of God.


Protestants. God made Christ by imputation a sinner, or Hateful of God.
unjust, guilty, hateful to God. See art. 11. cit.

Scripture. This commandment (of giving my life) I received Christ commanded to
die. Not commanded. He sufficiently redeemed. Not sufficiently.
of my Father.

Protestants. They say: A law was made that Christ should die: But this is
against Scripture. See art. 14.

Scripture: The Son of man is come to give his life a redemtion (in Greek
(...)) for many.

Protestants. They err saying that Christ's death was a sufficient redemption
((...)) for the sins of all: Christ died not sufficiently for all. See art.
16.

Scripture. He has reconciled in the body of his flesh by He redeemed us by
death.
death: Pacifiing by the blood of his cross.

Protestants. Nothing had been done, if Christ had suffered Not by death.
only corporal death: Reason it self teaches, that only corporal death (of
Christ) was not sufficient to redeem them who had deserved death both of body
and soul. Se more art. 17.

Scripture. Christ did die for the impious. They deny him Christ died for the
impious and damned. Not for them
that bought them, the lord, bringing upon them selves speedy perdition.

Protestants. Christ did not give him self for the impious and reprobates. He
shed not his blood for the sins of the impious and damned. See more art. 18.

Scripture. who is the Savior of all men, especially of the Savior of all
faithful. Who gave him self a redemption for all.

Protestants. It is not Christ the Redeemer of all? No. Christ Not Savior of
all.
is the Redeemer only of the elect, and of none else. See more art. 18. and 19.

Scripture. He is the propitiation of our sins, and not of our Propitiation
for the sins of the world. Not for the sins of the world. His soul went to
hell. Not to hell. Entered the doors being s^ut. Not being shut.
sins only but also for the whole world.

Protestants, They speak amiss, who say that by Christ's death the sins of
the whole world were redeemed. See art. 19. cit.

Scripture. Thou shall not leave my soul in hell.

Protestants. Christ's soul never went to the places of hell. Christ's soul did
not descend to hell. See art. 21.

Scripture. Jesus comes, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst.

Protestants. Christ by his divine power did open the shut doors. The doors
were not shut in the very instant of his passing. See more art. 23.

Scripture. Having a great high priest, that has penetrated Christ penetrated
the heaven. Not penetrated them. Christ prays for us. He prays not for us.
the heauenes, Jesus the Son of God.

Protestants. Christ ascended without penetration of quantities. We admit no
penetration. See art. 14.

Scripture. I will ask the Father. Who also makes intercession for us.

Protestants. We may not imagine that Christ as a Suppliant prays for us. His
death and resurrection are in steed of an eternal intercession. See more art.
25.

CHAPTER IV. OF ANGELS AND SAINTS.
SCripture. And the Angel of our Lord answered and said: O Angels pray for us.
Lord of Hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem?

Protestants. The Scripture teaches not that Angels pray. They pray not.
We deny that the holy Angels do pray in particular for our necessities. See
art. 4.

Scripture. And he prevailed against the Angel, and was Angels to be prayed
unto. Not to be prayed unto.
strenghtned, and he wept and besought him.

Protestants. The invocation of Saints and Angels is impious See art. 8.

Scripture. Our lord opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the Angels to be
bowed unto.
Angel standing in the way with a drawn sword, and he adored him flat to the
ground.

Protestants. We must beware that we nether adore nor worship Not to be bowed
unto.
Angels: He could not fall down to the Angel without diminishing Gods honor.
See art. 11.

Scripture. Nether take thou away thy mercy from us for God to be prayed by
the names of Saints. Not so to be prayed.
Abraham thy beloved, and Isaac thy servant, and Israel the holy one.

Protestants. In the Prophets there is not found any such invocation: Hear me
o God for Abraham. God is not to be besought by the names of Saints. See more
art. 9.

Scripture. For your selves know, how you ought to imitate us. Saints to be
imitated. Not to be imitated. God protecteth us for the Saints sake. Not for
their sakes. Some Saints bad power to work miracles. None had such power.
Santes receive men into eternal tabernacles. They do not receive.
Be ye followers of me.

Protestants. These trifles ought not to be sung to the people that they should
imitate the Saints. God requires that we follow his scripture only, and not
the examples of Saints. See art. 12.

Scripture. I will protect this city and save it for my self and for David my
servant.

Protestants. It is not to be borne, that they say, through Gods liberality
and Christ's grace the merits of Saints do profit us to protection. See art. 10.

Scripture. And he gave them power to cure infirmities and to cast out Devils.

Protestants. God never gave any man power of working miracles either mediatly
or immediately. See art. 16.

Scripture. Make unto you friends of the mammon of iniquity, that when you
fail, they may receive you into the eternal tabernacles.

Protestants. We must not understand, that men shall receive us into eternal
tabernacles. See art. 13.

Scripture. They shall be priests of God and Christ, and shall Saints reign with
him.
reign with him.

Protestants. The Saints do not reign with Christ. See art. They reign not
with him.
16.

Scripture. And he that shall overcome and keep my works Saints rule nations.
unto the end, I will give him power over the nations, and he shall rule them
with a rod of iron.

Protestants. It is an error, that Angels or the souls of the They rule them
not.
blessed men are appointed of God to rule and govern us. See art. 16. cit.

CHAPTER V. OF THE SCRIPTVRE OR WORD OF GOD.
SCripture. Paul according to the wisdom given him, has Some things in
Scripture. are hard.
written, as also in all Epistles, speaking in them of these things in which
are certain hard to be understood.

Protestants. Peter says not, that Paul's Epistles are obscure, No thing hard.
no nor that there are some obscure things in Paul's Epistles. No part of the
Scripture is obscure: How can the Scripture be called obscure in any part.
See more art. 1.

Scripture. Jesus began to preach and say: Do penance for The Ghospel
preaches penance. It preaches it not.
the kingdom of heaune is at hand.

Protestants. The Gospel properly is not a preaching of penance. The
Gospel preaches not to us that this or that is to be done, or exacteth any
thing of us. See more art. 4.

Scripture. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. Promises
life conditionally


Protestants. The Gospel promises salvation even to those Not conditionally.
that have no good works at all. The Ghospel requires not works to
salvation. See more art. 6. Gospel not contrary to the law.


Scripture Do we then destroy the law by faith? God forbid. But we establish
the law.

Protestants. The Gospel is truly opposite to the law. The law It is
contrary to it.
aad the Gospel of themselves wholly fight one with the other. See more art. 7.

Scripture. All things must needs be fulfilled, which are written Moises law
commands faith in Christ. It commands it not. Traditions to be kept. Not to
be kept.
in the law of Moises, and the Prophets, and the Psalms of me.

Protestants. Faith in Christ, the law never knew. The law of Moises commands
not faith in Christ. See more art. 8.

Scripture. Hold the traditions, which you have learnt, whether it be by word
or by our epistle.

Protestants. We care not for unwritten traditions: we acknowledge no word but
that which is written. See more art. 9.

CHAPTER VI. OF S. PETER, AND THE APOSTLES.
SCripture. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build Church built upon
Peter.
my Church.

Protestants. Peter is not rock, because Christ did not build Not upon Peter.
his Church upon Peter. See more art. 2.

Scripture. And I say to thee: Thou art Peter. And to thee Keyos given to Peter.
I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven.

Protestants. Christ called faith the rock, to which rock not to Not given to
him.
Peter, be gave these key^s. See art. 3.

Scripture. I have prayed for thee (Peter) that thy faith fail Peter's faith,
failed not. It failed.
not.

Protestants. For a time surely Peter's says failed whiles he denied Christ. It
is a blasphemous speech, that Peter denying Christ did not lose his faith. See
more art. 4.

Scripture. And the wall of the city having twelve foundations: The Apostles
foundations.
and in them twelve names of the twelve Apostles of the lamb.

Protestants. The Apostles were not the foundations. See Not foundations.
more art. 5.

Scripture. He that hears you, hears me. The Apostles simply to be heard.
Not simply to be heard.


Protestants. The Apostles be not simply to be heard, but to be examined
according to the rule of Scripture, S. Paul's Gospel or the new testament
must have been tried by the old. See more art. 6.

CHAPTER VII. OF THE PASTOVRS OF THE CHVRCH.
SCripture. If my couuenant with the day can be made void Pastors always.
etc. also my couuenant may be made void with David my servant, that there be
not of him a son to reign in his throne and Leuits and Priests my ministers.
Not always.


Protestants. It is false that the external ministry must be perpetual. The
Church has osten no man Pastor. Some short time the Church may be deprived of
Pastors. See more art. 7.

Scripture. Thou art Peter etc. And to thee I will give the Authority in the
Pastors
keys of the kingdom of heaven.

Protestants. The authority is not in the Prelates, but in the Not in them.
word: the Church has nothing but mere ministry. See more art. 2.

Scripture. Thou art Peter etc. and whatsoever thou shall One pastor ca^
excommunicate
bind on earth, it shall be bound also in heaven.

Protestants. We must remember, that this power (of excommunicating) One
cannot.
is given to no one man, but to the whole company of the Presbiterie. See more
art. 3.

Scripture. And he (Paul) walked through Syria and Silicia Pastors can make
laws.
confirming the Churches, and commanding them to keep the precepts of the
Apostles and the Ancients.

Protestants. The Church has no power to make laws. See They can not
more art. 4.

Scripture. The Holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to rule Pastors, rulers of
the Church. Not rulers.
the Church of God.

Protestants. The true nature of a ruler (of the Church) is in no pure man, one
or many. See art. 5.

Scripture. You shall be called the preistes of the lord. Pasters to be called
priests. Not to be so called.


Protestants. Who administer the word and Sacraments amongst the people, nether
may, nor ought to be called priests. See more art. 7.

Scripture. But how shall they preach, unless they be sent? No preaching without
mission. Without mission.


Protestants. Even they who are not lawfully called, may preach the word
fruitfully. Every Christian man has authority to preach Christ in what place
soever, where they are desirous to hear. See more art. 8.

Scripture. Moises and Aaron in his priests. Moises a priest. No priest.


Protestants. Moises did not exercise at all the preisthood, but was only a
Prophet. See more art. 10.

CHAPTER VIII. OF THE CHVRCHE.
SCripture. There shall be made one fould and one pastor. Church, but one only.
Not one only.


Protestants We say that there are twoe societies of men, that is, twoe
Churches to the one belong the predestinate; to the other, the reprobate.
Christ and the things themselves teach us, that there are twoe Churches. See
more art. 1.

Scripture. We are one body all that participate of one All those one body
who participate one Sacrament.
bread.

Protestants. The godly are no more joined in one body with Not all those.
the wicked, then light with darkness, Christ with Belial. See more art. 2.

Scripture. The gates of hell shall not prevail against her: of Church can not
fail. It can fail.
his kingdom there shall be no end.

Protestants. It is no marvel, though the Church be clean fallen down long
ago. Antichrist had rooted out the Church even from the ground. Christ's
kingdom was cast flat down. See more art. 4.

Scripture. You are the light of the world: A city can not be Church can not
be hid.
hid, situated upon a mountain.

Protestants. Often times God will have no visible Church It can be hid.
on earth. The whole visible Church may fail. See more art. 5.

Scripture. Which is the Church of the living God, the pillar Church is
infallible.
and strenght of truth.

Protestants. The universal Church may err. The Church Not infallible.
may err. The Catholic Church may err and that most grievously. See more art.
6.

Scripture. If he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee Church, simply
to be heard. Not simply to be heard.
as the Heathen and the Publican.

Protestants. We must not simply receive whatsoever the Church teaches. See
more art. 7.

CHAPTER IX. OF TEMPLES OR MATERIAL CHVRCHES.
SCripture. Who (Anna) departed not from the temple, by Churches for private
prayer
fasting and prayers serving day and right.

Protestants. Churches are for preaching only. It is no lawful Not for private
prayer.
end of Churches, that the faithful may privately pray in them. See more art. 1.

Scripture Twoe Cherubins also thou shall make of beaten Images to be set in
Churches. Not to be set in Churches.
gold on both sides of the oracle.

Protestants. The Jews had no manner Image nether painted not graven in their
temple. God abhors images. We must not suffer that Images be in Churches.
See more art. 3.

Scripture reports these words of a Heathen: This Heathens thought idols to
be Gods. They thought not so.
Paul says, that they are no Gods which be made by hands.

Protestants. It is a lie that the Heathens did believe the Images of their
Gods to have been their Gods them selves. See more art. 4.

CHAPTER X. OF BAPTISM.
SCripture. Unless a man be borne again of water and the Water necessary to
baptism. Not necessary.
Spirit, he can not enter into the kingdom of God.

Protestants. Though water be wanting, yet if the baptism of one cannot be
differred with edification, I would baptize as well with any other liquour as
with water. See more art. 1.

Scripture. Going, teach ye all nations baptizing them Baptism commanded of
Christ. Not commanded of him.
etc.

Protestants. Baptism is of less importance, then that the lord should have
greatly cammanded any thing about it. See more art. 3.

Scripture. Unless one be borne of water and the Holy Baptism necessary to
salvation. Not necessary. Simon Magus was baptized. He was not baptized.
Baptism profits all. Not all.
Ghost, he cannot inter into the kingdom of God.

Protestants. Children who die before they be christened, are not shut out of
the kingdom of God. See art. 4.

Scripture. Then Simon (Magus) also himself believed and being baptized he
cleaned to Philippe.

Protestants. That Simon Peter, and Simon Magus received the same whole
baptism, is most false. See more art. 5.

Scripture: As many of you as have been baptized in Christ, have put on
Christ.

Protestants. Baptism brings no commodity to those that are not elect. See
more art. 6.

Scripture. Christ loved the Church, cleansing it by the lauer Baptism purges
sin It purges not sin.
of water in the word.

Protestants. Who will say, that we are cleansed by this water? Do thou
think that water is the lauer of the soul? No. Baptism cannot wash away the
filth of sins. See more art. 7.

Scripture: Be baptized, and wash away thy sins. Sins washed away by
baptism. Not by baptism. All borne in in state of damnation. Not all.


Protestants. Paul was not whashed by baptism. See artic. 7.

Scripture. We were by nature the children of wrath, as also the rest. As by
the offense of one, unto all men to condemnation.

Protestants. Original sin is not imputed to them: the children of the
faithful are borne Saints. See art. 9.

Scripture. In what then were ye baptized? who said: in Ihons Some baptized in
Saint Ihons Baptism. Not in that baptism. Some knew not of the Holy Ghost.
They knew of him.
baptism.

Protestants. It is demonstrated, that they were never baptized in Ihons
outward baptism. See more art. 11.

Scripture. But they said to him: Nay nether have we heard whither there be a
Holy Ghost.

Protestants. How could it be that Jews had heard nothing of the Holy Ghost.
Se more art. 12.

CHAPTER XI. OF THE EVCHARIST.
SCripture. This is my body which is given for you. This is my The Eucharist
is the body of Christ. It is not his body.
blood of the new testament that shall be shed for many.

Protestants. The Sacramental bread is called Christ's body, although indeed
it be not Christ's body: The Eucharist is not truly the body of Christ. Some
do urge that the lords bread is the very body of Christ, but we say the
contrary. See more art. 1.

Scripture. Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and Christ's flesh to be
eaten.
drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you.

Protestants. Christ did not command his body to be eaten, Not to be eaten.
but symbolicall bread. We eat and drink nothing but bread and wine. Christ's
corporal flesh can be no way eaten. See more art. 2. His flesh truly meat.


Scripture. My flesh is truly meat.

Protestants. It is far from the body of the lord to be truly Not truly
meat.
eaten. See art. 2. cit.

Scripture. Drink ye all of this: For this is the blood of the Blood of the
new testame^to be drunk. Not to be drunk. The Chalice is the new testament.
There is sacrifice.
new testament.

Protestants. Christ did not give the blood of the new testament to drink. See
art. 3.

Scripture. This chalice is the new testament in my blood.

Protestants. That Cup was not the new testament This Cup was not the new
testament it self. See more art. 4.

Scripture. In every place there is sacrificing, and there is offered to my
name a clean oblation.

Protestants. There is no more Sacrifice remaining in the There is none
Church. See more art. 11.

Scripture. This is the chalice, the new testament in my blood, The Chalice
shed for us.
which (chalice, as is evident by the Greek text) shall be shed for you.

Protestants. The chalice was not shed for us. See more art. 6. Not shed
for us. We have an altar. We have none.


Scripture. We have an altar, whereof they have no power to eat who serve the
tabernacle.

Protestants. Paul makes no mention of an altar. In the Apostolical writings
there is no mention of an altar. Altars have no place in the time of the
Gospel. See more art. 24.

Scripture. And the whole mul^^tude of the children of Israel The Paschall
lamb sacrificed. Not sacrificed.
shall sacrifice him (the paschall lamb) at even.

Protestants. The holy Bible no where teaches that the paschall lamb was
immolated and sacrificed. The paschall lamb was no sacrifice. See more art. 13.

OF THE OTHER SACRAMENTS. CHAPTER XII.
SCripture. Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven. Men can forgive
sins. They can not


Protestants. Men do not forgive sins who attributes remission of sins to
a creature, robs God of his glory. It is proper to God alone to remit
sins, and so proper, as he communicates this glory to none. See more art. 1.

Scripture. Confess your sins one to an other. Sins to be confessed to
men. Not to be confessed to the^. Grace by imposition of hands. Not by it.


Protestants. God requires not this confession to manne. Confession of sins
is forbidden. Nether Christ nor his Apostles would command it. See art. 2.

Scripture. Resuscitate the grace of God, which is in thee by the imposition of
my hands.

Protestants. Grace was not given by the external sign (of imposition of
hands.) Imposition of hands of it self has no efficacy, but the effect
depends of God alone. See more art. 3.

Scripture. Every one that dismisseth his wife and marries an To marie after
diuerce is aduantrie. Not aduantrie. Men dying are to be auoiled.
other commits aduoutrie.

Protestants. Who dismisseth his wife for whoredom and marries an other, does
not commit aduoutrie, See more art. 6.

Scripture. Is any man sick among you? let him bring in the priests of the
Church, and let them pray over him, anoiling him with oil.

Protestants. The Priests were commanded, that they should Not to be
not anoile those that died. See more art. 7.

CHAPTER XIII. OF FAITH.
SCripture. This is the work of God that you believe in him Faith is a work.
whom he has sent.

Protestants. Faith is no work. It is false, that faith is a Not to work
work. See more art. 1.

Scripture. And now there remain Faith, Hope, and Charity, Faith distinct
from Hope
these three etc.

Protestants. Who wnderstand not that Faith, Hope, and Not distinct.
Charity are the self same thing, will be forced to let pass many knot^es in
Scripture unloosed. See more art. 7.

Scripture. And now there remain Faith, Hope, and Charity, Faith inferior to
Charity. Not inferior.
these three, but the greater of these is Charity.

Protestants. Faith is greater then Charity. Faith is better, more worthy,
more noble then Charity. See more art. 7.

Scripture. Of the Princes also many believed in him, but for Faith without
confession.
the Pharisees did not confess.

Protestants. True faith can no more be separated from confession Not without
confession. Faith of Christ's Godhead helps.
of mouth, then fire from heat. See more art. 9.

Scripture. These are written, that you may believe that Jesus is Christ the
Son of God, and that beleiuing you may have life in his name.

Protestants. To believe that Christ is one person, which is Helps not.
God and man, would help none. See more art. 3.

Scripture: Of the Princes also many believed in him, but Faith without
charity.
for the Pharisees did not confess. For they loved the glory of man more then
the glory of God.

Protestants. It is impossible to believe where charity wants. Not without
charity.
True faith can no more be without works then fire without heat. See more
art. 8.

Scripture. Faith without works, is dead. Faith some times dead. Never dead.


Protestants. Who believe, that true faith can be dead, believe against the
Confession of our Church. True faith can never be said to be dead. See more
art. 10.

Scripture. Without faith it is impossible to please God. Faith necessary to
salvation. Not necessary. Faith without works saves not. It saves. Belief
does justify.


Protestants: Infants are saved by Gods election albeit they be taken out of
this life not only without baptism but also without faith. See more art. 15.

Scripture. What shall it profit, if a man say he has faith but has not
works. Shall his faith be able to save him.

Protestants. Faith justifies without good works. Faith void of good works
is imputed to justice. See more art. 17.

Scripture. Whosoever beleiueth that Jesus is Christ, is borne of God. Abraham
believed and it was imputed him to justice.

Protestants. Faith does not justify us by the work belief. Not justifies
See more art. 18.

Scripture. To him that beleiueth in him who justifies the Faith reputed to
justice.
impious, his faith is reputed to justice.

Protestants. The act of beleiuing is not our justice. Not the Not reputed.
act or work of our faith, that is, our belief justifies us. See more art. 19

Scripture. Of the Princes also many believed in him, but for Certain princes
believed. They believed not. Many believed. They believed not. Faith cause of
Salvation. Not cause thereof. Simo^ Magus believed. He believed not. Faith by
hearing. Not by hearing.
the Pharisees they did not confess.

Protestants. We do not grant that thoses Princes had true faith. We deny
that they truly believed. See more art. 20.

Scripture. Ihon. 2. Many believed in his name.

Protestants. Their faith was not true, but hypocrisy. See art. 20. cit.

Scripture. Thy faith has made thee safe.

Protestants. Faith does not work, cause, or procure our Salvation. See more
art. 16.

Scripture. Simon (Magus) also him self believed.

Protestants. Some believe not at all, as Simon Magus. He was quite faithless,
indeed he believed not. See more art. 21.

Scripture. Faith is by hearing.

Protestants. Faith comes not by the labor of the preachers. Faith rises of
the Scripture alone, not of the authority of the Church: Faith can not be
gotten by words. See more articul. 22.

Scripture. For a time they believe, and in time of temptation Faith some time
lost.
they revolt.

Protestants. True faith can never be lost: It cannot be by Never lost.
any means, that those who believe should leese their faith. See more art. 23.

Scripture reports that Christ said to Thomas: Be S. Thomas faith.
not incredulous, but faithful. And that Thomas said: Unless I see etc. I
will not believe.

Protestants. Faith was not utterly extinct in Thomas. Faith He lost it not.
lay in his heart. See more art. 23. cit.

Scripture. He that beleiueth in the Son, has life everlasting. Faith
rewarded.


Protestants. There is noe reward to faith. No reward can be Not rewarded.
rendered to faith. See art. 24.

Scripture Reports that Christ said to the woman The woman's faith, pure.
who touched the hem of his garment: Thy faith has made the safe.

Protestants. It may be that some error or vice was mingled Not pure.
with the woman's faith: Perhaps she slipped a little out of the way. See more art.
25.

CHAPTER XIV. OF GOOD WORKS IN GENERAL.
SCripture says to a sinner beleiuing that there is one Some works of a
sinner, good.
God: Thou do well: and Rahab the harlot was not she justified by works?

Protestants. What works soever go before justification None good.
are evil. What can sinners alienated from God do, but is execrable in his
judgment? See more art. 1.

Scripture. In all these things Job sinned not with his lips. The just sin
not in every work. In every work. Good works sweet before God. Unsweet.


Protestants. The just man sins in every good work. All saints in every
good work do sin. See more art. 2.

Scripture. Noe offered holocaustes upon the altar, and our lord smelled a
sweell savor.

Protestants. Our works stincke before God, if they be called to a strait
account. Whatsoever we can give to God, is stenchie. See more art. 3.

Scripture. Remember, how I have walked before thee in truth, Some works,
perfect.
and in a perfect heart.

Protestants. All our good works are imperfect: They are None perfect.
partly evil. See more art. 4.

Scripture. Phinees stood and pacified and the slaughter ceased, Some works,
just before God. None just before hmi.
and it was reputed to him unto justice.

Protestants. Who make their works, even those which they imagine to do by the
grace of Christ, justice before God, make idols of them. See more art. 5.

Scripture. What is our hope or joy or crown of glory? Are Glory before God.
not you before our lord Jesus in his coming?

Protestants. It can not be, that any have glory before God. Not glory
before him.
See more art. 9.

Scripture. He who joins his virgin in matrimony, does Some works better,
then others. None better then others. Some works counseled. None counseled.
well, and he who joins not, does better.

Protestants. Before God there is no work better then other. See more art. 10.

Scripture. As concerning virgins, a commandment of our Lord I have not, but
counsel I give.

Protestants. There are not some precepts, and others, counsels. See more art.
11.

Scripture. If you will not forgive men, nether will your Father Some works
necessary to forgiveness. Not necessary.
forgive you your offenses.

Protestants. The pardon which we ask to be given to us, depends not upon
that which we give to others. See more artic. 12.

Scripture. Patience is necessary for you, that doing the will Some necessary
to saluauation. Not necessary. Some profitable. None profitable.
of God, you may receive the promise.

Protestants. Good works are not necessary to salvation. See more art. 13.

Scripture. Piety is profitable to all things, having promise of the life that
now is and of that to come.

Protestants. To teach, that works are wholesome and profitable is devilish,
and apostaticall from faith: works are unprofitable to Christian justice and
likewise to salvation. See more art. 14.

Scripture. Be ye in nothing terrified of the adversaries, which Affliction,
cause of salvation.
to them is cause of perdition, but to you of salvation, and this of God.

Protestants. The Scripture no where teaches, that the afflictions Not cause
of salvation.
which the Saints suffer of the wicked are cause of their salvation. See more
art. 15.

Scripture. Possess you the kingdom prepared for you. For I Works cause of
enjoying heaven. Not cause.
was an hungered, and you gave me to eat.

Protestants. None shall be saved for his works. The kingdom of heaven is not
given for good works. The just are not rewarded for the works of justice
which they have done. See more art. 15. cit.

Scripture. Labor, that by good works you may make sure Works make
cer^aintie of salvation. They make it not.
your vocation and election.

Protestants. We are utterly undone, if we be sent to our works when we must
seek the certainty of our salvation. See more art. 16. Works cause that God
loves us. Not cause.


Scripture. The Father him self loves you, because you have loved me.

Protestants. The obedience which the faithful give to him, is not so much a
cause why he continues his love toward them, as an effect of his love. See
art. 17.

Scripture. When you shall have done all things that are commanded We ought to
do good works.
you, say we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which we ought to do.

Protestants. Thou owe nothing to God but faith: This phrase We ought not.
of the law: A faithful man ought to do good works, belongs not to
Christians. See more art. 18.

Scripture: I have inclined my heart to do thy justification for We may do good
for reward. We may not.
ever, for reward.

Protestants. If thou pray, fast, etc. Beware thou do it not for that end
that thou may reap any temporal or eternal profit. See more art. 19.

CHAPTER XV. OF GOOD WORKS IN PARTICVLER.
SCripture. I say to the unmarried and to widous: It is good for It is good not
to marry.
them if they so abide.

Protestants. It is not good for a man to be single, for it is not It is not
good.
pleasant, not honest, nor profitable. See more art. 1. Single life,
couns^lled. No^ counseled.


Scripture. Art thou loose from a wife? Seek not a wife.

Protestants. Paul will have universally all to be married. God pronounces
the sentence, that he will have none to be unmarried. See more art. 4.

Scripture. He that joins his virgin in matrimony, does Virginity is a
virtue.
well, and he that joins not, does better.

Protestants. Virginity is no virtue, but a thing indifferent. Not a virtue.
We think that virginity is nothing. See more articul. 2.

Scripture. He that joins his virgin in matrimony does Virginity better
then marriage. Not better.
well, and he that joins not, does better.

Protestants. Single life in it self is much more baser then marriage. To
beget children, is the cheifest work after preaching. See more art. 3.

Scripture. Who departed not from the temple, by fastings and Fasting, service
of God.
prayers serving night and day.

Protestants. Fasting of it self is an indifferent thing. It is a No service
of God.
naughty superstition, to think that fasting is a part of Gods service. See
more art. 5.

Scripture. This kind (of Devils) is not cast out, but by Fasting drives away
Devils. It drives the^ not.
prayer and fasting.

Protestants. The ridiculous Papists make fasting an antidote to drive away
Devils. See art. 6.

Scripture: I Daniell mourned the days of three weeks, desiderable Choice of
meats, good
bread I did not eat, and flesh and wine entered not into my mouth.

Protestants. We hold this distinction of meats to be foolish, Not good.
and wicked: Choice of meats upon certain days S. Paul attributes to the
doctrine of Devils. See more art. 7.

Scripture. I desire, that prayers be made for all men. Prayer, to be made for
all. Not for all.


Protestants Nether must we pray for every one. We must not make prayers for
the sins of the reprobates. See more artic. 8.

Scripture. It is a holy cogitation, to pray for the dead, that Good to pray
for the dead.
they my be loosed from sins.

Protestants. We detest prayers for the dead. That form of Not good.
prayer: God give the dead a happy resurrection, is to be rejected. Prayer in
an unknown language, good.
See more art. 9.

Scripture says of one praying in the Church in an unknown tongue: Indeed
thou give thanks well.

Protestants. We detest prayers in an unknown tongue. It is Not good.
repugnant to Scripture, and contrary to sense of nature. See more art. 12.

Scripture. Vow ye, and render to our Lord your God. Vows good. Not good.


Protestants. Vows are against the ordinance of God; vows do not become
Christians. See more art. 14.

Scripture. If thou will be perfect, go sell all thou have, Forsaking of
riches, counseled. Not counseled.
and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven.

Protestants. The forsaking of goods, has no commandment nor counsel in
Scripture. See more art. 16.

Scripture. Alms delivers from all sin and from Alms delivers from
death. Not from death. Penal works, a part of penance. No part of penance.
death.

Protestants. Alms delivers not from temporal death nor from eternal
death. See more art. 15.

Scripture If in Tire and Sidon had been wrought the miracles that have been
wrought in you, they had done penance in hairecloth and ashes.

Protestants. Ashes, sackcloth was no part of penance. Sackcloth and ashes
are only an external sign of penance. See more art. 18.

Scripture. The child grew, and was strengthened in spirit, Eremiticall life,
good;
and was in the deserts until the day of his manifestation in Israel.

Protestants. Eremiticall life is clownish, savage, and far Not good.
from civility. See more art. 20.

Scripture. God saw their (Ninevites) works, that they were The Ninevites
pe^nance, true. Not true.
converted from their evil way etc.

Protestants. The penance of the Ninevites was not true penance. See more
art. 19.

CHAPTER XVI. OF SIN.
SCripture. He that commits sin, is of the Devil. Great sinners are of
the Devil. Not all.


Protestants. Nether the faithful who sin by chance, or of them selves by
weakness; but such as give them selves to sin, serve the Devil and ought to
be called Sons of the Devil. See more art.

Scripture. You are euacuated from Christ, that are justified Sin puts out
of grace.
in the law, you are fallen from grace.

Protestants. Not any enormious sin obscureth grace, much It puts not.
less extinguisheth it. The faithful sin, but fall not from grace. See more
art. 6. No murderer has life. Some murderer has. Justice stands not with
sin. It stands with sin. Sin to be redeemed with alms. Not to be
redeemed with alms. Sin purged by works. Not purged by them. Great sin
seperateth from God. Seperateth not. Sin cause of damnation.


Scripture. No murderer has life everlasting abiding in him self.

Protestants. David (a murderer) was not yet quite spoiled of spiritual life,
not yet deprived of justification. See more art. 6. cit.

Scripture. What participation has justice with iniquity.

Protestants. Sin dwells together with justice in us. A work is partly
good, partly evil. See more art. 7.

Scripture. Redeem thou thy sins with alms.

Protestants. Should not Christ have died in vain for sins, if sins could
be redeemed with alms? See more art. 8.

Scripture. By mercy and faith sins are purged.

Protestants. If purging of sins be given to men's works, then is Christ dead
in vain. See art. 8. cit.

Scripture. Nether fornicatours nor adulterers shall possess the kingdom of
God.

Protestants. Sin shall not draw us from Christ, though we commit
fornication or murder a thousand times a day. See more art. 9.

Scripture. Depart from me ye accursed into everlasting fire: for I was an
hungered and you gave me not to eat.

Protestants. Those that are adjudged to eternal punishment, Not cause of
damnation.
are not therefore damned because they sinned. Only incredulity damneth. See
more art. 10.

Scripture. Every one of us for him self shall render account Account is to
be given of sins.
to God. That every one may receive the proper things of the body as he has
done either good or evil.

Protestants. If works come into judgment, we are all damned. Not to be given.
These sins shall not come to account before God. See more art. 11.

Scripture reports that David said of him self: I have David did ill.
done ill before thee.

Protestants. David never committed sin: The regenerate He did not ill
commit noe sin. See more art. 12.

Scripture reports these words of David: I am he that David him self sinned.
have sinned, I have done wickedly.

Protestants. The elect him self does not sin, but sin that Not him self.
dwells in him. The true faithful or regenerate does not sin. See more
art. 13.

CHAPTER XVII. OF JUSTIFICATION.
SCripture. Abraham, was he not justified by works? Abraham justified by
works. Not by works. Man justified by works. Not by works. Sins forgiven
for love. Not for love.


Protestants. Abraham was not justified by his good works. He was justified by
no other thing at all but by faith. See art. 1.

Scripture. Do you see that by works a man is justified?

Protestants. We say, they are not justified by works, we can not be
justified by works. See art. 1. cit.

Scripture. Many sins are forgiven her, because she loved much.

Protestants. Not because the woman loved much, therefore her sins were
forgiven her. See art. 1. cit.

Scripture: By works a man is justified, and not by faith Man not justified by
faith only. By faith only. Some just before God. None just before God.
only.

Protestants. We are justified by faith only. By faith only we receive
remission of sins. See more art. 2.

Scripture. They were both just before God.

Protestants. Before God none is just, none can be just. Where shall any such
(just) be found amongst men? See more artic. 3.

Scripture. You are clean. The blood of Christ cleanses us Some clean.
from all sin.

Protestants. The beleiuers are just, and yet unclean. The None clean.
pious man is in him self unclean and filthy. See more art. 4.

Scripture. As far as the East is from the west, has he made Sins taken
from the justified. Not taken from them.
our iniquities far from us. There is no iniquity found in me.

Protestants. In the regenerate there are many sins, and great filth.
Innumerable sins even such as are worthy of death, remain in the
regenerate. See more art. 5.

Scripture Before him (God) justice has been found in me. Justice in me^. No
justice in them.


Protestants. There can be no justice in us. There is no inherent justice in
the judgment of God. See more. 8.

Scripture. To him, that beleiueth in him who justifies the Some inhere^t
thing imputed. No inherent thing, imputed. Men not certain of grace. Certain.
impious, his faith is reputed to justice.

Protestants. What is inherent, is not imputed. See more art. 9.

Scripture. Man knows not whether he be worthy of love or hatred.

Protestants. It is lewednes, to say, that none can know by certainty of faith
that he has obtained grace. See more artic. 10.

Scripture. Ye are fallen from grace. Some fall from grace. None fall from
grace.


Protestants: It is impossible for those that believe to fall from grace. The
elect never fall from grace. The faithful never fall from the grace of God.
See more art. 12.

Scripture. Thou by faith do stand: Be not highly wise, but We must fear.
fear.

Protestants: That is not to be suffered, that they exhort us We must not
fear.
to fear. I cannot be damned, unless Christ be damned. See more art. 13.

Scripture. If the just man shall turn away him self from his Some
reprobates, justified. Noreprobates justified. Man prepares his heart. He
prepares it not.
justice and do iniquity, in his sin which he has sinned in them he shall
dye.

Protestants. No reprobate is justified. The elect only repent and do good
works. See more art. 14.

Scripture. It pertains to a man to prepare the heart.

Protestants. In our conversion to God we have our selves wholly passiuely. A
man is like a block in his conversion. See more art. 15.

CHAPTER XVIII. OF EVERLASTING LIFE AND DEATH.
SCripture. Your reward is very great in heaven. You shall receive Salvation a
reward or retribution. No reward or retribution. There is a crown of justice.
No crown of justice. Faith alone saves not. It saves. Some already suffer
the pains of hell. None yet suffer the pains of hell. Hell a place of
torments. No place.
the retribution of inheritance.

Protestants. That he saves, is mere grace, not a reward or retribution. See
more art. 1.

Scripture. There is laid up for me a crown of justice.

Protestants. Paul acknowledges nothing in the whole course of salvation, but
mere grace. See more art. 2.

Scripture. Shall faith be able to save him?

Protestants. Faith alone saves. By faith alone we are saved. See more art. 3.

Scripture. As Sodom and Gomorrha and the cities adjoining in like manner
having fornicated etc. were made an example, sustaining the pain of eternal
fire.

Protestants. It is a false position: that the souls suffer in hell before the
bodies. See more art. 6.

Scripture. Lest they also come into this place of torments.

Protestants. We must not imagine, that hell is any certain, definite, and
corporal place. A local hell, is a fiction. See more art. 7.

Scripture. Depart from me ye cursed into fire everlasting. Hell fire, true
fire.


Protestants. They feign, that the souls of men and devils Not true fire.
are tormented in hell with true and corporal fire. See more artic. 8.

CHAPTER XIX. OF GODS LAW.
SCripture. My yoke is sweet, and my burden light. Gods law possible. Not
possible, Some have kept Gods law. None have kept it. Some have loved God with
all their heart. None have loved him so. Gods law in the hearts of some. In the
hearts of none. We pray to fulfill Gods will. We pray not so. Keeping the
co^mandments necessary to life. Not necessary.


Protestants. The law is impossible to be kept. It is impossible to keep the
commandments. See more art. 1.

Scripture. I have kept thy law. They have kept thy word.

Protestants. No man performs the law or ever performed it. See more art. 2.

Scripture faieth of Josias: He returned to our lord in all his heart, and in
all his soul, and in all his power, according to all the law of Moises.

Protestants: There was no Saint who in this mortal life loved God with all
is soul, with all his heart, with all his power. See more art. 3.

Scripture. The law of God in his heart.

Protestants. Even after regeneration, the word of the law is not properly
said to be in our heart. See more art. 4.

Scripture. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

Protestants. We do not pray, that we may fulfill the law. See more art. 5.

Scripture. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

Protestants. Woe be to their Cathecumens, if so hard a condition (of keeping
the law) be imposed upon them. See more art. 6.

Scripture. Do we then destroy the law by faith? God forbid: but we establish
the law.

Protestants. All the ceremonial law or the Decalogue is abrogated It is
abrogated.
from a Christian, because he is dead to it; And to be dead to the law, is not
to be bound with the law, but free from it and not to know it. See more art. 7.

CHAPTER XX. OF MAN'S LAW.
SCripture. Who, think thou, is a faithful and wise servant, Superiority
amongst Christians.
whom his lord has appointed over his family.

Protestants. Among Christians, there can be no superiority. Christ is my
immediate Lord, I know no other. See more art. 1.

Scripture. To the rest, I say, not our Lord: If any brother None amongst them.
have a wife an infidel, and she consent to dwell with him, let him not put
her away.

Protestants. They draw to themselves all the majesty of God, Man can command
that which God does not. He cannot. Conscience subject to ma^s laws. Not
subject.
who chaleng authority to make laws. See more art. 2.

Scripture: Be subject of necessity, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake.

Protestants. The laws of Princes bind not the conscience: have no power over
the conscience. See more art. 3.

CHAPTER XXI. OF FREE WILL.
SCripture. It shall be in the arbitrament of her husband, whether There is free
will.
she shall do it, or not do it.

Protestants. Free vill is a title without the thing. See more There is none
art. 1.

Scripture. Without thy counsel I would do nothing, that thy Freedom to good.
good might not be as it were of necessity, but voluntary.

Protestants. Man after his fall has no liberty to good. There No freedom to
good.
is no free will to good. See more art. 2.

Scripture. We are Gods coadiutours. Gods coadiutors.


Protestants. Papists make God the first and cheifest cause of all goodness, and
us coadiutours: Which is craftily to withdraw Not his coadiutors.
themselves from God. See more art. 3.

CHAPTER XXII. OF MAN'S SOVLE.
SCripture. Fear ye not them who kill the body, and are not Man's soul,
immortal.
able to kill the soul.

Protestants. I give leave to the Pope to make articles of faith Not immortal.
for his followers. Such as are that bread and wine are transsubstantiated in
the Sacrament: That he is Emperor of the world, and an earthly God: That the
soul is immortal, and all those infinite monsters in the Romish dunghill of
decrees.

What Propositions, I pray you, shall ever be thought co^tradictions, if these
be not: seeing there can scarce be devised more formal or more direct
opposition then is betwixt the most of these? But because perhaps the vulgar
Protestante will say, that he beleiueth not all or most of the Protestants
propositions here set down; albeit this excuse will not suffice him, as I have
showed in the end of my Preface, yet for his fuller satisfaction, I have
gathered twelve principal articles, which commonly all Protestants believe,
quite contrary to the express word of God.

THE COMMON PROTESTANTS CREED CONSIsting of twelve Articles quite contrary to
the express word of God in the Scripture.
1 PROTESTANTS believe, that a man is Lib. 1. c. 16. art. 2.
justified by only faith quite contrary to the express word of God. Ioannes.
2. v. 4. Do you see, that a man is justified by works, and not by faith only?

2 Protestants believe, that we can not keep Goods commandments, quite
contrary to his express word. Ezechiel 36. v. 27. I will make Lib. 1. c. 18.
art. 1.
that you walk in my commandments and keep my judgments, and do them.

3 Protestants believe, that the keeping of Gods commandments is not necessary
to come to life everlasting quite contrary to Gods express words. Matthew. 19.
v. 17. Lib. 1. c. 18. art. 6.
If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

4 Protestants believe, that no men can forgive sins quite contrary to the
express word of God. Ihon 20. v. Lib. 1. c. 11. art. 1.
22. Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose sins ye shall forgive, they are
forgiven them.

5 Protestants believe, that we are not bound to confess our sins to men
quite contrary to the express word of Lib. 1. c. 11. art. 2.
God Ioannes 5. v. 16. Confess your sins, one to an other.

6 Protestants believe, that men when they die are not to be anoiled quite
contrary to the express word of God. Lib. 1. c. 11. art. 7.
James 5. v. 14 Is any man sick among you? Let him bring in the priests of
the Church, and let them pray over him auoiling him with oil in the name of
our lord.

7 Protestants believe, that the blessed Sacrament is not the true body and
blood of Christ quite contrary to the Lib. 1. c. 10. art. 1.
express word of God. Luke 22. v. 19. This is my body, which is given for
you: and Matthew 26. v. 28. This is my blood, which shall be shed for remisson of
sins.

8 Protestants believe, that the Church of God is not infallible in faith,
quite contrary to Gods express word. 1. Lib. 1. c. 8. art. 6.
Timothy 3. v. 15. Which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and
ground of truth.

9 Protestants believe, that we must not believe Traditions quite contrary to
the express word of God. 2. Thessalon. Lib. 1. c. 5. art. 9.
2. v. 15. Hold the Traditions which you have learned, whether it be by word
or by epistle.

10 Protestants believe it is ill done to pray in the Church in an unknown
language, quite contrary to the express Lib. 1. c. 14. art. 12.
word of God. 1. Cor. 14. v. 17. where it is said of such a one. Thou indeed
giuests thanks well.

11 Protestants Believe, that there is no sacrifice in the Church quite
contrary to the express word of God. Malachie Lib. 1. c. 11. art. 11.
1. v. 11. In every place there is sacrificing, and there is offered to my
name a clean oblation.

12 Protestants believe, that there is no altar in the Church quite contrary
to the express word of God. Hebrews Lib. 1. c. 11. art. 12.
13. v. 10. We have an altar, whereof they have no power to eat who serve the
tabernacle.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE CONFERENCE OF CATHOLIC AND PROtestant doctrine with
the express words of the holy Scripture.
FIRST CHAPTER. OF GOD.
Article 1. Whether God wills iniquity or sin.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
PSALM 5. verse. 5. Thou art God will not iniquity.
not a God that wilt iniquity.

Abacuc. 1. verse. 13. Thine eyes are clean from seeing evil, and thou can
not look toward iniquity.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Saint Thomas part. 1. Summae. quaest. 19. art. 9. God will no way the evil
of sin.

D. Stapleton lib. 11. de Iustificat. c. 8 It is wholly repugnant to Gods
nature, to will sin.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Calvin in c. 3. Genesis v. 1. and 3. None of these things hinder, but God would
have man to fall.
that God would have man to fall, for some certain cause unknown to us. And
cont. Franciscan. libertin. in opusculis page 441. We say, that the devil and
man both fell by the will of God unknown to us.

Beza in 2. par. resp. ad acta Colloquij Mo^tis Belgartensis p. 177 says,
that our first parents fell indeed with the will and Man fall with the will of
God.
decree of God. Again. I said and do say, that it come not to pass, but by
the decree of God so willing, that our first parents deprived themselves of
their native goodness. And l. de Praedest. co^t. Castle. volum. 1. Theol. p.
340. having objected to him self, that if the causes of damnation come with
God his will, then man were out of all fault, and all the fault were in God: he
denies the sequel, and admits the antecedent, and adds, that God
decrees, and ordains the causes of damnation.

Peter Martyr in c. 9. Romans p. 348. God is said to hate sin, God wills
sin for some other end. He would have Adam to fall. He would have Adam to
sin.
because he wills it not for it self, but for some other end. And in locis
class 1. c. 14. p. 116. It cannot be doubted, but that God would have Adam to
fall. Zanchius l. 5. de natura Dei. c. 2. Would not God have Adam to sin, and
us all together with him to fall into this corruption; by which it comes to
pass, that we cannot but sin, unless he help us with his grace? He would.
Again. By this (omnipotent) will he would and ordained the sin of Adam, that
in him all should sin.

Piscator apud Vorstiu^ in Parasceue c. 3. Sins are done with Gods
procureme^t and will that they should be done. God will iniquity God will have
iniquity to be committed.
to be committed, albeit he do not delighte in it; as a sick man will drink a
bitter potio^, albeit he be not delighted with it. Because God will declare his
justice and mercy, therefore also he will that sins be committed. And apud
eunde^ in Collat. sect. 61. God will He will that sin be done.
not only that sins may be done, but also will that they be done.

The same Piscator in Thesibus l. 2. p. 184 It is false and implies
contradiction: that man fell, not with Gods will, but with He will sin though
he be no del^ghted with it.
his permission. For if he permitted, he also would, not simply and of it
self, as if he were delighted with sin, but in some sort and for some other
thing. Page 187. God can will some thing, with which notwithstanding he is not
delighted; As for example: he is not He wills wickedness for some other end.
delighted with wickedness, and yet permits it and that willingly, and
therefore wills it in some sort and for some other end. And p. 203. It is
not ill doctrine to say; That Gods will is done even by sinning, that is, even
sins are done by Gods will.

Bucanus in Institut. Theol. loco 14. p. 145. Is God not willing God wills
sin with a hidden will.
iniquity? If you take it simply, that God no way will it, the scripture is
against that. Wherefore we must expound it so: That God will it not with his
allowing or revealed or signified will, but with his hidden or good pleasing
will. And the same has Pareus lib. 2. de Amiss. Gratiae c. 16.

Mela^cthon in cap. 9. Romans This is a mystery unspeakable, to God wills
sin. Would Ada^s fall. Would Ada^s revolt.
wit, that God wills sins, and yet truly hates them.

Perkins in Exposit. Symbol. tom. 1. col. 773. God would Adams fall for a good
end. Et de praedestinat. col. 128. We must say, that God would have Adams
revolt to come to pass. And p. 129. Albeit God wills not sin simply and
for it self, yet he does decree it, and wills it to come to pass. See more
of the like sayings of Protestants if you please in my Latin book of this
matter Chapter. 1. Art. 1.

THE CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS OF THE HOLY SCRIPTVRE, OF CATHOLICS,
AND OF PROTESTANTS.
The Scripture expressly says, that God will not iniquity or sin; nay
that he cannot look toward it. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that God would have Adam to sin, would have his
fall, his revolt; that God wills sin, wills wickedness for some other end,
will have iniquity to be committed though he delighte not in it, as a sick man
will drink a bitter potio^ though he take no delighte in it, that the causes
of damnation came with Gods will, that he wills sin with a hidden and good
pleasing will. Which are as directly against the foresaied words of Scripture,
as any can be. Nether will it avail Ptotestants, to say (as some times they
do) that God wills sin, as it is the occasion of some good, to wit, of
manifesting his justice in punishing it, or his mercy in pardoning it.
Because, in saying that God wills sin, wickedness, iniquity, man's fall,
man's revolt, the causes of damnations (as in plain terms they doesaye) they
not only affirm: that God wills the act in which iniquity is, but the very
iniquity, malice, or sinfulnes it self, as is manifest both by the foresaied
words, as also because they some times teach (as we shall see hereafter article
5.) that sin, as it is sin, is preordinated of God. And in saying, that God
wills iniquity or sinfulnes it self, they directly contradict the
aforecited words of holy Scripture. For therein they mean, that iniquity or
sin is one of those things which are willed of God, which the Scripture
directly denies. Nether is this contradiction avoided by adding, that though
iniquity be willed of God, yet it is not willed of him for it self, or as it
is iniquity, but as it is an occasion of some good, because still it is
affirmed that iniquity it self is one of the things which are willed of God;
as in their own example; True it is, that a bitter potion is willed of the
sick, though it be not willed of him for it self, nor as it is bitter, but as
it is a mean to recover health. Wherefore in this matter, we must distinguish
twoe questions. The one is simple or absolute: to wit, Whether God will
iniquity or sin it self: To which question the holy Scripture answers
negatiuely, and the Protestants affirmatively. The other is a redoubling
question, namely, Whether God will iniquity or sin, as it is iniquity or
sin, and for it self: To which question both the Scripture and Protestants
answer negatiuely, but this their agreement with the Scripture in this second
question saves not their disagreement from it in the former question: which
disagreeme^t or contradictio^ is that which here I urge. Moreover, nether man
nor the devil him self can will iniquity, as iniquity, or for it self,
because as such, it is a pure privation of good, and nothing can be willed of
any, but as it is good, either true or apparent good. Whereupon Saint Denis with
the consent of all Divines and Philosophers said: None works, looking only
De divine. nominibus. c. 4.
to ill. Finally, to say that God wills sin as it is a mean to some good
end, is to make him like to them, who as the Apostle writes, Roman. 3. say:
Let us do evil that good may follow: whose damnation (says he) is just.
Blasphemous therefore it is, and against holy Scripture, that God will
iniquity or sin, under what consideration soever he be said to will it. And
so impious this is, as the holy Fathers say, that it takes away Tertull.
exhortat. ad Castit. c. 2. Prosper. l. 2. ad Vincent. c. 10
all sin and judgment of God, and is more Augustine. l. 1. de ordin. c. 1.
blasphemous then to deny Gods providence: yea some Protestants confess, that
it is contrary to scripture, as we shall see hereafter. l. 2. c. 25. 30.

ART. II. WHETHER SIN DOES please God.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
3. Kings. 11. v. 6. And Solomon did that which was not liked Sin pleases
not God.
before our Lord.

1. Paralipomenon 21. v. 7. And that which was commanded displeased God, and he
struck Israel.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Card. Bellarmin l. 2. de septem verbis Dom. c. 4. The greatness of the sin,
which Christ undertook to blot out by his passion, was in some sort infinite,
by reason of the infinite dignity and excellency of the person which was
offended.

PROTESTANT EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Bucanus and Pareus in the former article: God wills sin with his hidden
and good pleasing will.

Calvin de Praedestinat. p. 726. Whence therefore shall we Pleases God.
say that it came to pass, that Pharao should so inhumanly rage, but that it
so pleased God, partly for to try the patience of his people, partly to
exercise his power?

Beza de Praedestinat. cont. Castle. val. 1. Theol. p. 376. Gods will dath
embrace even those things which simply he allows not yea rejects and
punishes, yet decrees them and in some sort, and for some respect is pleased
with them. And in Absters. calum. Heshusij. ib. p. 324. We say, that a lie
pleases God, as it is the just punishment of them who preferred lies before
truth. And as Smidelin objected to his face in the Conference at Montebelgard.
p. 450. he taught that: In a wonderful and incomprehensible manner it pleased
God and he would, that our first parents should sin.

THE CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS OF SCRIPTVRE, CATHOLICS, AND PROTESTANTS.
Scripture expressly teaches, that sin pleases not, yea displeases God:
And in like sort teach Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that God wills sin with his good pleasing
will: that even those things which God approves not, do in some respect please
him: that lies do please him as they are punishments to men: that it pleased
God, that our first parents should sin.

ART. III. WHETHER GOD HATE SIN.
SCRITVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Psalm. 44. v. 8. Thou have loved justice and have hated iniquity, God hates
sin.
therefore God thy God has anointed thee with oil of gladness aboues thy
fellows.

S. Wisdom. 14. v. 9. But to God the impious and his impiety are odius alike.

Zachary. 8. v. 17. And think ye not every man in your heart evil against
his friend, and lying oathe love ye not: for all these things are such as I
hate, says our Lord.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarmin in psalm. 5. v. 4. God hates nothing more then sin.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Peter Martyr in Romans 9. Seeing sins have often times the nature of
punishment, it is manifest, that God hates them not as He hates not sin.
such. Again: For so much as God is said to not will or hate sin, that is
to be understood, in so much as pertains to the law, and scripture, and rule
of life revealed unto us. He is also said to hate sin, because he punishes
it, and wills it not for it self, but for some other end. Wherefore as he
works sin, he hates it not. The same also mean those, who (as we have
seen in the former article) teach, that sin pleases God.

THE CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS
Scripture expressly says that God hates iniquity, hates sin, and that
impiety is odious un him. The same say Catholics. Protestants expressly say,
that God hates not sin as it has the nature of punishment, nor as it is his
work: that when he is said to hate sin, that is to be understood, that he
says so in Scripture.

ART. IV. WHETHER GOD DOES work sin or inquitie.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Sophonie. 3. v. 5. Our lord in the mids thereof, will not do God does not
work sin.
iniquity.

Isaie. 53. v. 9. Because he has not done iniquity, nether was there guile in
his mouth.

Proverbs. 14. v. 22. They err, that work evil.

Matthew. 7. v. 18. A good tree can not yield evil fruits.

1. Joan. 3. v. 8. He that commits sin, is of the devil.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Council of Trent. Sessione 6. Canone. 6. If any shall say, that God works
ill deeds as well as good, not only permissiuely, but also properly and in
themselves: so that, no less the treason of Judas, then the calling of Paul,
was his proper work; be h^ accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Luther de seruo arbit. to. 2. fol. 459. diverse times says, that God works
evil in us and by us: and fol. 433. (as Zanchius God works sin.
confesses l. de praedestinat. c. 7.) says: God works good and evil in
us, rewards his good, and punishes his evil deeds in us.

Melancthon in Romans 8. printed 1521. As they confess, God works properly
aduldulterie.
that the vocation of Paul was the proper work of God: so we confess, that
they are properly Gods works, as well those the which are called indifferent,
as to eat or drink, as those, which are evil, as David's adultery. God does
all things not only permissiuely, but also mightly, that is, so that Judas is
treachery is his proper work, as the vocation of Paul.

Brentius in c. 3. Amos. printed at Francfurt by Peter God does the evil of
sin.
Bruboch. 1551. All things are done by the mighty hand and effectual working
of God, as well the evils of sin, as the evil of punishment.

Calvin Institut. l. 1. c. 18.. 3. Now have I clearly enough showed, that God
is called the Author of all those things which these Censurers will have to
fall out only by his idle permission. The like he says de Praedestinat. p.
727. And ibid. p. 726. Moises clearly affirms, that hardness (of Pharao) to
have Pharoes hardness, proper work of God.
been the work of God. Nether surely is Pharao his cruelty attributed here
in any other sense unto Gods counsel, then otherwhere he is said to give
favor to his people in the sight of the. Egyptians. And l. 3. Institut. c.
23.. 1. Whence it follows, that the hidden counsel of God was the cause of
this hardness of heart.

Beza de Praedestinat. cont. Castle. p. 400. Induration, is the just work of
God, and the work of Satan.

Peter Martyr in lib. Iudic. c. 3. These kind of speeches plainly God works
every way evil.
teach, that God not only by permitting, but also by doing, works every way
evil in us.

Piscator apud Vorstium in Parasceue c. 3. etc. in Amica. Collat. sect. 130.
Because God procures this manifestation of Procures sin it self.
of his justice and mercy, therefore also he procures sins them selves. God
procured that Absalon ravished his father wives.

Zanchius de Excaecat. q. 1. to. 7. col. 204. It is certain, Author of
induration.
that God as just judge, was the chief Author of this induration.

See more of their like sayings in my Latin book. c. 1. art. 4.

THE CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS
Scripture expressly says, that God will not do iniquity, has not done
iniquity: that a good tree cannot yield evil fruits: that who works; who
commits sin, is of the devil. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that God works evil in us and by us, punishes
his ill deeds in us: that David's adultery was the proper work of God, and
Judas his treason was Gods work, as well as Paul's vocation: that the evil of
sin is done by the effectual working of God: that God is the Author of
Induration or hardness of heart the cause of it: that it is Gods work: that
Pharaos cruelty against the Jews is attributed to Gods counsel in the same
sense, that the Egyptians favor toward them; that God every way works evil
in us: that God it the Author of all those things which Catholic Ce^surers
think to fall out by his permission: that God procures sin it self. Which
sayings are so blasphemous, as the holy fathers affirm, that they make God to
be no God: and so Basil. hom. quod Deus no^ sit causa mali.
contrary to holy Scripture, as the same Protestants confess it. See l. 2.
c. 25. and 30.

ART. III. WHETHER GOD OERDAINE SIN to be done, and predestinate men to sin?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Hieremie. 19. v. 5. And they have builtes the excelses of God ordains not
sin
Baalim, which I commanded not, nor have spaken of, nether have they ascended
into my heart. The same teaches the Scripture, where it denies that God
wills sin.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Council of Trent Session. 6. Can. 17. condemns this doctrine. The reprobats
are predestinate to evil.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Perkins de Praedestinat. to. 1. col. 127. We say, that Adams God decreed man's
fall.
fall came, God not only foreseing but also willing and decreing it In Serie
causarum. c. 52. It is wicked to say, that God did only forsee Adams fall, but
did not ordain it by an eternal Ordained it.
decree. In Apocal. 1. to. 2. God decreed by a general will, that men should
fall and sin.

Willet in Synopsi Contr. 8. q. 3. p. 859. The fall of Adam was both foreseen
of God and decreed to be, not permitted only. As Adams fall decreed as Christ's
death.
Christ his death was decreed and determined: so was the fall of Adam. For the
end of Christ's death was to restore Adams fall: and if the end be decreed, then
those things also which are necessarily referred to that end.

Calvin. 3. Institut. c. 23.. 8. Adam fell because God judged it so expedient.
Man falls Gods providence ordayning so. De Provident. p. 736. I acknowledge
this to be my doctrine: that Ordained of God.
Adam fell not by Gods permission only, but also by his hidden counsel. Et p.
738. I confess I wrote so: Adams fall was ordained by the secret decree of
God. De Praedestinar. p. 704. Let our faith with seemlie sobernes adore a far
of the hidden counsel of God, wherewith the fall of men was preordinated.

Beza de Praedestinat. cont. Castle. p. 340. How God is not in fault, if he
ordain the causes of damnation, we th^nke it a God ordeineth the causes of
damnation.
question inexplicable to man's sense. Page. 4* 7. We acknowledge it to be true,
that God has predestined whomsoever he pleased not only to damnation, but
also to the causes of damnation. In Absters. calum. Heshusij p. 319. We say,
that Adam could not fall but through the decree and ordination of God. We
think, that Adams fall was decreed of God.

Zanchius de Praedestinat. c. 4. to. 7. As well they which Men predestinate to
blindness.
are blinded are predestined to blindness, as they which are delivered, from
sin, are predestined to delivery. De Excaecat. q. 5. It is clear, that
God has predestined some to excecation. Sin even considered as sin, as
it serves to the glory of Sin even as sin is preordeined of God.
God not of it nature but by Gods goodness, so far forth is sin and the evil
of sin preordayned of God. Which words also Polanus has l. 4. Syntax. Theol.
c. 10. And the same Zanchius l. 5. de natura Dei c. 2. to. 2. This was that
which God first decrees damnation, and then sin.
God first decreed of the reprobates from all eternity: to will the
everlasting ordayning of some men to perdition: to this were their sins
ordained, and to their sins, forsaking and denial of grace.

Piscator apud Vorstium in Parasceue. c. 3. All things Sin done by a special
decree of God.
are done by the decree of God, even sins themselves, and that by an absolute
and special decree. c 6. God destinated all and every man to sin. Et in
Amica. Collat. sect. 58. God decreed absolutely and of him self, that sins
should be done. The same Piscator in thesib. l. 2. loco. 12. Reprobation,
denial of grace follows, this sins follow; sins, punishment follows,
to all God preordayned the reprobate from all eternity. See more of their like
sayings in the Latin book c. 1. art. 5.

THE CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS
Scripture expressly denies, that sin ascends to the heart of God, or that
God wills it. The same, Catholics.

Protestants expreslely affirm, that God ordained, decreed, determined Adams
fall: that Adam fell by Gods counsel and because he thought it expedient,
through the decree, and ordination of God: that God ordains the causes of
damnation, praedestinateth to the causes of damnation whom he pleases:
praedestinateth as well to blindness or excecation, as to delivery from sin:
preordayneth sin as sin, as it is occasion of good: first predestined men
to perdition, and after to sin: destinateth every man to sin, decrees
sin it self to be done by an absolute and special decree, and that of him
self. Which doctrine is accursed of the Council of Arausica can. 25. and
confessed by some Protestants to be contrary to Scripture. See l. 2. c. vlt.

ART. VI. WHETHER GOD COMMAND any to sin.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Ecclesiasticus c. 15. v. 21. He (God) has commanded no God comma^deth none to
sin.
man to do impiously.

Hieremie 32. v. 35. They have built the excelses of Baal etc. Which I
commanded them not.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Card. Bellarmin. l. 2. Amiss. Great. c. 8. The Scripture manifestly teaches
that God does not command sin.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Calvin de Praedestinat. p. 727. You see, that by Gods Satan lies by Gods
commandment.
commandment Satan is not only a lying spirit in the mouth of all the
Prophets, but etc. De Provident. page 739. What? Where God sends for Satan
the minister of his revenge, and gives him a plain commandment to deceive, is
not this different from bare permission? And p. 746. God calling Satan, God
bids Satan to lie.
bids him go to be a lying spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets for
deceive Achab.

Beza in Absters. calum. Heshusij page 324. God being angry with the wicked,
delivers them to Satan, and that with this commandment, that by lying and
all manner of deceit Expressly commands him to deceive.
he destroy them miserably. Page 382. Satan was sent to deceive Achab by the
express commandment of God. De Praedest. cont. Castle. p. 403. Calvin wrote
rightly and truly, that by Gods commandment Satan solliciteth to these
desires, which in regard of Satan and the wicked, are evil. See more in the
Latin book c. 1. art. 6.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture says expressly, that God commanded none to do wickedly: that he
commanded not to build the excelses of Baal. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Satan was a liar by Gods commandment: that
God gives him a plain command to deceive: that God bids him be a lying
spirit for to deceive: that God commands Satan to destroy the wicked by
lying and all kind of deceit: that God expressly sent him to deceive: and
commands him to solicit men to such desires as in them are evil.

ART. VII. WHETHER GOD TEMPTOR push any to sin.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
James c. 1. v. 13. Let no man when he is tempted, say that he God tempts
none to sin.
is tempted of God: for God is not a tempter of evils, and he tempteh no man.

Ecclesiasticus c. 15. v. 12. Say not: He has made me err, for impious men
are not necessary for him.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Cardin. Bellarmin lib. 2. de Amiss. Great. cap. 4. If God did push me to that
which is against his law, he should deny him self.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Whitaker l. 8. cont. Dureum. sect. 7. God pushed the ^indes of the Jews to
kill his son. God moves to sin.


Zuinglius de Provident. c. 6. tom. 1. God even so moves the judge to punish
the offenders, as he moves them to sin.

Bucer in c. 6. Matthew. The Scripture is not afraid to make God the Author of
temptation.
God the author of temptation, who some time brings the elect into
temptation, and that such as they truly fall and sin.

Calvin. 1. Institut. c. 18.. 4. Man by Gods just driving does that which is
not lawful for him. De Praedestinat. p. 727. Nether is Satan the minister of
Gods wrath, only because he soliciteth souls to naughty desires, but also
because he effectually draws them.

Beza de Praedestinat. cont. Castle. p. 401. God stirs up He stirs the
thief to kill. He tempts to sin.
the ill will of the thief to kill an other.

Peter Martyr in locis class. 1. c. 15.. 9. It is no marvel that we can not
understand, how it can agree with Gods justice to punish sin and yet to drive
to it by tempting: for God can do more then we can understand. ibid. p. 1010.
We must not deny, that God is the Author of temptations. In Romans 1. fol 34.
Nether must God be accused of injustice, though he will, incline, Drives men's
wills into grievous sins.
and drive the wills of wicked men into grievous sins.

THE CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that God is no tempter of evil, that he tempts
none, makes none err. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that God pushed the Jews to kill his son,
moves the offender to sin, is the author of temptation, drives man to that
which is unlawful, stirs up the thief to kill, tempts to sin, drives
into grievous sin: that the devil is Gods minister in soliciting and drawing
men to naughty desires. Which are so contrary to Scripture, as some times
Protestants acknowledge it l. 2. c. 30.

ART. VIII. WHETHER GOD MAKE men necessarily sin.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Genesis 4. v. 7. If thou do ill, shall not thy sin forthwith God imposes
not necessity to sin.
be present at thy door? but the lust thereof shall be under thee and thou shall
have dominion over it.

1. Cor. 10. v. 13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted
above that which you are able.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. Can. 5. defines that man has free will in evil.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Whitaker l. 8. cont. Dureum sect. 1. On whom the holy Some have necessity
to sin.
Ghost is not bestowed, they have a miserable necessity to sin.

Willet Controu. 18. q. 2. p. 855. Indeed Adam in respect of Gods appointment
did sin necessarily. The same has Perkins de Praedestinat. col. 134.

Luther de seruo arbit. to. 2. fol. 460. If God did foresee, that Judas would
be a traitor, Judas was necessarily a traitor, nether Judas a traitor of
necessity.
was it in the power of Judas or of any creature to do otherwise, or to change
his will. Fol. 434. This is the highest degree of faith, to believe him to be
just, who at his pleasure makes men Some necessarily damned.
necessarily to be damned.

Zuinglius de Provident. c. 6 Nether let any say: The thief is guiltles,
because he slew, God driving him; For he sinned against Some compelled to sin.
the law. But you will say: He was compelled to sin: I grant (I say) that he
was compelled.

Calvin 3. Institut. c. 23.. 9. The Reprobats would be excused in sinning,
because they cannot a void the necessity of sinning, Reprobates necessited to
sin.
especially since this necessity is imposed upon them by Gods appointment: But
we deny, that they can be justly excused, because Gods appointment is just. De
Praedestinat. p. 704. It sufficed to man's just damnation, to have fallen of his
accord from the way of salvation in which he was set. But it could not be other
wise. What then? Is he therefore faultles?

Beza de Praedestinat. cont. Castle. p. 415. That he says Necessarily do
sin.
the reprobats do necessarily sin, is most true. In 2. part Respons. ad
Acta Colloq. Montisbel. p. 178. With an other necessity Adam is said to have
fallen necessarily, to wit, what belongs to Gods appointement. Gods decree
necessitateth to sin.


Tilenus disput. 8. de Praedestinat. By this decree of God a double necessity
falls upon the reprobats, the one sinning, the other of perishing.

Zanchius l. 5. de natura Dei c. 2. We grant that reprobats by this
appointment of God are tied with the necessity of sinning, and consequently of
perishing, and so tied, as they cannot but sin and perish.

Piscator l. 2. de the sibus p. 183. It is falsely said, that it was in man's
will not to eat of the fruit of the forbidden tree, that is, Adam necessarily
sinned.
not to transgress the commandment. And page 282. Through the decree of God,
man could not but transgress. Polanus in Disp. private. disp. 3. Adam sinned
necessarily.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that the lust of sin is under us, that we have
dominion over it, and that God will not suffer us to be tempted above our
power. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the wicked do necessarily sin: that the
reprobats are tied by Gods appointment necessarily both to sin and perish:
that it was not in Ada^s will not to eat the forbidden aple, that through Gods
decree he could not but transgress, that he sinned necessarily and could not
do otherwise: that Judas was necessarily a traitor and could not change his
mind: that God co^pelleth the thief to sin. Which are so impious as S.
Prosper says: He is no Catholic, who says that by Ad c. 16. Gallor.
Gods predestination, as it were with a fatal necessity, men compelled to
sin are forced to death: and so contrary to Scripture, as Protestants some
time confess it. lib. 2. cap. 30. And thus much of God touching sin: Now of
God concerning sinners.

ART. IX. WHETHER GOD HATE ALL that work iniquity.
SCRITVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Psalm. 5. v. 7. Thou hate all that work iniquity. God hates all workers of
iniquity.


Ecclesiast. c. 12. v. 3. The highest hates sinners.

Math. 7. v. 23. Depart from me you that work iniquity.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D Stapleton l. 3. de Iustificat. c. 8. Sin of it nature, in whomsoever it
is, separateth from God, and makes him in whom it is, hateful to God.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker. l. 8. cont. Dur. sect. 34. The godly, though God hates not all
such.
they sin (grievously) yet are always most assuredly persuaded of Christ's
love and will.

Perkins de Praedest. to. 1. God being offended, does change the effects of
grace into the effects of a certain hatred, not against the faithful
themselves, but against their sins. He does not put away his fatherly
affection, and they are still children concerning the right of eternal life.

Calvin. 3. Instit. c. 2.. 12. We see that God wonderfully is angered with his
children, which he leaves to love, not that in him self he hates them, but
because he will terrify them with some feeling of his wrath.

Beza de Praedestinat. cont. Castle. p. 409. Albeit the lord God never hates
the elect.
hate all iniquity, yet hates he not all in whom iniquity is.

Zanchius l. 4. de natura Dei. c. 7. q. 2. God never hates the elect. Again.
It cannot be, that God at any time hates them. And in depuls. calum. to. 7.
God is angry with the elect whem they sin, but never hates them.

Pareus l. 1. de Amiss. Great. c. 7. God does not hate his children when they
sin.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly affirms, that God hates all who work iniquity: that
he hates sinners: that who work iniquity shall depart from him. The same
say Catholics.

Protestants expressly deny, that God hates the faithful when they sin:
that ever he hates the elect: that the faithful, though they sin, are ever
assured of Gods love: that God hates all in whom iniquity is. Which are so
opposite to Scripture as Protestants some times confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. X. WHETHER GOD IVSTIFIETH, that is, judges him to be just, who is wicked.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Proverb. 17. v. 15. He that justifies the impious, and he that Iustifier of
the impious, adhominable to God.
condemns the just, both are abominable before God. Isaie 5. v. 23. Woe to
you, who justify the impious for gifts. Romans 2. v. 2. We know, that the
judgment of God is according to verity.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Card. Bellarmin l. 2. de Iustif. c. 9. A wicked man cannot be truly justified,
that is, pronounced just, unless he who pronounces him just do withal make him
just.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Bucanus loco 31. de Iustificat. q. 18. p. 313. Seeing God God justifies the
wicked.
forbids to justify the wicked Proverb. 17. 15. Can he be said to do that
rightly which him self forbids? Rightly, because he it above all law.

Calvin l. de Caena p. 2. Let us be assured, that albeit we be God accounts
wicked, for just.
wicked and impure, yet we are acknowledged and accepted of the lord and
accounted for just. Et 3. Institut. c. 19.. 2. It is not inquired there, how we
may be just, but how being unjust and unworthy, we may be held for just.

Pareus l. 2. de Iustificat. c. 9. What he obiecteth, that a wicked man cannot
be truly pronounced just unless he be made The wicked may be judged just
according to the Gospel.
just, is true of inherent justice and according to the law: but it is false,
that he cannot be pronounced just with imputed justice and according to the
Gospel.

Illyricus Praefat. in epist. ad Romans It is all together contumelious against
Christ, that he cannot by his justice and efficacy justify and save such
sinners as are impious and want all good works.

Scarpius de Iustificat. Controu. 9. We are called just by the imputation of
Christ's justice: but we are also called unjust for injustice which is in us.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that it is abominable before God to justify the
wicked, and pronounces woe to him that does it, and adds that all Gods
judgments are according to verity, which that judgment is not, that
pronounces the wicked for just. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that God does that which him self forbids, to
wit, that he pronounces the wicked for just; that though we be unjust we are
held of the Lord for just; that Christ justifies and saves such sinners as
are impious; that with imputed justice the wicked are pronouncd just.

ART. XI. WHETHER GOD BE ANGRY with the faithful when they sin.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Exodus 4. verse. 14. Our Lord being angry at Moises, said etc. God angered at
Moises and Aaron.


Deuteronom. 9. v. 20. Against Aaron also being exceeding angry, he would have
destroyed him.

Michee 7. v. 9. I will bear the wrath of our lord, because I have sinned to
him.

Roman. 2. v. 9. Wrath and indignation, tribulation, and Gods wrath on all that
do evil.
anguish upon every soul of man that works evil.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Catechismus ad Parochos in orat. Dom. Albeit the act of sin be past, yet
sin remains by guilt and stain, over which Gods anger ever hanging does
follow it as the shadow the body.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther in c. 42. Genesis to. 6. fol. 575. Nether must we believe him, when he is
angry: For in deed Christ, that is, God incarnate is not angry. Does he not
seem to be angry? No surely, he is not angry. Nor suffer thy self to be so
persuaded, for it is not true but God but feignedlie angry.
feigned anger. In c. 3. Galat. to. 5. fol. 336. Follow not the judgment of
reason, which says, that God is angry with sinners. Et in argum. Epistolae
fol. 272. Thou can not be saved, unless thou forget the law, and determine
certainly in thy heart Not angry with sinners.
that there is no law or anger of God, but mere mercy and grace for Christ's
sake.

Calvin. 3. Instit. cap. 4.. 31. God is not so rigorous in his judgment of
chastyzing (the faithful) as he becomes angry.. 32. God always withhouldeth
his anger from the faithful. Item. Never angry with the faithful.
Nether hinders it, that the lord is often said to be angry with his
Saints, when he chastizeth their sins. For that is not meant of Gods counsel
or affection when punishes, but of the vehement feeling of sorrow, wherewith
they are affected, who sustain how little soever of his severity.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that God was angry with Moises, exceeding angry
against Aaron, had wrath against Micheas, and that wrath and indignation is
upon every soul that works evil. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say: that God is not angry with sinners, is not
angry indeed, his anger is not true but feigned, has anger but mere grace and
mercy, always withhouldeth his anger from the faithful, that what is said
of Gods anger against the faithful is not me^t of his mind, but of their
feeling of his chastisment. Which are so opposite to the holy Scripture as
even Protestants some times confess. See. lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. VIII. WHETHER GOD DOES punish sinners for sins past.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Genes. 3. verse. 17. God says to Adam. Because thou have God punished Adam
and Ever for sin post.
heard the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of the tree whereof I commanded
thee that thou should not eat, cursed is the earth in thy work, with much
toiling shall thou eat thereof all the days of thy life.

2. Kings. 12. verse. 14. Our lord has taken away thy sin, Also David.
thou ^halt not dye. Nevertheless because thou have made the enemies of our
lord to blaspheme, for this thing, the son that is borne to thee, dying shall
dye.

Ihon. c. 5. v. 14. Jesus said to him: Behold thou art made whole, sin no
more lest some worse thing chance to thee.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarmin. l. 2. de Paenitent. c. 2. We see that the punishment
inflicted upon David, had respect to that which was past, rather then to that
which was to come.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin. 3. Inst. cap. 4.. 33. Whiles the reprobates are scourged of God with
whippes, they begin in some sort to taste the punishments of his judgment; But
his children are beaten with God punishes not his children for sins past.
rods, not for to pay to God the penalty of their offenses, but to increase
thereby in repentance. Wherefore we gather that they respect more the time to
come, then the time past. Et. 30. What I pray you had Christ done for us, if
yet punishment were exacted for sin?

Zanchius de Perseuerant. q. 1. c. 2. This is most certain, that God never
imputes sin to the elect. The same say others as we shall see hereafter. c.
16. art. 1.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that Adam was punished because he had eaten of
the aple; and David, because he had made Gods enemies blaspheme. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Gods children are not punished for sin
past, that no sin is imputed to the elect. That no punishment is exacted of
us for sin. And hitherto we have seen that the Scripture teaches us how God
carries him self toward sins and sinners plain contrary to that which
Protestants teach: Now we will see the like touching good works.

ART. XIII. WHETHER GOD REGARD good works, or be delighted with them.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Genes. 8. v. 20. Noe built an altar to our lord, and taking of all cattle and
fowls that were clean, offered holocausts upon Noes sacrifice a sweet smell
to God.
the altar, and our lord smelled a sweet savor.

4. Kings c. 22. v. 2. And he (Josias) did that was liked before our Lord.

Malachie 3. v. 4. And the sacrifice of Judah and Jerusalem Sacrifice pleases
God.
shall please our lord.

Acts 10. verse. 4. And he said to him: Thy prayers and thy alms deeds are
ascended into remembrance in the sight of God.

Hebrews 13. ver. 16. And forget not beneficence and communication: for with
such hosts God is promerited (Or, as the Greek has) is pleased.

1. Ihon. 3. v. 22. We do those things which are pleasing before him.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarmin. l. 4. de Iustificat. c. 15 The seventh testimony is taken
out of those places (of Scripture) which teach that the works of the just do
please God. And l. 5. c. 2. He says that the sense of the forecited words
Hebr. 13. is this: With such hosts God is delighted or God is pleased with
such hosts.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther de Captiuit. Babylon. to. 2. fol. 69. Nether can God cares not at all
for works.
we any time deal otherwise with God, then by faith in the word of his
promise: He cares nothing at all for works nor needs them, by which we are
to deal rather with men and with our selves. Et Postilla in Domini. 1.
Aduentus fol 8. God cares Respects not yea loatheth them.
not for works. In festo S. Stephani fol. 376. God respects not works. We
foolishly feign that God is much delighted with our works, whereas he greatly
loatheth them. In festo Assumpt. fol. 435. Truly works are of no accounte
before God. In cap. 1. Ionae to. 4. fol. 411. The Papists have a conceit of
God, as if he were a God that is delighted and may be appeased with our good No
God, that is delighted with works.
works, whereas there is no such God, no such Godhead, which is delighted with
these things. And to. 7. Sermon. in Hebr. 11. God cares not greatly what kind or
what notable works we do.

Tindall in Fox his Acts printed 1610. p. 1138. There is no To make water
pleases God as much as preaching.
work better then an other to please God. To make water, to wash dishes, to be
a sowter or an Apostle, all is one. To wash dishes and to preach all is one, as
touching the deed to please God. Other Protestants (as testifies Schusselburg.
to. 7. Catal. Haeret. p. 551. Melancthon. in Respons. ad artic. Bauar. to. 3.
and Manlius in locis tit. de Eccles.) say: God cares not for good works. And
the same also do they think, who (as we shall relate hereafter) say, that,
before God, good works are mere iniquities, filth, stench and dung. For surely
God cares not for such things.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that good works are a sweet savor before God,
are liked of God, please God, are pleasing before God. The like say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that God cares not for works, cares not at
all for them, does not regard or respect them, is not delighted with them,
cares not what notable works we do, makes no accounte of them, yea greatly
loatheth them: that to wash dishes, to make water, to play the cobbler pleases
God as well as to be an Apostle.

ART. XIV. WHETHER GOD BE WORSHIPPED or served with good works.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Isaie. 19. v. 21. The Egyptians shall know our Lord in that day, and shall
worship him in hosts and in gifts. God worshipped by works.


Luke. v. 2. c. 37. Who departed not from the temple, by fastings and prayers
serving night and day.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Joan. 4. v. 23. Therefore God is so served inspirit and
truth, that as this worship does not exclude the outward acts of piety and
works of charity toward our neighbor, wherewith we worship and serve God
in justice, so etc.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther delibertate Christiana to. 2. fol. 5. For we do not Not glorified by
works.
glorify God by working, but by believing. Ibid. cont. Regem Angliae fol. 334.
God is served by faith only. De bonis operibus Not served by them.
to. 5. fol. 580. Only faith is the true worship of God. In c. 1. Ionae. to.
4. fol. 412. The true God is not served with works. There is one only
worship pleasing to God, to will true faith.

Tindal in Fox before cited: God is honored on all sides in Not worshipped by
works.
that we count him righteous in all his laws and ordinances, and also true in
all his promises. Other worship of God is none, except we make an idol of
him. Confession of Basil. art. 13. Faith is the only true worship of God.
The like say other Protestants, who (as we shall see hereafter) teach, that
good works are sin before God. For God is not served or worshipped with
sin, but disserued and dishonored by it.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that God is worshipped and served with good
works. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that God is not glorified by working, that God is
not served by works, that faith is the only true worship of God, that God is
served by only faith, that only faith is the worship of the true God: that
there is no other worship of God but to believe him right in all his laws and
true in all his promises.

ART. XV. WHETHER GOD DO ACcount those good works which are not commanded.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Mark. 14. v. 3. and 6. There came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment
of precious spike-nard, and breaking the A work not commanded, good in Gods
sight.
alabaster box, she powered it out upon his head. -- But Jesus said: let her
alone, why do you molest her; She has wrought a good work upon me,

1. Corint. 7. 25. And as concerning virgins, a commandment of our Lord I have
not, but counsel I give.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarmin. l. 2. de Monachis. c. 16. God is worshipped with every act
of virtue, though not commanded, yet done for God.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confessio Heluet. c. 16. God likes not works and worshippes chosen by us.
And Confessio Saxon. c. 17. We teach, that works (as they say) not due, are no
worship of God.

Luther Postilla in festo S. Joan. fol. 92. Nothing pleases Works not
commanded, not pleasing to God.
God, vhich is done without his commandment.

Melancthon in Disput. to. 4. p. 602. Works not commanded from heaven, are no
worhippe of God.

Calvin 4. Institut. c. 13.. 2. All voluntary worships which we devise without
his commandment, are abominable to God. In Romans 5. v. 19. They dote, who
vaunte to God of their works devised by themselves, who esteems them no more
then dung.

Lobechius in Disput. 9. p. 184. Without Gods commandment, Nor good.
a work though done with never so good intention nor forbidden, nether, is nor
can be good.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly affirms, that S. Magdalens anointing of Christ, though
not commanded, was a good work and grateful to him: that virginity is good,
though not commanded. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that God likes no work not commanded by him,
that no work not commanded is any worship of God: that no work whatsoever not
commanded of God is good, that what we do without Gods commandment is no more
respected of God then dung, and is abominable to him.

ART. XVI. WHETHER GOD BE PACIfied with good works.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
(...) 11. and. 13. But Moses besought the Lord his God pacified by works.
God, saying: why (...) fury angry against thy people etc. And our lord was
pacified (...) the evil which he had spoken against his people.

2. Paralipomen. 30. v. 18. and 20. And (...) for them saying etc. Whom our
Lord heard, and was pacified to the people.

Psalm. 105. v. 30. And Phinees stood, and pacified, and the slaughter ceased.

Ezech. 43. v. 27. The priests shall make your holocausts upon the altar, and
those which they offer for peace: and I will be pacified toward you, says our
lord God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Matthew. 17. v. 21. Diverse examples in Scripture do teach us the
force and power of fasting joined with prayer for to pacify God.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther in c. 1. Ionae to. 4. fol. 411. Papists have an opinion, that God can
be pacified with our good works, when as there is no No God, that is pacified
by works.
where such a God. In Galat. 2. to. 5. fol. 363. The works which I do
according to Gods law, do not pacify his wrath, but provoke it. Works
provoke Gods wrath.


Calvin 4. Inst. c. 15.. 4. It is the doctrine of the Scripture. that our good
works are always stained with much uncleanness, with which God may be justly
offended and angried: so far are they from purchazing us his good will, or
provoking his liberality toward us.

Confessio Saxonica c. de remiss. Peccat. It is a dishonor to the Son of God,
to imagine that any works are propitiation for sin The same has Apologia pro
Confess. August. c. de Implet. legis.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches (...) pacified with prayer, with zele, wi^^
(...) The same teach Catholics*

^^^^ants expressly teach contrariwise, that God is not pacified with good
works, that good works pacify not his wrath but provoke i^, that our good
works are far from purchazing Gods favor. That it is dishonor to Christ to
imagine that good works are propitiation for sin.

ART. XVII. WHETHER GOD WILL have his commandments kept.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ezechiel 36. v. 27. And I will make that you walk in my God will have his
commandments kept.
precepts and keep my judgments, and do them.

Matthew. 12. ver. 50. For whosoever shall do the will of my father that is in
heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.

Acts. 13. v. 22. I have found David the son of Iesse, a man according to my
heart, who shall do all my wills.

1. Thessalon. 4. v. 3. For this is the will of God, your sanctification; that
you abstain from fornication etc.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Actor. 15. v. 10. Behold and mark Caluins double bla^phemie:
He says, that God testifies, that it shall never be that his law be
fulfilled: He adds, that God will (...) that it be done, that he will not
that his law (...) ^hen these twoe be said any thing more absurd (...)
paradoxes?

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in Actor. 15. ver. 10. Nether let us rashly inquire, God will not have
them kept.
whether it can be (that Gods commandments be kept) which him self test^fieth
shall never be, and that he will that it never be. lib. 2. de lib. arbit. p.
148. We deny not, but that God can give so great grace to man, as may be
equal to the justice of the law, but because he has denied that he will do
it, we say, that it is sim^ly impossible to be done. He will noe have the law
to be kept.


B^za in 2. part Respons. ad Acta Colloq. Montisbel. p. 226. When we hear the
promises of the law, will he have them He commands that which he will not
haued one
to be performed of us? Nothing less. Therefore he commands some thing which
he will not have done, and promises also some thing which he will not perform.

Zanchius l. 3. de natura Dei c. 4. q. 10. Often times Gods commandment is one
thing, and his will is an other. For God commands Gods commandment contrary
to his will.
some thing, as to Pharao and to other wicked men, which properly he will not,
for if he would, it shoud be done.

Piscator apud Vorstium in Parasceue part. 8. If God will (properly speaking)
have his commandments kept of us, then can it not be but we should keep them.
And l. 2. These. p. 208. God some time does by word signify that he will, which
indeed he wills not: And. p. 201. Whereby we perceive, that there is a
certain God dissembleth,
holy dissembling in God, which is lawful to men, and much more to God who is
a most free agent. And loco 12. p. 172. He says, that there is holy
dissembling, and that Christ dissembled. And Grauerus in Absurdis Calvin. c. 5.
sect. 34. That is called a good and lawful dissembling, when one in outward
speech feigneth himself to will evil things, but in inward motion and
affection of heart or mind wills, and at last, does good. And of such a
dissembling (in God) there is an example Genes. 22. Thus they make some
dissembling good, and (...) dissembler, and yet cry out against all
aequiuocation. (...) Genes. 20. to. 6. fol. 244. seems to make Christ an
(...) thus he writes: That which they term an officious lie, is (...) fit of
our neighbor. So Christ in Luke feigned, that he (...) Saul's daughter said
that David lay in bed.

Beza also 2. part. respons. ad Acta Montisb. p. 174. says: There is some
good deceit. So God by his will of sign, or that which is outwardly declare,
not only wills but also commands Isaac to be killed of his father. And
Peter Martyr loco. 13. sect. 39. It is some time lawful to use good deceit.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that God will make us to walk in his precepts
and keep his commandments, that it is Gods will that we abstain from
fornication: and that who does Gods will is Christ's brother, sister, and
mother. The like say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach the contrary, that God will not have his
commandments kept: that God will not give sufficient grace to keep them: that
God will nothing less then to have his laws kept: that God commands some
thing which he will not have done, and promises some thing which he will not
perform. And thus much of God touching good works: Now let us speak of him as
he carries him self toward men or mankind.

ART. XVIII. WHETHER GOD LOVES all men, and has mercy on all.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Wisdom. c. 11. v. 24. and 25. But thou have mercy an all, because God loves
all.
thou can do all things, and dissemblest the sins of men for repentance.
For thou love all things that are, and hate nothing of those which thou
have made. And v. 27. But thou sparest all, because they are thine O Lord,
which love souls.

Ihon. 1. verse. 16. For so God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that every one that beleiueth in him perish not, but may have life
everlasting.

Romans 11. v. 32. For God has concluded all into incredulity, that he may have
mercy an all.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarmin. l. 2. de Great. and lib. arb. cap. 5. Nether Would have mercy
on all.
must these words (He has mercy on all, he spares all) be restrained to the
elect; For the reason why God spares all and has mercy on all is taken in
this place out of creation, because God has created all, and because he loves
souls and things which he has made: but this is common to all absolutely.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Controu. 2. q. 1. c. 13. p. 449. Christ loves not the reprobate.

Beza de Praedestinat. cont. Castle. vol. 1. p. 346. God God loves not all.
cannot be said to love all alike, no not to love all. P. 345. Albeit he has
created all in Adam, yet he loves, not all. 343. You will therefore say, he
is their father, for so much as pertains to creation. I confess: Therefore
say you: He loves them: But this He loves the elect only.
I flatly deny. In Colloq. Montisbel. p. God loves the elect only in Christ,
all the rest he justly hated from all eternity and will for ever hate. And in
2. part respons. ad Acta huius Colloq. p. 106. It is true, that God will not
have mercy an the^. P. 194. This I say, that there never was time, nor is, nor
shall be, when God would, wills, or will hereafter have mercy an every God
would never have mercieon all.
one. And de Praedestinat. vol. 3. p. 404. God concluded all (reprobats) under
sin, that he might justly destroy them. Which also he says in Explicat.
Christianismi p. 177.

Zanchius de Praedestinat. to. 7. col. 295. God can have mercy on all, but
because he nether would nor will, therefore etc.

Piscator in Thesibus l. 2. p. 185. I answer, that God would not have mercy
on all.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that God has mercy on all, spares all, loves
all, loves the world, loves souls. The same say Catholics.

Protestants on the contrary expressly say, that God has not mercy on all,
loves not all, loves not, nor ever loved the reprobate, concluded the
reprobate under sin for to destroy them justly.

ART. XIX. WHETHER GOD WOULD have all men saved.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Timoth. 2. v. 4. God will all men to be saved, and to come God would have
all saved
to the knowledge of the truth.

2. Peter. 3. ver. 9. Our Lord does patiently for you, not willing that any
perish, but that all return to penance.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarmin. l. 2. de Great. and lib. arbit. c. 3. It is true, that God
will have all saved, with that will which the Divines rightly call Antecedent.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cancione vltim. page 694. It is a plausible God would not give life
to all.
opinion, that God indeed will all to come to life, but it is near to
Pelagianisme. Again. He would not give life to all.

Rainoldus in Apologia These. page 247. It remains, that God will have saved,
not every one, but the elect of all God has not, will to save all.
kind of men: not simply all, but all given to Christ, all the predestinate.

Perkins de Praedcstinat. tom. 1. page 139. It seems, that there is not such
a will, or (as they say) a Velleitie in God, with which indefinitly and
conditionally he will have all and every man of all ages to be saved. That
antecedent universal will of all and every ones salvation in Christ, is
feigned. Col. 141. He calls them outwardly by the word preached, whom he
will not Would not in earnest have all saved.
have saved. And col. 144. denies, that God, would in earnest have all saved.
In Serie causarum cap. 52. It is not true, that God would have all saved by
Christ.

Abbotts orat. 2. deverit. Great. Christi page 28. It follows therefore, not
this, that God would have all to come.

Calvin de Provident. p. 750. From that reason, which is the the mother of all
errors, rises that God to thee, who without exception will have all saved.

Beza ad calum. Iacobi Andreae vol. 3. p. 125. This we grant, that God will
not have those that are reprobates to be saved, or the death of his son to
profit them.

Zanchius in Thesibus to. 7. col 280. It can no ways be said, that God simply
and properly would or will all men universally to be saved. Et de Praedestinat.
cap. 4. He will not have all saved.

Piscator in Thesibus loco 20. par. 313. Their opinion is impious, who affirm,
that God will have saved all and every man none excepted, and yet does not
save all. Et l. 2. loco 12. p. 143. God will not have every one saved.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly affirms, that God will all men to be saved, wills not
that any perish, but that all return to penance. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly deny, that God indeed will all to come to life, that
God in earnest would have all saved, that God would have every one saved, that
God properly would all to be saved; that he would have the reprobates to be
saved. Which are so plainly contrary to Scripture, as some Protestants
confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. XX. WHETHER GOD WOULD have some converted who will not convert.
SCRITVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Isaie c. 65. v. 2. I have spread forth my hands all the day to on God would
have some converted who will not.
incredulous peoples which goes in a way not good after their own cogitations.

Proverb. 1. v. 24. Because I called and you refused: I stretched out my hand,
and there was none that regarded.

Matthew. 23. v. 37. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and
stonest them that are sent to thee, how often would I gather together thy
children, as the hen does gather together her chickins under her wings, and
thou would not.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Math. 23. v. 37. God would recall the Jews unto him with a
true act of his will, for the hen will not metaphorically, but properly, gather
her chickins to her.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins de Praedestinat. to. 1. col. 121. God will conversion in some men,
only in approbation, exhortation, and means.

Calvin in Math. 22. v. 37. p. 293. I answer, that the will of God, of which
here is spoken, is to be considered by the effect, to wit, because he
indifferently calls all unto him by the preaching of his word, he is rightly
said to gather all unto him. And he adds, that he calls the reprobates,
only by the outward voice of men. And 3. Inst. c. 24.. 17. says, that God
indeed wills not this, but is said to will it figuratively and in humane
manner, as he is said to strech out his arms.

Beza in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 418. God will not have the God will not have
reprobates converted.
reprobates converted and saved. And adds, that they cannot will to be
converted. And in Respons. ad Acta Colloq. part. 2. p. 208. It is most false
and ridiculous to say, that God will any other to be converted but the elect.

Piscator apud Vorstium in Parasceue. ca. 8. God will not Nor them who indeed
repent not.
the conversion of them who in deed repent not.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that God would call the Jews unto him as a he^
her chickins, that he stretched his hands to an incredulous people, that he
called them who refused. The same teach Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that God will not the conversion of them who do
not repent: that he will not have the reprobates converted: that he will the
elect only to be converted: that he calls others only outwardly by man's
preaching, and wills their conversion, not properly, but figuratively only.

ART. XXI. WHETHER GOD CALL ALL men unto him.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew. 11. v. 28. Came ye to me all that labor and are God calls all.
burdened, and I well refresh you. And c. 22. v. 9. Go ye therefore into the
high ways, and whomsoever you shall find, call to the marriage.

Mark. 16. verse. 15. Going into the whole world, preach the Gospel to all
creatures.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarmin. de Amiss. Great. etc. l. 2. 9. The Scripture teaches that God
inuiteth all to him.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in Casibus conscient. cap. 7. It is evident that the promise of
salvation is not to be taken as universal without exception or restriction.
God inuiteth not all.


Beza de Praedestinat. cont. Castle. p. 417. Christ does not inuit simply all
unto him. Et in quaest. and Respons. p. 655. See, with how conuincent reason
that universal vocation is refuted. Vocation is not universal.
Wherefore not vocation, much less that universal election, can and must be
assigned, but only an indefinite vocation.

Zanchius in Supplicat. ad Senatum Argent. to. 7. col. 57. That God in earnest
calls all, is to be understood according to his revealed will, to wit, so
far as he calls all by the outward preaching of the Gospel, not excluding
any, but not according to his secret will. In depuls. calum. col. 260. The
promises Promises pertain not to all.
do not pertain indeed unto all, but only to the elect. And col. 261. There
is an other reason, why God does not give them (reprobates) faith, nor ever
simply promised it to them.

Bucanus in Institut. loco 36. Is not the vocation and remission Not remission.
universal Matthew 11. 28? It is rather indefinite.

Vrsinus in Miscellan. p. 74. If the universal promise belonged to all men,
what a mass of absurdity and impiety would follow?

Pareus in Galat. 3. lect. 43. The promises are universal to the beleiuers,
but not universal to the incredulous, for they belong not to them. Therefore
it suffices not to urge the vniueruersall articles, All: Of all.

Stosselius apud Zanchium l. 2. epistolorum. The Gospel Nor the Gospel.
belongs only to the elect.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ called all that are burdered, and
commanded to preach to all creatures. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Gods vocation is not universal, that God in
earnest calls not all: that the promise of salvation is not universal,
parteineth only to the elect, that the Gospel belongs only to the elect.
Which are so opposite to the Scripture, as diverse Protestants confess it. See
lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. XXII. WHETHER GOD OF HIM self will the death and damnation of men.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Ezechielis 33. v. 11. Live I, says our Lord God, I will not the death of the
impious, but that the impious be converted from God wills not death.
his way and live. c. 18. v. 23. Why, is the death of a sinner my will, says
our Lord God, and not that he convert from his ways and live? Et ver. 32.
Because I will not the death of him that dies, says our Lord. He made not
death.


Wisdom c. 1. v. 13. God made not death, nether does he rejoice in the
perdition of the living.

Tobie 3. 22. For thou art not delighted in our perditions.

Ecclesiast. 15. verse. 11. Impious men are not necessary for him.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Guard. Bellarmin. l. 2. de Great. and lib. arb. c. 16. The sins of men, and
not the only will of God, are the cause of positive reprobation, that is, of
that act wherewith God will adiudge reprotes to everlasting punishment.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Conc. vlt. p. 693. God predestined to eternal God predestinateth
to death whom and why he would. Sin, not the cause of damnation. God works
and wills death.
death whom he would, and because he would. Page 694. The only cause of
reprobation, whereof we speak, is Gods will, mind, and decree.

Perkins de Praedestinat. to. 1. col. 123. Sin is not the cause of the decree
of damnation. See Willet. cont. 18. q. 1. p. 855.

Luther l. de seru. arbit. to. 2. fol. 450. The hidden God works life, death,
and all in all. Again. He will not the death of a sinner, to wit, in word, but
he wills it with his unsearchable will.

Calvin 3. Institut. c. 22.. vlt. If we cannot give a reason No reason of
reprobation but Gods will. Some created todamnation, and to perish.
why God vouchsafes mercy to his elect, but because it so pleases him:
nether shall we have any other thing why he reprobateth others, them his will.
Cap. 21.. 5. To some eternal life is preordinated, to others eternal
damnation; Therefore as every one is created to either end, etc. In Roman. 9.
ver 18. Solomon teaches, shat the wicked were of purpose created for to perish.

Beza in Romans 9. v. 11. Who gather, that God, in those whom from all eternity
he destinated to reprobation and perdition, was moved thereto by their
foreseen incredulity and ill life, are greatly deceived. In Explicat.
Christianismi cap. 5. Reprobates he created to the end that he might be
glorified in their just condemnation. In Colloq. Montisbel. p. 447. He created,
ordained, and destinated the reprobates to eternal damnation for causes known
to him self alone. And de Praedestinat. vol. 3. p. 438. God of his mere will,
and therefore not for any respect of foreseen worthiness or unworthiness, has
destinated to hatred and perdition whom he would, either particular men or
whole nations. And this doctrine, he terms, the foundation of his faith.

Bucer in Matthew. 6. What he says, that he will not the death of the impious
and of him that dies, but would rather have him return and live, is to be
understood of them only, whom he has chosen to be converted and live.

Peter Martyr in Romans 9. It less despleaseth men, if they be God hates and
reprobateth for his mere will.
said to be predestined and chosen, then to be said to be hated and
reprobated for Gods mere will without all respect of deserts; and yet there
must be the same reason of both. Et libr. de libro arbit. tom. 3. locorum: It
seems at first sight absurd, that some should be created of God for to
perish, yet the Scripture Some created to perish. Gods will the only cause of
reprobation.
says it.

Musculus in locis tit. de reprobis. The cause of reprobation is not to be
attributed to the future wickedness of the reprobates, but to the only will of
God.

Piscator in Thesibus lib. 2. p. 182. God made man to fall. It He made men to
fall.
is false, that God has not need of a sinner. Page. 235. Nether is this simply
true, that God is not the beginning or cause of perdition. P. 245. Reprobation
is absolute, that is, depending of the mere pleasure of God, and not upon the
condition of incredulity foreseen.

Marlorat in Romans 9. v. 22. What inconvenience is it to say, Some made to
destruction.
that these were made to destruction?

Zanchius de Praedestinat. c. 1. to. 7. They take from God his Some created to
death, to be destroyed.
right, who say that it is false, that God created some to life, others to
death, only that he might show his mercy in them, and his power and justice
in these. cap. 4. He creates some to this end to be destroyed. c. 6.That one
is saved or damned, we must needs confess that Gods will was and is the
cheifest. Et apud Schusselburg. l. 4. Theol. Calvin art. 8. Gods will is the
first and unavoidable Gods will the first cause of perdition.
cause of the perdition of them that perish. And l. 3. de natura Dei c. 4. q.
4. As for that place of wisdom: Death entered into the world by the envy of
the Devil, and if there be any such others, in which death is attributed to the
Devil as to the Author, we answer, that it does not follow, that God wills
God author of death.
not death or is not the author of it; For the same effect may proceed from
diverse causes.

Bucanus l. 4. Syntagm. c. 10. The cause efficient and moving, for which the
decree of affirmative or negative reprobation was made of God, is not sin. --
The true and only moving cause for which the decree of reprobation was made,
is Gods pleasure or free will. See many more like sayings of Protestants in my
Latin book l. 1. art. 22.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that God of him self will not the death of the
impious or of him that dies: yea God swears that he will not his death, and
the Scripture adds, that God made not death, that it entered by the Devil,
that impious men are not necessary for God. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say the contrary, that God will the death of a sinner
with his unsearchable will: that he is the Author of death: that he created men
to perdition, death, and damnation: that he is the beginning, the first and
unavoidable cause of the perdition of them that perish: That he predestinateth
to death whom he would and why he would: that sin is not the cause of the
decree of damnation: That sin is nether efficient nor moving cause of
negative or affirmative reprobation, but only the pleasure and free will of
God.

ART. XXIII. WHETHER GOD DAMNETH men for sin.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew. 25. v. 41. Then he shall say to them also that be at God damneth for
sin.
his left hand: Get ye away from me you cursed into fire everlasting. For I was
an hungered and you gave me not to eat etc.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarmin l. 2. de Great. and lib. arb. c. 16. The Scriptures every where
teach, that by the just judgment of God everlasting punishment is rendered unto
sin.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther l. de seru. arb. tom 2. fol. 461. This most of all offends God
damneth men for his mere will. Respects not deserts in those that are to be
damned. Damneth those that deserve not.
common sense or natural reason, that God for his mere will does forsake,
harden, and damn men. Fol. 465. Let us, I pray you, feign, that God must be
such a one as respects deserts in them who are to be damned: Shall we not in
like manner avouch and grant, that he respects deserts in them who are to be
saved? And fol. 466. It is now incomprehensible, how it is just that he damneth
them that deserve not, and yet is believed.

Zanchius apud Schusselburg. l. 4. Theol. Calvin art. 8. Here we say, that
there is no other cause of men's damnation, the^ Gods mere pleasure. Rennecber.
16. The cause of damnation or reprobation is not to be saught in men, but Gods
will is the cheifest and supreme cause thereof. Also Gryneus. 16. Sins are
Sin not the cause of damnation.
not the cause why men are damned. And Spindlerus. 16. Sin can no way be the
cause why men are damned.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that men are damned and adjudged to hell fire for
sin. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say the contrary, that sins are not the cause why
men are damned, that can no way be the cause why men are damned, that there is
no other cause of men's damnation then Gods mere pleasure, that God damneth
those who deserve it not, that he respects not deserts in those that he
damneth, that he damneth men for his mere will. And thus much of Gods inward
and outward acts toward sin, good works, and mankind, let us now see
something of his power.

ART. XXIV. WHETHER GOD BE Almighty and can do all things.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Genes. 17. v. 1. Our Lord appeared unto him, and said unto God is almighty.
him: I am the God almighty.

Job. 42. v. 2. I know, thou can do all things.

Matthew 19. v. 26. With God all things are possible. The same is repeated Mark
10. and 14.

Luke 1. verse. 36. There shall not be impossible with God any word.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarmin. l. 3. de Euchar. c. 2. All divines write, that Gods power is
not absolute
God is said to be almighty, because he can do all that implies not
contradiction.

SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Calvin in Resp. ad Nebulon. p. 730. Calvin every where earnestly rejects
that devise of Gods absolute power, which the Sophisters prate of in their
schools. Which he repeateth de Praedest. 728. de Prouid. 755. 1. Inst. c. 17..
2. and l. 3. c. 23.. 2. and in c. 25. Isaiae.

Beza cont. Heshusium. vol. 1. p. 299. That saying of thine: All things are
possible to God, has some exception. P. 300. You forsouth, shall teach us,
that Gods omnipotency must not Gods omnipotency, limited. Some things,
impossible to God.
be tied to that order, which willingly he has appointed to him self. And
page 302. He says, that God can no more put Christ's body in two places at
once, then he can make new Gods. In Colloq. Montisbel. p. 27. God cannot make,
that Christ's body be substantially in many places at one time. Lib. quaest.
vol. 1. p. 658 God cannot make, that one and the same body be substantially in
many places, or in any place not coextended to the place. Which also he
repeateth Respons. ad Acta Torgens. vol. 3. p. 60.

Peter Martyr Respons. ad Gardener. object. 11. We complain, that you always
object Gods power, whereas this (Christ's To which Gods power does not extend.
Gods omnipotency not without exception. Bears not some things.
body to be at once in many places) is of that kind of things to which Gods
power does not extend. And lib. 1. Epistolarum Zanchij page 408. We warn the
godly, that Gods omnipotency, which we believe, is not to be believed without
all exception.

Sadeel ad art. 14. aburat. We have showed, that Christ's body cannot be really
present in many places at once, and that Gods omnipotency cannot bear this.
And yet these men say, that their faith can make present, things that are to
come, absent, and farthest of, as Sadeel speaks Lib. de Sacrament. Manducat.
p. 300. Beza l. de union hypostat. vol. 3. p. 97. and Apol. 1. cont. Saintem,
Martyr in locis class. 2. c. 16.. 12. in Disput. Oxionensi p. 227. and l. 1.
epist. Zanchij page 411. Whitaker l. 2. cont. Dur. sect. 8. Whereupon justly
said Smidelin the Lutheran unto Bez^ in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 26. They give
greater power to their faith, then to God.

Tilenus in Syntagm. c. 7. Who pretend, that Christ with Some^hings repugne to
Gods power.
his body did penetrate the stone that covered his tomb, or the doors shut,
do affirm that which repugneth to the nature of a glorified body, and to Gods
power in working miracles.

Dareus cited by Smidelin in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 178. and by Schusselburg. l.
1. Theol. Calvin art. 3. Christ could not so much as will, that his body were
at once in many places, because he could not perform it. And when C Bellarmin
did argue in this sort: God in the book of Numbers ca. 5. did give water
power to kill adulteress weomen; and c. 21. gave the brazen serpent virtue to
cure; therefore he can give the word of baptism virtue to change the water:
Daneus answers Controu. 3. c. 20. in these words: God can not give that power
to any creatures, unless he make them true God cannot make water to kill.
and substantial Gods, and transfuse his power into them. -- It is false, that
water, Numb. 5. had power to kill, or the brazen serpent, Numb. 25. had power
to cure. Besides, many Protestants say, that God cannot give to the Sacraments
power to work grace, nor to men power to forgive sins, or to work miracles,
and such like.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that God is almighty, that he can do all things,
that all things are possible to him, and nothing impossible. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say the contrary, that God has no absolute power;
that the saying of Scripture. All things are possible to God, has some
exception; that his omnipotency is tied to an order: that he can not put a
body in many places at once, or not extensiuely in place: that he cannot give
to water power to kill: that his omnipote^cie bears not some thing, extends
not to some thing, and that some things repugne unto it.

ART. XXV. WHETHER GOD CAN MAKE a Camelle pass through a needls eye.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Mark. 10. v. 25. 26. It is easier for a Camelle to pass through God ca^ make
a Camelle pass through a needls eye.
a needles, eye, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. --
With men it is impossible. And Matthew. 19. This is impossble, but not with God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarmin. lib. 3. de Euchar. cap. 6. The Pelagians said, that it was
impossble for a Camelle remaining a Camelle, to pass through a needls eye, but
not if he were lessened to the smalnes of a thread. This is refuted, because it
is not impossible with men, for a Camelle to pass through a needls eye, if he
cease to be a Camelle, and be changed into a small thread.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Willet Controu. 13. q. 1. page 609. It is not proved out of It is impossible
to God.
this place, that God ca^ draw the huge body of a Camelle through a needle,
remaining still of that bigness: no more then that it is possible for God to
bring a proud rich arrogant man to heaven, his affections not altered: both
these are impossible to God. And the same say Spalatensis l. 5. de Repub. c. 6.
nu. 179. Bell in his Jesuits Antepaste p. 47. and others.

Beza in Marc. 10. ver. 26. Can God make that a Camelle remaining such as it is
by nature, may pass through a needls eye? No.

Bucanus in institutio. loc. 48. page 797. God can make that a Camelle pass
through a needls eye, but not leaving him such as he is by nature, but making
him so small as is needful.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that God can make a Camelle pass through a
needls eye. Catholics say the same.

Protestants say, that God can not make a Camelle pass through a needls eye,
as long as he retains the bigness of a Camelle.

ART. XXVI. WHETHER THAT BE possible to God which shall never be.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew 3. ver. 9. I tell you that God is able of these stones to God can do
that, which shall never be.
raise up children to Abraham.

Matthew 26. verse. 53. Think thou, that I cannot ask my Father, and he will
give me presently more then twelve legions of Angels?

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarmin lib. 3. de Euchar. cap. 2. The Scriptures do most plainly
teach, that God can do many things which he will never do.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Beza in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 25. We say, that God is so almighty, for so
much as belongs to his power considered by it He cannot do that which he has
not decreed to do. His power must be measured by his will.
self, as he cannot do that indeed, which he has decreed* not do.

Ministri in Colloq. Parisiens. die 5. The omnipotency of God must be measured
according to his will and things which belong to his nature. The same
insinuates Calvin 1. Institut. c. 16.. 3. Where he will not admit any
omnipotency of God, but only that, which is effectual, operative, and is
continually working.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that God can do that which he will not do. The
same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that he can not do that which he has decreed not
to do; that his omnipotency must be measured according to his will; that he
has no omnipotency but that which is continually working.

ART. XXVII. WHETHER GODS TRVE Miracles be a sufficient testimony of truth.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ihon. 5. verse. 36. But I have a greater testimony then Ihon: Gods miracles a
sufficient testimony.
For the works which the Father has given me to perfect them, the very works
themselves which I do, give testimony of me, that the Father has sent me.
Cap. 10. ver. 38. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. But if
I do, and if you will no believe me, believe the works.

Luke 11. v. 20. But if I in the finger of God do cast out Devils, surely the
kingdom of God is come upon you.

Mark 16. v. vlt. But they going forth preached every where, our Lord working
withal, and confirming the work with signs that followed.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarmin. lib. 4. de Ecclesiast. cap. 14. A miracle is a sufficient
testimony, and where is a true miracle, there is true faith.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Controu. 2. quaest. 5. cap. 12. page 528. I say, No miracle is a
sufficient testimony.
that out of nether kind of miracles (true or apparent) there can be taken a
sufficient testimony, or a certain argument gathered for true doctrine. Page
529. It is manifest, that God gives power of working these kind of miracles
to false teachers, that he may tempt them to whom they are sent. Which he
repeateth again page 530. and adds: Miracles may be wrought to confirm
false doctrine. And Controu. 4. quaest. 5. c. 3. page 688. I answer, that
though they (Papists) did work true miracles, such as the Devil cannot
imitate, they were not therefore to be believed.

Daneus Controu. 4. lib. 4. cap. 14. page 784. We deny, True miracles not
sufficient.
that true miracles are a sufficient testimony of true doctrine.

Hospinian. l. de Origin Templorum page 140. God permits the Devils some
times to work true miracles -- God does this partly to tempt the elect,
partly for the greater blindness of the reprobate.

Luther in capit. 7. Matthew. tom. 7. fol. 92. I am nothing moved with miracles,
albeit in my sight they should raise the dead to life. For all these may
deceive. God also permits true miracles to be wrought for punishment of them
who care not for truth.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that true miracles are a greater testimony then
S. Ihon: that though we did not believe Christ, yet we should believe his
miracles: that they are Gods confirmation of truth: that if one in the finger
of God cast out Devils, certainly he preaches the kingdom of God. The same
say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that even true miracles are no sufficient
testimony or argument of true doctrine; that though we could do true miracles
such as the Devil cannot imitate, yet we were not to be believed: that miracles
may be done to confirm false doctrine: that God gives to false teachers power
to work true miracles for to tempt men: that they are nothing moved with
miracles, no though they should see the dead raised to life.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF GOD.
I did think, that it would not be ungrateful or unprofitable to the Reader,
if at the end of every chapter I set down the sum thereof, that thereby he
might, as once, perceive, in how many and how great matters which have been
handled in each Chapter, Protestants contradict the pure word of God: and also
how like very false Prophets they play the thieves in every chapter, and
steal some thing.

Calvin in Actor. 22. v. 14. Writes thus of Catholics: Papists have made a new
God: They have coined for themselves a Whether Catholics or Protestants make a
false God.
young God. The same he says otherwhere, and many Protestants: which whether
it agree to Catholics or to them will easily appear out of that which has
been said in this Chapter. For as touching iniquity or sin; the God of the
holy Scripture and of Catholics, wills it not, works it not, does not
predestinate nor tempt men unto it, does not command necessitate or compel to
sin: But the God of Protestants does all these, as appears out of the. 1.
4. 5. 6. 7. and 8. Article. As concerning sinners; the God of Scripture and
Catholics hates all that work iniquity, is angry with the faithful when
they sin, and punishes them for sins committed: The Protestants God does
none of these, as appears by the 9. 11. and 12. Article. As for good works;
the God of Scripture and of Catholics, is delighted with them, is worshipped
with them, accepts good works not commanded, is appeased with good works,
will have his commandments kept: The Protestants God does all the contrary, as
is seen by the 13. 14. 15. 16. and 17. Ar^icle. As touching men or mankind;
the Scripture and Catholics God, loves all, would have all saved, would (as a
hen her chickins) gather even the^ which will not come, will not the death of a
sinner, nor damneth men but for sin: The Protestants God is quite contrary;
as is evident by the 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. Article. And finally concerning power:
the Scriptures and Catholics God is omnipote^t, can do those things which shall
never be, can make a Camel pass through a needls eye: Such is not the
Protestants God, as is to be seen by the 23. and 24. Article. Seeing therefore
so many and so great properties agree to the Protestants God, quite contrary
to those which the God proposed unto us by the holy Scripture and Catholics,
has, it is evident, that it is an other and a new God different from the God
which the Scripture teaches: yea that it is (as Calvin speaks of the
Libertins God) an idol, Cont. libert. c. 14.
which ought to be more detestable to us the^ all the Paga^s idols: or rather,
that it is the very Devil him self. For what other can he be, who wills
iniquity, will have men to sin, works sin, procures sin, is author of
obduration, is in like sort author of cruelty as of love, predestinateth to
sin, preordaineth sin even as it is sin, decrees by a special decree
that sin be done, pusheth to evil by him self immediately and by a peculiar
action, necessitateth and co^pelleth to sin, commands to lie and is author
of temptation to evil, and consequently is the Tempter and Father of lying
(which names the Scripture appropriateth to the Devil) who cares not for good
works, is not delighted nor worshipped with them, will not have Gods
commandments kept, who commands that which he would not have done, and
promises that which he will not perform: who made death, and is the Author of
death and damnation, the fontaine of perdition, finally who damneth them that
deserve it not, and that for his mere pleasure. These and diverse other
qualities before showed, do plainly declare, who and what one he is, whom
Protestants teachers have proposed to the world to adore as God: who in truth
can be no other, then the very Devil.

It appears also out of that which has been rehearsed How many and great
attributes Protestants take from God. Goodness.
in his Chapter, that those coyners of a new God, do play the thieves, and
steal from the true God many of his principal properties. For they steall
away his goodness, in saying that he wills, works, decrees sin;
tempts, necessitateth, compels to sin: cares not for good works, nor is
worshipped with them. They take away his justice, in teaching that he hates
not all that work iniquity, is not angry with the faithful when Justice.
they sin, imputes not their sin to them, will not have his commandments
kept, commands that which he will not have done, and promises that which he
will not perform. They rob him of his omnipotency, Omnipote^cie.
whiles they affirm, that there are many things which he cannot do. And in
place of these admirable virtues, they give to him the contrary vices. For in
steed of goodness, they attribute unto him malice, wherewith he wills,
works, decrees iniquity; and predestinateth, necessitateth, and compels
men unto it. For Justice, they give him Injustice, wherewith he justifies the
impious remaining impious, and damneth those that deserve it not. And for
fidelity, they give him infidelity, wherewith he promises that which he will
not perform. And thus much of God: Now of Christ, God incarnate.

CHAPTER II. OF CHRIST.
ARTIC. I. WHETHER THE SON of God had his life and being of his Father.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
I Hon. 5. ver. 26. For as the Father has life in him The Son has life of
his Father. Is of his Father.
self, so he has given to the Son also to have life in him self.

Ihon. c. 6. v. 57. I live by the Father. Cap. 7. v. 29. I know him, because I
am of him.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
S. Thomas 1. part q. 27. art. 2. That which among the divine persons is
begotten, takes his being of the Father.

D. Stapleton in Joan. 10. ver. 30. This, that impious man (Calvin) does for
that purpose, to establish in some sort his peculier and new doctrine,
wherewith he will have the Son to be God of himself, and not of the Father.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker ad Ration. 8. Campiani p. 34. This saying (God Christ received not to
be God of his Father.
of God) some did afterward so understand, as they affirmed that Christ was not
God by him self and of him self, but received that of the Father. Wherein
they wholly took away the divinity of Christ.

Willet Controu. 20. q. 1. page 1161. The Father gave not to the Son to be
God. -- If Christ received life from his Father, Received not life of his
Father.
he could not have it in him self.

Calvin Admonit. ad Polonos in Opuscul. page 685.If the Father have his being
of him self, the Son have his being of Had not his being of his Father.
the Father, the holy Ghost of them both, do there not arise three natures?

Beza apud Campian. Ration. 8. The Son is not begotten Not begotten of the
Essence of his Father.
of the essence of his Father. Which Whitaker in his answer maintains.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly teaches, that God the Father gave life to the Son,
that the Son lives by the Father, that the Son is of the Father. The same
say Catholics.

Protestants teach quite contrary, that God the Son received not of the
Father to be God, but had that of him self, that Christ received not life from
his Father, that he had not his being of his Father, that he was not begotten
of the substance of his Father.

ART. II. WHETHER CHRIST WERE predestinate the Son of God.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Romans 1. ver. 4. it is said of Christ: Who was predestinate Christ
predestinate the Son of God.
the Son of God in power.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 3 part. q. 14. art. 1. Christ was predestinate the Some of God.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Daneus Controu. 1. q. 14. p. 30. He says: Christ was predestinate Not
predestinate the Son of God.
the Son of God: Which is Arianisme.

Affelman l. de Praedestinat.. 7. The matter or object of predestination are
not Origens souls, nor Christ, as those of Basel, of Herborne, and Maldonat do
falsely teach, who are contradicted by those of Heidelberg. The same do those
Protestants insinuate, who will not have us read in the place cited Romans

1. Predestinate, but, Declared the Son of God.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ was predestinate the Son of God.
The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say the contrary; that he was not predestinate the
Son of God, and call it heresy to say so. Which is so contrary to
Scripture, as Saint Austin says: Who denies the Son of God to have been
predestined, Tractat. 105. in Joan.
he denies him to have been man.

ART. III. WHETHER CHRIST AS man be to be inuocated or adored.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Philippen. 2. verse. 10. That in the name of Jesus every knee Christ to be
worshipped and inuocated as man.
bow of the celestials, terrestrials, and infernals.

Mark. 10. v. 47. and 48. The blind man cries: Jesus Son of David have mercy
upon me. The like Matthew 15. ver. 22. and c. 20. v. 31.

Luke. 23. v. 42. And he said to Jesus: Lord remember me when thou shall come
into thy kingdom.

Matthew. 2. ver. 11. They found the child with Marie his mother, and falling
down adored him. c. 28. v. 9. They took hold of his feet and adored him.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarmin l. 1. de Sanctis. c. 12. The Divines gives hyperdulie only to
the humanity of Christ and to his Mother.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Zuinglius l. de ver. and falls. relig. c. de Statuis tom. 2. How Not to be
worshipped as man. Not to be inuocated as man.
can they be ignorant, that Christ, as he was visible and man, was no way to be
worshipped, but as he was God.

Daneus in orat. Domini. page 574. Christ is not to be inuocated as he is man,
but as he is God consubstantiall to his Father.

In Exani. Kemnitij. p. 1447. Who directs his adoration or invocation to the
humanity of Christ, is accursed by the mouth of God. -- Christ's flesh is not
by nature God, albeit it be hypostatically truly united to God. Therefore who
properly direct their invocation unto it, are true Idolaters. Again. Christ,
as man, is our fellow servant and one of our brethren, albeit the first
begotten. Therefore Christ is not to be adored or inuocated as he is man.
Likewise: The flesh of Christ, albeit glorified and abiding united in one
person, is yet a creature. Wherefore who directs his adoration vnto-it,
blasphemeth God.

Beza in Colloq. Montisbel p. 292. We also deny, that Christ's humanity not to
be worshipped.
the humanity of Christ is to be worshipped. Which also he repeateth page 296.
298. 209. 284. and 301. And p. 284. and 292. We adore all Christ, we direct our
invocation to the Son of God, that is, to his divinity as the only proper
object of religious worship, and not to his humanity. Respons. 3. ad Sell:
vol. 2. p. 274. I confess, that this same man is to be inuocated, but not as
man, but as he is God.

Polanus in Sylloge Thesium part 1. p. 482. Christ is not the proper object of
adoration, but his divinity.

D^^ines of Neustad, in Schusselburg l. 4. Theol Calvin Christ hears not all
in his Humanity.
art. 2^. For Christ hears not all, saves not all, gives not the holy
Christ by his humanity, much less by his hands or feet. Th^se things are
proper to his divinity, and therefore agree to Christ man, not as he is man,
but as he is God.

Divines of Heidelberg (as reports Smidelin in Colloq. cit. p. 290.) write,
that Christ hears not our prayers in heaven according to his humanity.

Perkins in Serie Causarum cap. 21. tom. 1. col. 32. Nether could invocation
agree to Christ, unless, as he is man, so he were also God. For adoration is
not referred to his humanity considered by it self, but to the divinity, to
which his flesh is hypostatically united.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ was inuocated as he was Son of
David, and as in the time of his passion he had not yet entered into his
kingdom: and that he was adored as he was a child and the son of Marie. The
same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Christ as man is not to be inuocated, that
according to his humanity he hears not our prayers in heaven, that as man he
is no way to be worshipped, that Godhead is the only proper object of
religious worship: that who direct their invocation or adoration to Christ's
humanity blaspheme God, are true Idolaters, blaspheme God, and are accursed by
Gods mouth. Which are so opposite to Scripture as Some Protestants confess it.
See l. 2. c. vlt.

ART. IV. WHETHER CHRIST AS MAN, or the humanity of Christ had power to
quicken, to remitte sins, to work miracles?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew 9. v. 6. and 8. But that you may know that the Christ as man had power
to forgive sins.
Son of man has power in earth to forgive sins. -- And the multitudes
seeing it, were affraied, and glorified God that gave such power to men.

Ihon. 6. v. 54. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, To give life.
has life everlasting.

Acts. 4. verse. 10. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth To work miracles.
whom you did crucify, whom God has raised from the dead, in this same this
man stands before you whole.

Hebrews 9. v. 19. For if the blood of goats and of oxen, and the asses, of an
heifer being sprincled sanctifies the polluted to the cleansing of the flesh;
how much more shall the blood of Christ who by the holy Ghost offered him
self unspotted unto God, To pu^ge from sin.
cleanse our conscience from dead works to serve the living God?

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 3. part 416. art. 11. The power of forgiving sins consists in
Christ's divine nature by authority, but in his humane nature it is
instrumentally and by ministry.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in Galat. 3. v. 5. Not Christ himself as man, could As man he could
not work a miracle. Not profitable as man.
work a true miracle.

Zuinglius l. de ver. and falsa relig. c. de Euchar. to 2. Christ is profitable
to us on that part wherewith he descended from heaven, not on that whereby he
was borne of the immaculate Virgin. Again: He could be profitable only
according to his divinity. Which he repeateth in Joan. 6. to m. 4. and there
adds: Christ's flesh profits nothing, nothing at all. His flesh profits
nothing at all. Had no power to give life.


Beza in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 276. In the mean time we deny, that Christ's
flesh is truly viuificall. A gain: But that there is any power or virtue of
quickening in Christ's flesh, for which power imparted to it it may be said
viuificall and to quicken, that we deny. And p. 279. The virtue of quickening is
so proper to the divinity, as it cannot be communicated even to the flesh of
Christ nor to any other creature unless it be turned into the divinity. Lib.
cont. Brent. col. 1. page 527. he denies that Christ's humanity forgiueth
sins by virtue of the divinity which had given this power to it. And p. 545.
says. Note, that the power of saving is not attributed to the flesh though
assumpted, but to the divinity of which it is assumpted. And in Colloq. cit.
p. 228. The raising of the dead is the work of the divinity Nor to raise the
dead.
only, which cannot be attributed to the humanity of Christ.

Daneus Controu. 4. q. 9. p. 195. Christ the Son of man living on earth
remitted sins, but not as man, but as God: as in Remitted not sins as man.
the same divine nature he wrought miracles, not as man.

Sadeel respons. ad Art abiurat. 5. Our life firstly, properly, and precisely
proceeds from the divine nature. And the divines Nor hears our prayers.
of Heidelberg before cited: Christ as man hears not our prayers in heaven.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the Son of man had in earth power to
forgive sins, that who eats his flesh has life everlasting, that in the
name of Christ crucified miracles were wrought, that his blood cleanses our
consciences from sins. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach the contrary, that Christ as man was not
profitable unto us, that his flesh profits nothing at all, that it is not
viuificall not has any virtue of quickening, that the divinity has not given
it any power of forgiven sins, that our life proceeds precisely from the
divinity, that Christ as man did not forgive sins, did not work any
miracle, could not work any miracle, that the raising of the dead cannot be
attributed to his humanity. Which are so contrary to the Scripture as diverse
Protestants do acknowledge it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. V. WHETHER CHRIST AS MAN, or his humanity were every where.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Matthew. 28. v. 6. I know that you seek Jesus that was crucified: Christ's
body not in the Sepulcher after his resurrection.
He is not here.

Ihon 11. v. 15. Jesus said to them plainly: Lazarus is dead, and Not where
Lazarus died. Not where^e was sought.
I am glad for your sake, that you may believe, because I was not there. And c.
6. v. 24. When therefore the multitude saw, that Jesus was not there not his
disciples, they etc.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Card. Bellarmin l. 3. de Incarnat. c. 11. That Christ's humanity is
eueriewhere, is against Scripture.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Luther in Defens. verb. caenae to. 7. fol. 394. Christ manifestly Christ's
body in heaven and earth.
testifies, that his body is at once in heaven and in earth, or rather
present every where. Which he oftentimes repeateth. Whereupon Zuinglius resp.
ad Confess. Lutheri to. 2. fol. 446. says that Luther affirms Christ to be
in every In eueri^ place.
place, no less according to his humane nature, then his divine.

Brentius apud Bezam lib. cont. ipsum vol. 1. Theol. p. 516. It is necessary,
that wheresoever the divinity of Christ is, Wheresoever his godhead is
there also he have with him his humane nature.

Gerlachius tom. 2. disput. 2. p. 25. We put the humane nature of Christ
almighty and in all places.

Smidelin in Hospin. part. 2. Hist. fol. 323. The Humanity of Christ is every
where. Which he and his followers defended openly in the Conference at Mulbrun
and Montbelgard.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ as man was not in the sepulcher after
his resurrection, that he was not where Lazarus died, that he was not where the
Jews sought him. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Christ's body is every where, that his
humanity is wheresoever his divinity is, that his humane nature is in all
places. Which is so opposite to Scripture, as many Protestants confess it.
See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. VI. WHETHER CHRIST AS MAN be head of the Church?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Corint. 11. v. 3. And I will have you to know, that the head Christ head of
the Church as he is man.
of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is the man, and the head of
Christ is God.

Ephesians. 5. v. 23. Because the man is the head of the woman, as Christ is the
head of the Church, him self the Savior of his body.

Philippens. 2. verse. 8. He humbled himself, made obedient unto death, even
the death of the cross. For the which thing God also has exalted him, and
has given him a name which is above all names, that in the name of Jesus
every knee bow.

Roman. 14. ver. 9. For this end Christ died and arose again, that he may have
dominion both of the dead and of the living.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton l. 7. de Iustificat. c. 4. Christ not only as God, but also as
man, is head of the Church.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Controu. 2. q. 2. p. 455. I answer, that it is absurd, Not
foundation of the Church as he was man.
that the foundation of the Church be visible. The Church was not founded in
Christ, as he could be seen, but as he could not be seen. Page 456. Christ
was not a visible or sensible, but (that I may so speak) a credible
foundation. And Controu. 4. q. 1. c. 2. q. 525. Christ was no visible monarch
in the Church.

Vallada in Apologia cont. Episcop. Luzon. c. 5. It is gross Not head of the
Church, as man.
ignorance to make Jesus Christ head of the Church as he is man, which to this
day no divine durst say.

Zuinglius in Coloss. 1. tom. 4. It is impossible, that a visible man should be
head of the Church, seeing she is invisible.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ is head of men as he is under God, as
he is Savior of his body: that in the name of Jesus all knees shall know
because he humbled himself to death, that he died and rose again for to have
dominion over all. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the Church was not founded in Christ as he
was visible: that he was no visible Monarch of the Church: that he is not head
of the Church as he is man: that no visible man can be head of the Church.

ART. VII. WHETHER CHRIST AS man was a law maker, made any laws?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Isaie c. 33. v. 22. thus prophetieth of Christ: For the Lord Christ, lawmaker,
as man.
is our judge, the Lord is our lawmaker, the Lord is our King, he will save us.

Matthew. 11. v. 30. Christ says: For my yoke is sweet, and my burden light.
And c. vlt. ver. 19. All power is given to me in heaven and earth, going
therefore teach ye all nations. -- teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you.

Ihon. 15. v. 14. You are my friends, if you do the things that I command you.

1. Cor. 7. ver. 10. But to them that be joined in matrimony, not I give
commandment, but our Lord, that the wife depart not from her husband, and if
she depart, to remain unmarried, or to be reconciled to her husband.

Galat. 6. v. 2. Bear ye one an others burdens, and so you shall fulfill the
law of Christ.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Session. 6. Canon. 21. If any shall say, that Jesus Christ
was given of God to men as a redeemer to whom they may trust, not as a
lawmaker whom to obey, be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confession of Witenberg. c. de Euangelio: Nether is Christ no law maker.
Christ to be made a new lawmaker, seeing he nether has made a new law, nether
etc.

Powel Epist. lib. de Adiaphoris. We constantly deny, that Christ is a
lawmaker. Which also M. Perkins insinuates in Galat. c. 6. saying. The
Gospel must no way be called a new law.

Luther in Galat. 1. tom. 5. fol. 228. Christ is no lawmaker. Every lawmaker,
minister of sin.
Every law maker is the minister of sin. fol. 292. The Gospel teaches,
that Christ came not to give a new law and to give precepts of manners. In cap.
2. fol. 321. he says, that he labors to damn the old opinion of Christ a
lawgiuer and judge. Again: Define Christ rightly, not as the Sophisters and
Iustitiamans do who make him a new lawgiuer, who abrogating the old law gave a
new; to them Christ is an exactor and Tyrant. And in cap. 52. Isaiae tom. 4.
fol. 198. They err, who think Christ frames not ma^ners.
Christ to be a lawmaker who frometh manners.

Illyricus in Matthew. c. 5. Christ is no law giver.

Calvin in Antidot. Council. Sess. 6. Con. 21. We deny, He gave no new laws.
that Christ is a lawgiuer, who gave any new laws to the world. In Math. 5. v.
21. Nether must we imagine Christ a new lawmaker, who added any thing to the
eternal justice of his Father, but we must hear him as a faithful
interpreter. And in v. 43. Christ gives no new laws.

Beza in Math. 19. v. 19. As if Christ came to make any new law, and not rather
to deliver us from the curse of the law. In 2. He tought us not what to do or
shun.
Cor. 3. v. 6. Christ is the Minister of the Gospel, not teaching us what we
ought to do what to shun (which is the perpetual office of the law) but
freely offering himself for eternal life to them that believe.

Peter Martyr in Roman. 3. But we absolutely deny, that Christ gave new laws.

Pareus l. 4. de Inst. c. 4. Christ indeed as God was the giver and author of
the law with his Father, but in flesh he came not as a lawmaker, but as a
redeemer.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ was a lawmaker, that he has a law,
and commands some thing, that he imposes a yoke and burden. Catholics say
the same.

Protestants expressly say the contrary, that Christ was no lawmaker, no
lawgiuer, made no new laws, that he gave no precepts of manners, framed not
manners, tought us not what to do or what to shun, that every lawgiuer is
the minister of sin.

ART. VIII. WHETHER CHRIST AS man be a Judge?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ihon 5. v. 22. For nether does the Father judge any man, but all judgment he
has given to the Son, that all may honor the Son as they do honor the
Father. And v. 27. And he has Christ, judge, as man.
given him power to do judgment also because he is the Son of man.

Acts. 10. ver. 43. And commanded us to preach to the people, and to testify
that it is he that of God was appointed judge of the living and of the dead.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
^ard. Bellarm. l. 3. de Incarnat. cap. 16. Power of judging externally and
sensibly is given to Christ, because he is the Son of man.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther in Galat. 2. to. 5. fol. 321. I was so taught from a child, that I
waxed paile with fear at the very name of Christ, because I was persuaded that
he was a Judge. Wherefore I have duble labor to correct this evil. First, to
forget that old inueterate Christ is no judge.
opinion of Christ a lawmaker and judge, then to damn and reject it. And in
Galat. 5. tom. 1. Germ. Witenberg: apud Scioppium in suo Ecclesiast. c. 5. When
thou think of Christ as a Judge who will command thee to give an account of
thy life past, then be assured and certain, that it is not Christ, but the
very devil him self. The same doctrine he preaches Postilla in Dom. 3.
Aduentus, and in Die Pentecostes, where also he adds: If we have such an
imagination of Christ, as that I think he is a Judge, straight ways I fear
him, thence it follows that I become strange from him, and fearful in the
sight of God, so that also I hate him.

Iacobus Andreae apud Bezam respons. ad calum. vol. 3. page 131. Some of them
are not afraied to say, that Christ shall not exercise the last judgment as man
but as God. And the like think all they; who as we shall rehearse hereafter
chap. 16. say, that Christ will not exact any account of our life past. For if
he be our judge, doubtless he will exact account of us.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Christ is appointed judge of the living
and the dead, that he has power to judge because he is the Son of man.
Catholics the same.

Protestants expressly teach, that it is a damnable opinion to think Christ
to be a judge: that when we think of Christ as a Judge, it is not Christ, but
the Devil him self: that if we imagine Christ to be a judge we fall to hate him.

ART. IX. WHETHER CHRIST HAS made a new testament or covenant?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Hieremie 31. v. 31. Behold the days shall come, says our Lord, and I will
make a new covenant with the house of Israel Christ made a new covenant.
and the house of Judah, not according to the covenant which I made with their
fathers in the day that I took their hand to bring them out of the land of
Egypt. Which words the Apostle cites Hebr. 8. v. 8. and expounds them of the
covenant made by Christ.

Hebrews 8. v. 6. and 7. But now he has obtained a better A better testament.
ministry, by so much as he is mediator of a better testament which is
establiished in better promises. For if that former had been void of fault,
there should not certes a place of a second been sought.

Hebrews 9. v. 15. And therefore he is the mediator of a new A new testament.
testament, that death being a mean, unto the redemption of those
preuarications which were under the former testament, they that are called may
receive the promise of eternal inheritance.

Galat. 4. v. 24. For these are the twoe testaments. The one Twoe testaments.
from mount Sina etc.

Matthew 26. ver. 28. This is my blood of the new testament. And Luke 22. v. 20.
This is the chalice, the new tastament in my blood.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Missa c. 8. Christ at his last supper made his testament,
and therefore fulfilled the figure of the old testament.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confessions of Swizers cap. 17. Seeing there is always one only God, one
mediator of God and men, one testament or covenant, There is but one testament.
it necessarily follows etc.

Whitaker Cont. 2. q 2. c. 3. It is one and the same covenant, albeit by reason
of the times diuersely made.

Zuinglius in Elencho tom. 2. fol. 31. They are called two Not twoe testaments.
testaments, not that they are twoe different testaments. Fol. 33. Wherefore
there is one testament alone, one only testament. In Sermon. 1. Bernen. fol.
532. But seeing there are not twoe testame^ts, there must be this one.

Calvin 2. Instit. c. 10.. 2. The conuenant of all the Fathers is so little
different from ours in deed and in substance, that it is wholly one and the
same, yet the administration varieth.

Beza in Math. 26. v. 28. They cannot nor must not be called Not twoe covenants.
twoe covenants, as if indeed they were twoe. Cont. Heshus. vol. 1. p. 283. The
old and the new covenant is one only and singular covenant, whether we
consider the author, or the matter, or the end and scope of them both.

Peter Martyr in locis clas. 2. c. 16.. 27. We must needs determine, that the
covenant betwixt God and man of the old and new testament is one and the same.

Bucanus Instit. Theol. loco. 22. The twoe testaments are one in substance, or
in respect of all causes, efficient, material, and final.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ made a new covenant or testament, a
second, an other, a latter covenant or testament, a new one not according to
the old, a better testament established in better promises, and that the
former testament was not void of fault. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that there is always one testament or covenant,
one and the same covenant, wholly one and the same in deed and substance, one
and the same according to the Author matter and end, one in respect of all
causes material, formal, efficie^t and final* that there are not twoe
different testaments, that they must not be called twoe, as if indeed they were
twoe. Which are so manifestly repugnant to Scripture as diverse Protestants
confess it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. X. WHETHER CHRIST AS MAN were ignorant?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ihon 16. v. 30. The Apostles say to Christ: Now we know Christ knew all things.
that thou know all things, and thou need not that any man ask thee.

Ihon 21. v. 17. Peter said to him: Lord, thou know all things: thou
know that I love thee. And ca. 7. v. 15. And the Knew letters though he had
not learnt them.
Jews maruailed, saying: How does this man know letters, whereas he has not
learned.

Ihon. 2. v. 24. But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, for that he knew
all, and because it was not needful for him that Knew what was in man.
any should give testimony of man, for he knew what was in man. And c. 18.
ver. 4. Jesus therefore knowing all things that should come upon him, went
forth etc.

Coloss. 2. v. 3. In whom (Jesus Christ) be all the treasures Had all
treasures of knowledge.
of wisdom and knowledge hid.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 3. part. q. 15. art. 3. As in Christ there was no fomite of sin,
so there was no ignorance. Et q. 11. art. 11. He knew all particular things
past, present, and to come.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker ad Ration. 8. Campiani. Thou say, that Protestants Christ was
ignorant.
teach that Christ was ignorant. And why may they not teach so?

Zuinglius in c. 2. Lucae. Christ's soul daily profited, whereas from the
beginning he knew not all things.

Calvin in Math. 21. v. 18. There is no absurdity, if we say that according to
his humanity he knew not what kind of tree Knew not trees.
it was. In c. 24. v. 36. It was no inconueniencie, that Christ according to
man's knowledge was ignorant of some thing. In Lucae 2. v. 40. His soul was
subject to ignorance.

Beza in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 177. We must acknowledge, that Christ in the
time of his humiliation according to his humanity Was ignorant of many things.
was for us ignorant of many things. And p. 250. being asked, Whether Christ
according to his soul be searcher of hearts? he answered: No.

Gallastus in l. 2. Irenei. cap. 49. Christ was so ignorant as he He was tought
as we be.
learnt and was tought as men are.

Daneus Controu. 2. p. 143. Christ's soul was truly ignorant and knew not some
things. -- Christ knew not where Lazarus He knew not Lazarus his grave. Nor
figs on the tree. Was subject to childish ignorance.
his corpse was laid.

Pareus l. 5. de Amiss. Great. c 14. Christ knew not figs on the tree.

Serranus Cont. Hayum part 3. page 289. Luke testifies, that he was subject
to childish ignorance and forgetfulness.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches that Christ knew all things that should come
upon him, that he knew all things, that he knew all men, that he knew whar was
in man, that he knew letters though he had not learnt, that in him were all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. The same say Catholics.

Protestants contrariwise teach, that Christ as man knew not all things, was
ignorant of many things, was subject to childish ignorance and forgetfulness,
knew not the hearts of men, knew not where Lazarus his body was laid, knew
not figs on the tree, knew not what kind of tree it was, and was so ignorant
as he needed to be tought as men are. And this ignorance of Christ Serranus
lib. cit. page 290. calls the ground of their salvation. Which is so opposith
to Scriptures as some Protestants confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. XI. WHETHER CHRIST AS MAN were truly a sinner and hateful to God?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Hebrews 7. ver. 26. For it was seemly that we should have Christ separated
from sinners.
such a high priest, holy, innocent, impolluted, separated from sinners etc.

1. Peter 1. v. 19. You are redeemed with precious blood, as it were of an
immaculate and unspotted lamb, Christ. And c. 2. v. 22. Who did not sin,
nether was guile found in him.

Matthew 3. c. 17. And be hold a voice from heaven, saying. God well pleased in
Christ.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
D. Stapleton l. 7. de Iustific. c. 10. It is not only new, but also a
blasphemous kind of speech, to call Christ a sinner either by imputation or any
way at all. In Math. 26. ver. 39. We must maintain, that Christ nether had any
inconsiderate desire, nor said any thing that deserved correcting, nor offered
unmeasured requests, nor wanted a mild moderation.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Perkins in Cathol. reform. Controu. 4. c. 4. We may with Christ truly a
sinner.
reverence to his majesty in good manner say, that Christ was a sinner, and
that truly. And De Sermon. Dom in Monte to. 2. col. 212. We may most certainly
affirm, that Christ by and for our sins was made a sinner, not in but by
imputation.

Luther in c. 53. Isaiae to. 4. fol. 222. He is the greatest sinner, Christ the
greatest sinner.
so that there is none greater then the Son of God. And fol. seq. adds
that, He is wicked, guilty of death, and under the power of the Devil and hell.
In c. 3. Galat. to. 5. fol. 348. All the Prophets saw this in spirit, that
Christ was to be the greatest thief, murderer, adulterer, robber,
sacrilegious, so that none ever in the world was greater. -- If thou deny him
to have been a sinner and accursed, deny that he suffered and died. And fol.
350. he calls it most sweet doctrine and most full of comfort, that Christ
for us was made a curse, that is, a sinner obnoxious Christ not innocent.
to the wrath of God. And 351. We must not imagine Christ to be innocent, as the
Sophisters and almost all the Fathers, Hierome, and others have done. In Psalm.
22. to. 3. He seems in him self to swallow the temptation of blasphemy,
which was almost breacking out, as it were floting between praise and
blasphemy. Postilla in Domin. 2. post Epiphan. He uncivilly rejected the
Uncivilly rejected his mother.
most modest admonition of his Mother. And makes our B. Lady thus complaining
of him: He rudely rejecting has dishonored me, and with so uncivil an answer
has shamed me before so many guests.

Illyricus in Confess. Antuerpien. cap. 6. He may be most truly called a
sinner, by the most mighty imputation of his Father. Et in Claue Scripturae
part. 5. col. 858. God made Christ Hateful to God.
by imputation a sinner, or iniust, guilty, hateful to God. The like he has
part. 2. col. 534. and in 2. Corint. 5. ver. 21 In Math. 3. v. 15. he says,
that Christ by imputation was the Had need to be cleansed.
vncleanest of all, and had need to be cleansed by baptismes and justices.

Calvin in 2. Corint. 5. v. 21. How are we just before God? As Christ was a
sinner. In Math. 26. v. 39. he writes: I confess, that Christ had an abrupt
desire. Betwixt violent fluddes of temptations, he (as it were) wauered with
desires, now on one side, now on the other. He corrects and recalleth a
request which suddenly escaped him. This prayer of Christ was not thought of,
but the force and veheme^cie of sorrow did wrest from him a speech which by and
by was corrected. The same Violence made him for the present forget the
heavenly decree, that for that moment he did not think himself to have been
sent on this condition to be the redeemer of mankind. In c. 27. v. 46. But it
seems absurd, that a speech of desperation should proceed from Christ. The
answer is at hand. For albeit the sense of the flesh did apprehend
destruction, yet faith abode fast in his heart. In ver. 47. So we see,
Ouerwelmed with desperation.
that he was vexed on every side, that being overwhelmed with desperation, he
gave over calling upon God. Which was to renounce his salvation. In Joan. 12.
v. 27. By flying death, he confesses his delicatenes.

Beza in 2. Corint. 5. ver. 21. Christ was for us made sin, that is, a
sinner, not in him self, but by the guilt of all our sins Properly accursed.
imputed to him. In Galat. 3. v. 13. In that consists our salvation, that God
properly and without any figure powered all his wrath upon his Son, properly
and not figuratively accursed him, ^^ in his humanity he was our pledge, for
to receive us into grace.

Pareus in Galat. 3. lection. 35. He was made a curse, that is, accursed.

Daneus Controu. de baptismo c. 23. That which he obiecteth, He had need of
baptism.
that it is mere blaspemie, to say that Christ was a sinner, and had need of
baptism, is it self most blasphemous. -- Christ him has tought, that as he
was made man for our sake he needed this baptism.

Piscator in Thesib. lib. 2. p. 125. Christ by imputation was Accursed as the
damned.
truly a sinner, because for sins he was a curse, that is, accursed. But
none is accursed before God, but for sin, that is, as he is, or as he is held
for a sinner. And p. 619. To be accursed, was common to Christ with all those
to whom in the day of judgment he shall say: God ye accursed into everlasting
fire. Moulins in his Bucler of faith art. 17. section. 31. Christ made himself
culpable for to make us assoiled. See more of their like speeches in the Latin
book c. 1. art. 11.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Christ was separated from sinners, was
innocent, holy, unpolluted, immaculate, unspotted: that he was his Fathers
well beloved, Son, in whom he was well pleased. The same say Catholics.

Protestants say, that Christ was a sinner, the greatest sinner that ever was,
truly a sinner, most truly a sinner, not innocent, unjust, unclean, had need
of baptism, had need to be cleansed: was hateful to God, accursed of God,
accursed as the damned shall be at the day of judgment, was culpable, confessed
his delicatenes, had desires not premeditated that deserved correction and
recalling, floted between praise and blasphemy, reeled between temptations,
vnciuily rejected, dishonored, and shamed his mother, was so overwhelmed with
desperation, that he gave over calling upon God, which was to renounce his
salvation.

ART. XII. WHETHER CHRIST REEVsed to do the office of a Redeemer?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Luke 12. v. 51. But I have to be baptized with a baptism and Christ desired
to die for mankind.
how am I strained until it be dispatched?

Math. 16. v. 23. Where S. Peter dehorted him from suffering: Turning said to
Peter: Go after me Satan: Thou art a scandal unto me, because thou sauourest
not the things that are of God. And c. 26. v. 53. When S. Peter would have
defended him: Jesus says to him: Return thy sword into his place, --
Think thou, that I cannot ask my Father, and he will give me presently more
then twelve legions of Angels.

Ihon 4. verse. 34. Christ says: My meat is to do the will of him that sent
me, to perfect his work. And c. 18. v. 11. The chalice which my Father has
given me, shall not I drink it.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
D. Stapleton in Math. 26. ver. 39. Calvin affirms, that Christ, as much as
lay in him, refused, and drew back from doing the office a Redeemer: then the
which no more grievous accusation could be laid upon Christ by any Pagan or
Jew.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Perkins in Serie Causarum c. 15. Christ was subject to this Christ forget his
office.
weakness, not to remember the office imposed upon him by reason of the agony
shaking his sense. And c. 18. A little before Christ's death, sorrow did so
trouble his spirit, as for a time it stroke inwardly a marvelous amazement
and forgetfulness of the office imposed upon him.

Calvin in Joan. 12. v. 27. By flying death, he confesses his Had a destre
contrary to his vocation.
delicateness. Again. He recalleth the desire which he acknowledges to be
contrary to his vocation. In Math. 26. v. 36. Yet is not the question quite
answered. For since we lately said that all Christ's affections were rightly
composed, how does he now correct himself? For he does so submit his affection
to Gods will, as if he had exceeded measure. Surely in the first request there
appears As much as was in him he refused to do the office of a Mediator.
not that mild moderation whereof I spoke, because, as much as lay in him, he
refused and forbear to do the office of a Mediator. I answer, there was no
fault in that whiles the terror of death was before his eyes there fell upon
him such a darkness, as leaving all others, he laid hold upon such a desire.
Nether is it needful to dispute here subtly whether he could forget our
salvation. Again In that moment he did not think, that he was sent upon
condition to be the redeemer of man kind.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Christ so desired to accomplish our
redemption, as he was strained until he had perfected it, that his meat was
to do the will of his Father, that he sharply rebuked S. Peter when he dehorted
him from suffering, and forbadde him to defend him from it. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that Christ was so weak as to forget the office
of our redemption, that for a time he forgotte it: that he fled death, had a
desire contrary to his vocation, refused and forbore to do the office of a
Mediator, for a time did not think that he was sent upon condition to be the
redeemer of mankind.

ART. XIII. WHETHER CHRIST WAS assured of his salvation?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ihon n. v. 41. And Jesus lifting his eyes upward, said, Father Christ knew
knew that God did always hear him. That the abode in his fafathers love.
I give the thanks that thou have heard me, and I did know that thou do
always hear me. Chap. 15. v. 10. If you keep my precepts, you shall abide in
my love, as I also have kept my Fathers precepts and do abide in his love. C.
16. ver. 28. I leave the world and go to the Father. cap. 17. verse. 10. And
now I am not in the world, and these are in the world, and I come to thee.

Luke 22. verse. 69. But from hence forth the Son of man shall be sitting on the
right hand of the power of God. c. 23. v. 43. And Jesus said unto him: Amen I
say to thee: this day thou shall be with me in paradise.

Acts 2. v. 25. For David says concerning him: I foresaw the Lord in my sigth
always, because he is at my right hand that I be not moved.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Promptuar. Quadrages. fer. 4. hebdom, sanct. Christ, touching
the state of his soul, fears not the least forsaking of God. -- How can any
believe, that Christ could have the least suspicion of Gods malediction or
forsaking.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther in psalm. 22. to. 3. fol. 330. It follows, that Christ himself
suffered the dread and horror of a conscience troubled, and tasting the
everlasting wrath. fol. 331. Christ was no less Christ freighted as the damned
are.
freighted in soul, then we, or the damned are, whiles they dread and fly
God. fol. 333. He was most troubled with wandering fears and most unquiet
affections. And adds fol. 330. cit. that, In exceeding despair.
Christ was at once both excedingly glorying, and despairing.

Melancthon in c. 26. Matthaei apud Hofmeister in Art. 3. Floted betwixt hell
and life.
Augustan. The third, and that the greatest cause of Christ's dread, was a
feeling of Gods forsaking and wrath, whereby Christ floted betwixt hell and
life.

Calvin in Catechismo c. de fide. Because he presented himself Christ's
conscience anxious
before the tribunal seat of God, for to satisfy for sinners, it was
needful that his conscience should be tortured with this anxietie, as if he
had been forsaken of God, yea as if he had God his mortal enemy. In Math.
26. ver. 37. The depth of horrible destruction did grievously vex him to fear
and anxietie. In v. 39. It was needful Feared profound death.
for him to fear the profound depth of death. -- Christ was stroaken with the
dread of Gods malediction. In Hebrae. 5. v. 7. I doubt not but the Apostle
means, that Christ was delivered Feared to be swalowed of death. Almost
persuaded that he was cast away.
from that which he feared, to wit, lest overcome with evils he should yield,
or be swallowed with death. And the same repeateth Beza upon the same place,
and adds: He was almost persuaded, that he was cast away. And in Luc. 22. v.
44. Nether did Christ wrasle only with the fears of death as other men d^e,
but with the dreadful judgment of his angry Father, then the which nothing
can be thought more dreadful. And in this deiection of Christ consists the
sum of our comfort.

Pareus l. 3. de Iustificat. c. 12. When Bellarmin had said: He cannot fear,
who by faith is assured of his salvation: Answers: The proposition, unless
it be limited, is universally false. Who more sure of his salvation and
predestination, that our Savior, and yet did he not cry upon the Cross and
not without fear: My God etc. See more of their like sayings in my Latin book
c. 2. art. 13.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ knew that his Father did always
hear him, that he did abide in his love, that he went to his father, that he
should sit on the right hand of the power of God, that he should be in
paradise, that God was at his right hand, that he be not moved. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Christ suffered the dread of a conscience
tasting everlasting wrath, was freighted in his soul like to the damned, was
exceedingly despairing, did flote between hell and life, was tormented with
anxietie as if God were his mortal enemy, was grievously vexed with the dread
of horrible destruction, did fear the profound depth of death and Gods
malediction, feared lest he should be ouercomen with evils and swallowed with
death, was almost persuaded that the was cast away, was afraied of his
saluantion. And yet these men (as we shall see c. 17. art. 10.) avouch, that
every one of them is assured of his salvation, and account him no Christian or
faithful man, who is not so assured: yea they make assurance of salvation an
essential point of faith. So that they make themselves far more assured of
their Salvation then they make Christ: and condemn us for doubting of our
Salvation, who make Christ to doubt, fear, and despair of his.

ART. XIV. WHETHER CHRIST HAD a commandment of his Father to give his life, or
to die for us?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ihon 10. verse. 18. I yield my life, that I may take it again, No man takes
it away from me, but I yield it of my self, and Christ commanded to give his
life.
I have power to yield it, and I have power to take it again. This commandment
I received of my Father. cap. 18. verse. 11. The chalice which my Father has
given me, shall not I drink it.

Roman. 5. v. 19. For as by the disobedience of one man many were made
sinners: so also by the obedience of one, many shall be made just.

Philippen. 2. v. 8. He humbled himself, made obedient unto death even the
death of the cross.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 3. part quaest. 47. art. 2. Christ received a commandment of his
Father to suffer.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Polanus in Disput. private. periodo 1. disput. 36. They say: Not commaded to
die.
A law was made, that Christ should die. But this is against Scripture. For so
his merit should not have been voluntary. The same also do other Protestants
mean, who either say, that in every proper merit the oblation must needs be
not commanded, as Hutterus in Analysi Confess. Augustan. artic. 4. or that it
must not be due or of obligation, as Whitaker says lib. 9. cont. Dureum sect.
34. Perkins in Cathol. reform. Contr. 5. c. 2. Vorstius in Antibellarm. p. 638.
and others.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ received this commandment of his
Father to yield his life, that his Father gave him the chalice of his passion,
that he was obedient to death, and that by his obedience many are made just.
But (as Polanus himself confesses part. 2. these. p. 219.) obedience cannot be
so much as imagined, but in regard of the law to which it is afforded. The same
say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that there was no law made of Christ's death, that
if it had been commanded, his death had not been meritorious.

ART. XV. WHETHER CHRIST MERITED any thing for himself, or had any thing for
merit?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS. Christ exalted for his humiliation.

Philippen. 2. v. 8. and 9. He humbled himself, made obedient unto death, even
the death of the cross. For the which thing God also has exalted him, and
has given him a name which is above all names etc.

Hebrews 2. v. 9. But him that was a little lessened under the Angels, we see
Jesus because of the passion of death crowned with glory and honor.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 3. part. q. 19. art. 3. Christ had by merit the glory of his body,
and those things which pertain to his outward excellency, as ascension,
whorshippe, and such others.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in Philippen. 2. ver. 9. Nether Christ got nor sought Christ got
nothing for him self.
any thing for himself. In 2. Institut. c. 17.. 6. To enquire whether Christ
merited any thing to himself (as the Scholastiks do) is no less foolish
curiosity, then temerarious resolution when they affirm it. With what merits
could man obtain to be judge of the world, head of Angels?

Daneus Controu. 2. p. 27. The Sententiarians do say, that Christ merited also
to him self: but we deny it. He merited nothing for for himself.


Pareus l. 5. de Iustif. c. 3. It is false, that Christ merited to him self
exaltation.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ was exalted and had a name given him
above all names because he humbled him self, that he was crowned with glory
because of his passion. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Christ did not merit his exaltation, did not
merit any thing to him self, could not merit to be judge of the world and head
of Angels.

ART. XVI. WHETHER CHRIST REDEEmed us with a sufficient price, or truly
merited our redemption?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Cor. 6. v. 20. You are bought with a great price. Christ bought us with a
great price.


1. Timoth. 2. v. 6. For there is one God: one also mediator of God and men,
man Christ Jesus who gave him self a redemption (in Greek (...)) for all.

1. Peter 2. ver. 18. Knowing, that not with corruptible things gould or
silver, you are redeemed from your vain conversation With his precious blood.
of your fathers tradition, but with the precious blood, as it were of an
immaculate and unspotted lamb, Christ.

1. Ihon 3. v. 16. In this we have known the charity of God, because he has
yielded his life for us. c. 4. v. 10. He has loved us and sent his son a
propitiation for our sins.

Matthew 20. ver. 28. The Son of man is come to give his life a redemption (in
Greek (...)) for many.

Romans 3. v. 24. Justified gratis by his grace by the redemption (in Greek
(...)) that is in Christ Jesus.

Psalm. 129. v. 7. Because with our Lord is mercy, and with him plenteous
redemption.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 3. part. artic. 2. Christ suffering of charity and obedience did
give God some thing more then the recompense of the offense of all mankind did
exact. -- The passion of Christ was not only a sufficient, obut also a
superaboundant satisfaction for the sins of mankind.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Tindal in Fox his Acts printed An. 1610. page 1136. Christ Christ merited not
heaven.
with all his works did not merit heaven.

Daneus Controu. 2. lib. 5. p. 210. Three necessary conditions of merit do
fail in the works of a creature and of Christ man toward God. -- For by the
union hypostaticall, Christ does not He did not merit.
merit. Page. 200. Christ as man properly merited nothing with God. P. 202.
Yea not in this form of a servant could Christ merit any thing to himself,
because in this form he was a credture. But a creature can merit nothing of
his Creator.

Calvin 2. Instit. c. 17. 1. Truly I confess, that if any would simply and by
himself oppose Christ unto the judgment of God, there were no place for
merit; because there will not be found in man any worth which may merit
before God.. vlt. With what merits could man obtain to be judge of the world,
and head of Angels? 3. Instit. c. 11.. 12. It is fondly objected of him: that
the power of justifying far supasseth both men and Angels, seeing this
depends not upon the worth of any creature, but of Gods ordination. If the
Angels would satisfy God, they would avail nothing, because they were not
destinated to this end; but this was proper to Christ man, who was subject to
the law for to redceme us from the curse of the law. And Respons. ad quaest.
Sozin: Christ could merit nothing but through the pleasure of God. Et in Joan.
4. v. 10. When Christ is sated to have appeased the Father toward us, this is
referred to our sense. For as we are guilty to our selves, we cannot conceive
God but as angry and offended till Christ absolve us from the guilt. --
Wherefore touching the feeling of our faith God begins to love us in Christ.

Spindlerus apud Scusselburg. l. 4. Theol. Calvin. c. 5. The His death no
sufficient redemption for all sins.
Lutherans err in saying that Christ's death was a sufficient redemption
((...)) for the sins of all and every man.

Piscator apud Vorstium in Parasceue c. 6. Christ died not sufficiently, much
less effectually for all.

Welsingius apud Homium in Specim. Controuer. Belgic. His blood satisfied not
Gods justice.
art. 21. That Christ's blood satisfied Gods justice for our sins, is no where
extant, and it is plainly contrary to the free and just remission of sins,
which God has offered to us by Christ. And the same say other Protestants, as
Calvin reports 2. Instit. c. 17.. 1. and Beza in Absters. calumn. Heshusij p.
324.

Slatius apud Homium loc. cit. There is question, whether Christ properly
satisfied not.
Christ properly satisfied for us. We deny it. And the same has Vorstius ib.
Who also adds: That Christ satisfied by a certain acceptance, not by exact
identitie.

Pareus l. 5 de Iustific. c. 3. To merit, is the part of servants, To merit,
is serutle and sordid.
serutle, and sordid.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ bought us with a great price, that he
gave (...), that is, a ransom or price of redemption for us, that he redeemed
us with his precious blood: that God gave his life for us, sent his son a
propitiation for our sins: that with God there is plentuous redemption.
Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say the contrary: that Christ could not merit heaven,
had no place for merit if we respect the judgment of God, did not merit, three
conditions necessatie to merit wanted in his works, that power of meriting in
him depended of Gods pleasure and ordination: That properly he did not satisfy
for us, that his blood did not satisfy Gods justice, that his death was not a
sufficient (...) or ransom for all, that to merit is servile and sordid.

ART. XVII. WHETHER CHRIST REDEEmed us by his blood or corporal death?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Coloss. 1. ver. 22. And you, whereas some time alienated and Christ redeemed
us by his death. By his blood, By he oblacion of his body.
enemies in sense, in evil works, yet now he has reconciled in the body of
his flesh by death. verse. 20. Pacifying by the blood of his cross whether the
things in earth or the things that are in heaven.

Hebrews. 10. v. 10. In the which will we are sanctified by the oblation of the
body of Jesus Christ once. c. 9. verse. 12. By his own blood entered once into
the Holies eternal redemption being found.

Ephesians. 1. v. 6. In whom we have redemption by his blood the remiss^on of
sins.

1. Peter v. 19. You are redeemed with the precious blood as it were of an
immaculate and vnsported lamb, Christ.

Acts 20. v. 28. The holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to rule the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood.

Apocalips. 5. v. 9. Thou have redeemed us to God in thy blood.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 3. part. q. 48. art. 5. The price of our redemption is the blood of
Christ, or his corporal life which consists in blood.

Stapleton in Prompt. Quadrages. fer. 4. Hebdom. Sanct. Calvin puts not
only an other price beside the corporal death of Christ, but also an other
greater and more excellent: Can Christian ears suffer this?

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker lib. 8. cont. Dur. sect. 18. Calvin wrote most truly: Christ's death
had done nothing.
That nothing had been done, if Christ had suffered only corporal death.

Perkins de Sermon. Dom. to. 2. col. 576. Reason it self teaches, Was not
sufficient.
that only corporal death (of Christ) was not sufficient to redeem them who
had deserved death of body and soul.

Willet Cont. 20. q. 3. p. 1088. The bodily death of Christ was Was not the
full price.
not in respect of Gods justice the whole and full price of our redemption.

Calvin 2. Instit. c. 16.. 10. Nothing had been done, if Christ There needed a
greater price.
had suffered only bodily death -- There was an other greater and more
excellent price, that he suffered in his soul the horrible torments of a
damned and lost man.

Bezalib. quaest. vol. 1. Theol. Christ was in the midst of the torments of
hell, for to deliver us fully from both deaths etc.

Scarpe de Iustif. Cont. 16. Writes that diverse Protestants say, that those
places of Scripture, in which is said, that Christ dyed for us, are to be
understood only of his feeling of the wrath of God, and not of his bodily
death: and that his bodily death auailed nothing to our redemption nor was a
part of the satisfaction for sins.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Christ has reconciled us in the body of
his flesh by death, has pacified all things by the blood of his cross, has
sanctifies us by the oblation of his body, has found an eternal redemption
by his blood, has redeemed us by his blood, with his blood, in his blood, has
purchased the Church with his blood. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that nothing had been done if Christ had suffered
only corporal or bodily death, that his corporal death was not sufficient
to redeem us, that there was need of a greater and excellenter price, that his
corporal death auailed nothing to our redemption nor was any part of the
satisfaction for sins. Which are so manifestly opposite to Scripture as some
Protestants confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. XVIII. WHETHER CHRIST DIED for the impious and reprobats?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS. Christ died for the impious. For him that
perishes. For the unjust.

Romans 5. ver. 6. For why did Christ, when we as yet were weak, according to
the time die for the impious?

1. Cor. 18. ver. 11. And through thy knowledge shall thy weak brother perish,
for whom Christ has died.

1. Peter. 3. v. 18. Because Christ also died once for our sins, the just for
unjust.

2. Peter 2. v. 1. and seq. But there were also false Prophets in the people,
as also in you there shall be lying masters, which shall bring in sects of
perdition, and deny him that has bought them, the For those that go to
perdition.
Lord, bringing upon themselves speedy perdition -- unto whom the judgment,
now long since cease not, and their perd^tion sl^mbereth not.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarmin l. 4. de Amiss. Gratiae c. 7. Our Lord suffered and died for the
unjust.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Controu. 2. q. 1. c. 9. p. 437. Christ did not give Christ died not
for the impious. The wicked not redremed by Christ.
himself for the impious and reprobates. Which he repeateth cap. 13.

Rainolds thesi 4. q. 22. The wicked, albeit they be termed faithful for their
profession of faith, or for temporal faith, yet are they not redeemed or
founded in Christ. In Apologia thesium p. 246. Christ offered himself for the
elect only. 247. Redeemed only the elect.
The elect only were redeemed of Christ.

Perkins de Praedestinat. tom. 1. col. 135. Whom at any time he acknowledged
not, he never bought or redeemed with the price of his blood. col. 137. Of
these, Christ is only a half-redeemer, and therefore no redeemer. And de
Desertion. col. 1023. Christ is the redeemer only of the elect, and of none
else. So also D. Willet Contr. 9. q. 2. p. 893.

Calvin l. cont. Heshus. p. 849. I would know how the impious Not crucified for
the impious.
eat Christ's flesh for which it was not crucified: and how they drink his
blood, which was not shed to redeem their sins.

Beza in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 447. Christ died not for the sins of them that
are damned -- He shed not his blood for the remission of the sins of the
impious and damned. Epist 28. It is false that Christ is the mediator of the
infidels also.

Zanchius in Summa Praelection. to. 7. col. 272. Christ, according to the
purpose of his Father, was borne prayed, suffered and died only for the elect.
In Depulsion. Calum. col. 253. The Reprobats not redeemed.
reprobats were not redeemed by Christ.

Piscator apud Gerlachium Disput. 9. Christ no way died for the reprobats,
other sufficiently or effectually.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Christ died for the impious, for the
unjust, for those that perish: that he bought lying monsters who bring in sects
of perdition, and bring upon themselves speedy perdition, and whose perdition
slumbereth not. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly teach the contrary, that Christ gave not himself for
the impious or reprobats, that the wicked were not redeemed in Christ, that
Christ's flesh was not crucified for the impious nor his blood shed for their
sins: that Christ offered himself only for the elect, that they only were
redeemed by Christ: that Christ is redeemer of the elect and of none else, no
mediator of Infidels, was borne, suffered and dyed for the elect only, that
nether sufficiently nor effectually he died for the reprobats. Which are so
contrary to Scripture as many Protestants acknowledge it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. XIX. WHETHER CHRIST DIED for all?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
2. Corint. 5. v. 14. For the charity of Christ urges us, judging Christ died
for all.
this: That if one died for all, then all were dead, and Christ died for all.

1. Timoth. 2. v 6. Christ Jesus, who gave himself a redemption for all. Chap.
4. v. 10. Who is the Savior of all men, especially of the faithful.

Hebrews 2. v. 9. We see Jesus because of the passion of death crowned wi^h
glory and honor, that through the grace of God he might taste death for all.

1. Joan. 2. v. 2. We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just,
and he is the propitiation of our sins, and not of ours only, but also for
the whole worlds. Ca. ver. 14. The Father has sent his Son the Savior of
the world.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent. Sess. 6. c. 9. Howbeit Christ died for all, yet
notwithstanding all receive not the benefit of his death.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins de Praedest. to. 1. col. 144. It is maruailous absurd, Redeemed not
all.
that Christ on his part should have redeemed and reconciled to God all and
every one, and yet that in the end many of these should be damned. De Sermon.
Dom. to. 2. col. 341. The opinion of universal redemption, is an invention of
man's brain.

Calvin in 1. Joan. 2. v. 2. cit. Under all, he does not comprehend the
reprobats. In 1. Tim. 2. v. 5. The universal particle must be referred to all
kind of men, not to all persons.

Sadeel ad Art. abiur. 7. They speak amiss, who say that by Redeemed not the
sins of the whole world.
Christ's death the sins of the whole world were redeemed.

Piscator l. 2. These. p. 371. Christ died not universally for all men, but for
the elect only -- We deny, that Christ died sufficiently for all, but not
effectually. P. 177. Christ died nor for all, but for some.

Bucanus Instit. Theol. loco 36. Is not Christ the redeemer of all? No. More of
their like sayings may be seen in my Latin book c. 1. art. 19.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Christ died for all that are dead, that he
gave himself a redemption for all that he tasted death for all; that he is the
Savior of all men, the Savior of the world, the propitiation not only of our
sins but of all the whole world. Catholics teach the same.

Protestants expressly teach the contrary, that Christ on his part redeemed
not all and every one, that universal redemption is an invention of man's
brain: that Christ died not universally for all, redeemed not the sins of
the whole world, nether sufficiently nor effectually died for all, died but for
some, is not redeemer of all. Which diverse Protestants confess to be contrary
to Scripture. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. XX. WHETHER THE BLOOD wherewith Christ redeemed us was putrefied and
corrupted?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Acts 2. v. 27. Because thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor Gods holy
did not see corruption.
give thy Holy to see corruption.

1. Peter. 1. v. 19. Knowing, that not with corruptible things, gould or
silver, you are redeemed from your vain conversation of your fathers
traditions, but with the precious blood, as it were of an immaculate and
unspotted lamb, Christ.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
S. Thomas 3. par q. 34. art. ^ All the blood that flowed out of the body of
Christ, did rise in Christ's body, since it belonged to the truth of his humane
nature.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Perkins in Apoc. 1. to. 2. col. 41. The substance of that blood The substance
of Christ blood perished.
(of Christ) which was shed, did perish, whatsoever the Papists do prate. In
Cathol. reform. Co^tr. 10. c. 3. That blood which ran out the feet and hands
and si^e of Christ upon the cross, was not gathered up again and put into the
v^i^^es: N^^ the collection was needls, and none knows what is become of this
blood. The same insinuates Whitaker Contr. 2 q. 1 c. 9. p. 437.

Beza in 2. part. Resp. ad Acta Colloq Montisbel. p. 108. It were curious and
profane to enquire what became of that self same blood which ran out of the
wounds of Christ, and whether it were taken again of him when he arose.

Musculus in locis Tit. de Caena: We need not dispute of the blood of Christ,
what became of it after it was spilt on the ground, whether it were taken
again into his glorified body, or no.

Schusselbur lib. 1. Theol. Calvin. art. 20. reports Curaeus saying: Christ's
blood shed for us on the cross was long Long since consumed. Putrified.
since consumed. And Erastus his companians teaching: That Christ's blood which
he shed for our si^nes, is putrified and no more in being. Germanus Bauarus in
Feua^dent l. 4. Theomach. Calvin. c. 16. The substantial blood of Christ is
not given in the Supper, because it was corrupted on the ground. Corrupted.


THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that we were not redeemed with corruptible
things, but with the precious blood of Christ, that God suffered not his Holy
to see corruption. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that it is profane to enquire what is become of
Christ's blood, that long since it is consumed, corrupted, not gathered again,
perished, and is no more in being.

ART. XXI. WHETHER CHRIST'S SOVLE descended to Hell?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Acts. 2. v. 27. Thou will not leave my soul in Hell. Et v. Was in Hell.
31. Foreseing he spoke of the resurrection of Christ, for nether was he left
in Hell, nether did his flesh see corruption.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Actor. 2. v. 27. This place does plainly prove the descent of
Christ into Hell in soul, according to the article of Christian belief.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker. l. 8. cont. Dur. sect. 23. Calvin defends, that Never went to
Hell. Descended not to Hell.
Christ's soul never went to the places of Hell. And l. 9. sect 27. I believe
that Christ's soul separated from the body not only did not descend to Hell,
but straight mounted to Heaven.

Rogers upon the 3. Article of Protestants Confession: says, that Carlisle
against D. Smithe pa. 28. 77. calls this article (of Christ descent into
hell) an error and a fable. A fable.


Perkins in Explicat. Symboli to 1. col. 678. If we say that Christ in soul
descended into Hell, we plainly take away that manifest opposition between the
first and the second Adam.

Beza in Actor. 2. v. 27. Who by Hell understand the place which is commonly
called Hell, as if the soul of Christ had indeed descended thither, surely are
much deceived.

Serranus cont. Hayum part. 3. page 722. Beza desirous to Descent to Hell, a
fable.
stop the way to that Popish fable of the descent of Christ's soul into hell
etc.

Hemingius in Enchir. Theolog. class. 3. page 263. It skilleth not greatly, to
know how Christ descended into Hell, so that with true faith we hold that he
delivered us from the power of Hell.

Aretius in locis part. 1. fol. 72. Other (Protestants) deny To be taken out
of the Creed.
all descent of Christ into Hell. Some of them eagerly impugn this descent;
for they say, that this sentence is to be taken out of the Creed.

Ministers of Anhalt apud Hospin. in Concordia discordi. fol. 87. The Divines
of Berge have done well, that through ours and other men's admonitions they have
put out the article of the descent into Hell.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly affirms, that Christ's soul was in Hell: and our Creed
says that he descended into Hell: The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly deny, that Christ's soul descended to Hell, went to
the places of Hell: and say that the descent of Christ into Hell, is a Popish
fable: that it skilleth not greatly to know how he descended into Hell: that
some of them eagerly impugn this article of the Creed, and would have it put
out of the Creed, and that some have put it out. Which is so plain a
contradiction of Scripture as diverse Protestants confess it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. XXII. WHETHER CHRIST SVFfered the pains of Hell, of the damned, and the
second death of the soul?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Acts 2. v. 24. Whom God has raised up, loosing the sorrows of Christ loosed
the pains of Hell. Free among the dead.
Hell, according as it was impossible that he should be houlde^ of it.

Psalm. 87. v. 6. I am become as a man without help, free among the dead.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
D. Stapleton in Promptuar. Quadrages. feria 4. Hebdom. Sanctae: It is a very
devilish speech and execrable blasphemy of Calvin, that Christ in soul
suffered the horrible torments of damned and lost man.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Whitaker l. 8. cont. Dur. sect. 20. Christ suffered the pains of Hell for a
time.

Perkins in Explicat. Symboli col. 679. Others so expound: Suffered the pains
of Hell.
He felt and bore the torments and anguishes of Hell. This is a good and true
exposition. Col. 680. Those words: Crucified, dead, and buried, are not to be
understood of a common and ordinary, death, but of an execrable and cursed
death, by which Christ sustained the full wrath of God, yea the anguishes of
Hell both in body and mind. De Sermon. Dom. col. 575. Christ bore the sins The
anguishes of Hell in mind and body. Suffered the second death.
of the elect, together with the punishment due to them, so much as
appertains to the substance thereof, to wit, the first and second death.

Parkes cont. Willet. p. 114. Luther, Illyricus, Latimer tought that Christ
descended into Hell body and soul, and there sustained torments after death.

Willet Co^tr. 20. q. 3. p. 1083. I will show in what tolerable sense Died in
soul.
Christ is affirmed to die in the soul. Et pa. 1112. That Hell flames are not
eternal in Christ, the worthiness of his person obtained.

Luther in Psalm. 22. to. 3. fol. 330. Christ suffered that which we should have
suffered for sin, and which the damned now suffer. In Genesis 42. to. 6. f 586.
I think that Christ sustained the sorrows of Hell. -- Let us know, that Christ
must have borne the pain of Hell.

Hutterus in Analysi Confess. Augustan. art. 3. Christ suffered the true
sorrows of hell.

Lobechius disp. 6. p. 136. Christ suffered the punishment of Suffered the
pains of the damned.
the desperate and damned, and everlasting pains.

Calvin 1. Instit. c. 16.. 10. He suffered that death which God in anger
inflicteth upon the wicked. -- He suffered in soul the horrible torments of a
desperate and lost man.

In Catechismo c. de fide he asks: How can it come to pass, that Christ who
is the salvation of the world, should be subject to this damnation? and
Answers: He was not so under Was subject to damnation
it, as he remained under it. In Romans 10. v. 6. He suffered the horrors of
hell, for to deliver us from them.

Beza lib. Quaest. vol. 1. p. 672. He was in the midst of the torments of
hell.

Daneus Cont. 2. p. 165. Bellarmin says, that the only death which Christ
suffered in body, satisfied God for our sins. This is false. For the reward
of sin is death, and that is twoe fould. The Suffered the separation of God
from his soul.
first is the separation of the soul from the body; the second is the
separation of God from the soul. Both which Christ suffered, and therefore
both death of soul and body, and that wholly for us, and not only the death
of the body.

Vrsinus in Catechismo page 278. To believe in Christ who descended into hell,
is to believe that Christ suffered in his soul the hellish torments and
sorrows.

Polanus in Sylloge these. par. 3. p. 450. Christ died the eternal death. And
Pareus Colloq. Theol. 2. disput. 5. cites Brentius saying. Christ burnt in the
flames of hell. More like hellish Was burnt in the flames of hell.
speeches of theirs are in my Latin book ca. 1. art. 22. See Rogers upon the
3. Article of English Confession.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture says, that Christ was free among the dead, that he loused the
sorrows of hell and could not be held of it. The same say Catholics.

Protestants say, that Christ suffered the pains, the sorrows, the anguishes
of hell, the true sorrows of hell, hellish torments, that which the damned now
suffer, the torments of a desperate and lost man, that he burnt in the flames
of hell, was in the midst of the torments of hell, sustained the anguishes of
hell both in body and mind: suffered the torments of hell both in body and
soul: that he suffered the execrable death, the first and second death, that
death which God in his wrath inflicteth upon the wicked, the second death of
the soul which is separation from God, that he died the eternal death: that
he was under damnation.

ART. XXIII. WHETHER CHRIST ENTERED unto his disciples the doors being shut?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ihon. 20. v. 19. When it was late that day the first of the Sabboths, Christ
entered the doors being shut.
and the doors were shut, where the disciples were gathered together for fear
of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst. Et v. 26. After eight days,
again the disciples were within and Thomas with them, Jesus comes the doors
being shut, and stood in the midst, and said etc.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Joan. 20. v. 19. The Evangelist says that Christ entered the
doors being shut, which words exclude all opening of any entrance.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Willet Controu. 20. q. 2. p. 1079. We grant that Christ's coming in the doors
being shut, was miraculous, because one substance gave place to an other for a
time: and after the passing of his body, the place remained whole and shut as
before, but not in the very instant of passing.

Spalatensis lib. 5. Repub. cap. 6. number. 180. Christ could He opened the doors.
truly open himself the doors, and straight ways shut them, and in the
mean time hold the eyes of his disciples, that they should not see either the
doors open or himself enter until he was in the midst.

Peter Martyr in dialogo. col. 97. When our Lord would The doors gave place.
enter, the doors of themselves gave place.

Calvin Admonit. vlt. ad Westphal. p. 805. But if Christ by his divine power
did miraculously open the shut doors, does it therefore follow that his body
was infinite?

Beza cont. Westphal. vol. 1. Theol. p. 231. Calvin thinks He opened the
doors.
rather that the Evangelist spoke of the doors shut, to give to understand
that of themselves they opened to Christ's entrance. In Joan. 20. v. 19. Either
the doors of themselves opened to Christ, or he passed through the walls.

Piscator in Respons. ad Buscherum. c. 13. As if it were not more probable,
that Christ by his divine power did open the shut doors? More of their like
sayings may be seen in my Latin book chapt. 2. art. 23.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ entered to his disciples the doors
being shut and when the doors were shut. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the doors were not shut in the instant of
Christ's entrance, that Christ truly opened the doors, that the doors of
themselves opened and gave place. Which doctrine diverse Protestants confess to
be contrary to Scripture. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. XXIV. WHETHER CHRIST PENEtrated the Heavens?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Hebrews 4. v. 14. Having therefore a great high Priest that Christ penetrated
the Heauenes.
has penetrated the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 3. de Euchar. c. 6. It cannot be temerariously said of the
body of Christ, that the Heavens were broaken when he ascended to his Father.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Vorstius in Antibellarm. p 402. The question is begged in Did not penetrate
heaven.
all the examples which are bought to prove penetration of quantites, whereas
in truth no such thing is any where read in Scripture.

Spalatensis lib. 5. de Republic. cap. 6. number. 182. I admit no penetration.

Gualterus in Joan. 20. calls it a monstrous new doctrine, to say, that twoe
bodies can be at once in the same place.

Tilenus in Syntagm. cap. 8. says that Christ ascended without penetration of
quantities. And the Ministers in the Conference at Paris 1588. affirmed, that
he could not ascend, but renting and breaking the Heavens.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Christ penetrated the Heavens. The same
say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that in Scripture there is no example of
penetration, that they admit no penetration that it is a monstrous new
doctrine, that Christ ascended without penetration, and could not ascend but by
renting the heavens.

ART. XXV. WHETHER CHRIST'S DO IN heaven pray for us?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ihon 14. ver. 16. And I will ask the Father, and he will give Christ our
advocate with the Father. Makes incession for us.
you an other Paraclete.

1. Ihon 2. v. 1. But and if any man shall sin, we have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the just.

Romans 8. verse. 34. Christ Jesus that died, yea that is risen also again, who
is on the right hand of God, who also makes intertercession for us.

Hebrews 7. v. 25. Whereby he is able to save also for ever, going by himself
to God, always living to make intercession for us.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Sanctis c. 20. Christ prays for all. Et. l. 2. de Missa
c. 8. Christ is our only immediate intercessor with his Father.

Tolet in Ihon. 16. Annot. 35. The holy Fathers teach, that Christ in heaven,
as man, prays his Father for us; albeit some deny it, but improbably.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Peter Martyr in 1. Corint. 13. But they must know, that Christ's intercession
with the Father for us, is nothing else, but that Christ's intercession nothing
but etc
he is always present with the Father; and that by his prosence, because he
was delivered to death for us, Gods mercy toward the elect is most speedily
obtained.

Calvin in Joan. 16. v. 26. But when it is said, that Christ prays for us to
his Father, we must not imagine any carnal thing of him, as if falling at his
Fathers fect he humbly made Makes not bu^ble prayer.
prayer: but the virtue of his Sacrifice wherewith he once pacified God to us,
being ever of force, this effectual blood with which he cleansed our sins,
and the obedience which he performed, are a continual intercession for us. And
in Romans 8. v. 34. he says, that because his death and resurrection are in
steed of an eternal intercession, and have the efficacy of a lively prayer,
he is said to intercede for us. The like has Perkins de Serie Causarum to. 1.
col. 21.

Bezain Confess. c. 4. sect. 16. Nether therefore may we imagine, Prays not as
a Supplia^t.
that Christ as a Suppliant prays for us, but he reconcileth us to the Father
by the perpetual odor of his only sacrifice, and makes our prayers
effectual before God.

Bucanus in Instit. Theol. loco. 35. Christ, not by a gesture or prayer, as
casting himself at his Fathers feet, does humbly pray for us, but both by the
merit and virtue of his death, and also by offering our prayers to the Father.
The like say others as may be seen in my Latin book c. 2. art. 25.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ in heaven is our advocate, asks for
us, makes intercession for us. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Christ's intercession is nothing else but his
presence with his Father, that he does not humbly make prayer for us, that his
death and resurrection are in steed of prayer: that he prays not for us as a
Suppliant, that he does not humbly pray for us.

A SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF CHRIST.
In the former Chapter we showed that Protestants cry that we make a new God,
and that this fault rather falls upon them: now we will show that they object
the like unto us concerning Christ, and that themselfes are faulty therein. M.
Perkins in Cathol. reform. Controu. 9. cap. 11. thus writes of Catholics: They
worship an other Christ then we do. And in Conflictu Christi cum Diabolo
tom. 2. col. 130. The Papists Christ, is a feigned Christ. In Apocal. 2. col.
189. The Papists Christ is a false Christ, yea Protestants new Christ.
an idol of Christ. But out of that which has been related in this chapter,
it will appear, that the Catholics Christ is the true Christ described unto us
by the Scripture, and that the Protestants Christ, is a quite different and
opposite Christ. For the Christ which Scripture and Catholics propose, is (as
he is man) to be worshipped, to be called upon, head of the Church, lawmaker,
judge, can forgive sins, work miracles. None of which things agree to the
Protestants Christ.

According to Protestants, Christ as man was ignorant, most truly a sinner,
was afraied of his salvation: but not according to Catholics: According to
Scripture and Catholics Christ merited some thing for himself, truly merited
our redemption, and that by his bodily death or blood, nether was his blood
corrupted: but according to Protestants, he merited nothing for himself,
merited not our redemption with a just price, but by acceptance of his Father,
nor by his corporal death, but by some greater matter, and his blood was
corrupted, nor is now any more in being. According to the Scripture and
Catholics, Christ died for the wicked, for the damned, for all, descended into
hell, was free from infernal pains, entered to his disciples the doors being
shut, penetrated heaven, and there prays for us. None of which things agree
to the Protestants Christ, and consequently he is a far different yea
opposite unto the true Christ described to us by the holy Scripture.

Manifest also it is, that Protestants like true thieves Protestants take from
Christ.
steal from Christ his due honor, because the deny that as he is man, he is
to be worshipped, to be prayed unto, that he is head of the Church, lawmaker,
or Honor.
judge. They rob him of his power, in denying that as Power.
he is man, he can give life, forgive sins, raise the dead, enter the doors
being shut, penetrate the heavens, or work any true miracle. They bereave him
of his knowledge, Knowledge.
for they deny, that as he is man he knows all things, knows the secrets
of hearts, can hear our ptaiers, knew the kind of tree, but had need to be
tought as men are. They steal away his justice or Virtue: Virtue.
for they teach that he was truly and most truly a sinner, that as much as
lay in him he refused to do the office of a Mediator, that he had
inconsiderate desires and contrary to his vocation, that he behaved himself
uncivilly toward his mother, confessed his delicateness, let slip a speech
of desperation, nay was overwhelmed with desperation and exceedingly
despairing. They take from him certainty of salvation, because Certainty of
salvation.
they say, that he was afraied of his salvation, and was almost persuaded that
he was undone. They take Worth.
away worthiness, in saying that nothing had been done by his corporal death,
but that there needed a greater price, that he could not merit to be judge of
the world, that with all his works he merited not heaven, that he could not
merit our redemption by a worthy price but by acceptance of his Father.
Finally they spoil him of his goodness and merit, because they say that he
died not for the wicked, for the reprobate, Mercy,
for all, but only for some few elect, and that now he prays not for us in
heaven. And if you take away from Christ as man his honor, his power, his
knowledge, his justice, his worthiness, his certainty of salvation, his
goodness, what remains of Christ as man, but the bare name of a Savior.
Whereupon rightly said Saint Austin: If we diligently consider those things
which belong to Christ, he is only in name found amongst any Heretics
whatsoever. But hitherto having treated of God and Christ, now let us treat of
Angels and Saints who happily reign with him in heaven.

CHAPTER III. OF ANGELS AND SAINTS IN HEAVEN.
ART. I. WHETHER ANGELS AND Saints in heaven do the will of God?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
PSALM 102. ver. 20. Bless our Lord all ye Angels do Gods word.
his Angels, mighty in power, doing his word. And v. 21. Bless our Lord all
ye his hoastes, you his ministers that do his will. Do his will.


Matthew 6. ver. 10. Thy will be done, as in heaven, in earth also.

Apocal. 21. v. 27. There shall not enter into it (Heaven) any polluted thing,
nor that does abomination and makes lie.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarmin. lib. 1. de bonis operibus in particul. cap. 6. In heaven the
holy Angels obey God readily perfectly and in all things.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in Coloss. 1. v. 20. In this self same obedience, which Angels
obeobedience satisfies not.
(the Angels) give to God, there is not such exquisite perfection, as it
satisfies God in every point and without pardon. And 3. Instit. c. 14.. 16.
Nether the Angels themselves are answerable to that exceeding justice of God.
And c. 17.. 9. In the sight of God nether the Angels are just enough.

The same Calvin Concion. 16. in Job. There is in the Angels There is fault in
the Angels.
folly and vanity, that is fault. -- God found in his Angels that which he
may justly reprehend. -- Nether are the Angels of that perfection, in which if
it be rigorously examined, nothing may be found worthy of blame.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly teaches, that the Angels do Gods word, do his will,
that Gods will is done in heaven, that into heaven enters nothing that does
abhominatio^ or is polluted. The same say Catholics.

Protestants Expressly teach, that the obedience of Angels satisfies not God
in every point and without pardon: that the Angels answer not to Gods
justice: that they are not just enough in Gods sight: that in them is folly,
vanity, and fault, that which God may justly reprehend, that which is worthy
of blame.

ART. II. WHETHER THE SAINTS DO already enjoy their heavenly felicity.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Apocal. 7. v. 14. These are they which are came out of great Saints are before
the throne of God
tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of
the lamb: therefore they are before the throne of God, and they serve him day
and night in his temple.

Luke 23. v. 43. And Jesus said to him: Amen I say to thee, this day thou
shall be with me in paradise.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Session, 25. says. That Saints enjoy everlasting felicity
in heaven, and do reign with Christ.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther Postilla in Dom. 2. post Trinit. fol. 286. All the The Saints sleep.
Fathers before Christ's incarnation went into Abraham's bosom, that is, in
death abode with firm faith in this word and slept in it, and therein sleep
even now until the last day, excepting the^ who rose with Christ. And to. 6.
in c. 25. Genesis says that Saints sleep and know not what is done. Which
otherwhere he often times repeateth.

Calvin in 2. Petri 2. v. 4. Hence we may gather, not only what pain the
reprobate sustain after death, but also what is the Enjoy not yet felicity.
state of the children of God. For they quietly rest in hope of assured
felicity, howbeit as yet they enjoy it not. In Math. 22. v. 23. For nether God
does affirm, that the souls remain after death, as if now they enjoined
their present glory and happiness, but he differreth their hoppe until the
last day. Which he eftsoon, repeateth in Psychopannychia p. 405. and
otherwere. Whereupon Spalatensis l. 5. de Rep. c. 8. n. 113. 115. and 119.
confesses that Calvin teaches, that the blessed souls departed Nor their
essential reward.
out of this world, dot not enjoy their essential reward, felicity, and
glory, until the last day. And himself n. 103. affirms, that that opinion
which attributes perfect felicity unto blessed souls before the
resurrection, has difficulties which cannot be answered: and n. 120.
commends Caluins opinion in this matter, as pious and learned. And the
reason, why he incline^h unto him, he gives n. 102. in these words: For if
blessed If Saints wereinglorie, they could heaven us.
Souls be already fully happy, they may easily harken to us, and request
help of God. So, that for to bereave us of the prayers of Saints, they bereave
them of their heavenly felicity.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly affirms, that the Saints are now before the throne of
God, and in his temple, and that the good thief was in paradise with Christ.
The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly deny, that Saints enjoy their assured felicity, their
present glory and happiness, and say that their hope is differred unto the last
day: that all the Saints sleep unto the last day, and know not what is done:
that they as yet enjoy not their essential glory and felicity.

ART. III. WHETHER THE GLORY OF all the Saints be equal?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
1. Corina. 15. ver. 41. One indeed glory of the sun, an other Saints differ
in glory.
glory of the moon, and other glory of the stars. For star differs
from star in glory: so also the resurrection of the dead.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
C. Bellarm. l. 3. de Iustif. c. 16. The testimonies of the Scripture do teach,
that the rewards in heaven are not equal.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Peter Martyr in 1. Cor. 15. v. 32. But if God, in giving everlasting No
degrees of reward.
life, do not respect the worth of our works, whence shall we gather these
degrees of rewards. Again: our adversaries have devised this distinction of
substantial and accidental reward: They shall have the brightness of the
sun, that is, equally Equal glory.
the greatest glory.

Pareus l. 5. de Iustif. c. 20. The Papists do feign diverse degrees of
eternal life. But whence have they the degrees which they make?

Perkins in Galat. 1. tom. 2. All the elect enjoy equal essential Equal
essential glory.
glory.

Calvin in Matthew. 20. Some (Protestant) interpreters do gather this sum:
Because the heavenly inheritance is not gotten by merit of works but is
given freely, that the glory of all shall be equal.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that the dead shall rise as different in
glory, as one star differs from an other. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that there is no distinction of substantial or
accidental glory, that the substantial glory of all the elect shall be
equal: that there are no degrees of everlasting life, no degrees of reward in
heaven, that all shall equally enjoy the greatest glory. Which some
Protestants confess to be repugnant to Scripture. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. XX. WHETHER ANGELS AND Saints in heaven pray for us?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Zachary 1. v. 12. And the Angel of our Lord answered and Angels pray for us.
said: O Lord of hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and
on the cities of Judah with which thou have been angry.

2. Machabees 15. v. 12. And the vision was in this manner: And Saints.
Onias who had been the high priest, a good and benign man stretching forth
his hands prayed for all the people of the Jews. v. 14. This is a lover of his
brethren and of the people of Israel: this is he that prays much for the
people and for the whole city, Hieremie the Prophet of God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent sess. 25. cap. de Inuocat. says, that their opinion is
impious who say that the Saints pray not for us.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confession of France art. 24. We believe that whatsoever Saints pray not for
us.
men have feigned of the prayer of Saints, is nothing else but the frauds and
deceit of Satan. The like has Confess. Heluet. c. 5. and Apol. Confess. August.
c. de inuocat.

Willet Controu. 9. quaest. 3. page 440. Saints do not pray for us.

Whitaker ad Rat. 4. Compiani: Whether the Martyrs and Saints in heaven do pray
to Christ for us, we know not.

Zuinglius in Explanat. art. 20. There cannot be alleged out of the Bible any
doctrine or example, that proves Saints in heaven to pray for us. -- If as you
feign, they pray for us, they will move God nothing. For it is not done from
the heart.

Bullinger Decade 4. Sermon. 5. The Scripture teaches not, Angels pray not for
us.
that Angels pray. De Origin. cultus Diuorum. cap. 15. It becomes not the
Saints, taking to themselves the office of Christ, to pray for us.

Calvin 3. Instit. c. 20.. 21. What Angel or Devil ever told any man any
syllable of this prayer of Saints which they feign. In 1. Tim. 2. v. 5. It is
a mere fiction bred in the brains, that the dead pray for us.

Daneus Controu. 7. p. 1311. They request nothing of God, Nether in general
nor in particular.
either in general or in particular, for the necessities of those that live on
earth.

Polanus in Disp. private. disp. 25. The Saints departed pray not God for the
living, either in general or in particular.

Vorstius in Antibellarm. pa. 281. We deny, that the holy Angels, and
especially the souls of the Just departed hence, do pray in particular for our
necessities.

Pareus in Colloq. Swal. 3. They should sin, if they They should sin if
they prayed for us.
prayed for us. Because they should both accuse God of unmercifulness, as if he
heard not sufficiently Christ's prayers; and also should reprove Christ of
weakness and fluggishnes.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that an Angel, and Onias, and Hieremie after
their death did pray for the people. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that nether Angels nor Saints pray for us, that
it becomes not them to pray for us, that they should sin if they prayed for
us, that they do it not from their heart: that they pray nether in general nor
in particular for us: that the prayer of Saints is a fiction fraud and deceit
of the devil. Which is so opposite to Scripture as some Protestants
acknowledge it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. V. WHETHER SAINTS IN heaven care for our matters?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
2. Machabees 15. ver. 12. and 15. And the vision was in this Saints have care
for us.
manner -- And that Hieremie put forth his right hand and gave unto Judas a
sword of gould, saying: Take the holy sword a gift from God wherewith thou
shall overthrow the adversaries of my people Israel.

1. Cor. 13. v. 8. Charity never falls away.

2. Peter 1. verse. 15. And I will do my diligence, you to have often after my
decease also, that you may keep a memory of these things.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarm. l. 1. de Sanctis c. 18. The Angels pray for us and have care of
us in particular, therefore much more the spirits of holy men.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Tindal in Fox Acts p. 1137. What buildest thou Churches, Saints be not our
friends.
fou^dest Abbeys, Chauntries and Colleges in the honor of Saints, to my
Mother, S. Peter, Paul and Saints that be dead, to make of them thy friends?
They need it not, yea they be not thy friends.

Luther Postilla in Dom. 9. post Trinit. Nether are they thy friends, but
theirs, of whom in their life time they received benefit.

Calvin 3. Instit. c. 20. 23. For what Saint is to be thought Take no care of
us.
to take care of the safety of the people, Moises giving it over, who whiles
he lived far surpassed all others in this point? In Luc. 16. verse. 19. Here
the Papists are fondly subtle, whiles they will prove, that the dead have care
of the living, which is a stinking cavil. In Zachar. ver. 12. We know, that
the offices of charity Charity only for this life.
are restrained to the course of this life. Which also has Zuinglius respons.
ad Luther. to. 2. fol. 379.

Beza in Lucae 15. v. 10. Who can therefore rightly persuade himself or
others, that the Souls of Saints in heaven have care of those things, which
are done on earth, or that they know the^, and much less, that they ought to
be prayed unto?

Pareus in Colloq. Swal. 3. The Scripture denies, that the Care not for our
necessities
Saints in heaven know and care for our necessities.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that charity never falls away, that Hieremie
had care of the people after his death. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the offices of charity are restrained to
this present l^fe, that Saints in heaven are not our friends, that they have no
care of us, or of our necessities.

ART. VI. WHETHER ANGELS AND Saints hear our prayers and know our affairs?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Tobie 12. verse. 12. the Angel says: When thou did pray Angels hear our
prayers.
with tears, and did burte the dead and left thy dinner, and did hide the
dead by day in thy house, and by night did bury them, I offered thy prayer
to our Lord.

Luke 15. verse. 10. So I say to you, there shall be joy before the Know our
repentance.
Angels of God upon one sinner that does penance. And cap. 16. verse. 19.
Abraham being dead says: They have Moses and the Prophets.

Apocal. 4. verse. 1. After these things I looked, and behold a door open in
heanen, and the first voice which I heard was as it were of a trumpet speaking
to me, saying: Come up hither, and I Know things to come.
will show thee the things which must be done quickly after these. And c. 19.
v. 1. and 2. After these things I heard as it is were the voice of many
multitudes in heaven saying Alleluia, praise, and And punishments of the wicked.
glory, and power is to our God: Because true and just are his judgments
which has judged of the great harlot, that has corrupted the eorth in her
whordome, and has revenged the blood of his servants of her hands.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Sanctis c. 20. It is not true, that Saints do not know
what we ask of them.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker ad Ration. 4. Campiani. It is certain, that the Saints know not what
we do. Hear not our prayers.
Saints do not know what we do.

Apologia Confess. Augustan. c. de Inuocat. It cannot be said, that Saints do
hear our prayer.

Calvin 3. Instit. cap. 20.. 24. Who told, that they have so long ears, that
they can stretch them unto our prayers; so quick eyes, that they can perceive
our necessities? And in 1. Cor. 13. v. 8. The Saints do not know our estate.

Beza in 1. Joan. 2. verse. 1. The blessed spirits have no knowledge of things
done here below. And l. quaestion. and respons. vol. 1. It is easy to refute
as a foolish and gross fiction, that they say, that God reuealeth our prayers
to the blessed spirits.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the Angel heard the prayer and knew the good
deeds of Tobias: that the Angels know and rejoice of the penance of a sinner,
that Abraham knew of Moises and the Prophets, that Saints knew the wickedness of
the great harlot and Gods punishment upon her. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Saints know not what we do, that they hear
not our prayers, perceive not our necessities, know not our estate, that to say
that God reuealeth to them our prayers is a foolish and gross fiction.

ART. XVII. WHETHER ANGELS OR Saints in heaven do offer our prayers to God?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Tobie 12. verse. 12. cit. the Angel says: When thou did Angels off^r our
prayers to God.
pray with tears, I offered thy prayer to our Lord. Apocal. 5. v. 8. And when
he had opened the book, the four beasts and the sour and twenty Seniours
fell before the lamb, having every one harpes and goulden vials full of
odours which are the prayers of saints. And c. 8. v. 3. And an other Angel came
and stood before the altar, having a goulden censar, and there were given to
him many incenses, that he should give of the prayers of all Saints upon the
altar of gould which is before the throne of God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Cardin. Bellarmin. lib. 1. de Sanctis cap. 16. Calvin intimates, that not
only the Saints but nether the Angels can offer our prayers to God, which is
against most plain Scripture.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Willet Controuers. 9. quaestion. 3. page 440. That Saints They offer not up
our prayers.
should offer up our special prayers, and make particular request for us to
God, is no where found in the Scripture, but rather the contrary.

Reineccius tom. 4. Armaturae c. 7. The words of the Angel: Tobiae loc. cit.
are spoken after our fashion. For there is no need, that Angels should offer
our prayers to the Lord, because God is not far of.

Calvin 3. Institut. cap. 20.. 20. Christ having entered into the Sanctuary of
heaven till the end of the world, alone does offer to God requests of the
people, which sits a far of in the entry.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that the Angel offered Tobies prayer to God:
that the four and twenty seniors did offer the prayers of holy men before
the lamb: that an Angel did offer the prayers of all Saints before the throne
of God. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that Angels do not offer our prayers to the
Lord: that Saints do not offer our special prayers to God: that Christ only
offers to God the prayers of the people.

ART. VIII. WHETHER ANGELS OR Saints be to be prayed unto?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Genes. 48. verse. 16. Jacob thus praierh: The Angel that Angels prayed unto.
delivers me from all evils, bless these children, and be my name called
upon them, the names also of my fathers Abraham and Isaac.

Osee 12. v. 4. And he (Jacob) prevailed against the Angel Jacob prayed an
Angel.
and was strenghned, and he wept and besought him.

Tobie 5. verse. 21. And Tobias answering, said: well may you walk, and God be
in your journey, and his Angel accompany you.

Luke 16. ve. 24. Christ either in a history or in a parable makes the rich
man thus praying: Father Abraham have mercy on me. And v. 27. Then Father I
beseech the, that thou would send etc. And nether he, nor Abraham condemns
this prayer as impious or idolatrous, but only rejects it as two late.

Apocalypse. 1. v. 4. 5. S. Ihon thus prays: Grace to you and peace from him
that is, and that was, and shall come, and from the seven spirits which are in
the sight of his throne, and from Jesus Christ who is the faithful witness.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent. Sess. 25. c. de Inuocat. It is good and profitable humbly to
call upon the Saints that reign together with Christ.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
The English Articles art. 22. The doctrine of the Romanists Saints not to be
prayed unto.
touching invocation of Saints, is a fond thing vainly devised. In like sort
writes Confess. Heluet, cap. 5. Wirtenbergica c. de Inuocat. Augustana c. 21.
Saxonica c. 22. and Articuli Smalcaldici c. de Inuocat.

Perkins in Serie causarum cap. 21. The invocation of the Nor Angels.
Saints and Angels is much more impious. So in reform. Cath. page 251.

Rainolds in his Conference c. 1. sect. 2. calls it, a most pestilent
basiliske.

Melancthon in Disput. to. 4. pa. 531. The invocation of the dead, is manifest
idolatry.

Beza in 1. Joan. 2. ver. 1. The Souls in heaven of Saints departed this life,
cannot be inuocated without impiety. And lib. quaest. and resp. vol. 1.
affirms, that the invocation of Angels and dead Saints, is impious idolatry.
The Like say Protestants commonly.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Jacob made prayer to any Angel, besought
an Angel with tears, that Tobie prayed an Angel, that the rich man inuocated
Abraham, that S. Ihon prayed unto the seven spirits which are before the throne
of God. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that the invocation of Angels or Saints is a
found thing vainly devised, impious, idolatrous, and most pestilent.

ART. IX. WHETHER GOD BE TO BE prayed unto by the names of Saints?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Exodus 32. ver. 11. and 13. But Moises besought the Lord his God prayed by
names of Saints.
God, saying -- Remember Abraham, Isaac and Israel thy servants, to whom thou
swarest by thine own self, saying: I will multiply your seed as the stars
of heaven.

Psalm. 131. v. 10. For David thy servants sake, turn not away the face of thy
Christ.

2. Paralipomen. 6. v. vlt. Remember the mercies of David thy servant.

Daniel. 6. ver. 35. Nether take thou away thy mercy from us for Abraham thy
beloved, and Isaac thy servant, and Israel thy holy one.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Sanctis cap. 19. In the old testament men prayed God and
alleged the merits of Saints which were departed, that their prayers might be
helped by them.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confession of Saxony c. 22. says, that in the Prophets, Not to be so prayed.
there is not found any such invocation: Hear me O God for Abraham.

Confession of Bohemia art. 2. They teach, that God is to be prayed and
inuocated by the name of Christ only.

Calvin 3. Instit. c. 20.. 21. In Papistrie, God is besought by the names of
Saints. Ibid. Their merits are obtruded for to purchase Gods good will. The
like teach commonly all Protestants. So Perkins reform. Catholic Contr. 14. p.
257.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Moises prayed God by the names of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob: that Azarias in Daniel did the same: that Solomon prayed God
for David's sake and for his mercies. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that there is no such kind of prayer in the
Prophets: Hear me o God for Abraham's sake: that God is to be prayed unto only
by Christ's name: that to pray God by the names or merits of Saints is unlawful.

ART. X. WHETHER GOD TAKE Mercy on men for the merits of Saints?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMITH.
3. Reg. v. 4. But for David's sake our Lord his God gave him a God has mercy
for the Saints sake.
lamp in Jerusalem, that he might raise up his son after him and establish
Jerusalem, because David had done right in the eyes of our Lord.

4. Reg. 19. ver. 34. And I will protect this city, and I will save it for my
self and for David my servant.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Prompt. Cathol. in Festo Om. Sanctoru^: The Scripture by many
examples does show the merits of Saints, by which the godly are helped.

C. Bellarm. l. 2. de Missa c. 8. We ask mercy of God by the merits and
prayers of Saints, through the mediation of Christ.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Apologia Confess. Augustan. c. de Inuoc. We think, that we ought not to trust
that the merits of Saints are applied unto us, that for them God is reconciled
to us.

Whitaker l. 9. cont. Dur. sect. 38. We know, that you are God has not mercy
for the Saints sake.
blasphemous and injurious to Christ, who pray to Saints that their merits may
help you.

Calvin 3. Instit. c. 20.. 21. In Papistrie; Now and then the merits of Saints
are obtruded for to get Gods good will.

De vera reform. p. 339. It is not to be borne, that which they say, that
through Gods liberality and Christ's grace, merits of Saints do profit us for
protection and obtaining of favor.

Perkins ref. Cathol. Co^tr. 14. p. 266. We utterly deny that we are helped
by merits of Saints either living or departed.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that God did good to Abias David's great
graundchild for David's sake, and because David had done right in Gods sight,
that is, for the good deeds or merits of David: that he protected Jerusalem
for himself and for David. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that God is not reconciled unto us for the
merits of Saints: that it is blasphemous to say, that the merits of Saints do
help us: that they profit us not either for protection, or obtaining of favor.

ART. XI. WHETHER ANGELS OR SAINTS are to be worshipped with the bowing of our
body?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Genesis 19. v. 1. And the twoe Angels came to Sodom at even, and Lot sitting in
the gates of the city: who when he had seen Angels Worshipped.
them, rose up and went to meet them, and adored prostrate on the ground, and
said: I beseech you my Lords turn into the house of your servant.

Numbers 22. v. 31. Forewith our Lord opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the
Angel standing in the way with a drawn sword, and he adored him flat to the
ground.

Iosue 5. v. 13. When Iosue had seen an Angel and asked him who he was, and
the Angel had answered: I am a Prince of the hoaste of our Lord: Iosue fell
flat to the ground and adoring, said etc.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent. Sess. 25. By the Images which we kiss, and to which we put
of our hatts, we worship the Saints whose images they are.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confessio Mulhusnia art. 10. We dislike the veneration Not to be worshipped.
of Saints. And Heluet. c. 5. We nether adore, nor worship, nor invoke the
Saints in heaven.

Perkins reform. Cathol. Controu. 14. c. 2. p. 249. Because No not with civil
worship.
Angels appear not now as in former times, not so much as civil adoration in
any bodily gesture is to be done unto them. We deny that any civil
worship in bending of the knee or prostrating of the body is to be given to
the Saints.

Humfrey ad Ration. 3. Campiani page 263. Vigilantius tought that Saints are
not to be reverenced, nor that we ought Not to be reverenced.
superstitiously to run to their monuments. We say the same.

Whitaker Contr. 2. q. 6. c. 3. Papists worship Angels and the Saints.

Luther postilla in Domin. 23. post Trinit. For what other was the worship
and reverence of Saints, but a devilish thing?

Calvin 1. Instit. c. 12.. 3. He could not fall down to the Angel, without
diminishing of Gods glory.

Bullinger Decad. 4. form. 9. We must be ware, that we nether adore, invoke,
or worship Angels. The same say Protestants commonly.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Lot seeing Angels adored prostrate on the
ground: that Iosue hearing of an Angel that he was a Prince of Gods hoaste fell
flat on the ground and adored: that Balaam adored flat to the ground an Angel,
and yet was not reprehended therefore either of the Angel or of the Scripture.
Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly teach, that it is not lawful to reverence, venerate,
adore, worship or bow to the Angels or Saints, but it is a devilish thing.
And yet Luther himself thus writes epist. ad Erphurdienses tom. 7. fol. 500.
I do not think, that they are to be rejected or condemned, who whorshippe
Saints without presuming trust. For whatsoever they do to Saints, they do to
Christ. Nether can it be but Christ is partaker of the honor which is given to
Saints.

ART. XII. WHETHER SAINTS BE TO be imitated of us?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Cor. 11. v. 1. Be ye followers of me, as I also of Christ.

Philippen. 3. ver. 17. Be followers of me brethren and observe Saints to be
imitated and followed.
them that walk so as you have our form.

2. Thessalon. 3. v. 7. For your selves know, how you ought to imitate us.

Hebr. 13. v. 7. Remember your Prelates, who have spoaken the word of God to
you: the end of whose conversation beholding, imitate their faith.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Lucae. 9. v. 54. The faithful Christians piously and
carefully imitate the examples of the holy Fathers.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther Postilla in Festo S. Ioann. fol. 378. These trifles Saints not to be
imitated or followed.
ought not be sung unto the people out of the pulpits in preaching, that they
should imitate the Saints and follow their footesteppes. And in ferijs eiusdem
fol. 91. An old error has gotten possession and force, that we all look upon
the deeds and lives of Saints, and endeavor to follow them, thinking (like
fools) that this is a great piety -- The way of the Lord admits not
examples of Saints, but in all things expects the commandments of the Lord
only. In die Epiphaniae fol. 130. God Nor their examples.
requires, that we follow his only Scripture, and not the examples of Saints.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that we must follow Saints and imitate them.
Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly teach, that Saints are not to be imitated or followed,
their examples not to be admitted, that it is an error to look upon the lives
of Saints and follow them.

ART. XIII. WHETHER HOLY MEN receive us into everlasting tabernacles?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Luc. 16. v. 9. And I say unto you. Make unto you friends of Holy men receive
us into Heaven.
the mammon of iniquity, that when you fail, they may receive you into the
eternal tabernacles.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Lucae 16. ver. 9. Christ teaches, that they to whom we have
done good do receive us into eternal tabernacles, that is, Christ for the^ not
only by reason of the good work, but also for their prayers, gives us life
everlasting.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther postilla in Dom. 9. post Trinit. fol. 107. We must They receive us not
into Heaven.
not understand, that men shall receive us into eternal tabernacles.

Illyricus in Claue part. 2. tractar. 6. Pore men are said to receive their
benefactours into eternal tabernacles, whereas this is the deed of the Father
alone for the merit of his Son.

Calvin in Lucae 16. verse. 9. citat. He means not, that we must get patrons
and intreatours, who by their protection may shield and defend us. -- But they
do fondely and absurdly, who hereupon gather that we are helped by the prayers
or suffrages of the dead.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that holy men to whom we have done good, do
receive us into eternal tabernacles. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that no men receive us into eternal
tabernacles, that that is the deed of the Father alone, that we are not to get
patrons or intreatours for us.

ART. XIV. WHETHER ANY SAINT may be called our hope?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Thessalon. 2. v. 18. For what is our hope, or joy, or crown Saints called
our hope.
of glory? Are not you before our Lord Jesus in his coming? For you are our
glory and joy.

Ihon 5. v. 45. Think not, that I will accuse you to the Father, there is that
accuses you, Moises, in whom you trust.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de bonis oper. in part. c. 15. The B. Virgin is called our
hope, because, after God, we trust especially in her intercession.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in Co^fes. p. 109. Many kinds of prayers were brought Not to be so
called.
in, which had horrible blasphemies, as when the Virgin is termed of infidels
the gate of salvation, our hope.

Beza in Joan. 2. v. 5. Idolatry has so far prevailed, that they are not
ashamed to call Marie, the Queen of heaven, their hope, and salvation.

P. Martyr in 1. Cor. c. 3. They call the B. Virgin their hope, as if they
would put their hope in a creature.

Pareus in Colloq. 3. Swal. You salute Marie by the Title of your hope: Which
salutation tends to the dishonor of God.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the Thessalonians were the hope, joy and
crown of glory of the Apostle before our Lord: that the Jews did trust in
Moises, and yet were not reprehended therefore. Catholics say the like.

Protestants expressly say, that it tends to the dishonor of God, is
idolatry and horrible blasphemy to call our bessed Lady our hope.

ART. XV. WHETHER SAINTS HAD power to work miracles?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew. 10. ver. 1. And having called his twelve disciples together, Some
Saints had power to do miracles.
he gave them power over unclean spirits that they should cast them out, and
should cure all manner of disease and all manner of infirmity.

Mark. 3. ver. 15. And he gave them power to cure infirmities, and to cast out
devils.

1. Corin. 12. v. 9. To one certes by the spirit is given the word of wisdom
-- to an other the grace of doing cures in one spirit, to an other, the working
of miracles.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 4. de Eccles. c. 14. How could God more plainly express his
mind, then by giving to one the singular gift of miracles?

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in Gal. 3. v. 3. God never gave any man the power of Never man had
power to work miracles.
working miracles, either mediatly or immediately.

Vrsinus in Catechismo q. 99. The power of working miracles is not transfused
into Saints, therefore metaphorically they are said to work them.

Beza in 1. Cor. 12. v. 6. But in doing of miracles, if we consider the work
it self, Gods power does work without any communication at all, which he
imparteth not even to the Angels themselves. What then will some say? Were the
saints of God like stocks and blocks in the working of miracles? No. For either
by their prayers they obtained the miracles of God, or understanding Gods will
by inward grace or peculiar revelation, they declared it: but so, that no power
of theirs did in any sort concur as efficient cause to the working of the
miracles.

Piscator in These. l. 2. p. 373. Does God imparte to any creature the power of
working miracles? We deny it: because the power of working miracles is
omnipotency it self.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Christ gave the Apostles power to cure all
manner of diseases and infirmities: that to some is given the grace of working
miracles. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that God never gave to any creature the power of
working miracles either mediatly or immediately: that he imparteth not to Saints
the power of working miracles: that no power in them concurreth as efficient
cause to the working of miracles but only the power that is in God: that all
power of working miracles is omnipotency it self, and never imparted to any
creature.

ART. XVI. WHETHER SAINTS DO reign with Christ?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Apocal. 5. v. 10. Thou have made us to our God a kingdom and priests, and we
shall reign upon the earth.

Apocal. 20. ver. 6. They shall be priests of God and of Christ, Saints reign
with Christ.
and shall reign with him a thousand years. c. 22. v. 5. Our Lord God does
illuminate them, and they, shall reign for ever and ever.

Apocal. 2. v. 26. And he that shall overcome and keep my Have power over
nations.
works unto the end, I will give him power over the nations, and he shall rule
them with a rod of iron. Cap. 3. verse. 21. He that shall overcome, I will
give unto him to sit with me in my throne, as I also have overcome, and have
sitten with my Father in his throne.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Sanctis cap. 18. We learn, that the souls of holy
men after their death before the resurrection do receive power over nations,
and do rule them, and sit in the throne of Christ, that is, do with him
govern the whole world.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Reineccius tom. 4. Armaturae c. 7. The Saints do not reign Saints reign not
with Christ. Do not rule nations.
with Christ. The like has Vorstius in Antibel. p. 298.

Pareus in Collegio Theol. 9. disput. 18. says, that it is an error to say:
That as Angels, so the souls of blessed men are appointed of God to rule and
govern us. Of the same opinion are all other Protestants, who say, that the
Saints in heaven nether know nor care what is done on earth.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Saints reign with Christ, govern nations,
sit in Christ's throne. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that Saints reign not with Christ, are not
appointed of God to rule and govern us, know not, nor care not what is done on
earth.

ART. XVII. WHETHER ANY SAINT were full of grace?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Luc. 1. v. 28. the Angel says to our B. Lady. Hail full of grace.

Act. 36. ver. 28. Consider therefore brethren seven men of you Some Saints
full of grace.
of good testimony, full of the holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint
over this business. And v. 8. And Stephen full of grace and fortitude did
great wonders.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 3. part. q. 27. art. 5. The B. Virgin Marie obtained such fullness
of grace, that she was nighest to the author of grace.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Illyricus in Lucae 1. v. 28. cit. It is ill translated: Full of grace: None
full of grace.
For Christ alone is full of grace and truth.

Calvin in Lucae. 1. v. 15. expounds, Full of grace, Above the ordinary
course. Of the same mind also are other Protestants, who either deny that the
Angel saluted our B. Lady, Full of grace; or deny, that we have any inherent
justice or grace in us, as we shall see hereafter.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that our lady and S. Stephen was full of grace,
and that others were full of the holy Ghost. And Catholics say the same.

Protestants say, that Christ alone was full of grace, and that others have no
grace or justice in them.

A SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF ANGELS or Saints.
It appears out of that which has been rehearsed in this chapter, that
Protestants do far otherwise describe unto us Angels and Saints, then the
holy Scripture and Catholics do. For according to the Scripture and Catholics
they are perfectly just and perfectly do the will of God, but not according to
Protestants. In the verdict of the Scripture and Catholics, they pray for us,
have care of our matters, hear our prayers: In the opinion of Protestants they
do none of these. According to the Scripture and Catholics, they are to be
prayed unto, to be worshipped, to be imitated of us, and God is to be inuocated
by their names, who also for their good deeds, their sake does good unto us:
but according to Protestants none of all these things belong unto them. In the
doctrine of the Scripture and Catholics, they enjoy their heavenly felicity,
reign with Christ, and some of them had power to do miracles: but in the
Protestants Doctrine they nether enjoy their heavenly happiness, nor reign with
Christ, nor any of them had or can have power to work miracles.

Protestants therefore steal from Angels and Saints Protest. steal from
Saints. Power. Virtue.
their power, whiles they deny, that they are capable of power to work
miracles: steal away their perfect justice, in denying that they are perfectly
just or perfectly do the will of God. Rob them of their honor, because they
Honor.
deny that we may honor them, imitate them, pray to them, or pray to God in
their names. They spoil them Dignity.
of their dignity, in saying that God does not any good unto us for their
merits or good deeds. They bereave Knowledge.
them of their knowledge, in saying that they know not any thing that is done
on earth. They rob them of Charity.
their charity, because they say, that they pray not for us either in general
or in particular, have no care of us, not exercise any offices of charity
toward us. Finally they Happiness.
take from them their heavenly felicity, because they teach, that they enjoy
not that until the day of judgment. And hitherto we have spoaken of those who
are in heaven: now let us speak of these things which are on earth, and first
of the word of God.

CHAPTER IV. OF THE WORD OF GOD OR SCRIPTVRE.
ART. I. WHETHER ANY PLACES OF Scripture be hard to be understood.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
PETER 3. verse. 16. As our most dear Some places of Scripture hard to be
understood.
brother Paul, according to the wisdom given him, has written to you, as also
in all his epistles speaking in them of these things, in the which are certain
things hard to be understood, which the unlearned and unstable deprave.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
D. Stapleton in Joan. 17. v. 20. Catholics deny, that all the Scripture is
plain and clear.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Whitaker Controu. 1. q. 4. c. 3. p. 337. Peter says not, that Paul's
epistles are obscure, no nor that there are some obscure things in Paul's
epistles. And c. 4. p. 340. It is manifest, that the Scriptures are easy to be
understood. And he adds, that the whole will of God which is declared in his
whole word and Scriptures, and the whole Scripture, is easy. The same he
says p. 341. Of the whole Scripture, of the universal Scripture, and whole
word of God.

Luther l. de seru. arbit. to. 2. fol. 426. It is spread abroad by No place of
Scripture hard.
the impious Sophisters, that there are some things obscure in the Scripture,
and that all things are not laid open. Fol. 427. There is nothing at all left
obscure or ambiguous, but all things are brought into most clear light by the
word, and declared to the whole world whatsoever is in Scripture. And fol. 440.
I speak of the whole Sripture: I will not have any part of it to be said to
be obscure. The like he has Postilla in festo S. Iacobi fol. 430. and Cont.
Cocleum to. 2. fol. 410. Never any thing was uttered more simply, more purely,
more clearly, more easily, then the word of God. Praefat. Assert. art. The
Scripture is by it self No book more clear then the Scriture.
the most certain, the most easy, the most clear interpreter of it self,
proving, judging, and lightning all things. And in psalm. 37. to. 3. fol. 10.
If any of them say, that we need the Fathers interpretation, the Scriptures
are obscure: Thou shall answer: That is false. No book in the whole world is
most clearly written then the holy Scripture, which compared to all other
books, is like the Sun before all other lights.

Gerlachius disputat. 1. tom. 1. page 9. We say, that the whole Scripture is so
clear, as it needs no interpretation at all.

Zanchius de Scriptura tom. 8. col. 408. How then can the Scripture be said
obscure in any part thereof? col. 409. If the Scripture be obscure in no
part (as before we have showed) much less in those things which are
necessary to salvation. And l. 1. Epistol. page 98. The places of holy
Scripture, from whence the decrees of Christian religion are drawn, are so
plain and manifest, as they need no more diligent or clearer exposition.

Serranus cont Hayum part. 3. p. 267. says, that there is not any ambiguitie
or obscurity in the matter or words of the Scripture. And p. 269. that the
Lord has plainly laid open in the Scripture all the mysteries of our
salvation. Many more of their like sayings may be seen in my Latin book cap.
4. art. 1.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that in S. Paul's epistles there be some things
hard to be understood. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the Scripture says not that there are some
obscure things in S. Paul's epistles: that the Scripture, the whole scripture is
easy: that the whole scripture is so clear as it needs no interpretation at
all: that no part of it is obscure, that all things are clear whatsoever is
in the word and declared to the whole world: that the Scripture is the easiest
and clearest interpreter of it self: that no book in the whole world is so
clear as the Scripture, and that being compared to them, it is like the Sun
to other lights. Which are so manifestly contrary to Scripture as Protestants
themselves sometimes confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. II. WHETHER SCRIPTVRE CAN BE understood without the light of the holy
Ghost?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
2. Peter 1. v. 20. Understanding this first, that no prophetie Scripture not
understood of our selves.
(or exposition) of Scripture is made by private interpretation.

Matthew. 13. v. 11. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven, but to them it is not given.

Luc. 24. v. 45. Then he opened their understanding, that they might understand
the Scriptures.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
D. Stapleton l. 11. de Principijs c. 2. The spirit of God, of whom the
understanding of the Scriptures is to be asked and given, is not to be sought
in the Scriptures themselves.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Whitaker l. 1. de Scriptura c. 12. sect. 8. The Scriptures may Scripture not
understood by only reading. without the holy Ghost.
be known by only reading. l. 2. c. 8. sect. 16. I say, that the Scriptures
may be understood before faith and without faith. Again, But if thou think,
that the Scriptures cannot be understood at all without peculiar lightning of
the holy Ghost, thou art in a great error. And Controu. 1. q. 6. c. 13. For
so much as appertains to the knowledge of the letter, the Church has no
privilege.

Morton. in Apol. part. 2. l. 5. c. 10. Any one though never so Any may
understand the Scripture:
so impious, may search the Scriptures to knowledge, though not to wisdom:
that is, to the knowledge of truth, though not to the attayning of salvation.

Beza l. de notis Eccles. vol. 3. p. 137. But for to understand what the
Prophets and Apostles have in sum thought and thought of every article of
our religion, there needs only a wit not wholly dull, and knowledge of
tongues, and atte^tiue reading. And p. 138. Understanding is common to all that
have any judgment, but to knowledge, there is need of the external
illustration of the holy Ghost, by reason of the blindness, of man's judgment.
The same say all Protestants who teach (as we have seen in the former article)
that the Scripture is clear.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that prophecy, that is, understanding of
Scripture, is not made by private interpretation: that to know the mysteries of
the kingdom of heaven is given to some as a peculiar gift not common to all:
that Christ's disciples had need to have their understanding opened by him for
to understand the Scriptures. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the Scripture may be known by only reading:
that to know what the Prophets or Apostles thought of every article of our
religion, we need but a mean wit, knowledge of tongues and attentive reading:
That Scripture may be understood without faith and without any peculiar light
of the holy Ghost: that to understand the sense of the letter there is
privilege of the Church, that never so wicked men may know the truth of the
Scripture. Which are so contrary to Scripture, as diverse Protestants confess
it. See libro 2. cap. 30.

ART. III. WHETHER THE GHOSPEL be a law or contain any law?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew. 11. v. 30. My yoke is sweet and my burden light. c. 28. Christ's
Gospel contains laws and precepts.
v. 19. Teach ye all nations, baptizing them etc. teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you.

Ihon 15. v. 14. You are my friends, if you do the things that I command you.

Galat. 6. v. 2. Bear ye one an others burdens, and so ye shall fulfill the
law of Christ. The same is evident by other places which shall be cited in the
two next articles, and by the laws of baptism and the Euchariste which are in
the Ghospel.

Romans 2. v. 16. God shall judge secrets of men according to my Ghospel.

Apocal. 14. v. 6. And I saw an other Angel flying through the midst of
heaven having the eternal Gospel to euangelize to them that sit upon the
earth -- saying with a loud voice: Fear our Lord etc.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 4. de Iustif. c. 2. The Ghospel contains laws properly so
called.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther de votis to. 2. fol. 271. They know not the Gospel, The Gospel is
no law.
whiles they make a law of it. Postilla in Dom. 3. aduentus fol. 36. None of
thy works must follow the Gospel, for it is not a law which requires
works, but only faith, because in it nothing is done, but that Gods grace is
offered and promised.

Confessio Wittenberg. c. de Euangelio. Unless ye take the name of the law
generally for doctrine, certainly the Gospel of Christ is not properly a law.
The same says Pareus in Galat. 6. lect. 71.

Perkins in Gal. 6. to. 2. The Gospel must no ways be called a new law. So
also Beza cont. Sanct. Apol. 1. p. 305. Mart. in Romans 7. p. 375. in 8.

Melancthon in Disput. to. 4. p. 490. The old testament is a law: the new
testament is no law. The same say others, as appears by what has been
rehearsed cap. 3. art. 7. and shall be more in the twoe next articles.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the Gospel of Christ is a yoke and
burden, that therein he commands some things, that Christ has a law; that he
commanded the receiving of baptism and the Euchariste, that men shall be judged
according to the Gospel; that the eternal Gospel commands men to fear
God. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the Gospel is no law, no ways to be called
a new law, the new testament no law: the Gospel properly no law unless by
law you mean doctrine: that it is no law that requires works.

ART. IV. WHETHER THE GOSPEL does preach penance, and good works?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew 3. verse. 2. Ihon Baptist thus began his preaching The Gospel
commands penance.
of the Gospel: Do penance: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Matthew. 4. v. 17. From that time Jesus began to preach and to say: Do
penance: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Luc. 5. v. 23. I came not to call the just, but sinners to penance. c. 24. v.
26. It behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day, and
penance to be preached in his name and remission of sins unto all nations.

Acts 2. verse. 38. S. Peter thus preached the Gospel. Do penance, and be
every one of you baptized. And S. Paul c. 17. v. 30. God now denounces unto
men, that all every where do penance.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 4. de Iustif. c. 2. The Gospel threatens wrath and
indignation to them who do not receive our Savior, nor do penance.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
The Divines of Targa apud Hospin. in Concordia discordi The Gospel properly
is no preaching of penance.
fol. 66. If the Gospel be simply and properly taken for preaching, to wit,
of the grace of God in Jesus Christ, then it is no preaching of penance, but
oney a preaching of remission of sins. The like teach others ib. fol. 104.
And the Divines of Only commands to believe.
Berga ib. fol. 140. The Gospel teaches and commands only to believe in
Christ.

Luther Postilla in die Natiuit. fol. 60. We read and hear nothing preached in
the Gospel, but mere grace and mere bounty. In die Ascensionis fol. 264. I
often times said, that the Gospel cannot abide, that works be preached, how
good or great soever they be. And in Inst. de Moise fol. 449. The The Gospel
tells not what it to be done or omitted.
Gospel preaches not to us, that this or that is to be done or omitted, or
exacteth any things of us.

The Divines of Saxony apud Schusselb. tom. 7. Catal. Haeret. p. 803. condemn
Mayor, because he would have the Gospel properly taken to be a preaching of
penance and remission of sins.

Kemnitius in locis tit. de Iustif. p. 222. If we say that the Proper doctrine
of the Gospel is not of newness of life.
proper doctrine of the Gospel is not only of faith in the free promises for
Christ, but also of newness of life or good works, then straight it
follows, that good works also enter into iustication as a partial cause.
And page 224. Who would have the the Gospel properly so termed to contain
not only the promise of grace, but also the doctrine of good workesse, such
understand not what they say. For by this means the difference of the law and
the Gospel is confounded.

Liber Concordiae 1. c. 5. p. 594. We reject as false and pernicious Doctrine:
that the Gospel properly is a preaching of penance, The Gospel requires
not works.
and not only a preaching of the grace of God. The like has Gesnerus in
Compendio loco 15.

Gerlachius to. 2. disp. 13. The law requiring works properly belongs not to
the Gospel. Again. It is truly said, that not the Gospel but the law
requires works.

Lobechius Disput. 9. The word of the Gospel shows not, what is to be done
by working, but what we must believe.

Calvin in Romans 10. ver. 8. As the law exacted works, the Gospel, requires
nothing else, but that men bring faith to receive Gods grace. The like has
Beza in Catechismo compend. and others.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Ihon Baptist, Christ, and the Apostles
began the preaching of Gospel by preaching penance: that Christ came to call
sinners to penance, that penance and remission of sins are to be preached
in his name: that God in the Gospel denounces to all me^ that they do
penance. And the Gospel every where preaches good works. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the Gospel properly taken does not preach
penance: that the Gospel commands only to believe in Christ; requires
nothing but faith: shows not what is to be done or undone, but what is to be
believed: that it requires not works, cannot abide that works be preached
whatsoever they be: preaches not that this or that thing is to be done,
preaches not newness of life or good works, contains not doctrine of Good
works. Which are so contrary to Scripture as some Protestants confess it.
See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. V. WHETHER THE GOSPEL do reprove sin.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Romans 1. v. 17. For the justice of God is revealed in it (Gospel) The Gospel
reproves sin.
by faith into faith. v. 18. For the wrath of God from heaven is revealed upon
all impiety and injustice etc.

Ihon. 16. v. 8. And when he (the Paraclet) is come, he shall argue the world
of sin and of injustice. The same teach the places cited in the former
article, and others wherein the Gospel commands men to abstain from sin
and threatens punishment thereto.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton Roman. 1. verse. 18. Absurdly and impiously is said: that it
belongs not to the ministry of the Gospel to reprove sin.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther Concordiae cap. 5. page 593. When the law and The Gospel reproves
not sin.
the Gospel are compared together, we believe each, and confess, that the
Gospel is not a preaching of penance reproving sin: but that properly it
is nothing else but a most joyful message, and a preaching full of comfort not
reproving or terrifying.

Luther Postilla in die Om. Sanct. fol. 441. The law commands, Dot not
threaten.
threatens, and urges: the Gospel makes no threats nor pusheth on.

Schusselb. to. 4. Catal. Haeret. p. 209. The Gospel properly speaking does
reprove no sin: but this is the proper and most proper office of the law.

Calvin 2. Instit. c. 10.. 4. The Ghospells preaching pronounces nothing else,
but that sinners through the fatherly goodness of God are justified without
their merit.

Beza in Romans 1. v. 18. To reprove sin, rather belongs to the ministry of
the law, then of the Gospel.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that in the Gholpell Gods anger is revealed
upon all injustice: that the spirit of the Gospel reproves sin. The same
say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that to reprove sin rather belongs to the
ministry of the law then of the Gospel: that the Gospel properly taken
reproves not sin, but is nothing else but a message of joy and comfort: that
to reprove sin is the proper office of the law. Which is so opposite to the
Scripture, as some times Protestants confess it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. VI. WHETHER THE GOSPEL promises salvation with condition of good
works?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew. 19. verse. 17. If thou will enter into life, keep the The Gospel
promises salvation upon condition of Works.
commandments.

Luke. 13. verse. 3. Unless you have penance, you shall all likewise perish.

Roman. 8. verse. 13. If you live according to the flesh, you shall die.

Hebrews 10. v. 36 For patience is necessary for you, that doing the will of
God, you may receive the promise. C. 12. v. 14. Follow peace with all men and
holiness, without which no man shall see God.

Ihon 3. v. 5. Unless a man be borne again of water and the spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God. c. 6. v. 53. Unless ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you. c. 15. v. 10.
If you keep my precepts, you shall abide in my love.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. Can. 20. If any shall say, that a man justified and
never so perfect, is not bound to keep the commandments of God and the Church,
but only to believe: as if the Gospel were an absolute and bare promise
without condition of keeping Gods commandments, be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Apol. Conf. Augustan. fol. 60. Does not the Gospel promise remission of
sins and salvation even to those that have no good works at all? ib. in
resp. ad arg. If remission of sins do depend of the condition of our works,
it will be altogether uncertain.

Luther in Colloq. Mensal. apud Vlemberg. causa. 5. The Gospel promises
salvation without condition of works.
Whosoever says, that the Gospel requires works to salvation, is a liar.

Perkins in Gal. 3. to. 2. The Gospel offers and gives life freely without
condition of any work, and requires nothing but the acceptance of the thing
offered.

Willet Controu. 19. quaest. 1. pa. 1012. The Gospel and the law are twoe
distinct things. The law says: Do this and thou shall be saved: The
Gospel: Believe only, and it suffices unto life.

Adamus Francisci in Margarita Theol. loco 8. The promise of the Gospel is
not conditional.

Gerlachius to. 2. disput. 13. The promises of the Gospel are not
conditional, but absolute in respect of works.

The Divines of Saxony in Colloq. Aldeburg. Scripto. 6. p. 134. The promises
of the law are conditional, because they propose reward with condition of
obedience: But the promises of the Gospel are not conditional, but free.

Calvin in Antidot. Council. Sess. 6. Con. 20. In that the Gospel differs
from the law, because it promises life by faith, and not under the condition
of works as the law does. And 3. Instit. c. 11.. 17. The promises of the
Gospel are free and rely upon the only mercy of God, whereas the promises
of the law depend of the condition of works.

Peter Martyr in Romans 11. We deny, that Gods testament of remission of sins
in Christ has any condition adjoined.

Pareus l. 4. de Iustif. c. 1. The Gospel, properly is the doctrine of grace,
so it requires only the condition of faith. And c. 2. The Gospel strictly
and properly has promises of salvation under the only condition of faith, and
threats of death under the only condition of incredulity. Those promises and
threats alone are proper to the Gospel and Evangelical, all others are mixed,
partly evangelical, partly legal.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that if we will enter into life we must keep
the commandments; that patience is necessary for to receive the promise: that
without holiness no man shall see God: that to be baptized and to eat the flesh
of Christ is necessary to life: that unless we have penance we shall perish,
that if we live according to the flesh we shall die. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that the Gospel promises salvation even to
those that have no good works at all: that it requires no good works to
salvation, offers life without condition of any work: that the promises of
the Gospel are absolute in respect of works, are not conditional: that the
Ghosdell requires only the acceptance of the thing offered, requires only
belief to life, only the condition of faith. Which are so contrary to
Scripture as some times the Protestants themselves confess it See lib. 2. c.
30.

ART. VII. WHETHER THE GOSPEL be contrary to the law?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Romans 3. v. 31. Do we then destroy the law by faith? God forbid: The
Gospel not contrary to the law.
but we do establish the law.

Gal. 3. v. 21. Was the law then against the promises of God? God forbid.

Matthew 5. verse. 18. Do not think that I am come to break the law or the
Prophet. I am not come to break, but to fulfill.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
S. Thomas 1. 2. quaest. 17. art. 3. Something is contained in an other by
power, as the whole tree is contained in the seed: and after this manner the
new law is contained in the old.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Confessio Heluet. c. 13. The Gospel truly is opposite to It is contrary to
the law
the law: For the law works wrath and denounces maledictio^; the Gospel
preaches grace and benediction.

Illyricus in Sacrae Scripturae part. 2. tract. 1. eol. 10. There are twoe
kinds of doctrins, the law and the Gospel, and they of themselves and of
their nature truly contrary. Col. 11. This surely is the key of all the
Scripture and Divinity, to know that in Twoe maie^ to heaven and those
contrary.
it is contained a twofould kind of doctrine, and a double way of salvation,
which are of themselves plainly contrary the one to the other. Col. 39. The
law and the Gospel of themselves wholly fight one with the other: These
doctrins fight, but the law being the inferior yields to the Gospel the
superior; and so the one contradictorie falling, the other obideth true. And
Tract. 6. col. 547. 551. he says, that the Gospel corrects the law.

Luther in Gal 4. f. 373. Let the godly learn, that Christ and the law are
twoe contrary, all together incompatible.

Scusselburg tom. 7. Catal. Haeret. p. 446. True it is: Entire and perfect
obedience is necessary to salvation, for the Lord himself has said: If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. But contrariwise, there is full
power given to me to Protestants mittigate the rigor of the law.
interpret or mitigate this rigor. Wherefore I interpret and mitigate it
thus. Perfect obedience is necessary to one that is to be saved; to wit, either
his own or an other man's. And p. 446. says, that the Gospel corrects and
amendeth the sayings of the law.

Calvin 2. Instit. c. 9.. 4. Paul makes the justice of the law and the
Gospel contrary one to the other.

Vallada in Apolog. cont. Episcop. Luzon. c. 30. Luther speaks not simply of
Moises, but of Moises opposite to Jesus Christ, that is, of the law opposite to
the Ghospel. And seeing al Protestants think, that the doctrine of the law is
this: Our keeping of the law is necessary to salvation, and the doctrine of
the Gospel, this: Our keeping of the law is not necessary to salvation, they
must needs all say, that the doctrine of the Gospel is quite contrary or
contradictorie to the doctrine of the law. Whereupon Beza de Praedest. cont.
Castle. vol. 1. p. 393. writes in this sort: These are contrary: unless you
do all these things you shall die, and, Albeit you do them not, yet if you
believe, you shall live. Whereof the first, they say, is the doctrine of the
law; the second, of the Gospel.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the faith of the Gospel does not destroy,
but establish the law; that Gods promises are not against the law: that Christ
came not to break the law. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the Gospel is truly opposite to the law:
that the law and Gospel are twoe doctrins of their nature truly contrary,
plainly contrary, and fight one with the other: that the Gospel corrects
the law: that the justice of the law and of the Gospel is contrary one to
the other, and that this is the key of all Protestant divinity: and that
Protestants have full power to mittigate the rigor of Gods law. Which are so
contrary to Scripture, as Protestants some times confess it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. VIII. WHETHER THE LAW OF Moses did command faith in Christ?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ihon 1. v. 45. Him, whom Moises in the law and the Prophets Moises in the law
wrote of Christ.
wrote of, we have found Jesus the son of Joseph of Nazareth. c. 5. v. 45.
For if you did believe Moises, you would perhaps believe me also. For of me he
has written.

Luc. 24. v. 27. And beginning from Moses and all the Prophets Written of
Christ in the law.
he did interpret to them in all the Scriptures the things that were
concerning him. And v. 44. All things must needs be fulfilled, which are
written in the law of Moises, and the Prophets, and the Psalms, of me.

Act. 3. v. 22. Moises indeed said, That a Prophet, shall the Lord your God
raise up to you of your brethren as my self: Him Moises commanded to bear
Christ.
you shall hear according to all things whatsoever he shall speak to you. c.
26. v. 23. Saying nothing besides those things, which the Prophets did speak
should come to pass, and Moises, if Christ were passible etc. See c. 28. v. 23.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. lib. 4. Iustif. c. 4. Every where in the Gospel we read, that
diverse mysteries were fulfilled in Christ, because it was so written in the law
and Prophets.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in Gal. 3. to. 2. The Gospel requires faith in Christ The law knew
not Christ. The law of Moises commanded not faith in Christ. The law teaches
not faith in Christ
the Mediator, God and man, which faith the law never knew.

Pareus l. 1. de Iustif. c. 16. Faith is no work of the law: for the law of
Moises commands not faith in Christ. And l. 2. c. 4. The law knows nothing
of faith in Christ, of justifying faith, of faith of remission of sins. The
like has Ambing. apud Hospin. in Concord. discordi fol. 140.

Beza de Praedest. cont. Cast l. vol. 1. p. 393. There is no mention in the
law of this benefit (of free redemption by Christ) For the declaration of this
will belongs to an other part of Gods word, which is called the Gospel.

Apol. Co^f. Augustan. c. de Iustific. The Gospel preaches justice of faith
in Christ, which the law does not teach.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Moises wrote in the law, of Christ, that
Moises wrote things concerning Christ: That Moise commanded the people to hear
Christ in all things. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the law never knew faith in Christ, that
Moises commands not faith in Christ: that the law knows nothing of faith in
Christ: that in the law there is no mention of free redemption in Christ: that
the law teaches nothing of faith in Christ.

ART. IX. WHETHER ANY UNWRITTEN word or Traditions be to be kept?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
2. Thessal. 2. v. 15. Therefore brethren stand, and hold the traditions
Traditions not written to be held.
which you have learned: whether it be by word or by our epistle.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Counsel of Trent. Sess. 4. The holy Counsel does with equal pious
affection reverently receive and honor traditions belonging to faith or
manners, as either delivered by Christ's mouth or the holy Ghost, and by
continual succession conserved in the Catholic Church.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cont. 1. q. 3. cap. 10. We care not for unwritten Not to be held.
traditions. And Contro. 2. q. 5. c. 18. We acknowledge no other word then that
which is written. And what doctrine soever is not written we hold for bastard
doctrine.

Perkins in Cathol. ref. Contr. 20. c. 2. We acknowledge the only written word
of God.

Luther Postil. in ferias S. Stephani. Nothing is to be affirmed Nothing but
that which is expressed in Scripture.
which is not expressed in Scripture.

Iacobus Andreae l. cont. Hosium. p. 169. That faith is no faith, but an
uncertain opinion, which is not grounded upon an express testimony of
Scripture.

Wigand apud Scusselb. to. 7. Catal. Haeret. p. 681. Only those doctrines,
whose very words or equivalent for sense are extant in the Scripture, are to be
tought and delivered in the Church.

Calvin in Gratulat. ad Praecentorem page 377. Nothing is to be believed, which
is not expressed in Scripture. And cont. versipellem. pagin. 353. There is no
mention of unwritten traditions.

Beza in Romans 1. v. 17. Christians acknowledge no other object of this faith,
then the written word of God. Etad Reprehens. Castle. p. 503. Whosoever
beleiueth in doctrine of religion that which is not written, I say he embraces
opinion for faith, and an idol for God.

Vallada in Apol. cont. Episc. Luzon. c. 13. In all the holy No speech of an
unwritten word.
Scripture there is no speech of an unwritten word.

Daneus Controu. 7. page 1350. The foundation of Christian faith is one only,
to wit, the word of God, and that only written.

Hospinian part. 2. Histor. Sacram. fol. 23. The Magistrates of Zurich
commanded, that hereafter nothing should be proposed or preached in their
Church but the pure fined word of God contained in the books of the Prophets
and Apostles.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that traditions, as well they which are learned
by word, as they which are learned by writing, are to be observed. Catholics
teach the same.

Protestants expressly teach, that only written doctrine is to be tought,
nothing to be believed but what is written, only the pure fined written word
to be tought; no object of faith but what is written: nothing to be believed
but what is expressed in Scripture, and that in very words or in equivalent
sense, that there is no mention of unwritten traditions, no speech of unwritten
word: that they care not for unwritten traditions.

A SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF THE WORD of God or Scripture.
What we have rehearsed in this chapter does clearly show, that Protestants do
far otherwise judge of Scripture then the Scripture it self and Catholics
do. For the holy Scripture together with Catholics teaches that in it are
some things hard to be understood, that it cannot be understood without the
light of the holy Ghost: that the Gospel is or contains a law: that it
does preach penance and good works, reproves sin, promises salvation
under condition of good works, and is not contrary unto the law of God: that
the law of Moises commands faith in Christ: and that unwritten traditions are
to be observed: And Protestants defend all the contrary.

They show also, that Protestants steal from the Scripture Protestants steal
from Scripture.
her excellency wherewith she surpasses the capacity of man's wit: and from
the Gospel, that it contains any law, preaches penance or good works,
reproves sin, promises salvation upon condition of well doing, and
agreement with Gods law: whereby we see what a libertin Gospel they bring in,
to wit, such as contains Libertin Gospel of Protestants.
no law, preaches no penance or good works, reproves no sin, promises
salvation without all condition of well doing, and is quite contrary to the
law of God: And that they steall from the law of Moises that it commands
faith in Christ; and finally they take away all the unwritten word of God.

CHAPTER V. OF SAINT PETER AND THE APOSTLES.
ART. I. WHETHER S. PETER WERE first of the Apostles?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
MATTHEW 10. v. 2. And the names of the twelve S. Peter first of the Apostles.
Apostles be these: The first Simon, who is called Peter.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Pontif. c. 18. Peter was put first, by reason his
dignity.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Contr. 3. q. 5. c. 3. Wheresoever mention is made Not first.
of Peter, if we look well into the place, we shall find that nothing is given
to him, which agrees not to the other Apostles. And Controu 4. quaest. 2. c.
Paul makes himself equal to Peter in all points.

Tindal in Fox his Acts p. 1139. S. Paul is greater then Peter by the
testimony of Christ.

Articuli Smalcaldici page 345. We give no prerogative to Peter.

Luther in Gal. 2. to. 5. This place clearly shows, that all the Apostles
had equal vocation and commission. There was altogether equality amongst
them: no Apostle was greater then an other.

Illyricus in Praefat. lib. de Sectis. It appears, that Christ gave no
primacie at all in his Church to any man.

Caluinus in Matthew. 20. v. 25. Christ showed, that in his kingdom No primacie
or firstnesse.
there was no primacie, for which they contended.

Beza in Matthew. 10. v. 2. What if this word (First) were added of some who
would establish Peter's primacie?

Festus Homius disput. 12. All the Apostles were equal in dignity,
authority, title, and power. Again. Peter had no primacie amongst the
Apostles.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that S. Peter was the first of the Apostles.
Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that S. Peter had no primacie at all; and suspect
that the word, First, is added to the Scripture: they say also, that Saint
Peter had nothing which was not common to the other Apostles: that all the
Apostles were equal in dignity, authotitie, title, and power: that there was
altogether equality amongst the^, and none greater then an other: that S. Paul
was equal to S. Peter in all points, nay greater then he by the testimony of
Christ.

ART. II. WHETHER THE CHVRCH was built upon S. Peter himself?
PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Math. 16. v. 18. And I say to thee: That thou art Peter, and upon The Church
built upon S. Peter.
this rock will I build my Church -- And I will give thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Promptuar. Cath. in Festo Petri and Pauli S. Chrysostom does
diligently teach, that twoe things were here given to Peter: The one, the gift
of the Father; to wit the reuelalation of the word incarnate: The other, the
proper gift of the Son, to be the rock of the Church.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Controu. 4. q. 2 c. 2. Peter is not the rock, because Not upon S.
Peter.
Christ does not build his Church upon Peter.

Luther in Matthew. 16. to. 5. upon this, that is, upon me, not upon thee. Item.
He cannot be understood to build upon Peter.

Zuinglius l. de vera and falsa relig. cap. de Clauibus. I will build my Church
upon this rock: not upon thee, for thou art not the rock. Again: Only Christ,
not Peter, is the rock upon the which the Church stands.

Bucer in Matthew. 16. Faith in Christ is that rock upon which the Church is
said to be built, not that man Peter.

Calvin in Math. 16. v. 19. He faigneth, that Peter is called the foundation of
the Church. But who sees not, that he gives that to the person of a man,
vhich was spoaken of Peter's faith?

Beza in Matthew. 16. v. 18. But Matthew, or whosoever was his interpretour
seems by this difference of words to distinguish Peter from that rock on
which the building relieth.

Zanchius l. de Eccles. c. 9. The opposition of the Fathers is not admitted in
this place: upon this rock, that is, upon Peter.

Vorstius in Antibell. p. 64. Our men use to answer, that by the name of Rock,
not the person, but the faith or confession of Peter, or Christ himself, is to
be understood. More of their like sayings may be seen in my Latin book c. 5.
art. 2.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Christ speaking to Peter himself, has in
the words which immediately go before that clause: upon this rock etc, as also
in the which immediately follow it, and designing S. Peter's person both by his
Father, and by his proper name Peter, which he had given to him. (Which both in
the Syriack tongue in which Christ spoake, and in the Hebrew tongue in which
Saint Matthew wrote his Gospel, is wholly one and the self same word that Rock
is, and also in the Greek language is equivalent or synonimall with it, as
Protestants confess, and finally designing him by that pronoune This, said:
upon this Rock, (which is as much, as is he had said upon this Peter) I will
build my Church. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that S. Peter is not the Rock of the Church, not
the foundation, not he upon whom the Church is built. Which is so manifest a
contradiction of Scripture, as many Protestants confess it. See libr. 2. cap.
30.

ART. III. WHETHER THE KEYS OF the kingdom of heaven were given to S. Peter
himself?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew 16. verse. 18. and 19. And I say to thee. That thou The keys given to
S. Peter.
art Peter -- And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Prompt. Cathol. in Festo Petri and Pauli. The power of the
keys was promised by Christ to Peter alone, and therefore it was truly given.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Controu. 9. quaest. 5. c. 3. Surely the keys of the Not to any one
men.
Church were not given to any one singular man, but to the Church it self.

Bucher in Matthew. 16. This power (of the keys) is in the whole Church, but the
authority of administering it, is in the Priests and Bishops: as in old time
in Rome, the power was in the people; the authority, in the Senate.

Articuli Smalcaldici. We must needs confess, that the keys belong not to the
person of any one man, hut to the Church.

Daneus Contr. 3. c. 10. p. 244. Christ called faith the rock: Not to Saint
Peter.
to which rock, not to Peter, he gave these keys and the strength against the
power and gates of Hell.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Christ promised, and consequently gave,
the keys of Heaven unto S. Peter. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that the power of the keys is not in the
priests and Bishops: that they were not given to Peter, nor to any one singular
man. Which contradiction of the Scripture is so plain, as some Protestants
acknowledge it. See l. 2. c. 30

ART. IV. WHETHER S. PETER'S faith failed?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Luc. 22. v. 31. And our Lord said: Simon, Simon, behold Saint Peter's faith
failed not.
Satan has required to have you for to sift as wheat. But I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Lucae 22. v. 32. Christ does in those words manifestly teach,
that S. Peter's faith should not fail.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cont. 4. q. 2. c. 2. When Bellarmin had said: Peter lost charity,
but not faith when he denied Christ: answers: It seems, that a greater
wound was given to his faith then to his Saints Peter's faith failed.
charity. Again: That was surely a short apostasy.

Hutterus in Analysi Co^fess. Augustan. art. 12. It is a blasphemous speech of
Beza, when he writes: That Peter denying Christ did not loose his faith.

Reineccius to. 1. Armat. c. 22. Peter retained not faith. And to. 3. c. 4. For
a time Peter's faith surely failed whiles he denied Christ.

Daneus Contr. 3. c. 10. Bellarmin dreameth, when he says, that Peter's faith
could not fail: For by the denial which afterward he made, it appears to be
false which he impudently affirms of the indefectibilitie of Peter's faith.
The same he has ibid. lib. 4. cap. 3.

Lambertus and Schusselb. l. 1. Theol. Calvin. art. 14. says that Peter, when
he fell, had not that true faith wherewith we trust in God alone, and the
infidelity prevailed against Peter.

Iunius Contro. 3. l. 1. c. 10. Certainly Peter erred from faith.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Christ prayed that S. Peter's faith should
not fail: which undoubtedly he obtained. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that S. Peter lost his faith, erred from faith,
did not retain faith, did apostotate; that his faith failed, that infidelity
prevailed against him. Which is so open a contradiction of Scripture, as diverse
Protestants confess it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. V. WHETHER THE APOSTLES were foundations of the Church?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Apocalip. 21. v. 14. And the wall of the city having twelve The Apostles
foundations of the Church.
foundations: and in them twelve names of the twelve Apostles of the lamb.

Ephesians. 2. v. 20. You are citizens of the Saints, and the domesticals of God,
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the highest corner stone.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Pontif. c. 11. All the Apostles were foundations of the
Church.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Controu. 4. q. 1. c. 2. It is contrary to the analogy Not
foundations of the Church.
of faith, that any man should be a foundation of the Church.

Moulin. in his Bucler p. 380. The Apostles were not the foundations.

Peter Martyr in locis, clas. 4. cap. 3.. 4. If we read in the Fathers, (as we
do in the Apocalips) that there are twelve foundations, here foundation is not
put for the route of the building, but for great stones which are next to the
foundation.

Beza in Ephesians. 2. verse. 20. The Apostles and Prophets were builders of this
temple, that is, of the Church of God (as also now faithful Ministers are) but
not the foundation it self.

Herbrandus in Compend. Theol. loco de Eccles. The Apostles are not the
foundation of the Church, but by their doctrine of Christ they laid the
foundation.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that there are twelve foundations of the Church,
and in them written the names of the twelve Apostles: that we are built upon
the foundation of the Apostles, Christ being the chief corner stone where
there is manifest distinction made between the foundation on which we are
built, and Christ. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that the Apostles were not foundations, that they
were not foundations of the Church, but builders: not foundations, but great
stones next to the foundation: that no man can be a foundation of the Church.
Which are so contrary to the Scripture, as some Protestants confess it. See
l. 2. c. 30.

ART. VI. WHETHER THE APOSTLES were simply to be heard or believed without
examination of their doctrine?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Luc. 10. v. 16. He that hears you, hears me. The Apostles were simply to
be heard.


1. Thessalon. 1. v. 12. We give thanks to God without intermission, because
that when you had received of us the word of God, you received it, not as the
word of men, but (as it is indeed) the word of God. The same also is proved by
the testimonies cited in the next article.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton Defens. cont. Whitak. l. 3. sect. 5. It is absurd to judge of the
Apostles doctrine. Antidot. Act. 17. v. 11. Christ has joined his truth and
the Apostles preaching so narrowly, as he said who hears you, hears me:
Why then not also: who examineth your doctrine, examineth my truth?

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Controu. 2. quaest. 5. cap. 11. If the Apostles be not simply to be
heard, but to be examined according to the rule Not simply to be heard.
of Scripture, and to be received so far forth as they agree with it, and to
be rejected, as they differ, much, less etc. And l. 2. cont. Dureum sect. 2.
When Paul preached to the Berheans, they examined the Scriptures, for to know
fully whether those things which Paul tought, agreed with Scriptures. And this
their example is allowed with the highest testimony of the holy Ghost, and
proposed to all Christians to be imitated.

Calvin in Actor. 17. verse. 11. The Thessalonians did not take upon to examine
whether Gods truth were to be received or no: only they examined Paul's
doctrine to the line of Scripture. For the Scripture is the true touchstone, by
which all doctrins are to be examined. And seeing the Spirit of God praises the
Thessalonians, it prescribes in their example a rule for us. It was lawful
for the disciples to examine Paul's doctrine. And 4. Institut. c. 8.. 4. The
Apostles in their very name do show how far their commission stretches:
Forsooth, if they be Apostles let them not prate what they list, but
faithfully deliver his commandments who sent them.

Luther Praefat. Assert. Artic. to. 2. If S. Paul's Gospel or the new
testament must have been tried by the old Scripture whether it were so or no,
what did we, who would have the Fathers sayings, examined by the Scripture?

Daneus Contr. 4. p. 611. It is most false, that he writes, that the doctrine
and sentence of the Apostles was not examined of the disciples and auditors.
Yea Christ himself commands his own doctrine to be so examined Io. 5. 39.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that who hears the Apostles hears Christ:
that their word is not the word of men, but the word of God, and as such
received of such as are faithful. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the Apostles are not to be heard simply but
first to be examined: that all Christians ought to imitate the Bethea^s in
examining S. Paul's doctrine: that the Apostles must not prate what they list:
that the Gospel must be tried by the old testament.

ART. VII. WHETHER THE APOSTLES were sufficient witnesses of the truth?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ihon 15. v. 27. The Spirit of truth shall give testimone of me, The Apostles
were sufficient witnesses.
and you also shall give testimony, because you are with me from the
beginning. c. 21. v. 24. This is that disciple which gives testimony of these
things, and has written these things, and we know that his testimony is true.
c. 1. v. 7. This man came for testimony, to give testimony of the light, that
all might believe through him.

Acts 1. v. 8. You shall receive the virtue of the Holy Ghost coming upon
you, and you shall be witnesses unto me in Jerusalem, and in all Iewrie and
Samaria, and even unto the utmost of the earth. c. 5. v. 32. And we are
witnesses of these words, and the Holy Ghost, whom God has given to all that
obey him. c. 10. v. 42. Him God raised up the third day, and gave him to be
made manifest, not to all the people, but to witness preordinated of God, to
us who did eat and drink with him after he rose again from the dead.

3. Ihon. v. 12. And we give testimony, and thou know that our testimony
is true.

Exode. 14. v. 31. And they believed our Lord, and Moises his servant.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton Defens. Contr. Whitaker. l. 1. sect. 8. In all these things the
Apostles did allege their testimony, and themselves also as witnesses of that
truth which they tought And l. 3. sect. 3. The Apostles were witnesses of
their doctrine, and they gave authority to their doctrine. See him Cont. 4. l.
8. c. 9.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Controu. 1. q. 3. c. 11. God alone is a sufficient witness None but
God is a sufficient witness.
of himself. And l. 3. de Scriptura c. 13. sect. 3. The people did not believe
Moises for himself, but for that divine and great miracle. -- Belief, was
given to Moises and Paul, not for themselves, but for Gods authority which
appeared in their ministry. And ib. sect. 1. The testimony of the Church, as
of the Church, is but humane. And Contr. 1. q. 3. c. 11. cit. The judgment of
the Church is humane. The same follows evidently of that which they said in
the former article. For if the Apostles doctrine must be examined, it is
manifest that they are not sufficient witnesses of their doctrine.

The same Whitaker Contr. 2. q. 4. c. 3. Yea after Christ's Not the Apostles.
ascension and that descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, manifest it
is, that the whole Church erred about the vocation of the Gentiles, and not the
vulgar Christians only, but even the very Apostles and Doctors. -- These were
great errors, and yet we see that they were in the Apostles even after the
Holy Ghost had descended upon them.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly affirms, that the Apostles had the holy Ghost given
them to testify of Christ: that they were joined with the holy Ghost
witnesses of Christ: that they were witnesses appointed of God: that their
testimony is true: that all may believe through Saint Ihon: that the faithful
believed God and Moses. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that none but God is a sufficient witness of the
truth: that nether Paul nor Moises were to be believed for themselves: that
the testimony of the Church is but humane: That the Apostles erred and that
greatly even after the holy Ghost had descended upon them.

ART. VIII. WHETHER THE APOSTLES learnt any point of Christian doctrine after
Christ's ascension?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ihon 16. v. 12. Yet many things I have to say to you, but you The Apostles
learnt some thing after Christ.
cannot bear them now: but when he the Spirit of truth comes, he shall teach
you all truth.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Joan. 16. v. 12. By this testimony is clearly proved, that
Christ tought not all by word of mouth; but that both the Apostles and the
Church learnt many things of the Holy Ghost.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Contr. 1. q. 6. c. 10. The holy Ghost did suggest no They learnt
nothing.
other things then those which Christ had tought.

Calvin in Joan. 14. verse. 26. Mark what all these things are, which he
promises that he Spirit shall teach. He says: He shall suggest or bring to
mind whatsoever I have said. Whence it follows, that he shall not be a
coyner of new revelations. And 4. Institut. c. 8.. 8. That limitation is
carefully to be noted, where he appoints the holy Ghost his office, to
suggest whatsoever he had tought by word of mouth.

Beza in Joan. 14. v. 26. The Apostles nether learnt nor tought any point of
Christian and saving doctrine after the departure of the Lord.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that many things were told to the Apostles
which they could not bear in Christ's time: that the holy Ghost was to be sent
to teach them all truth. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that the Apostles learnt no point of Christian
doctrine after Christ's departure: that the Holy Ghost revealed no new thing to
them; that he suggested no other thing then Christ had tought.

ART. IX. WHETHER IVDAS WAS TRVELY a disciple, or in the true Church of Christ?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew. 10. v. 1. and seq. And having called his twelve disciples Judas was
truly a disciple of Christ.
together, he gave them etc. And the names of the twelve Apostles be these: The
first Simon who is called Peter -- and Judas Iscariot who also betrayed him. Et
c. 20. v. 14. and 47. and Marc. 14. v. 10. and 43. and. Luc. 22. v. 3. and 47.
he is called one of the twelve.

Ihon 12. v. 14. One therefore of his disciples, Judas Iscariot.

Acts 1. v. 17. Judas, who was the captain of them that apprehended Jesus,
who was numbered among us, and obtained the lot of this ministry. v. 25. Show
of these twoe, one, whom thou have chosen to take the place of this ministry
and Apostleship, from the which Judas has preuaricated -- And the lot fell
upon Mathias, and he was numbered with the eleven Apostles.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarm. l. 3. de Eccles. c. 7. Judas was once of the true Church, for
he was an Apostle one of the twelve, and called a Bishop of the Prophet David
psalm. 108. Which could not be true, unless he had been of the Church.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Controu. 2. q. 1. cap. 7. I answer, that the reprobate Judas never
of the Catholic Church.
Judas was never of the true Catholic Church. He held for a time a principal
place in the outward society of the Church, because he was an Apostle, but
this made him not of the true Catholic Church -- But how he was one of the
Apostles Austin tells, Tract. 61. in Joan. That how he was one in number not
in merit; Never an Apostle indeed. Never true member of the Church.
are in show not in virtue. But what is in show, seems to be, but is not
indeed.

Daneus Controu. 4. c. 2. Judas Iscariot and Simon Magus were never true
members of the true Church of God. Of the same opinion are Protestants
commonly, who deny that any reprobate can be in the true Church, as we shall
see hereafter c. 8.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Judas was one of Christ's disciples, one of
the twelve Apostles, was numbered amongst them, obtained the lot of their
ministry, had the place of Apostleship which S. Mathias afterward had. The
same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Judas was never of the true Catholic Church,
seemed to be one of the Apostles but was not indeed.

ART. X. WHETHER IVDAS WAS a Bishop?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Acts 1. v. 20. For it is written in the book of psalms: Be Judas was a
Bishop.
their habitation made desert, and be there none that dwell in it: and his
(Judas) Bishopric let an other take.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
C. Bellarm. cited in the former article. Judas is called a Bishop of the
Prophet David.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cont. 2. q. 1. c. 7. Judas was an Apostle therefore no He was no
Bishop.
Bishop: because the Apostles were no Bishops. The same say other Protestants,
who deny that the Apostles were properly Bishops.

THE CONFERENCE.
The Scripture expressly says, that Judas had the office of a Bishop, which
an other Apostle took: The same say Catholics.

The Protestants say, that Judas was no Bishop.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF SAINT Peter and the Apostles.
Out of that which has been rehearsed in this chapter it clearly appears,
that the Protestants in an other manner describe S. Peter and the Apostles,
the^ the holy Scripture and Catholics do. For the Scripture and Catholics
teach that S. Peter was first of the Apostles: that he was the rock on which
Christ built his Church, that he had the keys of the kingdom of heaven, that
his faith did not fail: All which Protestants deny. Besides the Scripture and
Catholics say, that the Apostles were foundations of the Church, were simply to
heard without examining their doctrine, were sufficient witnesses of truth;
learnt diverse things of the holy Ghost: All which are denied by Prorestants.
Moreover the Scripture and Catholics say that Judas was truly a disciple and
Apostle of Christ, and also a Bishop: which Protestants in like manner deny.

Wherefore Protestants steal from S. Peter his honor, that he is the first of
the Apostles; his authority, that he is the rock of the Church; and his power
of the keys and steadfastness of faith. And from the rest of the Apostles they
steal that they were foundations of the Church, simply to be heard,
sufficient witnesses of truth, and that they learnt any thing of the holy
Ghost.

CHAPTER VI. OF PASTORS OF THE CHVRCH.
ART. I. WHETHER THERE BE Always pastors of the Church?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
HIEREMIE 33. v. 21. Thus says the Lord: If my Pastors always.
covenant with the day can be made void, and my covenant with the night, that
there be no day and night in their time: also my covenant may be made void
with David my servant, that there be not of him a son to reign in his
throne, and levites and priests my ministers.

Ephesians. 4. v. 12. And he gave Pastors and Doctors to the consummation of the
saints, unto the work of the ministeric unto the edifying of the body of
Christ, until we meet all into the unity of faith and knowledge of the Son
of God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in 1. Cor. 15. v. 15. Impious Calvin does bouldly and often times
say, that Pastors, Doctors, Prelates, Bishops, Masters of Churches all
universally for many ages have wholly straied from the Christian truth and
been seducers.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther in psalm. 129. to. 3. The Church under Antichrist had no true ministry.

Calvin de vera reform. p. 322. Not without cause we avouch Not always.
that for some ages the Church was so torn and scattered, that it was
destitute of true Pastors. And p. 322. I grant indeed, that it can never come
to pass that the Church perish: but when they refer that to Pastors which
is promised of the perpetual continuance of the Church, therein they are much
deceived.

Beza de notis Eccles. vol. 3. Forsooth it fell out, that the lawful order was
then wholly abolished in the Church, as it is manifest that it has been now
for some ages, not so much being left as the smalleste shadow of the chiefest
parts of ecclesiastical vocation.

Sadeel ad Art. abiurat. page 533. It is false, that the external ministry
must be perpetual.

Daneus Controu. 3. p. 426. The Church eftsoon has no man Postour. And
Controu, 4. p. 757. The true Church has often wanted Prelates.

Lukbertus l. 5 de Eccles cap. 5. We say, that for some short time the Church
may be deprived of Pastors.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that there shall be Pastors as long as there
shall be day and night: that Pastors are given until we meet all in one faith.
The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the Church may be deprived of Pastors; that
Pastors may perish, that the ministry must not be perpetual: that the
Church sometime had no true ministry, was for some ages destitute of true
Pastors: that lawful order was for some ages quite abolished in the Church not
so much as the sle^derest shadow of the chiefest parts of ecclesiastical
vocation being left Which are so plain against Scripture as sometimes
Protestants confess it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. II. WHETHER AVTHORITIE of governing the Church be in the Pastors them
selves?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew. 16. v. 18. and seq. Thou art Peter etc. And to thee I will give
Pastors have authority to govern.
the keys of the kingdom of heaven.

Acts 20. v. 28. The Holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to rule the Church of
God.

1. Cor. 4. v. 21. What will you? In a rod that I come to you, or in charity
and the spirit of mildness?

2. Cor. 13. v. 10. These things I write absente, that being present I may not
deal hardly according to the power which the Lord has given me. And c. 10. v.
6. Having in readiness to revenge all disobedience.

2. Tim. 1. v. 11. I am appointed a preacher, and Apostle, and Master of the
Gentiles.

Hebrews 13. verse. 17. Obey your Prelates and be subject to them.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Triplicat. cont. Whitaker. c. 13. We see, that Paul puts
the authority in the Prelates.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker l. 1. de Script. c. 13. sect. 12. The authority is not Authority is
not in the Pastors.
in the Prelates but in the word, for whose administration the Prelates do
serve. Again: I acknowledge no ruling which the Church has. All the
authority is in God and in his word, the Church has nothing but mere
ministry.

Spalatensis l. 5. de Repub c. 2. n. 40. Church governors are most like to
Phisitia^s. The Physician appoints wholesome things, and forbids
unwholesome, prescribes diete etc. but has no They have no jurisdiction.
jurisdiction or command over the sick -- As it is the Physicians office to
govern the sick, that is, without jurisdiction: So it is the office of the
ecclesiastical rectors to govern the Church, that is, the faithful.

Calvin 4. Instit. c. 8.. 2. We must remember, that what authority or dignity
the Holy Ghost in the Scripture does give to Priests, or Prophets, or
Apostles, or Successors of Apostles, all that is given not properly to the men
themselves, but to the ministry whereof they are officers, or (to speak
brefly) to the word, whose ministry is committed to them. The same he has in
Joan. 16. v. 8. in Math. 20. v. 25. and in Jacob. 4. v. 12.

Beza in Math. 20. v. 25. What then, will you say. Have the No power at all
over consciences.
Ministers of the word of God no power at all? None truly they, no not over
consciences for instruction whereof they are appointed: But they are legates of
Christ, to say and do in his name sacred not civil matters, who alone has
all right of commanding, and he commands them to be heard as legates, not as
masters.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the power of keys was given to S. Peter:
that the Holy Ghost placed Bishops to govern the Church: that S. Paul had a
rod and power over the faithful, could deal hardly and punish all
disobedience, was Master of the Gentiles, and that we ought to be subject to
our Prelates. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that there is no authority in the Prelates
themselves: that the Church has no rule but mere ministry: that Pastors
have no more jurisdiction over the faithful then Phisicians over the sick:
that they have no power over the consciences, but that all authority or right
of commanding is in God only and in his word.

ART. III. WHETHER ANY ONE Pastor have authority to excommunicate?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 16. v. 19. Thou art Peter -- And whatsoever thou shall S. Peter had
authority to excommunicate. And S. Paul.
bind upon earth, it shall be bound also in heaven.

1. Timoth. 16. v. vlt. Of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander whom I have
delivered to Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton Cont. 2. q. 1. art. un. The Ecclesiastical power first,
principally, of it self, and immediately, is in particular persons.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Beza in Conf. c. 5. sect. 43. We must remember, that this power No one man can
excommunicate.
(of excommunicating) is given to no one man, but to the whole company of the
Presbytery.

Calvin 4. Instit. c. 11.. 5. The spiritual power (of excommunicating) must
not be exercised at the pleasure of one man, but by the lawful assembly.. 6.
This kind of power was not in one, but in the assemble of the Elders.

Peter Martyr in 1. Cor. 5. v. 4. So great an Apostle does not not take upon
him to excommunicate of himself and alone: which yet the Pope and many
Bishops dare.

Bucanus in Institut. loco 44. In whom must the power of excommunicating be?
not in any one either Bishop, or ordained of the Bishop.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that power of binding was given to S. Peter: that
S. Paul excommunicated or delivered some to Satan. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that power of excommunicating is in no one man,
Bishop or other: that S. Paul took not upon to excommunicate of himself.

ART. IV. WHETHER PASTOVRS OF the Church have power to command or make laws?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Acts 15. v. 28. It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and Pastors can
command.
to us, to lay no further burden upon you, then these necessary things: That
you abstain from the things imolated to idols, and blood, and that which is
strangled. And ver. 41. And he (Paul) walked through Syria and Cilicia
confirming the Churches, and commanding them to keep the precepts of the
Apostles and the Ancients.

1. Thessalon. 4. v. 11. We desire you brethren, that you work with your own
hands, as we have commanded you. And Epistol. 2. cap. 3. verse. 4. And we have
confidence of you in our Lord, that the things which we command, you both do
and will do.

1. Cor. 7. v. 12. For to the rest, I say, not our Lord: If any brother have a
wife an infidel, and she consent to Devil with him, let him not put her away.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 4. de Pontif. c. 17. The Pope and other Bishops can judge and
make laws.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in Antidoto Concilij Sess. 6. con. 20. As for laws of They cannot
command.
the Church, let them look to them: we acknowledge one lawmaker, who can give
rules of life, as we have our life from him. In actor. 15. v. 28. The sottish
Papists, who out of these words would The Church has no authority. No power
to make laws.
prove that the Church has some authority.

Musculus in locis c. de Magistrate. The Church has no power to make laws, but
she is commanded to hear and obey.

Luther de Captiuit. to. 2. fol. 76. Nether Pope, nor Bishop, nor any man has
any right to put a tittle upon a Christian man, unless it be done by his own
consent.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly affirms, that the Apostles put precepts and burdens
upon the faithful, that S. Paul commanded Christians to keep them, and that
himself commanded diverse things. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the Church has no authority of lawmaking,
has no power to make laws, that no Bishop or other can command a Christian man
any thing but what he will himself.

ART. VIII. WHETHER BISHOPS BE rulers of the Church?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Act. 28. v. 28. The Holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to Bishops rulers of
the Church.
rule the Church of God.

2. Tim. 1. ver. 11. I am appointed a preacher and Apostle and Master of the
Gentiles. 7. c. 5. v. 19. Against a Priests receive not accusation, but under
twoe or three witnesses.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent sess. 23. c. 4. Bishops are put of the Holy Ghost for to
rule the Church of God.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Spalatensis or Lohetus Respons. ad Marium. cap. 1. The true nature of a head,
and the true nature of a ruler, is in no pure No man ruler of the Church
man, one or many, nether Monarchically nor Aristocratically. Of the same
opinion are others as appears by what has been said before art. 2. and 4.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Bishops are rulers of the Church, that S.
Paul was master of the Gentiles, that S. Timothe was judge of Priests. The same
say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that no pure man one or many, can be head or true
ruler of the Church.

ART. VI. WHETHER DO RVLE THE true Church of God?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Act. 20. v. 28. The holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to Bishops rule the
true Church
rule the Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood.

Ephesians. 4. v. 11. And he gave other some Pastors and Doctors to the
consummation of the Saints, unto the work of the ministry, unto the edifying
of the body of Christ.

Isaie 62. v. 6. Upon thy walls, Jerusalem, I have appointed watch men.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Ttent Sess. 6. c. 1. The Holy Ghost has put all Bishops of
Patriarchall, Primatiall, Metropolitan and Cathedral Churches to rule the
Church of God which he has purchased with his blood.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Controu. 2. quaest. 2. c. 2. The rule of the Catholic Not the true
Church.
Church could yet never be seen. Again: The Catholic Curch, which contains
only good men, can nether be seen, nor comen unto, nor saluted. And q. 1. c.
10. There are some Prelates, who say and do not, but these are not of the
Catholic Church -- Bellarmin should remember, that Bishops are Pastors of
particular Churches, not of the Catholic Church. Of the same opinion are other
Protestants, who say, that the true Church of God is invisible to men, for such
a Church cannot be ruled of me^: or deny, that any reprobates, though they be
Pastors, are members of the true Church. For if they were Pastors of the true
Church, certainly they should be also members of the same and those principal.
And if no reprobates be Pastors of the true Church, nether be any elect:
because those Pastors, which are elect, rule no other Church then that, which
those which are reprobate, do. As Saint Peter ruled no other kind of Church,
then Judas did.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Bishops rule that Church which Christ
purchased with his blood: that they edify the body of Christ: and that there
are watch men upon the walls of Jerusalem: But Jerusalem, the body of
Christ, the Church purchased with Christ's blood, is the true Church. The same
say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that the rule of the Catholic or true Church is
invisible, that she cannot be seen: that noughtie prelates are not of the
Catholic Church: that Bishops are not pastors of the Catholic Church.

ART. VII. WHETHER PASTOVRS OF the Church be to be called Priests?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Isaie 61. ver. 6. speaking of the time of Gospel, says: Pastors of the
Church are to be called Priests.
And you shall be called the Priests of the Lord. To you it shall be said: The
Ministers of our God. And c. 66. v. 20. 21. And they shall show forth my glory
to the Gentiles -- And I will take of the^ to be priests and leuits, says our
Lord.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Missa c. 17. S. Austin says, that Bishops and
Presbyters are properly called Priests.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther de Instit. Ministr. to. 2. fol. 371. Who administer the Not to be
called Priests.
word and Sacraments amongst people, nether may nor ought to be called priests.

Calvin 4. Institut. cap. 18.. 14. With what trust dare these sacrilegious
follows call themselves priests of the living God?

Rainalds in his Conference c. 8. diuis. 4. They who charge us with falsehood
and corruption in that we call the Ministers of the Gospel, Elders; are
guilty themselves of heresy and blasphemy, in that they call them Priests.

Whitaker l. 9. cont. Dur. sect. 47. The names of Priests or Sacrificers, do no
way agree to the Ministers of the new testament, but abusiuely and
metonymically.

P. Martyr l. cont. Gardener col. 1075. We call not our Ministers, Priests.

Confessio Heluet. c. 18. We give none of our Ministers the name of Priests.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the Pastors of the Church shall be called
Priests: and that some of the Gentiles shall of God be taken to be Priests. The
same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Pastors of the Church may not be called
Priests, that they call none of them Priests: that it is sacrilege, heresy,
and blasphemy to call them priests.

ART. VIII. WHETHER ANY CAN BE a Pastor and preach without mission or calling?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Roman. 10. verse. 15. But how shall they preach unless they None can preach
without mission.
be sent?

Hebr. 5. ver. 5. So Christ also did not glorify himself that he might be
made a high priest.

Ihon 3. v. 28. A man cannot receive any thing, unless it be given him from
heaven.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
D. Stapleton in Romans 10. v. 15. The root of lawful preaching, is mission:
nether is there any lawful power of preaching Gods word, where lawful
mission went not before.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Art. Smalcaldici page 353. In case of necessity, a lay man absolueth, In
necessity a lay man absolueth. Some may preach with out mission.
and becomes Pastor and Minister to an other.

Luther tom. 2. German. fol. 256. A Christian man has so much power, that not
called, he ought to come forth and teach in midst of Christians, when he
sees the teacher there to err.

Id. l. de Instit. ministr. f. 372. We have showed evidently, that every one
has authority to minister the word, yea commandment, if he see that there is
none to teach, or that they teach not aright, who are. The like ib. l. de
Iudic. Eccles. 376. and de Captiuit. f. 80. And Postilla in die S. Stephani f.
84. Stephen by his example gives authority to every Christian to preach
Christ in what place soever, where they are desirous to hear.

Herbrand in Disp. 11. Even they who are not lawfully called may preach the
word fruitfully.

Melancthon in disput. to. 4. p. 507. A lay man can absolve, not only in case
of necessity, but otherwhere.

Iacobus Andreae in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 410. In case of necessity when
Ministers or other men are absent, it is lawful for a woman to comfort a sick
man by preaching, and absolve him of his sins. Kemnitius also 2. port. Exam.
tit. de Ministris p. 49. says that it is lawful in case of necessity to
preach without lawful vocation.

Peter Martyr in locis clas. 4. c. 1.. 15. When a Church is not yet built and
men are ignorant of Christian religion, whosoever shall be there by chance who
know Christ, they are bound to preach him: nether is ordination to be expected,
seeing it cannot be had.

Beza de Notis Eccles. vol. 3. Then, will thou say, shall it be lawful for
every one in the Church to teach? No truly -- But where a general disorder
rages under color of order, nether remedy can be expected from the authors
of this evil, then surely, as when the city is on fire, it is the part of
every good citizen out of order to bring water and cast upon the fire: so in
this fire of the Church, it is the duty of every pious man according to his
power to oppose himself to this evil.

Plessie de Eccles. c. 11. We know, that it is said: How shall they preach
unless they be sent: But because when all things are done confusely and out of
order, we must not look that all things may be done rightly, and according to
set order and form. For either that the Church be admonished that there need
reformation, or that any particular man take care of his salvation, every
Christian ought to know that he is called to that function by a general
vocation, so that he burn with zeal of the glory of God and charity to his
neighbor.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that none can preach unless he be sent, none can
take any honor unless it be given to him: that Christ made not himself
Priest or Pastor. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that one that is not called may fruitfully preach,
that any man may preach in case of necessity, or when there wants a Pastor,
or he erreth, or when there is a general disorder, or men are desirous to
hear: that a lay man may absolve in case of necessity and otherwise also:
that in case of necessity a lay man becomes a Minister and Pastor: yea that
where men want, a woman may preach and absolve from sins. Which are so
plainly against Scripture as some Protestants confess it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. IX. WHETHER A PASTOVR OF the Church may have also temporal jurisdiction?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Genesis 14. v. 18. and Hebr. 7. v. 3. Melchisedech is said to A Pastor of the
Church may have temporal jurisdiction.
have been both a Priest and King.

Exodus 18. ver. 13. Moises did sit to judge the people: And yet withal was a
priest as we shall show in the next article. 1. Reg. 1. and 4. Heli is said to
have been high Priest and judge of the people. The same is euidte^ of the
Machabees.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 5. de Romans Pont. c. 9. It does not repugne, that the Pope
should be both a spiritual Prince, and also a temporal Prince of some
province.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Zuinglius Art. 36. to. 1. Jurisdiction or administration of He cannot.
law which the said Church men do challenge, belongs wholly to the secular
Magistrate if he will be a Christian. And in explan. art. 36. All administration
of law is forbidden to Church men.

Calvin in Luc. 12. v. 13. So is the robbery of the Pope and his men
condemned, who though they pretend to be Pastors of the Church,
notwithstanding dare take upon them terrene and profane jurisdiction, which is
contrary to their function. The same he has 4. Iustit. c. 11.. 8.

Daneus Controu. 4. page 560. Let us show, that under the Gospel it is not
lawful for Bishops to have, execute, practice, both ecclesiastical and
political jurisdiction.

Polanus in Disput private. disput. 13. No man can be at once both a Bishop and
a political Prince.

Hutterus in Analysi Confess. Augustan. p. 622. It is manifest, that both powers
cannot agree to one and the same man at one time.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Melchisedech was at once both King and
Priest: that Moises was both judge and priest: the same of Heli and the
Machabees Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that all temporal jurisdiction belongs to the
civil Magistrate: all temporal administration of law is forbidden to Church
men, that the same man cannot have ecclesiastical and temporal jurisdiction,
the same man cannot be both Bishop and Prince.

ART. X. WHETHER MOISES WERE a Priest?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Psalm. 98. v. 6. Moises and Aaron in his Priests, and Samuel Moises was a
Priest.
among them that invoke his name.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 5. de Romans Pont. c. 9. Moises was both a sovereign temporal
Prince and a high priest, as is evident it out of the Scripture.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cont. 1. q. 5. c. 4. Nether did Moises exercise at all He was no
Priest.
the preisthood, but was only a Prophet.

Iuel in defens. Apol. Part. 6. c. 11. diuis. 4. Whether Moises were a Priest
or no, we are not certain.

Daneus Cont. 4. p. 561. I answer that Moises had not nor, exercised both the
functions of Preihstood and Magistrate; but only the functions of a Magistrate
and Prophet. The same said Hunnius in Colloq. Ratisbon. sect. 2. Where he
adds, that he sacrified as a Prophet, not as a Priest.

Chamier l. 1. de Pontif. p. 71. I grant, that Moises as superior to Aaron,
but as Magistrate, not as Priest.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture says plainly, that Moises was a Priest as it says that Aaron was
one. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that Moises was no preiste; exercised no preisthood.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF PASTOVRS.
What we have rehearsed in this Chapter does show, that Protestants do propose
far other kind of Pastors to us then the holy Scripture and Catholics do:
For the Scripture together with Catholics teaches us, that Pastors are
perpetual, have in themselves authority to rule the Church, that one single
Pastor has power to excommunicate, that they have authority to command and
make laws, be true rulers of the Church, do rule the true Church, be to be
called Priests, cannot be made nor preach without lawful calling, may have
also temporal jurisdiction, and finally that Moises was a Priest: All which
Protestants deny.

They also show that Protestants steal from the Pastors of the Church their
perpetuity, their authority, their power to excommunicate in particular,
their authority to command and make laws, their true power of ruling, or
ruling the true Church, their name of Priests and temporal jurisdiction: and
finally from Moises, his Preisthood. And thus much of Pastors: now of the
Church.

CHAPTER VII. OF THE CHVRCH.
ART. I. WHETHER THE CHVRCH be one?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
I HON 10. v. 16. There shall be made one fould and One Church.
one Pastor.

Romans 12. v. 5. So we being many, are one body in Christ.

Ephesians. 2. v. 16. That he may reconcile both in one body to God by the cross.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton Controu. 1. quaestion. 2. artic. 1. The Catholic doctrine is,
that there is one only Church which we profess in the Creed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Controu. 2. quaest. 1. cap. 7. page 432. There Twoe Churches.
must needs be one Church of the wicked, an other of the good. And cap. 14.
page 453. Where (Austin) says, that which we say, that there are twoe
societies of men in the world, that is, twoe Churches. To the one, belong the
predestinate; to the other, the reprobate.

Humfrey ad Ration 3. Campiani. We have showed, that This, and that.
Calvin and our Churches put not only that invisible Church, but also this
which is visible and apparent by her notes.

Morton in Apol. part. 1. l. c. 1. The question is, whether that Church which
in our Creed we believe and profess to be one holy and catholic be invisible,
and necessarily distinct from any visible Church. Protestants affirm: Papists
deny. And cap. 3. Many are in the visible Church who have nothing to do with
the invisible. Therefore there must be admitted some invisible Church, out of
which they are, distinct from that, in which they are.

Magdeburgenses Centuria 1. l. 2. c. 4. col. 171. Christ and Twoe Churches.
the things themselves teach us, that there are twoe Churches

Gesnerus in Compendio doctrinae loco 24. The^ will there be twoe Churches, one
visible, the other invisible? We must needs distinguish between the visible
congregation of them that are called, embrace the Sacraments, and profess the
pure word of God, and between the true faithful and elect.

Vrsinus in Catechismo p. 343. The militant Church is twoefould, visible, and
invisible. The visible is the company of those that agree in doctrine, having
many members dead or not regenerate: The inuisihle, is the company of the
elect and regenerate.

Daneus Cont. 4. p. 707. But if this man be of that opinion, Twoe Churches.
that Austin does not acknowledge twoe Churches, the one visible in which even
the reprobate are, an other invisible in which only, those are who are
predestined of God to salvation, he is much deceived.

Vorstius in Antibellarm. p. 124. One distinction separateth the true and
internal Church of Christ, which wholly consists of the elect and true
beleiuers, from the extern^ll company of professors, which often times has
many reprobates: albeit also it may be not without cause called the true
Church of Christ, by reason of professing true doctrine.

And seeing all Protestants divide the Church into visible and invisible, and do
not only profess, that the invisible Church is a true Church, but also
sometimes call the visible, a true Church, properly so termed, and the sp^use
and body of Christ, as I showed l. de Authore Protestant. Eccles. 2. cap. 6.
they must needs confess, that they make Visible and invisible Church distinct.
In parts.
twoe true Churches militant, which in their opinion differ in parts or
members, in definition, and in many proprieties. For according to them, the
parts or members of the invisible Church, are only just and predestinate men:
parts or members of the visible Church, are both just and unjust, predestinate
and reprobate. The definition of the invisible Church, is this: A Society in
justifying faith and predestination: The definition of the visible, this: In
Definition.
A Society in profession of true faith and lawful use of Sacraments. The
invisible, is known only to God: The visible, to God and me^ also. Against
the invisible, the gates In Proprieties.
of hell cannot prevail: against the visible, they may. She cannot be led into
error, at lest not into fundamental error: This may. She cannot wholly perish,
this may. She is believed of Protestants in the Creed, not this. She has no
visible notes whereby she may be distinguished from other Societies, this has.
If therefore both these Societies be true Churches before God, there must needs
be twoe true militante Churches. For one cannot differ from it self, in
parts, definition, and in so many and so great proprieties.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that Christ's fould is one, that Christians are one
mystical body. Catholics say the same.

Protestants plainly say, that there are twoe Churches, a twoefould Church, one
of the wicked an other of good: or one of the predestinate an other of the
reprobate: that there is this and that Church, visible and invisible.

ART. VII. WHETHER BAD MEN MAY be in the true Church?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 13. ver. 47. The kingdom of heaven is like to a net cast B^d men in the
Church.
into the sea, and gathering together of all kind of fishes. Which when it was
filled, drawing it forth and sitting by the shore* they chose out the good into
vessels, but the badde they cast out. So shall it be in the consummation of the
world.

Matthew. 3. v. 12. Whose fan is in his hand, and he shall clean Chafe in
Gods flore.
purge his flore; and will gather his wheat into the barn, but the chafe he
will burn with unquenchable fire.

1. Cor. 6. v. 15. Know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ?
Taking therefore the members of Christ, shall I make them the members of an
harlot? God forbid. c. 10. v. 17. For All Communicants, one body.
being many, we are one bread, one body all that participate of one bread.
The same is evident by what has been said before of Judas.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton Controu. 1. q. 2. art. 5. The orthodoxall sentence is, that the
true Church which we believe in our Creed, consists of good and badde.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cont. 2. q. 1. cap. 7. The Church consists of the The bad no
members of the Church.
good only. The bad are not members of the true Church. c. 11. The godly are
no more joined in one body with the wicked, then light with darkness, Christ
with Belial. c. 13. In the triumpha^t Church are only good, so likewise in the
militant. Et q. 5. c. 3. The wicked Belong to the Church.
belong not to the Church of God.

Rainalds these. 4. The wicked are no part of the body of Christ, therefore
nether of the Church. And in Apologia these. page 244. The Church proposed in
the Creed, contains only Saints.

Apologia Conf. Augustan. de Eccles. The wicked cannot be the Church.

Luther in Psalm. 118. tom. 7. Who has not true faith, is not a Pertain not to
the Church.
Saint and just, pertains not to the holy Church.

Calvin 4. Instit. c. 1. 7. None are admitted into that which is indeed the
Church before God, but they who by grace of adoption are the Sons of God.

Peter Martyr in locis clas. 4. c. 1.. 1. We avouch, that such Not parts of
the Church.
men (wicked) are not indeed and before God parts of the Church. In 1. Cor. 1.
Only Saints are truly and before God of the Church, the wicked in only show
and not indeed belong to the Church.

Daneus Cont. 4. p. 706. That which is the true Church, consists of Saints
alone.

Volanus l. 3. cont. Scargam. Confess, that in name only, In name only
members of the Church.
and not indeed (as thou falsely think) they are reputed amongst the members
of the Church of God, who being by nature goats are hidden under the name of
Christ's sheep in his flock. And he adds, that such are worthily, judged to
cover themselves with the vain and unprofitable mask of the Church.

Musculus in locis tit. de Eccles. Not so much as the name of the Church is to
be given to the wicked and reprobate.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that badde men are in the Church as badde
fishes in the net, and as chafe in the flore: that the bodies of those
Christians who commit fornication, are members of Christ: that all who eat of
one Eucharisticall bread, are one body. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly teach, that badde me^ are not members of the true
Church, pertain not to the holy Church, are not indeed and before God parts
of the Church, only in show, and not indeed belong to the Church, in name
only and not indeed are reputed among the members of the Church, cover
themselves with the vain mask of the Church, deserve not so much as the name
of the Church: that they are not joined in one body with the godly, are no
part of the body of Christ: That the Church, the Church proposed in the
Creed, the Church indeed and before God, the true Church, consists only of
good men and Saints.

ART. III. WHETHER REPROBATES may be in true Church?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
The parables cited in the former article of the net and Reprobates in Gods
net, in his flore, and his disciples.
the flore, and the example of Judas show manifestly, that reprobates may be in
the true Church.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton Cont. 1. q. 2. art. 1. The Catholic doctrine is, that there is
but one Church which we profess in our Creed, and that she consists of the
elect and reprobate.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cont. 2. q. 1. c. 7. We say, that the Church consists Reprobates
not of the Church indeed.
not of reprobates, but of only predestinate. Again. A reprobate may seem to
be of the Church, but he cannot be indeed of the Church. And q. 5. c. 3. That
is a false Church, which consists of reprobates.

Rainalds in Apol. These. p. 170. I determine, that the elect alone are
contained in the Church of the Creed.

M. Perkins. de praedest. tom. 1. col. 154. A reprobate is but in Only in show
members of the Church.
show only a member of Christ.

Abbats in Diatribam Thomsoni c. 8. Reprobates are not reputed in the Church.

Calvin in 1. Joan. 2. v. 19. Ihon plainly pronounces, that they Never members
of the Church.
who fall away, were never members of the Church.

Beza in Confess. cap. 5. sect. 8. As for the rest (Beside the elect) they are
not be numbered among the members of the Church, albeit they were Apostles.

Daneus Cont. 4. p. 689. The true Church of God contains only his elect.

Pareus Colloq. Theol. 1. disput. 12. The reprobate are not truly and indeed
of the Church, nor belong unto it before God. Not truly of the Church.


Sadeel in Refutat. Posnan. c. 4. Reprobates pertain not to the true Church.
And Musculus in the former article, will not so much as the name of the Church
to be bestowed upon the reprobates.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that those who are to be be cast out and to be
burnt with unquenchable fire, that is, reprobates, are in the kingdom of
heaven and in the flore of God, that is, in his Church. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly teach, that reprobates are not in the Church, not in
the true Church, not in the Church of the Creed, not indeed, not before Good:
that the Church, the true Church contains only the elect: that the
re-reprobates only in show and appearance can be of the Church, that they
deserve not the name of the Church that she is a false Church which consists
of the reprobates.

ART. IV. WHETHER THE CHVRCH continues ever?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew 16. verse. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock Church, invincible.
will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

Luke 1. v. 33. And he shall reign in the house of Jacob for Shall have no end.
ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton Cont. 1. q. 3. art. 2. The Church of Christ continues to the end
of the world.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Apology of the Church of England. Long ago has The whole Church clean
fallen down.
the Bishop of Rome willed to have the whole Church depend upon himself alone:
wherefore it is no marvel though it be clean fallen down long ago.
Again. When we likewise saw, that all things were quite trodden underfoot by
these men, and that nothing remained in the temple of God but pitiful spoils
and decaies, we reckoned etc.

Cartwright in Whitgifts Defense p. 217. When Antichrist Rooted out from the
ground.
had rooted out the Church even from the ground etc.

Luther in c. 49. Genes. tom. 6 The Pope has extinguished the Church.

Calvin cont. Sadolet. p. 132. The matter came to that pass, that it was
clear and manifest both to the learned and unlearned, Christ kingdom flat
down.
that the true order of the Church the^ perished, Christ's kingdom was cast
flat down, when this principality (of the Pope) was erected.

Beza in Conf. c. 5. sect. 29. But for that horrible tyranie (of the Popedom)
which overthrew the whole Church and whicb almost alone does stay her renewing
we etc.

Daneus in l. Augustini de Haeres. c. 95. About the year of our lord 574.
arose this destruction, plague, and tyranie of the Rooted out from the
foundation.
whole Church, which after rooted out the kingdom of Christ from the
foundation.

Chassanio l. 2. de Ecclesia p. 151. It is false: That the Church shall never
be broken of. More of there like sayings may be seen in my 2. book of the
Author of the Protestant religion c. 1. Where also c. 2. I have refuted their
euasions.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the gates of hell shall not pre^aile against
the Church. that there shall be no end of the kingdom of Christ. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the whole Church was clean fallen down long
ago: that nothing remained in the temple of God but pitiful spoils and
decaies: that the Church was rooted out from the ground: the Church extinct,
the whole Church overthrown, the whole Church destroyed: that the kingdom of
Christ was cast flat down and rooted out from the foundation: which are so
contrary to the Scripture as sometimes Protestants confess no less. See lib.
2. cap. 30.

ART. V. WHETHER THE CHVRCH BE always visible.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew. 5. verse. 15. Christ thus speaks to his disciples or Church cannot be
hidden.
Church: You are the light of the world. A city cannot be hid situated upon
a mountain.

And c. 18. v. 17. And if he will not hear them, tell the Church, And if he
will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the Heathen and the Publican.

Isaie 62. v. 6. Upon thy walls, Jerusalem, I have appointed Wacth me^ for
ever in the Church.
wachmen, all the day and all the night for ever they shall not hold their
peace.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton Cont. 1. q. 3. art. 1. The Church which we are to believe, must
necessarily always be visible. There must always be a visible Church.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cont. 2. q. 2. c. 1. Their (Papists) opinion is, that Militant Church
invisible.
the militant Church is always visible. But we teach, that the whole Church,
that is, the Catholic, is invisible, not only the triumphant part, but also
the militant. Et q. 4. c. 1. We confess, that there is always on earth some
number of them who piously worship Christ, and hold the true faith and
religion: but we say, that this member is not always visible. Their (Papists)
opinion is that there is perpetually some visible Church on earth.

Calvin in Praefat. Instit. Papists will have the form of the Church not
apparent.
Church to be always apparent and visible: we on the contrary affirm, that
the Church may consist of no apparent form. Et in Catechismo c. de fide. She
is not always seen with eyes, discerned by marks.

Daneus Cont. 4. l. 3. c. 12. Oftentimes God will have some visible Oftentimes
no visible Church.
Church on earth, oftentimes none. And l. 4. c. 8. The true Church may some
time fail to be visible.

Scarpe de Iustif. Cont. 5. The members of the visible Church The whole visible
Church may fail. In the uttermost extent*
may fail, yea the whole visible Church, as such.

Vorstius in Antibellarm. p. 136. Whence it follows, that the visible Church
of Christ, not only in a great part, but even whole, taken in the uttermost
extent, may for sometime fail from the true faith, and be wholly obscured.
Again. The external Church of Christ may be obscured and fail. More of their
like sayings may be seen in my foresaied book c. 4.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly teaches, that the Church of Christ cannot be hidden, and
bids us to tell and hear her. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly teach, that there is not always a visible number of those
who piously worship Christ, that the Church may have no apparent for me, is
not always seen with eyes, sometimes fails to be visible: that the whole
visible Church, as such, may fail: that the whole visible Church taken in her
uttermost extent may fail from the faith: that God oftentimes will have no
visible Church on earth. Which are so opposite to Scripture as Protestants
sometimes confess it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. VI. WHETHER THE CHVRCH be infallible in faith?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Isaie. 59. verse. vltim. This is my covenant with them, says Gods spirit ever
in the mouth of the Church.
our Lord: My spirit that is in thee, and my words that I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed,
and out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says our Lord, from this present for
ever.

Matthew. 16. verse. 18. And the gates of hell shall not prevail Gates of hell
prevail not against her.
against it.

Joan. 16. v. 13. But when the Spirit of truth comes, he shall teach you all
truth.

1. Tim. 3. ver. 15. Which is the Church of the living God, the The pillar of
truth.
pillar and ground of truth.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton Controu. 4. qu. 2. art. vnico. The Church in her determinations
of faith is ever must certain and infallible.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cont. 2. q. 4. cap. 3. God has not promised to his The universal
Church may err. In necessary matters. The whole Church.
Church, that she should not err. The universal Church may err. The whole
Church may err. It is evident, that the true Church may for a time err even
in necessary matters. Yea after Christ's ascension and that descent of the
Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, it is manifest, that the whole Church did err
about the vocation of the Gentiles, and not only the common sort of
Christians, but even the very Apostles and Doctors. And quaest. 5. cap. 17. The
Church may for a time err in some fundamental points.

Beza de notis Eccles. vol. 3. If some particular Church may err even in some
principal head of Christian religion, and yet leave not therefore to be a true
Church: why may we not say the same of all particular Churches taken not only
severally but all together, for this is the Catholic Church? And the marge^t
The Catholic Church, and in fundamental points. The whole Churrh.
says: Some errors may creep into the Church even in some fundamental head
of says.

Daneus Controu. 4. l. 3. c. 17. The whole Church, all Pastors generally may
err. The whole Church may be deceived, slip, and err.

Author Resp. ad Theses. Vademont. p. 503. The Catholic And grievously.
Church may err, and that sometimes most grievously. The like they teach
commonly.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Gods spirit and his word shall never
depart from the mouth of the Church: that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against her; that the Holy Ghost teaches her all truth: that she is the
pillar and ground of truth. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly teach: that the Church, the true Church, the universal
Church, the whole Church may err most grievously and in some fundamental and
necessary matters: that the whole Apostolik Church even after the descent of
the Holy Ghost did err. Which is so repugnant to holy Scripture, as
sometimes Protestants confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. VII. WHETHER THE CHVRCH be to be heard simply in all things?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew. 18. v. 17. If he will not hear the Church, let him be Church, simply
to be heard.
to the as the Heathen and the Publican.

Luc. 10. v. 16. Who hears you, hears me, and who despises you, despises
me.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton Cont. 4. q. 2. art. 3. We must simply and absolutely obey the
voice of the Church in doctrine of faith.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cont. 1. q. 3. c. 3. We must not simply receive whatsoever Not simply
to be heard.
the Church teaches; but whatsoever she is commanded of God to teach, and
proves by Gods authority. And q. 5. c. 5. The Church is to be heard, not
simply in all her sayings, decrees, sentences and commandments. The same he
has Cont. 2. q. 4. c. 2. and l. 1. de Scriptura c. 11.

Bucanus in Inst. Theol. loco. 43. Must we simply hear the voice of the
Church, and receive whatsoever she teaches? No.

Reineccius to. 4. Armat. c. 3. We must believe the Church in Not simply to be
believed.
all things, not taken simply and absolutely, but relatiuely and with
condition, as far as according to Scripture and out of that she proposes
divine truth.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture simply and absolutely bids us to hear the Church, and says
that who hears her, hears Christ. The same say Catholics.

Protestants deny, that she is simply to be heard or obeyed.

ART. VIII. WHETHER TRVETH, IN respect of us, do rely upon the Church?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Timoth. 3. ver. 15. Which is the Church of the living God, Church the
pillar of truth.
the pillar and ground of truth.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton. Controu. 4. quaest. 2. artic. vnico. The Church, according to
the ordinary course, is for faithful men the pillar of all revealed truth,
and for faith it self, the ground. For the faitfull rely upon the teaching of
the Church as an immovable pillar.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Contru. 2. q. 4. c. 2. The truth of faith does not Not pillar in
regard of us.
rely upon the Church as a foundation, no not in regard of us. Truth does not
rely upon the authority of the Church. Again. If the truth of faith did
rely upon the authority of the Church in respect of us, who then etc.

Bucer in Disp. Cantabrig. It is manifest enough that no Sustaineth not truth.
Church is to be termed the pillar and ground of truth, as if she did sustain
and conserve truth.

Melancthon in locis c. de Signis Eccles. to. 3. Faith does not rely wpon the
authority of the Church.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the Church is the pillar and ground of
truth. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the Church does not sustain or conserve the
truth: that faith relieth not upon her authority: that truth does not rely
upon her authority as a foundation, no not in regard or respect of us.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF the Church.
What has been repeated in this Chapter does make manifest, that Protestants
describe unto us a Church quite different from that which the holy Scripture
and Catholics propose. For the Scripture and Catholics teach that the Church
is but one: Protestants say there are twoe Churches. They say she contains
both badde and reprobates, that she endures for ever, is always visible,
infallible in faith, is simply in all things to be heard, and is the pillar of
faith touching us: All which points Protestants deny.

They also make manifest, that Protestants steal from the Church a great part
of her, to wit, the badde and reprobate faithful, and many of her chief
properties, namely, unity, perpetuity, continual visibilitie,
infallibility, and our dependencie upon her in belief. And thus much of the
Church: Now of Temples or material Churches.

CHAPTER VIII. OF TEMPLES OR MATERIAL CHVRCHES.
ART. I. WHETHER THE CHVRCHES be also for private prayer?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
KINGS 3. cap. 8. ver. 41. Moreover also the stranger, Place of prayer for a
stranger,
which is not of thy people Israel, when he shall come from a far country
for thy name -- and shall pray in this place, thou shall hear in heaven in the
firmament of thy habitation, and shall do all things for which the stranger
shall invoke thee.

2. Paralipomen. 6. verse. 21. Whosoever shall pray in this For whomsoever.
place, hear out of thy habitation, that is, from the heavens, and be
propitious.

Matthew 21. verse. 13. It is written: my house shall be called a house of prayer.

Luc. 2. v 37. Who departed not from the temple, by fastings For S. Anne.
and prayers serving night and day. c. 24. v. 53. And they were always in the
Temple, praising and blessing God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Cardin. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Santis. cap. 4. The Churches of Christians are
rightly instituted for to pray also private prayers.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Tindal in Fox Acts 1610. page 1138. Churches are for preaching For preaching
only.
only. And Fox adds: This article contains nether error nor honesty.

Vorstius in Antibellarm. p. 327. Nether is this a lawful end Not for private
prayer.
of Churches, that the faithful pray priuaty in them.

Luther in Festo Dedicat. Templi fol. 447. The people which believe in Christ
are all just and subject to no law, especially Not dedicated to prayer.
that pertains to ceremonies of temples: And therefore, now amongst them,
there is no temple dedicated to prayer.

And hereupon Protestants in Confess. Heluet. c. 23. bid them beware, that
they weary not the people with to long prayer: And in Confess. Argentinen.
cap. 21. They detest our long paier, as also does Calvin in Matthew. 6. ver. 7.
and finally in their Synod at Dordrach art. 46. they define that publik evening
prayers are not to be brought in, where they are not in use: and to be taken
away where they are. So well these men love prayers in Churches.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Gods Church is the house of prayer for all
people, a place of prayer where the stranger may make his prayer and be heard:
that Anna night and day prayed in the temple: that the Apostles were always in
the temple praising God. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Churches are only for preaching, that is no
lawful end of Churches to pray privately in them: that Christians have no
temple dedicated to prayer, and forbid long, and evening prayer in Churches.

ART. II. WHETHER CHVRCHES BE to be adorned?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Exodus 35. is described the wonderful adorning of the tabernacle Churches are
to be adorned.
made by Gods commandment: and 3. Reg. 6. the most rich ornaments of the temple
made by Solomon.

Psalm 25. v. 8. I have loved the beauty of thy house.

Marc. 14. v. 15. Say to the master of the house that the Master says:
where is my refectorie, where I may eat my Paske with my disciples? And he
will show you a great chamber, adorned, and there prepare for us.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Joan. 12. v. 3. Sumptuous d^cking and honorable adorning, when
they are done in the honor of God and for his worship, either in the adorning
or magnifencie of Churches, or in solemn administration of Sacraments, do
please God.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in Problemate c. de ornatu temploru^. The error Not to be adorned.
(of adorning temples) began to be strange in Constantins time: and the Fathers
the^ being carried away with the custom do exact the adorning of temples.

Calvin in Math. 26. v. 11 Let us not devise sumptuous worshippes of God with
the Papists. In Joan. 12. v. 6. Surely God cares not for external pomp --
wherefore they are preposterous interpreters, who out of Christ's answer do
infer, that costly and magnificall worshipps do please God.

Tigurini apud Hospin. part. 2. Hist. fol. 24. The ornaments of Churches
belong not to the true worship of God.

Vorstius in Antibellarm. p. 327. It is not only superfluous, but also vain
and superstitious, and in part ethnicall also and Jewish, to make great and
unprofitable expenses in adorning Churches, as every where uses to be done in
Popery. For that theatricall bravery is contrary to the simplicity of
Christian religion.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that God himself comcommanded the tabernacle
to be adorned, that Solomon by his instinct adorned the temple, that David
loved the beauty of Gods house: that Christ made choice of a great and adorned
chamber, wherein he should celebrate the Eucharist. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the adorning of Churches is an error,
superfluous, vain, superstitious, ethnicall and Judicial, and contrary to
Christian religion: that magnificall and costly worships please not God.

ART. III. WHETHER IT BE LAWEFVLL to put the Images of Angels or Saints in
Churches?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Exodus 25. v. 18. God thus commands: Two Cherubins Images in the Temple.
also thou shall make of beaten gould on both sides of the Oracle. And verse.
22. And I will speak to thee over the Propitiatory and from the midst of
the two Cherubins, which shall be upon the arc of testimony, all things which I
will command the children of Israel by thee.

3. Reg. 6. verse. 23. And he (Solomon) made in the Oracle two Cherubs of olive
trees of ten cubits in height. And v. 27. And he put the Cherubs in the midst
of the inner temple.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Session. 25. c. de Inuocat. The Images of Christ and other
Saints are to be had and kept, especially in Churches.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Iuel. art. 14. sect. 2. The Jews had no manner of Image, nether painted nor
graven in their temples.

Luther in Deuteron. 7. to. 3. I do not much love images, and would they were
not in Churches.

Zuinglius l. de ver. and falls. relig. c. de Statuis. Images must Not in temples
be taken out of Churches.

Sadeel ad Art. 59. Abiurat. God abhors images.

Peter Martyr in locis tit. de Cult. Imaginum. 22. We must not suffer, that
Images be had in Churches.

And in this point the Protestants doctrine is well enough known by their
deeds: yea some of them go so far as they deny that we may paint any Images
of Christ or the Saints. For thus says Leo Iudae in Zuinglius to. 2. f. 627.
If Christ and his Saints be in heaven, it is wickedness even to make their
images. With whom agrees Zuinglius ib. 630. Hoffman also ib. f. 631. says:
That good man thinks, that images may be kept and suffered, so that none do
adore or worship the^. But this opinion is contrary to the testimonies of
Scripture, wherein the Lord commands that we shall not make them. The same
intimates Confessio Heluet. c. 4.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that God commanded twoe Images of Angels to be
made and put in the Oracle: that Solomon made twoe others, and put them in the
midst of the inner temple. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that God abhors images, that they are not to be
suffered in Churches, no that the Images of Christ and his Saints are to be
made: that the Jews had no manner of Images in their temple.

ART. IV. WHETHER THE HEATHENS or Idolaters did think their Idols to be Gods.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Exodus 32. v. 8. God himself thus speaks unto Moises: They have made to
themselves a molten calfe, and have adored, and immolating hosts unto it, have
said: These are thy Gods, Israel, that have brought thee out of the land of
Egypt.

Acts 19. v. 26. Demetrius a Heathen has these words: Heathens thought theirs
Idols to be Gods.
Sirs you see and hear, that this same Paul by persuasion has auerted a great
multitude, not only of Ephesus, but almost of all Asia, saying: That they are
no Gods which be made by hands.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 2. de Imagine. c. 13. It is false, that the Heathens did not
think the idols to be Gods.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin 1. Instit. c. 11.. 9. Nether are the Heathe^s to be thought They
thought not so.
to have been so blockish, as that they knew not, that God was an other thing
then stones and stocks.

Daneus Controuer. 7. p. 1394. It is a lie, that the Heathens did believe the
Images of their Gods to have been their Gods themselves.

Zuinglius in Resp. ad Valentin. to. 1. f. 247. The Heathens did no more
account their Idols to be Gods, then now we use to account of our Images. The
like say Peter Martyr Controu. Gardener. col. 396. and Sadeel ad art. 59.
abiurat.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly teaches, that the idolaters did say, that their molten
calfe was their God, that Demetrius a Heathen reprehe^ded S. Paul, because he
tought, that they were no Gods which were made by men's hands. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that the Heathe^s did not think stocks or stones to
be their Gods: that it is a lie, that they thought the images of their Gods to
be Gods themselves. And yet these men, who against the plain testimony of
Scripture do defend the Heathens, do accuse the Catholics that they make Images
their God.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF TEMPLES or material Churches.
Out of that which we have rehearsed in this Chapter, it appears, that
Protestants have other kind of temples, then the Scripture and Catholics have.
For the Scripture and Catholics teach, that temples or Churches are also for
private prayer, that they are to be adorned, and that images of Angels or
Saints are to be put in them: all which Protestants deny: and consequently
they robe the Churches of one of their ends for which they are instituted, and
of their ornaments and holy Images.

CHAPTER IX. OF BAPTISM.
ART. I. WHETHER WATER BE necessary to Baptism?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
I HON 3. v. 5. Unless a man be borne again of Water necessary to baptism.
water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

Ephesians. 5. v. 26. As Christ also loved the Church and delivered himself for
it, that he might sanctify it, cleansing it by the lauer of water in the word.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent sess. 7. com. 2. If any say, that true and natural water is
not necessary to baptism, be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Beza Epistola 2. vol. 3. Theol. Though water be wanting, if Not necessary.
the baptism of one cannot nor ought to be differred with edification, surely
I would as well baptize with any other liquor as with water.

Polanus in Sylloge These. part. 2. p. 556. The external and sensible matter of
baptism, is water, and that wanting an other liquor proportionable.

Festus Homius in Disput. 45. We do not greatly deny, but where no water can
be had, there some other liquor which has the some use that water has, and is
very proportionable thereto, may be used in the place thereof.

Vorstius in Antibellarm. p. 367. Bellarmin and his do more restrain this
essence of baptism, then our men are wont to do; Whiles he avouches, that
pure water and that solemn form: In the name of the Father etc. is simply in
all places and times precisely necessary. Again. Extraordinarily and in some
most rare and unusual cases, we do not deny, but that some other kind of
liquor, which has the same use that water has, may be used. The same teaches
Luther in Colloq. Mensal. cap. 15. and Riuet judges it probable tractat. 3.
sect. 3. Nether is it disliked by Saddel ad Artic. abiurat. 11.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture plainly says, that unless one be borne again of water, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven: that Christ cleanses his Church with
the lauer of water. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that water is not simply necessary: that
extraordinarily and in case of necessity one may baptize in other liquor as
well as in water: that where water wants, an other liquor proportionable may
suffice. Which is so evident a contradiction of Scripture, as Protestants
themselves sometimes confess it. See lib. 2. cap. 30.

ART. II. WHETHER INVOCATION of the holy Trinity, be necessary in baptism?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew 28. ver. 19. Going teach ye all nations baptizing them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Catechismus ad Parochos cap. de baptismo. Pastors shall teach, that this is
the perfect and absolute form of baptism: I baptize the in the name of the
Father etc. and afterward adds, that this form does especially pertain to
the substance of baptism.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther l. de Captiuit. Babil. tom. 2. fol. 75. Howsoever baptisme^^s Not
necessary.
given, so that it be not given in the name of a man but in the name of God, it
truly saves: Nay I doubt not, but if one take it in the name of the Lord,
albeit a wicked Minister do not give it in the name of the Lord, that he is
truly baptized in the name of the Lord.

Zuinglius ad Struthionem to. 2. f. 312. Nether am I ignorant, that the
Apostles did not acknowledge these words (In the name of the Father etc.) for
such, as without them baptism could not stand. De baptismo ib. fol. 65. It is
evident, that these words of Christ, which he uses Matthew c. 28. are not so to
be taken, as if they were a certain form of baptism. And fol. 77. It shall
appear, that Christ would not, that in baptizing we should use this form of
words: I baptize thee in the name of the Father etc.

Calvin de ver. reform. p. 235. Papists disputing about the form of baptism,
stand upon the bare pronunciation of the words, as if Christ, when he commanded
the Apostles to baptize in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost, had prescribed them I know not what magical charm.

Vorstius in Antibellarm. page 366. According to our men's opinion nothing else
is required to the essence a baptism, but the plunging of that man into the
water, who is minded publicly to profess Christ. p. 367. About the form (of
baptism) if that must be essential, here we plainly disagree. For indeed it
no way consists in that pronuntiation of words, but in the immersion of the
man or the sprinckling of him with water done in the name of Christ or of the
holy Trinity.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly teaches, that Christ commanded to baptize in the name of
the holy Trinity. Catholics say the same.

Protestants plainly teach, that invocation of the holy Trinity is not
essential to baptism: that baptism howsoever given in the name of God, nay
though it be not given in Gods name, so it be taken in Gods name, is true
baptism: that baptism may consist without invocation of the holy Trinity:
that Chtist prescribed no certain form of words, nor would that we should use
the foresaied words whiles we baptize: that to stand upon it, is to make it a
magical charm. Which contradiction of Scripture is so clear, as some
Protestants confess it: As you may see infra l. 2. c. 30.

ART. III. WHETHER BAPTISM BE necessary by necessity of precept?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 28. v. 19. Going teach ye all nations, baptizing them Baptism
necessary by commandment.
in the name of the Father etc.

Act. 2. verse. 38. Be every one of you baptized in the name of Jesus Christ
for remission of your sins.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Session. 7. Can. 5. If any shall say, that baptism is free,
that is, not necessary to salvation be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cont. q. 47. c. 2. It is lawful to abstain from baptism, Not
necessary by commandment.
so there be no contempt or scandal in the fact.

Casaubon Epistola ad Card. Perron. Many (Protestants) put baptism amongst
those things, which whether they be absent or present it skilleth not much.

Bucer in Math. 9. I answer, that baptism as an external thing is of less
importance, then that the Lord should have greatly commanded any thing about
it.

Zuinglius de Baptismo tom. 2. fol. 96. Baptism is a ceremonial thing, which
the Church may well omit or take away.

OEcalampadius l. 2. Epist. page 363. It is an external thing, which the law
of Charity may dispense with.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly teaches: that Christ and the Apostles commanded baptism.
Catholics say the same.

Protestants plainly teach, that Christ did not greatly command any thing
about baptism: that the Church may well take it away: that we may abstain
from it, so there be no contempt or scandal: and that it skilleth not much
whether we have it or want it.

ART. IV. WHETHER BAPTISM be necessary to salvation in necessity of means?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ihon 3. verse. 5. Amen, Amen, I say to thee: Unless a man Baptism a
necessa^ie mean to salvation.
be borne again of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent. Sess. 6. c. 4. Which transferring (from injustice to
justice) after the promulgation of the Gospel, cannot be done without the
lauer of regeneration, or desire thereof.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cont. 1. q. 6. cap. 8. The salvation of infants does Not a necessary
mean.
not depend of the Sacraments. And l. 8. cont. Dureum. sect. 73. Who now
exclude infantes dying before baptism from life, speak against Scriptures,
against Gods mercy, and against the ancient custom. And he says that
Protestants reject the Catholic doctrine of necessity of baptism, as impious
and inhumane.

Confession of Scotland. page 159. We detest and reject his (Popes) cruel
judgment against infants dying without baptism: and the absolute necessity of
baptism which he puts.

Calvin in Marci 16. v. 16. We say that baptism is not simply necessary, but
in regard of our obedience. And 4. Instit. cap. 15.. 12. Children, who dye
before they be christened, are not shut out Children saved without baptism.
of the kingdom of God.

Beza cont. Westphal. vol. 1. p. 256. If any man's child die before he be
christened, we doubt not of his salvation. And in 2. part. resp. ad Acta
Colloq. Montisbel. p. 128. The question is, whether baptism be simply and
absolutely necessary to salvation, which I, with all right beleiuers do deny.

Peter Martyr in These. page 1008. Christians children are saved, howbeit they
dye before they be baptized.

Daneus Cont. de baptismo cap. 4. We accurse them, who bring in absolute
necessity of baptism. Et c. 8. It is blasphemy, that baptism is precisely
necessary to salvation.

Vorstius in Antibellarm. p. 368. Our men openly disclaim from Papists that
urge the absolute necessity of baptism.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly teaches, that the water of baptism in necessary for one
to enter into the kingdom of God. Catholics say the same.

Protestants plainly teach, that Baptism is not necessaire to salvation; not
simply not absolutely, not precisely necessary: that infants are saved without
baptism: and that the contrary doctrine is against Scripture, impious,
inhumane, and to be detested.

ART. V. WHETHER SIMON MAGVS received, or reprobates receive whole and entire
baptism.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Act. 8. ver. 13. Then Simon also himself believed, and being baptized, he
cleaued to Philippe. Simon Magus was baptized.


Acts 2. verse. 38. S. Peter speaks without distinction of elect or
reprobates. Be every one of you baptized in the name of Jesus Christ: And
verse. 41. They therefore that received his word were baptized. So cap. 8. verse.
12. They were baptized men and weomen.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Iustificat. cap. 14. Simon Magus converted by
Philippe and bapsized, did follow Philippe, as Luke writes.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Beza cont. Illyric. vol. 2. Theol. p. 144. What thou writest, that Simon Peter
and Simon Magus received the same whole Not fully baptized.
baptism, is most false. And p. 131. We do not acknowledge, that the
Sacraments are entirely received of the incredulous. In Colloq. Montisbel. p.
118. I grant, that the entire sacraments are offered not only to the godly
but also to the ungodly, but not received entirely of the ungodly. And in 2.
part. Resp. ad acta Colloq. Montisbel. p. 91. The whole sacrament is not
received of the unworthy. Besides ib. p. 110. he says, that the inward
ablution of the Holy Ghost is an essential part of baptism: And p. 41. and
seqq. and in Colloq page 355. and seqq. oftentimes repeateth, that the blood of
Christ is the principal and most essential part of baptism: And will not
that the reprobates receive either inward ablutio^ or the blood of Christ: And
therefore will not that reprobates receive the whole essence of baptism.
Moreover in 2. part cit. p. 76. he writes thus: We say, that Baptism is the
seal of remission and generation, but not in every one, nor always. And in
his opinion, it is essential to baptism to be this kind of seal and
consequently baptism is not true essential baptism in every one.

Peter Martyr cont. Gardener. col. 970. writes, that Baptism consists of
water and remission of sins: Which remission he will not have to be given to
reprobats. And therefore col. 853. says: If one would speak exactly, he
should say, that the impious do not receive the whole sacrament but only one
part thereof.

Piscator in Respons. ad Buscherum c. 10. The faith of the receauer pertains
to the substance of the Sacrament But they will not admit that reprobates have
faith, and therefore have not the whole substance of the Sacrament.

Besides, Sacramentaries commonly teach, that Christ is the matter and
substance of the Sacraments, and namely of the Eucharist: So expressly
teaches Calvin l. de Caena p. 2. and 4. Instit. c. 17. 11. Peter Martyr cont.
Gardener. col. 655. 755. Confessio Heluet. c. 19. and Consessio Basileensis
art. 20. But they deny, that the impious or reprobates receive Christ, and
consequently must say, that nether the impious nor the reprobates receive
entire baptism or Eucharist. Whereupon Bucer apud Hospin. part. 2. Histor.
fol. 147. said; That such impious as are quite impious, receive nothing but
bread and wine. And the like they must say of baptism, and consequently they
should rebaptize such as were quite impious when they were baptized, as not
receiving the whole substance of baptism; without which baptism is no true
baptism. Which may be also confirmed by that which Pareus says: Colloq.
Theol. 1. disput. 15. That Sacraments nether signify nor seal, and much less
do give, any thing to the incredulous. Such therefore as were incredulous when
they were baptized, ought to be baptized again, as not having received either
the sign or seal of baptism.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the reprobate Simon Magus was baptized, and
that diverse others were baptized without making any distinction between the
elect or reprobates amongst them. The same say Catholics. Protestants
expressly say, that Simon Magus had not whole baptism: that the impious or
reprobats do not receive the whole sacraments: that if we will speak exactly we
must say, that the impious receive but a part of the Sacrament.

ART. VI. WHETHER BAPTISM BE effectual in the reprobates, or profit them
anything.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Gal. 3. v. 27. For as many of you as are baptized in Christ, have Baptism
effectual in every one.
put on Christ.

Act. 2. v. 38. S. Peter speaks thus without any distinction of elect. or
reprobate. Be every one of you baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for
remission of your sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Iustificat. cap. 14. All infants are truly
justified by baptism. And lib. 2. de Great. cap. 16. Original sin is truly
remitted to many reprobates by the grace of baptism.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin de Rat. Concordiae p. 664. The Sacraments to the elect are helpsto
salvation, others they profit nothing. De Co^sens. Profits nothing to
reprobates.
Sacramentor. p. 754. Wediligently teach, that God does not indifferently put
forth his power in all that receive the Sacraments, but only in the elect. And
p. 761. The Sacraments profit not indifferently all, but only the elect of
God. Devera reform. p. 325. Who admit others (beside the elect) to baptism, do
profane it. And adds page 349. that baptism, was not appointed for the
reprobate.

Beza in Colloq. Motisbel. page 385. Whom God has not elected, albeit they
were baptized a thousand times with the external baptism of water, yet faith
and the Holy Ghost would Baptism effectual only in the elect.
never be given to them. And ib. and other where often: The power of baptism
shows it self only in the elect. And in 2. part. resp. ad acta Colloq.
Montisbel. p. 89. Faith and grace of baptism is not given to all infants that
are lawfully baptized. Many thousand infants baptized and not regenerated.
Which he repeateth p. 90. and 97. And in Colloq. cit. pa. 393. Many thousand
of infants receive baptism, who yet are never regenerated. Whereupon ib. p.
377. he writes thus: We can only probably affirm, that infants who are
baptized, receive the fruit of adoption.

Zanchius de Praedest. c. 6. to. 7. makes this conclusion. To those, who are
not elect baptism brings no co^moditte, nor the prayers made for them of the
Church. And in Confess. c. 15. to. 8. We believe, that all are baptized with
water; but the elect only with the spirit.

Musculus in locis tit. de Baptism. None, I think, is so mad, as to say,
that the Holy Ghost does, eue^ in the reprobates whiles they are baptized,
work the effect of his grace which is appointed for the elect and faithful.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that whosoever are baptized in Christ, do put on
Christ: that every one (without distinction of elect or reprobate) may be
baptized for remission of sins. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that Sacraments profit only the elect and give
nothing to others: that baptism is appointed for the elect alone: that the
reprobate though they were baptized a thousand times should not receive grace:
that many thousands of infantes are baptized and not regenerated: that only
the elect are baptized with the Spirit and that the contrary is madness.
Which is so opposite to Scripture as the holy Fathers pronounce that he is no
Catholic who says, that baptism does not take Prosper ad c. vlt. Gallor.
away sin in the baptized reprobats: and many Protestants confess it to be
contrary to Scripture. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. VII. WHETHER BAPTISM CLEANSES or washes away sins?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ephesians. 5. v. 26. Christ loved the Church, and delivered himself Baptism
cleanses.
for it, that he might sanctify it, cleansing it by the lauer of water in the
word.

Tit, 3. v. 5. According to his mercy he has saved us by the Saves.
lauer of regeneration, and renouation of the Holy Ghost.

1. Peter 3. verse. 21. Whereunto baptism being of the like sort Remitteth
sins.
now saves you also.

Act. 2. v. 38. Be every one of you baptized in the name of Jesus Washes
sins.
Christ for remission of your sins. c. 22. v. 17. Rise up; and be baptized,
and wash away thy sins.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Catechismus ad Parochos. c. de baptismo: This must be first delivered: that
sin, whether it be originally contracted from our first parents, or committed
of us, though it were so heinous as scarce could be imagined, is remitted and
forgiven by the admirable virtue of this Sacrament of baptism.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cont. 2. q. 1. c. 9. We do not get health by the outward baptism.
Etib. c. 9. God forbid, that any attribute that Baptism avails not.
to the outward Sacrament, which belongs to spiritual grace. Etib. q. 6. c.
3. Baptism of it self avails infants nothing to salvation, nor infuseth
faith or any grace into them.

Perkins in Gal. 3. to. 2. col. 171. Baptism indeed saves, but Saves not.
not baptism of water.

Willet Cont. 12. q. 3. p. 567. Baptism is not a remedy against Gives not
grace.
original sin. 569. Baptism does not confer grace.

Luther de Captiuit. Babil. c. de baptismo. Baptism justifies Profits not.
none, nor profits any. ib. co^t. Cocleum f 408. No part of Justification
can be attributed to baptism.

Melancthon in locis edit. 1522. Sacraments do not justify. Which he repeateth
l. cont. Anabaptistas.

Zuinglius de baptismo to. 2. fol. 62. Baptism is given and received for their
sakes who hold the same faith with us, not for his sake who is baptized: for
in him, that outward sign can work nothing. Fol. 70. External baptism which
is done by water, Helps not.
helps nothing to ablution of sins. Etf. 56. Some cried, that external
things are wholly unprofitable to salvation, and that no trust is to be put in
them, scing they are vain and altogether unprofitable. And surely they said
well, if they had not passed the bounds of charity and modesty. Fol. 97.
Baptism cannot Washes not sins.
wash away the filth of sin, nor washes away sin: It is nothing but a
sacramental sign whereby Gods people is bound to one faith and religion. 98.
Baptism makes us no whit the Makes no us better.
better. And l. de ver. and fall. relig. fol. 91. Some think that baptism
either wipeth away sins, or is a sign and certification of their wiping away:
both which say what they please, not what the word of God has tought. And in
Romans 4. tom. 4. The sign of baptism is not received for to confirm faith,
for to purge sins. Confirms not faith.
And apud Hospin. part. 2. Histor. fol. 31. Sacraments are only badges of
Christian society, and help nothing to salvation. Finally l. de Peccato
original. to. 2. f. 122. he says: How foolish then should he seem, who for
the words (of Scripture) would avouch that by baptismall water we are washed
from sins?

Calvin 4. Instit. c. 15.. 10. Now it is clear, how false it is, that by
baptism we are loosed and exe^pted from original ^inne.. 2. Who will say,
that we are cleansed by this water? In Catechismo Is no lauer of the soul.
Washes not.
page 36. Do thou think, that water is a lauer of the soul? No. In
Admonit. vlt. ad Westphal. p. 812. What if baptism wash us, how is the only
blood of Christ otherwhere called our ablution? p. 855. If they infer, that
the filth of the soul is purged by the corruptible element of water, the sun
of justice it self will be darkened. In Actor. 22. v. 16. Paul was not washed
by baptism, but recedued a new confirmation of the grace which he had
obtained. In Romans 4. v. 12. We deny, that men are justified by baptism. In
Ephesians. 5. v. 26. We must beware, to think, that water purges the filth of the
soul.

Beza in Catechismo vol. 1. Theol. page 693. Does water wipe away sin? No. In
Colloq. Montisbel. p. 366. The soul is not washed with water, but the body
only. p. 377. The baptism Infants not renouated when they are baptized.
of water is not the lauer of regeneration and renouation, but only signifies
and represents it. Et 357. We think it absurd, that infants are renouated
either at that very time when they are baptized, or befoee they be of
discretion and have known and apprehended Christ by faith. Which also he has
in 2. part. resp. ad Acta p. 322. Where also he says. p. 91. I said and do
yet say, that the renouation of infants who come to be men, is not to be
restrained to the time of their baptism given to them either in their infancy
or their youth, but that it begins from that time when by actual faith they
apprehend Christ. Which he repeateth p. 106. And apud Grauerum in Absurdis
Calvin. c. 4. sect. 20. I nether said that all, or any children are
regenerated at the time of baptism. Which also teaches Musculus in locis tit.
de baptismo. So that they will not have children to be regenerated either by
baptism, or when they are baptized.

Zanchius l. 4. de tribus Elohim c. 5. Water is only a sign of regeneration.

Piscator in These. loco. 25. Ananias said to Paul: Rise, and be baptized and
wash away thy sins, not that his sins were to be washed away by baptism,
which cannot be washed away but by the blood of Christ.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that the Church is sanctified and cleansed by the
lauer of water: that we are saved by the lauer of regeneration: that baptism
saves us: that we are baptized for remission of sins: that by baptism
sins are washed away. The same say Catholics.

Prorestants plainly say, that baptism justifies not, saves not, avails
nothing to salvation, infuseth not faith or any grace: that it works nothing
in him who receaueth it: makes us no whit better, cleanses not sin, purges
not sin, washes not sin, wipeth not sin away: confirms not faith,
certifieth us not of remission of sin; is only a badge of Christian
society, a sign whereby men are bound to on faith and religion; that children
are not regenerated either by baptism or at the time when they are baptized:
finally that baptism profits none, but is a vanie and vnprofittable thing.
What Christians, I pray the, are these, who make this account of their
Christendom: And these sayings are so repugnant to Scripture as sometimes
Protestants confess it. See l. 2. cap. 30.

ART. VIII. WHETHER IN BAPTISM even sins to come be pardoned?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Act. 8. v. 21. S. Peter speaks thus to Simon Magus already Sins to come
not forgiven in baptism.
baptized: Do penna^ce therefore from this thy wickedness, and pray to God if
perhaps this cogitation of thy heart may be remitted thee.

1. Cor. 5. v. 5. S. Paul commands a Corinthian baptized, for incest, to be
delivered to Satan, that his spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de baptismo. c. 18. Catholics gather that the efficacy of
baptism does not extend it self unto the time to come, but only to the time
past: for it pardons sins committed and not yet remitted.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Perkins in Serie Causarum c. 33. In baptism once administered, Sins pre^sent
and to come forgiven in baptism.
is given remission of sins not only past and present, but also of those
that are to come all your life time. The like he has in Galat. 3. to. 2.

Whitaker lib. 8. cont. Dur. sect. 101. Who are baptized, are baptized in
Christ's death: but Christ's death avails to wash away, not only those sins
which go before baptism, but also those which follow in all the life time.
The like he has Cont. 2. q. 5. 7. p. 515.

Willet Cont. 12. q. 6. p. 579. Baptism is a seal of remission of sins for
the confirmation of our faith, even of those which are committed after
baptism, as well as of sins done before -- Therefore baptism seals unto
us the remission of all our sins, going before or following after.

Bezal. Quaest. and resp. vol. 3. p. 344. Baptism therefore does not abolish
only sins past? Yea the fruit thereof stretches through the whole life of
the faithful. And in Hebr. 10. v. 11. Whosoever is sprinkled with blood of
Christ, is delivered for ever from sins past and to come. Et Epist. 5. The
fruit of baptism, is the sealing of adoption, the ablution from sins both
past and to come.

Daneus de baptismo cap. 18. tom. 2. Howsoever that grace and remission of
sins be sealed unto us, it pertains as is referred in all Christ's
sacraments to blot out all our sins past, present, and to come.

Zanchius in sua Confessione cap. 18. to. 8. For baptism is not given in
remission only of original or sins past, but of all for all the life time.

Festus Homius in Disp. 44 Remission of sins, not only of those which were
committed before baptism, but also of those which are to be committed all the
life, is sealed in baptism unto the faithful. More of their like sayings may
be seen in my Latin book c. 9. art. 8.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly teaches, that a baptized man must do penance for
remission of such sins as he commits after baptism: that a baptized man
was delivered to Satan, that his soul might be saved. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly teach, that in baptism is given remission of sins
past, present, and to come: that baptism avails for sins that follow all
the life time: that baptism is a seal of remission of sins as well
committed after as before: that whosoever is once sprinkled with Christ's blood,
is delivered for ever of all sins past and to come: that in baptism is given
and sealed to the faithful remission of all sins to be committed all their
life time. Which is to oppen a broad way to all wickedness. And whereas
Protestants have falsely said that, the Pope gives pardons for sins to be
done: we see, that they Protestants pardon, to sin.
manifestly give such pardon to all and every one that is baptized or
justified with them.

ART. IX. WHETHER THE CHILDREN of the Faithful be borne and abide in state of
damnation until they be baptized?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ephesians. 2. v. 3. And we were by nature the children of wrath, Children of
faithful borne in state of damnation.
as also the rest.

Romans 5. v. 12. As by one man sin entered into this world, and by sin death,
and so unto all men death did pass. v. 15. For if by the offense of one many
died. v. 18. Therefore as by the offense of one, unto all men to condemnation:
so also by the justice of one unto all men to justification of life. The same
also is clear by the places before cited for the necessity of baptism.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton. in 1. Cor. 7. v. 14. It is a new and profane paradoxe of Calvin:
that the children of Christian parents are borne the sons of God.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins de baptismo tom. 1. col. 842. Baptism does not Not in sote of
damnation.
make the children of Christian parents the sons of God, but only does seal
unto them the covenant of grace, and certifieth them that they are comprehended
in it. In Gal. 2. v. 15. Original sin, which is hidden from beginning in
them, is not imputed to them. The children of the faithful are borne Saints.

Willet Cont. 12. q. 3. p. 565. The children of the faithful are Are holy.
holy already even before they be baptized.

Zuinglius in 1. Co. r 12. tom. 4. The children of Christians are In the Church
with in the Church and body of Christ, even before they be Christened.

Calvin 4. Instit. cap. 16.. 31. Who are borne of faithful parents, Are Saints.
are by supernatural grace Saints.. 32. Straight after they are borne, they
are had and acknowledged of God for children. In Actor. 8. v. 37. I say that
the children of the godly, are borne Members of Christ.
children of the Church, and from the womb reputed members of Christ. And de
ve^. reform. page 349. he stretches this favor not only to the immediate
children of faithful parents, but also many generations after, and as he
says 4. Instit. c. 16.. 9. to the thousand generation. And seeing, that there
is no man in the world, who is a thousand generations from Noe, he must say,
that all children whosoever, at lest all the elect, are borne saints and in
state of grace and salvation.

Beza l. cont. Heshus. vol. 1. Theol. p. 307, The children of Are Saints.
the faithful are saints before God even from the womb. The like has
Confessio Heluet. cap. 20. Gallica artic. 35. Peter Martyr in locis Class. 2.
c. 8. and others commonly, as also may appear by what has been said before
art. 4.

Nay sometimes they say, that even the children of Infidels are borne in state
of grace and salvation.

Zuinglius de baptismo to 2. f. 91. Infants which are borne Infidels Children
in state of salvation.
of infidels I leave to the judgment of the almighty and just, albeit I can
find no cause of damnation in them. De Peccato orig. f. 119. Of Christians
children, we are sure that they are not damned for original sin, albeit to
confess plainly, that opinion seems more probable to us which we taught, to
wit, that we must not rashly condemn the children of Heathens. In Elencho fol.
36. We impiously condemn not only children of Heathens, but also of
Christians. And de Ratione fidei fol. 540. We rashly condemn the children of
Christian parents, yea of Heathen parents.

Vorstius in Antibellarm. p. 542. In this point the Protestants do not wholly
agree, but either say that all children whatsoever are through Christ's grace
saved, as Zuinglius and many more: or at least all elect children whether they
be borne of faithful or other parents though not baptized, are saved, as the
most Protestants say. And he adds: These men's opinion is much more secure;
but the sentence of the former is more gentle and probable enough, and
therefore not roshly to be condemned.

Hermingius in Enchiridio class. 3. p. 322. If the children of Infidels die
without baptism, we must leave them to Gods judgment. The same also follows
out of that which Calvin loco cit. Beza ad reprehens. Castle. vol. 1. p. 502.
and others say, that children of faithful parents are sanctified and
comprehended in the covenant of life unto the thousand generation.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the children of the faithful are by nature
or nativity the children of wrath as others are: that death passed unto all:
that condemnation passed unto all. The like say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Christian children are sons of God before
they be christened: that they are borne Saints: that original sin is not
imputed to them: that they are holy, within the Church, and body of Christ
before they be baptized: Saints by supernatural grace, members of Christ from
the womb, borne children of the Church, and from the womb Saints before God.
Likewise they say of Infidels children, that they find no cause of
condemnation in them, that they are rashly and impiously condemned: that all
children whosoever, or at least all elect children, though not baptized, are
saved: that such as come of faithful, though after a thousand generations are
sanctified and comprehended within the covenant of life. Which are so contrary
to Scripture as sometimes Protestants confess it. l. 2. c. 30. and S. Austin
says: L. 3. de Anima. c. 9.
Do not believe, do not say, do not teach, that infants dying before they be
baptized, may attain remission of original sin, if thou will be a Catholic.

ART. X. WHETHER THE BAPTISM of S. Ihon and of Christ were the same?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Marc. 1. v. 8. S. Ihon says: I have baptized you with water, S. Ihons
baptism different from Christ's.
but he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost.

Act. 19. ver. 2. (S. Paul) said to them: Have ye received the Holy Ghost,
beleiuing? But they said to him: Nay, nether have we heard, whether there be a
Holy Ghost. But he said: In what then were you baptized? Who said: In Ihons
baptism. verse. 5. Hearing these things they were baptized in the name of our
Lord Jesus.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Council of Trent Sess. 7. Can. 1. de baptismo: Isanie shall say, that Ihons
baptism had the same virtue that the baptism of Christ, be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Whitaker ad Ration. 8. Campiani: says of the baptism of S. Ihon and Christ.
It was the same ceremony, the same doctrine, Not different*
the same grace.

Willet Cont. 12. q. 7. p. 585. Ihons baptism was not diverse from Christ's
baptism, but was all one with it in property and effect.

Zuinglius de ver. and falsa relig. c. de baptismo. It is altogether one
baptism, whether you call it Ihons, or Christ's. Et de Baptismo to. 2. f. 75.
It will appear, that that outward baptism of water which John used agrees
with the external baptism of Christ and the Apostles, and that there is no
difference at all between them.

Calvin in Luc. 3. v. 3. It is false, that the baptismes of Ihon and Christ
were diverse.

Beza lib. quaest. and respons. page 344. I say, that indeed it was one only
and the same baptism, administered first of Ihon, and after by Christ's
commandment.

Bucanus in Inst. Theol. loco. 47. What differ the Baptism of Ihon Baptist and
of Christ? Not in Author, not in substance, not in doctrine, not in sign or
ceremony, not also in effector or signification. More of their like sayings in
my Latin book c. 9. art. 10.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that S. Ihons Baptism was given in water, Christ's
baptism in the Holy Ghost: that S. Ihons baptism was not given in the name
of the Holy Ghost, in so much as they who had been Baptized with it, knew not
that there was a Holy Ghost: that they who had been baptized with S. Ihons
baptism were baptized again with Christ's baptism. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that S. Ihons and Christ's baptism was all one
ceremony, one doctrine, one grace: was not diverse, but all one in property
and effect, altogether one: that there was no difference at all between them,
not diverse, one only and the same, not different in Author, substance,
doctrine, sign, ceremony, effect or signification.

ART. XI. WHETHER THOSE EPHESIANS, whereof is spoaken Actor. 19. had been
baptized with S. Ihons baptism?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Act. 19. v. 3. But he (S. Paul) said: In what the^ were ye baptized? The
Ephesia^s baptized with S. Ihons baptism.
Who said: In Ihons baptism. v. 5. Hearing these, they were baptized in the
name of our Lord Jesus.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Actor. 19. v. 5. We must believe and steadfastly believe, that
those twelve Ephesians had been before baptized of Ihon.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker lib. 8. cont. Dur. sect. 70. I deny, that those men They were not
baptized with S. Ihone baptism.
whereof Luke makes mention in the Acts, were baptized again.

Calvin 4. Institut. c. 15.. 18. I deny, that they were baptized again.

Zuinglius de Baptismo to. 2. f. 80. Behold an other argument, whereby it is
demonstrated, that those (Ephesians) were never baptized in Ihons outward
baptism. Resp. ad Hueber. f. 104. If thou had had any consideration of those
things, thou would never have come to that madness, to say that these
disciples had been baptized of Ihon.

Beza in Actor. 19. v. 2. We must needs say, that there is not treated of any
peculiar history of twelve men, who were either baptized or rebaptized of the
Apostle, or of baptism.

Sadeel ad Art. 10. Abiurat. We no where read, that Ihons disciples, after his
death following Christ, were rebaptized of the Apostles.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the said Ephesians were first baptized with
the baptism of S. Ihon, and after with the baptism of Christ. Catholics say
the same.

Protestants expressly say, that they were not baptized again, were not
baptized with Ihons baptism, and that it is madness to say it: that in the
foresaied place of the Acts, there is no speech of baptism or baptizing. Which
are so contrary to Scripture, as Protestants sometime confess it. See lib. 2.
cap. 30.

ART. XII. WHETHER THE FORESAIED Ephesians had heard of the Holy Ghost.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Act. 19. v. 2. And he (S. Paul) said to them: Have ye received The Ephesia^s
had not heard of the holy Ghost.
the Holy Ghost, beleiuing? But they said to him: Nay: nether have we heard
whether there be a Holy Ghost.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
D. Stapleton in Actor. 19. v. 5. S. Paul said to these Ephesians, because
they had answered, that they had heard nothing of the Holy Ghost; In what then
were you baptized?

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Calvin in Actor. 19. v. 2. How could it be, that Jews had heard They had
heard of the holy Ghost.
nothing the Holy Ghost? Surely hence we gather, that Paul spoake not so much
as in general of the Holy Ghost, and therefore there is a figure in the word
Ghost.

Beza in Actor. 19. v. 2. It were most absurd to believe, that they who had
been baptized of Ihon, and professed themselves disciples of Christ, were
ignorant that there was any holy Ghost.

Bucanus in Instit. loco. 47. What those twelve men deny, that they had heard
that there was a Holy Ghost, is not to be understood of the being or person of
the Holy Ghost, but figuratively of the visible manner of pouring down his
gifts.

Reineccius to. 4. Armaturae c. 18. If demand and answer had been simply
made of the Holy Ghost in respect of his person and grace, it would follow,
that they had had no knowledge of the person of the Holy Ghost: But the
consequent is absurd.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that the said Ephesians had not so much as heard
that there was a Holy Ghost. Catholics say the same.

Protestants plainly say, that it could not be that they had not heard of the
Holy Ghost: that it is absurd, most absurd to think that they were ignorant
of the Holy Ghost.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF BAPTISM.
The things which we have in this Chapter rehearsed, do clearly show, how
differently Protestants believe of baptism from the Scripture. For the
Scripture together with Catholics teaches, that water and the invocation of
the holy Trinity be necessary to baptism: that baptism is necessary by
necessity both of precept and of mean to salvation: that Simon Magus and
reprobats receive whole baptism: that baptism is effectual in the
reprobates: that baptism cleanses sins, but pardons not sins that are
to be done: that children of the faithful are in state of damnation before
they be baptized: that Christ's baptism is different from S. Ihons baptism:
All which Protestats deny.

They show also, that Protestants play the theiues with baptism, and steal
from it the necessity of water and of the invocation of the holy Trinity:
the necessity of precept and mean to salvation: the integrity and efficacy
thereof in the reprobates; the virtue of cleansing sins in any whomsoever;
the difference and excellency above the baptism of S. Ihon: which being taken
away, Christ's baptism remains only in name; and they likewise Christians in
name only. Thus much of Baptism: Now of the Eucharist.

CHAPTER X. OF THE EVCHARISTE.
ART. I. WHETHER THE EVCHARIST, or that which Christ after his last supper gave
with his hands unto his Apostles, was his body and blood?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
MATTHEW 26. v. 26. Christ said of that which with his hands he gave to his
Apostles to eat: This is my body. The same is Marc. 14. v. The Eucharist is
the body of Christ.
14. And Luc. 22. ver. 19. This is my body which is given for you. And 1. Cor.
11. v. 24. This is my body which shall be delivered for you. Moreover Ihon. 6.
ver. 15. he says: The bread which I will give, is my flesh for the life of
the world.

Matthew 26. v. 28. Christ says of that which he gave The blood of Christ.
his Apostles to drink: This is my blood of the new testament, which shall be
shed for many unto remission of sins. Marc. 14. v. 24. This is my blood of
the new testament that shall be shed for many. Luc. 22. v. 20. This is the
Chalice, the new testament in my blood, which shall be shed for you. 1. Cor. 11.
v. 25. This chalice is the new testament in my blood.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent sess. 13. c. 3. The Apostles had not yet received the
Eucharist of the hands of our Lord, and yet he truly affirmed that to be his
body which he gave. And cap. 4. Because Christ truly said, that that was his
body which he offered under form of bread, therefore etc.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Iuel in Denfense of the Apology part. 2. c. 10. diuis. 1. p. Not the flesh of
Christ.
209. The bread of the Sacrament is one thing, and the flesh of Christ is an
other -- There is great difference between the bread of the Sacrament and the
flesh of Christ. Art. 8. sect. 5. The sacramental bread is called Christ's
body, although indeed it be not Not indeed his body.
Christ's body. So also art. 21. sect. 1.

Bell in his Jesuits Antepast. p. 44. The meaning of Christ is Not his real
blood.
not: This is my natural body, and my real blood.

Spalatensis l. 5. de Repub. c. 6. n. 108. The holy bread, is not Not the
body of Christ.
the body of Christ. n. 112. The bread is called the body of Christ, not that
it is the body of Christ. -- The Eucharist, though it be Not truly.
called the body of Christ; Yet it is not truly and really the body of
Christ. ibid. page 165. It is false to say: The bread is the body of Christ.

Melancthon epist. ad Com Palatin. apud Hospin part. 2. Not the true body of
Christ
Histor. f. 260. Paul does not say, as they of Breme do; Bread is the
substantial body of Christ: nor as Hes husius does: Bread is the true body
of Christ.

Hospinian himself lib. cit. f. 261. The bread of the Supper Not his
substantial body
is not the substantial body of Christ. Which he repeateth fol. 254. The
very like words of the Heluetians her rehearses f. 161. and 153. of the
Tigurins 161. of the Strasburgians f. 100. of the Witenbergians fol. 292. of
Hardenberg. 297. and of Engelhard fol. 25.

Zuinglius l. de Caena to. 2. f. 283. These words of Christ: This Not corporal
flesh.
is my body, can no way be understood of substa^tiall and corporal flesh.
Which he has again l. de relig. c. de Euchar. and in Subsidio to. 2. fol.
247. And Sermon. 1. Bernen. f. 532. As if (the Apostle) should say, this is the
meaning of those things which we have told. It is not flesh which is set before
us, albeit now I have vouchsafed it that name, nor likewise blood, but bread
and drink.

OEcalampadius in Hospin. lib. cit. f. 41. Not without folly Not the self
same body.
would we bind men to confess, that this self same bread is the body of
Christ. And f. 118. Some do urge that the Lords bread is the very body of
Christ: But we say the contrary. Not his very body.


Bucer in Hospin. l. cit. fol. 191. Nether is bread the very body of Christ,
but a Symboll of it. And 192. All acknowledge that bread and wine are symbols,
and not the very things themselves of this great mystery.

Peter Martyr cont. Gardener. col. 147. The Sacrament of Not lawful to say:
This is etc.
the Eucharist being shown, it is not lawful for them to say of it all: This
is my body. Col. 359. Manifest it is, that the Eucharisticall bread is not
properly the body of Christ. And in Dialog. col. 137. This is my body, is
thus to be expounded: This, to wit that which was showed, signifies my body.

Calvin in Math. 3. ver. 16. The bread of the holy Supper, is Not Christ's
body.
called the body of Christ, not that it is it, but because it testifies to
us, that it is truly given to us for meat.

Beza in Catechismo sect. 9. This bread and this wine are Not our spiritual
food.
they not our spiritual food? No: but they signify to us that, from which
life everlasting proceeds. And lib. quaest. quaest. 207. page 356. So if you
properly understand this saying it will be no less false, that bread is the
body of Christ, then that a gourd As false that it is his body as that a
gourd is a man. Not Christ's true body
is a man.

Daneus Cont. de Euchar. c. 10. That Sacramental bread is not the true and
real body of Christ. The bread which Christ reached to the Apostles, was not
the true body of Christ. And c. 1. Whence it follows, that the signs
remain signs and seals, and never become the thing it self which is
signified, to wit, the true flesh and true blood of Christ.

Volanus l. 1. cont. Scargam. p. 793. Surely bread is not that Not the natural
body.
true and natural body of Christ, albeit it be called, but sacrame^tally his
body.

Musculus in locis tit. de Signis. The bread of the lords Not the very body.
Supper is not the very body of Christ.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that the Eucharist or that which our Savior
after his last supper gave with his hands to his Apostles to eat and drink;
was his body and blood; and to put us out of doubt, what body and blood, he
added: His body given for us, delivered for us: His blood of the new
testament, and shed for remission of sins: And otherwhere that the bread
which he would give us, was his flesh which he would give for the life of the
world. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the bread, the holy bread, the bread of the
Sacrament, the Sacrame^tall bread, the lords bread, the bread of the supper,
the bread of the holy supper, the bread of the lords supper, the bread which
Christ reached to his Apostles: the Symbols, the Signs: the Eucharist, the
sacrament of the Eucharist, the Eucharisticall bread, is not the body of
Christ, not his very body, not his body it self, not his true body, not his
substantial body: not flesh, not Christ's true flesh, an other thing and much
different from Christ's flesh; not the thing it self of this mystery, not our
spiritual food: that Christ's words can no way be understood of Christ's
substantial flesh, that his meaning is not; This my natural body: That the
Eucharist being showed we may not say if it: This is my body: that though it
be called Christ's body, yet it is not his body. Which are so directly
contrary to the Scripture as many of these men sometimes confess it as shall be
seen cap 30. of the 2. book. But because they do not only contradict the
Scripture in denying the Eucharist to be the body of Christ, which the
Scripture so often and clearly affirms, but diverse other ways also, I will
likewise set them down.

Secondly therefore, they contradict the Scripture, in saying that the
Eucharist is nothing but a simple ceremony, only bread, only a type or
figure, only a seal or sign of the body and blood of Christ, which the
Scripture so oftentimes says, is his true body and blood.

Whitaker Cont. 2. q. 5. c. 19. Sacraments are only seals of Only aseale.
those goods which are proposed to us in the word.

Cartwright in disput. Oxonien. apud Martyrem p. 134. Only a sign.
The Eucharist is only a sign.

Spalatensis l. 5. de Rep. c. 6. n. 113. The bread is not the body of Christ
indeed, but only a sign of it.

Perkins de Caena to. 1. col. 858. The bread is called the body, Only a sign
and seal.
whereas it is only a sign and seal of the body.

Melancthon as Luther reports in Hospin. part. 2. Histor. A simple ceremony.
fol. 194. Accounted the Eucharist no better then a simple ceremony.

Confessio Czinge. in Syntagmate page 196. The (Eucharisticall) Has only the
name.
signs, have not the substance of the things signified, but only their names.

Helueti in Hospin libr. cit. fol. 153. The bread, is not the Only a sign.
very body of Christ, but only a sign and Sacrament of it.

Iuel art. 10. sect. 1. p. 313. The bread in it self, is very natural Very
natural bread.
bread. art. 21. sect. 1. p. 443. The mystical bread is not Christ himself,
but only a sacrament of Christ.

Zuinglius de Caena to. 2. f. 286. The bread is only a figure, Only a figure
wherewith is signified that body which we ought to remember. f. 291. This
drink was nothing else indeed but wine. 293. Nothing Nothing else but a sign.
Nothing but bread and wine.
else but a sign and figure. And. 296. The Apostles themselves never called
this bread the body of Christ, but only bread. And in Respons. ad Lutherum
fol. 431. It is naught else but bread.

OEcolampadius apud Zuinglium to. 2. fol. 503. These particles (This, that) we
deny not to be certain and infallible tokens, No hing but common bread.
but such they are, as teach that here is nothing else but common bread. And
ibid. 510. The drink is a pure and bare creature, and naught else beside.

Calvin de administr. Caenae. p. 41. Let us account it enough, Nothing but a
note and sign.
if bread and wine be given us for a note and sign.

In admonit. vlt. ad Wesphal. p. 826. What other is the bread As the Dove was
the Holy Ghost.
and wine of the Supper, then a visible word? Cont. Heshus. page 861. The bread
of the Eucharist in the same manner is called the body of Christ, as the dove
is called the holy Ghost. And 4. Instit. c. 17.. 14. The Supper is nothing
else, but a visible testificatio^ of that promise which is Joan. 6. to wit, that
Christ is the bread of life which came from heaven.

Beza in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 42. The disciples saw, that Mere bread and wine.
Christ held bread, and that it was mere bread and wine which he gave with his
hands. Cont. Illy ric. col. 2. Theol. p. 149. I say, No better then water of
baptism.
that the water of baptism is as well the blood of the Lord, as that bread is
his body. Cont. Heshus. vol. 1. p. 308. The bread is no otherwise the body,
and wine, no otherwise the blood, then the water of baptism is blood. And in
1. Corint. 5. verse. 7. The No otherwise then the pascall lamb.
Pascall lamb is called Christ in the self same manner, that that bread is
said to be the body of Christ, which was given for us.

Daneus Cont. de Euchar. cap. 13. The Fathers will have the Only symbol and
sign.
bread and wine to be only symbols and signs of the true and essential body
and blood of Christ.

Peter Martyr apud Coccium to. 2 l. 6. art. 1. The bread and Only type and
sign.
wine, are only types and signs of the body and blood of Christ. And
hereupon, albeit, as Zanchius confesses in Resp. ad Arian. col. 876. the Roman
Church does keep baptism and the Supper, or as Calvin speaks, the half
part of the Supper is remaining in Popery, yet nevertheless they sometime
term our Eucharist, a Crust of bread, as does Whitaker Contr. 1. q. 2. c. 16.
and Perkins de Sermon. Dom. col. 554. Sometimes, a small crust of bread, as
Calvin Admonit. vlt. p. 800. cont. Versipel. p. 358. in Math. 19. v. 13.
Sometimes, a Crust, as Whitaker Contr. 2. q. 6. c. 3. Beza in Confess. c. 7.
sect. 11. Sometimes, a gobbet of bread, as Whitaker in place last cited:
Sometime, a most profane crust, as Beza li. quaest. vol. 3 p. 355. Sometime, a
cake and crust, as Peter Martyr orat. 1. Tigurin. Sometime, a wafer of pastie,
as the same Martyr cont. Gardener. col. 422. Thus reproachfully they term
that, which in their own opinion is the lords Supper, or at least the half
part thereof; but no marvel if they so speak so of our Eucharist, who say,
that theirs, is nothing else but bread, nothing but common bread, nothing but a
bare creature, nothing but a bare sign or figure, nothing but mere bread and
wine. But far otherwise said Christ, that his Eucharist was his body given
for us, his blood shed for remission of sins, and not as Protestants say
only a sign, only a seal, only a figure, only a toke^, only a
testificatio^, only a symbol, only a type of Christ's body, which only has
the name of Christ's body, only a simple ceremony; and no otherwise the body
of Christ, Then the Pascal lamb was Christ; the dove, the Holy Ghost; or the
water of baptism, the blood of Christ.

Thirdly they contradict the Sripture, in saying, that the Eucharist is only
figuratively and in some sort the body and blood of Christ, which the
Scripture in the places cited simply and absolutely says to be his body and
blood, and adds Ihon 6. v. 55. My flesh is truly meat, and my blood truly
drink. Which is most clearly opposite, to mere figuratively.

Spalatensis l. 5. de Repub. c. 6. n. 45. The wine in the Chalice is the blood
of the lord only ostensiuely or in show, that is, figuratively Only
figuratively.
and typically. And number. 115. The Eucharist, is not Christ substantially, but
only significantly and figuratively. And 118. It is but figuratively and
typically called the body of Christ.

Perkins in Cathol. ref. Cont. 11. c. 2. We take the bread to By resemblance
and no otherwise.
be the body of Christ sacramentally by resemblance, and no otherwise. And
Cont. 10. cap. 4. These words must not be understood properly, but by a figure.

Rogers on the 28. Article of Protest. Confess. page 174. Abominable be the
Popish errors, that substa^tially and really the body and blood of Christ is
contained in the Sacrament Eucharisticall.

Iuel art. 5. sect. 10. p. 255. As Christ is herbs or milk, even so, As he is
herbs or milk. As manna.
and none otherwise, he is bread or flesh. Art. 8. sect. 25. p. 303. As the
bread is Christ's body, even so was manna Christ's body.

Usher in his Answer to a Challenge p. 58. Nothing in this Not substantially.
world is more plain, then when our Savior said: It was his blood, he could
not mean it to be substantially. And ib. page 60. Not really.
The things which he honored with those names, cannot be really his body and
blood, but figuratively.

Whitaker l. 2. cont. Du. sect. 10. The bread is the true body Metonimycally.
of Christ, and the wine the true blood of Christ, but mistically,
metonymicall, Sacramentally.

Melancthon apud Hospin. lib. cit. fol. 69. This is my blood, is a metonimie,
as if you should say: The ensign or Maze is the Roman Empire.

Calvin cont. Heshus. p. 844. Bread may truly be said, to Symbolically.
be symbolically the true body of Christ. Which also he has Admonit. vlt. ad
Westphal. page 836. Where also page 821. he says: It appears, that to them
bread was symbolically the body. and p. 830. In some sort it is the body.
And 4. Instit. c. In some sort.
17.. 23. The bread is figuratively the body. And cont. Heshus. Improperly.
l. cit. p. 847. Could he more clearly testify, that bread is improperly
called the body of Christ, in respect of likeness?

Beza respons. ad Selneccer. vol. 2. page 270. The names But metonymically.
of the body and blood, are but metonymically given to the bread and wine.

Daneus Cont. de Euchar. c. 10. The bread is tropically called Tropically.
the body of Christ.

Peter Martyr l. cont. Gardin. col. 293. We say, that speech: Not properly.
This is my body, is not proper, but metaphorical and tropicall. And in
Hospin l. cit. f. 259. The words: This is etc. cannot be taken simply and
without a figure.

Peucer apud Hospin. in Concordia discordi fol. 206. The Not simply.
consecratea bread and chalice are the body and blood of Christ Relatiuely.
relatiuely, as figures and signs.

Wolfius in Schusselburg. l. 1. Theol. Calvin. art. 22. The Significantly.
bread is the body, and the wine the blood of Christ, significa^tly, no other
ways then a keye delivered is a house. More of their mere figurative
expositio^s of these words may be seen in my Latin book l. 2. c. 20. But by
that which here we have rehearsed, it clearly appears, that what the
Scripture simply says is the body and blood of Christ, Protestants say, is
only ostensiuely or in show, only figurasiuely, by resemblance and no
otherways, but metonymically, not properly no otherwise then a keye is a
house, is the body and blood of Christ.

Fourthly, they co^tradict the holy Scripture, in that they deny, that
Christ's body is present in the Supper, in the Eucharist, in the Eucharisticall
bread, or in the Sacrament: in which according to Christ's words it was so
present, as he badde his Apostles take it with their hands and eat it.

The Pseudosynod of London in Hospin. part. 2. Histor. d. 220. No faithful man
ought to believe or profess the real Real presence not to be believed.
Christ's body not in the Sacrament. Not present in substance.
and substantial presence of Christ's flesh in the Eucharist.

Whitaker in Respons. ad Demonstr. Sanderi page 741. Christ's body is not in
the Sacrament; nor in infinite Sacraments.

Iuel Defens. Apol. p. 221. Thus is Christ's body present, not really, nor in
suhstance, but only in mystery. Again. As Christ is present in the one
Sacrament (of Baptism) even so and none otherwise, is he present in the other
(of the Eucharist) which Absent in body.
he repeateth p. 264. And p. 234. Christ is present in majesty, absent in
body. 272. By abuse of speech, they say the body of As the people in the
Cup.
Christ is laid upon the table. 273. As people is in the Cup: so is Christ's
blood in the Cup. The like he has. artic. 8. diuis. As he dies in the
Sacrament.
1 And art. 12. diuis. 14. As Christ dies in the Sacrament: so is his body
present in the Sacrament.

Perkins in his Ref. Cathol. Contr. 10 ca. 1. We hold and Present as a thing
to the name.
teach, that Christ's body and blood are not present with the bread and wine in
respect of place of coexistence, but by Sacramental relation or this manner:
When a word is uttered, the same comes to the ear, and at the same instant the
thing signified comes to the mind, and thus by relation the word and the thing
spoaken of, are both present together.

Zuinglius in Respons. ad Propos. Eckij to 2. fol. 576. of this proposition:
The true and lively body of Christ and his blood are present in the Sacrament
if the Altar: Makes this Not present in the Sacrament.
censure: This proposition is nether pious nor Christian. Sermon. 1. Bernae fol.
527. Three articles of Christian faith directly fight against the presence of
the body and blood of Christ in the Supper. Not in the Supper. Present by
co^templation.
In Respons. ad Lutherum fol. 363. By contemplation Christ is in the Eucharist.
420. As for substance, there is nothing present besides bread and wine. 456. We
willingly grant and confess, that Christ's body is in the Supper in the same
manner As our bodies are in heaven.
that our bodies are now in heaven. And in epist. ad Principes fol. 546. Seeing
all this presence is nothing without the speculation Present by speculation.
of faith, it belongs to faith, that these things are, or be made present.
And apud Hospin. part. 2. Histor. fol. 102. I By contemplation.
believe, that in the Supper of the Eucharist, Christ's true body is present by
contemplation of faith, that is, that they who give thanks to the Lord for the
gifts given us in his Son, do acknowledge him to have taken true flesh,
truly to have suffered in it, truly to have wiped away our sins with his
blood: and so that all the matter done by Christ is made as it were present by
contemplation of faith. But that Christ's body should be really and in
substance present, we do not only deny, but avouch to be an error.

Tigurini in Hospin. part. 2. fol. 161. The sacramental union By signification.
wholly consists in signification. And in Scusselburg. l. 1. Theol. Calvin.
art. 21. The body and blood of Christ are by mere imagination By mere
imagination.
in the Sacrament of the Supper. And Carolstadius ib. art. 20. The body of
Christ is not in the Supper. Christ is not in Not in the Supper.
the Sacrament nether can be in it.

Calvin 4. Instit. c. 17.. 30. Whereas our Mediator is every where whole, he
is always present to his servants, and in the Supper affor death himself
present in a special manner: but so as he is whole there, not wholly, Totus no^
totum.
because in his flesh he is contained in heaven, until he come to judgment. In
Defens. 2. cont. Westphal p. 774. I said, that Christ's body is exhibited Not
present in substance.
effectually in the Supper, not naturally: according to virtue, not according
to substance. Se more ib. p. 778. 779 In Consens. de re Sacrament. art. 25. It
must needs be, that Christ's body be As far from us, as heaven from carth.
as far distant from us, as heaven is from earth. Which Beza often times
repeateth, as cont. Brent. vol. 1. page 574. De hypostat. union page 638. lib.
quaest. and resp. page 673. Resp. ad Andream page 130. Apol. 1. cont. Sainctem.
p. 302. Resp. ad Repetit. eiusdem. c. 10. p. 50. also Daneus cont Kemnit. c.
30. and others.

Beza cont. Heshus. vol. 1. p. 278. We say not, that Christ's Not present in the
bread.
body is present in the bread. Respons. ad Acta Torgensia vol. 368. We may
easily understand and declare out of the word the sacramental manner of
presence, to wit, such as the thing signified Present as the abject is the
thought.
is offered to the understanding to be known and approved; and by faith to be
embraced and applied to the beleiuer. And epist. 76. What this presence is, we
clearly understand and perceive out of the word of God: to wit, such as the
thing thought upon is present to our thought; and the thing believed, is
present to faith. And as Grauerus in Absurdis Calvin. cap. 3.. 43. says. This
presence he plainly puts in imagination. Present in imagination.


Zanchius in Hospin l. cit. f. 316. Touching the presence of Christ's body in
the Supper, I protest, that I do not willingly dispute No ward of presence in
the Scripture.
of it, because I read no word of it in Scripture. The like he has l. 2.
Epist. p. 69. and 89.

Peter Martyr in Schusselburg. l. 3. Theol. Calvin. art. 8. I remove the
presence of Christ's body from the Eucharist. And l. Presence removed from the
Eucharist.
cont. Gardener. col. 815. The presence of Christ's body in heaven directly
feighteth with the presence thereof in the Sacrament. col. 994. If besides
signification he will that there is a real presence; No presence besides
signification.
that we altogether deny. More of their like speeches may be seen in my Latin
book. c. 10. art. 1. But by these it is clear, that they say that Christ's
body is not in the sacrament, is not present in the Sacrament, is not in
substance present, is absent in body, is not in the Sacrament nor can be in
it: is not in the Supper according to substance, is not present in the bread,
is removed from the Eucharist: that there is no word in the scripture of the
presence of Christ's body in the Supper: that his blood is in the chalice as
the people are there, that he is no otherwise in the Eucharist then in
baptism: that he is not there otherwise then a thing is present to our
cogitation, or a thing to the name thereof, or our bodies are now present in
heaven, finally only present by speculation and mere imagination.

Fifthly they contradict the Scripture, by saying that no other thing is
received in the Eucharist or Supper, then in baptism, or in the simple word.

Calvin cont. Heshus. p. 860. There is no cause, why Christ No more present in
the Supper then in baptism. Then in the word.
should be said to be more present in the Supper, then in baptism. p. 847.
Surely there is a plain solution: That God gives not more to the visible
symbols, then to the word. Therefore communication is no less truly given us
by the Gospel, then by the Supper. 4. Instit. c. 14.. 14. He is deceived, who
thinks, that any thing more is given him by the Sacraments, then which
offered by the word of God he receaueth by true faith.. 17 There is no other
function of the Sacraments, then of the word of God. And c. 16.. 5. he says,
that the Sacrament is inferior to the word.

Beza in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 136. There is the same receiving of Christ in
the Sacrament, which is in the simple word. In 2. part. respons. ad Acta
Colloq. p. 109. Nothing more is to be sought in the Sacraments, then in simple
word. l. cont. Heshus. p. 287. Nothing more is given in the Supper, then in
baptism, or in the preaching of the word.

Bucer in Hospin. l. cit. p. 161. The memory of this body may More in the
word then in the Sacrament.
be refreshed by the bread, but more fully by the word.

Peter Martyr in 1. Cor. 11. This is the sum: that we understand the body
and blood of Christ to be offered to us no less by the words of God then by
Sacraments. In Disput. Oxonien. page 225. We receive no less the body and
blood of Christ in the word of God, then in this Sacrament. And cont. Gardener.
col. 1041. I deny not that that is our speech: Christ's body is received no
less in words then in the Sacraments. Nether am I afraied to say, that we come
much better to them by words, then by Sacraments.

Willet Cont. 11. q. 3. c. 557. There is the same substance of both Sacraments.

Iuel art. 5. diuis. 5. The word of God is the body and blood of Christ, and
that more truly then is the Sacrament. Art. 21. diu. 1. As Christ enters into
us by a minister, by his word, even so he enters into us by the Sacrament of
his body, and no otherwise. Defense of the Apol. p. 221. As Christ is present
in the one Sacrament, even so and no otherwise, is he present in the other.

Hereupon Apologia Confess. Augustanae. cap. de vsu Sacrament says, that the
Sacrament is as it were a picture of the word. Melancthon in Disputat. tom. 4.
page 513. The Sacrament is like a picture of the promise. And lib. contr.
Anabaptistas: As the will of God is showed in the word or promise, so also it
is showed in the Sacrament as in a picture. And oftentimes they say that there
is no other presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist, then there is in the
simple word, as you may see in Beza Apol. 1. cont. Sanctem p. 297. in Hospin l.
cit. fol. 36. 39. and in Concordia discordi f. 205. So that they plainly say,
that Christ is no more present in the Supper then in baptism, no more
communicated in the Supper the^ in the Gospel: no more received in the
Sacrament them in the word: that there is the same receiving of Christ in the
Sacrament and in the simple word, nothing more given in the Supper them in
preaching, no more offered by the sacrament then by the word: yea that the
Sacrament is inferior to the word, the memory of Christ's body more fully
refreshed by the word, then by this Sacrament: that we may better come to
Christ's body by words, then by this Sacrament. Which are so contrary to
Scripture, as sometimes themselves confess it. See lib. 2. cap. 30.

Sixthly they contradict the holy Scripture, whiles they say, that they Jews
received Christ's body before it was borne, as truly as we receive it in the
Eucharist.

Willet Cont. 11. q. 2. p. 544. We do hold, and constantly affirm The Fathers
no less received the body of Christ thou we.
and teach, that the Fathers in the law received no less the substance of
Christ by faith in their Sacraments, then we do in ours. -- Christ was as well
exhibited to them in their Sacraments, as he is in ours.

Beza in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 96. He was as present in their Sacraments, as he
is to us in ours. p. 69. The Fathers were no less partakers of the body and
blood of Christ, then we are in the Lords Supper. Respons. ad Acta, Colloq. p.
119. The Fathers as truly received Christ's true body and true blood, in the
word and in their Sacraments, as we by the instrument of the same faith now
receive them.

Peter Martyr cont. Gardener. col. 150. The Fathers in the old testament did
no less then we eat and drink the body and blood of Christ, for so much as
pertains to the thing it self.

Seventhly they contradict the holy Scripture, in saying that the Eucharist is
a symbolicall, mystical, and Sacramental body of Christ, which the Scripture
plainly says to be his true body.

Zuinglius de ver. and falsa relig. c. de Euchar. to. 2. f. 208. We are here
compelled plainly to confess, that this self same which Christ gave with so
great diligence and majesty, is his symbolicall Christ's symbolicall body
Sacramental body.
body. Respons. ad Luther. ib. fol. 514. It is easy to understand, that this
bread which Christ gives us, is Christ's sacramental body, that is, the sign
of his body, in that manner and form of speech wherewith showing the statue
of Cocles, we say: Behold Cocles that stout champion of his country. Epistola
ad Principes fol. 548. The bread is made the sacramental body of Christ.
Again: Our adversaries say that Christ's natural and substantial body is
given; we say, his sacramental. Hereupon the contention. And in Hospin. l.
cit. fol. 143. We are forced, will we nill we, to confess, that these words:
This is Mystical body.
my body, are thus to be understood: that is: A sacrament of my body: or,
This is my sacramental or mystical body.

Oecalampadius in Beza Resp. ad Repet. Sanctis. page 48. That bread is a
symbolicall body.

Zanchius lib. 1. Epistolarum page 280. These three bodies Mystical body.
of Christ we read in the holy Scriptures, His true and natural, his
Mystical, which is the Church, and sacramental, which is bread.

Daneus Cont. de Euchar. c. 10. Austin confesses, that the Only Sacramental
body.
bread is only the sacramental body of Christ, but not his natural body.
Again: The bread which Christ gave to his Apostles, was his sacramental body.

Vrsinus in Miscellaneis. p. 172. There is a body of Christ properly so
called, and a sacramental, which is the Eucharisticall bread. Thus we see, how
plainly they say, that the Eucharist is Christ's symbolicall body, his
sacramental body, his mystical body, and not his true body. Which himself
says most plainly to be his true body, that very body which was given and
delivered for us.

Finally we see, how many ways the Caluinists do contradict the express word
of God in this one matter. First, in expressly denying the Eucharist to be the
body of Christ, which the Scripture so often and so plainly affirms:
Secondly, in saying that it is only a sign or figure of Christ's body, which
the Scripture plainly and often says is his true body. Thirdly, in saying
that it is but only figuratively his body, which the Scripture simply and
absolutely says is his body. Fourthly, in saying, that Christ's body is but
figuratively, or by faith and imagination in the Eucharist: Which the Scripture
directly affirms to be the substance of the Eucharist. Fifthly, in saying that
Christ's body is no more received in the Eucharist, then in the simple word;
whereas Christ, bid us take and eat his body in the Eucharist, but not in
his word. Sixthly, by saying that the Fathers in the old law received Christ's
body in their Sacraments, as truly as we do in the Eucharist: when as they
were never bidden to take and eat Christ's flesh in their Sacraments, as we are
in the Eucharist. Finally, in saying that the Eucharist is Christ's symbolicall,
sacramental, and mystical body; which the holy Scripture says is his
body, which was given and delivered for us.

ART. II. WHETHER CHRIST'S FLESH be to be eaten, and his blood to be drunk?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 26. ver. 26. Take ye and eat: This is my body. ver 28. Christ's body
and blood to be eaten and drunck.
Drink ye all of this: For this is my blood etc.

Ihon 6. v. 53. Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, Truly.
and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. Et 56. My flesh is
truly meat, and my blood is truly drink.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Math. 26. v. 28. For to perfect the new testament and
covenant, of which Christ speaks, betwixt us and him, no spiritual eating or
drinking of the body and blood of Christ suffices, but there is plainly
required an external, real, and corporal receiving of them both.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Zuinglius l. de Relig. c. de Euchar. to. 2. Christ's flesh eaten, Christ flesh
eaten profits not.
profits nothing at all. Which he often repeateth in Exegesi fol. 333. 334.
336. 346. and in Joan. 6. to. 4. in so much as Hospin. part. 2. Histor. fol.
181. writes, that Zuinglius every where inculcateth, that Christ's flesh eaten
profits nothing. And c. cit. de Euchar. Nether do we think, that they are to
be Not be eaten spiritually.
heard, who determine thus: we eat the true and corporal flesh of Christ, but
spiritually: for they do not see, that it can not stand together, to be a body
and to be spiritually eaten. Again: What is given to be eaten, is Christ's
body, but symbolicall. In Exegesi fol. 329. Christ did not command his body
to be eaten, but symbolicall bread. Respons. ad Luther. fol 435. We eat and
drink We eat and drink nothing but bread and wine.
nothing but bread and wine. In Apol. f. 370. We teach, that the only sign of
Christ's body is eaten in this Eucharisticall Supper. Respons. ad Billican:
fol. 264. We are taught, that Christ's corporal flesh can be no way eaten. And
as Hospin. lib. cit. fol. 181. says: Zuinglius every where inculcateth, that
the true and real flesh of Christ cannot be eaten so much as spiritually: and
that to eat Christ's flesh is nothing else but to believe.

Oecolampadius in Hospin. l. cit. f. 75. Flesh eaten profits nothing, but the
spirit. And in Schusselburg. lib. 1. Theol. Calvin Mistica artic. 22. I do not
read in the Evangelists, that they bid receive and eat Christ's body.

Carolstadius in Scusselburg l. cit. art. 28. This I know, that Christ never
gave his body that we should receive it: For he says: My flesh profits you
not.

Tigurins in Schusselburg lib. cit. artic. 23. His flesh on earth profited for
to accomplish our salvation, now it profits no more.

Peter Martyr cont. Gardener. col. 146. It is far from the Christ's body not
to be truly eaten. He gave not his body but bread. He exhibited not his body
in substance.
body of the Lord, to be truly eaten.

Confessio Czengerina c. de Caena p. 193. Yea after the pronouncing of Christ's
words, Christ gave bread to the Apostles, and not his body.

Calvin defens. 2. cont. Westphal. page 774. I said, that Christ's body was
exhibited effectually in the Supper, not naturally: according to virtue, not
according to substance.

Beza Resp. ad Acta Torgens. vol. 3. p. 68. What is eaten with the mouth,
avails nothing to eternal and spiritual life.

Perkins in Cathol. reform. Cont. 10. c. 3. Though the body may be bettered
with spiritual food of the soul, yet cannot the soul be fed with bodily
food.

Polanus in Grauer in Absurdis Calvin. cap. 3. Those words of Christ: Take,
eat, are not spoaken of Christ's body for nether The words not meant of his
body.
took he that into his hands, nether brake, nor gave it to his disciples. And
albeit sometimes they say in words, that they eat the body of Christ: yet
they add, that to eat is nothing but to believe, as we have already repeated
out of Zuinglius, and have cited more places of their like sayings in my Latin
book c. 10. art. 2. or by word Body, or Flesh, they understand not Christ's
true body or flesh, but some other thing, as the same Zuinglius does Respons.
ad Luther. tom. 2. fol. 390. In Exegesi fol. 350. and 333. and in Explicat.
art. 18. tom. 1. fol. 37. In like sort, how beit sometimes in words they say,
they eat the substance of Christ's body, yet Beza confesses Apolog. 1. cont.
Sainctem page 294. that unwillingly they use the name Substance, and as he
adds Respons. 3. ad Selneccer page 271. Many of them refuse it, and not
without cause, and that is evident by the words now cited out of Calvin, and
more by Bullinger in Hospin. part. 2. fol. 344. Where he says: Who knows
not, that we are of their number, who do not admit this (word Substance) nor
ever would admit it.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ gave to his Apostles his body to be
eaten, and his blood to be drunk: that unless we eat his flesh, we shall not
have life: that his flesh is truly meat. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Christ's flesh eaten profits nothing,
nothing at all: that Christ's true flesh, cannot be eaten spiritually, can be no
way eaten; that it is far from Christ's body to be truly eaten: that Christ's
body is not exhibited in the Supper according to the substance thereof: that
those words: Take, eat, are not spoaken of Christ's body: that Christ's never
gave his body to be received, the Evangelists never commanded us to receive
and eat it: that what is given to be eaten, is Christ's symbolicall body, is
but symbolicall bread, is nothing but bread and wine, only a sign of Christ's
body: that Christ gave bread to the Apostles, and not his body. Which are so
contrary to the holy Scripture, as themselves sometimes confess it. See l.
2. c. 30.

ART. III. WHETHER CHRIST GAVE the blood of the new testament to be drunk?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew 26. v. 28. Drink ye all of this: For this is my blood The blood of the
new testament to be drun^k.
of the new testament.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Matthew 26. verse. 28. Christ professes, that what we drink in
the chalice, is the blood of the new testament.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Zuinglius in Subsidio to. 2. fol. 245. Christ did not give the Not the blood
of the new testament.
blood of the testament to drink. Which he repeateth again. And of the same
opinion all the rest are, who either deny that Christ gave his true blood to
drink, as we have seen in the former chapter, for Christ's true blood, is the
blood of the new testament: or deny, that the Eucharist is the testament, as
we shall hear art. seq.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ gave the blood of the new testament
to be drunk. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly deny it.

ART. IV. WHETHER THE EVCHARISticall Chalice be the testament of Christ?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS. The Chalice was the new testament.

Luc. 22. v. 20. Christ says: This is the chalice, the new testament in my
blood.

1. Corinthians. 11. verse. 25. This chalice is the new testament in my blood.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarm. l. 1. de Euchar. c. 11. As for the figure which they put in the
word, Testament, I say there is none there: and he avouches, that the
Eucharist is properly the testament of Christ.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Iuel art. 10. sect. 1. Nether was that cup in deed and really the It was not
ths new testament.
new testament. So also art. 12. sect. 16.

Willet Cont. 13. q. 1. p. 595. The wine in the cup was not the new
testament. 596. The blood is not the testament.

Peter Martyr in Hospin. part. 2. Histor. fol. 257. Nether the cup it self,
nor the liquor contained in it, is indeed the testament.

Zuinglius in Subsidio to. 2. fol. 245. This cup was not the blood of the
testament, nor the testament itself. De Caena fol. 291. The blood of Christ,
is not the new testament, and much less can we say, that this drink is the
new testament, howbeit it be called by this name. And the reason, why against
the express word of God, he denies the chalice to be the testament of Christ,
he gives l. de Relig. c. de Eucharist. in these words: If the cup be the
testament, it follows, that it is the true and sensible blood of Christ.

Oecolampadius apud Zuinglium to. 2. fol. 499. It must needs be, that this
chalice or cup be the sign of the covenant or new testament, not the new
testament itself indeed.

Beza in Lucae 22. v. 20. edit. An. 1565. Wine is called the covenant it self,
whereas it is only a symbol or badge of the covenant, or rather of that
wherewith the covenant is made, to wit, of the blood of the Lord. In Colloq.
Montisbel. page 38. I maruail, that you call the Supper of the Lord, a
testament, which seems very strange to me. The Supper of the Lord is not the
testament itself, but only a part of the testament, that is, the seal
thereof. The Cup cannot be the testament.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the chalice of the Eucharist is the new
testament. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that nether the chalice nor the liquor therein
contained is the new testament: that nether the wine nor the blood of Christ is
the new testament: that the Cup cannot be the new testament, but is only a
symbol or badge thereof or rather of the blood wherewith the testament was
made: That the Lords Supper is not the testament, and that it were strange to
call it so. Which contradictio^ of Scripture is so evident as diverse
Protestants confess it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. V. WHETHER AT THE VERY time of Christ's celebration of the Eucharist, his
body was given and delivered and his blood shed for us?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Luc. 22. v. 19. And taking bread he gave thanks, and brake, Christ's body was
given and his blood shed at Supper.
and gave to them saying: This is my body which is given for you. And S. Paul
1. Corinthians. 11. verse. 24. in Greek has, which is broken: as also S. Matthew 26.
verse. 28. S. Mark. 14. v. 24. S. Luke c. 22. v. 20. speak of the blood, or of
the Chalice, in the present tense: Which is shed.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Math. 26. v. 28. Those words: Which shall be shed for you, are
to be read in the present tense according to all the Evangelists in the Greek
text, and the sense is: which is now distributed for you, and is by real
participatio^ sprinkled and inwardely powered into every one of you.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Iuel art. 17. sect. 4. Christ gave his body to be broken, and his blood to be
shed not at his last supper, but only upon his cross, and not where else.

Spalatensis l. 5. cap. 6. sect. 229. says, that the forecited words, can be
no way true of the present time.

Peter Martyr cont. Gardener. col. 354. But I pray you, tell us once, what that
is which remains and is broken? If you say, Not given or shed at the Supper.
Accidents; you will be laughed at by children: If you say. The body of Christ:
you will be blasphemous. Col. 812. But who will say, that Christ himself or his
body is broken in the Supper.

Moulins in his Bucler part. 2. page 91. Christ did not say, that his blood was
shed in the Eucharist. Page 87. He speaks of a shedding which was not yet
made, but to be made at his death.

Bucanus in Institution. loco 48. Which is given: is not said but by change of
time present for that which is straight to come, for, Which shall be given, to
wit, on the cross, not in the Eucharist.

Reineccius to. 4. Armaturae c. 19. Christ used the time present for the
future. The same says Calvin Admonit. vlt. p. 836. Beza in Math. 26. v. 28.
Tilenus in Syntagm. c. 61. Micronius in Hospin. part. 2. f. 236.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that at the very present time of the celebration
of the Eucharist, Christ's body is given, Chrysostom, Theophilact, Oecum. in 1.
Cor. 10.
is delivered, is broken, and his blood is shed for us. And the holy Fathers
declare how it is most true. The Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that it is blasphemy to say, that Christ's body
is broken in the Eucharist: that his body is not broken in the Supper: that
his blood is not shed in the Eucharist: that Christ said, which is given,
for, which shall be given, and took the present time for the future. Which are
so contrary to the Scripture, as diverse Protestants confess it. See l. 2. c.
30.

ART. VI. WHETHER THE CHALICE of the Eucharist was shed for us?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Luc. 22. verse. 20. This is the Chalice, the new testament in my blood, which
(Chalice, as is evident in the Greek text) shall be The Chalice shed for us.
shed for you.

CATHOLICS EXPR^SSELY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Math. 26. v. 28 Keeping the grammatical and right sense of
the words of S. Luke, as they are in Greek, where the Chalice it self is said
to be shed in remission of sins, by the name of the Chalice we must needs
understand not wine, but blood in the chalice.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker ad Ration. 1. Campiani. The Chalice was not Not shed for us.
shed for us: And yet he confesses; that if we stick to the words (of the
Evangelist) we must either say, that the Chalice was shed for us, or we must
make false Greek.

Beza in Lucae. 22. v. 20. These words cannot be understood of the wine, much
less of the Cup.

Musculus in locis titul. de Caena: But if in Luke we read: Which is shed
for you, that is not referred to the Cup, but to the blood. Again: I think,
that the word of Shedding in Saint Luke, is not to be referred to the Cup of
the Sacrament, but to the blood.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that the Chalice was shed for us, as is manifest
by the Greek text, which alone Protestants account authentical: in so much as
not only Lutheran Protestants confess it, but also D. Willet though a a
Caluinist. For thus he writes Controu. 13. quaest. 1. page 595. The Paticiple
shed, agrees with the Cup, not with my blood: as the Evangelist says:
The Cup was shed. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the chalice was not shed for us; that these
words cannot be understood of the Cup: that the word Shed in S. Luke is not
referred to the Cup: Which contradiction of Scripture is so plain, as many
Protestants confess it, nor can it he avoided by any better color then by
changing the Greek text, or by saying that Saint Luke wrote false Greek, who
yet was an excellent Grecian as is evident by all his writings.

ART. VII. WHETHER BREAD BE Necessary to make the Eucharist?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 26. v. 26. And whiles they were at supper, Jesus took bread, and
blessed and brake, and he gave to his disciples and said: Bread necessary to
the Eucharist.
Take ye ad eat: This is my body.

Joan. 6. verse. 51. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and
the bread which I will give is my f^^h for the life of the world.

1. Cor. 10. v. 16. The bread which we break, is it not the participation of
the body of our Lord?

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 3. part. q. 74. art. 4. There must needs be bread of wheat, without
which the Sacrament is not made.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Beza Epist. 2. vol. 3. Where there is no use of bread or wine, or no plenty
at sometime, may no Supper of the Lord be celebrated? yes it may be well
celebrated, if that which is in steed of Bread not necessary.
bread and wine, either by common, use or by occasion of the time, be taken in
place of bread and wine. Which very words are repeated by Hospin. part. 1,
Histor. c. 2.

Tilenus in Syntagmate c. 61. In these countries in which there is no plenty,
no use of wheaten bread or wine pressed out of of grapes, we doubt not but the
Sacrament may be well celebrated, if that be used for this Symbol, which there
is in steed of bread and wine.

Bucanus in Institut. Theol. loco 48. What if bread, such as we have, and wine
want in any country, with what signs is the Supper to be celebrated? With
those earthly elements and corporal meats, which all men in that country use
for bread and wine, meat and drink. So also teaches Homius Disput. 47.
nether is it disliked of Peter Martyr in 1. Cor. 10. Calvin also apud Bezam
epist. 25. allows other drink in steed of wine in places where wine wants.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that the Eucharist is to be made of bread.
Catholics say the same.

Protestants plainly say, that bread is not necessary: That where bread
wants, there it may be made of other meats.

ART. VIII. WHETHER THE EVCHARIST may be made of azime or unleavened bread?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 2. ver. 17. is said, that Christ celebrated the Eucharist the first day
of the Azimes: Et Marc. 14. v. 12. The first Christ used azime bread.
day of the Azimes when they sacrificed the Pasche: and Luc. 22. v 7. the day
of the Azimes wherein it was necessary that the Pasche should be killed. Now
in the days of the Azimes it was forbidden Exodus 12. and 13. that there should
be any leaven bread amongst the Jews, and commanded, that he should die, who
in that time had eaten leaven bread.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 3. part. q. 74. art. 4. The custom of celebrating in azime bread,
is more agreeable to reason.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Beza l. quaest. and respons. vol. 3. I say freely, that there is a To use
azime is a blemish: sauoureth Iudaisme.
duble blemish in those Churches, which rather use azime then leaven bread. For
that sauoureth Iudaisme, and is less agreeable to our daily meat.

Lobechius Disput. 12. thus writes. The Zuinglian Caluinists Leaue^ bread,
necessary.
despising azime bread with a Pharisaicall pride, yea cursing it, do thrust
leaven bread upon the Church under opinion of necessity.

Pareus Colleg. Theol. 9. disput. 26. It must be household bread, for analogies
sake.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that Christ instituted the Eucharist, the first day
of the Azimes, when there was no leaven bread to be found amongst the Jews but
only azime: And Beza himself loc. cit. confesses, that Christ celebrated the
Eucharist in azime bread. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that we ought to make the Eucharist rather of leaven
bread then of azime, that to make it of azime, is a blemish, sauoureth
Iudaisme, and is to be accursed.

ART. IX. WHETHER THE BREAD and wine of which the Eucharist is made, be to be
blessed?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew 26. verse. 26. Jesus took bread, and blessed and Bread and wine,
blessed.
brake; and he gave to his disciples, and said: Take ye and eat: This is my
body.

1. Cor. 10. v. 16. The chalice of benediction which we do bless, is it not
the communication of the blood of Christ?

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Math. 26. v. 26. An other circumstance is, that he blessed the
bread and chalice.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Zuinglius l. de Caena to. 2. f. 294. They should not use the The word of
Blessing not to be used.
words of Benediction and Blessing in this place. (1. Cor. 10. cit.) For
commonly the use to be taken for the word of Consecrating.

Calvin in Math. 26. v. 26. Matthew and Mark use the word of Blessing; but
seeing in place thereof we read in Luke the word Blessing, for Thanks giving.
(...), there is no doubt of the sense; and seeing also, that in the Chalice
they add the word of thanks giving, they clearly interpret their former
speech. Whereby the ignorance of Papists is more ridiculous, who express their
blessing with the sign of the cross, as if Christ had used an exorcisme.

Musculus in loc. tit. de Missa. To bless, is not to consecrate, but to give
thanks, and to speak well of one; that I may not say, that nether Matthew, nor
Mark, nor Paul have used the word of Nether Matthew nor Paul used the word
Blessing.
Blessing in this matter. Of the same opinion are others, who will have the
word (...) in S. Matthew, to signify nothing but thanks giving. And so have the
Bibles of K. Edward and of Q. Elizabeth 1562. translated it.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ blessed the bread, and that we bless
the Chalice. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that blessing of bread is an exorcisme, that by,
blessing, nothing is meant but thanks giving, that we should not use it here,
that nether Matthew nor Paul used it in this matter. Which contradiction of the
Scripture is so clear, as some Protestants confess it. See l 2. c. 30.

ART. X. WHETHER THERE OUGHT to be made any preparation to the receiving of the
Eucharist?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Cor. 11. v. 28. But let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of the chalice. For he that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks judgment to himself.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Eucharist. cap. 17. The Catholic Church teaches,
that preparation to the Eucharist is not faith alone, but true penance and
confession of sins, if a man after baptism be fallen into mortal sin.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther Postilla in die Pascae fol. 241. We taught, that it Preparation of no
moment
is of no moment and of no value at all, whatsoever we prepare of our selves to
receive the Sacrament, as they did who by their confession and by other works
would make themselves worthy to receive the Sacrament. Which is a horrible
error and abuse. Et. f. 242. We have condemned them, and not without cause, who
endeavor by their works to come worthily.

The same Luther lib. de Captiuitat. Babylon. tom. 2. Only erroneous
consciences worthily communicate.
cap. de Eucharist. Out of these things we conclude, who do worhily
communicate: to wit only they who have sad, afflicted, troubled, confounded,
and erroneous consciences. Which doctrine Whitaker defends ad Ration. 8.
Campiani page 41. Again: By which thou see, that to have Mass worthily The
more wicked, the nearer to grace.
no other thing is required but faith. And apud Fabritium in artic. 20.
Augustan. By how much the wickeder thou art, by so much the sooner God gives
thee grace. And in psalm. 5. tom. 3. fol. 172. I will say one thing rashly and
bouldly: In this Blasphemers, most grateful to God.
life, there are none nearer to God, then these haters and blasphemers of God,
nor any more grateful or loving children. Which also Whitaker mantaineth loco
citat. And Concione de Praeparat. ad Euchar. An. 1518. The best disposition
Worst disposed, best disposed.
is no other, then that wherewith thou art worst disposed: and on the
contrary, then thou art worst disposed, when thou art best disposed.

Schusselburg Catal. Haeret. tom. 8. page 216. Papists do Faith suffices.
impudently deny, that faith is a sufficient preparation to receive the
Sacrament of the Eucharist. Kemnice. 2. part Exam. tit. De preparat. p. 178.
Faith alone is a sufficient Praeparation. The like has Calvin 4. Instit. c.
14.. 26.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that a man must prove or prepare himself to receive
the Eucharist: that who receaueth it unworthily, receaueth his judgment. The
same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that we must not make our selves worthy by works;
not endeavor by works to come worthily: that they only communicate worthily
who bring troubled and erroneous consciences: that we need nothing but faith:
that the best disposition is to be ill disposed: that haters and blasphemers of
God are nearest unto him and most grateful: that the more wicked one is, the
sooner God gives him grace: that faith is a sufficient preparation to the
Eucharist.

ART. XI. WHETHER THERE BE ANY Sacrifice in the Church?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Malachie 1. v. 11. From the rising of the sun to the going Sacrifice in the
Church.
down great is my name among the Gentiles, and in every place there is
sacrificing, and there is offered to my name a clean oblation. cap. 3. verse.
3. He shall purge the Sons of Leui, and will streyne them as gould and
silver, and they shall be offering sacrifices to our Lord in justice.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent. Sess. 24. c. 1. Christ in his last supper, that he might
leave a visible sacrifice to his beloved Church, as the nature of man
requires, offered his body and blood to God the Father under the forms of
bread and wine.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cont. 4. q. 1. c. 2. There is now no more Sacrifice No Sacrifice in
the Church
remaining in the Church.

Calvin in 1 Cor. 9. v. 19. The Lord instituted no Sacrifices in which holy
Ministers should be occupied. And because the Protestants opinion in this
matter is well enough known, I will rehearse no more of their sayings.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that in the Church there is Sacrifice and
offering of a clean oblation, and Sacrifice in justice. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that there is no more Sacrifice in the Church. And
yet Whitaker Controu. 3. quaest. 6. page 2. 615. writes thus: Without
Preisthood there is no Church. And Vallada Apologia cont. Episcop. Luzon. c.
26. No man denies, but the celebration of the Eucharist is a true Sacrifice.

ART. XII. WHETHER THERE BE AN altar in the Church?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Hebrew^ 13. v. 10. We have an altar, whereof they have no Christians have an
altar.
power to eat which serve the tabernacle.

Isaie 19. ver. 10. In that day there shall be an altar of our Lord in the
midst of the land of Egypt, and a title of our Lord to the border thereof.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 24. c. 1. The Apostle Paul writing to the Corinthians,
when he says, that they who are polluted with participation of the table of
Devils, cannot be made partakers of the Table of our Lord, by a table in both
places understands an altar.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in 1. Corinthians. 9. verse. 19. There are no altars to They have no^ ^^tar.
sacrifice.

Beza in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 350. Paul makes mention Paul speaks not of an
altar.
of a table of the Lord, and not of an altar. Ad Repetit. Sanctis c. 4. I
confess, there is no altar in the Christian Church. And l. Quaest. and Resp.
vol. 3. In the Apostolical writings there is no mention of an altar, but only
of a table of the Lord.

Peter Martyr in Romans 11. Altars have no place in the time of the Ghospel.
Herein also the Protestants doctrine is well known.

THE CONFERENCE
Scripture plainly says, that we have an altar. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say that we have no altar, that Paul makes no mention of
an altar, that there is no mention of an altar in the writings of the Apostles.

ART. XIII. WHETHER THE PASCHAL lamb was sacrificed?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Marc. 14. v. 12. And the first day of the Azimes, when they Pascal lamb
sacrificed.
sacrificed the Pasche.

Exodus 12. ver. 6. And the whole multitude of the children of Israel shall
sacrifice him (Pascal lamb) at even.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent. Sess. 24. c. 1. The multitude of the children of Israel did
sacrifice the old Pasche in remembrance of their going out of Egypt.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in Cathol. reform. Controu. 11. c. 5. The Paschal No sacrifice.
lamb was a sacrament, but no sacrifice. The same has Plessie l. 2. de Missa
c. 2.

Reineccius to. 4. Armaturae c. 19. The holy Bible no where Not sacrificed.
teaches, that the Paschal lamb was immolated and sacrificed.

Tilenus in Syntagmate c. 64. We do not grant, that the Paschal lamb was a
sacrifice properly called: yea Moises expressly denies, that it was a
sacrifice.

Pareus in Colloq. Theol. 9. disput. 27. The Minor is false: That the Paschal
lamb was a sacrifice properly called.

Beza in Marci. 14. v. 12. I used the word of Killing, rather then of
Sacrificing, that the domestical bankets of the Pasche might be distinguished
from those Sacrifices which in the temple were done of the Priests.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the Paschal lamb was sacrificed. Catholics
say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that it was not sacrificed, that it was no proper
sacrifice, that it was a domestical banquet: that Moises expressly denies, it
to be a Sacrifice. Which is so repugnant to Scripture, as same Protestants
confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF the Eucharist.
Out of all which has been rehearsed in this chapter, it is clear, how
different an Eucharist Protestants have from that which the holy Scripture
proposes. For the Scripture, and Catholics with it, teaches, that the holy
Eucharist is the true body and blood of Christ, that it is his testament: that
Christ's flesh is to be eaten, that whilst the Eucharist was instituted Christ's
body was given and his blood shed for us: that the chalice was shed in
remission of sins; that bread is a necessary matter of the Eucharist: that
unleavened bread is a couenient matter, and that we must prepare our selves to
receive the Eucharist. Moreover the Scripture teaches, that there is a
Sacrifice and altar in the Church, and that the Paschal lamb (which was a
figure of the Eucharist) was sacrificed: all which Protestants do deny.

It is clear also, that Protestants do steal from the What Protest. steal
from the Eucharist.
Eucharist the truth of the body and blood of Christ, the nature of his
testament, the necessity of bread, the conueniencie of unleavened bread to
make it of, and necessity of our preparation to receive it. They steal also
eating and drinking from the flesh and blood of Christ, and oblation and
shedding of them when the Eucharist was instituted. And from the Church they
steal both Sacrifice and altar, and sacrificing from the Paschal lamb. And
thus much of the Eucharist: Now of the other Sacraments.

CHAPTER XI. OF THE OTHER SACRAMENTS.
ART. I. WHETHER PRIESTS CAN forgive sins?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
MATTHEW 16. v. 19. And I will give to the the keys Priests can forgive sins.
of the kingdom of heaven -- And whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, it
shall be loosed in heaven.

Math. 16. v. 19. Amen, I say unto you, whatsoever you shall bind upon earth,
shall be bound also in heaven: and whatsoever you shall loose upon earth, shall be
loosed also in heaven.

Ihon. 20. v. 24. And he said to them: receive ye the Holy Ghost: Whose
sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them, and whose you shall retain,
they are retained.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent. Sess. 14. Can. 9. If any shall say, that the Sacramental
absolution of the Priest is not a judicial act, but a bare ministry of
pronouncing or declaring that sins are forgiven, be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins Galath. 4. tom. 2. The Pope challenges to They cannot.
himself proper and judicial power of forgiving and reteining sins.

Zuinglius in Art. 51. to. 1. Who attributes remission of sins to a
creature, robs God of his glory, and is an idolater.

In resp. ad Luther. to. 2. f. 430. These words: whose sins you shall forgive
etc. have not that sense, as if Christ in speaking the^ would give his
disciples power to forgive sins. In Exposit. fidei They cannot certify a man
of forgiveness of his sins.
ib. f. 557. Wherefore all these things seem frivolous: I absoluethee, I
certify thee, that thy sins are forgiven. This is deceit and mere trifles.
Et in Hebr. 6. to. 4. he says, that Christ spooke the words cited out of
Math. 18. by hyperoche, or ouerlashing.

Bullinger in Marci. 2. Men do not forgive sins, but teach that they are or
have been forgiven in Christ by faith.

Calvin in Joan. 20. v. 22. He made the Apostles only witnesses or preachers
of this benefit (of remission of sins) And 4. Instit. c. 11.. 1. For Christ
gave not this power properly to men, but to his word, whereof he mad men
ministers.

Beza in Confess c. 5. sect. 27. We must believe, that nether They cannot
properly bind or loose.
Pastors, nor Doctors can properly bind, or loose any, or open the kingdom
of heaven to any. For it is proper to God alone to remit or retain sins,
and indeed so proper, as he communicates this glory with none at all.

Zanchius de Eccles. c. 9. to. 8. Power of forgiving sins is not given
properly to the Apostles themselves or to others, but to their Ministry or to
the Gospel. For they do not properly forgive sins, but the Gospel
brings remission of sins to those that believe.

Daneus Cont. 4. c. 9. Christ gave power of forgiving sins to his Apostles,
as to Ministers that do only declare his benefit toward faithful men, not as
such that work and effect the forgiveness of sins.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that the keys of the kingdom of heaven are
given to pastors of the Church: that what they loose or forgive on earth, is
loosed or forgiven in heaven: that the Holy Ghost was given them that by
virtue of him they might forgive sins. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say: that God communicates power of forgiving sins
to none at all; that it is idolatry to attribute this power to any creature:
that Ministers of the Gospel do not properly loose any, that they forgive not
sins, but only declare it; that they are only witnesses and declarers of
this benefit: that virtue of forgiving sins is given to the Gospel, not to
men. Which is so plainly against the Holy Scripture, as some Protestants
confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. II. WHETHER WE MVST Confess our sins to men?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
James 5. v. 16. Confess your sins one to an other. Sins are to be
confessed to men.


Acts 19. v. 18. And many of them that believed came confessing and declaring
their deeds.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 14. Can. 6. If any shall deny that Sacramental
Confession was instituted, or is necessary by Gods law, be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
French Confession art. 14. Auricular Confession was forged Not to be conf^ssed
to men.
in Sath^ns shop: It is a devise of men.

Willet Controu. 14. q. 6. p. 736. It is not necessary to make confession at
all to men.

Confessio Argentinensis c. 20. Nether Christ nor the Apostles would commana it.

Luther in Postilla Epiphaniae. God requires not this confession to men. Sermon.
de 10. Leprosis tom. 7. Confession of sins is forbidden.

Calvin in Refutat. Cathalani. The lawmade of auricular Law of confession,
devilish.
confession, is devilish: It is an intolerable corruption, if you search into
it from the beginning and foundation.

Iuel defens. Apology part. 2. c. 6. diuis. 1. Thus much only we say: That
private confession to be made unto the Minister, is nether commanded by Christ,
nor necessary to salvation.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly commands, that we confess our sins to men, and
tells that the first Christians did confess their sins. That same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that it is not necessary to confess to men, that
nether Christ nor his Apostles commanded it, that God requires it not: that it
is forbidden, is a devilish law and devise of man and of Satan.

ART. III. WHETHER GRACE BE GIVEN by Imposition of hands?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
2. Tim. 1. v. 6. I admonish thee, that thou resuscitate the grace Grace given
by imposition of hands.
of God, which is in thee by the imposition of my hands.

Acts 8. verse. 18. And when Simon had seen, that by the imposition of the
hands of the Apostles the Holy Ghost was given, he offered etc.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 23. Can. 4. If any shall say, that by holy ordination
the Holy Ghost is not given: be he accursed. Et ib. c. 3. says, that by
holy orders grace is given.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in 2. Tim. 1. ver. 6. cit. The question is, whether grace Not given by
imposition of hands.
were given by the external sign (of imposition of hands.) To which question
I answer: As often as Ministers were ordered, they were commended to God by
the prayers of the whole Church, and by this means grace was obtained of God
for them, but not given them by virtue of that sign. The same Calvin in Actor.
8. v. 15. Luke here speaks not of the common grace of the Spirit, wherewith
God does regenerate us for sons to himself, but of especial gifts. In c.
6. v. 6. Hence we gather, that imposition of hands, since it was used of the
Apostles, is a comely and seemlie rite, but yet has not of it self any
efficacy or virtue, but the force and effect depends of God alone.

Beza Apologia altera cont. Sainctem vol. 2. p. 325. In the Ministry, the
ceremony of imposition of hands, does not make a Minister, as you very
ignorantly use to urge, but testifies to the Church, that he is already made.
And l. quaest. and respons. vol. 3. page 347. We must hold, that there were
never any Ministers of the Church made by imposition of hands: but who had
been lawfully called to the Ministry, were so put as it were in possession
of their function. Of the same opinion are they, who think that Imposition of
hands is not necessary to Ministers, as Brentius in Apol. pro Confess.
Writemberg c. de ordine. Herbrandus Disput. 11. Beurlinus in Refutat. Soti c.
67. Conciliabulum Parisiens. An. 1565. artic. 7. and much more they, who
forbid imposition of hands, as Pseudosynodus Dordracensis An. 1574. art. 23.
in these words: The brethren concluded, that Imposition of hands is to
Imposition of hands, forbidden.
be omitted.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the grace of God and the Holy Ghost are
given by Imposition of hands. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that grace is not given by imposition of hands:
that it has no efficacy or virtue, but that the effect is of God alone: that
by it pastors are not made, yea that it is not necessary to them, but to be
omitted.

ART. IV. WHETHER HANDS BE TO BE imposed upon them that have been baptized?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Act. 8. v. 16. and 17. For he (Holy Ghost) was not yet come Hands imposed
upon the baptized.
upon any of them: but they were only baptized in the name of our Lord Jesus.
Then did they impose their hands upon them and they received the Holy Ghost.

Act. 19. v. 5. and 6. Hearing these things, they were baptized in the name of
our Lord Jesus: and when Paul had imposed his hands on them, the holy Ghost
came upon them.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Actor. 8. v. 17. In these words is descricbed an other
Sacrament of the Church different from the baptism; which is called Imposition
of hands by reason of the form which Luke here tells that the Apostles used.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in Actor. 8. v. 17. cit. Let us remember, that Imposition Imposition of
hands is now a vain fancy.
of hands was the instrument of God, at what time he bestowed the visible
graces of his Spirit upon his servants: but since the Church has wanted such
riches, it is only a vain fancy. And 4. Institut. c. 19.. 6. he calls
Catholics, Stage players, because they say they imitate the Apostles in
imposing hands upon those that are baptized.

Gualterus in Actor 8. homilia 58. We know, that out of this place, Papists
have brought in the Sacrament of Confirmation, but it is so ridiculous, as etc.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the Apostles imposed their hands upon those
that were baptized. The same Catholics say.

Protestants expressly say, that it is a vain fancy and ridiculous to impose
hands upon those that are baptized.

ART. V. WHETHER MATRIMONY be a Sacrament?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ephesians 5. v. 31. For this cause shall man leave his father Matrimony a
Sacrament.
and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and shall be twoe in one flesh. This
is a great Sacrament; but I speak in Christ and in the Church.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 24. can. If any shall say, that Matrimony is not
truly and properly one of the seven Sacraments of the Evangelical law
instituted by Christ our Lord, but inverted of men in the Church, nor gives
grace; be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confessio Heluet. c. 19. We confess, that Matrimony is a No Sacrament.
profitable institution of God, but not a Sacrament. In like sort the English
Confession art. 25.

Jewel defens. Apolog. p. 185. Marriage of it self is nether Of itself, not
good.
good nor ill.

Whitaker l. 8. cont. Dur. sect. 64. What more foolish, then to make a
Sacrament of Matrimony?

Calvin 4. Instit. c. 19.. 34. What sober man would ever have thought, that
Matrimony was given for a Srcrament. And others, as we shall see hereafter c.
15. art. 2. say, that Matrimony is nothing, nor makes a man any whit the
better.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that Matrimony in Christ and the Church, that is,
among Christians, is a great Sacrament. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that Matrimony is no sacrament, that it is folly
and madness to make it a sacrament: that of it self it is not good, is
nothing, nor makes a man better. Which contradiction of Scripture is so
manifest, as same Protestants confess it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. VI. WHETHER ONE WIFE BEING divorced one may marry an other?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Luke. 16. verse. 18. Every one that dimisseth his wife, and No marriage after
divorce.
marries an other, commits aduoutrie: and he that marries her that is
dimissed from her husband, commits aduoutrie.

Marc. 10. v. 11. Whosoever dimisseth his wife, and marieth an other,
commits aduouttie upon her. And if the wife dimisse her husband, and marry
an other, he commits aduoutrie. v. 6. Which God has joined together let no
man separate.

1. Cor. 7. v. 10. But to them that be joined in matrimony, not I give
commandment, but our Lord, that the wife depart not from her husband, and if
she depart, to remain unmarried, or to be reconciled to her husband. And. v.
39. A woman is bound to the law so long time as her husband li^eth: but if her
husband sleep, she is at liberty, let her marry to whom she will, only in
our Lord.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Council of Trent. Sess. 24. Can. 7. If any shall say, that the Church does
err, when it taught and does teach according to the Evangelical and
Apostolical doctrine, that the band of Matrimony cannot be broken for the
adultery of one of the married parties: and that nether, no not the innocent
party which gave no cause of the adultery, can marie again whiles the other
party lives: be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRMI.
Willet Controu. 15. quaest. 2. page 782. For fornication, our New marriage
after fornication.
Savior has granted liberty both to dissolve matrimony, and to marry
again.

Confessio Saxonica. cap. 18. Marriage is not forbidden to the innocent party,
when the cause being known, she is pronounced free.

Confessio Scotica. We detest his (Popes) cruelty against the innocent
rejected by divorce.

Pseudosynod of Midelburg An. 1581. art. 57. If any for adultery have
separated himself from his wife, and will not be reconciled again with her,
and desire leave of a new marriage, the Presbytery (the adultery being first
proved) shall declare, that it is lawful by the word of God.

Luther in 1. Cor. 7. to. 5. What if the one party will not be reconciled to
the other, but will abide separated, and the other, not able to contain,
should be enforced to marry, what should be do, may he marry with an other?
I answer, that without doubt And other offenses.
he may. Again: If the husband would teach or force his wife to steal, to
adulterate, or commit any other crime against God, it is the same reason of
divorce with the other, that unless they be reconciled, a new marriage may be
made. Furthermore. What if the second marriage did not fall out right, that the
one party should urge the other, the husband the wife, or contrariewise, to
live wickedly like Pagans, or if the one would fly from the other until the
third or fourth marriage were made, may he marry of wife as often as she is
such as we have spoaken of, so that he have at once ten or more fugitive wives?
And again shall it be lawful A woman may have ten husbands livings.
for the wife to have ten or more husbands who all are fled from her? I
answer, that we cannot stop S. Paul's mouth, who, as often as it is needful,
will use his doctrine: his words are clear. The like he has ib. Sermon de
matrimonio, where also fo. 123. he adds: If the Mistress will not, let the
Maid come.

Bidembachius in Consensu Iesuitarum and Christian. p. 1588. Who rejecting his
wife for whordome, marieth an other, does not commit adultery.

Beza in Confess. c. 5. sect. 39. To whom divorce is lawfully Marriage lawful
after divorce.
granted, if reconcilement cannot be procured within the time appointed, to
them we give leave to marry a new. And epist. 10. he writes, that Bucer and
most of the Protestant Churches in Germany give leave to marry a new for
leprosy: to whom (says he) we leave their judgment free, as is reason.

Perkins de Sermon. Dom. to. 2. col. 261. By reason of whordome Whordome
dissolueth marriage.
marriage is dissolved. The same is the common doctrine of Protestants, as you
may see more in my Latin book art. 6.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that every one and whosoever dimisseth his wife
and marries an other commits aduoutrie: that a woman parted from husband
must be reconciled to her husband or remain unmarried: that she is bound to
the law of marriage so long as her husband lives: that man cannot separate
those whom God has joined. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that who having put away his wife for adultery,
marries an other, does not commit aduoutrie; that one may marry again for
aduoutrie, for malicious forsaking, for denial of coningall duty, for
incitation to wickedness, for leprosy; that whordome dissolueth marriage,
that one may have ten or more fugitive wives at once: that if the Mistress
will not, the Maid may be called.

ART. VII. WHETHER THEY WHO lie a dying are to be anointed with oil?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
James 5. v. 14. Is any man sick among you? Let him bring in the preistes of
the Church, and let them pray over him, anoiling The sick are to be anointed
with oil.
him with oil in the name of our Lord, prayer of faith shall save the sick,
and our Lord shall lift him up, and if he be in sins, they shall be remitted.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 14. Can. 2. If any shall say, that the holy anoiling
of the sick gives not grace, nor remitteth sins, nor lightneth the sick,
but that is now ceased, as if in old time is had been only the grace of
curing: be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confessio Saxonica art. 19. That which is now called extreme Not to be
anointed with oil.
unction, is now a spectacle full of superstition. Confess. Heluet. c. 19.
calls it a devise of man. Et Confess. Writemberg. An unprofitable and idle
ceremony.

Calvin 4. Institut. c. 19.. 18. Of the same nature is the anoiling of the
sick, to wit, an histrionicall hypocrisy; It pertains not now to us.

Beza in Confess. c. 7. sect. 11. The sacrament of anoiling, is idle and vain,
and now altogether superstitious.

Hospinian part. 2. Histor. f. 23. The priests were commanded, that they should
not anoile those that dyed, for that was superstitious and contrary to the
express word of God.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that those thall lie a dying, are to be anoiled
with oil, and it promises remission of sins to them. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that this anoiling pertains not to us, that it
is hypocrisy, an idle, and vain ceremony, and contrary to the express word
of God.

ART. VIII. WHETHER THE SACRAments of the old law were of equal virtue with
ours.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Hebr. 10. v. 1. For the law having a shadow of good things to Sacraments of
the old law shadows of the new.
come, not the very image of the things etc.

Coloss. 2. verse. 17. Let no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink, or
in part of a festival day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabboths, which are
a shadow of things to come, but the body Christ's.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Council of Trent Sess. 7. cap. 2. If any shall say, that the very sacraments
of the new law, do not differ from the Sacraments of the old law, but because
they be other ceremonies and either rites, be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Whitaker l. 8. cont. Dureum. sect. 39. Paul expressly teaches, Equal to the
Sacraments of the new law.
that the Israelites had the same sacraments in substance which Christ
delivered unto us.

Confessio Heluet. c. 19. For so much as belongs to that which is the chief
and the substance in the sacraments, the sacraments of both people were equal.

Lutherus l. de Captiuit. to. 2. fol. 75. It cannot be, that the new sacraments
do differ from the old sacraments.

Calvin 4. Institut. cap. 14.. 23. The Apostle speaks not more honorably of
them, then of these. In the sacraments he makes them equal to us. Whatsoever
he gave us in the Sacraments, the same the Jews in old time received in
theirs, what virtue ours have, the same also they felt in theirs.

Beza ad Repetit. Sanctis c. 8. p. 30. Unless with the Apostle, you make the
old sacraments the same indeed, there will be little or no difference at all
between the true God, and the false God of Marcion.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that the Sacraments of the old law differed from
the sacraments of the new, as much as a shadow differs from the image or
from the body it self. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that in substance they were the same, were equal,
did not differ, that what virtue we receive in our Sacraments the Jews felt
the same in theirs.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF the other Sacraments.
The things which have be declared in this chapter do evidently demonstrate,
how differently Protestants think of the other Sacraments from the holy
Scripture. For the Scripture together with Catholics teaches, that Priests
forgive sins, that sins are to be confessed to men: that grace is given by
Imposition of hands, that hands are to be imposed upon those that are baptized:
that Matrimony is a Sacrament, that one wife being put away it is not lawful
to marry an other: that those who lie a dying are to be anointed with oil:
that our Sacraments are more excellent then those of the old law. All which
are denied of Protestants.

They also show, that Protestants in this matter also keep their old custom,
and steal from Priests power to forgive sins; steal away the necessity of
confessing sins to men: from the baptized they steal imposition of hands,
and from the imposition of hands, virtue to give grace: from Matrimony also
they steal the nature of a Sacrament, and the indissolubilitie thereof, from
those that die, their anoiling, and from all our Sacraments their excellency
and virtue above the Sacraments of the old law. And thus far of the
Sacraments: Now touching Faith.

CHAPTER XII. OF FAITH.
ART. I. WHETHER FAITH BE A WORK, or to believe, be to do?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
I HON. 6. v. 28. 29. They said therefore to him: Faith is a work.
what shall we do that we may work the works of God? Jesus answered and
said to them: This is the work of God that you believe in him whom he has
sent.

Act. 16. verse. 30. The Gailer said to S. Paul and Hilas: Masters, what must
I do that I may be saved: But they said: To believe, is to do.
Believe in our Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved and thy house.

James 2. v. 19. Thou beleiuest, that there is one God. Thou do well.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Joan. 6. v. 30. The work of faith, because it is a work of
man wherewith he beleiueth and gives glory to God, is an active and free
work.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther de Captiuit. Babylon. to. 2. fol. 71. Faith is no work. Faith is no
work.


Calvin in Joan. 6. v. 29. It is evident enough, that Christ speak improperly,
when he called faith a work.

Beza ib. They are very ridiculous, who out of this place do infer, that
faith is a work.

Pareus l. 4. de Iustif. c. 17. It is false, that we are justified by the work
of faith, or that faith is a work.

Tilenus in Syntagmate c. 40. But nether (if we will speak) properly) can
faith be called a work.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that faith is a work of God or a divine work:
that to believe, is to do. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that faith is no work: that they are ridiculous
who say faith is a work: that it is false that faith is a work.

ART. II. WHETHER FAITH BELEIVETH any thing besides Gods promises?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Joan. 17. v. 3. And this is life everlasting, that we know thee, Faith knows
God and Christ. Beleiueth the resurrection of Christ. Understands the
creation. Beleiueth Jesus the Son of God.
the only true to God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

Romans 10. verse. 9. For if thou confess with thy mouth our Lord Jesus, and in
thy heart believe that God has raised him up from the dead, thou shall be saved.

Hebr. 11. v. 3. By faith, we understand that the worlds were framed by the
word of God.

1. Joan. 5. v. 5. Who is he that ouercometh the world, but he that beleiueth
that Jesus is the Son of God?

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. Can. 12. If any shall say, that justifying is
nothing else but a trust of the mercy of God forgiving sins for Christ; be he
accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther in Genes. 15. to. 6. f. 178. Surely faith, is nothing else, Faith,
nothing but an assent to the promises.
nor can do any thing else, but assent to the promises. Postilla in Epist. Dom.
3. Aduentus fol. 31. Faith is nothing else, then a firm, constant, perseuerant
trust far from all doubt and wavering, of Gods grace and good will to endure
for ever. A trust of Gods grace.


Melancthon in Coloss. 1. Faith signifies not knowledge of the history, for
such is in the Devils, but an assent wherewith we embrace the promise.

Hutterus in Analysi Confess. Augustan. art. 4. To believe Nothing but a full
trust.
in Christ, is nothing else, but with full trust of mind to rely upon the
Evangelical promises of free pardon of sins, and out of them to promise
undoubtedly to himself Gods grace, salvation, and everlasting life, for the
merit and redemption wrought by Christ. Again: There is one only and the same
object (of faith) in respect whereof it is said to save, to wit, the only
promise of Gods mercy of free pardon of sins, by and for Christ.

Gerlachius Disput. 17. to. 2. There is no other object of justifying faith
properly and specially so termed, then the word of the Gospel of the grace
and mercy of God and merit of Christ.

Lobechius Disput. 22. Others do err in the object of faith Gods whole word
not the object of faith.
which they make the whole Scripture for the object of justifying faith.

Bucer in 1. Timoth. 4. v. 15. Faith is nothing else, but a firm persuasion of
salvation gotten by Christ.

Beza in 1. Tim. 4. v. 15. Faith is nothing else, but a firm persuasion of our
election in Christ. In Confess. 4. sect. 5. Faith is not that, wherewith only
we believe God to be God, and his word to be true, for the Devils have this
faith. c. 7. sect. 8. Faith is not an historical knowledge of things revealed
by God, but a certain testimony which the Spirit gives to the hearts of all
the elect, that they are chosen of God. And in breui Confess. p. 82. That
indeed is it which we call faith so much commended in the Scripture, to wit,
when a man certainly persuades himself that the promises of salvation and
life everlasting do peculiarly belong to himself.

Zanchius de Perseuerant to. 7. col. 172. What other thing is faith, then a
certain persuasion conceived of the free good will of God toward us in Christ?

Serranus cont. Hayum part. 3. p. 211. Faith is wholly about the promises. The
like has Calvin 3. Instit. c. 2.. 8. and de vera reform. p. 318. and others.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that that is justifying faith wherewith we
believe the true God and Christ Jesus: Wherewith we believe the resurrection of
Christ, the creation of the world, and Christ to be the Son of God. The same
say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that justifying faith is not that wherewith we
believe the sacred history of Christ, wherewith we believe things revealed of
God, wherewith we believe Gods word to be true: but that it is all about the
promises, has no other object then the promises, is nothing but an assent to
the promises, is nothing but a trust of grace, nothing but a persuasion of
salvation.

ART. III. WHETHER BELIEVE THAT Christ is God, be justifying faith, or
profits any man?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Joan. 20. verse. 31. And these are written that you may believe To believe
Christ to be the Son of God, saves.
that Jesus is Christ the Son of God, and that beleiuing, you may have life
in his name.

1. Joan. 4. ver. 15. Whosoever shall confess, that Jesus is the Son of God,
God abides in him and he in God. The like is 1. Joan. 5. v. 5. and Romans 10. v.
9. cit. in the former article.

Math. 16. v. 17. When S. Peter had said: Thou art the Son of the living
God, Jesus answering said unto him: Blessed art thou Simon Bariona.

Act. 8. v. 37. When S. Philip had said to the Eunuch: If thou believe with
all thy heart, thou may: he answering, said: I believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Card. Bellarm. l. 1. de Iustificat. cap. 8. This faith which regards Christ's
divinity, is that which gives justice and life everlasting.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther Postilla in Dom. 5 post. Pasca fol. 263. Here we To believe that Christ
is God and Man helps none.
see, that to believe in Christ is not to believe that Christ is one person
which is God and man, for that would help none. F. 260. What is it then, to
believe in Christ? It is not to believe that he is God, or that he rules in
heaven equally with God, for this many others believe. In Gal. 3. to. 5. f.
346. It is a feigned faith, which Belief of all the Mysteries of our
redemption is a feigned faith.
hears of God, of Christ, and of all the mysteries of the incarnation and
redemption, and apprehends these things heard.

Hutterus in Analysi Confess. August. art. 4. Justifying faith, is not any
whatsoever, but a faith of Jesus Christ, not wherewith we believe Christ or
that there is a Christ -- The Epistle to the Hebrews in he whole eleventh
chapter puts the object of it diverse and manifould, but faith cannot, nor
must not be said to justify in regard of them all.

Zuinglius in Joan. 2. to. 4. Many believe Christ to be the Son of God, that
he was borne, suffered, and raised from death: but this faith justifies not.

Sadeel in Resp. ad Artic. abiurat. 33. It is not sufficient, if I believe that
Jesus Christ came into the world, suffered death, rose again, and ascended
into heaven: For this historical faith will not save me. Of the same opinion
are other Protestants, as appears by their words cited in the former article,
as also because they deny that the Catholic or (as they speak) historical
faith wherewith we believe what God has revealed generally to all, is
justifying faith, and likewise because they will have justifying faith to be
only a special trust, which every elect man has of Gods favor toward
himself.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the faith of the divinity of Christ, makes
God to abide in us, and us in God, that it makes men blessed, is that which
sufficieth to baptism, and which gives life. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that faith wherewith Christ, is believed to be God
and man helps none: that that faith wherewith all the mysteries of our
redemption are believed, is a feigned faith: that it is no justifying faith
wherewith we believe Christ, or that he was borne, suffered, and rose again.

ART. IV. WHETHER IVSTIFYING faith be one?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ephesians. 4. v. 5. One Lord, one faith, one baptism. Faith is bu^ one.


CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Iustif. c. 5. There are not many faithes: For there is
but one faith by reason of one and the same formal object, whereby all things
are believed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Scharpe de Iustif. Contr. 1. Justifying faith according to Faith is twoefould.
the diversity of the subject, is twoe fould; one of Infants, an other of men.
The faith of Infants can nether have knowledge nor application of the promises
of grace, as in men it has, yet Infants have their notions stirred up by the
Holy Ghost.

Polanus 2. part. These. tit. de Fide p. 611. Infants, albeit Infants have a
different faith from men.
they have not the same faith in all points that men have, by reason of the
weakness of their organs; yet they have some thing correspondent to it, which
the Holy Ghost works immediately in them according to their capacity and
strenght, for their justification.

Calvin 4. Institut. cap. 16.. 19. I will not rashly say, that Infants are
endued with the same faith which we feell in our selves. Et. 21. If having
received baptism, they depart this life before they come to years of
discretion, God renews them by the virtue of his spirit in a manner unknown
to us, which himself alone knows.

Beza in Explicat. Christianismi vol. 1. p. 186. Faith is in a manner
twoefould. One wherewith Christ is known in common and as it were generally,
to wit, wherewith we assent to the history of Christ and the propheties
written of him, which faith is sometimes given even to the reprobates: An
other, which is proper and peculier to the elect. In Colloq. Montisbel. page
402. The learnedest Divines of our age, do not say, that faith it self is
actually infused into the mind of Infants, but only some beginning thereof,
and as it were some seed or root. Wherefore Iacobus Andreae ib. fol. 403.
says: Your worship (if I have well understood you) discourses of a double
kind of faith, whereof A double kind of faith
the one is joined with understanding; the other is esteemed of you like to
seed.

Kemnice in 2. part. Exam. Council. Trid. p. 92. denies, that Infants have the
same faith which men have, but some other thing, which (says he) we nether
well understand, nor can express by words what it is, yet we call it faith,
because Scripture calls that instrument wherewith the kingdom of heaven is
gotten, faith.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture as plainly says, that there is but one faith, as it says that
there is but one God, one baptism. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that faith is twoefould, that Infants have some
things correspondent to faith, that they have not altogether the same faith
that men have: that they are renewed in a manner unknown to us, that they have
only a beginning root, or seed of faith, that we know not what it is which
they have in steed of of our faith: that there is a twoefould faith, one with
understanding, an othet without: that there is one faith of Infants, an other
of men: one of the elect, an other of reprobats.

ART. V. WHETHER ALL THE ARTIcles of faith may be believed without the Holy
Ghost?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Math. 16. v. 17. Flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, Faith not
without the holy Ghost.
but my Father which is in heaven.

1. Corint. 12. v. 3. No man can say: our Lord Jesus, but in the Holy Ghost.

2. Cor. 3. v. 5. Not that we be sufficient to think any thing of our selves
as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
D. Stapleton lib. 8. Princip cap. 2. It is an error: that any can believe
all the articles of faith by only humane faith.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Whitaker Contr. 1. q. 4. c. 1. We may in some sort know all the doctrine of
Scripture, and have historical faith by the All articles may be believed
without the holy Ghost.
ministry of the word, so that we know all the articles of faith and judge
them to be true, and that without internal light of the Holy Ghost, as many
wicked men and the Devils do.

Perkins in Gal. 2. to. 2. fol. 89. The Papists define justifying faith, that
is a gift of God wherewith we believe the articles of faith and all the word
of God to be true. But this faith the devils have. The same say Melancthon and
Beza cited in the former article and others, who teach that devils may have the
same Catholic, or (as they speak) historical faith, wherewith the mysteries
of faith are believed, which Christians have. Whereupon thus writes Pareus in
Gal. 3. lection. 32. Without trust, it would be only historical faith, which
even hypocrites have, yea the Devils themselves, who know and believe the
Gospel, to be true.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that flesh and blood reveal not the divinity of
Christ, but the heavenly Father: that none ca^ call Jesus Lord but in the
Holy Ghost: that of our selves we are not able so much as to think any good.
The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that without the light of the Holy Ghost we can
judge all the articles of faith to be true: that it is not a gift of God te
believe all the articles of faith and all Gods word to be true, but that the
devils themselves do believe so much.

ART. VI. WHETHER FAITH BE DIstinct from Hope and Charity.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Cor. 13. ver. 13. And now there remain Faith, Hope, Charity, Faith is
distinct from Hope and Charity.
these three, but the greater of these is charity.

Ibid. ver. 2. If I should have all faith so that I could remove mountains,
and have not charity, I am nothing.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in 1. Corint. 2. v. 12. We believe S. Paul, not Calvin, that
these, faith, hope, charity, are three. They are three, they are distinct,
they are not one and the same; there is one nature of faith, an other of hope,
an other of charity.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Zuinglius l. de ver. and falls. relig. c. de Merito to. 2. But who Faith, all
one with Hope and Charity.
understand not, that faith, hope, and charity are the self same thing, to
wit, this trust in God, will be forced to let pass many knots in Scripture
unloosed. Again: If hope save, and faith save, faith and hope shall be the same
thing. And soon after: Faith and charity must be the same thing. Nether let
here any merueill and fear, that these three Theological virtues are
confounded of us. Surely we have learned this out of Scripture, that unless
every one of these virtues be each other, it is quite nothing, much less a
virtue. Et c. de Euchar. Faith is hope and trust. In Resp. ad Luther. f. 397.
The same nature and of spring is of faith and love, yea both these are one and
the self same thing. The like he has in 1. Cor. 13. to. 4. And generally all
Protestants confound faith with hope, in that they say, (as we shall see
hereafter art. 14.) that faith is trust, and trust either is strong hope, or (as
we shall hear P. Martyr there teach) differs not from hope.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that Faith, Hope, and Charity, are three things.
The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that they are the self same thing, that they are
confounded, that each one of them is the other.

ART. VII. WHETHER FAITH BE greater then Charity?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
1. Cor. 13. v. 13. And now there remain Faith, Hope, Charity, Faith less
then Charity.
these there, but the greater of these is charity.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
S. Thomas in 1. Cor. 13. v. 13. These three remain now, but charity is
greater then all.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Confessio Augustana c. de discrim. ciborum in Melancthon. to. 3. The doctrine
of Justice by faith must be eminent in Faith above works.
the Church, that faith which beleiueth sins to be remitted for Christ, be
placed far above works. Et c. de bonis operibus. Amongst good works, the
chiefest and highest worship of God, is faith it self.

Tindal in Fox p. 1144. We can show unto God no greater The diuinest of all
Gods gifts.
honor, then to have faith and trust in him.

Perkins in Hebr. 11. Hence we gather, that faith is more divine, then all the
rest of Gods gifts.

Peter Martyr in locis clas. 3. c. 3.. 6. Faith, as it is a work, surpasses
by many degrees other works.

Luther in Galat. 3. to. 5. fol. 346. If charity be the form of faith as they
dote, straight ways I am forced to think, that charity is the chiefest and
greatest part of Christian religion, and so I leese Christ. In c. 4. fol. 382.
Who so teach faith, as they attribute more to charity then to faith, they
greatly dishonor Christ, and wickedly deprave his word. De Captiuit. Babil.
to. 2. The most excellent work of all. The chiefest.
f. 74. Faith is the most excellent work of all works. Postilla in Feria S.
Ioannis fol. 93. Whatsoever the Gospel teaches or commands of works, it
so teaches and commands, as it makes faith the chief. Et in Dom.
Quinquagesim. f. 207. More noble then Charity
Faith is more worthy, better, and more noble then charity.

Herbrandus in Compendio Theol. loco. de Iustificat. Faith is the chiefest and
hardest worship which we can give to God.

Lobechius Disput. 9. Faith has the first and highest degree amongst all
goods.

Reineccius to. 4. Armaturae c. 18. Yea faith is greater then Greater then
Charity. Above Charity.
charity.

Calvin in 1. Cor. 13. v. 13. If we sift all the effects of faith and compare
them, faith will be found to be superior in many points. Yea charity it self,
as the Apostle teaches 1. Thessalon. 1. is the effect of faith, but without
doubt the effect is inferior to the cause.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Charity is greater the^ Faith. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that faith is to be placed above works, is
greater, nobler, better then charity, more divine then the other guiftes of
God: that charity is inferior to faith.

ART. VIII. WHETHER FAITH MAY BE without Charity or good works?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Joan. 12. v. 42. Of the Princes also many believed in him, but Faith without
works.
for the Pharisees they did not confess, that they might not be cast out of
the Synagogue. For they loved the glory of men more then the glory of God.

1. Cor. 13. v. 2. If I should have all faith, so that I could remove
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.

James 2. v. 14. What shall it profit my brethren, if a man say, he has faith,
but has not works?

David also when he abused the wife of Vrias and procured him to be slain, had
not charity toward his neighbor nor toward God, whom he so greatly
offended: Nor S. Peter had charity to Christ, when he denied and foreswore
him. In whom at those times faith was without good, yea with very evil
works.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent. Session. 6. cap. 15. We must teach, that by every mortal
sin, the grace of justification is lost, though not faith.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Concion. vlt. p. 695. Who think, that true faith Faith never void of
good works.
may be idly, or void of good works, do believe against the Confession of our
Church. -- That is a false faith, which is not joined with the keeping of the
commandments.

Jewel in Defense of the Apology. p. 304. Yea say: Faith True faith without
works.
without works is nevertheless a true and real faith. Verily, so is fire
without heat a true and real fire. -- If the wicked without good works have a
true and real faith, then may you also say, that the Devil likewise has a
true and real faith. This faith is no faith. It is only an imaginary and
Mathematical fantasy.

Apologia Confess. Augustanae c. 3. Our adversary teach, Not with mortal
sin.
that faith may be with mortal sin. c. 5. They dream that faith can stand
with mortal sin. C. de resp. ad argumenta. Faith without good works, is
hypocrisy. Liber Concordiae Lutheran. cap. 3. True faith is never alone, but
always it has charity and Never without Charity.
hope with it.

Luther Postilla in Dom. 2. post Trinitat. It is impossible to believe, where
charity wants. In die Ascens. Where faith is sincere, it cannot be without
works. In festo Sancti Nicolai. As fire cannot want heat and smoke, so cannot
faith be without charity.

Zuinglius in Math, 19. to. 4. It is impossible, that justifying faith be
without works. True and justifying faith can no more be without works, then
fire without heat.

Bucer in Epitom. doctrinae Argentin. art. 8. True faith in Christ can never be
without lively trust in God, and firm hope of everlasting life, and burning
love both toward God and men. No more without Charity then Christ without his
Spirit.


Calvin in Antidot. Concilij Sess. 6. They shall no more separate faith from
charity, the^ Christ from his Spirit. In. 1. Joan. 4. v. 7. Away with that
foolish fiction of informed faith; for if any divide faith from charity, he
does, as if he went about to take away heat from the sun.

Beza in 1. Cor. 13. v. 2. Justifying faith, which apprehends Thou the sun
without heat.
Gods mercy in Christ, in thought may be divided from charity, but not
indeed. In 1. Timoth. 4. v. 1. Who separateth faith from the effects of the
Spirit of Christ, that is, from mortification of sin and vivification of
justice, therein testifies himself to be an infidel.

Pareus l. 3. de Iustif. c. 15. Faith cannot be without charity. l. 4. c. 9.
Love canno more be separated from faith then brightness from the sun.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that faith may be without love, without charity,
without works, yea with adultery, with murder, with denial of Christ. And
the same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that faith, true and real faith cannot be void of
good works: that it is impossible to believe without charity: that faith can
no more be separated from charity, then fire from heat, the sun from light,
or Christ from his Spirit: That faith without works is a false faith, an
imaginary fancy, hypocrisy: that it is a dream to say, that faith may be
with mortal sin. Which contradiction of the Scripture is so manifest, as
sometimes Protestants confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. IX. WHETHER FAITH MAY BE without confession of mouth?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ihon. 12. v. 41. Of the the Princes also many believed in him, Faith without
Confession of mouth.
but for the Pharisees they did not confess, that they might not be cast out of
the Snagogue.

S. Peter's faith never failed, as before is showed, and yet he confessed not,
yea denied and foreswore Christ. Mark 14.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Iustif. c. 15. S. Austin atributeth the same faith to
them who did confess Christ openly, and to them who durst not confess: Nether
can it be doubted, but the faith of them who confessed, was true faith in
Christ. Therefore also the faith of them, who confessed not, was true.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Cont. 4. q. 6. c. 2. True faith can no more be separated from
confession of mouth, then fire from heat, or the sun Not without Confession
of mouth.
from light and his beams. Surely it is not true faith, which breeds, not
confession. Again: If it yield and be ouercomen with fear, it is not true
faith,

Calvin in Romans 10. v. 10. Nether can any believe with, but he will confess
with mouth.

Zanchius in Confess. c. 17. to. 8. We believe, that true faith cannot want
plain confession of truth, where it needs.

Volanus lib. 3. cont. Scargam. page 1071. God gives true faith to none, hut
he openly and freely praises Christ setting aside all fear, and confesses
him securely to be his Lord and Savior.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that diverse believed in Christ who yet for fear
did not confess him; that Peter's faith failed not, though he did not confess,
yea deny Christ. Catholics say the same.

Protestants plainly say, that none can believe with heart, but he confesses
with mouth; that true faith can no more be separated from confession then fire
from heat, or the sun from his beams: that if it confess not, it is not
true faith, that God gives faith to none, but he openly and freely confesses.

ART. X. WHETHER FAITH WITHOUT good works be dead?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
James 2. v. 20. Faith without works is dead. v. 17. So faith if it have not
works, is dead in itself. v. 26. For even as the body Faith without works
is dead.
without the spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead.

1. Cor. 13. v. 2. If I should have all faith, so that I could remove
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. c. 7. It is most truly said, that faith without
works is dead and idle.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Apologia Eccles. Anglic. c. 301. True faith is lively, and ca^ in no wise be
idle. Jewel ib. p. 302. A dead faith, is no true faith. Confessio Belgica art.
24. It cannot be, that this holy faith be idle in a man.

Whitaker Concion. vlt. Who think, that true faith can be idle, or dead, or
void of good works, believe against the Confession True faith cannot be dead.
of our Church.

Luther in Gal. 2. to. 5. The Papists and fanaticall fellows do so understand,
that faith albeit true, if it have no works, is nothing worth. This is false.
And Postilla in die Epiphaniae, condemns as a point of Papistrie: Faith with
out works, is unprofitable.

Herbrandus in Compendio loco de Fide. True faith can never be, nor be said to
be dead.

Morlinus apud Schusselburg to. 7. Catal. Haeret. p. 168. It is a blasphemous
speech: Faith without works is nothing, is worth nothing, has no virtue or
efficacy. p. 169. Who says, that faith without the presence of works is
nothing, simply says with the Papists: That faith informed with good works
does justify a man. p. 178. It is a horrible obscuring and deprauing of Paul:
that faith without the presence of works is nothing.

Schusselburg to. 8. Catal. Haeret. p. 513. This proposition is blasphemous:
Faith in the moment of justification is nothing if it be there without works.
-- Is it a dead thing as some impious men affirm? God will quail and beat
down this blasphemy in them who do not repent. p. 514. The speech of James is
not to be wrested to the act of justification. For here faith, though it be
without Faith in the moment of justification, not dead, though it be without
works.
works, and bring with it no merits or works in the sight of God, yet it is
not dead -- In this strife, albeit faith epsy none of her good works, yet is
she not dead, albeit she be fainte and weak.

Bucer in Joan. 12. Surely I think, that the faith of these Princes (a
foresaied) albeit weak, yet was true and lively. The same says Pareus l. 1.
de Iustificat. c. 15.

Calvin in Antidoto Concilij Sess. 6. Can. 28. I deny not, Faith lively, even
in most grievous sins.
that some seed of faith remains in a man even in most grievous falls. That,
how little soever it be, I confess to be a parcel of true faith, and lively
also.

Zanchius in Confess. c. 27. to. 8. The faith of the elect always lives.

Contra remonstrantes in Collat. Hagae. 396. It is not said here: If faith be
defiled with any (grievous) sin, that that faith is dead: for so no man
should have lively faith. Of the same opinion are all Lutherans, who say, that
faith before and without good works does justify: and Sacramentaries also,
who teach that justification of faith remains in the faithful, what sins
soever they commit. For faith says does not justify or give life whiles it
is dead, but only whiles it is lively, if it justify without good works,
yea with very ill works, clear it is, that it is not dead or idle, but
lively without good, or with ill works.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that faith without good works is dead, is dead in
it self, is dead as a body without the soul: that all faith without
charity, is nothing. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that faith without works is not dead, is not
nothing, is not unprofitable: that though it be defiled with great sins, yet
it is not dead: that it nether can be, nor ca^ be said to be dead: that in
grievous falls it is lively, even in those Princes who loved the glory of men
more then the glory of God.

ART. XI. WHETHER THE FAITH whereof S. James speaks be true or justifying
faith?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
James 2. verse. 22. See thou, that faith did work with his Saint James
speaks of justifying faith.
(Abraham's) works, and by the works the faith was consummate, and the
Scripture was fulfilled, saying: Abraham believed God, and it ^as reputed him
to justice. Et v. 24. Do you see, that by works a man is justified, and not by
faith only?

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l 1. de Iustif. cap. 15 many ways proves that S. James speaks
of justifying faith.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker l. 1. cont. Dureum sect. 13. That James denies He speaks of a
devilish faith.
us to be justified by faith only, is to be understood of a vain, feigned,
dead, imaginary, and devilish faith. The like has Jewel cited before art. 8.

Zuinglius in Jacob. 2. to. 4. says S. James speaks of a counterfeit,
empty, and vain faith.

Calvin in Jacob 2. v. 17. and 19. He speaks not of faith. In v. Of a dead
image of faith
14. He speaks of a dead image of faith, of a false profession.

Beza in Jacob. 2. v. 14. It is not true faith, but a dead image.

Peter Martyr in locis clas. 3. c. 3.. 23. James makes mention of a dead
faith, but that is no faith.

Pareus l. 4. de Iustif. c. 18. For James deuideth not justification He
remoueth faith from justification.
between faith and works (as the Sophisters would) but wholly remoueth faith,
as a dead thing, from justification.

THE CONFERENCE
Scripture plainly says, that S. James spooke of faith which did work with
the works of Abraham, which was consummate by his works, wherewith Abraham
did believe, which was reputed to him for justice, and by which a man is
justified but not alone. The same say Catholics.

Protestants say, that the faith whereof S. James speaks was not justifying
faith, was not faith, was not true faith, was a vain, feigned, imaginary, and
devilish faith, was a counterfeite and dead image of faith.

ART. XII. WHETHER ANY FAITH be full or perfect and of some account in the
sight of God?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew 15. v. 28. Then Jesus answering said to her: O Woman Some faith great.
Full.
great is thy faith.

Act. 6. v. 5. And they chose Steven a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost.

Romans 4. v. 18. Who contrary to hope believed in hope. Et v. 19. Strong.
And he was not weakened in faith.

2. Cor. 8. v. 7. In all things you abuond in faith. Abundant.


Heb. 10. ver. 22. Let us approach with a true heart in fullness of faith.

James 2. verse. 22. And by the works the faith was consummate. Consummate.


1. Petri 1. v. 7. That the trial of your faith much more precious Precious.
then gould, which is proved by the fire, may be found unto praise.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Romans 4. v. 2. The act of faith wherewith the understanding is
captiuated unto the obedience of Christ, is an act of notable virtue.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Iacobus Andreae in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 106. Faith is Faith is imperfect.
imperfect, and no man beleiueth so firmly as he is bound to do.

Calvin. 3. Instit. c. 11.. 7. Faith, albeit of it self it be of no Of no
worth.
worth or value, justifies us bringing Christ: as a pitcher filled with money
does enrich a man. In Math. 9. v. 22. We see, that faith has need of pardon,
for to please God. In Act. 6. v. 8. Nether must we imagine any perfection of
faith, because he (Saint Steven) was said to be full of faith.

Beza in Colloq. Montisbel. page 28. It never came in our Not perfect.
mind to say, that there was any perfect faith in any.

Peter Martyr in locis class. 3. c. 3.. 6. Which I say, not, that I think,
that we are justified by faith as it is a work, for it is defiled with many
spots of our infirmity. c. 4.. 8. If faith it self be considered as it is
work, we cannot be justified by it, since it is a work lame and inperfect and
far worse then the law requires; but we are said to be justified by it as
by it we apprehend and apply to our selves the promises of God and justice and
merits of Christ. Imagine a most filthy hand leprous and of some beggar, Like a
most filthy and leprous hand.
with which he receaueth alms of the giver, surely that beggar is not helped
of the filthiness or leprosy of his hand, but of the alms which he takes
with what kind of hand soever. And in Roman. 11. he compares our faith, to a
weak, leprous, and scabbie hand.

Pareus de Iustificat. c. 7. It is not absurd: that with faith is Sinful.
mingled sometimes distrust or incredulity which is a sin, and that so by an
accident faith is sin. Again: Faith justifies, as a beggar by a scabbie
hand receaueth alms.

Pareus in c. 31. Enchiridij S. Augustini. If we consider how Not worthy the
name of virtue.
faith is of it self and in us, it is imperfect, lame, polluted, and defiled
and mingled with infidelity, so that it is not truly worthy of the name of
virtue. Of the same opinion are all Protestants who as we shall see in the next
chapter think that all our good works are defectuous and sinful. For in
this, the same reason is of faith and good works.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that some faith is great, full, abundant,
consummate, in hope against hope, nor weak, and more precious then tried
gould. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that every faith is imperfect, none perfect, none
of any worth or value, every one needs pardon, is sin, is defiled with
many spots, worse then the law requires, lame, polluted, defiled with
infidelity, like a most filthy, leprous, and scabbie hand, and not truly
worthy of the name of virtue.

ART. VIII. WHETHER FAITH BE CONsummate or perfected by good works of charity?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
James 2. v. 22. See thou, that faith did work with his works, Faith
perfected by works.
and by works the faith was consummate?

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 2. 2. quaest. 4. artic. 3. Charity is called the form of faith, in
that by charity the act of faith is perfected and formed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther in Gal. 2. to. 5. f. 296. The true Gospel is: that works Works no
perfection of faith.
or charity are not the ornament or perfection of faith.

Bullinger Decade 3. Sermon. 9. That opinion is altogether unworthy of a
Christian, which affirms, that our faith is perfected by works, that is,
that by works is supplied that which wants to faith.

Calvin in Jacob. 2. v. 22. Faith is said to have been perfected Faith not
perfected by works.
by works, not that it takes its, perfection thence but because thereby it is
proved to be true. The same say other Protestants commonly.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that faith is consummate or perfected by works.
The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that faith is not adorned or perfected by works:
that works do not perfect faith: that faith takes not her perfection from
works.

ART. XIV. WHETHER BY FAITH WE do only know that we are justified?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Luc. 7. v. 50. And he (Jesus) said to the woman: Thy faith Faith makes safe.
has made thee safe: go in peace.

Romans 1. c. 17. The just lives by faith. The same is Galat. 3. Gives life.
Hebr. 10. and Abacuc. 2.

Romans 3. v. 30. For it is one God, that justifies circuncision Justifies.
by faith and prepuce by faith. c. 5. v. 1. Being therefore justified by faith,
let us have peace toward God.

Act. 26. verse. 18. That they may receive remission of sins, and lot among
the saints by the faith that is in me.

Gal. 2. ver. 16. We also believe in Christ Jesus that we may be Saves.
justified by the faith of Christ.

Ephesians. 2. v. 8. By grace you are saved through faith.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Iustif. c. 17. Let us prove that true faith, is not (as
our adversaries would) a bare and sole apprehension of justice, but a cause,
and that it has virtue of justifying.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Zuinglius in Exposit. Fidei to. 2. f. 557. We say, that sins Faith only
make^h us certain of forgiveness.
are remitted by faith; whereby we mean nothing else then to say, that only
faith makes a man certain of the remission of his sins. De Prouidet. c. 6.
to. 1. f. 371. Justification and Salvation are attributed to faith, whereas
they proceed only from Gods election and liberality, and faith follows the
election, so that who have it, may know as it were by a sign and pledge that
they are elected. Et in Romans 8. to. 4. If we will speak properly, election
Faith saves not.
saves, not faith: but because faith is a certain sign that thou art an
elect, it is attributed to faith, which pertains to election.

Sutclif. l. 2. de Eccles. c. 6. The justice, wherewith we are just
Justification depends of no act of ours.
before God does not depend of any temporal act of man, but of the eternal
decree of God, and is then indeed when a man begins to believe. The like
has Perkins in Serie Causarum c. 57. Abbots in Diatribam Tomsoni c. 4. He
should remember, that before God we are actuallie justified from all eternity:
in We are justified from all eternity. Faith persuades us of our
justification.
whom yet this is not revealed and manifested but in due time.

Piscator in Thesibus l. 2. loco 8. When we say: we are justified by faith, we
mean, that by faith we are certainly persuaded, that God imputes justice to
us, or remitteth our sins for the satisfaction and obedience of Christ. Of
the same opinion are they, who (as we shall see in the next article) deny,
that faith is necessary to justification or salvation. For that shows, that
in their opinion faith has no other function in justification, then to know it
and to make us certain thereof. And perhaps for this cause, they both call
faith an apprehension of justice, and define it to be aknowledge of Gods will
toward us (as Calvin does 3. Instit. c. 2.. 6. and in Cathecismo c. defide) or
a persuasion of justification or salvation, as do Bucer and Beza cited art. 2.
For knowledge or persuasion does no way cause the thing, but only makes us
certain of it.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that we are justified by faith, receive remission
of sins by faith: that we live by faith, are saved by faith, that faith
makes us safe. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that we are actually justified from all eternity,
that our justification depends of no temporal act of ours: that our
justification is then revealed when we begin to believe: that to be justified
by faith, is to be persuaded that God imputes justice to us: that sins to be
remitted by faith, is nothing else, but men to be made certain by faith that
their sins are remitted.

ART. XV. WHETHER FAITH BE Necessary to justification or salvation?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Marc. 16. v. 16. He that beleiueth not, shall be condemned. Faith necessary to
salvation.


Joan. 3. v. 18. He that does not believe, is already judged, because he
beleiueth not in the name of the only begotten Son of God. Et v. 36. He that
is incredulous to the Son, shall not see And justification.
life, but the wrath of God remains upon him.

Hebr. 11. v. 6. Without faith, it is impossible to please God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. c. 7. Without faith none was ever justified.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Willet Cont. 12. q. 5. p. 574. Christ dwells in Infants by his Not
necessary to justification.
Holy Spirit, though they have no faith. The same he repeateth Contr. 13. q.
1. p. 592. Et Cont. 12. cit. p. 569. Infants have nether faith nor charity.

Whitaker Contr. 2. q. 6. c. 3. Baptism infuseth not faith or any grace into
Infants.

Perkins Cathol. reform. Contr. 16. c. 1. page 271. Though a Desire to believe,
is sufficient.
desire to repent, and to believe, be not faith and repentance in nature, yet
in Gods acceptance it is, God accepting the will for the deed. p. 272. Now if
any shall say, that without a lively faith in Christ none can be saved: I
answer, that God accepts the desire to believe for lively faith, in the time
of temptation and in the time of our first conversion. p. 273. Certain it is,
that God in sundry cases accepts of this desire to believe, for true faith
indeed, See Rogers on the 25. Art. p. 147.

Zuinglius de Prouidentia to. 1. fol. 370. It is not general. Faith not
necessary to salvation.
that who has not faith is to be damned. Again: As for the damnation of the
incredulous, they only are understood, who heard and believed not, of others
we cannot judge. De Peccato orig. to. 2. f 118. That (who beleiueth not shall be
damned) is not to be understood absolutely, but of the^ who having heard the
Gospel would not believe. Et in Exposit. Fidei to 2. fol. 659. Heathens may
be saved.
he says, that in heaven we shall find Hercules, Theseus, Numa and such like
Pagans; and his opinion therein defend the Tigurins in their Confession of
faith: Bullinger in the Preface thereof. Gualter in Praefat. operum Zuinglij,
and in Apologia pro eodem. And the same doctrine of the salvation of Pagans
mantayne Erasmus, Thommer, Hardenberg, Tossanus and other Protestants as
Schlusselburg reports l. 3. Theol. Calvin art. 7.

Bucer in Math. 19. Furthermore, out of that that Infants Infants saved without
faith.
want faith, nothing less is concluded, then (which some think) that
therefore they please not God, nor are Saints.

Musculus in locis tit. de baptismo. Infants are saved by Gods election, albeit
they be taken out of this life not only without baptism, but also without
faith.

Calvin in Math. 19. v. 14. That they avouch, that we are no other ways
reconciled to God and made heirs of adoption, then by faith, that we confess
of such as are of discretion, but for so much as pertains to infants this
place conuinceth it to be false. Et 4. Instit. c. 16.. 29. and 31. and li.
cont. Seruet. p. 647. he writes, that that sentence: Every one that beleiueth
not the Son of God, abides in death, belongs not to infants.

Beza in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 407. Albeit the children of Christans want
faith, yet is not baptism unprofitable to them.

Daneus Controuers. de Baptismo c. 10. He asks, what No faith needful to
Infants.
faith it is which we require in the baptism of Infants: I answer, None.

Peter Martyr in Schlusselburg. l. 1. Theol. Calvin art. 18. The children of
faithful parents are saints by the mere mercy of God, though they have not
true faith in Christ.

Hungari apud Grauer. in Absurdis Calvin cap. 4. sect. 25. The children of
Christians cannot be properly said to have faith; yet all that are
predestinate amongst them are saved and obtain the kingdom of heaven.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that who beleiueth not, shall be condemned, is
already judged, shall not see life, that the wrath of God abides upon him, and
that it is impossible to please God without faith. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Christ dwells in Infants though they have
no faith; that they please God, are saved, are Saints without faith: that the
sentence of condemnation against incredulous belongs nether to infants, nor
to such as have not heard the Gospel: that a man may be saved with desire of
faith, though he have no faith indeed: that in diverse cases God accepts the
desire of faith for lively faith: that diverse Paga^s are saved. Which are so
contrary to Scripture as diverse Protestants confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. XVI. WHETHER FAITH DO INdeed justify, or be a true cause of
justification?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
The holy Scripture in the places cited before artic. 14. Faith is a true
cause of Justification and Salvation.
says, that we are justified by faith, receive remission of sins by faith,
live of faith, are saved by faith.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. cap. 8. Faith is the beginning of man's salvation,
the foundation and root of all justification.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Confessio Belgica art. 22. Properly speaking, we mean not, Faith it self
does not justify.
that faith it self, by it self, or of it self does justify us, as which is
only as it were an instrument, with which we apprehend Christ our justice.

Whitaker ad Demonstrat. 10. Sanderi. Faith is not cause No cause of salvation.
of our salvation.

Perkins in Galat. 3. Faith does not cause, work, or procure Salvation
depends not of faith.
our Salvation. In Serie causarum cap. 57. Salvation depends not of our
faith. The same has Sutclife cited art. 14.

Illyricus in Claue Scriptur. part. 2. tract. 6. col. 551. Faith, the word, and
Sacraments are said to save us, whereas God alone does such things. col. 552.
It is often said: Thy faith has made thee safe, whereas the only mercy of
God and his omnipotency apprehended by faith does that. Whereupon he adds,
that Faith no true cause salvation.
in the Scripture; Effects are often times attributed to not true, or not to
principal causes.

Zuinglius in Elencho to. 2. f. 34. Here is a diffcultie: Hou faith does make
blessed or justifies -- But whatsoever seems hard to loose, flies a sunder
with a small stroke of the figure synechdoche. For faith is taken for the
election, the predestination, and vocation of God, all which go before faith.

Bucanus in Instit. Theol. loco 31. Nether the work nor act Faith does not
justify us
of faith does justify us, but Christ himself whom we apprehend by faith.

Pareus l. 1. de Iustif. c. 17. It cannot be said with out plain absurdity,
and falsitie, that we are justified by faith or out of faith, as by an
efficient or formal cause. Again: By no means that efficiencie or virtue of
justifying can be ascribed to faith, without absurdity and falsitie.

Tilenus in Syntagmate c. 41. This speech: Faith does justify us, is
figurative and metonymicall, and has this sense: God justifies the beleiuer
for the merit of Christ, which the beleiuer by only faith apprehe^deth. c. 56.
Baptism goes before salvation, but causes it not, which we give not to faith
properly, but only metaleptically.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that Faith truly causes justification and
salvation. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that faith is no cause of our salvation, nether
works not procures our salvation: that our salvation depends not upon our
faith: that faith does not justify us: that without absurdity and falsitie it
cannot be said faith is either efficient, or formal cause of justification, or
has virtue of justifying.

ART. XVII. WHETHER FAITH BEING alone and without good works can justify?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
James 2. v. 14. What shall it profit my brethren, if a man say he has faith,
but has not works? Shall faith be able to save him? v. 24. Do you see, that
by works a man is justified, and Faith alone does not justify nor save
not by faith only. The same prove the places before cited, which affirm that
faith without works is dead.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. c. 7. Faith does not perfectly unite to Christ, nor
makes a lively member of him, unless to it be adjoined hope and charity.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Confessio Belgica art. 24. We are justified by faith in Christ, and that also
before we have done any good works.

Luther in Gal. 2 to. 5. fol. 310. This faith, does justify before Justified
before works.
and without charity. fol. 312. It is an error and impiety to say, that
infused faith does not justify, unless it be adorned with Faith without
charity does justify.
the works of charity. Et in Disput. to. 1. f. 371. unless faith be without
any even the least works, it does not justify, nay it is (...) ^a^th.

Liber Concordiae Lutheran. c. 3 We reject and condemn, That faith does not
justify without good works, and so good The presence of works is not
needful.
works to be necessarily required to justification, and that without their
presence a man cannot be justified.

Illyricus in Claue Scripturae part. 2. tractat. 6. It is falsely said: That
faith is never without good works, if it be meant of their actual, and not
only potentiall presence especially in the first justification. Again: God
justifies the impious even not working: Therefore in justification good works
do not only not cooperate, but nether are they present.

Schlusselbug to. 7. Catal. Haeret. page 837. Our proposition Faith without
works justifies.
remains strange: That faith in the first justification of a wicked sinner,
is without all good works actually present.

Wigandus in Schlusselburg lib. cit. p. 792. Faith must needs be first, and
then works follow, albeit we cannot discern the time. For Luthers sentence is
certain: Faith justifies before it does good works. Et p. 764. The absence
of our good works does Absence of works hinders not justification.
not hinder God to impute justice by Christ.

Author de Iustif. to. 5. doctrinae Jesuit. p. 241. The holy Scripture
describes many justified in whom is no good work seen but only faith:
Again: These and the like examples do clearly show, that in the beginning
faith is truly without good works, and that it so void of good works is
imputed to justice, and receaueth remission of sins. See more of their like
sayings hereafter cap. 14. art. 12. For the same believe, as well the Lutherans
(who hold that the presence of good works is not necessary to justification)
as Caluinists, who teach that justification of faith remains in the faithful
even in most grievous sins.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that faith without works profits not, saves
not, is dead: that a man is not saved with faith only. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that faith justifies before we do any good work,
without and before charity, without even the least good works, without good
works actually present, without the presence of good works: that in
justification good works are not so much as present: that many are justified
in whom no good works are seen: that faith void of good works is imputed to
justice and receaueth remission of sins.

ART. XVIII. WHETHER FAITH DO justify as it is Belief, or as it beleiueth or
knows?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Joan. 17. v. 3. This is life everlasting, that they know thee the Faith
justifies as it is a knowledge.
only true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.

1. Joan. c. 5. ver. 1. Whosoever beleiueth, that Jesus is Christ, is borne of
God. v. 5. Who is he that ouercometh the world, but he that beleiueth that
Jesus is the Son of God?

Romans 4. v. 3. Abraham believed God, and it was reputed him to justice. c. 10.
verse. 9. If thou confess with thy mouth our Lord Jesus, and in thy heart
believe that God has raised him up from the dead, thou shall be saved.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. cap. 6. They are disposed to justice, whilst stirred
up and helped by Gods grace, conceauing faith by hearing, they are freely moved
to God, beleiuing these things to be true which are revealed and promised.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Willet Controu. 19. page 983. Faith does not justify us by Faith justifies
not as it is a Belief. As it is a Belief. But as it is a Petition.
the work of beleiuing. As it is an act of beleiuing only, it justifies not.

Field l. 3. de Eccles. c. 44. Special faith has sundry acts, but to this
purpose specially two: The one, by way of petition humbly entreating for
acceptance and favor: the other, in the nature of confortable assurance,
consisting in a persuasion, that that is granted which was desired. Faith by
her first act obtains and works our justification: by her second act she
does not actiuely justify, but finding the thing done, certifieth and assures
us of it.

Zuinglius l. de ver. and falsa relig. cap. de Merito. Faith in As it is a
Trust a Confidence.
Scripture is taken many ways. First for belief, then for stedfastnes, next
for trust in God; and of this only it must be vnderdoost; That faith saves.
Respons. ad Confess. Lutheri f. 507. To say that this kind of faith and assent,
brings any comfort, security, peace, tranquillity or salvation to our
souls, were false and most foolish.

Hemingius in Enchirid. class 1. page 109. It is manifest, that none is saved
by only knowledge. Whereupon every one sees, that justifying faith is not
only the knowledge of the history of Christ.

Lobechius Disput. 22. Saving faith is said to justify, not by the
foundation, as it is a knowledge and assent in the mind and trust in the will,
but by reason of the end or object, which is Christ. And of the same opinion
are other Protestants, as appears both by their words related before art. 2.
and 3. and also because they teach, that justifying faith, is not the Catholic
faith wherewith we believe the mysteries of faith, but a special trust or
confidence, wherewith every elect faithful man assures himself of the
remission of his sins; or at least, that it includes this trust. Hereupon
Confessio Saxon. c. 4. says: By faith is signified a trust resting
Prot^stants faith is Trust.
on the Son of God. Which is repeated c. 7. and 16. Luther Praef. in Epist.
ad Romans to. 5. Faith is a trust of the mercy of God toward us. Ministri
Saxonici in Colloq. Aldeburg. fol. 30. Faith, in this matter we understand to
be trust relying upon Christ. Zuinglius Respons. ad Confess. Lutheri to. 2.
fol. 506. Faith, is no other thing, then a certain and solid trust in God
only.

Calvin in Antidoto Concilij 6. Can. 12. It pleases not the reverend fathers,
that faith is a trust wherewith we embrace the mercy of God remitting sins
for Christ, But it pleases the Holy Ghost. And in like sort, others. But as
Peter Martyr says in 1. Cor. 13. Hope differs not from trust, so far as I
think can be gathered out of the Scripture: And consequently, their justifying
faith, is not belief, but hope.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly teaches, that faith justifies as it beleiueth God: as it
knows God and Christ, as it beleiueth Christ to have risen from death, as it
beleiueth Christ to be the Son of God. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that faith justifies not as it is an act of
beleiuing, as it is an assent or knowledge, or dersuasion: that as it is an
assent it brings no good to our souls; but only as it is a petition or
trust.

ART. XIX. WHETHER FAITH IT SELF can be imputed to justice?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Romans 4. ver. 3. Abraham believed God, and it was reputed him Faith imputed to
Abraham to justice. And to others
to justice. v. 5. But to him that works not, yet beleiueth in him that
justifies the impious, his faith is reputed to justice. v. 9. We say, that
unto Abraham faith was reputed to justice. The same is Gal. 3. v. 6.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Romans 4. v. 3. That act of beleiuing (In Abraham) was an act of
justice.

C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Iustif. c. 17. That it self is judge* justice, and
therefore faith does not apprehend justice, but faith it self in Christ, is
justice.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in Galat. 3. tom. 2. The act of beleiuing is not our justice.

Peter Martyr in Romans 4. verse. 3. cit. Nether are they to be Act of faith not
imputed to justice.
heard, who so expound this sentence, that they take faith meant by Paul to be
an act, as if this were the meaning: God imputed to justice that act of Abraham
wherewith he believed, as if he accounted it for justice.

Beza in breui Confess. vol. 1. Theol. p. 81. Paul said, that we are justified
by faith only, and line by it alone, that is, are happy; not as if faith
properly were our justice or life, but because by only faith we embrace
Christ, and surely know him to be our justice and life.

Sadeel ad Art. abiurat. 44. Not the act or work of our faith, Belief
justifies not.
that is, our belief, justifies us.

Piscator in These. l. 2. page 119. It is improperly said: Faith is imputed to
the beleiuer to justice.

Pareus l. 1. de Iustific. c. 17. Faith is said to be accounted for justice or
imputed to justice, not absolutely but relatiuely, by reason of her object,
which she regards and apprehends, that is, Christ with his justice. Again:
It is clear, that faith to be imputed to justice, is nothing else, but to seek
and receive justice or justification in the death and resurrection of Christ.
And no marvel that they deny that faith can be imputed to justice, seeing
they say it is so vicious and defectuous, as we have seen art. 12.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that the very beleiuing of Abraham, the faith of
Abraham, the faith of the beleiuer is imputed to justice. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that our beleiuing does not justify us, that the
act of Abraham's beleiuing was not imputed to justice; that the act of beleiuing
is not our justice that faith is not properly justice: that faith is improperly
said to be imputed to justice: that faith to be imputed to justice, is nothing
else, but by faith to receive justice. Which is so repugnant to Scripture, as
some Protestants confess it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. XX. WHETHER FAITH BE proper to the just?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Ihon. 2. v. 23. And when he was at Jerusalem in the Pasche Many ill me^
Believe in Christ.
upon the festival day, many believed in his name, seeing his signs which he
did. But Jesus did not commit him self unto them, for he knew all.

Joan. 12. v. 42. Of the Princes also many believed in him, but for the
Pharisees they did not confess -- For they loved the glory of men more then
the glory of God.

James 2. v. 19. is said to a wicked beleiuer: Thou beleiuest that there is
one God. Thou do well.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
D. Stapleton l. 8. de Iustif. cap. 32. The Scripture evidently witnesses,
that faith was in many without, charity, repentance, and other virtues.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Whitaker Concion. vlt. That which is called faith in the impious Impious have
no true faith.
or those who profess faith for a time, is nothing else, but either bare
knowledge, or guess, or opinion, or imagination, or an image of faith, true
faith it is not.

Rainalds these. 4. But the impious, are not faithful. Are not faithful. Nor
true beleiuers.


Abbots in Diatribam Tomsoni c. 15. Do they seem to thee to be true beleiuers
or justified, who loved more the glory of men then of God? Yea if we speak
properly, they are not so much as beleiuers.

Calvin in Math. 13. v. 20. We must know, that none are partakers of true
faith, but those, who being sealed with the spirit of adoption, call upon God
with their heart. Et 3. Instit. cap. 12.. 9. We acknowledge only the faith of
those that are godly.

Peter Martyr in 1. Corinthians. 13. We do not grant, that those The foresaied
Princes did not believe truly.
Princes (Joan. 12. cit.) had true faith. Et in Romans 11. We deny, that they
truly believed.

Musculus in locis tit. de necessit. fidei: We speak not of that faith, which
is rather opinion then faith; Such was their faith of which Ihon speaks c. 2.
cit. The Lord did not approve their faith, because it was not true.

Zanchius de Perseuerant. c. 2. to. 7. Considering both their own and the
Churches judgment, they are said truly to believe, but in the sight of God
they believe not truly -- Like to these were those whereof Ihon 2. says:
Many believed in him but Jesus etc. As if he had said: They thought they had
believed truly, but Christ saw that this did not believe truly, and therefore
he did not commit himself to them. Again: This faith is in Gods sight
hypocrisy always. Such was the faith of them, of whom is said Ihon. 2.
Many believed etc. And in like manner is this place of S. Ihon expounded by
Calvin 3. Instit. c. 2.. 12. by Gualter in Joan. 2. and by others.

Volanus l. 3. cont. Scargam. page 1069. The wicked have no true faith, but a
feigned and dissembled faith. Et p. 1071. Of this faith were they destitute,
who are said of Ihon to have believed, but not confessed for fear of the
Pharisees.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that many Princes who confessed not Christ, and
loved the glory of men more then of God, did believe in Christ: that many
believed in Christ's name, whom Christ trusted not: that a evil man does well
in beleiuing. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that the foresaied Princes did not believe, had not
true faith, were no beleiuers: that those whom Christ trusted not, did not
believe in the sight of God, that their faith was not true, not sincere, but
hypocrisy: that only the godly and the adopted sons of God are partakers
of true faith: that the faith of the impious and wicked, is feigned,
dissembled, an imagination, or image of faith, not true faith: that the impious
are not faithful.

ART. XXI. WHETHER FAITH BE proper to the Elect?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Act. 8. ver. 13. Then Simon (Magus) also himself believed, Simon Magus had
faith
and being baptized he cleeued to Philippe: Seeing also signs and very great
miracles to be done, he was astonished with admiration.

Heb. 6. v. 4. For it is impossible for them that were once illuminated, Also
some reprobates.
have tasted also the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy
Ghost etc. and are fallen, to be renewed again to penance.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
D. Stapleton in Actor. 8. v. 13. Simon Magus had true faith.

Card. Bellarm. l. 3. de Iustificat. c. 14. Faith is not proper to the elect.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Whitaker l. 8. cont. Dur. sect. 48. True faith is proper to the the elect. In
Concion. vlt. In no reprobate, true faith is found.

Zuinglius in Math. 19. tom. 4. The Scripture sometimes Simon Magus had no
faith indeed. Believed not all.
says, that some believed who professed faith, which indeed they had not, as
appears of Simon Magus in the Acts. In exposit. Fidei to. 2. fol. 558. There
are some who believe not at all, as were Judas and Simon Magus.

Calvin in Actor. 8. v. 3. c. The mind (of Simon) was wrapped in dissimulation
of faith.

Beza cont. Illyric. vol. 2. p. 131. Simon Magus was quite faithless. Was
quite faithless.
In Colloq. Montisbel. p. 379. Indeed he wanted faith, indeed he believed not.

Volanus l. 3. cont. Scargam. p. 1070. Scarga foolishly attributes true faith
to Simon Magus.

Daneus Contr. de Baptismo c. 14. He obiecteth, that Simo^ Magus lost faith,
and that other Apostates did the like: But I deny, that they have, or ever had
true faith.

Pareus l. 3. de Iustif. c. 14. Simon was an hypocrite, beleiuing only with
mouth, not with heart. And he adds: Nether makes it any matter, that Luke
absolutely says, that he believed. And as for reprobats.

Calvin 3. Institut. c. 2. 11. None are illuminated unto faith, None but the
predestinate have faith. Faith peculiar to the Elect.
but they who are predestined to salvation. In Confessione p. 106. I
acknowledge, that faith is a peculiar gift given to the elect alone.

Beza in Conf. c. 4. sect. 20. Faith is the gift of God proper and peculiar to
the elect alone.

Bucer in Matthaei. 16. They are safe for ever, who once have gotten true faith.

Musculus in locis: titul. de fide. Faith in Christ is only of the elect.

Zanchius de Praedestinat. c. 4. to. 7. The reprobates never Reprobates never
believe truly.
truly believe in Christ. And the same is the common doctrine of the
Protestants.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that the reprobate Simon Magus did believe, was
baptized, cleeued to Philippe, and was astonished at the miracles wrought by S.
Philippe: that even they who cannot be recalled to penance, were once
illuminated. Catholics say the same.

Protestants plainly say, that Simon Magus did not believe at all, was wholly
faithless, indeed wanted faith, indeed believed not, had not true faith,
believed only with mouth not with heart: that only the elect are illuminated
unto faith: that reprobates never truly believe: and that it makes no matter
that the Scripture absolutely says the contrary. These are so opposite to
Scripture as some Protestants confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. XXII. WHETHER FAITH BE by hearing?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Romans 10. ver. 15. Faith then is by hearing: and hearing is by Faith is by
hearing.
the word of Christ.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. c. 6. They are disposed to justice, whiles stirred
up and helped by Gods grace, conceauing faith by hearing, they are freely moved
to God.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker l. 1. de Scriptura c. 11. sect. 4. All true faith comes Faith not by
preachers.
from the Scripture, not by the labor of the Preachers. Again: All the
Fathers with one voice teach, that faith rises of the Scriptures only, not of
the authority of the Church. Et c. 13. sect. 8. Reading makes that we may
know the Scriptures and the doctrine of the Scriptures. Et Cont. 145. cap. 8.
Faith rises of the Of the Scripture only.
Scripture alone. And in the same place thus expounds the aforesaied words
of the Apostle: By hearing, that is, by the sense of the Scripture rightly
understood.

Zuinglius in Exegesi to. 2. fol. 347. We do not think, that faith, can be
gotten by words, but that faith being mistress, the words which are proposed,
may be understood. De Prouidentia cap. 6. tom. 1. When Paul writes to the
Romans, that faith is Not by outward hearing
by hearing; after the same manner, he attributes that to the nearer and more
known cause to us, which belongs only to the Holy Ghost, not to outward
preaching. The like words has Oecolampadius apud Schlusselburg. libro. 1.
Theol. Calvin. art. 1.

Calvin in Joan. 5. verse. 9. 3 Christ is not otherways rightly known but by
the Scripture.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Faith is by hearing, and adds there
also, that it is not without a Preacher. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that faith is not otherways then by Scripture,
that it is by only Scripture, by reading: that it is not by the labor of the
preachers, not by the authority of the Church; that it is by the Holy Ghost
and not by external preaching: that it cannot be gotten by words.

ART. XXIII. WHETHER FAITH IS, or can ever be lost?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Luke 8. verse. 13. For they upon the rock: Such as when they Some believe for a
time.
hear, with joy receive the word, and these have no roots: because for a
time they believe, and in time of temptation they reuoult.

Joan. 20. verse. 29. Then he says to Thomas: Be not incredulous, S. Thomas
lost his faith.
but faithful. And v. 25. Thomas said: Unless I see etc. I will not believe.

1. Tim. 1. v. 19. Certain have made shipwrak about faith. c. 4. Others leese
faith.
v. 1. In the last times certain shall depart from the faith. c. 6. v. 10.
Certain have erred from the faith.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Joan. 20. v. 28. The Gospel does plainly teach, the Fathers
plainly confirm, that Thomas was incredulous and an infidel.

C. Bellarm. l. 3. de Iustif. c. 14. Faith once had, may be lost.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker l. 8. cont. Dur. sect.ect 48. True faith, which is proper to the
elect, can never be lost. Et Contr. 2. q. 5. c. 7. We say, that True faith,
never lost.
faith once gotten, can never be lost.

Perkins in Gal. 1. to. 2. Where this faith truly is, it is never extinguished
or quite abolished.

Willet Contr. 19. q. 3. p. 1010. Our sentence is: that he which once has
received a true lively faith, can never finally fall away; nether can that
faith utterly perish or fail in him.

Calvin in Joan. 20. verse. 28. thus writes of S. Thomas: Faith was not in him
utterly extinct. Faith, which seemed to be S. Thomas lost not his faith.
abolished, lay as it were overwhelmed in his heart. In Math. 13. v. 10. It is
impossible, that faith which he has once graven in the heart of the godly,
should vanish and perish. In Lucae 17. v. 13. Lively faith never dies. Et 3.
Instit. c. 2.. 21. We avouch, that the root of faith is so putt out of a
faithful breast, that her light is never so putt out or choked but that it
lies as it were under the embers.

Beza in Joan. 6. v. 37. True faith and proper to the elect never falls
indeed quite away. In Colloq. Montisbel. p. 380. Who is once endued of God with
true faith, can never leese it more. In Confess. c. 4. sect. 20. I affirm,
that he who once in all his life felt a certain testimony of true faith,
ought to be secure, that it not only remains, but also shall remain to the
end, even then when those times shall come, as it seems to be utterly wanting.

Zuinglius in Lucae 9. to. 4. None can fall from true faith. None can fall from
faith.


Bullinger Sermon. 5. de Fide: True faith can nether fail nor be extinguished.

Zanchius de Perseuerant. to. 7. col. 128. It follows, that no true Christian
ever failed from faith, or can fail.

Pareus de Iustif. l. 3. c. 15. Faith which fails, is not true faith but
apparent and hypocritical.

Piscator apud Vorstium in Parascene cap. 9. It cannot be by any means, that
those which believe should leese their faith.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says: that S. Thomas for a time was incredulous, not
faithful, did not believe: that some revolt from faith, depart from faith,
make shipwrak of faith, err from faith. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that faith in S. Thomas was not quite extinct; that
it lay hid in his heart: that true faith can never be lost, never extinguished
or quite abolished, that lively faith never dies: that none can fall from
time faith: that who once has felt true faith may be sure that it will ever
remain with him, even then when it seems to be utterly wanting: that who
beleiueth can by no means leefe faith. Which are so opposite to Scripture, as
some Protestants confess it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. XXIV. WHETHER REWARD be given to Faith?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Joan. 3. v. 36. He that beleiueth in the Son has, life everlasting, Reward
to faith.
but he that is incredulous to the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of
God remains upon him.

Joan. 16. v. 27. For the Father himself loves you, because you God loves us
because we believe.
have loved me, and have believed that I came forth from God. c. 20. v. 29.
Blessed are they, that have not seen and have believed.

Math. 15. v. 28. O Woman: great is thy faith. Be it done to the as thou will.
Or as S. Mark has c. 7. v. 29. For this saying, Go Faith obtains the
promises.
thy way. The Devil is gone out of thy daughter.

Hebr. 11. v. 33. Who by faith overcame kingdoms, obtained promises.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Joan. v. 30. The act of faith, because is is an act of man,
wherewith he beleiueth and gives glory to God, is an active and free work,
and therefore may be rewarded as Abraham's faith was rewarded.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Zuinglius in 2. Cor. 5. tom. 4. Not that there is reward of No reward of faith.
works, or of faith but etc.

Calvin in Joan. 6. v. 29. Faith is a passive work (if I may so speak) to
which no reward can be rendered.

Piscator in These. loco 16. It is quite repugnant to faith, to be meritorious.
Of the same mind are they, who, as we reported before, say that faith is
defectuous, sinful, polluted, and like to a leprous and scabbie hand. For
boubtles such a thing deserves no reward.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that they who believe are blessed, have everlasting
life, as they who believe not, have eternal death: that men are loved of God
because they believe: that the woman's daughter was cured by her faith: that by
faith Saints obtain the promises. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that there is no reward of faith, that no reward can
be rendered to it: that merit is quite contrary to the nature of it.

ART. XXV. WHETHER THE FAITH OF them who touched the hemme of Christ's garment,
or theirs who touched the shadow of S. Peter, and napkins of S. Paul, was pure
and good?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 9. v. 21. She said within her self: If I shall touch only his
garment, I shall be safe; But Jesus turning and seeing her said: The
Hemorroissa her faith was good.
Have a good heart daughter, thy faith has made thee safe. c. 14. v. 36. And
they besought him, that they might touch but the hemme of his garment, and
whosoever did touch were made hole.

Act. 5. v. 15. And the multitude of men and weome^ that believed Who touched
Christ's hem.
in our Lord was more increased, so that they did bring forth the sick into the
streets, and laid them in bedds and couches, that when Peter came, his shadow
at least might over shadow any of them, and they all might be delivered from
their infirmities.

Act. 19. v. 11. And God wrought by the hand of Paul miracles And S. Paul's
napkins.
not common, so that there were also brought from his body napkins or
hankerchefs upon the sick, and the diseases departed from them, and the wicked
spirits went out.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Math. 9. v. 21. Christ himself affirms that this fact of
hers, proceeded of faith, saving: Thy faith has made the safe: and health
straight following this fact, does show evidently, that she thought this and
touched Christ garment upon an excellent and strong faith.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in Math. 9. v. 21. It may be, that some error and vice Some error in
the woman's faith.
was mingled with the womans faith. Again: That she fluck in his garment
rather then by prayer offered her self to be cured of him, perhaps she slipped a
little out of the way through inco^siderate zeal. In Math. 14. v. 36. cit. It
is credible, that they were somewhat superstitious, Some what superstitious.
seeing they restrained Christ's grace to the touching of his garment.

Daneus Co^tr. 4. p. 1348. He supposes that they who did those Erroneous.
things (Math 9. Act. 5. and 19. cit.) did not err, which is false, albeit
sick persons were heard of God, cured of their diseases. Again: God did not
approve the manner which they chose. Whose very words repeateth Hospin. l. de
origin Templorum p. 132.

Confessio Heluet. c. 4. Who will believe that a shadow or image of a body
could bring any profit to the godly?

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly teaches, that Christ both by word and deed approved the
faith of the woman which reverently touched the hemme of his garment: that he
both suffered others to touch the hemme of his garment and by miracles allowed
their fact: and that by great miracles approved their faith who touched the
shadow of Saint Peter or the napkins of Saint Paul. Catholics say the same.

Protestants plainly say, that perhaps there was some error or vice in the
faith of the woman who touched the hemme of his garment, and that she slipped a
little out of the way: that they were superstitious who touched our Saviors
garment: that they erred who touched his garment or the shadow of S. Peter, or
napkins of S. Paul, and that God did not approve their manner of doing: that
none will believe that a shadow can do any good to the godly. Which are so
opposite to Scripture as Protestants confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF FAITH.
By those things which have been rehearsed in this chapter, plainly
appears, how different a faith Protestants have from the Scripture. For the
Scripture together with Catholics teaches, that faith is a work or action;
that it beleiueth all the articles of faith or words of God, that it cannot be
had without the holy Ghost, that it is but one, and distinct from hope and
charity, and inferior to charity: that it may be without confession of
mouth, and without charity or good works: that without good works it is
dead, and without them justifies not: that it justifies as it is belief:
that indeed it justifies: and that we do not only thereby know that we are
justified: that it self may be imputed to justice, that sometimes it is
perfect and is of great value before God: that it is necessary to
justification and salvation: that it is not proper to the just or elect: that
it is gotten by hearing, that it may be lost: and that reward is given to it.
All which Protestants do deny.

It appears also, that Protestants play the theiues eue^ What Protest. steal
from faith.
toward faith which they would seem to esteem and and advance more then all
men, and steal from it, that it is a work or action, that it beleiueth all
things revealed of God, that it is distinct from hope and charity, that it is
one, that it justifies as it is belief, that it justifies indeed, that it is
necessary to justification and salvation, that it can be perfect, that it can
be imputed to justice, that it can be rewarded, that it is a virtue or truly
worthy of the name of virtue. And if we take from Faith the nature of a work
or act, the beleiuing of all that is revealed of God, the unity and
distinction from hope and charity, all perfection, power of justifying,
necessity to justification and salvation, worthiness of reward, nature of
justice or virtue, and finally the very name of virtue, we scarce leave the
name of Faith much less the thing it self. Nether only do they steal so
many and so great good properties from Faith, but also attribute many ill,
which are contrary to the nature of it: As that it is polluted with
infidelity, like to a scabbie or leprous hand, need pardon, and is sin. Such
a Faith foresooth it is which in steed of the Catholic Protest. faith, is true
infidelity.
faith described to us in the Scripture, Protestants have brought into the
world, which is true infidelity, and shows what kind of men the Authors
thereof are. And thus far of Faith* Now of good works.

CHAPTER XIII. OF GOOD WORKS IN GENERAL.
ART. I. WHETHER ANY WORKS OF a Sinner before he be justified, may be good?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
JAMES 2. v 25. Rahab the harlot, was not she justified A Harlot did good
works.
by works? Et v. 19. it is said to a Sinner: Thou beleiuest that there is one
God. Thou do well.

Luc. 7. v. 47. Many sins are forgiven her, because A sinner does well in
beleiuing God.
she has loved much. Et c. 18. v. 13. The publican standing a far of knocked
his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. I say to you this man went
down into his house justified more then he. And other place teach that
penance and good works go before justification, as we shall see hereafter.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. Can. 7. If any shall say, that all works which are
done before Justification, in what sort soever they are done, are true sins,
or deserve the hatred of God; be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in Gal. 3. to. 2. We are tought that the actions of those The actions
sinners are sin.
that are not regenerate, are sins. So Rogers on the 10. and 13. article.
Apologia Confess. Augustanae c. de Tradition. It is false, that he who out of
grace does the works cammanded, does not sin. c. de Iustif. It is false,
that men doing the precepts out of grace do not sin.

Confessio Heluet. c. 15. We must be just before we do good works.

Lutherus Postilla in Dom. post Natiuit. The Lord defines All works before
justification are evil. Are sins.
in the Scripture: what works soever go before justification, are evil and of
no moment.

Lobechius Disp. 22. The works of those that are not justified, cannot please
God, but in his judgment are accounted for sins.

Bucer in Disput. Cantabrig. page 714. What good work Provoke Gods wrath.
soever we seem to do before justification, is indeed sin and provoke
Gods wrath against us.

Peter Martyr in Romans 11. All works that are done before justification, are
sins.

Calvin in Antidoto Conc. sess. 6. c. 9. What works do they tell us of, that
are before justification? Posterity will scarce be persuaded, that there was
so much blockishnesse in Popery, that they would set any work before
justification, albeit they denied that it merited so great a good. Et 3. Inst.
cap. 14.. 7. What can sinners Execrable before God.
alienated from God do, but is excrable in his judgment?

Bezal. Qnaest. and resp. vol. 1. p. 676. It is foolish to say, that there are
any good works of them which are not justified.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture plainly says, that a horlot was justified by her works, that to
an other many sins were forgiven because she loved much: that a Sinner in
beleiuing God does well: that the Publican did many good works before he was
justified. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that before justification no works are good, all
are badde, are sins, execrable before God, and provoke Gods wrath again the
works.

ART. II. WHETHER EVERY GOOD work of the Just be sin, or the just sin in
every good work?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Job 1. v. 22. In all these things Job sinned not with his lips, Job sinned
not in some speeches.
nether spoake he any foolish thing against God. cap. 23. v. 11. My foot has
followed his steps, I have kept his way, and have not declined out of it.

3. Reg. 15. v. 5. Because David had done right in the eyes of our David
declined not but in some things.
Lord, and had not declined from all things which he commanded him all the
days of his life, except the matter of Vrias.

1. Cor. 7. v. 28. But if thou take a wife, thou have not sinned, and if a
Virgin marry, she has not sinned. v. 37. He sins not, if she marry.

2. Peter 1. v. 10. Doing these things, you shall not sin at any Doing some
things we sin not.
time. Apoc. 3. v. 4. But thou have a few names in Sardis, who have not defiled
their garments.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. c. 11. It is manifest, that they are against true
doctrine, who say that the just man sins in every act at least venially, or
(which is more intolerable) that he deserves eternal pains.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Whitaker l. 2. de Peccato orig. c. 3. Inherent concupiscence We sin in
every act.
makes, that we sin in every action of ours, eue^ good. Again: We teach,
that the just do always sin mortally by nature of the thing and the acts
themselves. Et ad Ration. 8. Campian. All good acts are sins.
All good actions are sins, in Gods judgment, mortal; if God pardon them,
light: This Luther said, and he said truly.

Tindal in Fox his Act. p. 1139. There is no deed so good, but that the law
damneth it.

Luther de Ration. Confitendi to. 2. fol 26. Even our good Good works are
sins.
works, if God judge them according to rigor, and not pardon them with
mercy, are damnable and mortal. De Captiuit. Babylon. fol. 80. Yea good
works are found to be sins. In Assert. art. 31. fol. 109. The just sins
in every good work. f. 110. He teaches to sin, who denies a good work to
be sin. In Confutat. Latomi fol. 220. All justice is unclean; every good
work sin Tomo 5. in Gal. 1. f. 227. Let there be works, so it be known
that before God they be sins. 228. The works of the law must needs be
sins, otherwise certainly they would justify. In c. 2. f. 231. Works of the
most holy law of God are so far from giving justice, as that they are sins
and make a man worse before God. De bonis operibus fol. 581. Let a man know,
All our actions are nothing but damnable sins.
that all his life and actions are nothing but damnable sins in the judgment
of God. Postilla in Dom. 4. post Pascha: With all thy works which thou do,
thou can do nothing else but sin. Postilla in Natali Christi f. 374. Christ
teaches, that all that is ours is nothing but sin before God.

Illyricus apud Schlusselburg. tom. 7. Catal. Haeret. p. 155. All Saints in
every good work do sin.
Hitherto our men disputed against Papists: that all Saints in every good
work do sin.

Wigandus ib. p. 719. For this very imperfection and pollution good works of
themselves are sins.

Calvin 3. Instit. cap. 17.. 11. There was never any work of a pious man,
which if it were examined by the severe judgment of God, was not damnable. In
Refutat. Serueti page 655. Because God pardons us like his children,
thereupon he by pardon imputes free justice to works, which of themselves are
unjust.

Beza in Conf. c. 4. sect. 19 If God in all rigor would examine The best
works are mere pollutions*
even the excellentest works of men, nothing e^s would be determined of them,
then that they are mere pollutions of Gods gifts. Et l. q. and resp. p. 674.
If you examine the best works of the most holy men according to the rule of
the law, I say they are sins.

Bullinger Decad. 3. sermon. 10. We say, that the good works of the faithful
are sins.

Serranus cont. Hayum. part. 2. p. 188. Whatsoever is of man, is evil, is
sin, what shewsoeuer it has of virtue.

Ianius Cont. 4. l. 3. c. 2. All the works of a man though justified, are
sins in themselves.

Pareus l. de Iustif. c. 15. The works of the just, if they be examined of God
according to the rigor of the law, are mere sins. Et c. 20. The just sins
even in well doing. We sin in well doing.


THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says: that Job in some things did not sin with his
lips, did not decline from Gods way, that David declined not from all things
that God commanded except the matter of Vrias: that men sin not in marrying:
that doing some things we shall not sin. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that in every good act we sin: that the just in
every act sins: that all Saints sin in every good work: that in well
doing we sin: that good works are sins: that good works are of themselves
damned, of themselves in just, of themselves mortal sins: that even the
works of Gods most holy law make a man worse before God: that every act in
the judgment of God is nothing but damnable sin, mere sin, nothing but
sin, nothing but pollution of Gods gifts.

ART. III. WHETHER WORKS OF the Just be a sweet smell before God?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Genesis 8. verse. 20. Noe offered holocaustes upon the altar, and A sweet savor.
our Lord smelled a sweet savor.

Numbers 29. ver. 21. And shall offer an holocaust for a most A sweet ^dour.
sweet odor to the Lord.

Apocal. 8. verse. 3. And an other Angel came and stood before the altar, having
a goulden censor: and there were given to him Incense.
many incenses, that he should give of the prayer of all Saints upon the altar
of gould which is before the throne of God: And the smoke of the incenses of
the prayers of the Saints ascended from the hand of the Angel before God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 4. de Iustif. cap. 20. The Scripture eueriewhere praises the
works of the just, and says, they are pleasing to God and accepted as a
sweet odor.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther in Disp. de Mysterio Trinit. to. 1. fol. 418. God exacteth Justice of
the the law is dung before God. Unclean.
the civil justice of the law, and in earnest commands it, though he know
that before him it is dung.

Wigandus in Methodo Doctrinae c. 12. Our good works are unclean, are dung.

Vrbanus Regin. in Interpr. loc. com. to. 1. f. 43. Our works Filthy.
generally art filthy.

Illyricus in Claue Scripturae part. 2. tract. 6. says, that Our works are
rifraffe, or outcasts, vertly unclean and that they need cleansing,

Schlusselburg to. 7. Catal. Haeret. p. 55. Paul will have all his
righteousness to be accounted rejected and contemned as dung and outcasts; and
Isaias a defiled cloute.

Calvin in Refut. Serueti p. 651. When I teach, that works are Stink before
God.
always mingled as it were with some dreggs, so that they stincke before God
if they be called to a streit account, he says, that I blaspheme against the
Spirit. The like he has de vera Ref. p. 317. Et 3. Instit. c. 14.. 16 The
Scripture teaches, that all our justices do stincke in the sight of God,
unless they draw some good smell from the innocence of Christ. Et c. 12.. 4.
Works, if they be judged according to their worth, are nothing but pollution
and filth. Et concione 158. in Job: Whatsoever we can give to God, is stenchie.

Bucer in Epitome Doctrinae Argent. art. 9. All Saints account for nothing and
dung, what good soever they did.

Pareus l. 1. de Just. c. 19. The Apostle simply opposes the justice of faith,
or by faith, or the justice of Christ and God with which alone he will be found
in Gods judgment, against all his works present, past, and to come; accou^ting
them all far less, for nothing, for dung. Again: Hitherto the Apostle
casting away all his works as dung, is no more blasphemous, then the whole
Prophetical Church was blasphemous, calling all her justices a defiled cloute,
which is as filthy a thing. Let Bellarmin go now and cry blasphemies, that
we call his works and justices, dung. Et l. 2. c. 12. says: That inherent
justices even in the state of grace, are filth, even all, in the rigor of Gods
judgment.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly faieth, that the good works of the Just are a sweet
odor, a most sweet odor, a smoke of incense before God. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the good works of the Just in the sight of
God are filth, dung, nothing but pollution, filth, and dung: that they are
stenchie, do stinck before God if they be thoroughly examined; that inherent
justices are filth.

ART. IV. WHETHER THE GOOD works of the Just be perfectly, wholly, and entirely
good?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Isaie 38. v. 3. Ezechias prays in these words: I beseech Ezechias walked in
a perfect heart.
thee Lord, remember I pray thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and
in a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thine eyes.

3. Reg. 11. verse. 4. Nether was his heart perfect with our Lord Also David.
his God, as the heart of David his father. cap. 15. verse. 4. Because David had
done right in the eyes of our Lord.

1. Joan. 4. v. 12. If we love one an other, God abides in us, and Charity
perfiled.
his charity in us is perfited. c. 2. v. 5. But he that keeps his word, in
him in very deed charity of God is perfited.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 4. de Iustif. c. 10. All Catholics teach, that the works of
the just are simply and absolutely just, and in their, manner, perfect; though
not in that perfection, but that they may increase.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker l. 8. cont. Dureum. sect. 89. There is no entire good No entire good
in this life.
of ours in this life. l. 9. sect. 34. Our works are many ways vicious, and
are not answerable to the perfection of Gods law. Ad Ration. 8. Campiani. In
every action of man, though notable, Some vice in every act.
there is some vice, which wholly marreth the action, and makes it odious to
God, if it be examined by the weight of his justice.

Perkins in Gal. 5. ver. 17. The works of the regenerate are in In part evil.
part evil.

Confessio Wittembergens c. de Bonis operibus. All the Imperfect.
good works, which we do, are imperfect, nor one can bear the severity of
Gods judgment.

Confessio Augustana. c. de operibus. The new obedience is far from the
perfection of the law. And Apologia eiusdem cap. de Implet. legis: Our works
are unclean and need mercy.

Confessio Heluet. c. 16. There are many things unworthy Have many
imperfections
of God, and very many imperfections are found in the works of Saints. The
like has Confessio Belgica art. 14. and Scotica Defiled.
art. 15.

Luther in Genesis 15. to. 6. Thy works are always defiled imperfect, and
polluted.

Kemnice 1. part. Exam. tit. de Iustif. Inherent justice in this life is only
begun, imperfect, and unclean.

Zuinglius in Marci 10. tom. 4. In the judgment of God all Impure.
our works, though never so good, will be found impure and unclean.

Peter Martyr in 1. Cor. 7. ver. 19. We do nothing, how good Spotted.
and holy soever it seem to be, which indeed is not spotted with many vices.
Again: As works come from us, they are disgraced with infinite filth.

Calvin l. de lib. arb. p. 141. There was never any good work, Lame.
which every way pure and perfect, wholly wanted any spot. In Math. 5. v. 12.
What good work soever comes from the best me^, is lame and vicious. In Actor.
6. v. 11. The works of Saints have always some fault mingled with them. The
like he has often times.

Beza in Confess cap. 4. sect. 19. So great is Gods goodness, that he does not
only not dislike our works though most imperfect, but also so far allows
them as he vouchsafes them reward.

Vrsinus in Catechismo q. 62. Our best works in this life are imperfect, and
consequently defiled with sin.

Pareus lib. 4. de Iustif. cap. 10. They prove that the works of Saints are
imperfect, and consequently sins. c. 15. The works of the Just have an
imperfect goodness, their goodness whatsoever is polluted with the filth of
our flesh, like as water passing through a filthy channel. Et Prooemio in l.
5. The good works of the just are not absolutely good, but always polluted
with inhabiting sin.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that the good works of the Just are good and
right in the eyes of God: that the charity of those who love one an other, and
keep Gods word, is perfect: that Ezechias walked before God in a perfect heart,
that David's heart was perfect before God. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, rhat the good works of the Just are far from
perfection: that there are many imperfections in them: that they are
imperfect, most imperfect, lame, vicious, not wholly pure, imperfectly good,
have no perfect goodness, are not absolutely good, not absolutely or simply
just, defiled with many vices disgraced with infinite filth, polluted as water
running through a filthy channel in part ill, and sins, and that there is
no entire good of ours in this life.

ART. V. WHETHER THE GOOD works of the Just be just or justice in the sight of
God?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Deuter. 24. v. 13. But if he be pore, the pledge shall not lodge To restore a
pledge is justice before God. Phinees zeal was justice. Noe Daniel and Job had
justice. Justice in Daniel.
with the that night; but forth with thou shall restore it unto him -- that
thou may have justice before our Lord thy God.

Psalm. 105. v. 30. And Phinees stood, and pacified, and the slaughter ceased,
and it was reputed to him unto justice.

Ezech. 14. ver. 14. And if these three men shall be in the midst thereof, Noe,
Daniel, and Job: they by their justice shall deliver their own souls, says
the Lord of hosts.

Daniel 6. ver. 22. My God has sent his Angel, and has shut up the mouths of
the lions, and they have not hurt me, because before him justice has been
found in me.

Luc. 1. v. 75. That without fear being delivered from the hand of our
enemies, we may serve him, in holiness and justice before him all our days.

Hebr. 11. v. 33. Who by faith overcame kingdoms, wrought Saints work justice.
justice.

1. Joan. 3. v. 12. Because his works were wicked, but his brothers, just.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton l. 6. de Iustif. cap. 8. The justice of good works done in faith
is true justice before God.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther in Disp. to. 1. f. 390. God rewards justice, which he Our justice is
wickedness.
accounts wickedness and iniquity. Et in c. 53. Isaiae to. 4. The justice
of Christians is only in reputation justice, but not formally.

Kemnice in locis tom. 2. tit. de Argumentis: To restore a pledge to the pore,
is truly a good and just work, but not such as if it be examined according to
the rigor of the law deserves the title of justice.

Calvin in Antidoto Council. Sess. 6. c. 8. How far is that Not justice.
Nether wholly nor in part.
newness which is begun in this life, from justice. Again: Will they bring
me one place, which witnesses, that God approves the begu^ne newness of life
for justice, either wholly or in part? In c. 11. ver. 183. It proceeds from
free imputation, that works get the Far from true justice.
name of justice, which otherwise would be far from the truth of justice. In
Romans 3. v. 27. The law of faith leaves no justice No justice.
in works whatsoever they be. In c. 11. v. 6. As often as grace is named, the
justice of works is brought to nothing. Et 3. Instit. c. 17.. 9. There is no
work which is not so defiled by it own corruption, that it retains not the
honor of justice. Again: works are judged just, above their worth.

Pareus l. 1. de Iustif. c. 19. Who make their works, even those which they
imagine to do by the grace of Christ, justice or merits of justice before God,
make idols of them, and so in truth make of them dung, and dunghill Gods. l.
2. c. 10. Hou should it be true and absolute justice, which fails in many
things? l. 3. c. 8. That inherent justice of charity and works, is so
uncertain and doubtful, as in truth it is none at all in the judgment of
God. Et l. 4. c. 20. Whether God examine our justice according to himself, or
according to the rule of the law, it is found to be injustice.

Ministri Electorales in Colloq. Aldeburg. p. 421. Nether Not to be called
justice.
can our works be called justice before God.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that the good works of the Just, are just, are
justice, are justice before God: that by him they are reputed for justice: that
the just shall deliver their souls by their justice. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that the good works of the Just are far from
truth of justice, retain not the honor of justice, are not true and absolute
justice: that before God they are nether wholly nor in part justice: that the
law of faith leaves no justice in works: that by grace the justice of works
is brought to nothing: that truly there is no justice in the judgment of God:
that God accounts our justice, injustice wickedness, iniquity: that who
make good works done by grace to be justice before God, make them idols and
dunghill Gods.

ART. VI. WHETHER IN THE GOOD works of the Just there can be any worth or
worthiness?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Philippens. 1. v. 26. Only converse ye worthy of the Gospel Conversation
worthy of the Gospel. We are worthy of the lot of Saints.
of Christ.

Coloss. 1. v. 12. God the Father has made us worthy unto the part of the
lot of the Saints in the light.

1. Thessal. 2. v. 12. As you know in what manner we desiring and comforting
you, have adjured every one of you (as a father his children) that you would
walk worthy of God, who has called you into his kingdom and glory.

3. Ihon. v. 6. Whom, thou shall do well, bringing on their way in manner
worthy of God.

Apoc. 3. v. 4. And they shall walk with me in whites, because Saints worthy
to walk with Christ.
they are worthy.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Joan. 4. v. 14. This place teaches the force and worth of
works which come of the Holy Ghost, against the the wicked. Heretics of our
time.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther de Seruo arb. to. 2. f. 453. In merit or Reward, either No worth in our
works.
we mean of the worth, or of the sequel: If you mean worth, there is no
merit, no reward.

Hemingius in Enchir. Class 1. p. 122. If we must judge of Unworthy of the
sight of God.
works according to their worth, they are unworthy to come in the sight of
God.

Calvin in Romans 9. v. 11. The worth of works is not regarded, which is none at
all. 3. Institut. c. 17.. 8. If we must set a price of works according to
their worth, we say, they are unworthy to come in the sight of God. Et in
Antidoto Council. Sess. 6. c. vlt. They give a false worthiness to works, as
if they please without forgiveness.

Bezal. Quaest. vol. 1. p. 674. I say, that these works of the regenerate, do
please, not for any worth of theirs, but for the mere grace of the Father. The
like has Bucanus in Institut. Ioco 32.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that we may converse worthily to the Gospel of
God, walk worthily of God: bring on others worthily of God: that some are made
worthy to the part of Saints: that some are worthy to walk with God in
white. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that there is no worth at all in good works, that
they are unworthy to come in Gods sight.

ART. VII. WHETHER LIFE EVERlasting or reward be promised or given to good
works or good workers?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew 20. verse. 8. Call the work men, and pay them Hire given to works.
their hire.

1. Tim. 4. v. 8. Piety is profitable to all things, having promise Life to
come promised to piety.
of the life that now is, and of that to come.

Apoc. 2. v. 7. To him that ouercometh, I will give to eat of the tree of life.

2. Paralipomen. 15. verse. 7. For there shall be reward to Reward to works.
your work.

Math. 25. v. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father, possess you the The Kinkdome
given for works.
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was an
hungered, and you gave me to eat etc.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 5. de Iustificat. c. 3. The Scripture in express words said,
that this reward is given to the work, not to the promise only.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Zuinglius in Lucae 13. to. 4. Works are not the things, to Salvation not
given to works. Nor heavenly rewards.
which God gives everlasting safety.

Author libri de Iustif. to. 5. doctrinae Iesuiticae p. 240. It must not be
demanded nor granted, that heavenly rewards are given to good works.

Pareus l. 5. de Iustif. c. 3. I say that it is a false gloss: Call the Nor
life everlasting.
workmen, give them their hire, that is, give the workmen life everlasting.
Again: I deny also, that (life everlasting) is given to workers.

Ministers of Saxony in Colloq. Aldeburg. page 162. You never read in the
Scripture: That everlasting life is given to good works.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that hire is given to workme^, that to him that
ouercometh is given to eat of the tree of life; that to piety is promised
both this life and the next: that there is reward to works. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that life everlasting is not given to workmen;
that it is a false gloss, Give the workmen their hire, that is, give workmen
life everlasting: that God gives not eternal life to works, that he gives
not heavenly rewards to works.

ART. VIII. WHETHER GOOD WORKS of the Just be meritorious before God?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Eccles. 16. v. 15. All mercy shall make place to every man, Merit in good
works.
according to the merit of his works.

Hebr. 13. ver. 19. And beneficence and communication do not God promerited.
forgette, for with such hosts God is promerited.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. c. 16. We must believe, that nothing is wanting to
those that are justified, whereby fully they may not be judged to have truly
merited life everlasting in due time by the works which are done in God, so
they depart hence in grace.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confessio Wittenberg. c. de Iustif. Before the tribunal of God, where true
and eternal justice and salvation is handled, No place at all for merits.
there is no place at all for the merits of men.

Confessio Belgica art. 15. We do good works, but not to Merit is vanity.
merit any thing by them. For what can we merit?

Confessio Scotica art 15. Whosoever brag of merit of their works, brag of
vanity.

Perkins Cathol. reform. Contr. 5. c. 1. We renounce all personal All
personal merit renounced.
merits, that is, all merits within the person of any mere man. c. 2. It must
needs be a fanaticall insolency for any man to imagine, that he can by his
works merit eternal life, who cannot We cannot merit bread
merit bread.

Luther de Seruo atbit. tom. 2. fol. 480. There is no merit at all.

Zuinglius in Exposit. Fdiei to. 2. f. 558. It is manifest, that the names of
Merit and Reward are in the holy Scripture, but in steed of a liberal gift.

Calvin 3. Instit. c. 16.. 2. We take from men the opinion of meriting. c. 7..
3. The works of Gods servants perpetually deserve Not one drop of merit.
rather shame, then praise. In Romans 4. v. 2. Who then of us will challenge one
drop of merit? In Gal. 6. ver. 8. I say, that they are not only unworthy of
the basest reward, but wholly worthy to be damned.

Beza in Joan. 1. v. 9. Where are merits which we may bring before Away with
the name of merit.
God? Et l. Quaest. vol. 1. p. 681. Away with the name of merit, which is
directly contrary to grace. Et 690. Thou shall not find in any place of the
Scripture the name of merit.

Scarpe de Iustific. Contr. 15. We say, that the works of the Nether condign
nor co^gruoue merit.
faithful in Gods sight are no way meritorious either condignely or congruously.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that every one shall be rewarded according to the
merit of his works: that God is promerited by good works. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants say, that there is no merit at all, not a drop of merit in our
works, that we cannot merit bread, not the basest reward, that our works are
no way meritorious nether condignely nor congruously. Which some Protestants
confess to be contrary to Scripture. See libro. 2. cap. 30.

ART. XI. WHETHER THE JUST may glory in God of their good works.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Cor. 1. v. 30. He that does glory, may glory in our Lord. We may glory
in God.
c. 9. v. 15. It is good for me to die rather, then that any man should make my
glory void.

Galat. 6. verse. 4. Let every one prove his own works, and so in himself
only shall he have glory, and not in an other.

2. Thessalon. 2. versus 19. and 20. For what is our hope or joy, or crown of
glory? Are not you before our Lord Jesus in his coming? For you are our glory
and our joy.

2. Corinthians. 1. v. 12. For our glory is, the testimony of our In the
testimony of our conscience.
concience.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Romans 3. ver. 21. Abraham had works by which he might glory
before God.

Cardinal. Bellarmin. libro quinto de Justification. cap 5. Faith excludes all
their glorying who glory in themselves, as if they, could work justice by
their own strength, and had of themselves all the good which they have; but it
excludes not the glorying of them who glory in our Lord.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther postilla in Natali Dom. fol. 374. There is no cause No glory in any
work.
why we should glory never so little in these (works) but rather that we should
blush.

Calvin in Com. 4. verse. 2. Abraham had not whereupon to glory before God. In
cap. 3. verse. 27. Without doubt he says that glorying is excluded, because we
can bring forth nothing that is our own, which is worthy of the approbation
or commendation of God. Again: When we come to the rule of faith, all All
glorying in works cast down.
glorying of works is cast down. The like he has 3. Instit. c. 14.. 16. and
17.

Peter Martyr in Romans 3. The will of God takes great care All glorying
excluded.
of this, that all glorying be excluded from us. Again: Seeing God will have
glorying excluded, it is clear how much they err who maintain merits. In c.
4. It cannot be that any have glory before God.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that we may glory in God: that every one shall
have glory in himself: that they to whom we have done well shall be our glory
before God: that our glory, is the testimony of our conscience. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that all glory of works is cast down: that all
our glorying is excluded: that we can have no glory before God: that in works
there is never so little whereupon to glory, but rather to be ashamed.

ART. X. WHETHER ALL GOOD works be equal before God?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Matthew 22. verse. 38. Thou shall love thy Lord thy God The greatest commandment.
from thy whole heart etc. This is the greatest and first commandment.

Luc. 10. v. 42. Marie has chosen the best part. The best part. Well, and
better.


1. Cor. 7. v. 38. Therefore both he who joins his Virgin in matrimony, does
well: and he who joins not does better. cap. 12. v. vlt. And yet I show you a
more excellent way. cap. 13. v. 13. And now there remain faith, hope,
charity: these three, but the greater of these is charity.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
D. Stapleton in 1. Cor. 7. v. 38. To join in marriage is good, not to join,
is better. Could the latter be preferred before the former in more plain words?

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Tindal in Fox his Acts page 1138. There is no work better No work better
then other.
then an other to please God: To make water, to wash dishes, to be a souter, or
an Apostle, all is one. To wash dishes, and to preach, all is one, as touching
the deed to please God.

Luther de votis to. 2. f. 291. Let us not distinguish between All works
equal with God.
works, they are equal with God, which are great and little with us and amongst
themselves, In Psalm. 14. to 3. In faith all works are equal. Again: To one
that beleiueth in God, all is one, whether he fast, or pray, or serve his
brother. For he knows, that he serves and pleases God equally in all
things, whether they be great or little works, precious or base, short or long.

De bonis operibus to 5. ^. 578. In this faith all works are made equal. Then
falls down all difference of works, whether they be great or little, long or
short, many or few. For works are not grateful to God in themselves but for
faith. Ib. in c. 3. Petri fol. 468 Before God there is no work better then
other, but by faith all are made equal.

Confessio Heluet. c. 29. It is most certain, that these works which in true
faith are done of parents, by the duties of marriage and housekeeping, do
please God no less then prayers, fasting, and alms.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that in Gods commandments there is one which is the
greatest: that in works there is the best part, good and better, greater and
excellenter. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that before God all works are equal, no work
exceeds an other, that all please God equally: that to wash dishes pleases
God as much as to preach, to be a sowter, as much as to be an Apostle: that the
duties of marriage please God no less then praying, fasting, and giving of
alms.

ART. XI. WHETHER ALL GOOD works be commanded of God?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
1. Cor. 7. v. 25. As concerning virgins, a commandment of Some good work not
commanded.
our Lord I have not, but counsel I give. v. 36. But if any man think that
he seems dishonored upon his virgin for that she is past age, and if it
must be so, let him do that he will. He sins In the free choice of men.
not if she marry.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
C. Bellarm. l. 2. de Monachis c. 8. It is the sentence of all Catholics, that
there are many true and proper Evangelical counsails, which are nether
commanded nor indifferent; but grateful to God and commended of him.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confessio Scotica art. 14. We affirm, that those wholly Only commanded works
are good. No counsails.
are good works, which by faith are done according to his commandment.

Luther l. de votis tom. 2. fol. 272. Religious men are pursuaded of this
sacrilegious and blasphemous opinion of counsails and precepts. Again: The
counsails which they imagine, are for the most part those whereof Christ
speaks Math. 5. to which add virginity and continency. But that all these
are not counsails but necessary commandments, this proves first of all etc.
In cap. 9. Isaiae to. 4. The Turk is better then these, who have brought in
this horrible error of counsails. De bonis operibus to. 5. fol. 577. There is
no work good, but that which God has commanded.

Hutterus in Analysi Conf. Augustan. page 413. Wherefore works cannot nor must
not be called truly good, but such as are commanded of God. p. 415. Away with
that detestable madness, which the Papisticall Sophisters have most bouldly
bewrayed in making commandments and Evangelical counsails.

Calvin in 1. Cor. 9. v. 18. We do not acknowledge any work to be good and
acceptable to God, which is not contained in the law of God; 4. Instit. c. 13..
12. There is none so small a word uttered of Christ, which we must not
necessarily obey. In Math. 5. v. 44. How preposterous and unsavory the
invention of counsails is, appears etc.

Beza in 1. Cor. 7. v. 25. I willingly avoid that false distinction betwixt
precepts and counsails.

Daneus Controu. 5. page 949. There are not some precepts; other, counsails.

Volanus l. 1. cont. Scargam. p. 1005. Those which they call Counsails are
precepts.
counsails of Christ, Christ himself plainly teaches to be his earnest
precepts, which all must obey.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that virginity is not commanded of God, but
counseled of the Apostle: that one without sin may marry his virgin or not
marry her. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly teach, that virginity is necessarily commanded; that
there is no work good but that which is commanded: that there are no counsails
distinct from precepts: that the counsails are precepts: that they are mad,
worse then Turks, and blasphemous, who distinguish between counsails and
precepts. Which are so plain against Scripture as diverse Protestants confess
it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. XII. WHETHER GOOD WORKS be necessary to justification?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 6. v. 15. But if you will not forgive men, nether will your Some good
work necessary to justification.
Father forgive you your offenses.

Joan. 15. verse. 10. If you keep my precepts, you shall abide in my love.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Session. 6. Can. 9. If any shall say, that a sinner is
justified by only faith, so as he understand that nothing else is required to
cooperate to the grace of justification, and that it is not needful in any
sort that he be disposed and prepared by motion of his will, be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confess. Argentinensis. c. 3. Whereas now some years it was tought, that man's
works are required to his justification, our men have tought that all
justification is to be ascribed to Gods good will and Christ's merits.

Confessio Bohemica art. 6. We teach, that men freely by Justification obtained
without works.
Christ, by faith in Christ through mercy are justified, and obtain salvation
and remission of sins, without any work or merit of man.

Apologia Confess. Augustanae c. de Respons. ad argum. tom. 3. Melancthonis:
Does not the Gospel promise salvation Justification promised to those who
have no good works. Presence of good works not necessary.
and remission of sins even to them who have no good works at all?

Liber Concordiae Lutheran. in Declarat. artic cap. 3. It is false, if any
say, that faith cannot justify without good works: or that the presence of
good works is necessary to faith for to justify: or that the presence of
good works is necessary to justification, or in the moment of justifying.

Luther de liberate to. 2. f. 5. Our faith makes, that none None have need of
works to be saved.
have need of the law or works for to be justified or saved. f. 6. A Christian
needs no works for to be justified or saved. Postilla in Dom. post Natale.
Nothing else is required to justification, then to hear and believe Christ
Jesus our Savior. And as Kemnitius in Schlusselburg. to. 7. page 530. says:
Luther clearly prof^sseth, that works are pernicious with that addition which
he calls Leuiathan, to wit, if they be said to be necessary to
justification and salvation.

Ministers of Saxony in Colloq. Aldeburg. p. 164. Whosoever Works not
necessarily present in the time of justification.
says, that our good works are necessarily present in the moment of
justification, he swarueth from the word of God, from the confession and
Apology of Auspurg, and from the doctrine of Luther.

Herbrandus in Compendio Theol. loco de Iustificat. What excludes that word:
Only? Not works only from the efficient cause if justification, and from
worth and merit; but also from all cause without which not, and from all
necess^rie of presence in the act of justification. For without works, a
sinner beleiuing in Christ is justified. Otherwise iustifi^ation would be
always uncertain, and so we should doubt of it. Again: To justification,
there is need of no other thing, but only of faith. Only faith needful to
justification. Those that have no good works may be justified. Presence of
good works not necessary.


Kemnitius in Schlusselburg. to. cit. p. 711. It is false, concontrarie to the
Apology it self, that none can be justified who has not good works. p. 716.
It is false, if I say that faith does not justify unless it have good works
actually present.

Morlinus in Schlusselburg. to. cit. p. 171. It is simply a false proposition:
The presence of good works is howsoever necessary in the act of
justification. Et 173. It stands for an invincible truth, if the presence of
good works be accounted as necessary in the act of justification, it is dung
and loss. Many more like sayings of Lutherans may be seen in Schlusselburg
to. cit.

Rainolds in Apologia Thesium p. 263. Good works are Not required to
justification.
not required to justification.

Calvin in Math. 6. v. 12. The pardon which we ask to be given to us,
depends not upon that, which we give to others. The like sayings of theirs we
repeated in the former chapter art. 17. and shall hereafter also c. 17. art. 1.
and 2.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that God will not pardon our sins, unless we
pardon others: that we shall abide in his love if we keep his precepts. The
same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that the pardon which me ask of God depends not
upon that which we give to others: that our works or good works are not
required to justification: that we may obtain remission of sins without any
work: that the Gospel promises remission of sins even to them who have no
works at all: that faith can justify without good works: that the presence
of good works is not necessary in the moment of justification: that we have
no need of works to be justified: that works are pernicious if they tought
necessary to justification: that faith justifies though it have no good
works actually present: that sole faith, excludes even the necessity of the
presence of good works, when we are justified.

ART. XIII. WHETHER GOOD WORKS be necessary to salvation?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 5. v. 21. For I tell you, that unless your justice abound Our justice
necessary to salvation. Likewise our conversion. And keeping of the
commandments. Patience necessary. And Holiness
more then that of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven. c. 18. v. 3. Amen, I say to you, unless you be converted
and become as little children, you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
c. 19. v. 17. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

Hebr. 10. v. 36. Patience is necessary for you, that doing the will of God,
you may receive the promise. c. 12. v. 14. Follow peace with all men and
holiness, without which no man shall see God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 4. de Iustif. c. 7. We say, that good works are necessary for
a just man to salvation.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
The Confession of Bohemia and the Apology of the Confession of Auspurg cited
in the former article, deny good works to be necessary to salvation.

Tindal in Fox his Acts p. 1143. We need not to labor for We need not labor
for heaven.
all these things (to be Christ's heirs and to have heaven) for these we have
already.

The English Translatour of Luthers commentaries upon the Epistle to the
Galathians: For if there have been since the Good works not necessary to
salvation.
time of Luther, and be yet some, which openly defend that works be necessary
to salvation, where he before so mightly has taught the contrary, what then
would these have done, if Luther had not been? Who also forewarned us of the
same, prophesying* that after his times the doctrine of justification would be
almost extinguished in the Church.

Liber Concordiae Luther. in Declar. art. c. 4. Those propositions of
necessity of good works to salvation, take away comfort Not necessary to
salvation.
from troubled and afflicted consciences, give occasion of doubting of the
grace of God, and are many ways dangerous. Again: Those propositions of the
necessity of good works to salvation, are not to be taught, defended,
painted: but rather to be hissed out, cast out of our Churches as false and not
sincere.

Luther in Gal. 1. to. 5. f. 286. The false Apostles did teach, that Doctrine
of false Apostles
beside faith in Christ the works of Gods law are necessary to salvation. l.
de votis to. 2. f. 281. Thou now understand, why I said so oftentimes, that
nether vows nor our works are necessary to justice and salvation. And as
Schlusselburg. to. 7. Catal. Haer. page 312. reports: This form of speech:
God works are necessary Cast out of Luthers Churches.
to salvation he caused to be blotted and taken out of same men's writings, and
made a public disputation of the same, and therein cast it out of his
Churches, and sent it back again to the Popes market: or as Illyricus and
Gallus ibid. page 567. write: In public disputation held at Wittemberg 1536.
he more then five times iterated this speech: That proposition good works be
Condemned.
necessary to salvation, we will have to be condemned, abrogated, and quite
shut out of our Churches and schools. The like says Scheptius cited in
Colloq. Aldeburg. p. 153. 349.

The Ministers of Saxony in Colloq. Aldeburg. p. 6. and 7. condemn this
proposition: Good works are necessary to Popish, and impious doctrine.
salvation. and p. 129. say, that it is Popish, scandalous, dangerous, and
impious, contrary to the word of God, the Conf^ssion of Auspurg and writings
of Luther: to which purpose they cite many of Luthers sayings: p. 134. they
say, it breeds desperation. Popish paradox.
p. 151. is the only foundation of the Popes kingdom. p. 349. a Popish
paradox.

Schlusselburg. tom. 7. Catal. Haeret. page 69. Good works Popish speech
are necessary to salvation, is especially the speech and phrase of Papists,
and the foundation of all Popish and Antichrists works. This foundation
standing, all Popery stands. If therefore we Foundation of Popery.
shall be so mad as to admit this proposition, we shall take away all
distinction between us and Popery, all our religion will be condemned, we justly
accounted Schismatiks, accursed, and either compelled to recant our doctrine, or
to be damned for ever. And to the same purpose he cites many famous Lutherans.

Morlinus in Schlusselburg. to 4. Catal. Haeret. page 229. I am assured, that
it is the doctrine of Satan, if any say or think, Doctrine of Satan.
that to a sinner, as he is now after his fall, works are any way necessary
to salvation. To which Poach adds p. 266. that, it is doctrine of Satan, to
say that good works are necessary to salvation, either in the law or in the
Gospel, or in any part whatsoever of Christian doctrine.

Illyricus Praefat. in Epistol. ad Romans Works are not any Not any way
necessary.
way necessary to salvation.

Hunnius de Iustif. p. 187. This proposition, wherewith it is said, that
works are necessary to salvation, I judge to be cast out of the Church,
howsoever it be painted or colored.

Herbrandus in Compendio Theol. loco de bonis operibus: Let this proposition:
God works be necessary to salvation, be cast away. The same say many other
Lutherans, whom I name in my Latin book c. 13. art. 13.

Confessio Heluet. cap. 16. We do not think, that good God works not
necessary
works are so necessary to salvation, that without them no man is ever saved.
And to this Confession subscribed the Protestant Churches of England, Scotland,
France, and Flanders, as is reported in Syntagmate Confessionum.

Calvin in Antidoto Concilij Sess. 6. Can. 20. In that the Gospel differs
from the law, that it promises life not upon condition of works, as that
does, but for faith.

Preus l. 3. de Iustif. c. 12. Whence we understand, that works Not absolutely
necessary.
are not absolutely necessary to salvation. l. 4. c. 1. We think even the
thief, who in all his life had done no good, when in his agony he fled to
Christ, being prevented by death, to have been saved with out works. Et. c.
2. Without new obedience the promise of life may be sure to the beleiuers. And
in Gal. 6. lect. 73. They Contrary to the Gospel.
(Interimists) did hold no few points of doctrine contrary to the Gospel,
of seven Sacraments, of works necessary to salvation etc.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that patience is necessary to attain the
promises: that without holiness none shall see God: that unless our justice be
greater then that of the Pharisees we shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven: that if we will have life, we must keep the commandments. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that works are not necssarie to salvation, not
absolutely necessary: that the thief was saved without works: that the
Gospel promises salvation without condition of works: that doctrine of
necessity of works to salvation is Popish, is the foundation of all Popery,
the doctrine of Antichrist and Satan. Which are so opposite to Scripture, as
sometimes Protestants confess it. See l. 2. c. 30.

ART. XIV. WHETHER GOOD WORKS be profitable or avail any thing to
justification and salvation?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Tim. 4. v. 8. Piety is profitable to all things, having promise Good
works profitable.
of the life that now is, and of that to come. The same teach other places
cited in the former article, and others to be cited in the next article.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Catechismus ad Parochos. cap. de Oratione. By devout prayers we appease God,
by alms we redeem the offenses of men, by fasting we wash away the filth of
our own life. And albeit every one be profitable against all kind of sins,
yet etc.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Apology of the English Church: We say, we have no meed No meed in works.
(in Latin, praesidium) at all by our own works and deeds, but appoint all
the means of our salvation to be in Christ alone.

Confessio Argentinensis c. 3. It is clear, that our works Works help
nothing to justice. Of no moment.
help nothing to this, that of iniust we become just.

Confessio Belgica art. 24. Works proceeding from the true root of faith are
of no moment of all for to justify us.

Whitaker ad Ration. 8. Campiani. God, in justifying us, Of no reckoning.
makes no reckoning at all of our works.

Tindal in Fox his acts p. 1143. All that think, that good Profit nothing.
works help or profit any thing to get the gift of salvation, they blaspheme
against God, and rob God of honor. Which Fox also maintains.

Luther l. de votis to. 2. f. 279. To teach, that works are wholesome Not
profitable.
or profitable, is devilish and Apostaticall from faith, seeing faith alone is
necessary and profitable. In 1. Petri. 1. to. 5. fol. 453. All which tend to
that end, that we may learn, that we cannot be helped by works. In c. 40.
Isaiae in Schlusselburg tom. 7. Catal. Haeret. fol. 320. When works are
condemned, they are Unprofitable.
so condemned, as unprofitable to Christian justice, and likewise to salvation.
Postilla in Dom. 3. post Pascha fol. 257. Nether will any works help
thither, he means to justification. In die Asce^sionis f. 267. Works do
nothing at all for piety and justification. Do nothing.
In dom. 13. post Trinit. Albeit I had all the works of Abraham, Noe, and all
the beloved fathers, they would profit me nothing. In Dom. 13. he says, that
works profit a man nothing. In festo S. Annae, that they do nothing. Et Sermon.
de 10. Leprosis to. 7. he writes: Let him know, that his works are not
necessary and profitable to himself, but only to his neighbor. Nor yet
content to have taught, that good works are unprofitable, he adds that they
are pernicious to salvation. For thus writes Hospin. in Concordia discordi c.
20. Rorarius shows, that Luther always used this proposition: Good works
pernicious to salvation.
Good works are pernicious to salvation. And the same confess the Ministers
of Saxony in Colloq. Aldeburg. p. 205. and Luther himself intimates in c.
40. Isaiae to. 3. in these words: The justice and wisdom of the flesh is
condemned, as unprofitable, yea pernicious to obtain justice and salvation.
For by justice of the flesh, he uses to understand good works. And so
Schlusselburg in the place now cited understood him.

The Ministers of the Elector. in Colloq. Aldeburg. p. 293. speak thus:
Amsdorfius has written, and after him or Pernicious to salvation.
by him Flac^ius: works are not only not necessary but also pernicious to
salvation: (and his words are at large related by Coccius to. 1. p. 1113.)
Besides they add p. 121. that the said Amsdarfius wrote a book with this
title: Good works are hurtful to salvation: And that no man may say, that
Amsdorfius spoake or wrote this only of the trust of works, himself
declares, saying: That good works even according to their nature or
Perni^ious even of their nature and substance.
substance as they are commanded of God, are pernicious to salvation. And the
same evasion rejects also Hospinian in place before alleged. Kemnitius also
in Schlusselburg to. 7. Catal. Haeret. p. 529. confesses, that in their Church
this doctrine is spread: The good works of the just are pernicious to
salvation. The same confesses liber Concordiae c. 4. Hutterus in Analysi
Confess. Augustan. disput. 13. Adamus Francisci in Margarita Theol. loco. 10.
Reineccius tom. 4. Armaturae c. 15.

Lubeccenses apud Schlusselburg to. 7. Catal. Haeret. p. The law unprofitable
to justification.
607. The law is not only not necessary to justification, but altogether
unprofitable.

Gerlachius to. 2. disput. 14. The moral now since the fall of man is so
unprofitable to justify and save, as etc.

Calvin in Resp. ad Sadolet. p. 126. Surely we deny, that in justifying man's
works are worth a hair. Again: we deny that works have any thing to do in
justifying a man. In Romans 8. v. 3. The law has no force at all to give justice.

Coccius tomo 1. page 1113. repeateth these words of Rather hinders.
Luther out of his Sermon in Natali Christi: It is now made evident, that to
this new nativity work nothing but rather hinder, precepts, laws, doctrine,
free will, good works, innocent life etc.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that piety is profitable to all things, and has
promise of the life to come. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that good help nothing to justification or
salvation, are not worth a hair; have nothing to do there: that they are not
profitable, work nothing to salvation, profit nothing to salvation: that they
are unprofitable, yea pernicious to justice and salvation, and that of their
own nature as they are commanded of God: and that to teach that works are
profitable, is devilish, and Apostaticall from faith.

ART. XV. WHETHER GOOD WORKS be a cause of salvation?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 25. v. 23. Because thou have been faithful over a few Works cause of
entrance into joy. And of possessing the kingdom.
things, I will place the over maniethings; enter into the joy of thy Lord. Et
v. 34. Possess you the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world: for I was an hungered, and you gave me to eat.

Romans 8. v. 10. The body indeed, is dead because of sin, but the spirit
lives because of justification.

2. Cor. 4. v. 17. For that our tribulation which presently is momentarie and
light, works above measure excedingly an eternal Tribulation works glory.
weight of glory in us. Et c. 7. v. 10. The sorrow that is according to God,
works penance unto salvation that is stable: but the sorrow of the world
works death.

Gal. 6. v. 8. He that sows in his flesh, of the flesh also shall Life reaped
of sowing in spirit.
reap corruption: but he that sows in the spirit, of the spirit shall reap
life everlasting.

Philippens. 1. v. 27. And in nothing be ye terrified of the adversaries, Men
work their salvation.
which to them is cause of perdition, but to you of salvation, and this of God.
Et c. 2. v. 12. With fear and trembling work your salvation.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton l. 8. de Iustific. c. 34. Good works are truly and properly the
cause either of reconciliation or of salvation.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker lib. 2. de Scriptura cap. 14. sect. 5. The just The just not rewarded
for for works.
are not rewarded for the works of justice which they have done.

Perkins in Serie Causarum c. 57. Salvation depends not of works, but of our
faith.

Luther in Gal. 2. to. 5. f. 308. Thus are we delivered from sin, Salvation
depends not of works. Life not given for works. Nons saved for works.
justified, and life everlasting is given us, not for our merits and works,
but for faith. In Catechismo f. 687. Surely our works do nothing to salvation.

Illyricus in Claue part. 2 tractat. 6. None shall be saved for his works.

Herbrandus in Compendio theol. loco de bonis operibus: Life everlasting is
given to us freely by Christ, and not for our good works.

Zuinglius in Joan. 5. tom. 4. Works do not save, do not Works save not.
justify.

Calvin in Romans 4. v. 16. If the heavenly inheritance come to Heaven comes
not by works. Affliction no cause of salvation. Works not in part cause of
salvation. No true cause
us by works, faith will fall, the promise will be abrogated. In Philippen. 1.
ver. 28. Certainly the Scripture no where teaches, that the afflictions, which
the Saints suffer of the wicked, are cause of their salvation.

Beza in Confess. c. 4. sect. 19. For these things are not so to be understood,
as if our works were cause of our salvation either wholly or in part.

Peter Martyr in Romans 9. God works are no true cause of eternal salvation.

Zanchius l. 5. de Natura Dei cap. 2. q. 7. The works of the godly are no
true causes of everlasting happiness; but only the means by which (as it were)
by degrees the elect are mercifully led into the everlasting and heavenly
city.

Pareus libr. 4. de Iustificat. cap. 7. Our adversary concludes false: that
the kingdom of heaven is given for good works.

Tilenus in Syntagmate cap. 48. Good works in respect of No cause at all.
salvation, can be no cause at all.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly teaches, not only that we shall possess the kingdom of
heaven because we have done good works, that we shall reap life everlasting
of the spirit, that the soul lives for justification, that sorrow according
to God works salvation, that afflictiction works glory and is cause of
salvation: but also in the same manner says, that the elect shall possess
heaven because they have done good deeds, as it says, that the reprobats
shall go into everlasting fire because they have done ill deeds: So it says,
that the soul lives for justification, as it says, the body dies for
sin: In like sort it says, that sorrow according to God makes salvation,
as it says, that sorrow of the world works death: Even in the same sort it
says, that of sowing in spirit we shall reap life everlasting, as it says,
that of sowing in flesh we shall reap corruption: And in the same kind of
speech says, that persecution is cause of salvation to those who suffer it,
as it says, that it is cause of damnation to those who make it. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that affliction is not cause of salvation: that the
heavenly in heritance comes not to us by works: that the life is not given
for good works: that we are not rewarded for good works, not saved for
works: that salvation depends not of works: that works are no way cause
salvation, are no cause of it either wholly or in part. Which do so plainly
contradict the Scripture, as therefore Illyricus is forced to reprove the
Scripture. For this he writes in Claue tractat. 6. cit. tit. de varia bonorum
operum praedicat. col. 551. We hear, that toto great effects and praises, yea
even salvation it self is attributed (of the Scripture) to good works. It
manifestly appears, that very often to much paise is given(by Scripture) to
good works, which does not agree to them, nor is to be attributed, if we will
speak exactly, truly, and properly. Behold how plainly he says, that
Scripture attributes to great effects unto good works, attributes salvation
unto them, attributes very oftentime to much praise unto them, and such
effects as agree not to them, nor are to be be attributed to them if we will
speak truly. But surely if the Scripture attributes to much to good works,
and that which does not agree to them, and which is not to be attributed to
them if we will speak truly, the Scripture in so doing, does falsely. But
whether the Scripture or Illyricus know better what is to be attributed to good
works, let Christians judge.

ART. XVI. WHETHER GOOD WORKS be a testimony of justice and predestination?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Joan. 2. ver. 5. But he that keeps his word, in him in By good works we
know we are in God. That we are translated from death. God works make election
sure.
very deed the charity of God is perfited: in this we know that we be in him.
cap. 3. ver. 14. We know, that we are translated from death to life, because we
love the brethren. And ver. 21. If our heart do not reprehend us, we have
confidence toward God.

2. Peter 1. verse. 10. Wherefore brethren labor the more, that by good works
you may make sure your vocation and election.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Romans 9. ver. 11. If we believe Saint Peter, the certainty of
our salvation, and consequently of the election, is concluded in doing of good
works, not in the only purpose of God.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confessio Wittenbergensis C. de Confess. We know, that Works make but doubt
and despair.
if we look unto our works, we should not only doubt, but also despair of
our salvation.

Ministri Electorales in Colloq. Aldeburg. page 427. We No certainty by good.
must certainly determine out of the word of God delivered and proposed unto
us, and not out of the feeling of infused newness of life, as it were by an
effect, that by faith freely for and by Christ we have remission of sins.

Calvin 3. Instit. c. 2.. 38. If we must judge by works, how God is affected
toward us, I confess that we can have but a small guess all it. De
necessitate reform. page 47. What shall man A small guess by works. Matter of
doubt and despair. Of trembling.
find in his works, but matter of doubting, and at length of despairing? And
in Antidot. Concili. Sess. 6. cap. 8. As long as we look what we are, we must
tremble before God: so far are we from having certain and unshaken hope of
eternal life. In Romans 4. v. 14. We are utterly lost and undone, if we be sent
to our works, when we must seek the cause or certainty of our salvation. In
1. Joan. 3. v. 22. Woe to us, if we look to our works, Nothing but matter of
fear.
which have nothing in them but matter of fear.

Pareus lib. 1. de Iustificat. cap. 10. The trust of remission of sins,
nether depends nor rises of a good conscience. l. 3. c. 2. Our faith and
trust does reap nothing of our own disposition, but fear of deceit, doubt,
and anxietie. Et l. 4. p. 625. Of our own Of doubt and anxietie.
accord we grant, that if faith must rely upon inherent justice, we must not
only doubt of grace and justice, but also perpetually tremble.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that we know that we are in God by keeping of his
word: that we know we are translated from death to life because we love our
brethren: that we have trust toward God if our heart do not reprehend us: that
we make our vocation and election certain by good works. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that by works we have no certain trust: that trust
nether depends nor rises of a good conscience: that by works we cannot have
any small guess how God is affected toward us: that we are undone if we must
seek the certainty of our salvation out of works: that in works is nothing
found but matter of doubting and despairing: that if we look to them, we must
not only doubt but despair of salvation.

ART. XVII. WHETHER GOOD WORKS be a cause why God loves us?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Joan. 16. v. 27. For the Father himself loves you because God loves us
because we love Christ. Because we keep his co^mandments.
you have loved me, and have believed that I comeforth from God. cap. 15. ver.
10. If you keep my precepts, you hall abide in my love, as I also have kept
my Fathers precepts, and do abide in his love.

Act. 10. v. 36. In every nation, he that fears him and works justice, is
acceptable to him.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Joan. 16. v. 27. Christ plainly says that his disciples
love was a cause, why God loved them with this kind of love.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in Joan. 15. v. 10. The obedience, which the faithful Good works no
cause of Gods love toward us.
give to him, is not so much a cause why he continues his love toward them,
as an effect of his love. Et in cap. 16. v. 17. We are here said to be loved
of God whiles we love Christ, because we have a pledge of his fatherly love.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly teaches, that God loves us, because we love and believe
in Christ: that God continues his love toward us, if we keep his
commandments. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that our obedience is no cause why God continues
his love toward us; that we are not loved of God because we love Christ.

ART. XVIII. WHETHER WE OUGHT to do good works?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Luc. 17. v. 10. When you shall have done all things that are We ought to do
good works.
commanded you, say: we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which we
ought to do.

1. Joan 2. v. 6. He that says, he abides in him, ought even as he walked,
himself also to walk. Et c. 3. v. 16. And we ought to yield our lives for the
brethren. Et c. 4. ver. 11. If God has so loved us, we also ought to love one
an other.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. Can. 20. If any shall say, that a man justified and
never so perfect, is not bound to the keeping of the commandments of God and
the Church, but only to believe; be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Tindal cited in Caluinoturcismo l. 4. c. 22. Thou owe nothing We owe nothing
to God but faith.
to God but faith, that thou maest confess Christ Jesus, and believe him to
have risen from the dead: for so thou shall be safe; in all other things God
has made it free to the to follow thine own will.

Luther Postilla in Dom. 3. Aduentus f. 39. All works besides God requires
nothing but faith. Works are indifferent.
faith are to be done to our neighbor; because God requires nothing of us but
faith, with which we give him his honor. In Gal. 2. to. 5. f. 223. Christ has
so abrogated the works of the law, as they may be held indifferently, but they
bind no more. Again: We are not tied to any external work at all, but free
to any We are free to all works. To all things.
work toward any man, at any time or manner whatsoever. -- A Christian is
wholly free to all things, doing or omitting as the occasion serves or wants.
Psalm. 5. to. 3. f. 171. Take this rule: where Luthers rule of doing good.
the Scripture commands a good work to be done, do thou so understand, that
it forbids thee to do a good work. Et apud Kemnitium in locis part. 2. tit.
de operibus p. 73. This phrase of the law: A faithful man ought to do good
works, belongs A Christian ought not to do good.
not to Christians. And apud Schlusselburg to. 7. Catal. Haeret. p. 193. We
fight as well against good works, as against sins. And l. de votis apud
Coccium to. 1. p. 1113. The doctrine Luther fights against good works.
of works is necessarily the doctrine of devils. Postilla in Natali Christi.
ib. Good works are a cover of filthiness and hypocrisy. Et Sermon. de Nouo
testamento seu de Missa: Let us beware Bewareth of good works.
of sin, but much more of good works and laws, and let us attend to Gods
promise and faith.

Ministri Electorales in Colloq. Aldeburg. p. 286. have these words: Gallus
affirmed, that Luther could hardly bear these propositions: Good works are
necessary: A Christian ought A Christian ought not do do good works.
to do good works. Et p. 128. Gallus, Otto, and many other men do openly and
bitterly reject as false and improper this speech: Good works are necessary;
and deny, that Christians ought to do good works.

Liber Concordiae c. 4. Some have disputed, that good works Good works are
free.
are not necessary, but free and voluntary. And some have earnestly
contended, that new obedience is not necessary in the justified.

Melancthon in Resp. ad Art. 24. Bauar. to. 4. Some (Protestants) New obedience
not due.
deny this proposition: New obedience is due: because it is voluntary.

Illyricus apud Schiusselburg. to. 7. Catal. Haeret. p. 271. condemns Mayor,
because he teaches, Good works are necessary to salvation, by reason of
debt. Et in Apologia. cont. No debt.
Tiletan. c. 6. All the obedience which Christ properly requires of those that
are to be saved, is only to believe in him, and to run to free bankets, to
which we are invited of him.

Pareus l. 4. de Iustific. c. 1. confesses, that this is the doctrine Good
works pertain not to the kingdom of Christ. Belong to Satan. We must pray
to have no good works.
of the rigid. Lutherans: Good works and new obedience partaine not to the
kingdom of Christ but to the world: Christians with their good works belong
to Satan; good works are so far from being necessary, as that they hinder
salvation and be pernicious: We ought to pray God, that we persevere to the end
in faith without all good works. And the same speeches of theirs are repeated
out of Colloq. Aldeburg by Coccius to. 1. p. 1113.

Zuinglius l. de Relig. c. de Merito: The Prophets do vehemently urge to good
works; but whom? those that believe not well.

Calvin in Joan. 6. v. 29. This alone does God ask of us, that God requires
only faith.
we believe.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that we ought to do the works which are
commanded us, that we ought to walk as Christ walked, that we ought to give
our lives for our brethren, that we ought to love one an other. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that a Christian ought not to do good works:
that good works are indifferent, free, voluntary, not necessary; and compel
no more: that a Christian is indifferent to all good works, not tied to do
good works: that good works are not necessary in nature of debt, new obience
not due: that all the obedience which God requires of us, is to believe: that
he requires nothing of us but to believe, this only that we believe: that
only those who believe not well are to be urged to good works; that we owe to
God nothing but faith, and that in all other things God has left us free to
follow our own will: that good works pertain not to the kingdom of Christ,
but of the world: that Christians with good works belong to the Devil: that we
must pray to persevere without good works: That when the Scripture bids us
do works, we must understand that it forbids us to do them.

ART. XIX. WHETHER GOOD WORKS may be done for rewards?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Psalm. 118. v 112. I have inclined my heart to do thy justification David did
good for reward. And Moises.
For ever, for reward.

Hebr. 11. verse. 26. By faith, Moises being made great, denied himself to be
the son of Pharaos daughter, rather chosing to afflicted with the people of
God, then etc. For he looked unto the remuneration. c. 12. v. 2. looking upon
the author of faith and And Christ.
consummatour Jesus, who, joy being proposed unto him, sustained the cross,
contemning confusion.

1. Corinthians. 9. verse. 25. And every one that strives for We strive for an
incorruptible crown.
the maistrie, refraineth himself from all things: and they certes that they
may receive a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible.

Philippens. 3. v. 13. Stretching forth my self to those that are For a prize.
before; I pursue the mark, to the prize of the supernall vocation of God in
Christ Jesus.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Session. 6. cap. 11. It is manifest, that they are contrary
to the doctrine of true religion, who say that the just sin in all their
works, if stirring up their sloth, and encorraging themselves to run their
race, in them, with this especially that God be glorified, they do also look
wnto eternal reward.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Tindal in Fox his Acts p. 1144. They that for fear of hell Not for joys of
heaven.
or for the joys of heaven do serve God, do a constrained service, which God
will not have.

Luther de libert. Christiana to. 2. f. 10 If thou pray at all, Not for
eternal profit.
fast etc. beware thou do it not for that end that thou m^est reap any
temporal or eternal profit. Deseruo arb. f. 453 Yea Nor for the kingdom of
heaven.
if they did good for to obtain the kingdom, they should never obtain it,
and should belong rather to the impious, who with a noughtie and mercenarie eye
seek those things even in God which are for themselves. Postilla in Dom. 9.
post Trinit. Good Not for eternal life.
works are not to be done for the cause of eternal life. Again: All good
works must be done altogether freely, and no fruit or profit must be sought
by them. How can we do any thing for obtaining the inheritance, which already
we possess by faith? And Not for the prize.
in Festo Om. Sanctorum. We must not exercise piety for this cause, that we
may get the prize. The like he has Sermon. in Hebr. 11. tom. 7.

Vrbanus Regius in locis com. tom. 1. fol. 359. says that good works are not
to be done, for any respect of merit or reward. Not for reward.


Apologia Confess. Augustan. c. 20. Paul with his whole speech condemns all
works, if they be done, that for them we may obtain life everlasting. Not for
life everlasting.


THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that we may do good for reward, for remuneration,
for joy, for an incorruptible crown, for a prize. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that we may not do good for any eternal profit,
not for the kingdom of heaven, not for the joys of heaven, not for eternal
life, not to obtain the inheritance, not for the prize, not for respect of
reward.

ART. XX. WHETHER GOOD WORKS be to be done for the glory of God?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Cor. 10. v. 31. Whether you eat or drink, or do any other All works to
be done for Gods glory.
thing, do all things unto the glory of God.

Matthew 5. v. ^5. So let your light shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent cited in the former article: Works are to be done especially
that God be glorified.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confessio Argentinensis. cap. 6. Nothing is to be reckoned Nothing is the
duty of a Christian but what is profitable to others.
among the duties of a Christian man, but that which is somewhat profitable to
our neighbor. The same has Bucer in Math. 5.

Luther de libertat. Christian. to. 2. fol. 9. A Christian in all his works
ought to be imbued with this opinion, and only look to this, that he serve
and profit others in all things he does, Has nothing before his eyes but the
profit of others.
having nothing before his eyes, but the necessity and commodity of his
neighbor. Fol. 10. What work soever is not directed to this only end, that
it be done either to chastize the body, or to-pleasure our neigbour, (so that
he ask nothing against God) is not good nor Christian. lib. de votis fol. 280.
A faithful conscience does apprehend and teach, that his good works are Does
good only for the profit of others. Before God we must cease from works. Good
works not to be directed to God. No good work but what is profitable to man.
to be done freely only for the profit of his neighbor, and to exercise the
body.

In 1. Petri 1. to. 5. fol. 449. In Gods sight we must cease from works, but
toward our neighbor we must be diligent at them. Postilla in Dom. 4. post
Trinitat. fol. 289. Works are to be directed to man only, and not to God. In
Natali Dom. f. 56. after he had said, that reason can not find out his
doctrine, he puts this example thereof: Who could think with himself, that
there are no good works, but such as are profitable to our neighbor, or are
referred to this end? In Dom. 14. fol. 319. Those only are good works, which
serve and profit our neighbor. Nether it is to be meruailed, if they teach,
that good works are not to be done for Gods glory, seeing (as before is
showed) they teach, that God is nether worshipped nor delighted with the^, that
in his sight they be stenches, dung, mere iniquity, and sin.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly bids, us to do all our works for the glory of God,
that God may be glorified with them. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that in doing good works we must only look to
this, have this only before our eyes, that we profit our neighbor: that
every good work is to be directed only for chastizment of our body or
profit of our neighbor: that it is not among the duties of a Christian man,
which profits not our neighbor: that before God we must cease from works:
that our works are to be directed to man only, and not to God. Which
sometimes Protestants themselves confess to be contrary to Scripture. See l.
2. c. 30.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF GOOD works in general.
The things which we have rehearsed in this chapter, do clearly show, that
Protestants teach far otherwise of of good works then Scripture does. For
the holy Scripture, and Catholics with it, teaches, that good works of the
just are not sins, are a sweet savor before God, are entirely good, are just
or iniust, worthy, meritorious, unequal, not all commanded of God, profitable
and necessary to justification and salvation, cause of salvation, testimony
of justice and election, a cause why God loves us: that we ought to do good
works, and for Gods glory, and that we may also do them partly for reward.
All which are denied of Protestants.

They also show, that in this matter of good works What Protest. steal from
ghost works.
(if in any whatsoever) Protestants play the thieues and steal. For from the
works of sins they steal all goodness; And from the works of the just
they steal entire goodness, true goodness, true justice, sweetness, worth and
merit before God, who judges of them as they are indeed. They steal away also
their necessity and vtilite of justifying and saving, their causalitie of
salvation o^ of Gods love toward us, their force of testifying justification
or election, our obligation to do them, and the end for which they are to be
done, to wit, reward and Gods glory. And consequently they take out of the
world, all true virtue or justice, and the sweetness thereof, and also the
worth, the commodity, the efficacitie, the testification, and end: and in
their steed bring in mere sins, mere iniquities, stenches, dung, unpleasant
to God, unworthy of God, and unprofitable to us, yea hurthfull and pernicious.
And yet these men take it in evil part to be called enemies of good works,
or that they speak contemptuously of them. But how (I pray you) can they
speak more contemptuously of good works, they Protest. enemies of good works.
callling them, ill, sins, mere sins, mere iniquities, mere pollutions,
stenches, and dung in the sight of God, who judges no otherwise of them then
they are indeed? Or how can they be greater enemies of good works, then by
taking away or denying that there are any true good works in the world, and by
putting in their places their quite contraries, that is evil works, and
sins? And hitherto of good works in general: Now of them in par-particular.

CHAPTER XIV. OF GOOD WORKS IN PARTICVLAR.
ART. I. WHETHER IT BE GOOD not to marry?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
CORINT. 1. cap. 7. verse. 8. But I say to the unmarried Good, to abide
unmarried.
and to woddows: it is good for them, if they so abide, as I also. And verse. 1.
It is good for a man not to touch a woman. verse. 26. It is good for a Not no
touch a woman.
man so to be.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 2. de Monachis. cap. 9. Paul absolutely pronounces, that it is
good not to touch a woman.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in 1. Cor 7. v. 1. The Lord calls it evil to want a Ill to want a
wife.
wife. In Genesis 2. v. 18. Maniethimke, that single life is good for them, and
therefore lest they should be miserable they abstain A wicked. suggestion of
Satan.
from marriage. But let the faithful learn to oppose this sentence of God
against the, wicked suggestions of Satan.

Peter Martyr in thesibus. p. 1002. It is not good for a man Not honest to be
single.
to be single, for it is not pleasant, not honest, not profitable.

And hereupon they condemn the vow of chastity or single life.

Luther de votis to. 2. fol. 273. Vowed chastity is quite contrary Vow of
chastity, contrary to the Gospel. Imptous.
to the Gospel.

Zuinglius de Relig. c. de votis. All vows of chastity are impious.

Calvin in Refutat. Cathalani prg. 384. The vow of single life, is a rebellion
against God.

Perkins in Galat 2. tom. 2. The vows of perpetual countinencie, poverty,
and regular obedience, are indeed the state of abomination.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture plainly says, that it is good to abide single, and not to touch a
woman. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that it is evil to want a wife, that it is a wicked
suggestion of Satan to abstain from marriage, that it is not good to be
single: and that the vow of chastity or single life, is naught.

ART. II. WHETHER VIRGINITY BE a virtue, or a good that is honest.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Cor. 7. v. 35 after the Apostle had exhorted to virginity Virginity is
honest or virtuous.
and single life, he says: And this I speak to your profit, not to cast a
snare upon you, but to that which is honest, and that may give you power
without impediment to pray our Lord.

Et v. 34. And the woman unmarried and the virgin thinks Holiness in body and
spirit. Better then marriage. More blessed.
on the things that pertain to our Lord that she may be holy both in body
and in spirit. ver 38. He that joins his virgin in matrimony, does well; and
he that joins not, does better. v. 40. But more blessed shals be be, if she
so remain.

Math. 19. v. 12. There are Eunuchs, which have gelded themselves Desired for
heaven.
for the kingdom of heaven.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 22. q. 152. art. 3. Virginity is a special virtue, having it self
to chastity, as magnificence to liberality.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker ad Ration. 8. Campiani: Virginity is not simply Virginity is not
simply good.
good. Again: Of them who can always keep virginal chastity, virginity is
to be desired, not altogether, but for those troubles which ordinarily follow
marriage.

Tindal in Fox his Acts p. 1141. Keeping of virginity and Virginity in the
religious is devilish. A thing indifferent. It is nothing.
chastity of the religious, is a devilish thing.

Apologia Confess. Augustanae cap. de votis: Obedience, poverty, single life,
are things indifferent.

Bidenbachius in Consensu Jesuit. and Christian. p. 769. We think, that
virginity, widdowhood, and marriage are nothing.

Calvin in Math. 19. ver. 12. It is a foolish imagination, that No virtue.
single life is a virtue; for of it self it pleases God no more then fasting,
nor deserves to be reckoned among the duties which he requires of us. Et de
vera reform. p. 321. Nether is virginity praised, as if of it self it were a
virtue.

Beza in Confess. cap. 4. sect. 16. There is a third kind of Of it self
nether good nor badde.
works, which of themseues are nether properly good nor badde. Of this kind is
fasting, sobriety, and desire of keeping virginity in those who have the
gift of continency. And c. 5. sect. 39. Nether virginity nor marriage we
reckon amongst those things, which simply and of themselves make us better and
more grateful to God.

Daneus Contr. 5. p. 1045. Virginity is no virtue, but a thing No virtue.
indifferent. And generally all Protestants when the Apostle calls
virginity, good, in Greek (...), will not have him understood of a good that
is honest or virtuous, but only of a good that is profitable.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that virginity is honest: that it is a holiness in
body and soul: that it is better and happier then marriage: and that it is to
be desired for the kingdom of heaven. Catholics say the same.

Protestants plainly say, that virginity is a thing indifferent, is nothing,
not simply good, not good of it nature, not of it self a virtue, not simply
good, not a virtue, not wholly to be desired, not required of God, and in the
religious, a devilish thing.

ART. III. WHETHER THE STATE OF virginity be better then the state of marriage?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Cor. 7. v. 38. He that joins his virgin in matrimony does Virginity
better then marriage.
well, and he that toyneth not, does better. ver. 40. More blessed shall she
be, if she so remain.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 24. Can. 10. If any shall say, that it is not better
and happier to abide in virginity or single life, then to marry; be he
accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker ad Ration. 8. Campiani: Virginity is never better Not better.
then marriage, but in some sort; Marriage is often times simply better then
virginity.

Willet Controuers. 15. quaest. 5. page 806. Virginity is Not more holy.
not a more holy and clean thing in it self then marriage is: before God in
themselves nether is more holy then either.

Confessio Witten berge^sis C. de votis: We must not think, Not more excellent.
that this kind of (single) life, is of self before the judgment seat of God
more excellent and more holy then marriage.

Luther Sermon de Matrimonio to. 5. f. 126. Single life in it Much more baste
thou marriage. Marriage a most divine state.
self is much more baser then marriage. And fol. 124. he calls marriage a
divine life, and in 1. Cor. 7. f. 107. the highest religion and most spiritual
state, and 107. truly heavenly, spiritual, and divine state, if it be
compared with this spiritual state. Again: We conclude, that marriage is like
gould, and this spiritual state, dung. In Genes. 2. to. 6. fol. 26. To beget
children, is after preaching To get children is the chiefest work
of the word of God, the chiefest work. And in c. 21. fol. 257. Married men's
life consists in the highest degree of spiritual life.

Vrbanus Regius in locis to. 1. f. 345. Preaching of the word Virginity in it
self baser then marriage.
of God makes the state of virginity better then marriage by reason of
greater impediments, which yet in it self is baser.

Bindebachius in Consensu cit. p. 799. If you consider these kinds of life
(virginity and marriage) by themselves they are indifferent, and before God
nether is more holy then the other.

Calvin in 1. Cor. 7. v. 35. Here thou have twoe things worth noting: The one
is, to what end single life is to be desired, to wit, not for it self, nor
because it is a perfiter state. In like manner Beza upon the same place.

Serranus cont. Hayum part. 3. p. 159. If marriage be the Nothing better then
mar-marriage.
seminary of mankind if the ornament, if the stay, as all the Politicians ever
taught, can there be any thing better or more excellent in life then marriage.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that virginity is better and more happy then
marriage. The same say Catholics.

Protestants express^ly teach, that virginity is not a perfecter state the^
marriage; not more holy, not more excellent: that it is baser then marriage,
much baser: that marriage is the high^^^ religion, most spiritual state, and
that in this life nothing is better or more excellent then marriage. What
religion (I pray you) have these men, whose chief religion and most spiritual
state, is marriage, and who account nothing in this life better then marriage,
and to beget children the chiefest work beside preaching?

ART. IV. WHETHER GOD WOULD have men to live single?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Cor. 7. v. 7. I would all men to be as my self. Et v. 27. Art God
exhorts all to single life.
thou loose from a wife, seek not a wife.

Math. 19. v. 12 He that can take, let him take.

Apocalips. 14. v. 4. These are they which were not defiled with weomen. For
they are virgins. These follow the lamb whether soever he shall go.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in 1. Corinthians. 7. verse. 8. The Spirit of God by the mouth of the
Apostle exhorts to constant virginity and single life.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther in Disput. to. 1. f. 383. The word: Increase and multiply, All
commanded to increase.
is naturally ingrafted and necessarily imposed generally upon all that are
men. De votis to. 2. f. 272. Plainly Christ did not counsel (virginity) but
rather discouraged. In 1. Cor* 7. to. 5. f. 105. Paul will have universally all
to be married. Sermon. de Matrimonio S. Paul will have all married.
f. 119. Increase and multiply, is not a precept, but more the^ a precept. He
is a baud, that flies marriage. Epistola in Wofgangum. to. 7. f. 505. God
pronounces the sentence, that he will God will have none unmarried.
have none to be unmarried, but multiply. He that will live unmarried,
plainly fights against God -- To take a wife, and to eat and drink, both
alike are enforced by necessity, and God commands a like both to be done. Et
Epistol. ad Equites Teuto. 2. To marry, as necessary as to eat or drink.
Church men commanded to marry. Priests commanded to marry.
Germ. Ienen. fol. 214. The word of God commands Church men to marry wives.

Confessio Augustana c. de Coniugio: Paul says that such a one is be chosen
Bishop, as is a husband. Et Apologia eiusdem cap. 15. They bid ws show a
precept which commands Priests to marry, as if Priests were not men.

Melancthon Resp. ad Acta Ratisbon. to. 4. Paul will have a Priest to be
married.

Zuinglius in Paraenesi ad Heluetos to. 1. f. 114. The holy Ministers
commanded to marry. And Bishops
Scripture is so far from forbidding Ministers of the Church to marry, that
it commands it more then once. fol. 115. When they hear Paul in so express
words commanding that a Bishop be married to a wife, etc.

Bullinger in 1. Timoth. 3. A Bishop is minister of the word: but he must be
husband of a wife, in that he is a Bishop, and must commend holy marriage to
others and terrify them from fornication.

Calvin in 1. Cor. 7. v. 25. Seeing the Scripture says Genes. 2. that male and
femall were created together, it seems equally Single life not commended to
any.
and without exception it calls all to marriage, at least single life is not
commanded or commended to any. In 4. Instit. c. 12. 24. Paul reckons
marriage amongst the virtues of a Bishop. Et c. 13. 3. This is indeed to tempte
God, to strive against nature which To strive against his flesh is to tempt
God. Desire of virginity accursed of God.
he has given, and to despise his present gifts as if they belonged not to us.

Sadeel ad Artic. 53. abiurat. This so great affectation of virginity and
single life, which God at last did accurse, was so ^suall with the Fathers, as
etc.

Zanchius in Thesibus to. 8. It is against Gods commandment, that a young man
who has need of marriage, should remain unmarried: and simply that a woman
should be wnmarried.

Whitaker Controuers. 2. quaest. 5. cap. 7. When Bellarmin had said:
Vigilantius taught that Church men ought to be married: answers. If
vigilantius meant the lawful marriage of Pastors, he was in the right.

Tindal in Fox his Acts p. 1139. A priest must have a wife for twoe causes.
The one etc.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says: that God by the mouth of the Apostle would have all
men to be a he was, that is, unmarried: that such as were unmarried he
exhorted, to remain so: that Christ exhorted all to single life who could take
it; that in heaven there is a special reward for virgins. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that Paul would have all men to be married, would
have a Priest or Bishop to be married, that Christ terrifieth men from
virginity: that God will have no man unmarried: that he as much commands to
marry as to eat or drink: that to increase and multiply is more then a
precept: that God has accursed the affectation of virginity: that single life
is commended to none. And thus much of virginity.

ART. V. WHETHER FASTING BE A virtue or worship or service of God?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Luc. 2. v. 37. Who departed not from the temple, by fastings Fasting is
service of God.
and prayers serving night and day.

Math. 6. ver. 17. When thou do fast, anointe thy head, and wash thy face,
that thou appear not to men to fast, but to thy Father who is in secret: and
thy Father who sees in secret, will Rewarded of God.
repay the.

Math. 4. ver. 15. But the days will come, when the kingdom shall be taken away
from them, and then they shall fast.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Lucae 2. verse. 37. This place teaches, that fasting belongs
to the service of God, as prayers do.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in Cathol. reform. Contr. 6. page 132. Fasting is a Fasting of th same
nature that eating is. Helps nothing to heaven. Profits nothing. Men's
fasting no better then beasts
thing indifferent, of the same nature with eating and drinking, and of it
self conferreth nothing to the obtaining of the kingdom of heaven, no more
then eating and drinking does.

Humphrey ad Ration. 3. Campiani p. 263. We grant, that it is true which
Sanders says of the Iouinianists and our men: That fasting, or abstinence
from certain meats profit nothing.

Luther in Ionae 3. to. 3 fol. 422. God esteems as much the fastings and
haireclothes of beasts as of men, and contrariwise. What cares God for
sackcloth, fasting and hairecloth?

Calvin in Math. 16. v. 18. Fasting of it self is an indifferent A thing
indifferent not required of God. No service of God.
thing, not of those kind of things which God requires and approves. In c.
4. ver. 1. In that they persuade themselves, that fasting is a meritorious
work, and a part of piety or of Gods service, it is a noughtie superstition.
In Act. 14. v. 23. Let us not putt any service of God in fasting, seeing that
of it self it is nothing nor is of account with God, but as it is referred to
an other end. In Of no moment.
Instit. l 4. c. 12. 16. Nether does Luke putt any service of God in f^sting.
-- Of it self it is of no moment. c. 19. We must take great heed, that fasting
be not accounted a kind of Gods service.

Beza in Confess c. 5. sect. 40. We commend not true fasts as a kind of Gods
service.

Peter Martyr in locis loco 10. 23. There is an other abuse, No service of God.
that there be some who attribute holiness to fasting, as if there were any
service of God in it: Whereas indeed fasting is only an exercise, which of it
self has no sanctity.

Pareus in Collegio Theol. 1. disput. 18. Fasting of it nature No virtue.
is no moral virtue. For temperance is a moral virtue, not because it
abstaineth from meat or drink, but because it moderatly uses meat and drink.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that S. Anne did serve God by fasting and prayer:
that God rewards those that fast that Christ will have his to fast. The same
say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that fasting is no part or kind of Gods service:
that it is an indifferent thing of the same nature that eating: that it
conferreth nothing to get heaven, that it is nothing, is only an exercise:
that God makes no more account of men's fastings then of beasts: that God
requires it not, nor approves it.

ART. VI. WHETHER FASTING BE A preservative against the Devil?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 17. v. 21. But this kind (of Devils) is not cast out but Some devils
cast out by fasting.
by prayer and fasting.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Stapleton in Matthew. 17. ver. 28. Prayer and fasting must be added as a most
sovereign antidote to drive away these kind of Devils.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in Math. 17. ver. 21. cit. The ridiculous Papists make No Devils cast
out by fasting.
fasting an antidote to drive away devils.

Illyricus in Claue part. 2. tractat. 6. col. 535 thus expounds the foresaied
words of Scripture: This kind etc. that is, they cannot be cast out, but by
earnest prayer proceeding of earnest repentant and penitent heart; and so he
gives no virtue to fasting.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that certain Devils are not cast out but by
fasting and prayer. The same say Catholics. Protestants plainly say, that it
is ridiculous to make fasting an antidote against Devils.

ART. VII. WHETHER CHOICE OF meats be lawful or virtuous?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Daniel 10. v. 3. In those days I Daniel mourned the days of Daniel used
choice of meats.
three weeks, desiderable bread I did not eat, and flesh and wine entered not
into my mouth.

Math. 3. v. 4. And his (S. Ihons) meat was locusts and wild And S. Ihon
Baptiste.
honey: Luc. 1. v. 15. And wine and sicer he shall not drink. c. 7. ver. 33.
For Ihon baptist came nether eating bread nor drinking wine. The like is said
of the mother of Sampson Iudic 13, v. 4. and of the Rechabits Hieremie. 35.

Romans 14. v. 21. It is good not to eat flesh, and not to drink Good, not to
eat flesh or drink wine.
wine, nor that wherein thy brother is offended or scandalized or weakened,

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm de bonis operibus in part. l. 2. c. 7. If Ionadab could for ever
forbid his children and nephews wine, and both his commandment and their
obedience pleased God, why cannot our mother the Church forbid her children
some meats for a time, so that both the Churches precept and our obedience
please God.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker ad Ration. 9. Campiani: It is madness, to have Madness, to use
choice of meats for religion. Foolish and wicked. No service of God.
any choice of meats for religion sake.

Perkins in Cathol. Contr. 12. cap. 2. We hold this distinction of meats both
to be foolish and wicked.

Confessio Argentinensis c. 9. We have omitted that choice of meat which was
commanded upon certain days which Saint Paul attributes to the doctrine of
Devils.

Calvin in Luc. 1. v. 15. We must not imagine a service of God No service of
God. Fond superstition.
in o^stayning from wine.

Beza in Confess. cap. 5. sect. 41. This choice of meats, which some make a
service of God, we doubt not with the Apostle to call a devilish and most fond
superstition.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture express^ly says, that Daniel many days abstained from fle^h, wine,
and desiderable bread: that S. Ihon Baptiste nether eat bread, nor drunk wine
or sicer that it is good not to eat flesh nor to drink wine. Catholics say the
same.

Protestants expressly say, that the choice of meats is superstitious,
foolish, madness, wicked and devilish doctrine: that there is no service of
God in abstinence from wine. And thus much of Fasting.

ART. VIII. WHETHER IT BE LAWFVLL to pray for all?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Timoth. 2. verse. 1. I desire therefore first of all things, that We must
pray for all men.
obsecrations, prayers, postulations, thanks giuings, be made for all men.

Exodus 32. v. 32. Moises thus prays for the idolatrous people: Moses prayed
for all.
Either forgive this tr^spasse, or if thou do not, strike me out of the book
that thou have written.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Septem verbis Dom. c. 1. says that Christ upon the
cross prayed for Pilat, and the chief Priests, Scribes, and people of the
Jews.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Rainolds in Apologia thesium. p. 245. Nether must we pray We must not pray for
every one.
for every one. For we are forbidden to pray for them that sin to death.
Wherefore where we are bidden to pray for all the world: All, designeth all
kinds, not all of every kind.

Beza in Joan. 5. ver. 16. Hereof it follows, that no sins Not for
reprobates.
are venial to the reprobates, and therefore we must not make prayers for the
sins of the reprobates.

Daneus in orat. Dom. p. 593. says that: Thy will be done, belongs not
properly to reprobates, as if we prayed God that they quietly and willingly
submitt themselves to God and do and execute his will, out of their heart,
faithfully and obediently.

Piscator in Thesibus lib. 3. loco 11. We ought to pray for all Nor for those
that sin to death.
that are alive, they only excepted, whom we see do sin to death. The same
also says Bucanus in Instir. loco. 17. to which he adds loco 37. that a man
must not pray for the obdurated, or those that sin against the Holy Ghost.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that we must pray for all, and that Moises prayed
for the idolatrous people amongst whom many were reprobates. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that we must not pray for all, not for reprobates,
not for those that sin to death, not for the indurated, not for those that
sin against the Holy Ghost.

ART. IX. WHETHER IT BE LAWFVLL to pray for the dead?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
2. Match. 12. verse. 43. And (Judas) making a gathering, sent twelve thousand
drachmes of silver, to Jerusalem, for sacrifice to be offered the for sins
of the dead. Et ver. 16. It is therefore a A holy thing to pray for the dead.
holy and healthful cogitation to pray for the dead, that they may be loosed
from sins.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent. Sess. 25. c. 1. The Catholic Church teaches, that the
souls detained in Purgatory are helped by the suffrages of the faithful.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Jewel art. 18. sect. 3. p. 433. This kind of prayer (for the dead) It is
superstitions.
is mere superstitious, and utterly without warrant of Gods word.

Confessio Seotica generalis: We detest his (Popes) prayers Detestable.
for the dead.

Calvin Epistola 366. That form of prayer: God give the One may wish well to
the dead but not pray.
dead a good and happy resurrection, because it is not fitting to the rule of
good prayer, is to be rejected: yet I do not deny, but that one may make such
a wish.

Brentius in Dom. 12. post Trinit. Albeit we may wish all happiness to the dead,
yet prayer for them is vain.

Confessio Witten bergen. c. de Memoria de functorum. Charity requires, that
we wish all rest and happiness in Christ unto the dead: But there is no
testimony of Prophetical and Apostolic doctrine, that they be helped by our
prayers.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the people of God under the law offered
sacrifices for the dead, which Calvin also confesses 3. Instit. c. 5.. 8. and
that it is a holy and healthful thing to pray for them that they be loosed
from their sins. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that it is lawful to wish good to the dead, but
that to pray for them is vain, superstitious, and detestable. And yet Luther
Sermon. de de Diuite and Lazaro to. 7. f. 268. de Captiuit. Babylon. f 72. and
cont. Catharin. f. 151. Et in Hospin. Concordia discor. f. 225. Apologia
Confess. Augustan. c. de vocabulis Missae. Agenda, Anglica apud Bucerum p. 427.
449. Zuinglius art. 60. Vrbanus Regius and others, allow praying for the dead.

ART. X. WHETHER IT BE LAWFVLL to pray for that which God has not promised?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 26. ver. 39. Christ thus prays: My Father, if it be Christ prayed for
that which was not promised to him. And S. Paul. And Abraham and David.
possible, let this chalice pass from me.

2. Cor. 12. verse. 8. For the which thing thrice I besought our Lord, that it
might depart from me, and he said to me: My grace suffices the. In like
sort Abraham prayed for Sodom Genesis 18. David for the life of his child 2.
Kings 12. and Hieremie for the saving of Jerusalem Hier. 32. and yet had no
promise of that for which they prayed.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. de bonis operibus c. 9. Sometime the prayer is meritorious and
not impetratorious, as when a just man of charity asks that which perhaps is
not expedient for him, as when S. Paul prayed thrice that the prick of the
flesh might be taken from him -- In prayer is not required faith wherewith we
certainly believe that absolutely God will do that which we ask.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins reform. Cathol. Contr. 4. page 79. That which we are to ask God in
prayer, we must believe it shall be given us as we ask it. -- It is a rule of
Gods word requiring that in every petition we bring a particular faith whereby
we believe, that the thing lawfully asked shall be given accordingly.

Tindal in Fox his Acts page 1139. To ask of God more then he has promised,
comes of a false faith, and is plain idolatry. Idolatry, to pray for more
then God has promised


Melancthon in Disput. to. 4. p. 487. As often as thou call upon God in any
business, first of all think certainly that thy prayers are heard for the Son
of God. Unless this faith go before, thy prayer is vain. ib. p. 555. Let
faith assure us, that our Prayer for corporal goods ever heard. Every good
man assured to be heard. No prayer to be made with out Gods promise.
prayer for corporal goods is heard, and never frustrate.

Illyricus in Marci 5. v. 28. Every godly man in praying persuades himself
by the word and promise of God, that in his petition he is heard, no less then
if he heard God answering with a clear voice, that he had heard him.

Luther Postilla in Dom. 5. post Phasca fol. 261. Who pray without a promise of
God, they imagine that God is angry with them, whom by prayers they endeavor
to appease. -- There God hears not, and our praeier and labor is lost.

Daneus in Exam. Kemnitij c. 29. We ought to ask nothing Nothing to be asked
but what is promised.
of God, but what he has promised.

Calvin in Iacobi 1. v. 6. As we cannot pray, but the word must go before, so
must we believe before we pray. For by praying we testify, that we hope for
the grace which he has promise. -- Wherefore it is faith which relying upon
Gods promise, assures us to obtain that which we ask. -- This is a notable
place, for to refute that doctrine of Popery, to wit, that we must pray with
doubt and uncertain opinion of success. The like he has. 3. Instit. c. 20..
15.

Confession of Saxony cap. 22. The prayer which is without faith, that is,
where a man assures not himself that God allows and hears his prayer, is
vain.

Apologia Confessio. Augustanae cap. de Tradition. Of our prayer we must be
assured, that it is effectual, that it is heard.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ prayed for the taking away the cup
of his passion; S. Paul for taking away the prick o the flesh; Abraham for
Sodom, and the like; and yet they had no promise nor particular faith, that
they should obtain those things. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that it is lost labor and idolatry, to pray for
any thing which God has not promised: that we ought not to pray for any thing
which God has not promised.

ART. XI. WHETHER ANY OBTAIN some thing of God for his own or his prayers
worth?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Joan. 3. verse. 21. If our heart do not reprehend us we have We obtain
because we keep the co^mandments. Good hears the just.
confidence toward God, and whatsoever we shall ask, we shall receive of him,
because we keep his commandments.

1. Peter 3. v. 12. The eyes of our Lord are upon the just and his ears unto
their prayers.

James 5. verse. 16. The continual prayer of a just man avails much.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. lib. 1. de bonis operibus c. 9. Scripture in diverse places
witnesses, that justice is required in him that prays for to obtain
assuredly.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther Postilla in Dom. 5. post Pascha fol. 263. Whence None heard for his
worthiness.
it follows, that none receaueth any thing of God for his own worth or the
worth of his prayer. Thy worthiness does not help thee, thy unworthiness does
not hinder thee. Of the same opinion are other Protestants, who deny that
there is any worth in us or in our works.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that a good conscience breeds confidence in God:
that they who keep Gods co^mandments receive what they ask: that Gods ears
are unto the prayers of the just; that a just man's prayer avails much.
Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that the worthiness of him that prays,
profits nothing: that no man obtains any thing of God for his own or his
prayer worthiness.

ART. XII. WHETHER IT BE LAWFVLL to pray publicly in the Church in an unknown
tongue?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Cor. 14. ver. 17. the Apostle thus says of one that publicly prayed in
the Church in an unknown tongue: For Praying in a strange tongue is good.
thou indeed give thanks well.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in 1. Corint. 14. v. 17. The Apostle condemns not, but
approves prayer in an unknown tongue.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Scotica Confessio generalie: We detest his (Popes) prayers It is detestable.
in an unknown tongue. The like has Co^fess. Austria art. 14. and Heluet. c.
22.

Iuel art. 3. sect. 1. says, that it is not only repugnant to the Repugnant
to Scripture and common sense.
Scriptures of God, but also contrary to the sense of nature.

Calvin 3. Instit. cap. 20.. 33. Who can sufficiently wonder at the unbridled
license of the Papists, who fear not to roar out their prayers in an
unknown tongue?

Peter Martyr in 1. Cor. 14. verse. 17. The Apostle in this his saying does not
approve the action. But says. Thou give thanks well, because the words
uttered by thee, being of the Holy Ghost, cannot but have a good sense. Et in
ver. 14. The idiots are reprehended, Praying in Latin, is reprehended. Not to
be suffered.
who pray in Latin, Pater noster.

Aretius in locis part. 3. fol. 21. It is manifest, that a strange tongue is
not to be suffered in Christ's Church.

Beza in Respons. ad Acta Colloq. Montibel. part. 2. p. 26. Does not the
Apostle in express words forbid to pray in a Forbidden.
tongue which is not understood of those that are present?

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that he who prays in the Church in a strange
tongue, gives thanks well: The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that such kind of prayer is to be condemned, and
expressly forbidden of the Apostle.

ART. XIII. WHETHER WE BE COMmanded to say our Lords prayer?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Luc. 11. ver. 1. and 2. One of his disciples said to him: Lord teach We are
commanded to say our Lords prayer.
us to pray, as Ihon also taught his disciples. And he said to them: when you
pray say: Father etc.

Math. 6. verse. 9. Thus therefore you shall pray: Our Father etc.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de bonis operibus cap. 4. Our Lords prayer excels all
other forms of prayer, in authouitie, brevity, perfection, order, efficacy,
necessity. -- In necessity, because there is no other form of prayer which
all Christians in the very words are commanded to keep and use but this.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Bucer in Mat 6. Note, pray in this manner, not these words, Not commanded.
as the common people hitherto was foolishly persuaded, thinking that they had
prayed well, when they had mumbled up these words -- Nether are we here taught
in what words we should pray, but what we ought to ask with hearty desire.

Calvin in Math. 6. v 9. Christ bids not his disciples pray in these words,
but only shows them whither they ought to refer all their desires and
prayers.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Christ commanded that when we pray we say:
Our father. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Christ taught us not to say these words, that
he taught not what words we should pray withal: that it is a foolish
persuasion to think that the recital of our our Lords prayer, were a good
prayer. Which is so contrary to Scripture as some Protestants confess it. See
lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. XIV. WHETHER IT BE LAWFVLL to vow any thing to God?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Psalm. 75. v. 12. Vow ye, and render to our Lord, your God. Lawful, to vow.


Isaie 19. v. 21. it is said of the time of Gospel: And they shall vow vows
to our Lord, and pay them.

Eccles. 5. verse. 3. If thou have vowed any thing to God, differ not to pay
it. But whatsoever thou have vowed, pay it.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 2. de Monachis. c. 17. Vows have never ceased in Christ's
Church since the promulgation of the Gospel.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Tindal in Fox his Acts p. 1138. Vows are against the ordinance Unlawful.
of God. Which Fox there mantaineth.

Luther de Ratione Confitendi to. 2. fo. 28. I for my part could wish, that
there were no vows at all among Christians besides these which which we made
in baptism. De Captiuit. Babylon. fol. 77. One thing here I add, which I
would that I could persuade all men, that is, that all vows whatsoever were
taken away and avoided. fol. 78. It is not a little contrary to Christian
Contrary to Christian life.
life, that a vow is a certain ceremonial law, a humane tradition or
presumption, from which the Church is freed by baptism.

Vrbanus Regius de Noua and vet. doctrina tom. 2. fol. 26. Iudaical.
That rite of vowing was Iudaical, and is now abolished as sacrifices are.

Zuinglius in Explanat. art. 30. I speak of vows in general, Contempt of
God.
that by Christ they are abolished. To vow, is a curiosity, contempt, and
abasing of God, and exaltation of men. -- Wherefore Sinful.
seeing vows proceed of perfidiousnesse, and fight against God, they are sins.

Peter Martyr l. de votis col. 1337. Vows do no more continue, the Gospel
being now revealed and brought in. And 1383. Become not Christians.
I said indeed and recall not, but make good, that vows do not become
Christians.

Daneus Contr. 5. p. 1020. God no where has commanded or prescribed that any
thing should be vowed unto him.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that Christians shall vow to God, and exhorts
them to vow and to pay their vows. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that vows are against Gods ordinance, that they
fight against God, proceed of perfidiousnesse, are sins,nnes, humane
presumption, curiosity, contempt of God, and that God never appointed them:
that they are abolished, continue no longer, become not Christians, and that it
were to be wished, that they were all taken away.

ART. XV. WHETHER ALMS DELIVER from death and sin?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Tob. 4. v. 11. Alms delivers from all sin, and from death. Alms deliver
from sins and death.
c. 12. v. 9. Alms delivers from death, and that is it which purges sins,
and makes to find mercy and life everlasting.

Luke 11. v. 41. Give alms, and behold all things are clean unto you.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Promptuar. Morali Dom. 1. post. Pentecost. By the liberality
of alms we oftentimes avoid the just punishments of sins, and many assaults
of the Devil.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Aretius in locis part. 1. f. 90. Alms delivers not from te^porall Nether
from temporal nor eternal death. Not from sin.
death, nor also delivers from eternal death.

Confessio Wittenbergens. c. de Eleemosyna: What need had there been of the
passion of Christ to blot out sins, if they be blotted out by the merit of
alms?

Apologia Confess. Augustanae c. de Resp. ad argumenta: We will not say that
(speech of Tobie) is an hyperboll, although it must be so understood, lest it
detract from the praises of Christ.

Vallada in suo Apologia cap. 22. This manner of speech of Tobie is
hyperbolicall.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that alms delivers from death and sin; The
same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that it delivers not either from temporal or
eternal death: that if it did deliver from sin, Christ's death had not been
needful.

ART. XVI. WHETHER IT BE LAWFVLL to sell all, and give it to the pore?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 19. v. 21. If thou will be perfect, go sell all that thou Perfect men
must give all to the pore.
have, and give to the pore, and thou shall have treasure in heaven. v. 27.
Then Peter answering, said to him: Behold we have left al things, and have
followed thee.

Act. 4. v. 32. Nether did any one say, that ought was his own, of those
things which he possessed, but all things were common unto them.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Mathei 19. v. 21. It was the error of Vigilantius, and it is
now of Calvin and of all Heretics to deny, that voluntary poverty is a mean
and instrument of greater perfection,

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Apologia Confessio. Augustanae. cap. penult. The forsaking Forsaking of goods
not counseled. A humane tradition. Not Catholic doctrine.
of goods has no commandment nor counsel in the Scripture. Again: It is a
mere humane tradition and unprofitable worship.

Confessio Wittenbergens. c. de votis: The kind of vowing single l^fe,
poverty and obedience agrees not with the true Catholic doctrine.

Perkins in reform. Cathol. cap. 8. p. 166. The second is the vow of poverty
and monastical life, in which men bestow all Against Gods will.
they have on the pore and give themselves wholly and only to prayer and
fasting. This vow is against the will of God. The like he has in Casibus
Conscient. col. 1125.

Morton l. 1. Apologiae c 40. Your doctrine (of giving all) Sauoureth heresy.
sauoureth rather heresy, then religion.

Whitaker Contr. 2. q. 5 c. 7. Monks and Jesuits nether marry Is
Anabaptisticall.
wives, nor have any thing proper, but have all things common: But this, to
have all things common, is Anabaptisticall.

Melancthon in locis tit. de Paupertate: The Gospel nether counsaileth nor
commands to leave our goods, unless they be taken from us, nether
counsaileth it nor commands to make things common.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that to give all to the pore is a mean of
perfection: that the Apostles forsake all: and that the first Christians had
all things common. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the Scripture counsaileth not to forsake our
goods: that it is a mere humane tradition: that it agrees not with true
Catholic doctrine; that it rather sauoureth heresy then religion: that to have
all things common, is Anabaptisticall.

ART. XVII. WHETHER PENANCE BE commanded to all?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Act. 17. v. 30. God now denounces unto men, that all every Penance commanded
to all
where do penance. c. 20. v. 21. Testifying unto Jews and Gentiles penance
toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. And To Jews and Gentiles.
c. 8. v. 22 it is said to Simon Magus. Do penance from this thy wickedness.

Luc. 24. v. 27. It behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again To all nations.
from the dead the third day, and penance to be preached in his name, and
remission of sins unto all nations.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 3. de Paenitent. cap. 2. Who have committed a mortal sin,
are bound by Gods law to do penance.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in Apoc. 2. to. 2. This precept of repentance, is not given Penance
not commanded to every one.
severally to every one, but only to the Church of God, or to that people
which at last shall be the Church.

Calvin de Praedest. page 706. God is said to will life, as he God wills not
penance to all but by word.
wills penance. But this he wills, because by his words he inuiteth all to
it. And of the same mind are others, who say, that God wills not the
salvation of any but of the elect only, otherwise then by his word; For if
indeed he will not have the reprobate do penance, but only in word or show,
surely nether does he command them to do pe^nance, otherwise then in word, and
in outward show.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that God denounces penna^ce to all men every
where, to Jews and Gentiles, to all Nations, to Simon Magus. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that God commands not penance to every one, but
only to his Church, or to these who at last shall be his Church: that he does
not will penance to all but only in word.

ART. XVIII. WHETHER CHASTISMENT of the body be a part of penance?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 11. v. 21. Woe be to the Corozain, woe be to thee Bethsaida. For if in
Tire and Sidon had been wrought the miracles that have been wrought in you,
they had done penance in Bodily chastizment a part of penance.
hairecloth and ashes long ago.

Job. 42. v. 6. I reprehend my self, and do penance in imbers and ashes.

Jonas. 3. v. 6. And he rose up out of his throne, and cast away his garment
from him, and was clothed in sackcloth and sat in ashes. And he cried and
said in Niniue from the mouth of the King and his Princes, saying: Men and
beasts and oxen and cattle, let them not taste any thing nor feed, and let
them not drink water. And let men and beasts be covered with sackclothes.

Joel. 2. v. 12. Convert to me in all your heart, in fasting, and in weeping,
and in mourning.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Math. 11. erv. 21. It is convinced out of this place, that
penance properly consists not only in change of life and repentance, but
also in penal works.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Willet Contr. 14. q. 1. p. 711. Ashes, sackoth, was no part of No part of
penance.
repentance, but an outward testification of their inward grief.

Whitaker Praefat. ad Demonstrat. Sanderi. I said, that penance did not
consist in certain external punishments, but in inward grief conceived of
the remembrance of sin, and in amendment of life.

Calvin in Math. 11. ver. 21. Penance is here described by external Christ
regards notmuch corporal penance.
signs, whereof then there was solemn use in the Church of God: not that
Christ insisteth much upon this upon this point, but he accomodateth himself
to the capacity of the common people. Et Concione 158. in Job: Sackcloth and
ashes are only an external sign of penance.

Beza in Math. 11. v. 21. cit. Which custom (of casting ashes upon themselves)
was after word translated to those whom they called Penitents, I wish it had
been done with more judgment and better success.

Vorstius in Antibellarm. p. 439. Painful works, are only outward, and
oftentimes deceitful and feigned signs of penna^ce. Wherefore they are not
parts of true penance.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that penance in sackcloth and ashes is good: that
God bids us to convert to him in fasting, weeping, and mourning: that the
Niniuits did penance in sackcloth and ashes, and Job in embers and ashes. The
same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that Christ did not much insist upon sackcloth and
ashes: that they are no parts of penance, but only an outward sign thereof:
that penance consists not in outward punishment: that the custom of casting
ashes upon penitents was done without good judgment.

ART. XIX. WHETHER THE PENANCE of the Ninevites were true?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Jonas 3. v. 10. And God saw their (Ninevites) works, that they were converted
from their evil way: and God had mercy on Penance of Ninevites, was true.
the evil which he had spoaken, that he would do to them, and he did it not.
Et ver. 5. And the men of Niniue believed in God, and they proclaimed a fast,
etc.

Math. 12. v. 41. The men of Niniue shall rise in judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it because they did penance at the preaching of
Jonas.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Catechismus ad Parochos cap. de Paenitentia: There are most clear examples of
the Niniuits, of David, of the Penitent woman, of the Apostles: all which
imploring the mercy of God with many tears, obtained pardon of their sins.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Beza lib. quaestion. vol. 1. Theol. page 674. God approved Not true penance.
the penance of the Ninevites, although it was not true penance, but some
kind of humiliation under the mighty hand of God.

Sadeel de vera peccator. remiss. p. 109. It is very absurd to compare those
Heathen (Ninevites) strangers from Gods covenant, and void of true doctrine,
who had heard nothing of the true God, nothing of the M^ssias, with godly men
receiving the benefit of Christ with true faith.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says that the Ninevites believed in God, did penance,
were converted from their evil way. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that the Niniuits were void of true doctrine, had
heard nothing of the true God, and that their penance was not true.

ART. XX. WHETHER EREMITICALL life be lawful?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Luc. 1. verse. 80. And the child grew and was strenghtned in Eremiticall life
lawful.
spirit, and was in the deserts until the day of his manifestation in Israel.

Math. 4. v. 1. Then Jesus was led of the Spirit into the desert.

Hebr. 11. v. 38. Wandering in deserts, in mountains and dens, and in caves
of the earth.

Marc. 1. ver. 13. And he (Jesus) was in the desert forty days Christ in the
desert with beasts.
and forty nights, and was tempted of Satan, and he was with beasts.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Promptuar. Dom. 2. Aduentus: Our Heretics will not that S.
Ihon lived in a desert poperly termed, in a wilderness, in solitude, lest so
notable example of his may seem to patronise our Ermits and Anchorets.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
The Magdeburgians Centur. 1. l. 1. cap. 10. Luke reports Eremiticall life,
superstitious.
that the child (Ihon) abode in the desert unto the day of his manifestation;
which is not to be understood of any den far from all conversation of men,
as if he had lurked there like a bear or a hater of mankind, as afterward
Ermits and such kind of men feigned to themselves superstitious religious. Et
Cent. 4. c. 10. they write thus of Ermits: But who will not accurse these
monsters of men, as enemies of humane society, and offending against the whole
second table?

Perkins in reformed Cathol. C. 8. p. 168. For time of peace, I see no cause of
solitary life.

Polanus in Disput. priuatis disput. 22. Eremiticall life, is Savage and in
humane.
clownish, savage, and far from civility. The like say other Protestants.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that S. Ihon Baptist was from a child in the
desert, that Christ was led of the Spirit into the desert, and was there
forty days and with beasts: that Gods Saints wandered in deserts, denns, and
caves of the earth. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that eremiticall life, is clownish, savage, and
superstitious, that Eremits deserve to be accursed, and do sin against the
whole second table.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF GOOD works in particular.
That which we have related in this chapter evidently shows, that Protestants
doctrine of good works in particular is clean contrary to the doctrine of
the holy Scripture. For the Scripture together with Catholics teaches, that
not to marry is good and counseled of God: that virginity is a virtue, and
better then the state of marriage: that fasting is a virtue and worship of
God, and an antidote against the Devil, and that choice of meats is lawful:
that we may pray for the dead, for all, and for that which God has not
promised, and in strange tongue, and that he that prays may be heard for his
own or his prayers worth: that it is lawful to sell all, and give to the
pore; that alms delivers from death and sin; that penance is commanded to
all: that punishment of the body is a part of penance: All which Protestants
deny.

They show also, that Protestants steal quite away Whatvertues Protest. reject.
many particular virtues, and many things also from other virtues which they
will seem to leave. For they take quite away the virtues of virginity, of
fasting, and vowing: They take from prayer, that it be made for the dead, for
all, and for that which God has not promised: They take from religion the
forsaking of goods, from alms the power of delivering from death and sin,
and from penance the punishment of the body. And thus much of good works:
Now of their contraries, that is, sins.

CHAPTER XV. OF SINS
ART. I. WHETHER SINS BE IMPVTED to the Elect and Faithful?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
REG. 2. C. 12. V. 5. and seq. And David said to Nathan: our Lord lives, the
man that has done this, is the child of death -- And Nathan said to Sin was
imputed to David.
David: Thou art that man. Thus says the Lord God of Israel: -- Why therefore
have thou contemned the word of the Lord that thou would do evil in my
sight -- For which thing the sword shall not depart from thy house for ever
because thou have despised me. The same teach both other places before cited,
which say that God is angry and hates the faithful when they sin
grievously: as also such as teach, that God punishes them for sins, and that
sins are mortal even to the elect faithful: Which we shall cite soon after.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Amiss. Great. c. 7. If sins do remain with a lively
justifying faith in men that are once justified, even by this they are not
imputed: nether are they so much venial and to be forgiven, as already
forgiven and remitted, nether make they a man guilty of any p^ine or
punishment: And there is no man but sees, how absurd and pernicious this
doctrine is.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Wootton in Answer to Popish Articles. p. 92. Sin is Sin is remitted
before it be committed.
remitted as soon as it is committed, or rather before it be committed, a man
once justified having obtained full remission of all sins, past, present, and
to come.

Abbots in Diatribam Tomsonic. 20. That sins be not Not imputed to the elect.
imputed to the elect, pertains to mercy.

Luther in Gal. 2. to. 5. f. 229. Because justice and fulfilling of the law is
begun by faith, therefore for Christ in whom they believe, the rest of sins
and fulfilling of the law is not imputed. In c. 5. f. 420. A beleiuer, having
sin and sinning, nevertheless remains Not to the faithful.
godly. -- Albeit they have and commit sins, yet let them know that they are
not imputed to them through Christ. In c. 8. Isaiae Sin makes not Christians
guilty.
to. 4. f. 83. This is Christian liberty, that we may satisfy the law in some
part: But where we do not, there it does not make us guilty, because we have
remission of sins.

Calvin in Joan. 5. v. 29. No not sins, whereof the faithful Sin not
imputed to the faithful.
daily do make themselves guilty, are imputed to them. Et 3. In-Instit. cap.
4.. 28. he says that the sins of the faithful are venial, because they
are not imputed.

Beza in Epistola dedicator. Resp. ad Castle. p. 427. Sins are not imputed to
them that believe. Which he repeateth fol. Not to the beleiuers.
457. and vol. 3. p. 350.

Zanchius de Perseuerant. q. 1. c. 2. This is most certain, that God never
imputes sins to the elect. Not to the Elect.


Pareus l. 4. de Iustif. c. 1. after he had related these words of Luther:
Where faith, is no sin can hurt: adds, What more true?

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture plainly says, that sin was imputed to David albeit he was
faithful and elect. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that sin is not imputed to the faithful, never
imputed to the elect, that sin makes not the faithful guilty, hurts them
not: that a beleiuer even sinning remains godly: that sin is remitted to
him even before it be committed.

ART. II. WHETHER ANY SINS BE mortal to the faithful and elect?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Genesis 2. v. 17. it is said to Adam a faithful and elect man: Sin mortal to
Adam.
In what day soever thou shall eat of it, thou shall die the death.

Numbers 18. ver. 22. That the children of Israel approach not To the Israetes.
any more to the tabernacle, nor commit deadly sin.

Romans 5. v. 12. As by one man sin entered into this world and To all men.
by sin death, and so unto all men death did pass. Et v. 18. As by the
offense of one, unto all men to condemnation.

1. Cor. 15. v. 22. As in Adam all die. Et Epist. 2. cap. 5. v. 14. If one died
for all, then all were dead.

Ephesians. 2. v. 5. Even when we were dead by sins, quickened us together in
Christ.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Amiss Great. cap. 7. That all sins of the predestinate,
be termed venial, and all sins of the reprobates, mortal, is confuted out
of the examples of the Scripture with strong arguments, nor only of Catholic
Doctors, but also of Lutherans.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in 1. Joan. 5. v. 16. He denies, that they are sins to Grievous
sins of Saints, not mortal.
death, not only those in which the Saints do daily offend, but also if it
chance that sometimes they grievously provoke the wrath of God. 2. Instit. c.
8.. 59. The sins of Saints, are venial. l. 3. Venial.
c. 4.. 28. The sins of the faithful be venial.

Beza in 1. Joan. 5. v. 19. Hence it follows, that no sins are No sins of
the Elect, mortal.
mortal to the elect; none venial, to the reprobate.

Zanchius in Depulsione calum. to. 7. col. 258. Because sins are pardoned to
the elect, nor are imuputed to death, therefore in respect of the persons which
are in Christ, sins committed of them, cannot be called mortal. De
Perseuerantia ib. col. 156. The falls of Saints are not deadly to them, and
therefore they die not in Gods sight with such falls.

Musculus in locis tit. de Peccato: If the persons be elect and faithful in
Christ, it follows, that their sins are not mortal, but venial.

Bucanus in Instit. Theol. loco. 16. To the elect, all sins, All sins of
the Elect, be venial.
even the most grievous, are venial by Christ.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that sin was mortal to Adam, though he were both
faithful and elect: that by him death and condemnation passed unto all men:
that all men were dead in him. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that no sins are mortal to the elect and
faithful: that no sins are imputed to them to death: that no falls are
deadly to them, nor that they die with any whatsoever: that even most grievous
sins are venial to the elect. Which some Protestants confess to be against
Scripture. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. III. WHETHER OMELY Incredulity be sin?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Joan. 19. v. 11. Therefore he that has betrayed me to thee, has Sin, to
betraie Christ. Sin, to kill S. Stephen. Sin, to accept persons. Sin, not
to do the good one knows.
greater sin.

Act. 7. v. 60. Lord lay not this sin unto them.

James. 2. v. 9. But if you accept persons, you work sin. And c. 4. v. 17.
To one knowing to do good, and not doing it; to him it is sin.

CATH OLIKS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Stapleton orat. Catechet. 2. etc. Pride is so capital a sin, as it is the
supreme head of all sins, even of them which are termed capital.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Luther Postilla in Dom. 4. post Pascha. fol. 260. The Lord Only incredulity
sin.
teaches here far otherwise, while he says: The holy Ghost reproves the
world for sin because they believe not in me, where only incredulity is
accounted sin. In Disput. tom. Sin proper to incredulity.
1. f. 371. As nothing justifies but faith: so nothing sins but
incredulity. Justification is proper to sin in Quarto modo. No sin, but
incredulity.
all sort: so is sin to incredulity. lib. cont. Cathar. to. 2. fol. 156.
Christ has appointed, that there should be no sin but incredulity. Et in
postilla Domestica feriae 2. Pentecost. impress. 1601. There is no more any
sin, but not to believe.

Melancthon apud Cocleum in art. 6. Confess. August. As according to the
Gospel only faith is justice: So contrariwise according to the Gospel,
only incredulity is sin. Only incredulity, sin.


Calvin in Joan. 15. verse. 22. Christ by these words seems to insinuate, that
only ncredulitie is sin: and there are, who think so.

THE CONFERENCE.
The Scripture expressly says, that it was sin to betraye Christ, to kill
S. Stephen: that it is sin to accept persons, and not to do the good which
we know. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say: that there is no sin but incredulity, only
incredulity is sin: that sin is in all sorts proper to incredulity.

ART. IV. WHETHER SIN OUGHT to be overcome of the faithful?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Romans 6. v. 11. and seq. So think you also, that you are dead to We ought to
overcome sin.
sin -- Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that you obey
the concupiscences thereof.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Roman. 6. v. 12. If the Spirit struggle, but ouercometh not
sin in the bedie: then it obeys and yields to the concupiscences of the
body. How then does S. Paul exhort those that are regenerate in Christ, that
sin reign not in their bodies, and that they obey not concupiscences of the
flesh? These carnal and Epicurean Heretics will have the spirit to struggle
with the flesh, but not overcome it.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Beza in Romans 6. ver. 12. edit. An. 1565. and 1582. This exhortation is fitly
added to that which went before, that we may understand, We ought not to
overcome sin.
how far we be dead to sin as long as we live here: to wit, so far as
that the spirit do struggle (against sin) but not overcome. Of the same
opinion are others, who (as before we saw) do teach, that we ought not to do
good works. For if we ought not do good works, surely we ought not to
overcome sin.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that we ought to think our selves dead to sin:
that sin ought not to reign in us, nor we ought to obey the concupiscences
thereof. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that the spirit ought to struggle against sin, but
not so as it overcome it.

ART. V. WHETHER ANY THAT SERVE the flesh do also serve God?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Romans 8. v 13. If you live according to the flesh, you shall die. Livers
according to the flesh shall die. Please not God. Are of the Devil.
v. 8. They that are in the flesh, cannot please God.

Math. 6. v. 24. No man can serve two Masters.

1. Joan. 3. v. 8. He that commits sin, is of the Devil.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
D. Stapleton in Math. 6. v. 24. Who serve God, can nether serve the Devil, nor
the flesh.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Calvin in Math. 6. v. 24. It is surely true, that the faithful are never so
wholly obedient unto God, but that now and then they are withdrawn by the
vicious lusts of the flesh: but because Some seruer^ of the flesh are approved
of God.
they mourn under this miserable slavery and dislike themselves, nor serve
this flesh otherwise then against their will and striving, their desires and
endeauours are approved of God, even as if they did afford him entire
obedience. In Romans 8. v. 5. The Apostle testifies, that he accounts not them
carnal, who do aspire to heavenly justice, but who are wholly given to the
world.

Beza in Praef. ad Pastores Basil. vol. 1. page 427. To nill evil and yet to
do it, is the part of Saints who do wrestle.

Pareus l. 2. de Iustif. c. 7. Sons of the Devil, are not simply Not all
grievous sinners, Sons of the Devil.
(grievous) sinners, but obstinat sinners. l. 4. cap. 17. Nether the faithful
who sin by chance, or of themselves by weakness, but such as of themselves
give themselves to sin, serve the Devil and ought to be called sons of the
Devil.

Scarpe de Iustif. Contr. 13. They only are said to serve the Devil and to be
his sons, in whom sin reigns and who commit sin with a full will, but
the faithful do not so sin. See also what they say in the next article.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that who serve the flesh, shall die; nor ca^please
God: that none can serve twoe masters: that whosoever commits sin is of
the Devil. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that even the sons of God serve the flesh: that
the Apostle accounts none carnal but such as wholly give themselves to the
world: that only obstinat sinners are sons of the Devil: that the the
faithful sinning either of infirmity or wilfully, serve not the Devil: that to
nill evil and yet do it, is the part of Saints: that they only serve the
Devil who with full will commit sin.

ART. VI. WHETHER BY GRIEVOVS sins the faithful fall from grace?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Joan. 3. v. 8. He that commits sin, is of the Devil. v. 15. No
murderer has life in him. Sin makes to fall from grace.
You know, that no murderer has life everlasting abiding in himself.

Gal. 5. v. 4. You are euacuated from Christ, that are justified in the law,
you are fallen from grace.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Session. 6. cap. 15. We must teach, that grace of
justification once received, is lost, not only by infidelity, but also with
any other mortal sin, though faith be not lost.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Contr. 4. q. 6. c. 2. But it is more absurd which he S. Peter did not
leese grace
says, that Peter (by denying Christ) lost grace. Et Concione vlt. p. 696. To
go from grace, that is, to obey the concupiscence of the flesh, and to resist
Gods motions, and admonitions, is far from falling from grace.

Perkins de Baptismo to. 1. col. 819. This is most worthy of remembrance, that
the Apostle calls the Galathians even in that very time when they erred in
the foundation, and even were gone to an other Gospel, Sons of God, saying:
you all are the sons of God. For hereupon we may truly conclude, that not No
enormious sin obscureth grace.
any enormious sin, nor every error which is committed against the
foundation, obscurreth the grace and regeneration which makes the Sons of
God, much less extinguish it. In Serie Caufarum c. 42. By falls, grace and
faith are not taken Sin takes not away grace.
away but illustrated. cap. 51. It shall appear out of the word of God, that
it is far otherwise the^ that grace is extinguished by every mortal sin.
And de Sermon. Dom. tom. 2. col. 391. he says, that David and Peter even when
they sinned as they did, were by regeneration the Sons of God, and the grace
of God remained in them.

Abbots in Diatribam Tomsoni c. 22. David was not yet David just, when he
committed murder.
quite spoiled of spiritual life, not yet deprived of justification, but
worthy to be deprived. Again: Guilt of sin does not take away
justification, does not extinguish the Holy Ghost, does not exclude the right
of inheritance to the kingdom of God, but only the use thereof.

The university of Zurich apud Zanchium tom. 7. col. 74. Seeing the strife of
the spirit with the flesh is always in Saints, it follows that the spirit
does always remain in them, though sometimes they be ouercomen with the
weight of the flesh.

Calvin in 2. Petri 2. v. 21. The faithful also sin, but they Faithful in
grace even when they sin.
fall not from grace.

Beza in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 388. Whosoever is elect, albeit Fall not from
grace by sin
he sin grievously, as is said of David, yet he falls not from grace, into
which God once received him. In Confess. c. 4. sect. 20. The Holy Ghost did
testify to their (David Peter) spirit, that they, though they had most foully
fallen, were not withstanstanding accounted in the number of the Sons of God.
And in Colloq. cit. When Smidelin had said: I ask whether David David
adultering kept the holy Ghost.
committing adultery, lost the Holy Ghost, or no? Beza answered: He lost him,
not but kept him. Which p. 381. he expliteth by this example: As druncknesse
can for a time take away the use of reason, but yet not reason it self: So
sin ca^ for a time take away from the elect the use of the Holy Ghost and of
grace, but not grace and the Holy Ghost himself, who abides in them and
departs not from them, as nether he departed from David. Et 2. part. resp. ad
Acta Colloq. Montisbel. p. 71. It is a vain Nether venial nor mortal sins
exclude the holy Ghost.
distinction between venial and mortal sins. For nether the one nor the
other cast of the Holy Ghost, but interrupt his efficacy.

Zanchius de perseuerantia tom. 7. col. 359. says, that it cannot be said
without blasphemy, that Saints by sinning leave to be the sons of God, and
leese all right of everlasting life. Et col. 150. The Holy Ghost departs
not, but is contristated with our sins.

Pareus l. 3. de Iustif. c. 14. denies, that either David by adultery and
murder, or Solomon by idolatry or S. Peter by denying Christ, lost
justification. And l. de Amiss. Great. c. 7. When the spirit ouercometh the
flesh, there cease not to be flesh in Saints, but it abides tamed. In like
sort, when the flesh ouercometh the spirit, as in David when he fell, the
Spirit does not cease to be in Saints, but abides ouercomen and troubled. Et
c. 11. Reconciliation, grace, love, adoption, not every one, nay never a sin
of the faithful, can dissolve.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that who sought justification in the law, were
euacuated from Christ, were fallen from grace: who commits sin, is of the
Devil: and and that no murderer has life in him. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the faithful by sinning do not fall from
grace: that David in adultery and murder, S. Peter in denial of Christ,
Solomon in idolatry, lost not justification: that the sins of the faithful
take not away the Holy Ghost but only the use thereof: that the Holy Spirit
is in the faithful when they are ouercomen of the flesh: that no sin of
theirs can dissolve grace: that no enormious sin extinguisheth grace. Which
some Protestants confess to be against Scripture. See lib. 2. cap. 30.

ART. VII. WHETHER SIN CAN stand with justice?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
2. Cor. 6. v. 14. What participatio^ has justice with iniquity, Justice and
Iniquity stand not together.
or what society is there between light and darkness, and what agreement with
Christ and Belial?

Wisdom. 1. verse 4. Wisdom will not enter into a militious soul, nor dwell in
a body subject to sins.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Amiss. Great. cap. 12. Sin fights with grace, and
cannot remain together with justice.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Abbots in Diatribam Tomsoni c. 25. Sin dwells together Justice dwells
with sin. Faith with infidelity.
with justice in us.

Perkins in Galat. 5. True faith is always mingled with contrary
incredulity, in so much as they who believe, feel much incredulity in
themselves.

Luther in Gal. 3. to. 5. f. 335. A Christian is together just and a sinner, a
friend and enemy of God. Et Assert. art. 31. tom. 2. If therefore every one
be also a sinner whilst he is just, what can A work partly good partly
naught. Life and death together.
follow more evidently, then that a work also is partly good, partly evil?

Calvin cont. Franciscan. libertin. p. 471. Behold how contraries may be
together in one subject: For life is begun, and much of death remains. In
Math. 17. verse. 24. Seeing faith is no where perfect, it follows that we are
partly incredulous. In Luc. 1. verse. 6. The justice which in them is praised,
depends of Gods free pardon, and therefore he imputes not that injustice
which remains in them.

Beza lib. Quaest. vol. 1. page 672. In one and the self same Purity and
filth, light and darkness together.
subject, but in diverse respects, are purity and filth, light and darkness,
faith and incredulity.

Pareus l. 4. de Iustif. c. 17. I answer, that there is no absurdity, that
faith has sometimes did ust or incredulity mingled with it, and so by
accident, that faith is sin. l. 1. c. 14. A sinner Faith is sin by
accident. The same man just and and wicked. The same work, good and evil.
beleiuing is in the first moment of justification justified by grace, and
wicked by nature. Et lib. 4. cap. 17. Works are good and not good, and worthy
of reward and punishment, but in diverse respects. Good, in so much as they are
of God and done of the regenerate according to the law, by faith, and to the
glory of God: Evil; as much as they are defiled by the impure flesh and other
sins. Again: They are worthy of reward in the court of mercy, but worthy
of punishment in the court of Gods justice.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that there is no participation of justice with
iniquity, no society of light and darkness: that the Holy Ghost dwells
not in a body subject to sin. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that a man is at once just and wicked, friend and
enemy of God: that life and death, purity and filth, light and darkness,
faith and incredulity, sin and justice, can be in the same man together, yea
that the same act can be at once good and ill, in the same act, faith and
incredulity. Which same Protestants confess to be contrary to Scripture. See
lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. VIII. WHETHER SINS MAY be redeemed by good works?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Daniel 4. v. 24. Redeem then thy sins with alms and Sins redeemed by
alms
thy iniquities with the mercies of the poor, perhaps he will forgive thine
offenses.

Prou. 15. v. 17. By mercy and faith, sins are purged. Et c. By mercy.
6. v. 6. By mercy and truth, iniquity is redeemed.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 2. de Paenit. c. 3. Catholics teach, that the temporal pains
of the other life, may be redeemed by fastings, prayers, alms, and other pious
and painful works of this life.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confessio Anglica art. 12. Good works cannot putt away Sins not redeemed by
all mes.
our sins.

Confessio Wittemberg. cap. de Eleemosyna: What need had there been of the
passion and death of Christ, if sin could be blotted out by the merit of
alms?

Hunnius de Iustif. page 197. Should not Christ have dyed in vain for sins,
if they could be redeemed by alms?

Herbrandus in Compendio loco de bonis operibus: If sins were redeemed with
alms, God should seem iniust, condemning the poor for sins, because he had
not given them riches, as he did to others, wherewith they might redeem their
sins.

Calvin 3. Instit. c. 4.. 25. Papists say, there are many helps Nor by good
works or charity.
whereby we may redeem our sins, as tears, fasting, offerings, duties of
charity: To such lies I oppose etc. In Luc. 7. v. 50. By this speech is
refuted their error, who think that sins can be redeemed by charity.

Sadeel de ver. peccat. remiss. p. 113. If expiation of sins be given to men's
works, then is Christ dead in vain?

Aretius in locis part. 1. f. 90. Inward clensing comes not of alms. If it
had been possible to redeem sins by alms, Christ had died in vain.

Homius in Disput. 70. Alms has not that force which Papists blasphemously
attribute to it, to wit, to dispose a man to the grace of justification, to
wipe away sins, and to satisfy for them.

Willet Contr. 19. q. 3. p. 1034. It is an abominable and blasphemous Not by
works.
opinion, that any man by his works should be able to redeem his sins.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that sins are redeemed by alms, that sins
are purged and redeemed by mercy. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that sins are not redeemed by alms or charity:
that it is not possible to redeem sins by alms: that Christ's eath had been
in vain if sins could be redeemed by alms: that it is abominable and
blasphemous to say that sin may be redeemed by alms. Which are so contrary
to Scripture as sometimes Protestants confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. IX. WHETHER TO ABSTAIN from great sins be necessary to salvation?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Cor. 6. v. 9. Do not err: Nether fornicatours, nor seruers of Great
sinners shall not enjoy heaven.
Idols, nor adulters, etc. shall possess the kingdom of God.

Ephesians. 5. v. 5. Know you this, that no fornicatour, or unclean, or covetous
person (which is the service of idols) has inheritance in the kingdom of
Christ and God.

Romans 8. v. 13. If you live according to the flesh, you shall die. Shall die.


CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 4. de Iustif. cap. 9. It can no way be, that faith accompanied
with evil works can save a man.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Contr. 2. q. 5. c. 7. We say: If any have an act of No sin hurts
where faith.
faith, that sin cannot hurt him: This Luther says, this we all say.

Luther de Captiuit. Babyl. to. 2. f. 74. So thou see how rich A Christian
cannot leefe his salvation by any sin.
a Christian or baptized men is; who, though he would, cannot leese his
salvation with what great sins soever, unless he will not believe. For no
sins can damn him, but only incredulity. De votis ib. fol. 281. There are
none so ill works of one that beleiueth in Christ, which can accuse and
condemn him. De liberate ib. f. 8. No work profits an infidel to justice
and salvation, No sin da^neth infidelity.
and contrariwise no evil work makes him evil or damned, but incredulity.
In c. 53. Isaiae to. 4. No sin can hurt him that beleiueth. In Gal. 2. to. 5.
f. 313. The false Apostles taught, that unless you live according to the law
you are dead before God: Paul teaches the plain contrary. In c. 4. f. 404.
The true knowledge of Christ or faith disputes whether thou have done good
works to justice, or evil works to damnation, but simply thus determines:
whether thou have done good works, thou art not therefore justified, or
whether thou have done ill, thou art not therefore damned. Et to. 1. Epist.
edit. Ienae f. 345. Be a sinner, and sin No murder or fornication can draw
us from Christ. Perseuerer in sin, are just.
stoutly: Sin shall not draw us from Christ, albeit we commit fornication or
murder a thousand times a day.

Bergenses apud Hospin. in Concordia discordi. f. 86. Justice is imputed even
to them who persevere in sin.

Melancthon in Joan. apud Cocleum in Art. 6. Confess. Augustanae. As by the
Gospel only faith is justice, so that though thou had done all the sins
of all me^, yet if thou beleiuest that the Father has mercy upon thee for
Christ, thou shall be safe: So contrariewise, by the Gospel only
incredulity is sin. Only incredulity is sine.


Reineccius to. 4. Armaturae. c. 15. Evil works do not make an evil man, to
wit, him that is in Christ.

Zuinglius lib. de. ver. and falsa relig. tom. 2. c. de Peccato: Only
increduli^ie is not pardoned.
It follows, that only incredulity is that, to which pardon is denied.

Calvin in Romans 8. v. 13. Howsoever we be yet subject to sin, nevertheless
he promises us life, so we prosecute our desire of mortifying the flesh.

Author resp. ad theses Valentinianas p. 925. This would that notable Divine
(Luther) and all our men; So we have true faith, no sin how great soever
shall hinder ws to be made partakers of the everlasting inheritance. See more
in my Latin book c. 15. art. 8.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly bids us not err, for nether fornicatours nor
adulterous, nor such grievous sinners shall possess the kingdom of God, and
that if we live according to the flesh we shall die. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that a Christian cannot be damned with what great
sins soever, so he will believe; that only incredulity can damn him: that
though he commit fornication and murder a thousand times aday shall not be
drawn from Christ: though he had done all the sins of all me^ he shall be
saved, if he believe: that pardon is denied only to incredulity: that so one
have faith, sins can not hurt him; that so we have true faith no grievous
sins whatsoever shall hinder us to enter into heaven: What other I pray you
is this but that voice of the Serpent to Eve; Ye shall not die.

ART. X. WHETHER SINS BE THE cause for which men are damned?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 25. v. 41. Get ye away from me you cursed into everlasting Men are
damned for not exercising charity. According to their works.
fire which was provided for the Devil and his Angels: For I was an hungered,
and you gave me not to eat etc.

Apocal. 20. v. 12. And the dead were judged of those things which were written
in the books according to their works.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 2. de Great. and lib. arb. c. 16. The Scripture every where
teaches, that eternal punishment is by the just judgment of God rendered to
men's sins.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther in Ionae. 1. to. 4. f. 409. Let us know, that we are not Men are not
damned in sin. Only incredulity damneth.
damned in sin, nor saved by good works.

Postilla in Dom. 8. post. Trinitat. f. 300. I observe, that no work is so
evil, as it can damn a man, only incredulity da^neth. That a man commits
adultery, that work condemns not, but adultery does show, that he has
lost his faith. In Dom. 4. post Pascha: Only incredulity is held for sin.
In die Ascensionis: Nether is there any sin so great, which can condemn a
man: only incredulity damneth whosoever are damned. Damnation follows no
sin but infidelity.

Iacobus Andreae in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 109. None but None but infidels are
damned. Men are not damned because they have sinned.
the incredulous is damned. 105. Unless incredulity were in those that are to
be damned, none should be damned. p. 447. Those that are to be adjudged to
eternal punishment are not therefore damned because they have sinned, but
because they would not embrace Christ with true faith. And in the margent:
Only incredulity damneth men. Whereupon Beza in the same Colloquie page 421.
and 448. and in part. 2. resp. page 215. said: Surely your speech seemed to us
intolerable: That men are not damned for sin, or because they have sinned.
And notwithstanding Beza himself in the same Colloq. page 103. says: The
only efficient cause of damnation, is our incredulity and 106. I say, that
only incredulity Only incredulity causes damnation.
is the efficient cause of the damnation of the impious. Et 2 part. resp. cit.
p. 6. Men perish not simply for sin, but for incredulity.

Schlusselburg. to. 7. Catal. Haeret. p. 824. No sins condemn, unless
incredulity be adjoined.

Bidembachius in Consensu Jesuit. and Christian. printed at Rochel 1584. p.
733. This saying is not ill used of some divines: It only damneth.
Only incredulity damneth: Wherefore either Torrensis must reprove the office
of the Holy Ghost reproving the world, and correct his tongue; or he must
grant that men are damned for incredulity alone.

Reineccius to. 3. Armaturae c. 12. Man is punished not because Men are not
punished because they did not well. Sins do not damn. Only infidelity is
cause of damnation
he did not well.

Zuinglius in Joan. 5. tom. 4. Sins do not make a man unjust, nor damn a
man, but impiety and incredulity.

Pareus in Collegio Theol. 7. Disput. 5. It is rightly said: That only
infidelity is the cause of damnation.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that men are damned for sins of omission, or
not doing that which they were bound to do: that every one is judged
according to his works. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that men are not punished because they did not
well: that sins condemn not me^: that men are not damned for sins or
because they have sinned: that no sin is so grievous as it can condemn a
man: that damnation follows no sin but incredulity; that only
incredulity damneth men: that men are damned for infidelity only.

ART. XI. WHETHER WE MVST GIVE account of our sins?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 12. verse. 36. I say unto you, that every idle word that Man must give
account of every idle word.
men shall speak, they shall render an account for it in the day of judgment.

Romans 14. v. 12. Every one of us for himself shall render account to God.

2. Cor. 5. v. 10. For we must all be manifested before the judgment Of things
that he has done.
seat of Christ, that every one may receive the proper things of the body
according as he has done either good or evil.

Apoc. 20. ver. 12. And the dead were judged of those things which were written
in the books according to their workss.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Act. 15. v. 11. Caluinists cannot abide, that works be called
to account: But these pestilent teachers lead their followers right to the
pit of hell, and directly gainesay the holy Scripture: Works must come to
account.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confessio Palatina p. 202. I believe and confess, that God Gods iugdment not
to be feared.
the Father for Christ's most full satisfaction, never remembers my sins, so
that I have no need to fear the judgment of God.

Luther in Gal. 1. to. 5. f. 282. Christ will not exact an account He will not
take account of our life. Not enter into judgment with us.
of us of our ill passed life.

Calvin in Math. 12. v. 36. In this is founded the trust of our salvation, that
God will not enter into judgment with us. In c. 27. v. 26. Nether is it to be
feared, that our sins come any more into Gods judgment. In Roman. 4. v. 6.
Who are covered with Christ's justice, they have not only God appeased to them,
but also to their works, whose spotts and blemishes are covered with Christ's
purity, that they come not to account. In Gal. 3. v. 22. It follows
undoubtedly: If works come into judgment, we are all damned.

Beza in Confess. c. 4. sect. 12. This sanctification of humane nature in
Christ imputed to us by faith, has made that the relikes of that corruption
which is even in the regenerate, come not to account before God.

Scarpe de Iustif. Contr. 7. These sins shall not come to account before God.

Tilenus in Syntagmate c. 67. The elect do know, that nether their deeds, nor
all their words shall be called to the reckoning of this (last) judgment.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that we shall give account of every idle word:
that every one shall give account for himself: that every one shall receive
for the good or ill which he has done: that the dead shall be judged according
to their works. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Christ will not exact an account of our life
ill passed: that God will not enter into judgment with us: that our sins
shall not come to judgment: shall not come to reckoning: that nether all our
deeds or words shall come to the reckoning of judgment.

ART. XII. WHETHER THE ELECT being justified commits ill or sin?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Psalm. 50. ver. 6. David says of himself: To thee only have David did ill.
I sinned, and have done ill before thee.

2. Reg. 12. v. 9. Nathan says to David: Why therefore have thou contemned
the word of the Lord, that thou would do evil in my sight?

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Amiss. Great. c. 7. David himself peculiarly bewaileth
his adultery and murder, and amongst other things says: To thee only have I
sinned, and have done ill before thee.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Zanchius de Perseuerantia tom. 7. col. 124. David sinned He committed not
sin.
indeed, but never committed sin. Et 147. The regenerate commit not sin.

Musculus in Locis tit. de Peccato. The elect commit not The elect commit not
sin.
sin, though they sometimes do sin. Again: The elect commit not sin, but
the reprobates.

Abbots in Diatribam Tomsoni c. 20. Christ manifestly shows, that it is one
thing to sin, an other to commit sin, and says, that the justified do not
commit sin.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that David (though an elect and justified man)
sinned, did ill before God, contemned Gods word. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that David never committed sin, that the
regenerate commit not sin, that the elect commit not sine.

ART. XIII. WHETHER THE ELECT himself, being justified, sins?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
2 Reg. 24. v. 17. David says of himself: I am he that have David sinned and
did wickedly. Did evil.
sinned, I have done wickedly: Et 1. Paralipomen. 21. v. 17. It is I that have
sinned, it is I that have done the evil.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Session. 6. Can. 23. If any shall say, that a man once
justified cannot sin, nor leese grace etc. be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Academie of Marpurg apud Zanchium in tom. 7. col. The elect do not sin.
66. The elect himself does it (sin) not, hut sin inhabiting in him.

Bucer in Matthaei 7. A Christian sins not, and yet he A Christian sins
not.
has sin.

Zanchius in Supplicat. ad Senatum Argentinensem tom. 7. col. 59. The elect
cannot properly obey the concupiscences Does not obey concupisce^ce.
of sin.

Whitaker Controu. 2. q. 2. cap. 2. True faithful can never be Is not
ouercomen of Satan.
ouercomen of Satan.

Contra-remonstrantes in Collat. Hagae. pap. 351. Sin has not rule over the
elect. And 347. There is plainly said, who is borne of God, that is, the true
faithful and regenerate, that he does not sin so, as sin rules over him
again, nor can so sin.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that David though justified, did evil; wickedly;
did sin The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that the elect him self commits not sin, that
a Christian sins not: that the elect properly obey not the concupiscences of
sin: that sin rules not over an elect.

ART. XIV. WHETHER THE ELECT being justified, ever do sin wittingly and
willingly?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
2. Reg. 12. v. 9. it is said to David: Why have thou conte^ned David
contemned Gods word. Despised God.
the word of the Lord. Et v. 10. The sword shall not depart from thy house for
ever, because thou have despised me.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Romans 6. v. 12. calls it filthy doctrine, that the elect
being justified do not shake of the yoke of the law of God of set malice; but
of frailty, because the flesh ouercometh the spirit striving.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Iacobus Andreae in Colloq. Montisb. p. 382. The elect The elect sin not of
purpose. Not of full will.
sin not of purpose, but against their will.

Perkins de Praedest. to. 1. col. 153. The regenerate do not sin of whole or
full will.

Academie of Zurich apud Zanchium to. 7. col. 74. Nether of them (David, Peter)
sinned with his whole heart and mind. And Zanchius himself ib. de
Perseuerant. col. 98. The true faithful being once ingrafted in Christ never
sin with their mind, that is with their whole mind, heart, and full will,
but Only of ignonorance.
only with flesh, ignorance, and frailty: Et col. 363. Saints never sin of
set malice, or (as others say) with their will, but always either of frailty,
or of ignorance.

Daneus Contr. de Baptismo c. 14. Men sin in two sorts: Either with whole
affection of mind feeling no fight between the spirit and flesh; and in this
sort do not they sin, who are borne of God and have true faith.

Pareus l. 1. de Amiss. Gratiae. cap. 6. Who is borne of God (...) not sin
with his whole heart. Et l. 3. de Iustif. c. 15. ^^ece we have clearly, that
the regenerate do not sin, to wit, with their whole heart and to death. (...)
death.


Scarpe de Iustif. Contr. 5. No faithful persons sin with full force of will.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly teaches, that David though an elect and justified man
contemned Gods word, despised God. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly teach, that the elect do not sin with their whole
heart, never sin with their will, never with full will: but only of frailty
or ignorance or with the flesh.

ART. XV. WHETHER THE WIDOWS whereof S. Paul speak did make void their faith
by marrying?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Tim. 5. v. 11. and 12. But avoid the younger widows, for when Somewidows
damned for marrying again.
they shall be wanton, in Christ, they will marry, having damnation because they
have made void their first faith.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 2. de Monachis c 24. The Apostle faith, that they make void
their first faith, which will marry.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Apologia Confess. Augustan. c. de votis: Paul condemns Not damned because
the married.
the widows, not because they married.

Whitaker l. 9. cont. Dureum sect. 39. The Apostle writes, that those widows
were to be damned, not because they married.

Lutherans de votis to. 2. f. 302. But nether does Paul condemn this in them,
that they will marry.

Illyricus in Claue part. 1. verbo Fides: There is no speech of breaking of vow
or of marrying again.

Zuinglius in Explanat. artic. 30. Paul says, that these broke their first
faith, because they used the pleasure of the flesh not with husbands: for they
who married, did not break their faith.

Peter Martyr libr. de votis col. 1352. It cannot be gathered hence, that to
have a will to marry was accounted sin in them.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that those widows whereof S. Paul speaks had
their damnation by marrying, because by marrying they made void their first
faith. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that they had no damnation by marrying, that they
did not sin by marrying; that there is no speech in S. Paul of marrying
again: that he spoake of such as out of marriage used the pleasure of the
flesh: Which contradiction of the Scripture is so evident, as some Protestants
confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. XVI. WHETHER VSVRIE be sin?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Psalm. 14. v. 1. and 5. Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle etc. Usury,
sin.
He that has not given his money to usury.

Psalm. 71. ver. 14. From vsuries and iniquities he shall redeem their souls.

Ezechiel 18. verse. 5. and 8. And a man if he shall be just has not lent to
usury and not taken more, has turned his hand from iniquity -- This man is
just, living he shall live, says our Lord God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 2. 2. q. 78. art. 1. To take usury for money lent, is of it self
unjust.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Bucer in Disput. de Vsuris page 794. The Lord did not forbid Not all usury
forbidden. Some usury allowed.
and condemn all usury, but usury of a certain kind, to wit, that with
biteth and helps not the neighbor, which alone I think to be allowed.

Calvin in Epistolis edit. 1619. page 488. If we condemn all usury, we make
the snare of consciences straiter then the Lord himself would. Again: I find
not by any testimony of Scripture that all vsuries are condemned.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that who lends money to usury, shall not dwell
in Gods tabernacle, that souls are to be redeemed from usury, that a just man
does not lend to usury. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expresseiy say, that al usury is not condemned, that some is to
be allowed.

ART. XVII. WHETHER ALL HAVE sinned in Adam?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Romans 5. v. 12. As by one man sin entered into this world, and All men sinned
in Adam. All made sinners in Adam.
by sin death, and so unto all men death did pass in whom all sinned. Et
ver. 19. As by the disobedience of one man many were made sinners.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 4. de Amiss. Gratiae. c. 13. In that one man, all sinned.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Zuinglius de Peccato orig. to. 2. f. 116. Nether hinders it, We sinned but
figuratively in Adam. Not truly sinned.
that S. Paul Romans 5. says: All have sinned. For after the same manner the
word, Sinned, is put metonymically. De Ratione fidei ib. f. 539. I confess
that our first father committed a sin which is truly a sin, but they who
are descended of him did not sin in this sort.

Adolphus Venator apud Homium in Specimine etc. We did not sin in Adam.
art. 15. Thereupon it may be gathered, that we did not sin in Adam, because
etc.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that all sinned in Adam, that by his disobedience
many are made sinners. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that all sinned in Adam but figuratively; that Adam
truly sinned but not they who are descended of him; that we sinned not in Adam.

ART. XVIII. WHETHER THERE BE any original sin?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Scripture in places before cited says, that all sinned Original sin, true
sin.
in Adam, that by his disobedience many were made sinners: and 1. Cor. 15. v.
12. that in Adam all died.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 5. Can. 2. If any shall say, that Adam by his sin of
disobedience, transfused only death and punishment of the body in all man
kind, and not sin, which is the death of the soul: be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Zuinglius de Peccato orig. to. 2. f. 115. What could be said Original sin,
is no sin, Not truly called sin.
more breefly or clearly, then that original sin, is no sin, but a
sickness: Fol. 116. This is that I will: that original sin is not truly
called sin, but metonymically of the sin committed of our first father.
fol. 115. What could be said more weakly and more far from Canonical
Scripture, then that it is not a sickness, but a guilt? De Baptismo ibid. fol.
87. It follows, Not guilt. No stain.
that little ones or Infants are without all blemish or stain. f. 90. Whence we
gather, that original sin is indeed a sickness, which yet of it self is
not faulty, nor can cause the punishment of damnation. Again: How can it be,
that what is a sickness and contagion, deserves the name of sin, or is
sin indeed? And Respons. ad Luther. fol. 517. The sum of all which No sin
indeed. Not such a sin as has fault. Not properly sin. Makes not guilty
of death.
I taught in my book of original sin is this: That original contagion is
not such a sin, that has any fault, but rather is a sickness which by
reason of Adams sin, cleaves unto us.

Homius in Specimine etc. art. 15. brings many Protestants who deny
original sin: as Venator. Original sin is not properly sin, nor
deserves damnation. Arminius: Original sin is fondly said to make guilty
of death. Borrius. There is no reason why God would impute this sin to
Infants.

Beza de Praedestinat. cont. Castle. vol 1. p. 421. thus writes of Castellio
(whom D. Humfrey ad Ration. 1. Campiani much commends for learning and
honesty) Out of which it may be easily gathred, that either thou accountest
original Original sin, a fable.
sin, a fable; or else do so diminish it, that what is by origin, thou
would have to be attributed to imitation. Nether is Beza himself far from
the same opinion; for 2. part. resp. ad acta Colloq. Montisbel. p. 103. he
denies, that elected infants need any renouation. Faber also and Erasmus,
whom Protestants challenge for theirs, do deny original sin in Romans 5.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that all have sinned in Adam, that all die in Adam,
that by his disobedience many are made sinners. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that original sin, is no sin but a sickness; not
truly a fault, but figuratively: not a guilte, not a blemish not a stain, not
faulty of it self, that it can not cause damnation; not such a sin as has
fault, not a sin indeed, nor deserves the name of sin.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF SINS.
The things which we hau^ rehearsed in this chapter, do make manifest, that
Protestants teach of sins quite contrary to holy Scripture. For the
Scripture (and Catholics with it) teaches, that sins are imputed to the
faithful: that they are mortal to them as well as to others: that they ought
to be ouercomen of the faithful: that whosoever serve sin, serve not God:
that great sins put out grace, nor can stand with justice: that they are to
be redeemed with good works: that to abstain from them, is necessary to
salvation: that they are the cause why men are damned: that we must give an
account of them: that they are committed of the elect and that with full
consent: that usury is a sin, and that original sin is a true sin. All
which Protestants do deny.

They make also manifest, that Protestants play the What Protest take from
sins.
theiues toward sins also, and steal from them no less then from good
things, but that they steal from sin other kind of qualities and for an
other end. For from God, from Christ, from Saints, from the Church, from
Sacraments, from good works and other godly and holy things they steal that
which is good, virtuous, and worthy of praise and honor, that thereby they
may not seem so worthy to be loved and esteemed of men: But from sins they
steal malice, all power of hurting the faithful, in saying they are not
imputed to them, cast not them out of Gods grace, and such like now rehearsed,
to the end that they should not seem so horrible and so much to be avoided of
the faithful: And thereby they show themselves to be friends of sin, and
precursors of him who is termed: The man of sin. And thus much of 2. Thessal.
2.
Sins: Now of Justification from them.

CHAPTER XVI. OF JUSTIFICATION.
ART. I. WHETHER JUSTIFICATION be of works?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
JAMES 2. v. 21. Abraham our father was he not Abraham justified by works.
Man. Rahab.
justified by works? verse. 24. Do you see, that by works a man is justified?
Et v. 25. Rahab the harlot was not she justified by works?

Luc. 7. v. 47. Many sins are forgiven her, because she has loved much.

Act. 3. verse. 19. Be penitent therefore and convert, that your sins may be
put out.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Romans 4. v. 2. Abraham's works had glory even before God, and
he was justified of then as S. James does most expressly affirm.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Apologia Confess. Augustanae c. de Iustif. Reconciliation Reconciliation, not
by works.
is not received by works. c. de Implet. legis: If any think, that he
obtains remission of sins because he loves, he dishonors Christ. c. de
votis: It is an impious opinion, that we obtain remission of sins for our
works.

Confessio Bohemica art. 7. Good works are to be done, not Justification not
by works.
that we think that we obtain remission of sins for them. Gallica artic.
22. We are not justified by works. Belgica artic. 24. Good works are of no
moment at all for to justify us. Argentinensis Works help not to
justification.
cap. 3. Good works help nothing for to make us just of unjust. Heluetica
cap. 15. We receive this justification not by any works.

Whitaker ad Ration. 8. Campiani. In justifying us, God makes no reckoning of
our works. For the just lives not of works.

Perkins in Serie Causarum cap. 51. To be justified by good Abraham, not
justified by works.
works, is both false and ridiculous. In Gal. 3. Abraham was not justified by
his good works. In c. 4. That doctrine, which dreameth of Justification by
works, brings in idolatry. Et in c. 5. it ouerturneth the foundation of
religion.

Luther de liberate tom. 2. fol. 4. A soul is justified by no works. In Gal.
1. to. 5. Sin is taken away by no works. In c. 3. Abraham was justified by
no other thing at all but faith. Epist. Abraham not justified by works.
ad Liuones to. 7. All doctrine of justifying and saving us by works, is
impious, devilish, and high blasphemy against God. Et to. 1. fol. 393. We must
firmly believe against the Devil, that the woman was saved by only faith
before she loved.

Calvin 3. Instit. c. 11.. 6. In justification there is no place for works. c.
14.. 5. Works help nothing to justify us. cap. 16.. 1. Men are not justified
by works.
We say, they are not justified by works. In Gal. 2. v. 15. We cannot be
justified by works.

Beza in Confess. cap. 4. sect. 17. How can we be justified by Works do not
justify.
works? l. Quaest. p. 689. Good works do not justify.

Peter Martyr in locis class 3. c. 4.. 8. Justification is not had of works.

Bullinger de Iustif. fidei Sermon. 6. Abraham was not justified by his works.

Aretius in locis part. 2. f. 78. We are not justified of works.

Zanchius in Confess. c. 21. art. 4. We constantly confess, that a man is not
justified of works. Man is not justified by works.


Polanus in Disp. private. perio do 1. disput. 36. Not because the woman loved
much, therefore her sins were remitted her.

Pareus in Gal. 2. lect. 24. The Apostle denies, that works either alone or
with faith do justify.

Rogers artic. 11. Works have no place or portion in the Works with faith do
not justify.
matter of our justification.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that Abraham was justified by works, that Rahab
was justified by works: that the woman's sins were forgiven because she
loved: that men must repent for to have their sins forgiven. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that Abraham was justified by works, by nothing
else at all but by faith, that the womans sins were not forgiven because she
loved; that sin is not taken away by any works that we are not justified by
any works, that works have no place, are of no moment, or reckoning in
justification: that it is impious, devilish, ridiculous, and most blasphemous
against God, to dream of Justification by works.

ART. II. WHETHER JUSTIFICATION be by faith only?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
James 2. v. 24. Do you see, that by works a man is justified, Justification,
not by faith alone.
and not by faith only.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Council of Trent Session. 6. can. 9. If any shall say, that the impious is
justified by faith alone, so as he understands, that nothing else is required
to cooperate to the grace of justification, and that it is no way necessary
that he be prepared and disposed by motion of his own will, be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Confessio Saxonica c. de Remiss. Peccat. Wittenbergica c. de Iustif. Articuli
Smalcaldici part. 2. c. 1. liber Concordiae c. 3. Confessio Anglica art. 11.
Heluetica cap. 15. Belgica art. By only faith.
22. Bohemica art. 6. teach in express terms, that we are justified by only
faith. And the same in other words teach Confessio Augustana. c. de fide.
Argentinensis c. 3. and Gallica art. 20.

Apologia Confess. Augustanae c. de Iustif. We are justified By faith alone.
by faith alone, if by justification we mean, to be just of unjust, or to be
regenerated. Again: Faith alone does justify, alone makes just of unjust. By
faith only we receive remission for Christ. Et c. de Resp. ad Argumenta.
Remission of sins and Only by faith.
justification is received only by faith. These things we obtain only by
faith.

Luther de liberate to. 2. fol. 4. A soul is justified by faith By nothing
else.
alone. In Gal. 2. to. 5. Faith justifies, and nothing else.

Vrbanus Regius in Catachesi fol. 136. We are Justified by faith only.

Schusselburg. l. 1. Theol. Calvin art. 15. Paul teaches, that By faith alone.
a man is justified by faith only, by faith alone.

Zuinglius ad Matthaeum Rutling. to. 2. f. 151. We are justified by faith alone.

Calvin in Galat. 2. v. 16. We are justified by faith alone.

Beza in Romans 3 verse. 20. What was the Apostles intent? To teach, that no man
is justified by any other means then by faith. We are justified by only faith.

Peter Martyr in 1. Cor. 1. It belongs to faith only, that we be justified
by it.

Whitaker ad Ration. 1. Campiani: That is our doctrine most true and most
holy: That a man is justified by faith alone.

Perkins in Catechesi tom. 1. col. 487. How can thou be Only by faith.
made partaker of Christ and of all his benefits, and fruitfully enjoy them?
Only by faith.

Rogers artic. 11. Only by faith we are accounted righteous before God.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that a man is not justified by faith only. The
same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that a man is justified by faith only, by faith
alone, and no other way then by faith: that nothing justifies but faith.

ART. III. WHETHER THE IVSTIFIED, be indeed, and in the sight of God, just?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Genesis 7. ver. 1. God thus speaks to Noe: I have seen thee Noe^ just in Gods
sight.
just in my sight. c. 6. v. 9. Noe was a just and perfect man.

Job 32. v. 2. And Eliu was angry and took indignation and he was angry
against Job, for that he said himself to be just before God.

Luc. 1. v. 6. And they were both just before God. Just before God.


1. Cor. 5. v. 21. Him that knew no sin, for us he made sin: that we might
be made the justice of God in him.

Ephesians. 1. ver. 4. He chose us in him before the constitution of Holy in Gods
sight.
the world, that we should be holy and immaculate in his sight in charity.

1. Joan. 3. verse. 7. He that does justice is just: even as he also is just.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Session. 6. cap. 7. Being endued with justice of God, we are
not only reputed, but also are named and are just.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Illyricus in Math. 20. v. 12. Surely so it is in religion and before None is
just before God.
God, and especially in the kingdom of Grace, where all depend of free
mercy, and none is just. Et in Praef. partis 2. Clauis, says that Papist
take, to justify, amiss, of real, and not of imputative justice.

Reineccius to. 4. Armaturae cap. 15. Nether does God look upon us but in his
Son; whereupon it comes to pass, that we we seem quite others then we are.
As looking through glass We seem to God others then we are.
which is green, yellow, or of some other color, the things which me behold
seem to us to be of the same color of which the glass is, through which we
see: So to God (I speak humanely for the weakness of the flesh) beholding and
considering us in his Son, we seem to be of his color, and shyning with his
justice and innocence: And thereby he seeing and touching us, thinks that he
touches his own natural Son, as Isaac speaking to Jacob his younger Son,
thought he spoake to Esau his elder son. And the same example of a great
glass or spectacles uses Zanchius l. 2. de Natura Dei. c. 2.

Hunnius de Iustif. p. 19. rejects it as Popish doctrine, that by
justification, a man is made indeed just.

Zuinglius in Luc. 1. to. 4. Before God none can be just. None just before God.
Not just, but held just. Not just indeed.


Calvin 3. Instit. c. 19.. 2. It is not inquired there (in Justification) how
we be just; but how, (though unjust and unworthy) we may be held for just. c.
11.. 11. Let him grant, that they are counted just, who are not indeed.
Again: He is just, not indeed, but by imputation. In Math. 12. v. 37. The
Papists think it absurd, that we say a man is justified by faith, because they
expound it to be made and be just indeed: But we mean, to be accounted just
and to be absolved in the judgment of God. In Luc. 18. v. 19. This place
plainly tells, what is properly to be justified, As if we were just.
to wit, to stand before God as if we were just. In Romans 3. ver. 25. I have
already eftsoon admonished, that men are not justified, because they be such
indeed, but by imputation. In 2. Cor. 5. v. 21. How are we just before God?
foresooth as Christ is a sinner. In Antidoto Council. sess. 6. c. 8. They (of
Trent) affirm, that we Not truly just.
are truly just and not only reputed. De Caena p. 2. Let us be assured, that
we, though we be wicked and unclean, nevertheless, are acknowledged and
received of the Lord and also held for just. Et Concione 158. in Job. Where
shall any such (just) be found None just.
amongst men?

Beza in Math. 12. v. 37. Paul testifies that we, being not in Not in our
selves just but accounted so.
our selves just, yet are justified in Christ apprehended by faith, that is,
accounted for just, and so absolved.

Pereus l 1. de Amiss. Great. c. 6. It is more sure to say, that they (Zacharias
and Elizabeth) were just and faultlesse before God and men, not absolutely, but
by imputation of justice. Of the same opinion are all others who say, that for
God to justify men, is not to make them just, but only to declare or
pronounce them such.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Noe was just before God, Job just before
God: Zacharias and Elizabeth just before God: that God chose us for to be just
in his sight: that he made Christ sin for to make us the justice of God: and
that who does justice is just, even as God also is just. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that none is just: that in justification it is not
enquired how we are just, but how we are held for just: that to be justified,
is not to be just: that the justified are not indeed just, not truly just, but
so reputed: that before God they are no otherwise just then Christ was a
sinner: that we appear quite others to God, then we are: that God looking upon
us and touching us, takes us for his own Son, as Isaac took Jacob, for
Esau.

ART. IV. WHETHER THE IVSTIFIED be clean?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Ezech. 36. v 25. And I will power upon you clean water, and The justified, be
cleansed.
you shall be cleansed from all your contaminations.

Joan. 13. v. 10. And you are clean. c. 15. v. 3. Now you are clean Are
clean.
for the word which I have spoaken to you.

1. Cor. 6. ver. 11. And these things certes you were, but you are washed, you
are sanctified.

Ephesians. 1. v. 4. He chose us in him that we should be holy and Immaculate.
immaculate in his sight in charity.

Tit. 2. verse. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and might cleanse to himself a people acceptable.

Hebr. 9. v. 14. How much more, shall the blood of Christ, who Cleansed from
dead works.
by the Holy Ghost offered himself unspotted unto God, cleanse our conscience
from dead works?

1. Joan. 1. v. 7. And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son clea^setb Clea^sed
from all sin.
us from all sin.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 5. can. 5. There is no damnation to them who are truly
buried with Christ by baptism to death, who walk not according to the flesh,
but putting of the old man and putting on the new which is created according
to God, are made innocent, unspotted, pure, harmless and beloved of God.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
French Confession art. 11. Even they who excel in holiness Defiled with
many sins.
are defiled with many sins, as long as they live in this world.

Luther in Confutat. Latomi to. 2. f. 218. The beleiuers are Unclean.
just, and yet unclean.

Zuinglius in Explanat. artic. 39. All men are unjust before Unjust.
God.

Calvin 3. Institut. cap. 15. 5. Though we be unclean, he is cleanesse to us.
In Romans 4. v. 5. None shall come to the justice of Impious.
faith, but he that shall be impious in himself. In v. 20. He pronounces
Overwhelmed with sin.
to hold us for just, and we are ouerwehlmed with sin. The like he has in
the places cited in the former article.

Beza in Romans 4. v. 5. Who justifies the impious, that is, accounts him just
in Christ who is himself impious.

Iunius l. 4. de Eccles c. 11. The pious man, is in himself unclean Filthy.
and filthy.

Scarpe de Iustif. Contr. 8. We are called just for Christ's justice imputed to
us; and unjust, for inherent sin.

Pareus l. 4. de Iustif. c. 17. But if Christ have now absolutely cleansed his
Church and people, what follows, but that the Romish Babylon is nether Church
nor people of Christ? Of the same opinion are they also who (as we shall see in
the next article) teach that sins remain in the justified.

And hereupon Protestants (albeit each of the^ beleiueth as a point of faith,
that he is justified) profess that they are Protestants confession of their
own wickedness.
most wicked. For thus they say in the French Confession art. 18. In our selves
we are worthy of all hatred. Et in Confess. Heluet. cap. 8. We are drowned in
naughty lusts, turned from good realie to all evil, full of all wickedness,
distrust, contempt, and hatred of God. And in their French Common prayers:
Ready to all wickedness, unprofitable to all good works making no end of
transgressing Gods commandments, and continually increasing their damnation
with impure and wicked life. Beza also in his Confession cap. 4. sect. 10. It
is evident enough, that we are overwhelmed with infinite wickedness. Et de
Praedest. cont. Castle. p. 422. Our vices are great and many. Calvin de Caena
page 2. There is none of us who can find one crumme of justice in himself,
but rather we are defiled with so many vices and wickedness, and full of such
a multitude of sins, as etc. Whitaker l. 2. de Peccato orig. c. 3. says
that they burn with hatred and contempt of God. Apologia Confess. Augustanae
c. de Peccato orig. says that their godly men doubt of the anger of God, of
the grace of God, of the word of God, are angered at the judgment, of God,
murmr at his deeds etc. Et Pareus l. 3. de Iustif. c. 8. adds, that they
pass never a day without many a mortal sin. This verdict they give of
themselves. Wherefore it is no meruail, that in their French Confession art.
18. they say, that they cast away all opinion of virtues and merits. And such
are they that are justified after the Protestant fashion, and to make us such,
Christ (forsooth) was incarnated and suffered, and sent the Holy Ghost into
the world.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that the justified are clean, are washed, are
cleansed from all their filth, are cleansed from dead works, and from all
sin, are unspotted. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that the justified are not absolutely cleansed,
are unclean, impure, filthy, unjust, impious, defiled with many sins: and
that those who are justified after the Protestant manner, are drowned in
naughty lusts, full of all wickedness, worthy of all hatered, burn with
hatred and contempt of God, doubt of Gods word etc. And if their justified men
be such, what I pray you are the rest?

ART. V. WHETHER IN THOSE THAT are justified, remain the sins from which
they are justified?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Isaie 44. v. 22. I have clean taken away thine iniquities as a Sin taken
clean away. No iniquity in David. As for as the East from the west.
cloud, and thy sins as a mist.

Psalm. 16. v. 3. By fire thou have examined me, and there is no iniquity found
in me. Psalm. 102. v. 12. As far as the East is from the West, has he made
our iniquities far from us.

Joan. 1. ver. 29. Behold the lamb of God, behold him that takes away the
sin of the world. 1. Joan. 3. v. 5. And you know, Sin taken away.
that he appeared to take away our sins.

Romans 8. v. 1. There is now no damnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Council of Trent Sess. 5. Con. 1. If any deny, that by the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ which is given in Baptism, the guilt of original sin is
remitted: or else says, that all that is not taken away which has the true and
proper nature of sin, but avouches, that that is only shaven or not
imputed; be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Confessio Saxonica c. 9. Let him confess, that in the regenerate Many great
sins in the justified.
there are yet many sins and great filthiness worthy of the wrath of God.
The like has the English Confession art. 9. The French art. 11. The Flemish
art. 15. The Scottish art. 15.

Whitaker l. 2. de Peccato orig. c. 3. If thou think, that the regenerate
can be without (mortal) sins, thou think against Scripture and true
faith. l. 3. c. 3. How many things there are in Many things worthy of
damnation.
us worthy of damnation, that speech of the Apostle declares, and he adds
that in the regenerate, sin does live, does prevail, and does flourish.

Perkins de Baptismo to. 1. col. 835. Remission takes away Sin not taken
away but not imputed.
sin, so as it is not imputed; not, that it is not.

Willet Contr. 12. q. 6. p. 577. The blot and stain of sin remains still.
We are not void of sin.

Luther in Assert. art. 2. to 2. It is one thing, for all sins Sin reted,
but not taken away. The just are guilty of mortal sin.
to be remitted; an other, to be all taken away. Baptism remitteth all sins,
but takes not quite away. De Ratione confitendi fol. 26. This is the most
mortal of all mortal sins, not to believe himself to be guilty of
damnable and mortal sin before God. In Gal. 3. to. 5. Beleiuing, we are
reputed just, though sins, and those great ones, remain in us.

Liber Concordiae c. 3. When we teach, that by the working of the Holy Ghost
we are regenerate and justified, it must not be Injustice in the regenerate.
so taken, as if no injustice at all did stick to the regenerate and justified
after regeneration.

Reineccius to. 4. Armaturae. c. 22. Sins are taken from Sin not taken away
but not imputed.
us, not that they are no more, but that they are not imputed, and condemn not.

Calvin in Joan. 1. ver. 29. Abeit sin do ever more stick in us, yet in the
judgment of God it is none. In Antidoto Council. Truly abides in us.
sess. 5. Truly sin abides in us.

Peter Martyr in Locis. Class. 1. c. 14. When God is said to Remission takes
away only the punishment.
remit, to wipe out, to forgive sins, he makes not that they be not, or have
not been; but the obligation to bear the punishment for sin, is taken away.

Pareus l. 5. de Amiss. Great. c. 7. Innumerable sins, even such Innumerable
sins in the regenerate.
as are worthy of death, remain in the regenarate.

And hereupon they teach, that remission, is nothing but a forgiveness of the
punishment.

Whitaker l. 3. de Peccato orig. cap. 3. Remission does pardon and forgive the
punishment, not take away or remove actually To forgive sins is only not to
punish them.
the fault.

Beza in Math. 6. v. 12. To remit sin, is nothing else, but not to exact the
punishment thereof.

Piscator in Thesibus l. 1. p. 428. The remission of sin, is nothing else, but
not to punish for sin.

Kemnitius de Origin Iesuitarum c. de Peccato: The remission of sin, is one
thing; the abolition, is an other.

Or as Luther said in the words cited: It is one thing for sin to be
remitted, an other, to be taken away.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that God takes away sin, puts out sin
as a cloud or mist: that he makes our iniquities as far from us, as the East
is from the West: that he found no iniquity in David: that there is no
damnation in them, who are in Christ Jesus. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that many sins, innumerable sins, great
sins, worthy of death, great filthiness worthy the wrath of God, remain,
truly remain, are continually in those that are justified: that sin lives
and prevails in the regenerate: that sin is not taken away, no sin quite
taken away; that it is not made to be no more: that remission of sin is
nothing, but forgiveness of the punishment. Which are so contrary to
Scripture as sometimes Protestants confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. VI. WHETHER SINS BE simply forgiven?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Joan. 20. v. 23. Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven Sins
simply forgiven.
them.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 5. de Amiss. Great c. 7. Nether can it be granted without
impiety, that the sentence of the Apostle (that there is no damnation in the
Justified) is not simply true.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Pareus l. 5. de Amiss. Gratiae c. 7. It is most true, that sins Not simply
forgiven.
are not simply remitted; but with continual prayer of remission. Et l. 4. de
Iustif. c. 17. he says, that Christ does not absolutely cleanse his people.
The same teaches Illyricus in Apologia Confess. Antuerpiensis c. 3. and all
Protestants, who say (as we have seen before) that sins remain in the
justified, and that they are still guilty of sin, and deserve damnation, and
that remission of sins, is nothing but forgiveness of punishment. For if
only punishment be forgiven the justified, if the sin still remain in them
by which they are guilty and deserve damnation, manifest it is, that sin is
not simply remitted to them.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture simply says, that sin is remitted. The same say Catholics.

Protestants simply say, that sin is not simply remitted.

ART. VII. WHETHER ALL THAT ARE justified, be equally just or holy?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Job. 1. v. 8. Have thou considered my servant Job: that there None like to Job.
is not the like to him on the earth, a man simple, and right, and fearing God,
and departing from evil.

Numbers 12, v. 3. Moises was the mildest man above all men Moises mildest of
all me^.
that dwell upon the earth.

Math. 8. v. 10. I have not found so great faith in Israel. Greatest faith
Greatest love.


Joan. 21. v. 15. Jesus said to Simo^ Peter: Simon of Ihon love thou me more
then these?

Apoc. 22. v. 11. He that is just, let him be justified yet, and let the holy,
be sanctified yet.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
C. Bellarm. l. 3. de Iustif. c. 16. Lutherans teach, that all just men are
equally just, so that none is iuster then an other, nor the same increases in
justice.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Luther in Math.Math 7. to. 7. fol. 96. A Christian is as good and Every
Christian as holy is S. Peter.
holy as S. Peter and Paul: nether is any greater or better then he. Postilla
in Domin. 24. S. Peter is not better then the theife on The B. Virgin excels
not the sinner. We are as holy as the Saints. Better then they.
the cross: Marie the mother of God does not excel Marie the sinner. In festo
Natiu. Mariae. We are as holy as Marie and the other Saints. If they were now
upon earth, they would not be ashamed to subject themselves to me and to all,
and to honor us, as better then they.

Brentius homilia in die Visitationis: Marie is not preferred before all weomen
for her own holiness, or other such like virtues.

Polanus in Disput. priuatis periodo 1. disput. 37. One is not None more just
then an other. No less then Christ.
more just then an other before God.

Pareus l. 2. de Iustif. c. 7. By Christ's justice imputed to us, we are
accounted no less just then Christ himself, at least keeping the proportion
of the head and members.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that there was none on earth like to Job: that
Moises was the mildest man upon earth: that there was not so great faith in
Israel as in the Centurion: that Peter loved Christ more then others: that the
just may be yet justified. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that every Christian is as good and holy as the
Apostles: that we are as holy as our B. Lady and the Saints in heaven: that
we are better then they: that we are are as just as Christ himself: that one
is not more just then an other.

ART. VIII. WHETHER THERE IS ANY justice or grace inherent in the justified?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Daniel 6. v. 22. My God has sent his Angel, and has shut Justice in Daniel.
up the mouths of the Lions, and they have not hurt me, because before him
justice has been found in me.

Luc. 1. v. 28. And the Angel being entered in, said unto her B. Virgin full of
grace.
Hail, full of grace our Lord is with thee.

Act. 6. v. 8. And Steven full of grace and fortitude.

Ephesians. 4. verse. 24. Put on the new man, which according to God is created in
justice and holiness of truth.

2. Tim. 1. v. 6. Resuscitate the grace of God, which is in thee by Grace in
Timothe.
the imposition of my hands.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Romans 4. v. 2. The Scriptures plainly teach inherent justice
in man.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
French Confession art. 18. Casting away all opinion of virtues No opinion of
virtue. No justice in us. Not a crume of justice.
or merits, we rest altogether in the obedience alone of Christ.

Calvin in Romans 8. v. 3. There can be no justice in us. In Gal. 3. v. 6. Seeing
men have no justice in them, they get it by imputation. De caena p. 2. There is
none of us who can find any cru^me of justice in himself. There is no good
in us. Et in Confess. fidei p. 158. We openly confess, that there is nothing
in us, which if God look upon, he may not justly condemn.

Beza in Confess. cap. 4. sect. 8. Faith compels us to confess, Nothing in
us but cause of damnation.
that there is nothing in us besides causes and proofs of damnation.

Humfrey ad Ration. 2. Campiani p. 142. As for infused Not any justice.
grace, that is, inherent justice: we say and teach that no gotten habit, no
ingrafted virtue, no infused quality, not any justice by which we may be
justified before God, is inherent in us: but that there is ingrafted and
inherent all wickedness, all rebellion and stubburnesse of the flesh.

Pareus lib. 2. de Iustificat. cap. 7. We are void of inherent We are void of
inherent justice.
justice; therefore we need imputed justice. lib. 3. cap. We have already
showed, that there is no inherent justice in the judgment of God.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says that there was justice in Daniel before God: that
our B. Lady and Saint Steven were full of grace: that grace was in Timothe:
that we must put on the new man who is created according to God in justice of
truth, that is, true justice. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that there is no justice in us before God, there
can be no justice, not a crumme of justice, no virtue, no good, nothing but
cause of damnation, and which deserves to be damned.

ART. IX. WHETHER JUSTICE INHErent in us can be imputed to us?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Psalm. 105. v. 30. Phinees stood and pacified, and the slaughter Zeal imputed
to justice.
ceased, and it was reputed to him unto justice.

Romans 4. v. 3. Abraham believed God, and it was reputed him Also faith.
to justice. v. 5. To him that works not, yet beleiueth in him that
justifies the impious, his faith is reputed to justice. v. 9. We say, that to
Abraham faith was reputed to justice. And in like sort. v. 4. it is said,
that reward is imputed to the worker, and v. 8. that sin is imputed to the
sinner.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Romans 4. ver. 2. David the Prophet most expressly says, that
the zeal of the honor of God and of his law in Phinees, was reputed him to
justice.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Pareus l. 2. de Iustif. c. 3. What inhereth, is not imputed. For No inherent
thing imputed.
that is properly imputed, which is not had: That is not imputed which is had
according to Paul's discourse. l. 3. c. 1. What inhereth, is not imputed.

Piscator in Thesibus l. 2. page 68. If any say: Reward is imputed according to
debt, abuses the word, Imputed. And page 72. It implies contradiction, that
inherent justice should be imputed.

Moulins in his Buckler art. 19. sect. 31. It is certain, that faith, as it is
a virtue inherent in us, cannot be imputed to us: Our actions are not imputed.
for they are not our actions or virtues, but of others, which are imputed to
us.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that the zeal of Phinees was imputed to him for
justice: that Abraham's belief was reputed to him: that the faith of the
beleiuer is reputed to him. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say; that what inhereth is not imputed: that inherent
virtue cannot be imputed: that it implies contradiction that inherent justice
should be imputed.

ART. X. WHETHER THE IVSTIFIED be infallibly certain and by divine faith, that
they are justified?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Eccles. 9. ver. 1. Man knows not, whether he be worthy of None knows that
he is worthy of love. Or whether he be simple.
love or hatred, but all things are reserved uncertain for the time to come.

Eccles. 5. v. 5. Of sin forgiven, be not without fear.

Job 9. v. 21. All though I shall be simple, the self same shall my soul be
ignorant of.

Hier. 17. v. 9. The heart of man is perverse and unsearchable, None knows his
own heart.
who shall know it.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. cap. 9. None can know with certainty of faith which
cannot be deceived, that he has obtained grace.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Commonly they teach, that every faithful man is justified by a special or
peculiar faith wherewith he beleiueth that his sins are forgiven. For thus
they profess in Confess. Augustana apud Melancthonem to. 3. art. 4. They We
are justified by beleiuing our selves to be such.
are justified, when they believe that they are received into grace, and that
their sins are remitted for Christ. This faith God imputes for justice. Et
art. 5. God justifies those, who believe that they are received into grace for
Christ.

And Apologia Confess. Augustanae. c. de Iustificat. This Special faith of our
own justification justifies us.
special faith, wherewith every one beleiueth that his sins are remitted
for Christ, and that God is appeased and pacified for Christ, obtains
remission of sins and justifies us. And c. de Paenitentia: Remission of
sins comes by that special faith, wherewith every one beleiueth that his
sins are forgiven him for Christ. Whitakerus ad Ration. 8. Campiani p. 41.
Whosoever beleiueth that his sins are remitted, this very faith absolueth
him. The same teach commonly all Protestants, and many of them are named in my
Latin book: And because it is well enough known, I will allege no more of
their sayings to prove, that they think themselves to be justified by a
special faith wherewith they believe that they are justified.

Whitaker Concione vlt. This one thing I say: Whosoever We have certain faith
of our justification.
deny us to be certain of our salvation with certainty of faith, leave us no
faith. l. 8. cont. Dur. sect. 47. None are justified, but who know that they
are justified.

Iuel Defense of the Apology. page 149. Our people be As certain as if Christ
said so to us.
so certain of the remission of their sins in the blood of Christ, as if
Christ himself were present and spoake it to them.

Perkins de Baptismo tom. 1. col. 820. He beleiueth not the Gospel unless he
likewise be persuaded that he is the son of God. And same ibid. col. 206. The
true faithful are certain by faith, that their sins are forgiven them.

Rainolds thesi. 2. p. 71. That they are elect, faith persuades every pious
man touching himself, and charity, touching others.

Luther in 1. Petri 1. to. 5. Thou must believe, that thou art a We must
believe that we are Saints.
Saint, and that with so great certainty and constance, that thou fear not
to leese thy life for it. In Psalm. 14. to. 3. f. 245. It can be no ways faith,
unless it be an undoubted opinion, wherewith a man is certain above all
certainty, that he pleases God, and has him propitious in good, and
indulgent in evil.

Calvin in Math. 21. v. 21. Christ does not acknowledge that No beleiuer
without special faith.
any believe, but such as without doubt do think that God is propitious to
them. The same he has in Romans 1. v. 6. and 3. Instit. c. 2.. 16. In Antidoto
Concilij Sess. c. 10. What lewdness, I pray, is it, that none can know by
certainty of faith, that he has obtained grace? And in Catechismo cap. de
fide, he defines Faith, to be a sure and settled knowledge of Gods fatherly
good will toward us. The like he has 3. Instit. c. 2.. 16. and Beza in
Confess. c. 4. sect. 5.

The sixth article of Lambeth: A true faithful man, that is, We are certain by
faith of justice and salvation.
endued with justifying faith, is certain by fullness of faith of the
remission of his sins, and his eternal salvation by Christ.

Peter Martyr in Romans 6. We must be resolved with steadfast faith, that God
loves us, and has received us into grace by Christ.

Pareus l. 3. de Iustisic. cap. 4. Without doubt it is most false in the
faithful, that none can be certain with divine faith of true conversion.

Willet Contr. 19. q. 2. page 1005. By a lively faith we may be assured that
our sins are forgiven us, and that we be fully justified in Christ,
reconciled to God, and are remaining in the state of grace.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that a man, knows not whether he be worthy of
love or hatred: that he knows not whether he be simple: that none knows his
heart: and bids us not to be without fear of the forgiveness of our sins.
The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that a man must firmly believe that he is a
Saint, that his sins are forgiven; that a man may know with divine faith that
his sins are forgiven: that he beleiueth not the Gospel unless he believe
this, that he is no faithful man except he believe so: that they are as
certain that their sins are forgiven, as if Christ himself in presence had
said so to them: that this kind of belief is justifying faith.

ART. XI. WHETHER PENANCE GO before Justification?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Acts 3. v. 19. Be penitent therefore, and convert, that your Penance before
forgiveness.
sins may be put out. c. 2. v. 38. Do penance, and be every one of you
baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for remission of your sins. cap. 8. v.
22. Do penance from this thy wickedness, and pray to God, if perhaps this
cogitation of thy heart may be remitted thee.

2. Cor. 7. v. 10. The sorrow that is according to God works penance unto
salvation that is stable. Likewise the prodigal son repented before he was
received into grace of his father, and likewise S. Marie Magdalen, before her
sins were forgiven.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Marci 1. v. 15. Penance always goes before regeneration and
remission of sins.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in Apoc. 2. tom. 2. col. 114. Regeneration goes before, Repentance
follows justification.
and repentance follows as the fruit thereof.

Willet Contr. 14. q. 4. page 721. Faith is first, whereby we are justified and
our sins remitted before God, then follows repentance.

Calvin in 3. Instit. c. 3.. 2. We will prove, that a man cannot seriously
repent, unless he know that he is Gods, but none is truly persuaded that he
is Gods, unless he have first apprehended his grace.. 1. It ought to be out of
doubt, that penance does not only follow faith (special of the remission of
our sins) but also that it rises of it. The same has Beza in Absters.
calumniarum He^husij p. 328.

Pareus l. 1. de Iustif. c. 20. The works of penance and love Later then
justification.
are by nature later then faith and justification, as the effects of free
justification. Et c. 24. We have after proved, that penance and works are by
nature later then justification. The like has Apologia Confess. Augustanae c.
de Dilectione etc. de Iustificatione.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly commands to do penance for to obtain remission of
sins, and to have sins put out: and says that sorrow according to God
works penance to salvation. The same say Catholics.

Protestants say, that none seriously repent but they who know they have
already obtained remission of sins: that penance is the effect of
justification and by nature later then it.

ART. XII. WHETHER JUSTIFICATION be ever lost, or can be lost?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 12. v. 43. When an unclean spirit shall go out of a The Devil goes
out and returns again.
man, he walks through dry places, seeking rest and finds not. Then he
says I will return into my house whence I came out-and takes with him seven
other spirits more wicked then himself, and they entering in, dwell there; and
the last of that man be made worse then the first.

Math. 24. v. 12. And because iniquity shall abound, the charity Charity of
some waxes could.
of many shall wax could.

Joan 15. ver. 6. If any abide not in me, he shall be cast forth as the branche
and shall wither, and they shall gather him up and cast him into the fire, and
he burns.

Romans 11. ver. 22. See then the goodness and severity of God; upon them
surely that are fallen, the severity: but upon thee, the Some cut of
goodness of God, if thou abide in his goodness, otherwise thou shall also be
cut of.

Gal. 5. v. 4. You are fallen from grace. Fallen from grace.


Hebr. 10. verse. 9. How much more think you does he deserve worse punishment,
who has trodden the Son of God under foot, and esteemed the blood as the
testament polluted, wherein he is sanctified.

Apoc. 2. v. 5. Be myndfull from whence thou art fallen, and do penance.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. Can. 23. If any shall say, that a man once
justified, can sin no more nor leese grace, be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Bucer apud Zanchium l. de Perseuerantia to. 7. col. 172. Nothing is more
profitable, then to preach, that is impossible for Impossible to fall from
grace. None fall from grace. Nor from remission.
those that believe, ever to fall from grace.

The Academie of Heidelberg. ib. 70. The elect once received into grace, never
afterward fall from it.

Zanchius himself in Summa Praelect. ib. col. 274. If any shall say, that
remission of sins once obtained is in Saints made void by falls afterward, he
overthrows the whole scope of the Gospel.

Calvin 3. Institut. cap. 2.. 11. The seed of life engrafted in the hearts of
the elect never perishes. l. 1. c. 14.. 18. I deny, that the The faithful
never ouercomen.
faithful can ever be overcome of Satan.

In Ezechielis 18. v. 24. David is found to be a perfidious murderer, a
betraier of the army of God, and briefly there is a huge multitude of sins
in that pore King, and it seems that Gods Grace never extinct in David.
grace was stifled in him, but not quite extinct.

Beza in 2. part. respons. ad Acta Colloq. Montisbel. p. 87. The Holy Ghost
never departed wholly or could depart from him who once has had the feeling
of true faith.

Polanus in Disput. priuatis disput. 16. The regenerate can never wholly leese
faith and the grace of God.

Piscator in Thesibus l. 2. p. 253. The faithful never fall from the grace of
God.

Contra remonstrantes in Collat. Hagae p. 351. The elect never falls from
grace.

Rainolds these. 2. p. 77. It is clear, that the justified sons of God by
faith are often times beaten with the strokes of tentation, but never killed.

Abbots in Diatribam Thomsoni c. 5. says, that those whereof S. Matthew
speaks cap. 24. cit. had never true charity.

Perkins de Desertione col. 1026. This principle is to be Who is once in grace
ever continues so.
held: Who is once in state of grace, shall ever more continue in it.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that there are men from whom the Devil departs
and returns again whose charity waxes could: that some fall from grace:
that there are some branches in Christ which abide not in him: that some are
sanctified by the blood of Christ who afterward tread it under foot. The same
say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that a man once received into grace never falls
from it: that the seed of life once ingrafted in a faithful heart never
perishes: that faithful men are never ouercomen of Satan: that it is
impossible for beleiuers to fall from grace: that remission cannot be made void
by falls afterward: that there was never true charity in them in whom it
waxes could. Which are so contrary to Scripture, as many Protestants
confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. XIII. WHETHER THE IVSTIFIED man may fear to fall?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Romans 11. ver. 20. But thou by faith do stand: Be not highly Fear.
wise, but fear.

1. Cor. 10. v. 21. He that thinks himself to stand, let him Take heed.
take heed, lest he fall.

Philippens. 2. ver. 12. With fear and trembling work your Work with fear.
salvation.

Hebr. 4. v. 1. Let us fear, lest perhaps forsaking the promise of entering
into his rest, some of you be thought to be wanting.

Prou. 28. v. 14. Blessed is the man who is always fearful. The fearful,
blessed.


CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. c. 3. Who think, that they stand, let them beware
lest they fall, and let them work their salvation with fear and trembling.
cap. 9. Every one whilst he looks upon himself and his own indisposition,
may fear of his grace.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in Conflictu Satanae to. 1. col. 1035. I account my As certain of
salvation as etc.
self as certain of salvation, as if my name were expressly written in the
holy Scripture.

Tindal in Fox his Acts page 1137. Nether can thou be We cannot be damned
unless Christ be. Christ must be damned before we be. As sure of our salvation
as of the Gospel. Free from all fear.
damned except Christ be damned with thee: nether can Christ be saved, except
thou be saved with him.

Luther Postilla in die Natiuit fol. 52. He (Christ) must be damned, before he
can be damned, for whom he has given himself.

Affelman l. de Praedest.. 80. Every true Christian ought to be as certain of
his salvation, as he must believe the Gospel.

Calvin in 1. Luc. v. 73. Seeing God does reconcile men to himself in Christ;
seeing he defends them with his safeguard that they be free from all fear etc.
In Joan. 3. v. 18. Christ will have the faithful to be secure from fear of
damnation. In Antidoto Council. Sess. 6. cap. 14. That is not to suffered, when
they exhort We must not fear. As sure of heaven as Christ.
us to fear. Et 4. Instit. c. 17.. 2. We dare bouldly avouch, that everlasting
life is ours, and that we can no more miss of heaven, that Christ himself.
The like has Conradus Fabritius apud Zuinglium to. 2. f. 28.

Beza in Luc. 1. verse. 74. Fear in this place signifies dread of future
evil, which is directly contrary to the trust of the sons of God. In
Co^fess. c. 4. art. 13. Let every one of us thus discourse We cannot perish.
with himself: I am in Christ Jesus, and therefore I cannot perish. And in
Explicat. Christianismi c. 8. p. 200. he says, that a man may be as certain
of his salvation, as if he had climbed to heaven, and had heard it out of Gods
own mouth.

Peter Martyr in c. 11. Romans Nether ought any to marvel, that we say, that
faith expels that fear which is joined with doubt of salvation. Et in locis
class 3. c. 3. Who sincerly believe Fear not to be damned.
in Christ, do not fear to be damned for ever.

Co^tra -- Remonstrantes in Collat. Hagae p. 374. Who have Have no cause to
fear.
once believed, are certain, that this is Gods gift; and therefore have no
cause to fear to be damned.

Pareus l 3. de Iustif. c. 2. How do they make a man secure, if All fear
expelled.
they expel not all fear -- But we do thus teach: that a sinner if he look
upon the promise and mercy of God, may and ought not to fear but surely
trust, and that unless he do so, he makes God a lier.

Bucer apud Zanchium lib. 2. de Natura Dei c. 2. The first thing which thou
owe to God, is to believe that thou art predestined A principle of
Protest. faith.
of him. We must therefore presume as a principle of faith, that we are all
elected of God to this end to be saved for ever, and that this purpose of God
cannot be changed.

Zanchius l. 5. de Natura Dei c. 2. to. 2. col. 497. Every one is bound to
believe that he is chosen and predestinate in Christ to The reprobates are
bound to believe that they shall be saved.
eternal salvation. When we say, Every one is bound to believe this, we
except none, no not the reprobates, who shall nether ever believe, nor yet can
believe in Christ. The like of the reprobates teaches Perkins in Casibus
Conscientiae cap. 7. col. 1329.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly bids the justified to fear, to take heed lest he
fall; to work our salvation with fear: to fear lest any of us prove
reprobate: and says that he is happy who is always fearful. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly bid the justified to be secure from all fear, from
fear of damnation: that it is not to be suffered, that men be exhorted to
fear: and bid men be persuaded, that they cannot perish, that they have no
cause to fear, that they dare assure themselves of heaven as much as Christ
himself: that they are as sure of salvation, as if their names were written in
Scripture, or they heard it out of Gods mouth: that they cannot be damned
unless Christ be damned: And add, that every one, even the reprobates, are
bound to believe this, and that this a principle of their faith.

ART. XIV. WHETHER JUSTIFICATION be proper to the Elect.
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Ezech. 18. ver. 24. But if the just man shall turn away himself Some
reprobates justified.
from his justice, and do iniquity according to all the abominations which
the impious uses to work, shall he live? All his justices which he had done
shall not be remembered, in the preuarication which he has preuaricated, and in
his sin which he has sinned, in them he shall die.

Math. 24. v. 12. And because inquitie shall abound, the charity Charity in
some in whom it waxes could.
of many shall wax could.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Council of Trent. Sess. 6. Can. 17. If any shall say, that the grace of
justification, is given only to the predestinate to life: be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Whitaker Contr. 2. q. 1. cap. 8. Saints indeed none are, but None sanctified
but the predestinate.
those who are predestinate. The only predestinate are endued with the spirit
of sanctification.

Perkins de Desert. to. 1. col. 1026. God bestows his spirit No reprobate is
regenerate.
upon the reprobate, but not so far as his nature is regenerated or renewed.
And Some apud ipsum col. 209. Remission of sins pertains to the elect alone.

Calvin de Praedest. p. 695. He justifies none, but whom he None justified
but the predestinate.
has ordained to life. P. 713. It is certain, that the reprobates are never
endued with the spirit of adoption. In Antidoto Council. sess. 6. Can. 17.
Whosoever is ignorant that the spirit of regeneration is not given but to the
elect alone: I know not what he knows in the Scripture.

Beza l. quaest. vol. 1. p. 687. The elect alone repent and do good The elect
repent.
works.

Abbots in Diatribam Tomsoni cap. 5. There is nothing in reprobates borne of
God: No reprobate is justified. No reprobate justified.


Rainolds Thesi 4. God justifies the elect alone.

Pareus l. 1. de Great. and lib. arbit. c. 16. Albeit the reprobates seem
sometimes to be converted, yet inwardly they are never regenerate.

Vrbanus Regius in locis tom. 1. fol. 307. The reprobates shall never have
grace which makes grateful, nor true faith and charity.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that a just man may turn himself from justice and
die in sin: and that the charity of many shall wax could. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that the predestinate are justified, only the elect
regenerated: only the predestinate are Saints: that the reprobates are never
adopted, never truly justified, never regenerated, only seem to be
converted: and that there is nothing borne of God in them.

ART. XV. WHETHER A SINNER COOperate or prepare himself to justification?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Prou. 16. v. 1. It pertains to a man to prepare the heart.

Ezec. 18. v. 27. And when the impious shall turn away himself Man must
prepare his heart. He does quicken his soul. Cleanses himself. Sanctifies
himself.
from his impiety, he shall vinificate his soul. v. 31. Make to your selves a
new heart and a new spirit.

2. Tim. 2. verse. 21. If any man therefore shall cleanse himself from these,
he shall be a vessel unto honor.

1. Joan. 3. v. 3. And every one that has this hope in him sanctifies
himself.

James 4. v. 8. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye
double of mind.

2. Cor. 7. v. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from all inquination.

1. Reg. 7. v. 3. Prepare your hearts to our Lord, and serve him Prepares his
heart.
only.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. Can. 4. If any shall say, that man's free will moved
and stirred of God, does by assenting cooperate nothing with God moving and
stirring, whereby he may prepare and dispose himself to obtain the grace of
justification; nor can dissent though he would, but like to a thing without
life does nothing at all, and has it self merly passiuely, be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker l. 2. de Peccato orig. c. 3. In our very conversion In our
conversion we are mere passive.
to God which is done by grace, our free will has not in it self any power,
but in this matter we have our selves wholly passiuely.

Perkins in Apoc. 3. Hence I gather, that the Papists doat, We dispose not our
selves to justification.
in saying, that in regeneration man has free will and the use thereof, and
that he can dispose himself to justification.

Luther deseruo arb. to. 2. f. 454. In the very renewing and We are mere
passive and do nothing.
change of the old man, who is the son of the Devil, into a new man, who is
the son of God, a man has himself merely passiuely, nether does any thing,
but is wholly done. In Psalm. 5. to. 3. It is an error, that free will has any
actiuitie in good works, when we speak of an internal work. What actiuitie
has claye when We have no actiuitie.
the potter gives it a form?

Postilla in die Natiuit. fol. 62. No other ways then if God No more then a
dead tree.
change a dry post into a new green and flourishing tree: so does Gods grace
renew a man.

Liber Concordiae c. de lib. arbit. The conversion of our depraved No more then
a dead man.
will is the work of God alone, as the raising of the dead in the resurrection
is to be attributed to God alone.

Schlusselburg. tom. 5. Catal. Haer et. p. 44. Is it well said, No more then a
block.
that a man is like a block in his conversion? Well.

Mansfeldenses apud eundem p. 474. The true and plain sentence of this
question, and as it were the true proposition of all the matter, which
Scripture and with it and out of it Luther sets down, is this: That a man
in his conversion has himself merely passiuely, and by his strength
cooperateth nothing at all to Gods grace.

Yea some Lutherans not content to deny, that a man cooperateth to his
conversion, and to say that he behaueth himself merly passiuely like to a
block, add also, that he resists and repugneth to his conversion.

Praetorius apud Schlusselburg. tom. cit. page 532. Flanius Man is converted
against his will.
says: A man in his conversion is like a block doing nothing of himself,
yea resisting and like an enemy striving against God. What do you dislike in
this doctrine of Luther and Illyricus?

Gesnerus in Compendio doctrinae caelestis. loco 12. It follows, that a man
in his conversion does not only cooperate nothing, but also resists the
Holy Ghost.

Piscator apud Vorstium in Parasceue ad Collat. c. 8. God works faith and
conversion in men, whomsoever he conuerteth they not only being impious, but
also actually rebelling, and continewing in the act of rebellion. Thus they.

Calvin 2. Instit. c. 3.. 7. But there be some, who will grant Man has no
part in his conversion.
that the will of it self turned from good, is converted by the only power of
God, yet so as it being prepared has some part in working. But this is
wrongly given to man, that he obeys preventing grace with an attending will.
Et ib.. 10. It is false, that men are drawn willingly. Which also he has in
Ioa. 6. v. 44. In Actor 9. v. 5. The Papists attribute the praise of our
conversion He does not cooperate.
to Gods grace, but in part only, because they imagine that we cooperate.

Beza in Confess. cap. 4. sect. 17. There can be no concurse of Does not
concur:
grace and free will, when the Spirit of God by his mere grace freeth us from
sin.

Pareus l. 6. de Great. and lib. arbit. c. 9. God takes away the ill will, and
makes a good. In this the Scripture attributes no operation to the will but
mere passion.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly teaches, that a man must prepare his soul, prepare his
heart: turn himself from iniquity, make a new heart, cleanse and sanctify
himself. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly teach, that a man does not cooperate, not concur, has
no part in working, is merly and and purely passive in his conversion, is like
a block: that the conversion of a sinner is the work of God alone as the
raising of the dead: yea that a man in his conversion actually resists and
rebelleth against God.

ART. XVI. WHETHER AFTER Justification there remain at any time any temporal
punishment due?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
2. Reg. 12. verse. 14. Nathan said to David: Our Lord has David punished
after he was forgiven.
taken away thy sin, thou shall not die. Nevertheless because thou have made
the enemies of our Lord to blaspheme; for this thing the son that is borne to
the dying shall die.

Numbers 20. v. 12. And our Lord said to Moises and Aaron: Also Moises and
Aaron.
Because you have not believed me to sanctify before the children of Israel,
you shall not bring in the peoples into the la^d which I will give them. Et
Genesis 3. v. 17. Punishment is imposed upon Adam because he had eaten of the
forbidden aple, and yet it is not doubted but his sin was forgiven him.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 14. c. 8. The Council declares that it is altogether
false and contrary to the word of God, that the fault is never remitted of
God, but that all the punishment also is pardoned.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in Luc. 21. v. 43. Away with that naughty devise, of No punishment
after forgiveness.
the retaining of punishment when the fault is remitted. In Romans 4. v. 6. The
Scholastiks do fable, that the fault being remitted, punishment is retained of
God.

Beza in Math. 6. v. 12. It is not only false, but also a fond and foolish
opinion of the Sophisters, who think that punishment being retained, the fault
is remitted.

Daneus Contr. 6. p. 1204. It is an error that the fault being remitted, any
punishment is retained.

Bullinger de Iustific. Sermon. 6. What I pray you had Christ Any temporal
punishment contrary to Christ's suffrances.
profited us, if yet punishment (temporal) were exacted of us for sins?

Spalatensis l. cont. Suarem c. 2. The fault is never remitted, but the whole
punishment is with all pardoned.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that David was punished with the death of his son
even after his sin was remitted: The like it says of Moses, Aaron, and
Adam. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that it is false foolish and erroneous, to think
that the fault being remitted any temporal punishment is retained: that
Christ had profited us nothing if any temporal punishment were exacted of us
for sin. Which is so cou^trarie to Scripture as sometimes Protestants
themselves confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF justification.
Out of that which we have rehearsed in this chapter clearly appears, that
the Protestants doctrine of Justification is quite contrary to the holy
Scripture. For the Scripture (and Catholics with it) teaches that
justification is of works, and not of faith only: that the justified are just
indeed and before God: that they are clean, and that the sins from which
they are justified remain not in them: that there is in them inherent grace or
justice, and that it is imputed to them: that they are not certain by
infallible faith that they are justified: that penance goes before
justification: that justification may be lost, and that the justified ought to
fear lest he fall: that justification is not proper to the elect: that a
sinner cooperateth to his justification: and that sometimes after justification
temporal punishment remains: All Which Protestants deny.

It appears also, that Protestants even in this matter keep their old
custom of stealing. For they take from justification the virtue of abolishing
sin in those that are justified, and of making them truly just and clean,
and of giving them internal justice, and of making that it be imputed to them:
They take also from it that it can be communicated to the reprobates. And thus
much of Justification.

CHAPTER XVII. OF LIFE AND DEATH EVERLASTING.
ART. I. WHETHER LIFE EVERLASTING be a reward?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
MATH. 5. v. 12. Be glad and rejoice, for your reward Reward in heaven.
Everlasting life rendered to us.
is very great in heaven.

Romans 2. v. 6. God will render to every man according to his works: to them
truly that according to patience in good work seek glory and honor and
incorruption, life eternal.

Colossens. 3. ver. 24. Knowing that you shall receive of our
Heauenlieinheritance a retribution or reward.
Lord the retribution (Beza and the Anglish Bible translated, Reward) of
inheritance.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. c. 16. Everlasting life is to be proposed to those
who work well to the end and hope in God, both as a grace mercifully promised
to the children of God by Christ Jesus, and as a reward, and to be faithfully
given by Gods promise to their good works and merits.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in reformed Catholic Contr. 5. p. 110. The kingdom Kingdom of heaven
not a reward properly. Not a reward or recompe^se.
of heaven is called a reward not properly, but by a figure or by resemblance.

Ministers of Saxony in Colloq. Aldeburg. page 6. reject this proposition:
Life everlasting is given for good works as a reward or recompense.

Illyricus in Math. 5. v. 12. The Lord calls goods to come a Called a reward
by abuse.
reward abusiuely. And in Clane part. 2. tractat. 6. col. 545. It uses to be
called sometimes a reward by abuse.

Gerlachius to 2. disput. 26. These gifts do not properly deserve the name of
a reward.

Zuinglius de Prouidentia cap. 6. to. 1. These are hyperbols By ouerlashing of
speech.
and ouerlashesse: If thou will enter into life keep the commandments: Who
shall do the will of my father etc. and what other promises soever have been
made to works. Et in 2. Cor. 5. to. 4. Not that there is any reward of faith
or works, but etc.

Calvin in Antidoto Concilij sess. 6. c. 17. That they make No reward.
everlasting life a reward, in that I dissent from them. 3. Instit. c. 21.. 1.
Salvation comes to us by the mere liberality of God: He Mere liberality.
saves of his mercy good pleasure, and repaieth not a reward. l. 18.. 3. Let
them know, that they have received a gift of grace, Not a reward
not a reward of works. In Ephesians. 2. v. 8. That he saves, is mere grace, not
a reward or retribution.

Bucer in Math. 5. The things which come to us from God, Free gift.
are no reward, but his free gifts.

Peter Martyr in Roman. 4. Everlasting life may have some Far from the nature
of reward.
resemblance of reward, but is far distant from the nature thereof. Wherefore
everlasting life cannot be called a reward but by some resemblance.

Piscator in Thesibus loco 16, If properly speaking life everlasting If there
were reward, there were Merit.
were a reward, surely we should merit it by good works. Wherefore it
remains that life everlasting be called a reward by a figure.

Luther apud Scioppium in Ecclesiast. c. 67. If I saw heaven open and could
merit it by taking up a straw from the ground, yet would I not take up the
straw.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture plainly says; that everlasting life is given according to works,
and in that manner of speech, as it says that wrath and indignation is given
according to works: that there is very great reward in heaven: that we shall
receive the retribution or reward of inheritance. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that everlasting life is no retribution or reward:
that it is far from the nature of reward: that all the promises made in the
Scripture to works are hyperbols or ouerlashings of speech: that is improperly
a reward, abusiuely a reward: that it deserves not the name of reward. Which
are so contrary to Scripture, as sometimes Protestants confess it. See lib.
2. c. 30.

ART. II. WHETHER LIFE EVERLASTING be a Crown of Justice?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
2. Tim. 4. v. 7. and 8. I have fought a good fight, I have consummate
Heavenly reward is a crown of justice.
my course, I have kept the faith, Concerning the rest, there is laid up for me
a crown of justice, which our Lord will render me at that day a just judge.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton l. 9. de Iustif c. 3. The Scriptures most manifestly show, that
happiness is a reward of justice promised of God.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins refor. Catholic. Contr. 5. p. 109. We must acknowledge life eternal
to be every way the gift of God. p. 108. It is a free gift.

Calvin 3. Instit. c. 15.. 4. Beatitude it self is the mere goodness Of mere
liberality.
of God. c. 21.. 1. Salvation comes to us of the mere liberality of God In
Romans 6. v. vlt. Hence we gather, that our salvation is wholly from Gods grace
and mere goodness. In 2. Tim. 2. v. 12. Paul acknowledges nothing in the
whole cause of salvation, Of mere grace
but mere grace of God. In Antidoto Council. sess. 6. It comes to us by no
other Title then of free adoption.

Beza in Confess. c. 4. sect. 7. We profess, that everlasting By not title but
of free adoption.
life is wholly and in all parts the free gift of God. lib. quaest. vol. 1. p.
655. Wholly of his mere grace does he give us the benefit of eternal life.

Bucer in Epitome doctrinae Argentinen. Everlasting life remains mere grace.

Zuinglius in Exposit. fidei tom. 2. f. 558. Eternal happiness comes by the
only grace and liberality of God.

Bullinger Decade 3. Sermon. 9. None is so sottish, as he understands Wholly and
merely of grace.
not, that the whole benefit of salvation is attributed wholly and merely to
grace.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that everlasting life is a crown of justice, to be
given to him that has fought a good fight and consummated his course, and that
of a just judge. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that life everlasting is mere grace, mere goodness,
in all parts a free gift: that it comes to us of mere goodness, not
otherwise then by mere gift, by no other Title then of free adoption. Wholly of
mere grace: that it is nothing but mere grace: that S. Paul acknowledges
nothing in all the course of salvation but mere grace. Which is so contrary to
Scripture as some Protestants confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. III. WHETHER SALVATION OR eternal life be of faith only?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
James 2. verse. 14. What shall it profit my brethren, if a man Salvation no^ of
faith only.
say he has faith, but has not works? Shall faith be able to save him?

Philippen. 2. verse. 12. With fear and trembling work your Salvation is to be
wrought of us.
salvation.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
C. Bellarm. l. 4. de Iustif. c. 7. We say, that good works are necessary to
a just man to salvation, not only in manner of prepresence, but also of
efficiencie, because they work salvation, and without them faith alone works
not salvation.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Perkins in Gal. 3. to. 2. col. 157. They are deceived, who say, Works no
cause of salua. Faith only saves. Works not profitable to salvation.
that faith and works concur as causes of salvation.

Luther de votis to. 2. fol. 273. Faith alone saves: fol. 279. This is the
sum of sums: Works and vows can nether be taught nor persuaded, unless
we say, that they be holesom and profitable to justice and salvation: But to
teach, that they are wholesome, is devilish and Apostasy from faith, because
faith alone is necessary and wholesome. ib. de Captiuit. Baby l. f. 78. It is
certain, Faith alone is wholesome.
that none of them was saved by his vows and religion, but only by faith, in
which we all are saved. Postilla in die Ascensionis. Works help nothing to
salvation. It is enough to have faith.
Faith alone by it self and without any works saves us, and works do
nothing at all to piety or salvation. In Dom. post Ascens. Faith delivers
from the Devil, hell, sin, and all misfortune; which if we have, it is enough.

Ministers in Saxony in Colloq. Aldeburg. p. 162. Whosoever teaches, that
eternal life is given for good works, he departs from the word of God, the
Confession of Auspurg and Life not given for works.
the Apology. Thou shall never read in the Scripture, that eternal life is
given for good works.

Liber Concordiae c. 3. p. 691. By faith alone we are justified before God and
saved. 694. But this error also is to be rejected when it is taught: That a
man is any other way, or by any other thing saved, then by that, by which he
is justified before God: as if by only faith we were justified before God, but
yet that it were impossible to obtain eternal salvation without works. cap.
4. in Epitome art. We believe, teach, and confess, that good works Works
wholly excluded from saltion.
are wholly to be excluded, not only when we treat of the justification of
faith, but also when we dispute of our eternal salvation. Again: We reject
and condemn these speeches: Good works are necessary to salvation.

Zuinglius in Expostulat. ad Lindouerum to. 1. fol. 204. Faith alone saves us.

Calvin in Romans 10. v. 10. We are saved by faith alone. In c. 1. v. 7. It is
faith alone, which brings euerlastingnesse of life.

Beza in Explicat. Christianismi c. 8. vol. 1. page 199. Who Salvation relieth
not upon works.
teach, that men's salvation relieth upon works either wholly or in some part,
do plainly ouerturne all the Gospel.

Pareus l. 4. de Iustif. c. 4. The Gospel promises salvation under the
condition of faith alone.

Daneus Contr. de Baptismo c. 17. All the manner of our salvation purchased by
Christ, stands in faith in him.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that faith alone can not save us. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that faith alone saves, alone brings life: that
by faith only we are saved: that salvation is promised upon condition of faith
only: that works concur not to salvation, work nothing to salvation, are
not necessary to salvation, are not wholesome.

ART. IV. WHETHER ALL MEN, BOTH good and badde, be to be judged?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Apoc. 20. v. 12. And I saw the dead, great and little, standing Great and little
are to be be judged.
in the sight of the throne, and books were opened, and an other book was
opened which was of life; and the dead were judged of those things which were
written in the books according to their works. And the sea gave the dead,
that were in it, and death and Every one. All.
hell gave their dead that were in them, and it was judged of every one
according to their works.

2. Cor. 5. v. 10. For we must all be manifested before the judgment Every one
seat of Christ, that every one may receive the proper things of the body
according as he has done either good or evil.

Matthew. 25. verse. 32. And all nations shall be gathered before All nations.
him, and he shall separate them one from an other, as the pastor seperateth
the sheep from the goats. Then shall the King say to them that shall be at his
right hand: Come ye blessed etc. Then shall he say to them also that be at his
left hand: Go ye away etc.

Act. 10. v. 43. It is he that of God was appointed judge of the living and of
the dead.

Hebr. 22. v. 22. But you are come to mount Sion, and the city All.
of the living God -- and the judge of all, God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Catechismus ad Parochos in Exposit, Symboli. Of which article that is the
sense and meaning, that in the last day Christ our Lord shall judge all mankind.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther apud Scioppium in suo Ecclesiast. c. 5. Christians Only infidel --
know, that only infidels who will not receive the Gospel, are to be judged
of Christ in the last day. Let us learn and note this Not the faithful.
well, that we fear not death and the last judgment: for Christ is not to come
to judge us, but he will judge them who believe not.

Bullinger Concione 90. in Apoc. f. 163. The impious are Impious, not the pious.
to be judged, but not the pious. -- The good, because they are justified and
absolved, appear in judgment with glory to judge after their manner and
fashion the wicked, but not to be judged of any.

Tilenus in Syntagmate c. 67. The elect do know, that nether Not the elect.
their deeds nor all their words are to be called to the account of this
judgment. The like say others, as we have showed before c. 3. art. 10.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that all the dead shall be judged according to their
works: that all must be manifested before the tribunal of Christ: that all
Nations shall be gathered to Christ's judgment: that Christ is judge of the quick
and the dead: that God is judge of all. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that the impious are to be judged but not the pious:
that the good are not to be judged of any: that only infidels shall be judged.

ART. V. WHETHER THERE BE ANY. to whom, seeking eternal glory according to
patience of good works, everlasting life is rendered?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Roman. 2. verse. 6. and 7. Who will render to every man There are some such.
according to his works; to them truly that according to patience in good
work, seek glory and honor, and incorruption, life eternal.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Romans 2. v. 6. cit. If Christ alone shall bring those works,
to which the Apostle here says that eternal life is re^dred, he should not
have said: He will render to every one according to his works, but to every
one according to Christ's works.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Beza in Romans 2. v. 6. What is here said of Sophisters, as if There are no
such.
any out of Christ, or regenerate in Christ, are found such in the judgment of
God, as these here are described, does vary much from the scope of the
Apostle. For that surely is most absurd. Or as he has in edition of 1565.
Shall any man bring these works, to which the Apostle says that life
eternal shall be rendered: Either men not regenerate, or the sons of God? But
nether Abraham surely has whereof to glory before God.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that there are some, to whom seeking glory
according to patience of good works, eternal life is rendered. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that there are no men to whom life eternal is
rendered according to their works, nor that there are any works to which
eternal life is rendered.

ART. VI. WHETHER THE SOVLES OF reprobates departed this life do now suffer the
pains of hell?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Jude. v. 7. As Sodom and Gomorrha and the cities adjoining Sodomites in
eternal fire.
in like manner having fornicated and going after an other flesh, were made an
example, sustaining the pain of eternal fire.

Luc. 16. verse. 22. And the rich man also dead, and he was Dives in torments.
buried in hell. And lifting up his eyes when he was in torments etc.

Numbers 16. ver. 33. And they went down into hell quick, covered with the
ground. Are in hell.


CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas. Suplement. q. 69. art. 2. As soon as the soul is loosed from the
body, either it is cast into hell or mounteth to heaven, unless it be hindered
be some guilt so that it need first to be purged. And the contrary opinion is
to be held for heresy.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Scultet. in 1. part Medullae in Tertulliano c. 42. As that The souls not
punished before the body.
positio^ of his is new, so also is it false: That the souls suffer in hell
before the bodies.

Confession of Wittemberg. cap. de Memoria defunctorum. Faith requires of us
to believe, that the dead are not nothing, but truly live before God; the
godly, happily in Christ, and the imperious in horrible expectation of the
revelation of Gods judgment.

Confessio Belgica art. 12. says thus of the Devils: Reprobates expect their
torments.
They daily expect the horrible torments of their wicked deeds.

Calvin 3. Institut. cap. 25.. 6. There is no doubt, but that the same lot
befalls to the reprobates, which Jude assigns to the Devils, to the tied
bound in chains, till they be drawn to the punishment, to which they are
adjudged. In 2. Petri 2. verse. 4. Expect their revenge.
The reprobates suffer horrible torment of the revenge prepared for them.

Luther in 25. Genes. to. 6. fol. 321. I cannot affirm, whether Uncertain
whether wicked souls be now tormented.
the souls of the wicked be tormented straight after death. 322. We know not,
whether damnation begin straight after death. Sermon de Diuite and Lazaro tom.
7. fol. 268. I dare not affirm, that Dives is now vexed with these torments.
In cap. 2. Ionae to. 4. f. 418. I am not very certain, what hell is before the
last day. And apud Schioppium lib. cit. ca. 3. Nether has the The place of the
dead has no torments.
place of the dead any torments.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the Sodomites suffer the pain of
everlasting fire: that Dives is buried in hell, is in torments, and tormented
with fire: that Dathan and Abiron descended quick into hell. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants say, that they dare not affirm, that the souls of the wicked are
tormented straight after their death: yea they teach that it is false that
souls are punished in hell before the bodies.

ART. VII. WHETHER HELL BE any place?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Luke 16. verse. 22. And the rich man also died, and he was Hell is a place of
torments.
buried in hell. And v. 28. Lest they also come into this place of torments.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 2. de Purgatorio c. 6. Hell is a place of punishment.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther Sermon. de Diuite and Lazaro tom. 7. fol. 267. Hell Hell, nothing but
conscience. No corporal place.
can be nothing else, but a conscience void of faith and fraught with sin.
Postilla in Dom. 2. post Trinitatem. fol. 286. True hell shall begin at the
latter day. The place where a soul may be and yet want quiet, can not be a
corporal place. Hell can be naught else but an empty, faith less, sinful,
and wicked conscience.

Perkins in Apocalips 2. to. 2. col. 90. We must not imagine, No certain place,
that hell is any certain definite and corporal place.

Brentius apud Hospin. part. 2. Histor. fol. 308. I laugh There is no local
hell.
at your old wives dotages of a corporal and local heaven or hell. Fol. 331.
A local hell, is a fiction.

Schlusselburg lib. 1. Theol. Calvin art. 27. writes, that the Catechism of
Heidelburg calls in doubt whether there be No such appointed place.
any hell indeed, and an appointed place where the wicked and damned after
this life are to be punished with eternal pains together with the wicked
spirits. And that Bucer upon S. Ihon openly affirms this.

Calvin 2. Instit. c. 16.. 9. To shut up the souls of the dead in prison, is
childish.

Tilenus in Syntagmate cap. 6. We condemn the Papists, who out of the dream
of their drunken brain do put the place of the damned in the midst of the
earth.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that hell is a place of torments. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that hell is no place, no corporal place, no
prison; that it is nothing but a wicked conscience; that it shall begine at a
the latter day: which are so repugnant to Scripture, as some Protestants
confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. VIII. WHETHER THE FIRE OF hell be true fire?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Matthew. 25. verse. 41. Get ye from me you cursed into fire True fire in hell.
everlasting.

Jude. v. 7. cit. Sustaining the pain of eternal fire.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas. Supplement. q. 70. art. 3. The fire of hell is not imaginary or
metaphorical fire, but true corporal fire.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in Apoc. 2. to. 2. col. 90. We must not imagine, that No corporal fire.
the torments (of hell) are corporal, but rather spiritual, seeing they are an
apprehension or feeling of the wrath of God and of his revenge.

Calvin in Math. 3. v. 12. Touching everlasting fire, we may Metaphorical fire.
gather, that it is a metaphorical speech.

Daneus Controu. 4. cap. 11. They feign, that the souls of me^, and Devils
are tormented in hell with true and corporal fire. Controu. 6. page 1181. It
is impossible, that the souls of men separated from their bodies should be
tormented with any corporal fire.

Vorstius in Antibellarm. p. 269. It implies contradiction, that corporal
fire should work upon a mere spirit, as man's soul is said to be.

Tilenus in Syntagmate cap. 68. There is no cause, why we should say that (in
hell) is corporal fire. The same says Polanus in Sylloge thesium. part 2.
p. 518. and Lobechius disput. 6. and 19.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the fire of hell is fire. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that it is not true or material fire, but
metaphorical: that souls and mere spirits cannot be tormented with corporal
fire.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER OF EVERLASting life and death.
What we have rehearsed in this chapter clearly proves, that Protestants
teach far otherwise of everlasting salvation and damnation, then Scripture
does. For Scripture (and Catholics with it) teaches, that eternal salvation
is a reward, a crown of justice, and comes not of faith only: that the
souls of the reprobates do now suffer the pains of hell: that hell is a true
place, and that the fire of hell is true fire: All which Protestants deny.

The same also prove, that Protestants steal from eternal salvation the
nature of a reward, and crown of justice, and dependencie of good works: and
steal from hell the nature of a place and true fire.

CHAPTER XVIII. OF GODS LAW.
ART. I. WHETHER GODS LAW BE possible?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
EZECHIEL. 36. v. 27. And I will put my spirit in God will make us to keep his
law
the midst of you, and I will make that you walk in my precepts and keep my
judgments and do them.

Math. 7. ver. 21. He that does the will of my Father Some do his will.
which is in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. c. 11. v. 30.
My yoke is sweet, and my burden light.

Romans 8. v. 4. God sending his Son in the similitude of the Justification of
the law fulfilled in us
flesh of sin, even of sin damned sin in the flesh, that the
justification of the law might be fulfilled in us. c. 13. v. 8. He that loves
his neighbor, has fulfilled the law.

Gal. 5. ver. 14. All the law is fulfilled in one word: Thou shall The law
fulfilled in love
love thy neighbor as thy self.

1. Joan. 2. ver 4. He that says, he knows him, and keeps not his
commandments, is a lier, and the truth is not in him. c. 5. v. 3. This is the
charity of God, that we keep his commandme^ts, and his commandments are not
heavy.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. c. 11. No man must use that temerarious speech and
condemned of the Fathers under a curse: That Gods commandments are impossible
to be kept of a justified man. For God commands not impossble things, but by
commanding he admonishes to do what thou can, and to ask what thou can
not, and helps that thou may.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker l. 1. co^t. Dureu^ sect. 9. Thou can do nothing less, We can not
fulfill the law
the fulfill the law? No man can obey the law. And Contr. 2. q. 6. c. 3. he
avouches it to be a foundation of Christian religion: That Gods law cannot be
fulfilled of us: and ib. q. 5. c. 7. says, that the contrary is Pelagian
heresy.

Perkins de Baptismo to 1. col. 833. The Papists think, that a man in this
life can observe and fulfill the law.

Confession of Auspurg. cap. 6. So great is the weakness of No man can
satisfy the law.
man's nature, as no man can satisfy the law.

Apology of England. We say, that in this life we can no way satisfy the law.

Luther de liberate to. 2. fol 4. All the commandments are All the
commandments are impossible
are alike impossible unto us. In Gal. 3. f. 329. The law exacteth impossible
things.

Calvin in Antidoto Concilij Sess. 10. cap. 12. They bring nothing which
helps their wicked opinion of the possible observation of the law. In Luc.
10. v. 26. It is impossible for us to perform The law is impossible to be kept.
that which the law commands. In Actor. 15. v. 10. It is manifest, that the
law is impossible to be kept.

Beza in Luc. 18. v. 22. No man can keep one commandment so as the law
prescribes. In Romans 10. ver. 6. The law proposes not heaven but under an
impossble condition.

Daneus Contr. de Baptismo c. 15. It is altogether impossible Altogether
impossible.
to keep the commandments. Contr. 5. p. 974. Bellarmin says, that is easy
for him that has charity to keep the law: I answer that even to him it is
impossible.

Adamus Francisci in Margarita Theol. loco 5. Albeit Even with God his grace
regenerate men be helped and governed of the Holy Ghost, yet they are hindered
by the remnants of sin, that they cannot satisfy the law.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that Gods commandments are not heavy, that his
burden is light: that who loves his neighbor, fulfilleth the law: that God
will make us to keep his judgments: that he sent his Son, that the
justification of the law might be fulfilled in us. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that no man can satisfy the law, that the law is
impossible even to a justified man, that the law is impossible: that all the
commandments are a like impossible: that no one can be kept: that the law
proposes not heaven but under an impossible condition: that the doctrine of
the possible observation of the law, is wicked.

ART. II. WHETHER EVER ANY HAVE kept Gods law?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Psalm. 118. verse. 55. I have been myndfull in the night of thy David kept
Gods law.
name, o Lord, and have kept thy law.

Luc. 1. v. 6. And they were both just before God, walking in Also Zacharias
and Elizabeth.
all the commandments and iustifications of our Lord without blame.

Joan. 17. v. 6. Thine they were, and to me thou gave them, And the Apostles.
and they have kept thy word.

Act. 13. v. 22. I have found David the son of Iesse a man according to my
heart, who shall do all my wills.

1. Joan. 3. v. 22. Whatsoever we shall ask we shall receive of him, because
we keep his commandments.

Apoc. 3. v. 10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, and I will
keep thee from the hour of tentation. c. 14. v. 12. Here And Saints.
is the patience of Saints, who keep the commandments of God, and the faith
Jesus.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. ca. 16. We must believe, that nothing wants to the
justified, that they may not seem to have fully satisfied the law of God
according to the state of this life with those works which are done in God.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
The Confession of Scotlond artic. 15. We affirm, that None but Christ has
kept the law.
none on earth (Christ only excepted) in work and indeed so performs, and
shall perform that obedience to the law, which the law requires.

Confession of Auspurg. c. de operibus. Saints do not satisfy Not Saints.
the law.

Confession of Bohemia art. 7. We teach, that there is none who in deeds does
fulfill the precepts of the law.

Luther in Gal. 3. to. f. 3. 343. Moises requires a worker who perfectly does
the law; But where shall we have him? No where. In. c. 4. f. 393. No man does
the law.

Calvin in Romans 13. verse. 8. No man performs the law, nor ever performed it.
In Act. 15. v. 10. The faithful after they are regenerate with the spirit of
God, do give themselves to the justice of the law, but yet they perform not
all, but half and much less then half. In Gal.Gal 3. v. 10. It is clear,
that never any was found or can be fouud, who fulfilleth the law. In verse. 12.
There is none who does the works of the law. The like he has in Antidoto
Council. sess. 6. c. 12. In 3. Instit. c. 17.. 3. and 13.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that David kept Gods law, did all his wills: that
Zacharias and Elizabeth walked in all Gods commandments without blame: that the
Apostles kept Gods word: that Saints have kept Gods word and commandments. The
same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that none besides Christ gave that obedience to
the law which it requires; that no man in deed has fulfilled the law: that no
man satisfies the law: that the regenerate do much less then half of the law.

ART. III. WHETHER EVER ANY HAVE loved or followed God in all their hearts?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Deuteronomy. 30. v. 6. Our Lord thy God will circuncise thy heart, and God will make
us to love him in all our heart. David did so.
the heart of thy seed, that thou may love our Lord thy God in all thy heart,
and in all thy soul that thou may live.

3. Reg. 14. verse. 8. Thou have not been as my servant David, who kept my
commandments, and followed me in all his heart, doing that which was well liked
in my sight.

3. Reg. 8. v. 23. Lord God of Israel, who keep covenant and mercy with thy
servants that walk before thee in all their heart.

4. Reg. 23. v. 25. There was no king before him (Josias) like Josias followed
God in all his heart.
to him, who returned to our Lord in all his heart, and in all his soul, and in
all his power according to all the law of Moises.

Daniel. 3. 41. Azarias thus prays: And now we follow thee Also Azarias.
in all our heart, and fear thee, and seek thy face.

Psalm. 118. v. 10. With my whole heart I have sought after thee. And David.


CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de Amiss. Gratiae. c. 12. Luke writes of Zacharias and
Elizabeth that they walked in all the commandme^ts and iustifications of our
Lord: nether would they be said to have walked, in all the commandments, who
had neglected the first and greatest which is of loving God with all the heart.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
The Apology of the Confession of Auspurg. c. de Resp. ad Argumenta. No man
fears so much, loves God so much, beleiueth God so much as he ought.

Luther in Gal. 5. to. 5. f. 417. Thou shall not find one on earth, who so
loves, God and his neighbor, as the law requires. Postilla None can love God
in all his heart.
in Dom. 10. post. Trinit. f. 315. He requires, that we love him with all our
heart, which no mortal man can perform.

Brentius homilia 1. in Dom. 13. post. Trinit. None was ever found amongst the
Saints, who loved God perfectly with all his soul.

Calvin. 2. Instit. c. 7.. 5. I say, there was no Saint, who whilst No Saint
ever loved God in all his heart.
he was in this mortal life, attained to that hight of love, that he loved God
with all his soul, with all his heart, with all his power.

Pareus l. 4 de Iustif. c. 11. Such love (of all his soul) none of the Saints
had, or can have in this infirmity.

Daneus Contr. 5. p. 973. That this precept: Thou shall love God etc. can be
fulfilled, both under the old and the new testament, and that God promised it
Deuter. 10. v. 12. 30. v. 6. Hier. 24. v. 7. is most false.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly teaches, that God will make the faithful to love him
with all their heart: that the three children followed God in all their heart:
that David sought God in all his heart: that God uses mercy to them who walk
before him in all their hearts: that Josias returned to God in all his heart, in
all his soul, in all his power, and according to all the law of Moises. The
same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach; that there is not one who loves God so as the
law requires: that no Saint loved God with all his heart: that no Saint ever
had the love God in all his heart.

ART. IV. WHETHER GODS LAW BE in the hearts of any?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Hierem. 31. v. 33. I will give my law in their bowels, and in their Gods law
in the heart of some.
heart I will write it.

Psalm. 36. 31. The law of God in his heart.

Deuteronomy. 30. v. 14. But the word is very near thee, in thy heart and in thy mouth
to do it. The same Romans 10. v. 6.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Romans 10. verse. 6. The Scripture here says plainly: The word
is near, that is, the commandment of the law to do it. This is not true
says the Heretic, and the word of the law, or the commandment of the law is
not properly in our heart.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Calvin in Romans 10. v. 6. Even after regeneration, the word Gods law in the
heart of none.
of the law cannot be properly said to be in our heart, because it requires
perfection from which the faithful themselves are far of. The same say
others who teach that the law is impossible. For if it be impossible, it is not
in our hearts.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that Gods law is in our bowels, is written in our
hearts: is in the hearts of some. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the law of God is not properly in the heart of
any.

ART. V. WHETHER WE PRAY THAT we may fulfill Gods law?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 6. v. 10. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. We pray to
fulfill Gods law.


CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 1. de bonis operibus in part. cap. 6. We pray that Gods help
and grace be given us, whereby we may and will fulfill Gods commandments.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Perkins in Gal. 3. to. 2. col. 135. We do not pray, that we may We pray not so.
fulfill the law, but that we may endeavor according to our stre^ght to
fulfill it.

Calvin in Math. 10. v. 6. It suffices, that with desire we testify that we
hate whatsoever is against the will of God. In like sort Daneus in orat. Dom.
and others, who teach that it is impossible to fulfill the law. For no man
prays for that which he knows to be impossible.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly bids us pray, that Gods will be done in earth as it in
heaven, where doubtless it is fulfilled The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly teach, that we do not pray that we fulfill Gods law,
that it suffices to testify that we hate what is contrary to Gods law. Which
is so contrary to Scripture as sometimes Protestants themselves confess it.
See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. VI. WHETHER THE KEEPING OF the law be necessary to salvation?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Math. 19. v. 17. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. Keeping
of the law necessary to salvation.


Joan. 15. ver. 10. If you keep my precepts, you shall abide in my love.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D, Stapleton in Math. 19. v. 17. This doctrine of Christ does manifestly show,
that the keeping of Gods commandments is necessary to everlasting life.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther in Galat. 2. tom. 5. f. 311. The Papists teach: Faith in Not necessary.
Christ justifies, but with all the commandments of God must be kept, because
the Scripture says: If thou will enter etc. There Christ is straight denied
and abolished.

Calvin in Math. 19. ver. 17. This answer of Christ is legal; That none is
accounted just before God unless he has satisfied the law, which is
impossible. 3. Instit. c. 17.. 7. A legal promise, which added to an
impossible condition, proves nothing. In Antido to Council. sess. 6. p. 280.
Woe be to their Catechumens, if so hard a condition (of observing the law) be
imposed upon the^. what other then eternal malediction is laid upon them. In
Act. 15. v. 10. The whole world is cast headlong into eternal perdition, if it
cannot obtain salvation but by keeping the law. In Math. 9. v. 10. It
suffices to testify this by desire, that we hate whatsoever is contrary to
Gods will, and wish it were not.

Perkins in Cases of Conscience c. 7. If men do endeavor to yield God
obedience in all things, God will so accept this their slender and small
endeavor of doing that which they can do by his grace, as if they had
perfectly satisfied the whole law. Slender endeavor accepted of God


Piscator loco 17. The faithful are freed from the rigor of the law, and
therein from care and fear of maledictio^ of the law for the breaking thereof.

Pareus l. 4. de Iustif. cap. 7. It is enough, if they endeavor to Enough to
endeavor.
begin the new obedience of the law according to all the commandments, and ask
and impetrate the pardon of defects for the merits of Christ, otherwise no
flesh would be saved.

Peter Martyr in 1. Cor 10. v. 12. The precepts of good works require no other
thing of us, then endeavor and diligence to live well. In c. 7. v. 19. upon
that: But the keeping of Gods comma^dments, This, says he is not expected of
you, who already are children and belong to Christ, but only keeping of the
commandments of God so far as the condition of man and state of this present
life do suffer.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that if we will enter to life, we must keep the
commandments. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that it is not necessary to keep the
commandme^ts: that it is enough to endeavor. to begin the keeping of them:
that God accepts a sle^der endeavor of keeping them for a perfect keeping.

ART. VII. WHETHER THE LAW OF the ten commandments be abrogated and taken away
from the faithful?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY DENIES.
Romans 3. v. 31. Do we then destroy the law by faith? God forbid: The law not
abrogated by faith in Christ. If no law, no sin.
But we do establish the law. c. 4. v. 16. Where there is no law, nether is
there preuarication.

Math. 5. v. 18. Do not think that I am come to break the law or the
Prophets. I am not come to break, but to fulfill.

Joan. 14. v. 15. If you love me, keep my commandments.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Council of Trent Sess. 9. Con. 19. If any shall say, that nothing is
commanded in the Gospel but faith, and that the rest are indifferent, nether
commanded nor forbidden, but free, or that the ten commandments belong nothing
to Christians: be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Luther Sermon de Moyse: The ten commandments belong The ten commandments
belong not to Christians.
to Christians: And Whitaker l. 8. cont. Dureum sect. 91. adds: This article
is surely most worthy of Luther, because it contains most high truth and
comfort.

The same Luther in c. 18. Deuteronomy. to. 3. f. 56. Know, that Gods law is that
only which commands to the wicked and desperate The law abolished to the
godly.
men what is to be done, but where the godly are, there the law is abolished.
In Gal. 2. to. 5. fol. 227. The heart being justified by faith, straight ways
all laws cease, all things are free and lawful. 223. The law is dead, and
compels no more, yet we may do the law upon charity, but not as a law. 315.
all the ceremonial A Christian not bound to the law.
law or the decalog, is abrogated to a Christian, because he is dead to it. And
to be dead to the law, is not to be bound with the law, but to be free from it
and not to know it. 370. Christ has abrogated all laws universally. Postilla
in die Pentecostis f. 273. The Holy Ghost is given to this end, to abrogate
and take away the law. Wherefore Christians are not to be governed by laws, but
others who profess not Christ in their heart, are to be bridled with laws, are
to be remitted to hangmen and tormentours, and to be governed by the sword, for
to be kept in order. Et f. 272. The Holy Ghost does so abrogate the law, that
he leaves not so much as the letter of the law, or if any thing remain, it
remains only for to preach by word.

Melancthon in locis apud Fabritium in art. Augustan. 20. p. 364. We have
divided the law into three parts, Moral, ceremonial, and judicial, all
which must needs be abrogated if the old testament be abrogated. And this was
the cause of abrog^ting the law, because it could not be performed or done.
Which The moral law is abrogated.
cause pertaining more to the moral law, then to the ceremonial or judicial,
we must needs say that the Decalogue also is abrogated.

Michael Nea^der apud Schlusselburg. to. 4. Catal. Haeret. p. 61. I abide in my
opinion, that the law is not given to the just The law has no use. All laws
taken away.
in any use or office.

Tindal in Fox his Acts page 1140. Edit. An. 1610. Christ took away all laws
and makes us free and at liberty.

Or as M. Rainolds l. 4. Caluinuoturcismi c. 22. reports his words out of an
other edition: Christ has freed us from all laws, so that hereafter no law
binds us in conscience.

Zuinglius in Explanat. artic. 16. The law is taken from the godly by Christ.

The same in effect say all other Protestants, who teach, that the condemnation
of the law, or imputation of the breach thereof, is taken from the faithful,
so that it is not imputed to them either for fault or punishment. For it
implies contradiction, that there be a law, and that the breach thereof make
not the wilful breakers subject to sin or punishment. Wherefore Luther in
Disput. 6. to 1. proposit. 14. said truly: A law which condemns not, is a
feigned or painted law like to a Chimaera. And that the breach of no law is
imputed to the faithful is the common doctrine of Protestants, as is to be
seen in Conf. Heluet. cap. 12. Scotica art. 15. Apologia Confess. Augustanae
c. de Implet. legis. Martyr. in locis class. 2. c. 15. Calvin. 2. Institut. c.
7. Beza in 1. Joan. 5. v. 3. and in c. 2. v. 7. Whitaker loco citat. and others.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the law is not destroyed by faith in Christ
but established; that Christ came not to break the law but to fulfill it: that
if there be no law, there is no sin. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the ten commandme^ts belong nothing to
Christians: that the law commands only the wicked: that that being
justified all laws cease: that the law compels no more: that we are not
bu^od with the law: that Christ has abrogated all laws: that that the law
is not given to the just in any use: that no law binds any more. Which is
so contrary to Scripture, as some Protestants confess it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER of Gods law.
By what has been reported in this Chapter clearly appears, that
Protestants teach quite contrary to the holy Scripture concerning Gods law.
For the Scripture together with Catholics teaches, that Gods law is possible,
that some kept it; that some have loved God in all their heart, that Gods law
is in the heart of some, that we pray to fulfill it: that the keeping of it is
necessary to salvation, and that the moral law of the ten co^mandments is
not taken away from the faithful: all which Protestants deny.

By the same also appears, that the Protestants also in this matter play the
thieves. For they take from Gods law that it is possible, that it has been
kept of any, that it is in the hearts of any, that it is necessary to
salvation, and that it obliges the faithful.

CHAPTER XIX. OF MAN'S LAW AND SVPERIORITIE.
ART. I. WHETHER THERE BE ANY Superiority among Christians?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
PROVERB. 8. verse.s 15. By me Kings do reign.

Math. 24. v. 45. Who, think thou, is a faithful Christ appointed some over
his family. All power is of God.
wise servant, whom his Lord has appointed over his family?

Romans 13. v. 1. Let every soul be subject to higher powers, for there is no
power but of God.

Tite 3. v. 1. Admonish them to be subject to Princes and Potestates.

Hebr. 13. v. 17. Obey your Prelates, and be subject to them. Subject to Prelates
and Princes.


Act. 2. v. 28. The Holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to rule the Church of
God.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm. l. 3. de Laicis c. 3. The Prophets foretold that all the Kings of
the earth should serve Christ and the Church, which cannot be unless there be
Kings in the Church.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther l. de saeculari potestate apud Coccium tom. 1. l. 7. No Superiority
among Christians. A Christian, subject to none.
art. 1. Among Christians there can be no superiority.

De liberate Christiana to. 2. f. 3. A Christian man is the most freest Lord
of all, subject to none. De votis ibib. fol. 270. Christ has given me so much
liberty, that I man subject to none, but to himself only; Christ is my
immediate Lord, I know no other any more. In 1. Petri c. 2. to. 5. f. 462.
Christ has committed the badde to profane power, for to govern the^ as they
ought to be governed: the good, that is those who believe, he has reserved to
himself, whom he governs by his word only.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that Kings reign by God, that we must obey the
higher powers, that we must be subiest to Princes and Prelates, and to rulers of
the Church. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that there is no superiority among Christians:
that a Christian is subject to none, under none but Christ: that Christ is his
immediate Lord, and that he knows no other.

ART. II. WHETHER MAN HAVE AVthoritie to make laws?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Act. 15. v. 29. It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to The Apostles
made laws.
us, to lay no further burde upon you then these necessary things: That you
abstain from things immolated to idols, and blood, and that which is strangled.

Ibid. v. 41. Paul walked through Syria and Cilicia confirming the Churches
commanding them to keep the precepts of the Apostles and the Ancients.

1. Cor. 7. verse. 12. For to the rest, I say, not our Lord: If any Also S.
Paul.
brother have a wife an infidel, and she consent to dwell with him, let him not
put her away.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Act. 15. v. 28. The Church can impose temporal laws as
precepts for some good end, to wit, to keep peace in the Church, which bind
the faithful in conscience and before God to obey them.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Confession of Basle art. 10. None can forbid that which None can forbid
that which Christ forbade not. God alone ca^ make laws.
Christ has not forbid.

Lutherl cont. R. Angliae. to. 2. f. 346. The power of making laws belonges to
God alone. De Captiu. Babyl. fol. 77. Nether men nor Angels can by any right
impose any law upon Christians, but as they will themselves.

Calvin 4. Instit. c. 10.. 7. We hear, that God chalengeth God only a
lawgiuer.
this as proper to himself alone, to govern us by the command of his word and
by laws. Ibid.. 8. If God be the only lawgiuer, men must not take this
authority upon them. In Iacobi 4. v. 12. They draw to themselves all the
majesty of God, who challenge authority to make laws.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the Apostles had authority to impose
necessary burdens, and to command that which Christ had not commanded: to
command their precep^s to be kept: and to make laws for married persons. The
same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that none can forbid that which Christ has not
forbid: that the power of making laws is proper to God alone: that no law
can be imposed upon Christians but as they will themselves.

ART. III. WHETHER MAN'S LAW CAN bind the conscience?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Romans 13. v. 2. Who resists the power, resists the ordinance Man's law can
bind conscience.
of God, and they that resist, purchase to themselves damnation. v. 5.
Therefore be subject of necessity, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
D. Stapleton in Romans 13. v. 1. The breach of humane laws offends also God
-- The very consciences of the faithful are bound with civil laws.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Contr. 4. quaest. 7. c. 1. We say, that the laws of Princes laws
bind not conscience.
Princes bind not the conscience, for this is proper to God. lib. 8. cont.
Dur. sect. 103 Who impose laws upon the conscience, challenge power of saving
and destroying, and rob God of his right. The laws of Magistrates have no
power over the conscience.

Perkins in Anatomia Conscientiae: tom. 1. col. 1215. We Conscience subject to
no man's law.
acknowledge no subjection at all of the conscience to men's laws. In Galat. 5.
tom. 2. col. 258. The Magistrates law makes a thing necessary externally;
Nevertheless the thing in it self is not made necessary, but remains
indifferent, and you may use it or not, if you avoid contempt or scandal.

Luther in 1. Petri c. 2. tom. 5. f. 464. The Magistrate cannot bind the
conscience. De seruo arbit. to. 2. fol. 431. Consciences are bound with Gods
law only.

Zuinglius in Explanat. artic. 28. It is no sin which God forbids not.
Man's additions cannot make any thing to be good or evil. Art. 24. No
Christian is bound to those works which Christ has not commanded.

Calvin in Iacobi 4. verse. 12. It is God alone, who has the conscience subject
to his laws. In Refutat. Cathalon. p. 384. No mortal man can make laws which
bind the conscience, and make men guilty of Gods judgment. De necessitate
reform. page 58. We teach, that consciences are free and quite from men's laws.
In Confess. fidei p. 109. Men have no power to bind the conscience under
mortal sin. The like he has 3. Instit. c. 19. and 4. c. 10.

Beza in Confess. c. 5. sect. 33. God has reserved to himself alone all this
power of binding the conscience with laws. cap. 7. sect. 9. It is lawful to
God alone, to impose laws upon the conscience.

Peter Martyr in locis. class 4. cap. 4.. 5. The Apostles No sin to break
the Apostles laws without scandal.
did decree, that Gentiles converted to Christ should abstain from strangled
meat, and immolated to idols, and from blood -- If any had eaten of them
without offense of others he had sinned nothing in conscience.

Daneus Controu. 3. p. 509. Men's commandment can not bind our consciences.
Contr. 5 pa. g1125. No law, but Gods, can bind us in consciencience.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that who resists the Magistrate resists Gods
ordinance, and purchases damnation, and that we must be subject to him for
conscience sake. Catholics say the same.

Protestants expressly say, that Magistrates cannot bind the conscience: that
God alone can bind the conscience: that breakers of the Apostles precept
without contempt or scandal did not sin.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER of man's law.
What has been rehearsed in this chapter plainly proves that Protestants
teach contrary to the Scripture concerning man's law. For the holy Scripture
and Catholics withal, teaches that there is superiority among Christians,
that men have power to make laws, and that their laws may bind the
conscience: all which are denied of Protestants.

It proves also that Protestants even in this matter keep their old custom
of stealing: For they take from Christians all superiority, all power of
making laws, and from their laws all power of binding the conscience.

CHAPTER XX. OF FREE WILL.
ART. I. WHETHER MAN'S WILL BE free in indifferent matters?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
NVMBERS 30. v. 14. It shall be in the arbitrament Man free in things indifferent.
of her husband, whether she shall do it or not do it.

Iosue 24. ver. 15. Choice is given you, choose this day that which pleases you.

2. Reg. 24. verse. 12. Choice is given thee of three We have choice.
things; choose one of them which thou will.

1. Corint. 7. verse. 37. For he that has determined in his heart being settled,
not having necessity, but having power of his own will etc.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent. Sess. 6. Con. 5. If any shall say, that man's free will is
after Adams sin lost and extinct, or a thing only in Title, or a title
without the thing, finally a devise of Satan brought into the Church: be he
accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Luther art. 36. tom. 2. Free will after sin is a thing only in No free will
after sin.
Title. And in assert. eiusdem articuli: Free will is a devise amongst things,
and a title without the thing: because no man has in his power to think any
good or ill, but all things fall out of absolute necessity. There is no doubt,
but that by Satan's teaching this name, Free will, came into the Church.

The same Luther de seruo arbit. to. 2. f. 434. Man's will is Man's will is like
a beast.
set in the midst as a beast: if God sit upon it, it wills and goes
whither God will; if Satan sit upon it, it wills and goes whither Satan
will: Nether is it in his power to run to either rider or to seek him, but
the riders themselves strive about We do all things of necessity.
him whether shall have him. fol. 435. It is certain, that we do all things of
necessity, and nothing by free will. The like he has p. 461. 486. and
otherwhere often.

Melancthon in locis editis An. 1521. apud Bellarm. l. 4. Men have nether free
will nor reason.
de Great. and lib. arbit. c. 5. Men use the name of free will, which is most
different from the holy scripture, from the sense and judgment of the Spirit.
And out of Plato his schole, is added the word Reason, as pernicious as that.
Again: Seeing all things that fall out, fall out necessarily according to Gods
predestination, there is no liberty of will. What then (will you say) is there
no chance in things, no hap, no fortune? The Scripture say, that all things
fall out necessarily. And if there seem to thee to be some chance in humane
matters, thou must here command the judgment of reason. Which words of his also
are repeated by Zanchius de Praedestinat. c. 5. to. 7. col. 435.

Zuinglius l. de Religione c. de Merito. to. 2. Gods providence takes away
both free will and merit. The very name of free will disliked.


Calvin l. 2. lib. arb. p. 153. The name of free will displeases me, and I
would it were taken away. Et p. 154. Who mantaineth free will, uses an other
language then the Holy Ghost does. 2. Instit. c. 2.. 8. Because I think it
(name of free will) cannot be kept without great danger, and that it would be
great good to Church if it were abolished, nether will I use it, and I should
wish others if they will hear me, to forebeare it. Et l. 1. cap. 15.. 8. Who
do yet seek will in man lost and drowned in spiritual perdition, do plainly
doat. Et in confess p. 108. We nether grant merit, nor free will. No free will
in indifferent things.


Polanus in Disput. priuatis disput 34. A sinful man has no free will in
indifferent and civil matters.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that man has freedom in choice to do: that he
has choice to choose what he will: that he has not necessity but power of his
will. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that free will is a devise: a thing only in
title, or title without the thing: that there is no liberty no chance in
things: that all things fall out of absolute necessity; that man's will is like
a beast: that a sinful man has no free will in indifferent and civil things.
Which some Protestants confess to be contrary to Scripture. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. II. WHETHER MAN'S WILL BE free in moral matters that are good or badde?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Genesis 4. v 6. Why art thou angry, and why is thy contenance Free will in
moral matters.
fallen? If thou do well, shall thou not receive again: but if thou do
ill, shall not thy sin forthwith be present at thy door? But the lust thereof
shall be under thee, and thou shall have dominion over it.

Iosue 24. v. 15. Choose this day that which pleases you, whom We have choice
in moral matters.
you ought especially to serve. ver. 22. You are witnesses, that your selves
have chosen to you our Lord for to serve him.

Eccles. 15. ver. 18. Before man there is life and death, good and Some could
sin and did not.
evil: what pleases him, that shall be given him. c. 31. v. 10. He that could
transgress, and has not transgressed; and do evils, and has not done.

Philemon. ver. 14. But without thy counsel I would do nothing: Voluntary
and not of necessity,
that thy good might not be as it were of necessity, but voluntary. The like
is 1. Corint. 7. verse. 37. cited in the former article.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
C. Bellarm l. 5. de Great. and lib. arbit. c. 14. Orthodoxall truth teaches,
that man in state of corrupted nature is endued with free will in moral
matters.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Whitaker Contr. 2. q. 5. c. 7. p. 515. Luther and Calvin grant Man's will not
free to good.
man's will to be free to sin and ill doing, but not to good. p. 517. It is
the Pelagian heresy: That man after his fall has any liberty left to good.
The like has Morton l. 1. Apologiae. c. 30.

Luther de seruo arbit. to. 2. fol. 460. If here could be any change or
freedom of will in Pharao to both parts, God could not have so certainly
have foretold his induration. -- Which No free will to good.
could not be, unless induration were wholly beyond the power of man, and only
in Gods power. Resp. ad Artic. Louan. fo. 504. There is no feee will to good.

Calvin 2. Instit. c. 3.. 10. God moves the will, not as it has Not in our
power to obey or resist.
been taught and believed these many ages, that afterward it is in our choice
either to obey or resist the motion, but by working it effectually. We must cast
away that saying of Chrysostom: whom he draws, he draws willing. Which he
repeateth in Joan. 6. verse. 44.

Pareus l. 5. de Great. c. 29. p. 919. Who want justice, are not free to
justice, but to injustice: nor to good, but only to ill.

Piscator in Thesibus page 423. A man in sin has no free will to good, but
only to ill.

Thus teach they of man's will to good; of the same toward ill, this they say.

Calvin 2. Institut. c. 3. 5. I marvel, if any think it a harsh Man is of
necessity drawn to ill.
speech, that I say man's will having lost liberty is by necessity drawn or
led to evil. Et. A carnal man necessarily obeys every draught of Satan.
The same he has c. 5.. 1

Daneus Contr. 6. p. 1224. That sins are not the acts of Sin is not the act
of a free will.
free will, is false. They are the acts of our own accord, but not of free
will.

Vallada in Apologia c. 20. Who can deny this necessity of sinning in a man
not regenerate? The same teach others as has been showed before c. 2. art. 8.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that the lust of sin is under a man: that, as
it pleases him, good or evil shall be given to him: that he has choice whom
he will serve: that some thing is voluntary to him and not necessary: that he
could have sinned and yet did not. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that there is no free will to good: no freedom to
both parts: that it is not in our choice to obey or resist: that by necessity
we are drawn to ill: that sin is not an act of free will, but only of our
own accord. Which is so contrary to Scripture, as some Protestants confess
it. See lib. 2. c. 30.

ART. III. WHETHER MAN'S WILL cooperate with Gods grace to good acts?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Cor. 3. v. 9. For we are Gods coadiutors. c. 15. ver. 10. I have We are
Gods coadiutors.
labored more abundantly then all they: yet not I, the grace of God with me.

Math. 25. v. 20. Lord five talents thou did deliver me; behold, We gain
more with Gods grace.
I have gained other five besides.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Council of Trent Sess. 6. Con. 4. If any shall say, that man's free will moved
and stirred up of God, does cooperate nothing by assenting to God moving and
calling: be he accursed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther in psalm. 5. to. 3. fol. 174. It is an error, that free will Free will
works not in good.
has any actiuitie in a good work, when we speak of an inward work.

Zuinglius in Explanat. art. 20. The Papists make God the We are not Gods
coadiutors.
first and chief cause of all goodness, and us cooperatours, which is
craftily to withdraw themselves from God.

Calvin 2. Institut. cap. 3.. 12. The Apostle says not, that Gods grace
labored with him to make himself fellow of the labor; but rather gives the
whole praise of the labor to grace alone.. 6. We see, that not content to have
given simply the praise of our conversion to God, he excludes us expressly
from all fellowshippe.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture expressly says, that we are Gods coadiutors, that Gods grace
labors with us: that we gain over that which was given us. The same say
Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that we are not coadiutors of labor, that we are
not Gods coadiutors, that we have no fellowshippe of the labor.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER of Free will.
That which we have rehearsed in this chapter plainly declares, that
Protestants teach far otherwise of free will then the holy Scripture does.
For that Scripture (and Catholics with it) teaches, that man has free will in
indifferent matters, and in moral both good and badde, and that he cooperateth
with Gods grace to good: All which Protestants deny.

It shows also that as Protestants have stoallen from God, from Christ, from
Saints, from the Church, and other things spoaken of before, so also they
steal from man that which is the most excellent thing in him, to wit, free
will, or dominion over his own acts, and make him a slave, and like to beasts.

CHAPTER XXI. OF MAN'S SOVLE.
ART. I. WHETHER MAN'S SOVLE BE immortal?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
MATH. 10. ver. 28. Fear ye not them who kill the Soul of man cannot be
killed.
body, and are not able to kill to soul. c. 22. ve. 32. He is not the God of
the dead, but of the living.

Joan. 11. ver. 26. Every one that lives and beleiueth Shall not die.
in me, shall not die for ever.

Eccles. 12. v. 7. And the spirit returns to God who gave it. Returnet to God.


CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 2. 2. q. 164. art. 1. The soul of man is immortal, beasts souls
are mortal. Et 1. part q. 118. art. 2. It is heresy to say, that a
reasonable soul is transfused with the seed.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther in Assert. art. 27. to. 2. f. 107. I give leave, that the Pope make
articles of faith to his followers, Such as are: That bread and wine are
transsubstantiated in the Sacrament: That the soul is the substantial form
of man's body: That he is Emperor of the world and king of heaven, and an
earthly God: That the soul is immortal, and all those infinite monsters in
the Romish The soul is mortal.
du^ghill of Decrees: that such as his faith is, such be his Gospel, such his
faithful, such his Church, and like lips like lettuce, and the pot may have
a fit cover. And in the Margent: Articles made of the Pope.

Zuinglius l. de Religione c. de Clauibus to. 2. f. 187. But they do not so
agree amongst themselves where the keys were given; that it is marvel, why
the Pope of Rome, seeing he alone can judge the Scripture as these men dream,
has not pronounced by some law where they were given, lest there should be so
great dissension in a matter of so great moment, or rather of profit: For The
soul dies with the body.
he might easily, for he has decreed, that souls do not die when the body
dies.

Vorstius in Antibellarm. p. 543. There want not some among Infants perish like
beasts.
Christians, who think that either all Infants or some are quite extinguished
by death as beasts are. And he himself insinuates, that man's soul is not a
pure spirit, as appears by words cited in an other place. Calvin in Explic.
perfidiae Gentilis. p. 677. Some (Protestants) did say, that there is no
shorter way to abolish the protection of Saints, superstitious prayer for the
dead, the invention of Purgatory and such like, then if we would believe death
to be the destruction of the soul. Souls perish.


Brentius homilia 35. in c. 20. Lucae apud Reginaldum l. 4. Caluinoturcismi
cap. 5. Albeit there be no public profession among us that the soul perishes
with the body, and that there is no resurrection of the dead; yet that most
unclean and most profane life, which the greatest part of men follow,
clearly shows, that in their mind they think that there is no life after
this life, or at least that they doubt of the life to come. No life after this.
Men are begotten even according to the soul.


Besides they teach that man's soul is transfused with the seed.

Bergenses apud Hospin. in Concordia discordi f. 104. Write that a man is
naturally begotten of his father and mother, both according to body and soul.

Luther disput. 2. to. 2. fol. 500. Who shall think, that the soul is by
transfusion, seems not to think amiss from the Scripture. Et fol. 501. That
is nothing, which is said: A reasonable soul is infused whilst it is
created, and created it is infused. Et Vorstius in Antibellarm. p. 530. Luther
thought that the soul was by transfusion.

Hutterus in Analysi Confess. Augustanae art. 2. p. 157. We Our Souls are not
created but transfused.
resolve, that that opinion seems more probable to us, which thinks that
souls are not infused of God, but are propagated from parents to children by
transfusion.

Peucerus apud Schlusselburg l. 2. Theol. Calvin. art. 6. I conclude that
souls rise by transfusion.

Schlusselburg. to. 2. Catal. Haeret. p. 195. It appears sufficiently in the
writings of Luther and Melancthon that they incline to this opinion, which
says that souls are by transfusion, and they show great arguments out of the
Scripture.

Reineccius to. 3. Armaturae cap. 6. We gather, that souls are together with
the bodies propagated from the parents into the children, and not made of the
seed as out of matter; but of the soul of the parents as one candle is
lightened of an other, and that as the body, so the soul is in the seed, not
actually, but in power, which being dead is raised up by Gods government.

But to teach that man's souls is by transfusion, is in effect The Soul being
dead it raised.
and deed to say it is mortal, as the Protestants themselves confess. Pareus
l. 4. de Amiss. Great. c. 11. Whether we say that souls are sowed with the
bodies, or immediately transfused out of other souls, as one light is kindled
of an other, we cannot defend the immortality of the soul any more. Beza in
Romans 5. v. 12. Which opinion can no way be mantained, but that the substance of
man's soul must be diuisible and consequently corruptible.

Moreover they teach, that man's soul after his death sleeps and feels
nothing.

Luther in 2. Ionae to. 4. f. 417. Scripture teaches that the dead sleep: I
think that they are so drowned with a marvelous The Souls sleep and feel
nothing.
and unspeakable sleep, as they feel or see less then they that otherwise
sleep, and when they shall be raised, they shall not know where they have been,
or how they were suddenly borne a new. Ib. in c. 9. Eccles. f. 36. Solomon
seems to think, that the dead sleep so, as they know nothing at all. He
described the dead like to sensles carcases. Et f. 37. An other place, that the
dead feel nothing. Solomon thought, that the dead did wholly sleep and feel
nothing at all. In cap. 25. Genesis to. 6 f. 722. There is a great difference
between the Saints sleeping and Christ reigning: they sleep and know not what
is done.

Calvin in Psychopanychia p. 388. I know many good men, into whose mind some
thing was instilled of this sleep (of the souls) either through to much
readiness to believe, or through ignorance of Scriptures, whereby they were
not sufficiently instructed at the time for to resist, whom I would not offend
if I may.

Sleidan l. 9. Histor. Luther teaches out of Scripture, that the souls of the
dead do rest and expect the latter day of judgment: and he adds that out of
this Luther overthrew purgatory.

But to teach, that the souls have no feeling, is as much as to say, that they
are perished, according to the verdict of the Protestants themselves. For thus
Beza epistola 82. To deprive the soul of motion and sense, is alone as to kill
the soul. The same says Calvin lib. cit. p. 391. Daneus Contr. 2. p. 160.
Zuinglius in Exposit. fidei tom. 2. fol. 559. and in elencho fol. 37.

Castalio also apud Bezam de puniendis Haereticis, (whose learning and honesty
D. Humfrey ad Ration. 1. Campiani says he well knew) writes thus: Men
dispute of the Trinity, of Predestination, of free will, of God, of Angels, of
the state of souls after this life, and of other such matters, which nether
are so necessary to obtain salvation by faith, because without knowledge of
them publicans and harlots have been saved, nether if they be known make they
a man better.

Finally they use to understand the Saints departed this life by this term,
The dead. For so does the Apology of the Confession of Auspurg. c. de Inuocat.
Sanctorum: The confession of Saxony c. 21. Melancthon in locis. c. de
Sacramentis, c. de Caeremonijs. c. de scandalo. c. de liberate Whitaker l. 9.
cont. Dureum sect. 36.

Whereupon Kemnitius 3. part Examinis p. 228. says that the Saints departed
are usually termed The dead.

CONFERENCE OF THE FORESAIED WORDS.
Scripture expressly says, that the soul cannot be killed, and that it
returns to God. The same say Catholics.

Protestants expressly say, that the soul dies, that it is a Popes decree,
that the soul dies not, that it is a monstrous thing to say that it is
immortal: they add also that it is by transfusion, that after death it
feels nothing: that all or most infantes perish as beasts that the knowledge
of the state of souls after this death, is not necessary to salvation nor
makes a man the better.

ART. II. WHETHER MAN'S SOVLE BE the form of his body?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
Genesis 2. v. 7. Our Lord God formed man of the styme of the Soul form of the
body.
earth, and breathed into his face the breath of life, and man became a living
soul.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
S. Thomas 1. part q. 76. art. 4. A reasonable soul is united to the body as
a substantial form.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther cited in the former article: I give leave that the Not substantial
form of the body.
Pope make articles of faith to his followers. Such are: That the soul is a
substantial form of the body. In psalm. 22. to. 3. f. 348. It is not
determined according to the spirit of truth, nor according So also Farellus.
to the authority of Scriptures, but by the Popes reed according to vain
traditions of men: That the essence of God is nether generated nor generateth:
That the soul is a substantial form of the body: That bread and wine are
tra^ssubstantiated on the altar: that one kind is to be given to lay men for
the whole Sacrament, and like monsters.

Polanus in Sylloge Thesium part 2. p. 518. Man's soul is No form of the
body.
no form of the body, against Bellarmin.

Bucanus Instit. loco 8. p. 89. The soul is in one only member Not in every
member of the body.
and place of the body.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly says, that the soul was infused of God into man, and that
by it he was made a living creature. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly say, that man's soul is no form of the body, that it is
monstrous to say that it is the form of the body: that it is in one only
part and place of the body, and not in the whole body.

ART. III. WHETHER THERE BE ANY resurrection of the dead?
SCRIPTVRE EXPRESSLY AFFIRMS.
1. Cor. 15. v. 16. For if the dead rise not again, nether is Christ The dead
shall rise.
risen again. And if Christ be not risen again, vain is your faith.

1. Thessalon. 4. v. 14. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again: so
also God them that have slept by Jesus will bring with him. And the same is
most plainly taught in innumerable places.

CATHOLICS EXPRESSLY AFFIRM.
Catechismus ad Parochos in Exposit. Symboli: As we believe that many have
been raised from death, so we must believe that all shall be raised to life.

PROTESTANTS EXPRESSLY DENY.
Luther l. de seruo arbit. to. 2. fol. 442. Behold experience, what the most
excellent wits amongst the Gentiles thought of the life to come and the
resurrection. How much more excellent they were of wit, did they not the more
think the life to come and resurrection to be ridiculous. -- Finally to this
day the most, Luther not free from denying the resurrection of the dead.
by how much they are of greater wit and learning, do they not the more laughe
at that article, and account it afable, and that openly. And I would to God
thoum, y Erasmus and I, were free from this leaven. So rare is there any
faithful soul touching this article.

Brentius apud Reginaldum cited in the first article: Yea such words fall from
diverse (Protestants) by which they signify No resurrection of the dead.
that they believe not the resurrection of the dead, as well when there are
drunken as when they are sober, in their familiar talks.

Vorstius in Apologetica resp. ad Homium p. 41. writes thus: Let them see, who
will enquire these things more curiously, what amongst our men Calvin himself
sometimes thought of this matter in his epistles p. 85. Where Farellus plainly
enough Calvin denied the resurrection of the flesh.
tells that he not only doubted of the resurrection of this flesh, but
thought plain contrary from others at that time. And nevertheless none
accursed him therefore of heresy. Yea among the Lutherans James Schegkius in
Antisimonic. sect. 9. p. 420. Schegkius denied the resurrection of these bodies.
Openly denied, that the same bodies should rise hereafter. And yet he was
courteously excused of his parteners, and it no where appears, that he was for
that condemned of heresy either of his own men or of ours.

Calvin Epistola 104. thus writes to Laelius Sozinus Sozinus denied the
resurrection of the flesh.
(whom Camerarius in vita Melancthonis much commends) I see that you are not
satisfied about the resurrection of the flesh.

Farellus, who was the first Minister of Geneua, and whom Calvin and Beza
highly commend, and his picture is put amongst the worthies of the new
reformers, denied the resurrection of this flesh. For thus writes Calvin to
him, as reports M. Reinalds in Caluinoturcismo l. 3. c. 22. It is no
marvel, that the resurrection of this flesh seems a Nether Calvin
maruaileth at it.
thing incredible to thee. Thou thinks it suffices if thou beleiuest that
sometime we shall have new bodies. Behold, the first Apostle of Geneua thought
the resurrection of this flesh a thing incredible; nether that seemed any
meruaill to his Coapostle Calvin.

Besides, all they who, as we rehearsed cap. 3. artic. 20. deny that Christ's
blood rose again, deny that there was a perfect resurrection of Christ of
whom his blood was a part, and consequently they must deny that the blood of
other men shall rise again, and so there shall not be a perfect resurrection of
men.

Moreover Calvin in 4 c. 1.. 27. says that those Corinthians who denied the
resurrection, were not excluded from Gods mercy. Sadeel and Theses Posnan. c.
12. page 806. Protestants account deniers of the resurrection to be members of
the Church and children of God, and faithful.
that they kept the name of a true Chruch; which also says Riuet. tract. 1.
sect. 39. Beza 2 part respons. ad Acta Montisbel. pa. 253. and Luther in
Galat. 1. fol. 215. The Confession of Zwizerland adds, that they were holy
Churches of God. Author Respons ad theses Vadimont. page 533. affirms, that
they fell not from true faith. And Perkins tractat. de Baptismo col. 819.
avouches, that they were the sons of God. But if they who denied the
resurrection, kept the name of a true Church, remained the sons of God, were
not excluded from Gods mercy, fell not from faith, surely either the
resurrection is no article at all of faith, or not necessary either to grace or
salvation.

THE CONFERENCE.
Scripture plainly teaches, that there shall be resurrection of the dead, and
that the contrary doctrine denies Christ's resurrection and overthrows all
Christian faith. The same say Catholics.

Protestants plainly teach: that the more witty the Gentiles were, the more
they laughed at the resurrection, that the more learned men now are the more
they think the resurrection to be a fable: that Luther and Erasmus were not
free from this leaven, and that in this matter a faithful soul is rare: that
Schegkius openly denied resurrection of this body, (which is indeed to deny
all resurrection, seeing resurrection is not but of the same which died) and yet
was condemned of no Protestants, yea excused of some: that many of them both
drunk and sober let fall such speeches from them, as do show that they believe
not the resurrection of the dead: That amongst the Sacramentaries two
principal Apostles Calvin and Farel did not believe the resurrection of this
flesh, and consequently not the resurrection of the dead: that Sozinus was not
satisfied about the resurrection of the flesh: that many of them deny the
resurrection of the blood: and lasty that they avouch that those Christians,
who denied the resurrection of the dead, fell not from true faith, not from the
Church, or favor of God.

THE SVMME OF THIS CHAPTER of man's Soul.
What we have rehearsed in this chapter plainly shows, that Protestants
think far otherwise of man's soul, then the holy Scripture does. For the
Scripture, and Catholics with it, teaches, that the soul of man is the form
of the body, is immortal, that there shall be resurrection of the dead: which
Protestants deny.

It shows also, that Protestants play the theiues toward their own souls,
whilst take from it immortality, and the nature of the form of the body,
and deny the resurrection of the dead. And hitherto we have showed, that
Protestants in 260. articles contradict the express words of the holy
Scripture: it remains, that we show that they also contradict the true sense
of the words; which we will do by twoe ways, the one by general reasons, the
other by the plain confession of The Scope of the second book.
some Protestants touching many of the foresaied articles.

End of the first book.
THE SECOND BOOK. IN WHICH IT IS SHEVVED THAT PROTESTANTS CONTRADICT THE TRVE
sense of holy Scripture.
CHAPTER I. THAT PROTESTANTS CONTRADICT the true sense of Scripture, because in
so many things they gainsay the express words thereof.
FIRST of all, we must consider, that when the holy Scripture and Catholics
both of purpose intend clearly to declare their meaning touching the foresaied
260. articles in controversy, they do iumpe either in the very self same, or
inequiualent words: and that contrariwise, when the Scripture and the
learnedest of the Protestants intend to express their meaning concerning the
said articles, they use quite opposite and contrary speeches. Which is a
manifest sign, that the Catholics doctrine about the said articles is the
self same with the doctrine of the holy Scripture, and the Protestants
doctrine, quite contrary thereunto. For sithence this agreement of Catholics
with the Scripture in words and speech, and disagreement of Protestants in the
same, falls out so often and in so many and weighty matters, it cannot be
attributed to chance, because chance, as the Philosophers 2. Phys^c.
teach, is in those things only which fall out seldom: And therefore it
proceeds of the nature of these sentences or doctrines, whose agreement or
disagreement with the sentence of the holy Scripture, breeds this so
frequent agreement or disagreement with the words or speeches of the same.
Wherefore thus I argue in form of syllogism: These doctrines, which when they
are of purpose to be expressed clearly, distinctly, and as they differ from
all other doctrines, do of their nature require to be expressed with the very
same or equivalent words, are in deed one and the self same doctrine: And
contrariwise, those doctrines, which when they are to be so expressed, of their
nature require to be expressed with quite opposite and contrary words, or
speeches, are in deed opposite and contrary doctrines: But the Scriptures and
the Catholics doctrines touching the foresaied 260. articles, are of the first
kind, and the Scripture and Protestants doctrines, of the second: Therefore
they are all one, and these, quite contrary. The Mayor of first proposition is
evident. For how could twoe doctrines or opinions of their nature require to be
expressed with the self same or equivalent words, if there were any difference
between them. For vndoubtely that difference would exact some difference in the
words; and those words which clearly and fully express the one doctrine,
could not clearly and fully express the other. And much less could one and
the self same speech clearly expressly the^ both, if they were contrary one
to the other. And therefore certain it is, that twoe contrary doctrines
cannot of their nature require to be expressed by the self same or equivalent
words. And consequently also it is most certain, that the Scriptures and
Catholics doctrines which touching these 260. articles of their nature require
to be expressed with the self same or equivalent words, are not opposite one
to the other. But those doctrines, which when they are to be clearly and
distinctly expressed, of their nature require to be expressed with opposite and
contrary speeches, must needs also of their nature be contrary one to the
other. For else why should they of their nature require to be expressed by
contrary speeches? And the opposition which is between the speeches, wherewith
they require to be signified, rises of the oppositio^, which is between the
doctrines themselves. The Minor or second proposition is proved. First by the
reason already made: Because it cannot come by chance, that in so many and so
weighty matters, when Catholics and Protestants do of purpose clearly and
distinctly express their opinions, those should agree in words and speech with
the holy Scripture, and these should disagree. This agreement therefore and
disagreement in words, must needs rise of the very nature of their opinions.
Secondly, it may be proved by examples; but for breuities sake I will be
content with one. That the Protestants opinion touching the Eucharist; or that
which Christ after his last supper gave with his hands to be eaten, when it is
clearly and dinstinctly to be expressed, as it differreth from the Catholic
doctrine of the same matter, of it nature requires to be expressed by a
proposition which is simply negative, appears manifestly: First because their
opinion of that matter is simply negative, to wit, that it is not the body of
Christ; And an opinion which is simply negative, requires to be expressed by
the like proposition, such as this is: This is not Christ's body. Secondly,
because many, and the learnedest of the Protestants, and often times, and in
many places, have expressed their opinion of this matter by such a
proposition, when they meant purposely to express it clearly and distinctly,
as it defferreth from the Catholic doctrine, as I have showed before c. 11.
art. 1. who best knew, with what kind of proposition their opinion required to
be expressed when it was most clearly and distinctly to be expressed, when it
was most clearly and distinctly to be declared. And in the same manner it is
evident, that the Catholic doctrine of this matter, of it nature requires to
be expressed by a proposition which is simply affirmative, as this is: This is
Christ's body, because their doctrine of this matter is simply affirmative, and
because Catholics use to express their doctrine by this kind of proposition.
And that the doctrine of the Scripture concerning the same point, of it nature
requires to be expressed by a proposition which is simply affirmative, is
manifest, because she four times of purpose expressing her meaning of this
matter, she uses a proposition which is simply affirmative, and never uses a
proposition negative. Wherefore either the Scripture never expressed her meaning
of this matter in such a proposition, as of it nature it required to be
expressed withal, but always by a contrary kind of proposition, and then
also when of purpose she meant to express her meaning most clearly and
distinctly, or the Scriptures meaning touching this matter of it nature
requires to be expressed by a proposition which is simply affirmative, as this
is: This is my body: or, This is Christ's body. And consequently it is one and
the self same kind of proposition, wherewith the Scriptures and Catholics
doctrine of this point requires to be expressed, to wit, a proposition simply
affirmative; and the propositions wherewith the meaning of the Scripture and of
Protestants of the same matter are to be expressed are quite opposite, to wit,
the one simply affirmative; the other, simply negative; and the like are their
meanings.

But that the force of this argument may better appear, 1. Head from the
numbers of articles in which Protest. contradict the Scripture.
I will divide it into diverse heads. The first shall be taken from the multitude
of matters of articles in which Protestants do contradict the express words of
Scripture, which are (as we have seen) 260 and more. For though it may chance,
that one once, or twice, or seldom may contradict the express words of an
other, and yet not contradict his sense or meaning, yet it can no way be
thought, that this can fall out so often. Because so great and so frequent
opposition between their words, cannot (as I said before) come by chance:
therefore it must rise of the opposition which is between their meaning. For
how should their tongues so often jar, whoses minds always agree? How
should they who always mean the same, so often speak contrariwise? How
should the same sense and mind, be expressed so often by contrary signs?

The second head shall be taken from the quality and 2. From the number of
Protest. who do co^tradict.
multitude of Protestants who have crossed the express words of Scripture. For
admit, that some one or few Protestants, and those not the lest learned, should
cross the express words of Scripture, and yet the Protestants doctrine should
not cross the true meaning of the Scripture; yet it is altogether incredible,
that so many, and so famous Protestants, should so often fight with the
express words of Scripture, and yet their doctrine should not be contrary to
the meaning of the Scripture: For this their crossing of the Scriptures words
could not rise of chance, because it is in so many Protestants; nor of
ignorance, because they were the learnedest amongst them, and therefore it
proceeds of the very nature of their doctrine. And consequently, their
doctrine of it nature is opposite to the Scriptures doctrine.

The third head is taken of the manner wherewith 3. From the manner in which
they contradict.
Protestants cross the express words of Scripture. Because, for the most
part, they cross them so directly, so plainly, so manifestly, as they cross
the very words of Catholics, which of set purpose they contradict, or as ever
any Heretik crossed the express words of Scripture, or as any man can cross
them. Wherefore either let them deny, that the contradict the meaning of the
Counsel of Trent, of D. Stapleton, or C. Bellarmin which of purpose they do
contradict: or let them grant, that they contradict also the meaning of the
holy Scripture: or else let them say, that the contradictio^s of senses or
meanings are not to to be gathered out of any opposition in words, though
never so great and manifest, but out of their pleasure. Besides, either let them
deny, that ever any Heretic co^tradicted the true meaning of the Scripture,
or let them grant the same of themselves; seeing they have often times, as
directly, and as evidently crossed the express words of Scripture, and those
spoaken of purpose for to declare the Scriptures meaning, as ever any Heretic
crossed the Scriptures words. Moreover, they not only cross the express
words of Scripture as ditectly and plainly as ever any did, but also they
many times cross them in so many and so different forms of speech, as
scarce any, who would have it known that he did contradict the Scriptures
meaning, could divise more manners how to contradict it.

The fourth head, is taken out of the quality of the 4. From the quality of
the words which they contradict.
words of Scripture which Protestants do contradict. For they are express,
formal, clear, not obscure nor doubtful; and spoaken not by the way, but of
purpose for to express the Scriptures meaning of those matters, as is evident
in all the articles. And what can be the true sense of Scripture, if that be
not, which such kind of words do of themselves most evidently afford? Or who
can be thought to contradict the Scriptures true meaning, if he do not, who
contradicts the evident sense of such kind of words? Surely I doubt not, but
if these words were written in any other book then in the Scripture, that the
Protestants would confess, that they contradict the sense of them, as well as
they contradict the sense of Catholics words. For as S. Austin said in the
like case of Pelagians: Lib. 1. de peccat. mer. c. 9.
If I should speak thus, these would oppose, and cry, that I speak not well,
I thought amiss: for they would understand no other meaning in these words of
any man who should speak them, but this, which they will not understand in
the Apostle. 5. From the sense in which they contradict.


The fifth head we will take from the sense of those words of Scripture which
the Protestants contradict. For the sense in which the Protestants oppose
themselves againsts the Scriptures words, is not forced or violent, but
obuious, easy, open, and which the words of themselves do plainly show, and
in which such words use to to spoaken and understood of men. And evident it is,
that all words ought to be understood according to such a sense and that such a
sense is the true sense of them, unless the contrary be manifestly proved.
For this is the very rule of understanding words, which the Luther. de verb.
cenae. to. 7. Melancthon in Hospin. p. 74. Martyr in loc. tit. de Euchar.
Perkins in 1. Gal, v. 8. Pareus l. 5. de Illyricus in Claue part. 2. tom. 7.
Protestants themselves sometimes do vehemently urge, and unless it be
observed, the understanding of words will be uncertain and according to every
ones fancy. Wherefore unless Protestants do evidently convince, that those
words of Scripture which they contradict, are to be understood in an other
sense, then in that which of themselves according to their ordinary acception
amongst men they bear, they cannot deny, but in contradicting this ordinary
sense of the words of Scripture, they contradict the true sense of them. And
therefore the Reader in this matter must diligently mark, that Catholics are
not bound to prove, that the words of Scripture or of Protestants be to be
taken in their usual and ordinary sense amongst men; but that this is to be
supposed as a rule and undoubted principle of understanding words, unless the
contrary be demonstrated: And if any deny it, he is not to be admitted to
any disputation which is grounded in words or testimonies, because he denies
the very first principle of understanding words, which being denied, all
dispute grounded on words is vain. Wherefore that Protestants, who say that
Catholics do beg that point which they ought to prove, when they urge, that
the words of Scripture are to be understood according to the sense which they
openly show, and in which men use to speak and understand such words, know
not, what ought to be proved in disputations out of words, and what is to be
supposed as a principle thereof. Whereupon Kemnitius himself in Examen. part
2. tit. de Missa. says: What madness is it, to leave the plain sense, which
has certain and manifest testimonies of Scripture, and to devise a new
exposition? And the same say other Prostants, as we shall rehearse hereafter.
In Perorat.
But if Protestants will have either the words of Scripture, or any other words
whatsoever, to be understood in an other sense, then that wherein they use to
be understood of men, all the burden of proving lies upon them. Which because
they cannot prove, we justly conclude, that they contradict the true sense of
the words of Scripture which we before have alleged, and frame this argument:
Whosoever contradict that sense of the Scriptures words, which of themselves
they bear, and in which they are usually understood of men, and cannot
demonstrate, that they are to be understood in an other sense, they contradict
the true sense of the words of Scripture: But Protestants do so. Therefore they
contradict the true sense of the holy Scripture. The Mayor or first
proposition, is (as I said) the principle and ground of all dispute out of
words: and the Minor or second proposition is evident by the answers of
Catholics unto the proofs which Protestants bring for to show that the words
of Scripture are to be understood in an other sense, then they show, or men
usually understand them in.

The sixth head is taken out of the circunstances which 6. From the
circunstances of the words.
make for the native and usual sense of those words of Scripture which
Protestants contradict. For example: Christ said simply of that which he gave
with his hands to his Apostles after his last Supper: This is my body: and the
Protestants simply say of the same; This is not Christ's body, and consequently
contradict Christ's words not only in their plain, native, and usual sense,
but also which is confirmed by all their circunstances, of end, of time, of
place, of the speaker, and of the hearers. As for the circunstance of the end,
it is plain, that the end of these words was to tell clearly the Apostles
what indeed that was which he then gave them. And all his other words, were
either spoaken of other matters, or if of the same matter, yet they were spoaken
to this end to tell the Apostles what it was which then he gave them, but to
what end they should use it, or for some such like purpose. And that the
foresaied words do clearly express, what that was which at that time Christ
gave to his Apostles, is so evident, as our adversaries themselves confess.
For thus Admonit. vlt.
Calvin: I deny not, but Christment to speak most clearly. And Cont. Selnec.
Beza: If the question be about the word of God, surely we have none more
express, and in which we more willingly rest, then the institution of the
Supper it self: This is my body. Authors Admonit. de libro Concordiae c. 3.
p. 91. The words of the Supper are most clear, and of themselves abundantly
sufficient for to be rightly understood. And the same Whitaker ad Rat. 3.
Zuinglius in Expl. art. 18. Riuet tract. 3. sect. 12. Polanus part. 1. these. de
caena.
others confess. The circonstance also of the time confirms the same: For it
was the last when Christ was to converse with his Apostles in humane manner,
and therefore it was behouefull, that, if ever, he should then speak in must
plain and usual sense, especially speaking of a matter newly then instituted
by him, and bequeathed by him, by his last will and testament, and necessarily
to be known of them, and yet which could no way be known of them but by
Christ's words. But evident it is, that the most clear manner of speaking, is
to speak in the plain, native, and usual sense of words, And consequently
Christ, who by our adversaries confession, meant to speak most clearly, speak
in the plain, native, and usual sense of his words. The circunstance of place
also concurreth. For the place where Christ spoake these words, was free and
void of strangers, so that thereby no occasion could be to mean otherwise then
the words usually did bear. The circunstance also of the Speaker does much
confirm the same. For he was the word it self, the wisdom of his Father, who
both best knew how he ought to express his meaning about a new thing which
could not be known of us but by his words, and was most desirous that we
should know what it was, and that we should rightly understand his meaning.
Finally Christ's hearers do contest the same. For they were his Apostles, to
whom he had made known the mysteries of God, and therefore of their part
there was no cause to speak otherwise, then men use to do by such kind of
words.

The seventh head shall be taken from the nature or quality 7. From the matter.
of the matter of the foresaied articles, in which Protestants contradict the
express words of Scripture: together with Protestants want of the like
opposite words of Scripture, which may seem expressly and without any
inference or exposition of Protestants, to teach as Protestants do. For the
matter of the foresaied articles partly is such, as the very light of reason
does see, that it is so as the express words of Scripture does teach it to be:
to wit, That God wills not, does not, commands not sin: That he tempts
not, nor prodestinateth men to sin, that he justifies not the impious
remaining impious, that good works are necessary to salvation, and the like:
Partly is known to be such by very experience, as, That a man has free will
in good and badde, that he cooperateth to his conversion, that faith is an act
of man, and such others: Partly it is new, never heard of before, and far
beyond the reach of all reason, as is the Eucharist, and many more. Now
Protestants, in all kinds of matter What kind of words Protest. want.
which is in controversy, and almost in all the foresaied articles, want
express words of Scripture, which were of purpose spoaken to declare what a
thing was, and which, of themselves, plainly, and directly without any
inference or exposition of men, may so much as seem to say, that it is so as
Protestants teach. Seeing therefore that What kind of words Catholics do bring.
in all kind of matter in controversy, and in all the foresaied articles,
Catholics do bring both express words of Scripture, and spoaken of purpose to
declare what we ought to believe touching that article, and which plainly and
directly according to their native and usual sense amongst men without any
inference or exposition added to them, pronounce that it is so as Catholics
teach, and that the light of reason and experience also contest the same sense
in such matters as they can reach unto: And that Protestants in none or very
few articles can bring any such express words of Scripture, which may so much
as seem to be so plain What Protest. oppose against the express words of
Scripture.
for them, as those are for Catholics, but in all, or all most all the said
articles, only bring their inferences or arguments, and those composed at
least of one humane principle, and that in matters which humane reason no way
can reach unto, it is mere madness to forsake the doctrine the doctrine of the
Catholic Church, holy Fathers, and Councels, and the most express words of
Scripture in all the said articles, and the very light of reason and
experience it self in many of them, and to harken to the inferences,
consequences, and humane arguments of a few, new, and disagreing Heretics. For
example: Seeing the Eucharist, as it is a matter of faith, to wit, a Sacrament
instituted of Christ, and a gift given of him to the Church (whether it be
only a seal of grace, as Protestants would, or the true body of Christ, as
Catholics believe) is a new thing, instituted first of Christ, and never heard
of before, nor falls under the reach of sense or reason, but only of faith,
and is such as Christ would have it to be; is it not Madness to follow men's
consequences rather then Gods words.
madness, to gather what it is, rather by the humane inferences or arguments
composed of some few, new, and disagreing men, of one humane principle at
least, then by Christ's own words, and those most express, and spoake^ of him
purposely for to tell us most clearly what he would have the Eucharist to be?
For who well in his wits will persuade himself, either that these men by their
humane arguments perceive better, what a thing, which falls not under reason,
is, then Christ who instituted it: or that they know better what Christ would
have it to be, then Christ himself: or that they express Christ's meaning more
clearly by their arguments and consequences quite opposite to Christ's words,
then he has done by his own express words speaking by himself of purpose
for to declare his meaning: or finally, that Christ expresses his meaning
concerning the Eucharist, by a humane principle no where delivered of him, and
a humane argument never made of him, and that also directly opposite to his
own express words, better then by his own most express and clear words,
and those of purpose spoaken for to express clearly what he would have the
Eucharist to be? Can any man believe, that a few, new, and disagreing men do
understand the supernatural matters of faith better then God himself; or that
they declare better what they are by their humane inferences and arguments
composed of humane principles, the^ God himself does by his own express
words spoaken by him of purpose for to declare what they are? what it is to
prefer man's word before Gods word, and man before God, if this be not? Or
does any wise man teach new Notethis.
things, necessary to be known of us, and which cannot be known but by his
teaching, and that but once in his life, and a little before his death, only by
contraries, to wit, by saying that they are that which they are not indeed, and
never saying, that they are that which truly they are? And shall we think,
that Christ, the wisdom of his Father, did once only in his life, and near
unto his death teach us what the Eucharist is, (which was then a new thing
never heard of before, and necessary to be known of us, and yet could not be
known but by his teaching) only by the contrary; to wit, by saying most
expressly that it was his body given and broken for us, and never saying,
that it was not his body, but only a figure thereof, if indeed it only were
a figure as Protestants believe? would God, or Gods Scripture (as S. Austin
writes) ^. 33. cont. Fa^stum c. 7.
speak in an other manner to us then ours is? No surely, unless it would not
be understood of us. And who will say, that Is it men's custom to be taught by
co^traries?
it is our manner to be taught new things, and that but once, and which cannot
be known but by some Masters teaching, not by our Masters express words
spoaken by him of purpose for to tell us what those things are, but by a quite
opposite discourse, not made of him but of some other, and consisting at least
of one principle which he never allowed?

By these, Reader, thou see clearly (as I hope) that if Either Protest.
contradict the true sense of Scripture, or none.
ever any have contradicted the true sense of the Scripture, the Protestants
have done it: First because, they have as often, and in as many, and as
weighty matters, contradicted the express words of Scripture, as ever any
have. Secondly, because they have contradicted, as express, and clear words,
and those as purposely spoaken to declare the Scriptures meaning, as ever any
words were which any have co^tradicted. Thirdly, because they have
contradicted them in as plain, clear, and usual sense, and which is
confirmed by as many circunstances, and by light of reason, and experience, as
ever any words of Scripture were contradicted in. Fourthly, because they
contradict these kind of words in this kind of sense, with as evident want of
the like words which may seem plainly and directly of themselves without all
inference or exposition of man to bear the contrary sense, as ever any did.
Thou see also, what a maine difference there is between The difference
between the grounds of the Cath. and Protest. faith.
the foundations of the Catholic and Protestant belief touching these
articles. For whereas the foundation of the Protestant belief concerning the
Eucharist is no express word of God, which is purposely spoaken to declare
this matter, and which of it self without all help of man does plainly and
directly pronounce, that it is such as they believe; but either man's word only,
or man's discourse framed at least out of one humane principle: the foundation
of the Catholic faith, is Gods express and clear word, spoaken of him
purposely for to declare what the Eucharist is, which of it self without any
help of us, clearly, and directly avouches that the Eucharist is such as
Catholics believe it to be, and against which words no other express words of
God, directly contrary to these, can be opposed, but only humane arguments
and discourses. These (as S. Austin speaks) are the proofs of our course,
these the foundations, these the strength. Whatsoever Lib. de unit. c. 19. In
Psalm. 21.
they gain say, men say: but this God says. Yet let us hear, what it is
which men say against God.

They except (says Calvin) that they have the word, by 4. Instit. c. 17.. 25.
which the will of God is made manifest. A most just exception doubtless,
especially in matters of faith, and such as cannot be known but by Gods word,
and against them who so much brag of Gods word. For if we have Gods, word, we
have also Gods meaning, unless they can demonstrate the contrary. Whereupon
well said Tertullian: Either deny, that these are written, or who art thou,
that Contr. Praxeam. c. 23.
thou think that they are not to be understood as they are written? Forsooth
(says Calvin) if we give them leave to banish out Loco cit.. 20
of the Church the gift of interpretation, which may bring light to the word.
Again: We using daily study, do embrace that sense, which the Holy Ghost does
suggest. And once more: The reverence of Christ's words, is not a pretext just
enough, why they should so reject all the reasons which we object. Behold,
Reader, once more, the difference between the Catholic and Caluins faith. The
Catholic faith (by the adversaries confession What Calvin opposes against the
express word of God.
) is grounded upon the express and plain words of God: Caluins faith relieth
upon his gift of interpretation, his study, the suggestions of his spirit,
his reasons, which he dare oppose, yea prefer, before the express word of God.
But we demand, that seeing we have for us the express word of God, wherewith
Gods will touching the Eucharist is made manifest, he produce the like word of
God, whereby it may be made manifest, that the Caluinists have the gift of
interpretation rather then the Catholics, or the Lutherans, or any sort of
Christians; or that that gift of interpreting which interprets Gods express
words, spoaken by him of supernatural matters of purpose to declare what they
are contrary to their usual sense, is the gift of God. But if he cannot
produce any such word of God, it were stark madness to forsake Gods express
word, and the plain meaning thereof, which besides Sacramentaries all
Christians else do embrace, and to follow a gift of interpretation either
uncertain, or feigned. Besides, Protestants do banish the gift of infallible
interpretation out of the Church, in saying, that she may err in matters of
faith and interpretatation of Scripture, why then do they in this matter
pretend such a gift, and oppose it against Gods express words? Moreover to
expound words which (by their own confession) are most clear, is no other
thing, then (as S. Austin says) to cast darkness upon clear light. Nether
Sermon. 14. de verbis Apost.
banish we the gift of interpretation out of the Church, which never
interpreted these words but in their native and usual sense; but we deny that
Heretics have the gift of interpreting the Scripture; and affirm, that their
new exposition, directly contrary to Gods words, both express and of purpose
spoaken to declare this matter, and condemned by Gods Church, is no
interpretation, but a deprauation and corruption. Furthermore, we reject no
interpretation which may bring light to the word, but we deny, that Caluins
interpretation is such, but rather quite extinguisheth the clear light of the
word. For what greater darkness can be cast upon light, then in express words
spoaken of purpose to declare a matter, and by which a new doctrine is
delivered, a new Sacrament instituted, a last will is made, and which were
spoaken of the Master of truth, unto his disciples, when he was to forsake
them, to expound Is, by, Is not: and, Body given for you, by A bare figure or
Sign thereof. And thus we have heard what Calvin opposes against Gods
express word: now let us see how he would diminish the force and authority of
the same.

I confess (says he) that they have the word. A confession surely much to be
esteemed, especially proceeding In Act. 9. v. 21.
from such an adversary as is accustomed to cry: That Papists find no weapons
for them in the Scripture. But he should also have confessed, as the truth is,
that Protestants have not such a word, to wit, which plainly and directly
denies the Eucharist to be the body and blood of Christ. For thereby it would
have appeared more clearelie, whether Catholics or Protestants find the better
weapons in the Scripture. But he adds: Yet such a word, as the
Anthropomorphites had, when they made God to have a body. Yea such a word, as
thou or any Christian has, when he makes God to have been incarnated, to
have suffered, to have risen again, and to have ascended to heaven; and (as I
dare say) a clearer word also, if the words themselves and the foresaied
circunstances be considered. So that Differences between the Cath. and the
Anthropomorphites.
more justly may any Heretik, who denies the foresaied mysteries, object to
thee, the example of the Anthropomorphites, then thou can object it to us in
this mystery. For the Anthropomorphites in no place of Scripture had God has
a body: We have a most express word, wherewith Christ said most directly of
that which he gave to his Apostles: This is my body. The Anthropomorphites had
no express Deuter. 4. Actor. 7. Joan. 4.
the Scripture no where directly (either clearly or obsculy) denies, nether
the denial thereof can any way be wrou^g out of the Scripture, but by adding a
false humane principle, and by making a deceitful humane argument. Thus many
and thus great differences are there between the word, wherewith we make the
Eucharist the body of Christ, and the word wherewith the Anthropomorphites
made God to have a body, as I think are not between the word which the
Anthropomorphites alleged, and the word wherewith any other article of
Christian faith is proved.

And thus much touching the first argument taken from the opposition betwixt
the words of the holy Scripture and of Protestants in 260. articles, and such
words of the Scripture as were spoaken of purpose for to tell us what we were
to believe, and in their open and plain sense, which they manifestly show, and
in which such words use to be spoaken and understood of men: which argument as
a foundation of all the rest that follow, shall be included in every one of them.

CHAPTER II. THAT PROTESTANTS CONFESS, that they contradict the sense of those
words, which the Catholic Church many ages ago and many of themselves
believe to be the words of God.
THE second argument, wherewith we will prove that Protestants contradict the
true sense of the holy Scripture, we will take from their confession, wherein
they confess, that they contradict the sense of those words, of which, some of
them (to let pass all other proofs) are acknowledged by diverse Protestants,
and all of them were many ages ago judged by the Catholic Lutherans confess
that their doctrine is against S. James Epistle.
Church to be a part of the holy Scripture.

For Luther and the Lutheran Protestants do confess, that the chiefest point
of Protestancie, to wit, of Justification by only faith, does verily
contradict the Epistle of S. James, where he says. Ye see, that a man is
justified by works, and not by faith only. For thus writes Luther in his
Preface upon that Epistle: I judge it to be the writing of no Apostle, for this
cause. First because directly against S. Paul, and all other Scripture, it
attributes justification to works. And in Luther says: S. James doated.
c. 22. Genesis tom. 6. fol. 282. James concludes ill. It follows not as James
doateth: Therefore the fruits do justify -- let our adversaries therefore be
packing with their James. Melancthon de Sacris Concion. to. 2. fol. 23. But if
they cannot be mittigated by any exposition, as those words of James: Ye see
etc. these absolutely are not to be admitted. Magdelburgenses Ce^tur. 1. l. 2.
c. 4. col. 54. The Epistle of James swarueth not a little from the analogy of
Apostolik doctrine, whiles it ascribes justification not to faith only, but
to works. And Centur. 2. c. 4. col. 71. The Epistle of James attributes
justice to works contrary to Paul and all other Scriptures. Schlusselburg.
lib. 1. Theol. Calvin. art. 15. fol. 50. James contrary to Paul attributes
justice to works. And tom. 8. Catal. Haeret. page 500. he says of S. James.
He fights directly with Paul and all the rest of the Scripture, by giving
justice before God to man's works. The same confess Pomeranus and Vitus
Theodorus cited by Coccius to. 1. lib. 6. art. 23. and Pappus cited by Gretser
l. 1. de verbo Dei c. 18. and the same is insinuated by Hunnius de Iustific.
page 219. Whereupon Daneus in Enchirid. Augustini c. 67. says: It troubles
many now a days, so that some have cast out the Epistle of James, others have
called it straweish. And Pareus l. 4. de Iustif. c. 18. Luther could not accord
(James with Paul) but by casting away the whole Epistle. Beza also in Iac. 2.
v. 14. Many have cast away this Epistle for this cause, as if it were
contrary to true doctrine. Nether do only Lutherans judge thus of S. James
his Epistle, but also some Sacramentaries. For Musculus de locis tit. de Some
Sacramentaries reject Saint James.
Iustificat. says: That impertinentlie he alleges the examples of Abraham;
That he confounds the word of faith, and sets down a sentence different
from Apostolical doctrine. And ib. tit. de Scriptur. pa. 172. plainly
professes, that he houldeth it not for authentical Scripture. And the
Confession Heluet. c. 15. says: The same said he (James) not contradicting
S. Paul, otherwise he were to be rejected. And nevertheless, commonly all
Sacramentaries account S. James Epistle to be a part of holy Scripture; in so
much as the English, French, and Flemish Protestants have put it in their
Confessions, as a point of their faith.

Wherefore thus I argue in form: what contradicts the Epistle of S. James,
contradicts the holy Scripture. The chiefest point of Protestancie touching
Justification by only faith co^tradicteth the Epistle of S. James: Therefore
it contradicts the holy Scripture. The Mayor or first Proporsition is not
only believed and tought of all Catholics, but also commonelie of
Sacramentaries: And the Minor or second Proposition is granted by the
Lutherans.

In like sort all Protestants acknowledge their doctrine Protestants confess
that they teach contrary to Machab. Tobie. etc.
of not praying for the dead to be contrary to those words of 2. Machab. c.
12. It is a holy and wholesome cogitation to pray for the dead, that they may
be loose from their sins. Whereupon Calvin in Antidoto Council. Trident. sess.
4. p. 265. says: Out of the 2. of Machabes both Purgatory will be proved,
and the Intercession of Saints: out of Tobie, Satisfactions, Exorcismes, and
what not? They will borrow no few matters of Ecclesiasticus. For from whence
might they better draw their dreggs. So plainly he confesses, that his
doctrine in the foresaied points contradicted the books of Machabes, Tobie,
and Ecclesiasticus. And notwithstanding S. Austin (whom Calvin 4. Instit. c.
14.. 26.
Protestants account the best witness of antiquity) clearelie testifies that
many ages ago the holy Church held the books of Machabes for Canonical
Scripture. For thus he writes of them lib. 18. de Ciuitat. c. 36. Which, not
Jews, but the Church holds for Canonical. And the like he says lib. 1.
cont. Gaudent. cap. 23. Lib. de doctrine. Christ. c. 8. l. 2. Retract. c. 4.
and otherwhere. Besides many Protestantt, as Calvin in Antidot. cit. p. 266.
Whitaker Contr. 3. q. 6. c. 3. Perkins de Symbol. p. 787. and also Hyperius,
Zanchius, Lubbertus, Hospinian, Rainolds, Field, and others alleged in the
Protestants Apology Tract. 1. Sect. 3. confess, that the Council of Carthage
(where S. Austin was present and subscribed thereto) did reckon the books of
Machabes in the number of Canonical Scripture. And to omit all other arguments
drawn out of the Scripture and Fathers for the infallibility of the Church,
the Protestants themselves eftsoons confess, that the Church can discern
true Scriptures from false, and that we are bound to yield to her judgment. For
thus says Luther l. de Captiuit. to. 2. fol. 84. This indeed has the Church,
that she can discern The Church can discern the word of God. Has authority
to judge.
the word of God from the word of men, as Austin confesses that he believed
the Gospel being moved by the authority of the Church. The Confession of
Wittenberg. cap. de Eccles. The Church has authority to judge of all
doctrines. And cap. de Concilijs: She has an assured promise of the
perpetual presence of Christ, and she is governed of the holy Ghost.
Melancthon Respons. ad Acta Ratisbon. tom. 3. page 732. We acknowledge this
authority of testifying the Apostolical Scriptures, or discerning the
writings of the Apostles from counterfeit, does agree to the true Church.
Calvin de vera ref. p. 232. I deny not, but that it is the proper office of
Church to discern true The proper office of the Church.
Scriptures from counterfeit. Peter Martyr Praefat. 1. Epist. ad Corinth. We
will easily grant, that the ancient Church was endued so much with the holy
Ghost, that by his leading and direction they easily discerned between those
which were proposed to them, which were the true and sincere words of God, and
by this spiritual power they distinguished the Canon of Scriptures from
apocryphal books. And in locis Class. 1. c. 6.. 6. We acknowledge the office
of the Church to be, that being endued with Gods Spirit, she may distinguish
the true and sincere books of holy writ from counterfeit and apocryphal.
Iuel in Defens. of the Apology page 204. The Church of God, had the spirit of
wisdom, She has the spirit of wisdom. Can discern true Scriptures.
whereby she might discern true Scriptures from false. Fulke in his Answer to
a false Cathol. p. 5. The Church of Christ indeed can discern true Scriptures
from false. Perkins de Sermon. Dom. tom. 2. col. 252. The Church has the gift
of judging of greatest matters. She can judge of the book of Scripture, Has
the gift of judging.
which are Canonical, which are not, of the spirits of men, and of their
doctrines, and therefore surely can judge which company of men is the true
Church, which is not. Whitaker Cont. 1. q. 3. c. 1. page 315. We deny not,
that it belongs to the Church, to approve, to acknowledge, to receive, to
promulgate, to commend the Scriptures to all her children, and we say, that
this testimony is true and ought to be admitted of all. Cap. 2. page 316. It
is the office of the Church to judge and discern true sincere and right
Scriptures from false, counterfeit, and bastard. And for to discharge Has the
spirit of Christ to distinguish
this office, she has the Spirit of Christ, by which she may distinguish
truth from lies, she knows the voice of her Spouse, she is most iuditious
and can discern spirits. Cap. 5. p. Her tradition conuinceth.
322. I deny not, that the Tradition of the Church is an argument by which it
may be co^uinced, which kookes are Canonical, which not Canonical. cap. 6.
page 323. The Church has the Spirit of God, by which being taught, she hears
the voice of he Spouse, and acknowledges his doctrine. cap. 7. page 324.
Indeed we may Her authority co^pelleth
be compelled by the authority of the Church to acknowledge the Canonical
Scripture: I say (as I often said before) that we are compelled by the
authority of the Church to believe these books to be Canonical. And cap. 9.
page 326. We grant with Ireney, A sound demonstration.
that the authority of the Church is a sound and breife demu^stration a
posteriori, of Canonical doctrine. And l. 1. de Scriptura c. 1. sect. 9. he
affirms, that the testimony of the Church ought to be received, and who
receaueth it not, is guilty of sacrilege. And lib. 2. cap. 4. sect. 4. p.
227. I say the testimony of the Church is sufficient to refute and convince
those, who think amiss of the Scriptures. The like he has ib. p. 218. 228.
and and other where often.

Out of which confessions of Protestants of the authorite and power of the
Church to discern and distinguish true Scripture from false, we may thus
argue. It belongs to the Church, yea it is her function and proper office, to
discern true Scriptures from false, she has that she can distinguish the word
of God from the word of man, she is taught of the holy Ghost, endued with Gods
Spirit, has the gift of judging, the spirit of wisdom for to discern, by
her tradition it may be convinced which books are Canonical which not, by her
authority, we may be compelled to acknowledge the Canonical Scripture, her
authority is a sound demonstration of Canonical doctrine, her testimony
ought to be received of all, and who receaueth it not, is guilty of
sacrilege. But this holy Church many ages ago has judged the books of
Machabes to be Canonical; Therefore they are such. The Mayor or first
Proposition is the confession of Protestants now rehearsed, and the Minor is
confirmed by the foresaied testimony of S. Austin and the confessions of the
forenamed Protestants. And howsoever Protestants, The Cath. advantage over
Protest.
will delude this argument, they must needs confess, that Catholics have the
advantage of them, in that Protestants produce no testimony which forces
Catholics to reject any book which any Father testifies to have been
anciently held of the Church for Canonical, as Catholics produce the
testimony of S. James, which makes the Lutherans to reject his epistle, which
other Protestants confess to be Canonical, and an other testimony out of the
books of Machabes, which forces all Protestants to reject those books, which
S. Austin and other do witness to have been anciently held of the Church for
Canonical. Wherefore let this be one argument.

Who not only in many and weighty articles do contradict the express words
of holy Scripture, and those spoake^ of purpose that we might know the true
meaning thereof touching those articles, but also are forced to reject many
books of Scripture, whereof some, even many of themselves, and all of them,
the holy Church many ages since has judged to be parts of the holy
Scripture, those contradict the very true sense of Scripture: But Protestants
do so: Therefore they contradict the true sense of Scripture.

CHAPTER III. THAT PROTESTANTS ARE FORCED to use violence to the text of that
part of Scripture which they receive.
IN the former chapter, we saw how Protestants were forced to reject a good
part of the holy Scripture, now we shall see, how they deal with that part
which they seem to admit, by adding to it, by detracting from it, by changing
some words, by calling others in doubt, by false translating some, by changing
the order of others, and such like dealings. And let the Reader note, What
falsifications of Scripture are here touched.
that whereas Protestants corrupt the words or sense of holy Scripture for
twoe ends, whereof the one is, that it may seem to make for them: the other
is, that it may not seem to make against them; I will in this, and the next
chapters relate only their fashions of corrupting the Scripture that it may
not seem to make against them; because these make more to my purpose, which is
to show that Protestants contradict the true sense of the holy Scripture: And
by that which shall be said of this their manner of corrupting, it will easily
be gathered, what their other manner of corrupting Scripture is. Let him also
note that I intend not to bring all the examples of Protestants corrupting
Scripture in any kind whatsoever, but only so many as may suffice to prove,
that they use to corrupt Scripture in such sort. For as Tertullian observed
l. Praescript. c. 38. Who mean to teach new doctrine, are forced by necessity
to alter the instruments of doctrine. Et c. 17. Heresy, if it admit any
Scripture, does change it by addition and detraction for to serve her turn.

Wherefore because these words of the Apostle Romans They add to the text.
11. v. 32. For God has concluded all things into incredulity, that he may
have mercy on all: do prove, that God has a will to have mercy an all. Beza
twice adds to the text the Pronoune Them, in this manner: For God has
concluded all them in obstinacy, that he might have mercy on all them: Lest
the Apostle should seem to speak simply of all, and not of the elect only,
as Beza would.

Because those words Romans 2. v. 27. And that which of nature They add.
is prepuce, fulfilling the law, shall judge thee, who by the letter and
circumcision art a preuaricatour of the law: Prove that some do fulfill the
law, Beza adds twice the particle If, in this sort. If it fulfill the law.
And so of an absolute proposition makes a conditional. The same does Calvin,
the Kings and Queen Elizabeth's, Bible, and the French Geneua Bible of the
years 1562. 1568. 1605. and 1610.

Because those words of the Apostle ad Philemon v. 14. They add.
But without thy counsel I would do nothing, that thy good might be not as it
were of necessity, but voluntary: prove good works to be voluntary and not
done necessarily, the French Bibles An. 1605. and 1610. add this particle: As;
and make the Apostle to say: But as voluntary. The Kings Bible for voluntary,
has willingly.

Because those words Tit. 5. v. 3. According to his mercy he has saved us by
the lauer of regeneration and renouation of the holy Ghost, prove, that
Baptism concurreth to work our salvation, the French Bibles An. 1562. 1568.
1605. and 1610. take away those words, He has saved us, and put them in the
former verse, where they make not so much against them. The Kings Bible puts
a comma betwixt: He has saved us, and, By the lauer etc. Lest the Apostle
should seem to say, that God works our salvation by baptism, and as
Catholics teach, and not only signify it thereby, as Protestants would.

Because those words 2. Pet. 1. v. 10. Wherefore brethren labor, They take
from the text.
that by good works you may make sure your vocation and election: prove good
works to be necessary to salvation, and to breed assurance thereof: Luther in
his Dutch Bible and in his Commentary upon that place tom. 5. blotteth out
those words: By good works. And so does the Kings Bible, Beza, Tremellius and
other. Schioppius also in Ecclesiastico c. 12. writes, that Luther in his
Bible left out those words Mark 11. v. 26. If so be that you will not forgive,
nether will your Father that is in heaven forgive you your sins: Which teach
that our good works are necessary to remission of sins.

Because the verb: Is: in the words of the institution of They change the
words of the text.
the holy Eucharist, do prove that it is the body and blood of Christ, the
Protestants of Zurich in their Dutch Bibles have changed is into this verb:
Signifies, as Schlusselburg. l. 2. Theol. Calvin c. 6. witnesses that he has
seen and read. Yea Zuinglius l. de ver. relig. c. de Euchar. to. 2. was so
audacious as to write thus: Thus has Luke, which Evangelist only we will
allege: This signifies my body which is given for you. For as he says l.
de Caena tom. 2. fol 274. If Is be put substantiuely, we must needs confess,
that the true substance of the true fllesh as Christ is present in the supper.
And Respons. ad Billican. tom. 2. fol. 261. If you take, Is, substantiuely,
then the Papists have wone. A goodly excuse surely for to corrupt the holy
text: For if it must be corrupt, it must be done for to up hold heresy. But
this corruption of Scripture is so great and so manifest, as Schlusselburg. l.
cit. said justly: This only corruption of the words of the Son of God,
ought to drive all men from the company and impiety of Caluinists.

Because the words, Benediction, and we do bless, in that They change.
speech of S. Paul 1. Corinthians. 10. The Cup of benediction which we do bless,
etc. do insinuate, that the wine in the Cup ought to be blessed, Zuinglius l.
de Caena. tom. 2. fol. 294. says: The words of Benediction and blessing ought
not to be used in this place. For commonely they use to be taken for the word
of Consecration. And 1. Corinthians. 5. to 4. thus he writes: Thus are the words:
The Cup of thanks giving wherewith we give thanks is it not etc. And in like
sort he has l. de Subsidio tom. 2. fol. 253. of which corruption of Scripture
thus writes Illyricus upon this place: Some corrupt this text, by translating:
The Cup of thanks giving by which we give thanks, and the text so corrupted
they use in their liturgies in steed of the words of the Institution or holy
supper, making a duble sacrilege. Calvin also in Math. 26. ver. 26. not only
expounds the word (...), by He gave thanks, but also in the very text,
translateth it when he had given thanks. And yet (as himself confesses there)
Matthew and Mark use the word of Blessing. Why therefore would not he use the
same word in S. Mathews text?

Because those words Acts 2. v. 27. Because thou will not They change.
leave my soul in hell, prove that Christ's soul descended into hell, Beza in
his translation An. 1557. thus changes the text: Because thou will not leave
my carcass in the grave. Et ad Defens. Castle. p. 460. he says: My soul,
in the text I did translate My carcass, but in my Notes, My life: but we may
also take, My soul, in steed of the Pronoune, Me. Which exposition (says he)
is most plain. And he adds: Where as I noted, that by the ancient
translation (my soul) the error rose, I did it not without cause, since we see
that Papists wrest this place especially for to setle their Limbus, and the
Fathers from thence devised that descent of Christ soul into hell. As if he
had said, I was forced to alter the tongue of the holy Ghost, because he
spoake against me. In like sort, because we prove the same out of that passage
Act. 2. v. 3^. Foreseing he spoake of the resurrection of Christ, for nether
was he left in hell etc. the French Bibles An. 1562. 1567. 1568. 1605. of Hell,
have made Grave, as also has Tremellius done in his Latin translation of the
Bible neuewed by Iunius and printed at Hannow 1603.

Because those words Psalm. 5. verss. 5. Thou art not a God They change.
that wilt iniquity: prove that God no way wills iniquity or sin: the
Kings Bible translateth the place thus: That has pleasure in wickedness. The
French Bibles An. 1568. That loves iniquity: And those of 1588. and 1610.
That art not delighted with iniquity. And the like has Piscator apud Vorstium
in Parasceue cap. 3. and Tremellius in this place. That so they may defend
their blasphemous doctrine, that God wills iniquity, though he do not love
it.

Because these words Ezechiel. 33. verse. 11. Live I, says They change.
our Lord: I will not the death of the wicked, but that he be converted from
his way and live: do prove that God of himself wills no man's death, the
Kings Bible translateth them thus: I have no pleasure in the death etc. and so
also does Musculus in locis tit. de veritate, Tremellius in this place,
Piscator in Thesibus l. 2. p. 187. and others. That God may seem of himself
to will men's death, though he take not pleasure in it, as (say they) a sick
man wills a bitter potion, though he take no delighte in it.

Because the words 2. Thessalon. 2. v. 15. Hold the traditions They change.
which ye have learnt, whether it be by word or by our Epistle: do prove that
traditions not written are as well to be held as those that are written: Beza
in his translation An. 1598. changes the disjunctive particle whether, into
the coniunctiue Also, in this manner: Hold the traditions which ye have
learnt by speech and also by our Epistle. Whom follow Author Respons. ad
Theses Vadimontanas page 647. and others. An other translation of Beza in
Tremellius has thus: Hold the delivered doctrine, which you have been taught
both by speech and by Epistle. Where for whether he has And, and for
Traditions, Delivered doctrine, as Tremellius for Traditions, has,
Commandments, The French An. 1568. and 1605. have Institutions, and the Queens
Bible, has Ordinances.

Because those words 1. Timoth. 2. v. 4. Who will all men They change.
to be saved, show that God has a will to save all men, Beza in that place
changes All, into whomsoever: that God may seem to have only a will to save
whatsoever kind of men. In like sort ib. v. 6. Where the Scripture says:
Who gave himself a redemption for all. Beza translateth, For whomsoever.

Because that speech 1. Timoth. 4. v. 10. Who is the Saniour They change.
of all men, especially of the faithful: declare that Christ redeemed all men:
Beza in that place in steed of Savior, puts, Preserver. And says: Because
the name of Savior troubles many, in that commonly it signifies eternal
life purchased by Christ, therefore to avoid ambiguitie, I chose rather to say
Preserver. As if he had said: Because the word which the Scripture uses, does
show that Christ purchased eternal life for all, therefore I have changed it
for an other.

Because those words Coloss. 1. v. 10. That ye may walk They change.
worthy of God: and 1. Thessalon. 2. v. 11. We have adjured every one of you
that you walk worthy of God: and 3. Epistle of 5. Ihon. v. 6. Whom, thou
shall do well, bringing on their way in manner worthy of God: do show that
good works may be worthy of God; Beza in all these places, for worthy of
God: has Agreeable to God. Tremellius 1. Coloss. v. 10. for worthy of God,
has: It is just. and 1. Thessal. 2. It is agreeable to God. The Kings Bible 3.
Joan. 6. cit. has After a godly sort.

Because Christ's words Lucae 7. ver. 47. Many sins are They change.
forgiven her, because she has loved much: insinuate justification by works.
Beza in place of Because (in Greek (...)) translateth For. And adds that he
did so, that it might be more easily perceived, that in these words is not
showed the cause of remission of sins. The Kings Bible, Illyricus and others
follow Beza herein.

Because those words of S. Luke c. 1. v. 6. They were both They translate ill.
just before God, walking in all the commandments and iustifications of our
Lord without blame: help to prove, that good works are iustifications, and do
justify: Beza, though he confess that the Greek word which S. Luke uses, be
to be literally translated Iustifications: Yet says, that he would not so
interpret it, that (says he) I might take away this occasion of impugning
justification by (only) faith, and so in steed of Iustifications, has, Rites.
Tremellius, has Righteousness. Queen Elizabeth's and King James Bible,
ordinances.

Because those words Philip. 2. v. 12. Work your salvation Translate ill.
with fear and trembling: prove, that we may work our salvation: The French
Bibles An. 1562. 1568. 1605. 1610. in steed of work have, Endeavor you: that
the Scripture may seem only to say, that we may endeavor to work, but not
work our salvation.

Because those words James 5. v. 16. Confess your sins Translate ill.
one to an other: prove, that we ought to confess our sins to men, the
French Bibles An. 1605. 1610. translate them thus: Confess your faults one
against an other, as if the Apostle had bidden, only to confess offenses done
against men. The same insinuates the Kings Bibles, whiles for Sins it has
Faults.

Because those words Actor. 23. v. 11. And the night following, Translate ill.
our Lord standing by him, said etc. do prove, that Christ was present with S.
Paul in prison, the French Bibles An. 1560 1562. 1568. 1605. in steed of
Standing by, translate, He presented himself. Tremellius has, He was seen.

Because those words Hebr, 4. ver. 14. Having therefore a Translate ill.
great high Priest that has penetrated the heavens, Calvin for Penetrated the
heauenes, translated: He entered, Beza, He passed through: Tromellius, He
ascended.

Because that Pronoune demonstratiue Hic, This: in those words of Christ: This
is my blood, does prove, that it Translate ill.
is not referred to the word Cup or wine, but to the word Blood, Beza in
Math. 26. v. 28. would not translate it Hic in the masculine gender, but Hoc in
the neuter gender. For (says he) homilia 2. de ver. present. vol. 3. page
316. Surely who says Hic, This is my blood; points at nothing, but his own
blood. The like he says in Cyclope page 268. Piscator l. 2. These. p. 450. And
yet as Illyricus says: All both ancient and new, and Calvin himself
translate, Hic: This is my blood. And Beza himself Hebr 9. ver. 20.
translateth the very self same Greek words thus, Hic est sanguis: This is my
blood: because there they prove not that the Euchariste is the blood of Christ,
as they do Matthew. 26. v. 28. cit. Musculus also in locis tit. de Caena page
360. affirms, that (...) used by S. Matthew and S. Mark, is not well
translated in the Masculin gender Hic, Unless we understand Calix, and
nevertheless in the same place says, that Matthew and Mark write, that our
Lord said: Hic: This is my my blood of the new testament. So that though twoe
Evangelists teach that our Lord said Hic, This, in the Masculine gender, yet
it is not well translated so.

Because those Greek words Luc. 22. verse. 20. (...) that is. This is the new
cup which the new testament in my blood, that (Cup) which is shed for you,
do evidently show that the word Shed is referred to the word (Cup) and
consequently do prove that it was a Cup of the true blood of Christ, Beza
upon that place, and Respons. ad Illyr. p. 198. and other Protestants after
him, says, that either there is a manifest Solloecophanes, wherein the They
call in do o^ the words.
Nominative case is put for the Dative, or else these words are foisted into the
text: And yet confesses, that all our ancient Copies have the nominative case:
or as Fulk says Praef. in nou. testam. not. 49. All the Copies extant have it
in the nominative case. And Beza herein is followed of Whitaker l. 1. cont.
Dur. sect. 35. Daneus Contr. de Euchar. p. 544. Bucanus loco. 48. Piscator in
Refutat. Sophismatum Hunnij p. 468. and of others. Zuinglius resp. ad Matthaeum
Rulling. tom. 2. fol. 156. somewhat bolder, translated these Greek words so, as
the word Shed cannot be referred to the word Cup to which alone S. Luke
refers it, for thus he has: Hoc poculum in sanguine meo, qui pro vobis
funditur: and Respons. ad Confess Lutheri tom. 2. fol. 511. says, that it is
an Enallage or Change of the Nominative case for the Dative. Moreover Beza Luc.
22. verse. 17. calls in doubt: those words: Which is given for you: Whereby
the real presence is confirmed.

Because those words Math. 10. verse. 2. The names of the They call in doubt.
twelve Apostles be these: These first, Simon, who is called Peter: prove the
primacie of S. Peter; Beza upon that place says: What if this word, First, be
added by some, who would stablish the the primacie of Peter? And nevertheless
adds: We find it so written in all Copies. And so by his own confession,
contrary to the testimony of all Copies calls in question a word which
favors the Primacie of S. Peter.

Because the Pronoune Hoc or Hic in the words of They ^^ll in doubt.
the Eucharist, being taken adiectiuely, helps to prove the Eucharist to be
the body and blood of Christ: Daneus l. 1. de Euchar. c. 1. page 543. says:
What if I except, that the proper words of Christ were only these twoe? Is my
stesh: I shall with one word frustrate all this proof by the Pronoune, Hoc:
But if thou can nether prove thy exception of Christ's words, nor can deny,
but that the Evangelists have the pronoune Hoc, This, is not thy exception both
vain and impious?

Because those words 1. Corinthians. 13. v. 2. If I should have Translate ill.
all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am
nothing: do prove, that no faith at all works justification without charity:
Beza therefore All translateth whole, and says he does it, lest this text
should deceive any.

Because those words Daniel 4. v. 24. Redeem thou thy Translate ill.
sins with alms, prove, that good works do redeem sins: The Kings Bible
translateth it thus: Break of thy sins by righteousness: And others say,
that our translation is naught: And nevertheless P. Martyr on this place
avouches. That the Chaldee, in which tongue this was written, has word for
word, Redeem thy sins by justices, and so it is cited by Calvin 3. Instit.
c. 4.. 36. Apolog. Confess. August. c. de respons. ad argumenta, and also by
others reported in the Protestants Apology Tract. 1. sect. 4. subdiuis. 7.

Because those words Hebr. 2. ver. 9. But him, that was a They change the order
of the words.
little lessened under the Angels, we see Jesus because of the passion of death,
crowned with glory and honor: prove, that Christ was crowned with glory,
because he suffered death: Beza turns the words thus: But we see that Jesus
crowned with glory and honor, who for a time was made inferior to Angels for
suffering of death. And King James Bible follows him: As if the Apostle had
not said, why Christ was crowned with glory, but why he whas made inferior
to Angels. And yet Beza is not ashamed to add: Let no man marvel that I have
changed the placing of the words.

Because the words 2. Pet. 2. v. 8. For in sight and hearing They (...) the
(...).
he was just, dwelling with the^ who from day to day vexed the just soul with
unjust works: prove, that me^ may be just in some deeds: The King and Queens
Bible turn the words thus: For being righteous, and dwelling among the^, in
seeing and hearing vexed his soul. Where they do not refer just or righteous to
Seeing and hearing as the text does.

Because those words 1. Corinthians. 14. verse. 17. Thou indeed They omit words.
give thanks well, do plainly approve prayer in an unknown tongue;
Zuinglius Calvin and Beza in their Commentaries slip over these words. Yea
Calvin 3. Instit. c. 20.. 33. citing this sentence, omitteth the word well. In
like sort Calvin and Beza Luc. 22. v. 32. slip over those words of Christ: I
have prayed for thee, by which S. Peter's Primacie is confirmed.

Wherefore thus I make my third argument: Who beside the foresaied opposition
to the express words of Scripture, are forced many times to use violence to
the very sacred text by adding or taking away words, by changing, by calling in
doubt, by ill translating, by omitting, by changing the order of the words,
they are to be judged to contradict the true sense of the holy Scripture. But
Protestants do so. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER IV. THAT PROTESTANTS OVERTHROW all force of the words of holy
Scripture, yea contemn and deride them.
OUR fourth argument shall be, that Protestants, when they nether dare deny, nor
change the words of Scripture, yet overthrow all the force of them, yea
sometimes contemn and scoff at them.

The first way by which they delude the express word of God, is that in what
kind of matter soever, to wit, whether it be of precept or doctrine, whether it
can be known only by Gods word or no: and in what places soever, to wit,
whether in them the matter be handled purposely, or no; in what kind of matter
soever (I say) and in what kind of place soever, the holy Scripture speaks
expressly against the^, they cry, that we must not stick to the letter nor
urge it. Zuinglius in Math. 19. to. 4. The words Protest. will not have the
word of God urged against them.
of Christ: what God has joined, let not man separate, are so dry, that it
may seem, that married persons can be separated for no cause. Here because the
letter clearly makes against him, he adds: But we will not after the Jewish
manner stick so superstitiously to the letter. And in Mark. 1. We must not
stick fast to the bare letter, but the letter is to be expounded and directed
according to the rule of the (Protestants) Spirit. Et Institut. de caena. tom.
2. fol. 288. Is it fit in Scripture to urge earnestly only the letter, or
rather having consulted other places, we ought to consider, what the authority
of it may admit. Because in the matter of the Eucharist, the words of Scripture
are clare aga^^st them: Calvin 4. Instit. cap. 17.. 20. says: Christ's words
are not under the common rule, nor are to be examined gramatically.. 23. These
good Masters, that they may appear men of letters, do forbid to Calvin
scoffeth at those who urge the word of God.
go any whit from the letter. What monstrous absurdities cannot phrentik men
gather, if they may object every tittle for confirmation of their opinions.
And he terms it foolish stubbernesse, to contend earnestly about (Christ's)
words. And calls us Catchers of syllables, froward and stubbern exactours of
the letter, foolish and ridiculous masters of letters, because in the matter
of the Eucharist we stick close to the express words of Scripture, and urge
them against him; as if with scoffs and taunts he would beat us from the
express word and letter of almighty God. Moreover in Math. 3. v. 16. he
says: Some do foolishly and preposterously urge the letter, that they may
include the thing in the sign. And in Math 26. v. 28. The Papists and such
like are foolishly superstitious, whiles they lay fast hold upon (Christ's)
words. And Admonit. vlt. ad Westphal. page 8^7. We must not earnestly insist
upon the words. Beza cont. Westphal. p. 214. By what right is it not lawful
for us to appeall (as I may say so) from the word to the sense? P. Martyr l. de
Euchar. p. 124. Ye must not always object the clearness of the sense. page
126. Ye must not take first sense which offers it self. p. 126. Ye should
not so much urge the plainenes of the sense. and page 149. They object again
us the simple sense and hold that firmly. Zanchius l. 1. Epist. p. 34. They
have cried to importunely and till they were hoarse: The word, the words.
Kerberman l 1. System. Theol. page 169. They importunely urge the letter or
words of Scripture. Willet in Synopsi Contr. 19. page 885. We must not take the
letter, but follow the sense, where we find mention made of the universality
of Christ's death. page 886. It cannot literally be understood, that God would
absolutely have all me^ to be saved. Thus speak these men, when the letter or
plain sense of Scripture makes expressly against them. In the mean time
whenever the letter of Scripture seems to favor the^, they most
veliemently press^^. As for example, because S. Paul sometimes calls the
Eucharist bread, they will needs have it to be material bread. Calvin in Math.
26. verse. 28. The Papists deny, that bread is showed, but Paul refuteth their
Difference between the words which Protest. and which Cath. urge.
dotage, affirming that the bread which we break is the communication of the
body of Christ. The like he has 4. Instit. c. 17.. 15. and others after him:
And nevertheless, the Scripture never says directly of the Eucharist: This
is bread, as four times it says most directly of it: This is Christ's body:
Nether does it in any place restrain the word, Bread when thereby it
signifies the Eucharist, to the proper signification of material bread, as it
does many ways restrain the word Body to signify the true body of Christ,
by adding that it is the body given delivered or broken for us. Moreover the
Scripture it self Joan. 6. clearly expounds, that when by the word Bread it
signifies the Eucharist, it means the very flesh of Christ. So that in the
self same matter, that word which is said of the Eucharist in an identicall
speech saying, This is this, and which oftentimes and most clearly is tied to
it proper signification, nor is ever expounded in Scripture to be otherwise
taken, must not be urged against Protestants, because it makes against them;
and an other word, which nether is ever so said of the Eucharist, nor is any
way restrained to it proper signification, yea which the Scripture it self
expounds figuratively, must be urged, because it seems to favor
Protestants: and consequently the letter or word of Scripture is to be urged,
or not urged, according as it favors or disfauoureth Protestants. Which is
indeed to shape the Scripture to their opinions, not to frame their opinions to
the Scripture.

But if they cannot obtain, that the letter of the holy They call it begging
of the question, to urge the letter.
Scripture be not urged against them, they take an other course to delude the
authority or force thereof. For they call the open and plain sense of it into
controversy, and then cry, that it is the begging of the question to argue
against them out of a sense which is controuerted. Thus do the Protestants,
when we urge against them the words of the Eucharist, as ye may see in
Zuinglius in Exegesi to. 2. fol. 338. Ad Epistol. Amici fol. 322. Calvin
Admonit. vlt. ad Westphal. p. 805. Beza cont. Westphal. page 232. P. Martyr 1.
Corint. 11. fol. 158. Iuel art. 5. sect. 5. and others. Yea sometimes they go
so far as to say, that it is a manifest abuse, folly, vanity, and dotage to
argue against them out of the words of the Supper or Eucharist. Author
orthodoxi Consensus in Schlusselburg lib. 4. Theol. Calvin. art. 20. page 125.
It is a manifest abuse of the words of the Supper, to prove that by the words
which is question or controversy. Humfre ad Rat. 2. Campiani p. 118. He will
play the fool, who disputes out of this place, which is in controversy.
Calvin Admonit. vlt. cit. p. 821. Let them leave to pretend a vain prejudice
of words, of whose sense and meaning the contention is between us. And in
Gratulat. ad Precentor. p. 379. We except, that it is foolishly pressed as most
certain, whereof doubt is. But what argument taken out of the Scriptures words
can be good and strong, if that which is taken out of Christ's express words,
which are both clear, and of purpose spoaken to declare what the Eucharist is
(which what it is cannot be known but by his plain words) and which alone
were spoaken of him to this end, be a begging of the question, a vain,
foolish, and frivolous argument, only because it has pleased some few, new,
Heretics, to call the clear sense of these words into question.

Thirdly if they dare not say, that the words which They devise many senses.
make against them, have an other sense, then that which they clearly afford,
yet they will devise many senses, and say; that it is uncertain in which of
those senses the words are to be understood, and consequently that nothing can
be certainly gathered of them. Thus deals Kemnice in Exam. tit. de Baptismo
page 69. Where having brought many expositions of the word Baptism Actor. 19.
Whence we prove, that the baptism of Christ was different from that of S.
Ihon, thus at last he concludes: Nothing ca^ be proved out of places, that are
obscure, ambiguous, and in controversy. Indeed if those places must be counted
such, of which it has pleased new Hheretiks to devise diverse senses; Let them
give the like liberty to other Heretics, and they shall see how much they will
prevail against them by any words of Scripture whatsoever.

Their fourth shift is, that when the words of Scripture They will have Gods
meaning rather out of by places, then out of proper.
which are spoaken purposely of any matter, make against them, they will not
have the question to be denied by them, but either by words which are not
spoaken at all of that matter, or but incidently and by the way, and will have
these to be the rule of expounding to others, and so gather the sense of
Scripture rather out of a strange place then out of the proper place. Thus the
Sacramentaries will have the question of the Eucharist to be tried rather out
of the 6. of S. Ihon (though commonly they teach that there Christ spoake not
of Eucharist) or out of words which speak of Christ's ascension into heaven, or
out of words which speak of the end of the Eucharist, then out of those which
purposely and which only speak of the substance of the Eucharist. Zuinglius
Epist. ad Matheum Rutling. tom. 2. fol. 153. says that Christ speaks not of
the Eucharist in the 6. of S. Ihon: and yet from thence takes (as he speaks
fol. 155. his Buckler, and l. de relig. fol. 206. his brazen wall and sheeld,
and fol. 215. his hard adamant. Note.
And says. fol. 155. cit. that we must only stick to these words: Flesh
profits nothing: or (as he speaks in Exegesi fol. 336.) To them before all
others. And as for the words of the Supper, which were spoaken purposely of
this matter, he says plainly l. de relig. c. de Euchar. We rely not upon
them, but only upon this word. Flesh profits nothing. And adds: What
think ye of this subtle devise, which forsooth relieth upon (Christ's) words
only. And Resp. ad Billican. fol. 264. This dispute does not rely upon those
words: This is my body. For we would not seem to ground our opinion upon
these letters. For that were unlawful. See more of the like stuff in his
Apology tom. 2. fol. 371.

Bullinger cited by Schluslelburg. loc. cit. We desire our Christ's words of the
Euchar. are no Protest. ground of that matter
adversaries that they do not (as heretofore they have done) make the words of
the Lords supper which are in controversy, as the foundation of their
doctrine. Melancthon. Epist. ad Frideric. Elector. apud Martyrem in Dial. col.
112. In this controversy (of the Eucharist) the best is, to bold the words of
Paul: The bread which we break is the communication of the body. Peter Martyr
cont. Gardener. col. 440. It is fond which he adds, that in the mystery of
the Eucharist we must recurre to the words of our Lord instituting it. Calvin
Admonit. vlt. ad Westphal. page 818. In vain they shall cry: we must go to
the fountain. And de Rat. concordiae page 866. There is no reason to insist
upon the essential verb; Is. Ye see, that in the very question, what the
Eucharist is, they say that it is fond and contrary to reason, to recurre to
the words of the Institution thereof, to insist in them and make them our
foundation, and nevertheless the words of the Institution are spoake
purposely, and that only to tell us what the Eucharist is; but will have us to
run to other places where it is not spoaken at all of the Eucharist, or at
least not of the substance thereof. This plainly shows, that in very deed
they make not the Scripture the foundation of their faith, nor gather their
belief from thence: Which themselves sometimes do plainly confess. For thus
P. Martyr Protest. gather not their faith out of the Scripture.
praefat lib. de Eucharist page 26. This is the basis strength and foundation
of the opinion (of the Eucharist) which I have set down: That it is proper to
God to be every where, and that the condition of humane nature is to be
contained in some certain Reason, ground of Protest. in the Euchar.
place, nor can be diffused to many places at once. Calvin 4. Instit. c. 17..
20. The reverence of Christ's words is no sufficient pretext, why they should so
reject all the reasons which we object. Author Orthodoxi Consensus in
Schlusserburg. lib. 1. Theol. Calvin. art. 23. We must not simply behold the
words of Christ, but think of some other thing, and with inward eyes behold
them as mysteries. And Victorinus ib. In the question of the Supper of the Lord
we must look with the left eye upon the words of Christ, and with the right,
behold the natures of Christ and the writings of Antiquity. Ye see them
profess, that the foundation and strength of their opinion is a humane
principle; that their reasons are to be preferred before Christ's words: that we
must not simply look upon Christ words but think upon some other thing, that
we must look upon Christ's words with the left eye, and with the right upon
nature. Which is the very doctrine of Suencfeldius in Schlusselburg art. 23.
cit. Remove (says he) from thy sight: Take and Eat: This is my body, and
then consider what is the nature of man's body, of eating, of Sacraments, and
of old figures, and so thou shall find most certain truth. In like sort
they confess, that they learnt not their faith out of Scripture. Zuinglius
Resp. ad Sermon. Lutheri to. 2. fol. 372. Faith cannot be learnt or discussed out
of words, but the Protest. have not their faith out of Scripture.
teacher of it is God, and after we have it delivered from him, we may see the
same in words. And in Exegesi fol. 347. We do not think, that faith can be
gathered out of words, but that faith being the mistress, the words which are
set before us may be understood. How I pray you should we gather faith out of
words, since we ought not to come to expound Scriptures. But being already armed
with faith? And OEcolampadius in Hospin. part. 2. Histor. fol. 70. I come not
to Scripture, but being before hand armed with faith.

Their first shift is to scoff and deride the manner of Protecst. soffe at
plain proofs out of Scripture.
arguing out of the express words of Scripture. P. Martyr in Schlusselburg. l.
4. Theol. Calvin. artic. 20. calls our argument taken out of the words of the
institution of the Eucharist. a Five word proof. And in Dial. col. 130. thus
speaks: I always thought that ye were not so wise as ye Gods word not
enough.
should be in laboring so much for an opinion both absurd, and unprofitable,
and having nothing to mantaine it but Christ's word: This is my body. Calvin.
1. Instit. cap. 2.. 3. says that they are mad, who endeavor to defend the
images of God and Saints by the example of the Cherubins. The same says
Hospin. l. de orig. Templorum page 254. and Beza 2. part. respons. ad Colloq.
Montisbel. page 31. terms the same, a stinking argument. Whitaker ad Rat. 3.
Campiani makes this to be a Sophisme: Saint James commands to Foolish to
strive about Christ's words
anoint the sick: therefore we must anoint them. Zuinglius de Peccat. orig.
tom. 2. fol. 122. says: How foolish should he seem, who for words (of
Scripture) would avouch, that we are washed from original sin by the water
of baptism. OEcola^padius co^plaineth, that the words of the Institution of
the Eucharist, are objected to him as a Helene, and the samewords Calvin
terms Ajax his buckler, and the only refuge of Papists.

Finally they are sometimes driven to blaspheme the They blaspheme the very
words of Scripture.
words of Scripture, and to say that they will nether believe them, nor God
himself. P. Martyr cont. Gardener col. 423. terms the words of the
Institution of the Eucharist a little speech of five words, and col. 1095* a
five word speech: Zuinglius Respons. ad Billican. tom. 2. f. 264. Poor
letters. Burensis in Schlusselburg. Praefat. in tom. 3. Catal. Haeret. Four
impotent words. Sheldon. l. of Antichrist page 82. in scoff: Five omnipotent
words. Hospin. part. 2. Histor. fol. 63. Five magical words. Gratianus Anties
tom. 6. doctrinae Jesuit. fol. 158. speaks in this sort. To be present
according to Gregory, is to draw Christ's body out of heaven by fiueuerbicall
or magical power. Volanus l. 2. cont. Scargam. page 1047. Feigning to your
selves a new Christ of bread, made by the fiue-word-breath of a Priest.
Moreover Zuinglius (as before is rehearsed) called Christ's words of the
indissolubilitie of marriage, dry words, and l. de Relig. c. de Euchar. says,
that the words of conscration, are too dry for some men's capacity. Poach in
Schlusselburg. tom. 4. Catal. page 305. thus writes: It must needs be, that
the law, since it nether Gods law, in lie.
is Christ nor in Christ, is contained in error, lie, and death. And the
Scripture (as Luther says in his disputations) is not to be understood
against Christ, but for Christ, and therefore to be referred to him or not to
be accounted true Scripture. Luther being sore urged by the words of Scripture
touching works and the law; teaches his followers to answer thus tom. 5. in
3. Galat. fol. 345. Simply we must answer in this sort: Here is Christ, there
the testimonies of the Scripture touching works and the law. But Christ is
Lord of the Scripture -- Thou vrgest the servant, that is the Scripture, this
servant I Luther leaves the Scripture to Papists.
leave to thee: I urge the Lord who is King of the Scripture. And speaks yet
more plainly German. edit. Wittemb. tom. 1. in these words: Albeit the Papists
do bring a huge load of Scriptures in which good works are commanded, I care,
nothing He cares not for all the Scripture.
for all the sayings of the Scripture, though more were brought. Thou Papist
art very insolent and proud with the Scripture, which yet is under Christ and
the Lord. Wherefore I am nothing He is not moved with it.
moved thereby. Go too foresooth, rely upon the servant as much as thou wilst,
but I rely upon Christ the true Master, Lord, and Emperor of the Scripture.
Him I will believe, and I know he cannot lie to me, nor lead me into error. I
had rather honor and believe him, then to suffer my self to be drawn one
finger breath from my opinion for all the sayings of the Scripture. Lo how
Luther cares not for all the sayings of the Scriptures, is nothing moved with,
will not alter his opinion for them all, and leaves them to the Papists. And
in like sort tom. 1. disput. de Fide fol. 387. says: But if our adversaries
urge the Scripture against Christ, we urge Christ against the Scripture. We
have the Lord, they have the servant. Papist have the Scripture.
And in Colloq. cap. de verbo Dei fol. 22. speaking of his followers, says:
The Scripture is contemned, corrupted, and mocked of us. Yea Zuinglius in
Elencho tom. 2. fol. 10. affirms, that when Paul wrote, the Commentaries of
the Evangelists and the Epistles of the Apostles were not of authority, and
that Paul did not attribute so much to his Epistles, as that Paul did not
think his Epistles divine.
whatsoever was contained in them was holy. The like is insinuated by Calvin
Actor. 17. verse. 11. Where he says, that the Thessalonians did not dispute
whether Gods truth were to be received, only they examined Paul's doctrine
according to the rule of Scripture: Plainly putting a difference between Gods
truth, and Paul's doctrine. Finally Zuinglius professes Zuinglius will not
believe what he cannot comprehend.
to believe nothing which he cannot comprehend. For thus he speaks in Hospin.
Part. 2. Histor. fol. 72. God does not propose to us things that are
incomprehensible: Or as Melancthon reports ib. fol. 82. God does not propose
to us such things to be believed, as can no way be comprehended. And in
Schlusselburg l. 4. Theol. Calvin. art. 9. thus professes his more then
Devilish infidelity: Albeit God with He will not believe God though he swear.
all his blessed Angels should come from heaven, and swear that in the Supper
of the Lord the body and blood of Christ were given to all that receive it:
yet nether could, nor would I believe it, unless I should plainly see with my
eyes and feel Christ with my hands. The very same he insinuates Respons. and
Bellica^. tom. 2. fol. What I pray you differ these men from the Protest.
imitate the libertins.
Libertins of whom thus writes Calvin in Instructione cap. 9. We already
said, that these men in the beginning were wont plainly to laugh if any
alleged the Scriptures, nor dissembled to hold them for fables; yet they
forbore not to use the^ if there were any place, which they could wrest to
their purpose. But when they perceived that all good men did detest such
sacrilege, they put on this coat under which now they lurk; to wit, they
profess not to reject the holy Scriptures, but feigning to admit them, wrest
and change them into allegories. And do not the Protestants deride the
Scripture, when they call the words thereof a fiue-word speech, beggarly
letters, impotent and magical words: and when they see that all good men
detest such blasphemy, do they not turn the^ into figures or allegories?

Wherefore I make this my fourth argument. Who not only in so many and so
great matters contradict the express words of Scripture: but also in many and
great points are compelled to forsake the letter thereof, to call the manifest
sense into question, to say that it is a begging of the question, to argue out
of it to devise many new senses for to reject a place as ambiguous, and to say
that the sense of Scripture is to be gathered rather out of a strange then out
of the proper place where it is purposely handled, who finally deride the very
kind of arguing out of the express words of Scripture and openly blaspheme
them, they are to be thought not only to gainsay the true sense of Scripture,
but also to contemn the Scripture and God himself. But so do Protestants.
Therefore etc.

CHAPTER V. THAT PROTESTANTS SAY THAT words of Scripture which make against
them, were not spoaken of certain knowledge.
OUR fifth argument to prove that Protestants repugne to the true sense of
Scripture, shall be, because sometimes they deny that the words which were
spoaken of God, of Christ, of the Apostles, were spoaken by them of their
certain knowledge, but only by guess or conjecture.

For if out of that saying of God, Ezechielis 3. verse. 6. and seq. For not to a
people of profound speech and of an unknown tongue art thou sent to the house
of Israel: nether to many peoples of profound speech and of an unknown tongue
whose words thou can not hear, and if thou were sent to them, they would
hear the: We will prove, that some can be converted which yet will not be
converted. Contra-remonstrantes in Collat. Hagae. answer: This is said, not
in respect God did not certainly foresee what he said.
of that which God did certainly forsee in these or those: but in respect of
that which according to all outward show a man might judge. Forsooth, God did
not certainly foresee, that other people would have heard the Prophet, if he
had been sent to them, as he plainly affirms, but like a man spoake by
guess out of the external appearance.

If we prove the same out of those words of Christ Math. 11. ver. 21. If in
Tire and Sidon had been wrought the miracles that have been wrought in you,
they had done penance Nor Christ.
in hairecloth and ashes: Calvin upon this place tells us: that Christ
disputes not what God did foresee to become of these or those, but what some
of them would have done, for so much as could be gathered by the thing. And ib.
in v. 33. We admonished before, that Christ speaks after a humane manner, and
does not tell out of the heavenly oracle what he had foreseen was to be, if
he had sent to the Sodomits. And lib. 6. de lib. arbitr. page 197. It is
evident, that Christ would by that kind of speech no other thing, the^ if one
now should say: There is no Turk so obstinate or rebellious to God, or so
impious, who would not have been converted, if he had read seen and heard
those things with which Pighius will not amended. The like have
Contraremonstrantes loc. cit. So that Christ did not certainly foresee that
the Tyrians and Sodomites would have repented if they had seen the like
miracles, and yet he plainly affirms it.

If we prove that a man may fall from grace, because S. Peter 1. cap. 1. verse.
9. says: For he that has not these Scripture speaks not of knowledge, but
of charity.
tbings ready, is blind, and groping with his hand, having foregotten the
purgation of his old sins. Zanchius in Summa Praelect. tom. 7. col. 276.
answers: This place is to be understood according to the judgment of
charity. The same he has in Thesibus tom. 8. col 700. and Piscator in
Thesibus l. 2. p. 195. Forsooth, S. Peter judged charitably, but not truly
that such a man (as he speaks of) had been purged from his sins.

If we prove, that God would have all men to be saved, because S. Paul. 1.
Timoth. 2. verse. 4. Who will all men to be saved: Perkins lib. de Praedest.
tom. 1. col. 139. says: Paul Likewise S. Paul.
speaks in this place according to the judgment of charity of Christians,
not according to the judgment of secret and infallible certainty. In like
sort answers Piscator loc. cit. and also to Hebr. 6. verse. 5. and cap. 10.
verse. 29. Where is it said, that some reprobates were sanctified with the
blood of Christ.

If we prove, that the wicked and reprobates may be in the body of Christ, and
put him upon them, because S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 12. ver. 13. We were all
baptized into one body: and Gal. 3. v. 27. As many of you as are baptized in
Christ, have put on Christ. Vorstius in Antibel. p. 124. answers: The Apostle
speakheth there out of the judgment of charity, which accounts all the
citizens of the outward Church, that is, all that profess faith, to be
faithful. But charity beleiueth all things, and therefore is deceived, which
is far from the certainty of faith. Which is as much as to say, S. Paul or
the Scripture was deceived in these sayings.

If we prove, that God would have some to be converted who will not, because he
says Math. 23. verse. 37. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I gather
together thy children as the hen does gather together her chickins under her
wings, and thou would not: Beza de Praedestinat. cont. Castle. vol. 1. page
398. answers: If we will attribute this speech to Christ as he was God, doste
thou not know, that God for to allure his children to him, through his infinite
goodness, by taking upon him humane affections, does sometime stammer with us?
God stammereth.


Fifthly therefore I prove that Protestants contradict the true sense of
Scripture in this sort. Who not only gainesay the express words of holy
writ, so as we have seen, but also are forced in many and great mysteries of
faith to say that the Apostles, Christ and God himself did not certainly
foresee what they said, and that the holy Ghost did not speak of certain
knowledge but by conjectures as men do, they gaynesay the true meaning of the
holy Scripture. But Protestants do so. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER VI. THAT PROTESTANTS AFFIRM many weighty sayings of the Scripture
not to have been spoaken according to the mind of the Authors.
MY sixth argument shall be, because Protestants are driven to say, that Scripture
speaks not according to it own mind and according to truth, but according
to the error and opinion of others, and that in many and great matters, as of
faith, of good works, of sacraments, of the very mean of attayning salvation
and the like.

For if we prove that wicked men may have faith, because S. James speaks not
according to his own mind.
S. James cap. 2. verse. 18. speaks thus to such a one. Thou have faith, and I
have works, and v. 19. Thou beleiuest that there is one God: thou do well:
Calvin on that chapter v. 14. says: Let us remember, that he speaks not
according to his own mind, as often as here he names faith.

If we prove, that the keeping of the commandments Nor Christ.
is necessary to salvation, because Christ says Math. 19. v. 17. If thou will enter to life, keep the commandments. Pareus l. 3. de Iustificat. c. 12.
p. 812. answers: The Lord sends him to the works of the law, not that he
thinks this way of salvation possible, but for to confund his hypocrisy.
Brentius in Pareus l. 4. de Iustificat. c. 2. and in Gerlachius tom. 2. disput.
13. says: Christ so answered, as he rather showed him the way to He showed
the way to perdition.
eternal damnation. Which answer (says Pareus c. 2. cit.) is no less true,
then that saying of the Apostle: ye are euacuated from Christ, who are
justified by the law.

If we prove, that justice is necessary to salvation, because Christ says
Mat. 5. ver. 21. Unless your justice abound more then that of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Pareus l. 4. de
Iustif. c. 4. p. 964: answers; Not that this (inward justice) was possible to
the He showed an impossible way.
disciples, or to any other man; but that the exactness of the law and there
impossibility being acknowledged, they might forsake the endless way of the
law, and seek life in the Gospel.

If we prove that God rewards good works, because the Scripture often
speaks so: Zuinglius l. de relig. c. de Merito, answers: There are some so
doltish, that whatsoever thou criest, they think God gives all things to
merits, and where these are not, that there his grace is in vain hoped for:
whose weakness or rather perfidiousnesse God abuses, and inuiteth to good
works by hope of reward, that so nothing may be wanting to his servants. And
Ochinus in Schlusselburg. lib. 1. Theol. Calvin. art. 23. dares. call in
question, whether Christ spoake those words which he would have spoaken. We
answer (says he) that it may be, that when He spoake not that he would
Christ said: This is my body, he would have said: The bread signifies my
body.

The like they mean, when they say, that the holy Scripture speake^h by
grant or concession.
Scripture speaks by concessio^ or grant. For thus Calvin in lac. 2. v. 12.
That he terms it faith, is by way of concession orgraunt. And 3. Instit. c.
17.. 11. That the Apostle calls faith a vain opinion which is far from the
nature of faith, is by way of grant. Beza in Iac. 2. ver. 14. James calls it
faith, by way of grant, that he may not seem to strive about words. In like
manner Illyricus and others.

Kemnitius in locis part. 2. tit. de Argumentis, writes, that in those
sayings: If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments? Who shall do
these, shall live in them: Do this, and thou shall live: The doers of the law
shall be justified, Christ and Paul answer by way of concession or grant.

If we prove, that we can cleanse our selves from sin, because 2. Cor. 7. v.
1. it is said: Let us cleanse our selves from all inquination of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting sanctification in the fear of God: Calvin 2. Instit. c. 5..
11. answers: By concession or grant it is attributed to us, which belongs
to God. And if we prove that there are some little precepts, because Christ
says Math. 5. v. 19. One jot or tittle shall not pass of the law, till all
be fulfilled: Calvin upon that place, says; Where Christ terms little
precepts, it is a kind of concession or grant.

If we prove, that God will render eternal life according to the patience of
good works, because Romans 2. v. 7. is said: God will render to every man
according to his works: to them truly that according to patience in good
work, seek glory, honor, and incorruption, life eternal: Beza upon that
place answers: In this description of just judgment, this is said of the
Apostle by way of grant or concession, as also when straight after he says
ver. 13. Not hearers, but doers of the law are justified.

If we prove that some do keep the law, because it is written Romans 2. v. 26.
If then the prepuce keep the justices of the law, shall not his prepuce be
reputed for circuncision? Beza upon that place answers: These things are
said of the Apostle by way of grant or concession, as also I noted before
verse 9.

If we prove, that the sacraments of the new law be Scripture speaks by
contention.
better then the sacraments of the old, because S. Paul in the Epistle to the
Hebrews prefers them before these, Calvin. 4. Instit. c. 14.. 25. says:
This we must especially note, that in all these places Paul speaks not simply
but by way of contention or arguing -- Let us therefore remember, that here he
disputes not of ceremonies taken in their true and natural signification, hut
wrested to false and wicked interpretation, not of the lawful use of them, but
of their superstitious abuse.

Diverse times also they are forced to say, that the Scripture speaks after a
humane manner, and according to the mind, capacity, or error of others, not
according to the nature of the thing.

For if we prove, that reward is given to alms, because Christ says Luc. 16.
v. 9. Make unto you, friends of the mammon of iniquity, that when you fail,
they may receive you into the eternal tabernacles: Calvin excepteth, that,
Christ speaks After a humane manner.
after a humane manner.

If we prove, that some are truly just, because Math. 1. v. 19. it is said:
Joseph her husband, for that he was a just man: Illyricus upon that place,
answers: Here he is called just after the common manner, that is, honest, and
desirous to be honest.

If we prove, that God gives sufficient means of salvation to some, who yet
are not saved, because he says Isaiae 5. v. 4. What is there that I ought to
do more to my vinyard, and have not done? Pareus l. 1. de Great and lib. arb.
cap. 11. answers: He speaks not as God, but after a humane manner like a
vineroll. The like says Calvin. lib. de Provident. page 744.

If we prove, that Christ has bought even those who deny him, because it is
plainly said so. 2. Pet. 2. v. 1. Grossius Professor at Basel in Apol. pro
Disput. inaugurali says: The Lord is said to have bought such, both
according to the custom of Scripture, which according to the judgment of
charity says, that all are redeemed, saints, and cleansed from sin,
whosoever are baptized and profess Christ, albeit they be not all such before
God: as also, according to their own opinion Scripture speaks according to
men's false opinion. After a humane manner.
and boastes. For whom the Lord has indeed bought, they never deny him.

Zuinglius in Exposit. fidei tom. 2. fol. 558. writes this; Worke^ do not
merit, but when (the Scripture) promises reward to works, it speaks after a
humane manner -- Because men give to the^ that have well deserved, and the
gifts are called rewards, God also calls his gifts reward or recompense.
The like has Bullinger in Romans 2. And Reineccius tom. 4. Armaturae c. 7.
says, that those words of the Angel Tob. 12. I offered thy prayed to our
Lord; are spoaken after a humane manner. For (says he) there is no need, that
Angels should offer our prayers to the Lord, for God is not far of.

Calvin 3. Instit. c. 18.. 9. answering to that place Math. 19. v. 17. If thou will enter to life, keep the commandments, says: As if it, were not
manifest, that Christ did accomodate his speech to them with whom he had to
do. Polanus in Disput. private. 38. says: This place in which Christ
commands to keep the precepts of the law, is to be understood in According
to men's supposition.
part to wit, according to the supposition of the young man.

Masculus in Joan. 6. says: In that (Christ) calls faith a work of God, it
is an application wherewith he accomodateth According to men's words.
himself to the words of this people. And Luther in Galat. 2. tom. 5. fol.
317. Paul through too great zeal and indignation By too much zeal and
indignation.
of spirit, calls Grace a law, whereas in truth it is nothing else but the
greatest and infinite liberty in Christ.

Beza in Cyclope vol. 1. page 306. The Apostle Hebr. 7. v. 18. calls the
former precept, unprofitable, But he speaks upon In supposition of adversaries
the supposition of his adversaries. -- So dealt Christ with the Capharnaites.
Christ according to their supposition says his flesh profits nothing. And
in Joan. 6. v. 31. But here again Christ speaks upon their supposition with
whom, he discourses. Et in Dial. cont. Heshus vol. 1. p. 285. 306. and cont.
Westphal. p. 241. says: The Apostle in all that treatise (of the old
sacraments) according to his adversaries supposition considers the ceremonies
a part from Christ and by themselves. The like has Tilenus in Syntagmate cap.
57. But Gratianus Antiiesuita tom. 6. doctrinae. Jesuit. part. 2. page 3.
speaks yet worse, saying: According to this impious supposition, the
According to an impious supposition.
Scripture speaks contemptibly of the Sacraments, and calls Circumcision
some where Prepuce, other where Concision, other where unprofitable, and Manna
also viuificall bread.

If therefore we prove the keeping of the law to be necessary to life, because
Christ says Luc. 10. ver. 28. Do this and thou shall live: Calvin. ib. in
ver. 26. answers: Christ speaks here about obtaining life as he was asked.
For he According to the demand.
tells not plainly (as he does otherewhere) how men may come to life. --
Christ in this answer does accommodate himself to the lawyer, and respects
the demand. See also Whitak. l. 8. cont. Dur. sect. 38.

If we prove that the Eucharist is a nobler food then manna, because Christ
says Joan. 6. v. 27. Work not the meat that perishes, but that endures
unto life everlasting. Calvin 4. Instit. c. 14.. 25. answers: Christ
accommodateth According to the gross opinion.
his speech to the gross opinion of the Capharnaites. The same he has in
Joan. 6. versus 50.

If we prove, that the Eucharist is of more virtue then Manna was, because
Christ says Joan. 6. v. 58. Your fathers did eat manna and died: he that
eats this bread shall live for ever: Calvin 2. INstit. c. 10.. 6. answers:
The Lord spoake According to carnal men's capacity.
to hears, who only sought to be filled with meat of the belly, and cared
not for the true food of the soul, does somewhat accommodate his speech to
their capacity, but especially he makes the comparison of manna and of his
body according to their meaning. And in 1. Cor. 10. v. 3. Christ accommodateh
his speech to the meaning of the hearers. We see, that the Lord speaks Not
according to the nature of the thing.
not there according to the nature of the thing, but according to the meaning
of the hearers.

If we prove that Christ added somewhat to the rigor of the law, because he
says Math. 5. v. 22. You have heard, that it was said to them of old; Thou
shall not kill etc. But I say unto you, who soever is angry with his brother,
shall be in danger of judgment: Calvin ib. answers: Christ indeed To the
capacity of the valgar sort. To their gross error. To the capacity of the
common people.
brings the words of the law, but he accommodateth himself to the common
capacite of the vulgar sort. And in Romans 2. v. 26. The Apostle does
accommodate his speech according to their gross error, as also he does in his
Epistle to the Galathians.

If we exhort to do penance in hairecloth and ashes, because Christ says
Math. 11. ver. 21. If in Tire and Sidon had been wrought the miracles that
have been wrought in you, they had done penance in hairecloth and ashes long
ago: Calvin ib. answers: Penance is described by the external signs,
which were then solemnly used in Gods Church, not as if Christ urged this
matter, but because he turns his speech to the capacity of the common people.

If we prove that we shall have life everlasting for giving all our goods to
the poor, because Christ says. Math. 19. v. 21. If thou will be perfect,
go, sell the things that thou have, and give to the poor and thou shall have
treasure in heaven. Beza ib. answers. These words of Christ declare not how
life everlasting is of it self to be gotten, but are spoake^ to reprove him
that was deceived with false hope of his justice. Calvin ib. in v. 20. says:
Christ's answer was directed according to the To the man's disposition.
man's disposition. Gerlachius tom. 2. disput. 13. says: The Lord in the
places alleged (Math. 19. and Luc. 10.) accommodated To men be wicked with
false doctrines. To men's errors
his speech to them who asked him, who were bewiched with an opinion of legal
justice and Pharisaicall doctrines. And again: Christ might easily accommodate
his speech to those errors. Illyricus in Claue part. 2. tract. 1. col. 32.
writes thus: Christ after an other manner shows the way to the kingdom
Christ showed one way to some, an other to others.
of heaven, to the Pharise, to the lawyer, and to that young man vaunting of the
fulfilling of the law: and in other manner unto Nicodemus boasting of his
discipline and good habits gotten by long time and time goodness of nature and
free will, and yet in an other manner unto miserable sinners wrestling with
their conscience with the wrath of God and their sins.

Author respons. ad Theses. Valent. p. 800. thus teaches: That we may grant,
that oftentimes in Scripture justification is denied to the old and attributed
to the new testament: Yet According to the Jews supposition.
none sees not, but that this is said of the Apostle by supposition of the
Jews, who like to Papists, did speak of the old testament as of the law which
should give justice by works. And p. 813. In that Gregory is deceived, that
he thinks it follows out of Paul's discourse, that prepuce keeps the law,
which in truth the Apostle spoake upon supposition, not as if it were indeed
or could be, but to show boasting of the law, circumcision, and all the other
ceremonies, was very vain.

Nor content to have thus deluded so many and so weighty sentences of
Scripture, they give a general rule so to delude them. Calvin in 1. Corinthians.
10. ver. 3. It is the General rule to delude Scripture thus.
manner of the Scripture, when it speaks of Sacraments or other things
sometimes to speak according to the capacity of the hearers: and so it does
not respect the nature of thing, but what the hearers think amiss. And l. de
Praedest. p. 713. The Scripture when it talks of the Sacraments, uses to
speak in twoe sorts: If it talk with hypocrites, according to their wrong
meaning, it deuideth the truth from the signs. The like he has Gal. 3. v.
27. and in Joan. 6. v. 32. Daneus tom. 2. Corinthians. 4. page 217. Peter Martyr in
locis closs. 2. c. 16.. 14. and in 1. Cor. 10. Et Polanus in disput. private.
32. says: God oftentimes Scripture calls just, who indeed are not so.
speaks according to their opinion with whom he speaks: So are they in the
Scripture called just, who indeed are not just, but only in opinion either of
themselves or of others. By these and many such like sleights Protestants use
to delude the holy Scripture, which if they be admitted, nothing at all can be
proved out of Scripture.

Wherefore I thus make my sixth argument. Who not only in 260. articles do
contradict the express words of Scripture in their clear sense: but also in
many and weighty matters are forced to say, that the Scripture speaks not
accordig to her own mind, means not as she speaks, speaks by way of
grant, concession, or argument, according to the mind, capacity, gross
opinion, error of others, and after a humane fashion, not according to the
nature of the thing: they are to be thought to gain say the true meaning of the
holy Scripture. But Protestants do so. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER VII. THAT PROTESTANTS ARE FORCED to say that the Scripture speaks
ironically, mimetically, hyperbolically and by amplification and fiction.
MY seventh argument to prove that Protestants contradict the true sense of the
Scripture, shall be because they are forced to say, that many and most weighty
sentences of Scripture, of faith, good works, Sacraments, redemption of
sins, means of purchasing heaven, and the like, were spoaken not in earnest,
but ironically, mimetically, hyperbolically, by amplification and fiction.
Precepts ought to be kept: Ironically.


For if we prove, that Gods commandments can be done, because Leuit. 18. Romans
10. Gal. 3. is said: Who shall do those things, shall live in them: Luther in
Gal. 3. tom. 5. fol. 347. Answers, I wnderstand that this speech is an
ironie, or scoff.

If any prove the same, because Christ says Luc. 10. v. Ironically.
26. Do this, and thou shall live: Luther loc. cit. answers: I understand
this place in common, that this saying of Christ: Do this and thou shall live,
is a kind of ironie and mockage. Poach in Schlusselburg. l. 4. Catal. Haeret.
4. 301. Albeit the lawyer do inquire of life everlasting, yet if Christ's
answer be understood according to the law, that is, without (speaciall) faith,
life, cannot be meant of eternal life, without an ironie. Et p. 312. I do not
deny, but Christ's answer may he wnderstood of eternal life, not according to
the law, but an other way, to wit, either according to the Gospel, or by
ironie. Again: That saying and the like may be expounded three ways. First by
ironie, as Luther says Genesis 9. and Galat. 3. Secondly according to the law.
etc. And Gerlachius tom. 2. disput. 13. There is a secret ironie of Christ.

If we prove that the commandments must needs be kept, because Christ says
Math. 19. v. 17. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments: Pareus
l. 4. de Iustificat. c. 2. p. 967. answers: Luthers ironie (about this place)
may be defended. And page 969. It was a serious conference, and yet that
hinders not, but that the Lord might use an ironie. And Gerlachius to. 2.
disp. 13. cit. It was a serious conference, and yet there is a secret ironie.

If we prove, that an ill man may have faith, because S. James cap. 2. speaks
thus to such a one: Thou have faith. An ill man has faith: Ironically.
Thou beleiuest that there is one God: Thou do well: Beza ib. answers:
That which follows: Thou have faith, is spoaken ironically: And Calvin. ib.
v. 18. Erasmus is much deceived in that he acknowledges not an ironie in these
words. The speech is ironicall. And Thou do well, is added for to extenuate.
And likewise in Romans 3. v. 30. he says: I think that there is an ironie in
the words. And lib. 6. de lib. arbit. page 198. Solomon Man's is to prepare his
heart: Ironically.
says (Proverb. 16.) it is man's part to prepare the heart, and the Lords to
govern the tongue. Who sees not that it is an ironicall description of man's
arrogancy, who challenges to himself all high matters, and has not the
least matter in his power?

If we prove, that good works do cleanse from sin, Alms cleanses sin.
Ironically.
because Christ says. Luc. 11. v. 41. But yet that that remains, give
alms, and behold all things are clean unto you: Vallada in his Apology c.
22. page 300. answers: Christ is far from teaching that by alms sins are
redeemed, that on the contrary he derideth and rebukes the Pharisees that
they had this opinion. And the Apology Conf. August. c. de respons. ad argum.
There are many who interpret it to be an ironie. This interpretation is not
absurd, nor has any thing which is contrary to other Scriptures. P. Martyr
in Romans 11. Those words: Give alms etc. may be expounded three ways. The
first is, to say, that the speech is ironicall. And this he repeateth in locis
class. 3. c. 4.. 34. Aretius also in locis part. 1. fol. 90. says: Others
choose rather to take this sentence of Christ ironically.

If we prove that sins may be redeemed by alms, because Daniel says c. 4.
ver. 24. Redeem thy sins by alms: Schlusselburg. tom. 8. Catal. page 524.
says: There are Alms redeem sin. Ironically.
some that expound this place ironically. Which he does not dislike.

If we prove that the commandments may be kept, because Luc. 18. v. 22. a man
that said he had kept them all, Christ reprehendeth not, but says: Yet one
thing thou One thing lacking: Ironically.
lackest: Sell all that ever thou have, and give to the poor etc. Beza ib.
answers: Yea all things (lack) seeing no man can keep even one commandment so
as the law appoints: wherefore Christ speaks with a holy ironie.

If we prove that a sinner has free will or power to convert himself,
because God says Oseae. 5. ver. vlt. Going I will return to my place, until
you fail and seek my Men seek God: Ironically.
face: Whitaker and Rat. 9. Campiani answers: Which words truly he spoake
ironically and mimetically. And lib. 9. cont. Dur. sect. 25. It is manifest,
that the Lord spoake ironically. Thus you see in how great matters they say,
that the Prophets, Apostles, Christ, and God himself spoake ironically or
scoffingly, when they speak against the^, which is indeed to make the
Prophets, Apostles, Christ, and God himself to be scoffers, or rather to
scoff and mock them. Now let us see, how they say, that the Scripture speaks
mimetically, or by imitation of others.

If we prove that faith, is a work, because Christ Faith is a work:
Mimetically.
says. Joan. 6. v. 29. This is the work of God, that you believe in him.
Beza ib. answers: Perhaps this kind of speech, is borrowed of the common uses
and is to be expounded by mimesis or imitation: as if one coming to a
Phisician should ask of him for how much money would he cure him, and the
Physician should answer in these words: All the money which I demand of you
is this, that you trust me and be persuaded that I seek naught but your
health. If I say the Physician should thus answer, who could gather out of
this answer that money is the trust which the Physician demands of the sick
man for to obey wholesome advise. Wherefore they are very ridiculous (that I may
omit other paralogismes) who out of that place do gather that faith is a work.
Pareus l. 1. de Iustificat. c. 16. Faith is improperly called a work. For
Christ calls faith in it self a work of God, according to the speech of the
Jews who asked him. And Whitaker lib. 8. cont. Dur. sect. 88. Christ called
faith a work, either mimetically, or because it is the work of the holy Ghost.

If we prove, that that faith whereof S. James speaks Faith justifies:
Mimetically.
is justifying faith, because c. 2. v. 24. he says: Ye see, that a man is
justified by works, and not by faith only: that is: Man is justified by
faith, but not by only faith: Pareus l. 4. de Iustificat. c. 18. answers: He
adds that Antithesis: And not by faith only: by mimesis or imitation of the
hypocrites: we are justified by faith only: ye see (says he) this is false.

If we prove that Christ's flesh is truly eaten, because he says Joan. 6. My
flesh is truly meat: Zuinglius in Exegesi tom. Christ flesh eaten:
Mimetically.
2. fol. 333. answers: He finely observes the imitation of the Jews, who
either thought or would seem to think that he was but a mere man. And
vpbraiding to these men their error, he says: His flesh is truly meat. The
same he repeateth in Joan. 6. tom. 4. fol. 308. And adds fol. 334 According
to etheologie and mimesis which are a kind of alleosis, that is by imitation,
wherewith he spoake according to the speech and opinion of his enemies: he
uses the word Flesh and means Says Flesh, and means Spirit.
the Spirit, that is his Divinity, as often as he attributes life to his
flesh.

If we prove that there are twoe testaments because S. Paul says Gal. 4. For
these are twoe testaments, the one truly One testament. Mimetically.
etc. Zuinglius in Elencho tom. 2. fol. 3. answers: Paul calls it one
testament, not that it was truly a testament, but by etheologie or imitatio^
of them who so called it. And he adds: who more stiffly -- embraced shaddows
(as it is the gross disposition of men) more then they ought, would rather
leese light then darkness: not unlike to that mad man, who greatly
complained that his friends had procured him to be restored to his wits. After
the manner of these men Paul says that there are twoe testaments. See how he
says that Saint Paul speaks like a mad man. And in Joan. 6. tom. 4. p.
305. Where Christ calls faith a work, he says, Christ plaieth in the word,
work, and calls faith a work, because they looked to works. So in the
Epistle to the Romans and Galat. by imitation he calls grace, the law of the
spirit. And in Math. Grace called a law. Mimetically.
19. page 107. The Lord continues in his imitation, and accommodateth his
speech to the mind of the young man, who after a Pharisaicall manner did think,
that justification and life everlasting were to be gotten by works. And in
Jacob. 2. p. 549. he says, that when S. James terms faith that which is
without works, he speaks by imitation, imitating them Faith without works:
Mimetically.
who bragged of dead faith, which is no faith, as of lively and true faith.
Illyricus also in Claue tract. 4. col. 332. says, that by imitation the
Gospel is called the law of faith Romans 3. and faith a The Gospel law of
faith, Mimetically.
work Joan. 6. and in like manner it is said: Make to your selves friends of
the mammon of iniquity.

If we prove that those things which are written in the book of wisdom, were
spoaken of Solomon because the prayer to God which is in the 9. chapter can
agree to no other, Whitaker Controu. 1. quaest. 1. c. 12. answers: That might
be done mimetically by imitation, of the writer, Solomon prays to God
Mimetically.
whosoever, he was. And the same says Rainolds Praelect. 20. and. 21. As if
imitations which are grounded in lies, and that in prayers to God were to be
admitted in Scripture. What other thing were this for Scripture but to imitate
others in lies, and even then when it speaks to God? And thus much of their
Mimeses or imitation: Now let us see some of their hyperboles.

If we prove that faith may move mountains, because Faith may move mountains
Hyperbolically.
Christ says Math. 17. ver. 20. If you have faith as a mustard seed, you
shall say to this mountain, Remove from hence thither, and it shall remove:
Calvin ib. in v. 19. answers: It is certain, that it is an hyperbolicall
kind of speech, when he says that by faith trees and mountains may be
removed. The same has Illyricus upon this place.

If we have prove that alms delivers from sin, because Alms delivers
from sin: Hyperbolically.
it is said Tobie 4. v. 11. Alms delivers from all sin and from death:
Vallada in his Apology cit. page 304. answers: This kind of speech of Tobie
is hyperbolicall: And Apologia Confess. August. c. de respons. ad argum. We
will not say that it is an hyperbole, albeit it must be so taken, least it
detract from the praise of Christ, whose proper office is to deliver from death
and sin.

If we prove that one man by his prayer may procure One man procures life to
an other: Hyperbolically.
life to an other, because it is said. 1. Joan. 5. verse. 16. He that knows
his brother to sin a sin not to death, let him ask, and life shall be given
him sinning not to death: Calvin ib. answers: If you understand of man, that
he gives life to his brother, it is an hyperbolicall speech.

If we prove that God has promised reward to good God rewards works
Hyperbolically.
works, Zuinglius de Provident. c. 6. answers: These are hyperboles and
hyperoches: If thou will enter into life keep the commandments: Who shall do
the will of my father, etc. and what promises soever else are made to works.
Thus they devise hyperboles in Scripture: and yet Pareus lib. 1. de Iustific.
cap. 15. and in Galat. 1. Lect. 9. says: I dare not say that there is an
hyperbole in Scripture, since it ouerlas heth the truth, and seems to be a
kind of lie.

If we prove that faith can be without charity, because Faith without
charity: A fiction.
S. Paul says 1. Cor. 13. v. 2. If I have all faith so as I remove
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing: P. Martyr ib. answers: The
Apostle speaks by fiction for to exaggerate the dignity of charity. -- Who
sees not, that Paul speaks here hyperbolically? And in Romans 11. When the
Apostle Impossible. Charity extolled, by fiction.
by all means extolled charity, he used a fiction for to extol it. But Luther
Postilla in Domin. Quinquagesimae, says: Paul brought an impossible example.

If we prove that faith may be without works because S. James says cap. 2.
v. 18. Show me thy faith without Faith without works.
works: Calvin ib. answers: In that he bids show faith without works, he
argues from an impossible thing: And in v. 17. It is clear enough, that the
Apostle does reason from an impossible thing.

If we prove that widows marrying after they have given their faith to the
contrary; are damned, because (as S. Paul speaks 1. Timoth. 5 verse. 12.)
they have made void their first faith: Calvin 4. Instit c. 13.. 18. answers:
The Widows leese their first faith: By Amplification.
Apostle for amplification sake adds, that they have broken or made void
their first faith.

Wherefore in form thus I argue: Who not only in so many and so great
matters contradict such words of Scripture, and in such a sense as we have
seen, but also in many and great matters are forced to say, that the
Scripture seaketh ironically, mimetically, hyperbolically, by way of fiction,
and of amplificatio^, and by impossibilities, they are to be thought to
contradict the true sense of the Scripture. But Protestants do so. Therefore
etc.

CHAPTER VIII. THAT PROTESTANTS ARE COMpelled to turn the most general
propositions of the Scripture into particulars.
THE eight argument wherewith I will prove that Protestants co^tradict the true
sense of holy Scripture shall be, because in many and weighty mattie, to wit,
of God, of Christ, of the Church, of Sacraments, of faith and the like, they
are forced to turn the most universal propositions of Scripture into
particulars.

For touching God: If we prove that he has a will to have mercy on all,
because Romans 11. v. 32. it is said: God Touching God.
has concluded all into incredulity, that he may have mercy on all: Beza ib.
answers: The universal particle (All) is to be restrained, to wit, (as he
says l. de Praedest. cont. Castle. All, that is, Some.
p. 360.) All who shall believe. The like he has in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 421.
and in Resp. p. 216. 223. and Calvin 3. Instit. c. 24.. 17. But Zanchius l. 1.
de Not. Dei. c. 2. tom. 2. call. 562. says that this place and also that
other: Preach the Gospel to every creature and the like, belong only to the
elect. If we prove the same because Sapient. 11. v. 24. it is said: Thou have
mercy on all etc. P. Martyr in Romans 9. answers: But it easily appears,
that these things are to be understood All, that is, Some.
of the universal company of the elect.

If we prove that God has a will to save all, because 1. Timot. 2. v. 4 it is
said of God: Who will all men to be saved: Bucer in Math. 6. answers: That
he says, All; is as much as if he had said, some of all. Et Idem apud
Zanchium l. de Perseuerant. to. 2. col. 343. That place 1. Timoth. 2. Who will
all: and 1. Joan. 2. He is the propitiation etc. cannot be understood but
synechdochically, for many, that is for the elect. And again: It is certain
that the places, which promise salvation universally, belong only to the
elect. And Beza in Joan. 6. v. 40. It must not be taken for an universal, but
for an indefinit proposition: Calvin upon the place cited, says: It speaks
of kinds of men, not of all persons. And Perkins in Serie causarum c. 52. We
must know, that this proposition is not general, but indefinit.

If we prove the same out of these words. 2. Pet. 3. v. 10. Not some, but all,
that is, Some.
Not willing that any perish, but all to return to penance: Beza in Colloq.
Montisbel. p. 422. and in respons. p. 231. and De Praedestinat. cont. Castle.
p. 355. answers: It is plain, that Peter speaks only to the faithful.
Zanchius l. 5. de Not. Dei. cap 2. It is understood only of the elect. And
Bucer in Math. 6. It is meant of them only whom he has chosen for to be
converted and live.

If we prove that God calls all, because Christ Math. 11. ver. 28. cries:
Come to me all that labor and are burdened All, that is, Some.
and I will refresh you. Beza l. quaest. and resp. vol. 1. p. 699. answers:
But ye will say the calling and promise is universal. But understand it
indefinite, (and that in regard of certain circustances of which we spoake)
and thou shall think more rightly. For otherwise behold with how necessary
reasons that universal calling, is refuted: wherefore not an universal
calling, but only an indefinite can and must be defended.

If we prove that God hates even the faithful when they work iniquity,
because Psalm. 5. v. 7. it is said: Thou hate all who work iniquity: they
will except the All, that is, Some.
faithful as appears by what we rehearsed l. 1. c. 2. art. 9.

If we prove that all things are possible to God, because so it is said. Math.
19. v. 26. Beza Dial. cont. Heshus: vol. 1. answers: That saying of thine:
All things are possible to God: has some exception.

Of Christ: if we prove that he died for all, because it is Touching Christ.
said. 2. Cor. 5. ver. 15. If one died for all, then all were dead and Christ
died for all: Beza ib. answers: Since it is here spoaken All, that is, Some.
of the Church or of the elect only considered universally, we must needs
restrain, All, to that whereof the speech is, Et Contraremonstrantes in
Collat. Hagae p. 131. That All, wherewith it is said, Christ died for all, is
expounded not to be exte^ded universally to all and every and none excepted,
but is to be restrained only to the faithful.

If we prove, that Christ is the propitiation for the sins of all the world
because 1. Joan. 2. v. 2. it is said: He is the All the world, that is, Some.
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only; but also for the whole
worlds: Zanchius in Summa Praelect. tom. 7. col. 264. answers: When he
says, Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, we are
not compelled by name of the world (He amitteth, whole) to understand all men
universally. Again: Christ is the propitiation only for the sins of the
elect of the whole world. Calvin upon this place: Nether had Ihon any other
meaning, then to make this good common to the whole Church. Beza ib. By the
name of the world (He also omitteth whole) are understood all the elect of all
ages, degrees, and places.

If we prove that Christ is the Savior of all men because it is said. 1.
Timoth. 4. v. 10. Which is the Savior of All, that is, Some.
all men especially of the faithful. Author Resp. ad Theses Vademont. p. 482.
answers: This pertains to the elect only.

Of the Church: if we prove, that she erreth not in any Touching the Church.
point of faith: because Christ says Joan. 16. v. 13. When he the spirit of
truth comes, he shall teach you all truth: Whitaker Contr. 2. q. 4. c. 2.
expounds it thus: That is, All truth, that is, Some.
all necessary truth. Again: I answer, that Christ and the holy Ghost
teaches the Church all truth simply necessary, but yet oftentimes leaves
some error. The like has Rainalds thesi. 2. and Bucanus loco 41. But Daneus
Contr. 4. p. 632. says: Properly and truly this promise of Christ pertains
to those twelve whom he then spoake unto: Wherefore it is a personal
blessing, which must, not be extended to any other then to those twelve
Apostles. The like has Moulins in his Buckler page 51.

If we prove that wicked men may be in the Church which is the body of Christ,
because S. Paul says. 1 Cor. 10. v. 17. For being many, we are one bread,
one body, all that All, that is, Some.
participate of one bread Beza dial. cont. Heshus. p. 280. answers: That, All
that participate, cannot be extended to the wicked. Whitaker Cont. 2. q. 1. c.
11. says: The Apostle speaks only of the good and godly, the wicked do
not participate that bread whereof the Apostle speaks.

If we prove that all the Corinthians and Galathians baptized, were in the
Church and had put on Christ, because 1. Cor. 12. v. 13. it is said: For in
one Spirit we were all All, that is, Some.
baptized into one body: And Galat. 3. ver. 27. For as many of you as are
baptized in Christ, have put on Christ: Whitaker Contr. 24. 1. cap. 8.
answers. The Apostle in these places speaks not of all the Corinthians and
Galathians, but of those only who were endued with the spirit of Christ and
true faith.

Touching Sacraments: If we prove that Baptism is Touching Sacraments.
necessary to all, because Christ says Joan. 3. v. 5. Unless one be borne
again of water etc. Pareus l. 6. de Amiss. Great. c. 1. answers: The
proposition is to be limitated. And commonly One, that is, Some.
they except infants.

If we prove that baptism is effectual also in the reprobate, because Galat.
3. ver. 27. For as many of you as are baptized As many, that is, Some
in Christ, have put on Christ. Beza ib. answers: It is added (As many) for
to take away the difference of nations, states, and sexes. And 2. part. resp.
ad Acta Montisb p. 62. By no color of reason it can be understood universally
of every baptized person. Zuinglius in Elencho tom. 2. fol 13. says: It is
spoaken synechdochically: All did eat the same spiritual bread, when as they
only eat it who were spiritual.

If we prove that the bound of marriage dureth all the life of the married
parties, because it is said. 1. Cor. 7. v. 39. A woman is bound to the law, so
long time as here husband So long, that is, for a time.
lives. Peter Martyr ib. answers: When he writes, that a woman is bound to
her husband so long as he lives, the exception which Christ has must be
added, to wit, unless adultery be committed. Beza l. de Diuort. vol. 2. p.
87. says: The Apostle respects that which is ordinary, and falls out for
the most part, as supposing that amongst the faithful, to whom he wrote,
marriages could scarce be dissolved by any other means then by death.

If we prove that all sick folk are to be anointed with oil, because S. James
says cap. 5. ver. 14. Is any man sick Any man, that is, Some.
among you? let him bring in the priests of the Church and let them pray over
him anoiling him with oil in the name of our Lord. Tilenus in Syntagm. cap.
58. answers: As if those things which are spoaken indefinitly and commonly,
were to be taken universally.

Concerning faith: If we prove that faith it is necessary Touching faith.
to all, because it is said Joan. 3. ver. 36. Who beleiueth not, abides in
death: Calvin 4. Instit. c. 16. 31. answers: Christ speaks not there of the
general guilt, wherewith all the Who: that is, Some.
posterity of Adam is infected, but only threatens the despisers of the
Gospel, who proudly and obstinately refuse grace offered to them. The like
has Vorstius in Antibel. page 375. If we prove the same out of those words
Mark vlt. ver. 16. He He, that is, Some.
that beleiueth not, shall be damned. Zuinglius lib. de Peccat. orig. tom. 2.
fol. 118. This is no way to be understood simply, but of those who having heard
the Gospel would not believe.

If we prove that no faith avails any thing without charity, because it is
said 1. Cor. 13. v. 2. If I have all faith so All, that is, Some.
as I remove motu^aines, and have not charity, I am nothing: Calvin ib.
answers: The faith whereof he speaks is particular. Beza ib. As for All,
that signifies not in this place all kinds of faith, but declares a certain
perfection of this kind, that is, it signifies rather whole, then all. Peter
Martyr in Romans 11. page 935. says: We must know, that universal propositions
are to be restrained to the matter whereof the speech is: And in Romans 9. p.
725. and 728. he limitateth many universal propositions of the Scripture.

Touching good works: If we prove that charity falls Of good works.
not away in heaven, because it is said 1. Co. 13. ver. 8. Charity never
falls away: Calvin ib. answers: What if I Never, that is, not for a time.
except, that the perpetuity of charity, whereof the Apostle here speaks,
is after the last day and belongs not to the time between. And in Zachary
1. v. 12. We know, that the offices of charity are restrained to the course of
this life.

If we prove that the Apostle does counsel single life unto all men, by these
words 1. Cor. 7. v. 7. I would all men to be as my self: Bullinger ib.
answers: I would indeed all All, that is, Some.
men, to wit, who feign chastity (observe (says he) the synechdoche) and
leave their wives, to be as my self.

If we prove that God grants chastity to all that ask it out of that most
universal promise of Christ Joan. 16. Any thing, that is, Some.
ver. 23. Amen, Amen, I say to you if you ask the Father any thing in my name,
he will give it you. Daneus Contr. 5. p. 1038. answers: That general promise
of Christ does not legitimate (that I may so speak) or make lawful all our
prayers before the Lord, but only those things which we ask according to Gods
express and revealed will, and not other things. And Perkins in Casibus
Conscient. l. 2. c. 15. Christ's promise is to be understood of those things
which are necessary to salvation, and not of these especial gifts. In like
sort answers P. Martyr de Votis. col. 1437. Riuet in Contr. tract. 1. sect.
67. Vorstius in Antibel. p. 224. and others.

If we prove that we may pray for all men, because S. Paul says. 1. Timoth.
2. v. 1. I desire therefore first of all things, that obsecrations, prayers,
postulations, thanks giuings, be made for all men. Rainolds Apol. These. page
245. Answers: Where we are bidden to pray for all, the word All, does not
signify All, that is, Some.
every of the kind, but every kind of men.

Concerning sins: If we prove that even a faithful Of Sins.
man committing a great sin, becomes the son of the Devil, because. 1.
Joan. 3. v. 8. it is said: Every one that commits Every one, that is,
Some.
sin, is of the Devil. Scarpe de Iustificat. Contr. 13. answers: They only
are said to serve the Devil and to be his children, in whom sin reigns,
and who commit sin with a full will: but the faithful do not sin so. The
like has Pareus lib. 2. de Iustific. cap. 17. and lib. 4. cap. 17. And if we
prove that David when he committed murder, had not life in him, because 1.
Joan. 3. v. 15. is said: And you know that no murderer has life everlasting
in himself: Protestants will except both David and all the elect faithful, as
appears by what we rehearsed l. 1. c. 16. art 5. and 6.

If we prove that no fornicatour has inheritance, in Christ's kingdom, because
S. Paul says Ephesians. 5. verse. 5. Know you this that no fornicator has
inheritance in the kingdom None, that is, not Some.
of Christ and of God: Scarpius de Iustif. Contr. 5. page 86. excepteth the
faithful.

If we prove that all faithful must fear least they fall, Who, that is, Some.
because it is said. 1. Cor. 11. v. 12. Who thinks himself to stand let him
take heed. Et Romans 11. v. 20. Thou by faith do stand, be not to highly wise,
but fear. Calvin. 3. Inst. c. 12.. 22. He does not warn every man. Of Gods
law.


Touching the law of God: If we prove that the faithful may keep all the
commandments, because it is said All, that is, Some.
of Zachary and Elizabeth. Luc. 1. v. 6. They were both just before God,
walking in all the commandments and iustifications of our Lord without blame:
Calvin. ib. says: I answer that these praises, wherewith Gods servants are
so highly commended, are to be taken with some exception.

If we prove that Josias did keep the whole law of God, because it is said of
him. 4. Reg. 23. He turned to our Lord in all his heart, according to all the
law of Moises: Hunnius All, that is, Some.
tractat. de Iustific. p. 170. answers: That which is added (According to all
the law of Moises) does chiefly respect that reformation in religion instituted
according to the law of Moses.

Thou see (Reader) how often and in how many, and weighty matters
Protestants are forced to turn the most general or universal sayings of the
Scripture into particulars, and how many universal particles both
affirmative, as All, Every one, Every creature, As many, Whole, As long
time, Who, Any man, Any thing and Negatiues, as Not any, Never, No
fornicator, No murderer, they change into particulars, whenever they make
against them. Which is so great and so manifest an abuse of Scripture as What
some Protestants thing of turning universal propositions into particulars.
some of themselves cry out against it. For thus Iacobus Andreae in Colloq.
Montisbel. p. 418. speaks to Beza: It is impiety to exclude any man from
this universal promise. p. 419. It is manifest impiety and abominable
doctrine, contrary to the express letter to make a particular promise of an
universal. Et page 421. It is horrible to hear, so manifest an universal
proposition to be made a particular.

Wherefore I thus frame my eight argument: Who besides the foresaied opposition
to the express words of Scripture, are compelled in so many and so great
matters to change so many and so manifest universal propositio^s of the holy
Scripture into particulars, they are to be judged to gainsay the true sense of
the Scripture. But Protestants do so. Therefore etc. And the more forcible this
argument ought to be against them, because themselves teach: That as often as
there is an universal proposition in Scripture, it must not be limited by any
distinction, unless that be grounded upon certain and clear words of
Scripture; For otherwise every doctrine may be deluded by subtilitie of
distinctions. So Gerlachius tom. 2. disp. 24.

CHAPTER IX. THAT PROTESTANTS DO LIMITATE many unlimited Propositions of the
Scripture.
MY ninth argument, that Protestants contradict the true sense of Scripture, I
will take from thence, that they are forced to limitate many vnlimitated
propositions of Scripture, touching great matters, as of God, of Christ, of the
Church, and the like.

For if we prove that God does not at all tempt to evil, Touching God.
because S. James says absolutely. c. 1. v. 13. God is no tempter of evil,
and he tempts no man: P. Martyr in locis. clas. 1. c. 15.. 9. answers: When
James denies, that God tempts, he denies it not altogether, but in that
sort in which those carnal Christians of his time, did affirm him to tempt,
as if they when they sinned, had not been in fault. Calvin upon this place: He
speaks here of inward temptations, which are nothing but inordinate desires,
which provoke us to sin: And he rightly denies God to be author of them.
Pareus l 2. de Amiss. Great. c. 8. James does not remove from God simply all
temptation, but only the inward temptation, and such as may make a man
excusable.

If we prove that God wills not iniquity at all, that is nether for it
self, nor for any other thing, because. ps. 1. v. 5. it is said without any
limitation: Thou wilst not iniquity: they limitate this saying many ways, as
that God wills not iniquity for it self, or by his word, or by allowance,
or delighte in it, as appears by what we rehearsed l. 1. c. 2. art. 1.

If we prove that God of himself wills not the death of any man, because he
says. Ezech. 33. v. 11. I will not the death of the wicked, and c. 18. v. 32.
I will not the death of him that dies: Zanchius l. 3. de Not. Dei c. 4. q. 4.
answers: If thou vrgest the word: I will not the death of a sinner, and that
God speaks of his good pleasure, I say that place is to be understood of the
elect only. Beza 2. art. resp. ad Acta Montisbel. p. 196. That restriction of
conversion, shows that this is to be understood only of them, to whom is
granted the grace of conversion, which surely is proper to the elect. Piscator
in Thesib. l. 2. p. 187. The Prophet speaks not here of every sinner, but of
him only that is converted. But Luther lib. de seru. arbitr. tom. 2. fol. 450.
says. God wills many things, which by his word he shows that he wills
not. So he will not the death of a sinner, to wit, by word, but he wills it
by his unsearchable will.

If we prove that God wills the conversion of every sinner, because he
says without limitation Ezech. 33. v. 11. I will not the death of the wicked,
but that he be converted and live: Calvin l. de Praedest. p. 786. and de
Provident. p. 737. answers: God is said to will life, as he is said to will
penance, and this he wills because by his words he inuiteth all to it: but
this is not contrary to his secret counsel, wherein he has decreed to
convert none but his elect. Piscator in Thesibus lib. 2. page 236. says: That
God speaks there of the wicked who is converted.

If we prove that Christ, even as he is God, would gather those who will not be
gathered, because he says absolutely Math. 23. v 37. How often would I gather
together thy children, as the hen does goth gather together her chickins under
her wings, and thou would not? Perkins de Praedest. tom. 1. col. 157.
answers: I say, that Christ speaks here not as he was God, but as he was
minister of the circumcision: The same says Luther lib. cit. fol. 451. and
others.

If we prove that God calls even the reprobate, because he says without
limitation Apocal. 3. v. 20. I stand at the door and knock: Perkins loc. iam
cit. answers: Those at whose door Christ stands are the faithful and the
converted.

If we prove that God even by inward vocation calls the reprobate, because
without all limitation it is said, Math. 23. v. 37. How often would I gather
thy Children: And Isaiae 65. v. 2. I have spread fourth my hands all the day to
an incredulous people, And c. 5. v. 4. What is there that I ought to do more
to my vineyard, and have not done to it? Et Prou. 1. v. 24. I have called, and
you have refused: Contra-remonstrantes in Collat. Hagae p. 245. and seq.
limitate all these sayings only to outward calling. And Pareus l. 1. de Great.
and lib. arb. c. 11. to only calling by outward means. After which manner
Protestants also limitate those words Math. 22. v. 14. Many are called, but
few are chosen.

If we prove that men may resist the holy Ghost speaking within them, because
without limitation it is said Acts 7. v. 51. You have always resisted the
holy Ghost: Calvin. ib. answers: They are said to resist the holy Ghost,
who obstinately reject him speaking by the Prophets, for here is no speech of
inward revelations which God inwardly inspireth to any, but of the outward
ministry.

If we prove that Christ did not teach his Apostles all Touching Christ.
the points of faith, because himself says. Joan. 16. v. 12. Yet many
things I have to say to you, but you cannot bear them now: But when he the
Spirit of truth comes, he shall teach you all truth: they limite this to
rites and discipline. Beza ib: These words are to be understood of those
things, which pertained to the execution of the Apostolical function and
foundation of Churches.

If we prove that Christ was Mediator of all men because it is said 1. Tim. 2.
v. 6. One Mediator of God and men, the man Jesus Christ: they limite this to
the elect faithful: Beza Epist. 28. It is false, that Christ is mediator also
of the infidels. In like sort Hunnius de Iustif. page 179. restrains that
saying Hebr. 5. ver. 9. He was made to all that obey him, cause of eternal
salvation, to obedience in faith.

If we prove that unwritten traditions of faith are to be Touching Traditions.
believed, because S. Paul says without limitation 2. Thessal. 2. ver. 15.
Stand, and hold the traditions, which you have learned, whether it be by word,
or by our epistle; they limite this to only traditions of rites or ceremonies;
Whitaker Contr. 1. q. 6. cap. 10. Other (Protestants) think, that Paul
speaks of certain external matters and rites of no great moment. Academia
Nemaus. Resp. ad Tournon. page 554. By the word Tradition in the Apostles
writings, is meant either the application and right handling of doctrine, or the
appointing of rites and discipline.

If we prove that Christ committed all his sheep to S. Touching S. Peter.
Peter because without any limitation he says to him Joan. 21. v. 17. Feed
my sheep. Whitaker Cont. 1. q. 5. cap. 5. answers: Christ does not say to
Peter: Feed all my sheep, but speaks indefinitely. And Beza ib. in verse. 15.
Must Gods word be thus profaned? Surely Christ did not add All; and the
difference betwixt universal and indefinite propositions, is well known. As
if Protestants did not as well limitate universal propositions, as indefinite;
as appeared in the former chapter. Besides Daneus Contr. 3. p. 127. faithful:
An indefinite What Protest. say of an indefinite proposition.
proposition is equivalent to an universal. And Calvin in 1. Joan. 3. v. 3. An
indefinite speech is as much as an vniu^^sall. And 4. Instit. c. 17.. 29. It is
our part, whatsoever is absolutely spoake of Christ so to embrace, as without
exception that take place with us which he would say.

If we prove that the Church is always famous and visible, Touching the Church.
because Isaie c. 2. v. 2. says without limitation of time: And in the latter
days the mountain of the house of our Lord shall be prepared in the top of
mountains, and shall be elevated above the little hills, and all nations shall
flow unto it. Et c. 61. ver. 9. And they shall know their seed in the Gentiles
and their budde in the midst of peoples. And Miche. 4. v. 8. And the remanent
of Jacob shall be in the Gentiles in the midst of many peoples, as a Lion
among the beasts of the forest. Whitaker Contr. 2. q. 2. c. 2. answers: The
Prophets foretell that no kingdom shall be so glorious, no city so ample, no
Empire so large as the Church shall be in the times of the Messiah -- But we
never read, that the Lord has promised that this majesty and glory of the
Church shall be constant and perpetual. Et Morton. in Apolog. part. 1. l. 1. c.
13. The league is indeed perpetual, but this so admirable success is not
always so universal, but in a manner peculiar to the age of the Apostles.

If we prove that the Pastors of the Church be always visible, because Christ
says of them Math. 5. v. 15. A city cannot be hid situated upon a
mountain. Whitaker loc. cit. answers: Albeit Christ say, that godly Doctors
and Pastors shall not be obscure, nor escape the sight of men; yet he says
not, that there shall be always such Doctors which may be as visible as
mountains.

If we prove that the Church is the pillar of all truth of faith, because S.
Paul 1. Timoth. 3. ver. 15. without any limitation calls her the pillar and
strength of truth: Whitake Contr. 2. q. 4. c. 2. answers: In this place is
meant not simply all truth, but only necessary truth. And Vorstius in
Antibel. p. 143. The Apostle speaks not of every truth that howsoever
pertains to religion, but only of wholesome truth, or which is necessary to
salvation, and that conditionally also, to wit, so long as she shall remain
the true Church of Christ.

If we prove that the Church is always infallible in faith, because, without
limitation to any time, she is called loc. cit. The pillar and strength of
truth: P. Martyr in locis clas. 4. c. 4.. 21. says: I grant, She is indeed
the pillar of truth, but not always, but when she relieth upon the word of
God. Confessio. Heluet. c. 17. She erreth not, as long as she relieth upon the
rock Christ, and the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. Daneus Contr. 4.
p. 717. The place of Paul speaks of the visible Church, which on earth is the
keeper of heavenly doctrine, so long as she is true. Bullinger Dec 4. Sermon. 5.
The Church erreth not so long as she hears the voice of her Spouse and
Pastor. Herbrandus in Compend. loc. de Eccles. She erreth not so long as she
houldeth and follows the word of God.

Of we prove that the Church is to be heard simply in all things, because our
Savior without anielimitation says Math. 18. v. 19. If he will not hear the
Church, let him be to thee as an Ethnik and Publican. Whitaker lib. 1. de
Scriptura c. 13. sect. 1. answers: The Son of God himself commanded to
hear the voice of the Church, but not preaching any thing but Scripture.
Herbrand. loc. cit. says the Church is to be heard, as long as she preaches
heavenly and incorrupt doctrine. Moulins in his Buckler p. 84. limitateth this
speech of Christ, to quarrels betwixt particular men, and not to questions of
religion. The like said Field. l. 4. de Eccles. c. 4. and others.

If we prove that the Church in teaching cannot err, because Isaias says c.
59. v. 21. This is my covenant with them says, our Lord: My spirit is in thee
and my words which I have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth,
and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the mouth of thy seeds seed,
says our Lord, from this present for ever. Whitaker libr. 1. de Scriptura
cap. 11. sect. vlt. answers: This promise is not made to the teaching Church,
but to the whole Church, that is, to the elect.

If we prove that the militant Church is perpetual, because the Scripture
says, that Christ's kingdom shall be perpetual, Daneus Contr. 4. p. 718.
answers: All these places and the like properly pertain to that Church which
God shall gather in heaven, not on earth.

If we prove that the visible Church is always the true Church, because she is
called 1. Timoth 3. the pillar of truth: Daneus loc cit. page 721. answers:
Let him know, that the visible Church then, and so long is said to be the true
Church, as long as the voice of heavenly and Evangelical truth sounds in
her.

If we prove that the visible Church cannot err, because Math. 16. v. 18. it
is said, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church: Moulins
in his Buckler p. 49. answers: That is meant of the Church of the elect, not
of the universal visible Church.

If we prove, that the Church of any age is to be heard, because Christ Math.
18. Without any limitation of time bids us to hear the Church: Herbrand.
in Compend. loc. de Eccles. answers: This command is not universal of the
Church of all times, but Christ speaks of his little Church according to the
condition of those times, which then wanted a pious politik Magistrate who was
a member of the Church. In like sort Whitaker l. 1. de Script. c. 7. sect. 8.
limitateth those words of Christ. Joan. 6. He shall teach you all truth: and
those. Luc. 10. v. 16. Who hears you, hears me ib. c. 8. sect. 1. and those
of S. Ihon. 1. c. 4. v. 6. Who knows God, hears us, in l. 2. de Script. c.
6. sect. 3. to the Apostles only.

If we prove that none may preach unless he be sent, because S. Paul says
absolutely Romans 10. v. 15. How shall they preach, unless they be sent? they
except where a Church is not yet founded, or where Pastors teach not truly, or
where all things are in confusion, as appears by what we told. l. 1. c. 7.
art. 8.

If we prove that none may marry after divorce, because without any
limitation it is said 1. Corinthians. 7. v. 10. But to Touching, Matrimony.
them that are joined in matrimony, not I give commandment but our Lord, that
the wife depart not from her husband, and if she depart, to remain unmarried
or to be reconciled to her husband: Calvin ib. answers: This is not meant of
those who have been divorced for adultery. Others except other cases as
appears by whath has been said l. 1. c. 12. art. 6. And in like manner
they limitate those words Math. 19. ver. 9. He that shall marry her that is
dimissed, commits aduoutrie: For thus Beza in Luc. 16. v. 18. The Lord
speaks of divorces used amongst the Jews, amongst which divorce for adultery
cannot be reckoned. The like he has in 1. Cor. 7. v. 11. Bucer in Math 8. and
others.

If we prove that all men ought to confess all their Touching Confession.
sins to men, because S. James c. 5. v. 16. absolutely says: Confess your
sins one to an other: Calvin. 3. Instit. c. 4.. 12. answers: Such a
confession must befree, so as it be not exacted of all, but only commended who
feell that they have need of it: And moreover, that nether they who use it for
their need, be compelled by any precept, or drawn by any cunning to tell all
their sins, but as far forth as themselves shall think fit. Co^fessio
Heluet. cap. 14. restrains Saint James words to those sins only which are
committed against our neighbor.

If we prove that now a days sick persons are to be Touching extreme Unction.
anointed with oil because S. James. c. 5. v. 14. says: Is any man sick
among you? Let him bring in the Priests of the Church, and let them pray over
him anoiling him with oil in the name of our Lord: Calvin. 4. Instit. 19.. 19.
answers: This is commanded by James: To wit, James spoake for that time,
whiles as yet the Church did enjoy this blessing.

If we prove that all who soever believe not, shall be Touching faith.
damned, because Christ says absolutely. Mark vlt. v. 16. He that beleiueth
not, shall be condemned: Zuinglius l. de baptismo tom. 2. fol. 93. answers:
What man is so doltish, blockish, and blind, who sees not that these words of
Christ are spoaken only of those, who having heard the Gospel, do not
believe? Musculus in locis lit. de Baptismo: These kind of sentences concerning
faith are not to be applied to infants, as these: Without faith it is
impossible to please God etc.

If we prove that alms delivers as well from sin Touching good works.
past or present, as to come, because it is said Tobie. 4. ver. 11. Alms
delivers from all sin and from death: they restrain this to future sins:
Apologia Confess. Augustan. c. de Resp. ad Argum. We grauut that alms do merit
many benefits of God, and delivers, not from present, but from future sin,
that is, deserve that we be defended in dangers of sin and death.

If we prove that alms do purge inwardly, or the soul, because without
limitation it is said Luke 11. v. 14. Give alms, and behold all things are
clean unto you: they limitate this to outward cleasing only: Peter Martyr in
Romans 11. The third way (of expounding this place) is more fit, as I think. For
Christ exhorts them to cleanse their soul, which is within, and that is done
by faith: And as touching outward things he adds: Give alms so all things
shall be clean to you.

If we prove that we may sell all and give to the poor, because our Savior
says Math. 19. verse. 21. If thou will be perfect, sell what thou have etc.
Perkins in Casibus Conscie^t. l. 3. c. 4. limitateth that counsel of Christ,
to that man alone to whom he spoake, saying: Those words contain a personal
and particular commandment. And in like sort Fulk Math. 19. not. 9. and Mark.
10. not. 3.

If we prove that the conception of concupiscence, or Touching sin.
the inuoluntarie act thereof is no sin before God, because S. James says.
cap. 1. v. 15. Concupiscence, when it has conceive, brings forth sin:
Calvin. ib. answers: James disputes not when sin begins to be borne, so
that it be sin and reputed for such before God, but when it shows it self.

If we prove that the keeping of the law is absolutely necessary to life
everlasting: because Christ says absolutely. Math. 19. v. 17. If thou will
enter to life, keep the commandments, they limitate these words to a certain
manner of entering, to wit (as they speak) by entering by the law, or by good
works, or merits. Calvin in Math. 5. ver. 21. Who will enter to life by good
works, those he bids nothing else but to keep the commandments of the law:
And upon this place: We gather, that this answer of Christ is according to the
law. And in Antidot. Council. session. 6. cap. 9. Surely whosoever will merit
eternal life, has a rule prescribed to him by the law: Do these, and thou
shall live. In like sort answers Pareus lib. 4. de lustificat. cap. 2. And
Illyricus in Claue part. 2. tract. 6. says: That all men are bound to do
good and avoid sin under pain of loss of eternal life, is a sentence of
the law, and both must and ought to be restrained by the (Protestant) Gospel
or remission of sins. So that no precepts of doing good and avoiding ill,
pertain to the Protestant Gospel.

If we prove that with Gods grace a man may inwardly convert himself from
evil to good, because it is said absolutely Zachary 1. ver. 3. Convert to
me, says the Lord of hosts, and I will convert to you: they limitate this
only to outward conversion: Peter Martyr in Roman. 11. The Prophet spoake not
of inward justification, but of outward conversion to good works.

If we prove that we are not infallibly certain of forgiveness Touching
Justification.
of sins or eternal punishment, because it is said absolutely Joel. 2. v.
14. Who knows if he (God) will convert and forgive? and the like is said
Ion. 3. v. 9. Kemnice in locis part. 2. tit. de Argum. limitateth this to
forgiveness of temporal punishment, and says: All the speech of the Prophet
tends to that he treats of remission of temporal punishment. In like sort
he limitateth many other places of Scripture, in which forgiveness is
attributed to works, only to forgiveness of temporal punishment. That also
of Tobie cap. 4. Alms delivers from death, he restrains to temporal
death. And in like manner, promises made to good works he limitateth to
certain blessings in this world or in the next, but will not have them
extended to eternal life. And finally wheresoever in the Scripture any man
prays God to judge or reward him according to his justice, he limitateth that
to the justice of his cause or quarrel with other men.

If we prove that everlasting happiness is given for good Touching eternal life.
works, because S. James says cap. 1. ver. 25. He that has remained in it,
not made a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed
in his deed; they limitate this to blessedness in this life: Schlusselburg. to.
8. Catal. Haeret. p. 497. thus answers to this place: To be blessed, is not
always taken in holy writ for eternal salvation, but for blessedness in this
life.

If we prove that we must not only believe but also keep the law, because
Christ says Math. 5. ver. 18. I am not come to break (the law) but to
fulfill: Calvin. ibid. answers: Here is treated of doctrine, not of life.
Touching doctrine we must not imagine any abrogation of the law by the coming
of Christ. And v. 19. where is said: One jot or one tittle shall not pass of
the law till all be fulfilled: Calvin. ibid. says: I answer that word be
done (or fulfilled) is not referred to men's lives, but to the solid truth of
doctrine.

If we prove that our consciences are obliged by the particular Touching laws
of men.
just laws of Princes, because it is absolutely said Romans 3. v. 2. He that
resists power, resists the ordinance of of God: and v. 5. Be subject of
necessity, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake: they limitate
these words to the power of Magistrates in general. Daneus Contr. 5. p. 1127.
To obey the Magistrate in general, is a matter of conscience, but to obey this
or that law of the Magistrate wholly and in all points, we are not bound in
conscience. And Whitaker libr. 8. cont. Dureum sect. vlt. We must obey the
Magistrate in general for conscience sake, because by a general precept we
are commanded to obey the Magistrate: but particular laws of Magistrates have
no command over our consciences. In like sort Calvin 4. Instit. c. 10.. 5.

Wherefore thus in form I frame my ninth argument. who not only in so many
and so great matters do contradict such words of holy Scripture and in such
sense, as we have seen, but also take so much upon them, as limitate and
restrain so many and so weighty sentences of Scripture, they are to be
thought to gain say the right sense of Scripture. But Protestants do so.
Therefore etc.

CHAPTER X. THAT PROTESTANTS CHANGE many absolute Propositions of Scripture
into conditionals.
THE tenth argument shall be taken from that Protestants are forced to change
many and weighty absolute Propositions of Scripture into conditionals.

For if we prove, that absolutely God will not the death Touching God.
of a sinner, but rather his life and conversion, because he absolutely says
Ezechiel 18. and 33. I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he be
converted and live: Calvin l. de Praedestinat. page 706. answers: Whereas the
Prophets speech exhorts to pennace, no marvel if God say, he will have all
to be saved; but the mutual relation between threats and promises shows that
such kind of speeches are conditional. -- So the promises which inuit all to
salvation, show not what simply and precisely God has decreed in his secret
counsel, but what he is ready to do to all that are brought to faith and
penance.

Touching the Church, if we prove that the gates of Touching the Church.
hell shall not prevail against her, because Christ does absolutely so promise
Math. 16. ver. 16. Besnagus l. de statu Eccles. cap. 8. and others, add this
condition: If she forsake not her duty and the word of God. If we prove that
simply we must hear the Pastors of the Church, because Christ says. Luke 10.
ver. 16. He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you, despises
me: Calvin. ib. adds this condition: If the Church do faithfully her duty.

If we prove that the Church is simply infallible, because 1. Timoth. 3. she is
simply called the pillar and strength of truth: Vallada in Apol. cont.
Episcop. Lusonensem cap. 20. answers: The visible Church cannot be the pillar
of truth, but as it is grounded upon the doctrine of the Apostles. Vorstius in
Antibell. page 143. The Apostle speaks conditionally, to wit, as long as the
Church perseuereth to be the Church of Christ. Academia Nemaus. resp. ad
Tournon. p. 546. Let it be a true and faithful Church, if it discern truth
from falsitie by undoubted and authentical truth.

If we prove that the Church is simply to be heard, because Christ says.
Math. 18. ver. 17. If he hear not the Church, let him be to thee as an Ethnic
and Publican: White in his way p. 78. answers: The sense is, that we must
obediently hear the Church, and obey her, not simply in all things, but
conditionally, as long as she speaks agreably to Gods word. And Author
respons. ad Theses Vademont. page 688. The answer is easy and ready: As long
as the Church teaches the word of God, she is to be heard, but her authority
is none when she seperateth her self from Gods word. And when Bellarmin had
brought many places of Scripture to prove that the Church cannot fail:
Vorstius libr. cit. page answers: In them certain conditional promises are
proposed unto us, by which eternal salvation and security against Satan,
death, etc. is promised of God to all and every faithful, to wit, as far
forth and as long as they shall be such, or persevere in true faith.

If we prove that there are some doers of the law, as Touching Gods law.
well as there are hearers, because Saint Paul says absolutely Romans 2. ver.
13. Not the hearers of the law are just with God, but the doers of the law
shall be justified: Calvin. ibidem answers: This sentence has only this
meaning: If justice be sought by the law, we must fulfill the law, because the
justice of the law consists in the perfection of works. Peter Martyr ibid.
That which he says, has this meaning: If any were to be justified before
God by the justice of the law, he must fulfill the law. Pareus libr. 4. de
Iustificat. cap. 14. The Apostlesaieth indeed: Doers of the law shall be
justified, but he means conditionally if there be any. And Illyricus in
Claue part. 2. tract. 4. writes thus: Roman. 2. When Gentiles do those things
which are of the law: that is, if they did them. Again: Do this, and thou
shall live, is put for: If thou do them, thou shall live.

If we prove that there are some which love their neighbor and fulfill the
law, because it is said Romans 13. v. 8. Who loves his neighbor, has
fulfilled the law: Calvin. ib. answers: Paul says not what men do or not
do, but speaks upon condition, which you shall not find any where fulfilled.
And if you prove that the law may be fulfilled because the Apostle says.
Galat. 6. v. 2. Bear ye one an others burdens, and so ye shall fulfill the
law of Christ: Calvin ibid. answers: Because none performs altogether that
which Paul requires, therefore we are all far from perfection.

If we prove that single life is simply good, because S. Paul says absolutely
1. Cor. 7. v. 1. It is good for a man not to touch a woman: P. Martyr in locis
Class 3. cap. 7.. 17. answers: They should see, that what Paul has of the
praises of single life, are never spoaken absolutely.

If we prove that virginity may be absolutely counseled Of good works,
to men, because S. Paul. 1. Corinthians. 7. v. 7. says absolutely: I would all
men to be as my self: And ver. 25. A concerning virgins, a commandment of our
Lord I have not, but counsel I give: And ver. 28. Art thou loose from a wife,
seek not a wife. Calvin in ver. 25. cit. answers: Because it is a slipperie
matter and full of difficulties, he speaks always under condition. And in v.
27. This second member must be taken under condition.

If we prove that some may fall from grace because S. Of Justification.
Paul says. Gal. 5. v. 4. You are fallen from grace: Pareus in Galat. 1.
lect. 7. answers: The Apostle speaks that conditionally. And in cap. 5.
verse. 4. lect. 61. For the Apostle affirms not that the Galathians were
fallen, but threatens, that if that if they will be justified by the law, that
it will come to posse that they fall.

wherefore thus I make my tenth argument: Who beside the foresaied opposition
on to so many and such words of holy Scripture, are forced to change many
and weighty absolute sayings of Scripture into conditionals they contradict
the true meaning of the holy Scripture. But Protestants do so. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XI. THAT PROTESTANTS CHANGE Conditional Propositions of the Scripture
into Absolute, and delude them diverse other ways.
THE eleventh argument for to prove that Protestants contradict the true sense
of holy Scripture, shall be because they are sometimes forced to change
conditional propositions thereof into absolute, and to delude them diverse
other ways.

For if we prove that our freindshippe with God depends of our keeping the
commandments, because Christ said conditionally Joan. 15. v. 14. Ye are my
friends, if ye do the things that I command ye: Calvin. ibid. answers: He
means not, that we obtain so great honor by any merit of ours, but only
admonishes us, upon what condition he receaueth us into favor and vouch
safeth to reckon us amongst his friends.

But this will be more evident by that we shall show in the next chapter how they
of causall propositions make no causall.

Diverse others ways they delude and frustrate the conditional propositio^s of
holy Scripture. For if they can by any color they expound them of only
faith, or of the holy ghost: So they delude those places: Joan. 6. verse. 53.
Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye shall
not have life in ye: and Joan. 3. ver. 5. Unless a man be borne again of
water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God: Which teach
that Sacraments are necessary to salvation. Or if they must needs expound them
of good works, they will not expound the^ of doing all necessary good works
and avoiding all necessary evil, but of some only or in part, or of
endeavor to do or avoid them: so they delude those sayings of the Scripture
Romans 8. v. 13. If you live according to the flesh, you shall die: but if by the
spirit you mortify the deeds of the flesh you shall live. Calvin. ib. He
promises us life, if we endeavor to mortify the flesh. For he does not
exactly require the death of the flesh, but only bids us endeavor to tame
the lusts thereof. And the like he does in many other places, as may be seen
hereafter c. 16. And in like manner they delude all other sentences of
Scripture which teach, that if we will be saved or justified, we must do good
works and eschew evil. And according to this they say, that we must do some
good, or have some good works: that we must have a begun or imperfect newness
of life, and keep the law in some sort or fashion: Luther in Isaiae 8. to.
4. f. 83. The holy Ghost is given that we may satisfy the law in some part.
In some part.
And in Psalm. 51. to. 3. fol. 455. We will fulfill and keep the law, but with
a large, that is, with a true Evangelical dispensation. Confessio Saxon. c. 9.
It is needful that there be some obedience Protest. dispensation. Some
obedience. Some beginning. In some sort. In some kind. To begin.
in those that are justified. Schlusselb. to. 4. Catal. p. 176. The justified
are free from the accusation and damnation of the law, not from beginning of
obedience. Bucer in Romans 8. Christ gives that spirit whereby we avoid sin in
some sort. Pareus l. 3 de Iustif. p. 645. Saints do not doubt of some kind of
inherent justice: and l. 4. c. 7. It is enough if we endeavor to begin the new
obedience of the law according to all the commandments. So that wheresoever
the Scripture says conditionally: If thou will be justified or saved do this
or do not that, they understand it with a large dispensation: that is, do
somewhat, or do not somewhat of it: or begin or endeavor to do or not do it.

But if this shift will not serve, because the Scripture speaks conditionally
of keeping the whole law, as Math. 9. v. 17. If thou will enter into life,
keep the commandments; and the like, the^ they say it is the doctrine of the
law not of the Gospel. Calvin ib. We gather, that this answer of Christ is
according to the law. Illyricus in Claue part. 2. tract. 6. col. 543. That all
be bound under pain of loss of eternal life to do good and avoid sin, is
a sentence of the law, and must and ought to be corrected and restrained by the
(Protestant) Gospel or by remission of sins. Peter Martyr in Romans 11. That
saying: Forgive, and it shall be forgiven, is a precept, and therefore pertains
to the law. Melancthon in Apologia tom. 3. c. de argumentis: The promise of
reconciliation and of eternal life is free, but proper legal promises are
added for works: as who shall give a draught of water, shall not want his
reward.

Wherefore thus I frame my eleventh argument. Who not only contradict the
express words of Scripture, but also are compelled to turn conditional
propositions of Scripture into absolute, and to delude them diverse other ways,
do contradict also the sincere meaning of the Scripture. But thus do
Protestants. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XII. THAT PROTESTANTS CHANGE many causall propositions of Scripture
into not causall.
THE 12. argument for to prove that Protestants contradict the true sense of
Scripture, shall be because they are compelled in many and weighty
controversies to turn causall propositions into not causall.

For is we prove that Christ was exalted for his humiliation, because it is
said. Philippen. 2. ver. 8. He humbled himself made obedient unto death even
the death of the cross. For:
For the which thing God has exalted him. Calvin ibid. answers: That
illatiue particle (wherefore) in this place signifies rather consequence, then
cause. And 2. Instit. c. 17.. vlt. The solution is easy, that Paul there
speaks not of the cause of Christ's exaltation, but only shows the
consequence. And Daneus Controuer. 2. page 201. The particle, For which,
shows the order and continuation of the speech, not the cause for which. If
we prove the same, out of those words Hebrew. 2. ver. 9. We see Jesus because
of the passion of death, crowned with glory and honor: Calvin. ib. answers:
Because of the passion of death, is as much, as if he had said, Christ having
died, was raised to this glory which he has gotten -- For the means only
(that I may so speak) of obtaining glory is declared.

If we prove that confession of faith is cause of salvation, as faith is cause
of justification, out of those words Romans 10. ver. 10. For with heart we
believe unto justice, but with the To.
mouth confesson is made to salvation: Calvin. ib. answers: We must not
gather thereof, that confession is cause of salvation: he meant only to tell
how God does perfect our salvation. It is a necessity of perpetual
consequence, not that he attributes salvation to confession. Hunnius lib. de
Iustificat. p. 186. says: That Confession to salvation is the same, that
confession of salvation. Which the Electorall Ministers in Colloq. Aldeburg. p.
295. affirm to be a corruption of Scripture.

If we prove that keeping of the commandments is cause of our freindship with
God, by those words Joan. 15. v. 14. You are my friends if you do the things
that I command If.
you: Calvin ib. answers: He means not, that we get so much honor by any
merit of ours; but only admonishes us upon what condition he receaueth us
into grace, and vouchsafes to reckon us among his friends.

If we prove that the forgiveness of our sins depends upon our forgiving
of others, out of those words. Luc. 11. v. 4. Forgive us our sins, for
because our selves also do Because.
forgive every one that is in debt to us. Calvin in Math. 6. v. 11. answers:
Nevertheless forgiveness which we demand for our selves, depends not of
that which we give: but by this means Christ would exhort us to forgive all
offenses, and withal confirm more our trust of forgiveness as it were by
fealing it. Nether skilleth it that in Luke is the particle (...), which is as
much as, For because, or For, because Christ's meaning was not to note the
cause, but only to advertise what kind of mind we ought to have toward our
brethren whiles we seek to be reconciled to God.

If we prove that by charity we be made the sons of God, out of those words.
Math. 5. ver. 45. But I say to you: That.
love your enemies, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
persecure and abuse you, that you may be the children of your father which is
in heaven. Calum ib. answers: Understand not, that by our beneficence we
become the children of God: But because the same Spirit which is witness,
assurance, and seall of our free adoption, does correct the naughty affections
of the flesh, which are contrary to charity, Christ proves by the effect,
that no others are the children of God, but those who resemble him in clemency
and meeknes.

If we prove that love is the cause of forgiving sins, by those words. Luc.
7. v. 47. Many sins are forgiven her, Because.
because she has loved much: Aretius in locis part. 1. fol. 84. answers:
Because, is taken ostentiuely, not causatiuely: This is so necessary, as the
place cannot be otherwise understood. The like has Illyricus in Claue part. 2.
tract. 4. Polanus in disp. private. 36.

If we prove that keeping of the commandments is cause of obtaining what we
pray for, out of those words. 1. Joan. 3. v. 22. Whatsoever we shall ask, we
shall receive of Because.
him, because we keep his commandments. Calvin. ibidem answers: He means
not, that our trust in prayer consists in our works, but this only he
urges, that piety and sincere worship of God cannot be separated from
faith. Nether must it seem absurd, that he uses the causall particle though
he mean not of the cause, for the inseparable accident uses sometime to be
put for the cause.

If we prove that works are cause of reward, out of these words. Math. 16.
ver. 27. He will render to every man According.
according to his works: Calvin ibid. answers: As often as reward is
promised to good works, the cause of salvation is not showed, but the
faithful are only encouraged to do well, because they are assured that they
shall not leese their labor.

If we prove that good works are cause of eternal happiness, out of these
words. Math. 25. v. 34. Possessethe For.
kingdom etc. For I was hungry, and you gave me to eat. And c. 25. v. 23.
Because thou have been faithful over a few things I will place the over many
things, enter into the joy of thy Lord. And Apocal. 7. ver. 14. These are they
which are come out of Therefore.
great tribulation etc. therefore they are before the throne of God. Pareus
lib. 5. de Iustificat. c. 3. says: The answer of all Protestants is, that
the causall particle in the places alleged, does not signify cause, but
consequence. And Calvin. Math. 25. ver. cit. That they insist upon the causall
particle is a weak thing; for we know that not always the cause, but rather
the consequence is meant, when everlasting life is promised to the just. And in
the same manner does Kemnice in locis tom. 2. tit. de Argum. delude many
places of Scripture.

If we prove that Christ is cause of our election, by those words. Ephesians. 1. v.
3. As he has chosen us in him (Christ) In.
before the constitution of the world: Piscator in Thesibus, loco. 19.
answers: Paul would say nothing, but that he has chosen us to this end that
he might adopte us in Christ, and save us for him and by him. Which he
repeateth libr. 2. p. 288. In like sort Zanchius l. 5 de Nature. Dei. c. 2. q.
4.

If we prove that Saints shall have glory for their worth or merit, by those
words Apocal. 3. ver. 4. They Because.
shall walk with me in whites, because they are worthy: Pareus l. 5. de
Iustif. c. 2. answers: He signifies not the cause meritorie, but the
condition in holy Martyrs agreing with the rule of justice; So that we may
understand, not wherefore, but what of kind men shall walk with Christ.

If we prove that good works are the cause of glory out of those words. Romans
8. v. 17. If we suffer with him, that That.
we may be glorifid with him: Calvin ibidem. answers: This form of speech
shows the order which the Lord observes in bestowing salvation upon us,
rather then the cause -- He discourses not from whence salvation comes, but
how the Lord governs his servants. If we prove the same out of those words.
Hebr. 10. v. 36. For patience is necessary for you: that doing the will of
God, you may receive the promise: Pareus l. 4. de Iustific. page 1032.
answers: We deny not but some relation of patience unto salvation is
signified by the final condition, to wit, relation of order, of means, or of
condition without which not, but false it is, that thereby is signified a
causall relation.

If we prove that good works are cause of salvation, as bad are the cause of
damnation, because it is often said in Scripture: He will render to every one
according to his works: According.
Bucanus Institut. loco 32. answers: The particle According, in those
speeches does not signify cause but conformity. And Martyr in 1. Corinthians. 3.
says: According, does not signify Merit or cause, but rather proportion,
form or similitude.

If we prove that virginity helps to heaven, by those words Math. 19. v. 12.
There are Eunuchs which have gelded For.
themselves for the kingdom of heaven: Musculus in locis tit. de votis
answers: We must not understand it so, as if this kind of gelding helped any
thing to salvation.

Behold (Reader how many kinds of causall propositions are they forced to
make not causall, and how many and express causall particles, to wit: For:
To: That: In: According: Because, they make frustrate and to no purpose.

Wherefore thus I argue: who besides their opposition to the express words of
Scripture, are forced in so many and so great matters, to make so many and so
clear causall propositions to be not causals, and to frustrate so many and so
evident causal particles, they are also contrary to the true sense of
Scripture. But Protestants do so. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XIII. THAT WHAT IS SPOAKEN SIMPLY they make to be spoaken in part or
respectively.
MY 13. argument shall be, because Protestants are compelled to make that to be
spoaken in part, which the Scripture speaks simply or absolutely.

For if we prove that God simply will not the death of Of God.
a sinner, because he simply says and swears it Ezech. c. 18. Perkins in
Exposit. Symbol. to. 1. col. 777. answers: This place must not be taken
simply but respectively: to wit, that Not simply but respectively.
of the twoe, God would rather the one, to wit, that a sinner should rather
live then dye. Finally so far forth he wills not death as it is the
destruction of his creature. The like he has in Serie Causarum c. 52. And
Calvin de Prouid. p. 737. So far as So far forth.
he exhorts all to penance, the Prophet justly denies that he wills the
death of a sinner. And in the same sort he expounds that saying of S. Peter
2. c. 3. v. 9. Not willing that any should die: Indeed (says Calvin) as
far as God will receive all to penance, he will none should perish.

If we prove that God takes our sins from us, by those words 1. Joan. 3.
ver. 8. For this, appeared the Son of God, that he might dissolve the works
of the Devil. Calvin. ib. In a sort.
answers: But if in this life there be no full and solid regeneration, he
freeth us not from sin and slavery but in a sort. And Daneus Contr. de
Baptismo. c. 14. on earth sin is not In part.
quite taken away but in part.

If we prove that there is nothing worthy of damnation Of Justification.
in those that are justified, because simply it is said Romans 8. ver. 1. There
is no damnation to them that are in Christ Not simply.
Jesus. Illyricus in Apol. pro Confess. Antuerp. answers: No damnation is in
them who are in Christ Jesus, not simply and in it self, but by accident, to
wit, continual prayer for forgiveness of sins being adjoined: And Pareus l.
5. de Amiss. Great. c 7. It is most true, that sins are not simply forgiven,
but continual prayer for forgiveness being added.

If we prove that simply there are some things hard in Of Scripture.
Scripture, because it is so said 2. Pet. 3. v. 16. As also in all his
Epistles speaking in them of these things, in which are certain things hard to
be understood: Zanchius de Scriptura to. 8. col. 412. answers: He says not,
that they are hard to Not to any.
any, but to twoe kinds of men? to wit, to the unlearned and unskillful of the
Scriptures and that are not taught of God, and to the unstable, that is, who
are not firm in faith. In like sort. Bullinger Sermon. 3. de verbo Dei. and
others.

If we prove that Saints have true justice before God, If justification.
because David offers his justice to be examined by the judgment of God and
desires to be judged thereby; Calvin. 3. Instit. cap. 17.. 14. answers:
Saints nether will Not wholly.
have inquiry to be made of them wholly, that according to the whole tenor of
their life they may be quitted or damned: nether challenge to themselves
justice of divine perfection, but in comparison of the wicked and impious.

If we prove that charity is simply greater then faith, Of good works.
because the Apostle simply says. 1. Cor. 13. v. 13. And now there remain,
faith, hope, and charity, these three, but the greater of these is charity:
Calvin. ib. answers: It is manifest, Not in all points.
that charity is here said to be the greater, not in all points, but as far
as it shall be perpetual, and now is the chief, in conseruing the Church.
Whitaker l. 9. cont. Dur. sect. 24. The Not every way.
Apostle says that charity is greater then hope and faith, not every way,
but only in part. Hunnius de Iustif. p. 154. prefers Not simply.
charity before faith and hope, not universally or simply, but in part. And
Luther Postilla in Dom. Quinquagesim. who does not acknowledge that Paul
speaks here of the continuance of charity and of the other gifts, not of
their dignity or virtue?

If we prove that the Church is to be simply heard, because Of the Church.
she is simply called the Pillar and strength of truth. 1. Tim. 3. Academia
Nemaus. Resp ad Tournon. page 546. answers: Let the Church be the keeper and
interpreter of truth, Not simply.
not simply and absolutely, but in part. Serranus cont. Hayum. part. 3. p.
145. When the Church is called the mother of the faithful, the pillar and
strength of truth, those sayings of the authority of the Church nether ought,
nor can be understood simply, but in part or in somesorte. Author respons. ad
These. Vademont. But in part.
p. 492. and 523. I answer, the Church is called the pillar and strength of
truth, not simply, but in somesorte. And p. 689. God has not commanded to
obey, the pastor or the Church simply, but in somesorte.

If we prove that single life is simply good, because S. Paul. 1. Corinthians. 7.
simply says: It is good for a man not to Not absolutely.
touch a woman: Reineccius tom. 4. Armaturae. cap. 23. answers: The Apostle
speaks so not simply and absolutely, but in some sort and respectively. And
ib. adds, that when S. Paul says: It is good for a man to be so: Paul's
counsel is to be taken in some sort, to wit, of an incommodious thing. Et
Whitaker l. 8. cont. Dur. sect. 86. Paul praises virginity, not in it self,
but for some other end.

If we prove that Virginity is simply better then marriage, because simply it
is said. 1. Cor. 7. v. 38. Who joins Not simply but upon condition.
his virgin in marriage does well, and who joins not, does better: Beza ib.
answers: That is, provides better for his children; and that not simply, but
upon conditions before expressed by the Apostle: In like sort is that to be
understood which is added: She is more happy who marries not again.
Zuinglius also ibid. When he says: He does better, and soon after: He Upon
comparison.
shall be more happy, he means not simply, but in comparison.

If we prove that there may be some perfect men in this life, because some are
simply so called 1. Cor. 2. Philippen. 3. and other where, Pareus lib. 2. 2. de
Iustificat. cap. 7. answers: He attributes perfection to himself and to
others, In comparion.
not absolutely but in comparison of Catechumens. And l. 4 c. 11. Most places
speak of perfection not absolutely, but in respect of In respect.
the most corrupted world. So also Lobechius disput. 9. p. 191.

If we prove that there are some men just, perfect, keepers of the
commandments, and the like, because the Scripture simply calls some so:
Pareus l. 4 de Iustificat. c. 11 answers: These Saints are praised that they
were perfect, Not absolutely.
followed the Lord in all their heart, etc. not absolutely, but because they
were sincere worshippers of God. And Hunnius de Iustif. p. 169. They are termed
perfect after their manner, that is, imperfectly and in comparison of the
wicked. And Illyricus in Claue part. 2. tractat. 4. writes thus. Tobie 4.
Alms delivers from sin: to wit, concerning some temporal punishment, not
touching sin or eternal punishment. In like sort: Redeem thy sins with
alms Daniel. 4. And Author Gratiani Antiiesuitae part. 2. p. 33. The Jesuit
obiecteth, that Paul. 1. Cor. 10. affirms the Sacraments of the old law to
have been I some sort.
types: I answer (says he) It is true, but in some sort, not simply. And p.
seq. to that Heb. 10. v. 1. The law having a shadow of future goods, he thus
answers: These things are spoaken comparatively of the Apostle, not simply.
Finally Calvin Admonit. vlt. p. 830. says: Because the bread is a Sacrament
of the body, it is the body in some sort.

Let this therefore be my 13. argument. Who beside the foresaied opposition to
the express words the Scripture, in many and great controversies are forced
to expound that in some sort, or in part, or respectively, which is spoaken
of the Scripture simply and absolutely, they contradict the true meaning of the
holy Scripture: But Protestants do so: Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XIV. THAT PROTESTANTS WILL NOT expound there sayings of the Scripture,
of that time whereof it speaks.
MY fourtenth argument shall be taken from that Protestants are forced to expound
the sayings of Scripture of a different time from that of which Scripture
speaks, and that in many and great matters.

For if we prove that at the very time of the institution Of the Eucharist. Not
is shed, but shall.
of the Eucharist, Christ's body was given and broken, and his blood shed for
us, because three Evangelists and Saint Paul in Greek relating Christ's words,
use the participle of the present tense as also does S. Luke in the vulgar
Latin text: nevertheless Protestants will not understand Christ's words of the
time then present, but only of the time the^ to come, as we showed. l. 1. c.
11. art. 5.

If we prove that those that are justified, are now in herently Of
justification.
lust, by those words. Romans 8. v. 29. Whom he has foreknowne, he has also
predestined to be made conformable to the image of his Son: 1. Cor. 15. v.
49. As we have borne the Conformable not now, his hereafter.
image of the earthly, let us also bear the image of the heavenly: Pareus l.
2. de Iustif. c. 3. answers: We grant all this, of the state to come, when
we shall be fully conformable to the image of Christ by justice and glory
(keeping the proportion of the head and members) but it makes nothing for our
adversary for the present state.

If we prove that in this life our sins are taken from us, Of Sins.
because the Scripture says, that God takes away, cleanses, blotteth out
sin: Pareus l. cit. c. 7. answers: The Sins taken away not now but
hereafter.
phrases of Scripture speak of sanctification of the Church, now indeed begun,
but hereafter to be perfected, by which the filth of sin now begins by the
virtue of Christ's spirit to be taken away by the roots, to be blotted out,
cleansed, and purged out of our flesh, and at length shall be quite taken away
and blotted out.

If we prove that God does now cleanse us from all iniquity, because it is
said. 1. Joan. 1. v. 19. He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and
cleanse us from all iniquity: Calvin ib. answers: If any object that
whilst we live in this life we are never cleansed from all injustice, for so
much as belongs to reformation: that is true indeed, but Ihon teaches not
what God does now perfect in us.

If we prove that in this life some are made just by the merits of Christ, as
by Adams demerit they were made iniust, by these words Romans 5. v. 19. As by the
disobedience of one man many were made sinners, so also by the obedience of
one, many shall be made just. Pareus l. 2. de Iustificat. cap. 3. answers: In
this life we are made just imperfectly, in the next, we shall be made perfectly
just. Hereupon perchance Luther said Disput. 3. tom. 1. We think, that a man
to be justified, is not to be yet just, but to be in the way and course to
justice.

If we prove that faith without works is always dead, because it is said.
James 2. verse. vlt. Faith without works is dead: Schlusselburg. to. 8. Catal.
p. 526. answers: The saying of James touching faith dead without works, is
to be understood of ehe time after justification: So that he will not have
faith to be dead without good works whilst it justifies.

If we prove, that God always will all men to be saved, by those words. 1.
Tim. 2. Who will all men to be saved: Perkins in Cases of Conscience cap. 7.
sect. 3. answers: God will all men to be saved: understand, now in this last
age of the world.

If we prove, that Saints in heaven ask mercy for the faithful, because
they ask revenge upon their persecutors, by those words Apocal. 6. verse. 9 I
saw under the altar the souls of them that were slanie for the word of God
etc. and they cried with a loud voice saying: How long Lord holy and true
iudg^st thou not and reuengest not our blood on them that dwell on the earth:
Confessio Wittember. c. de Inuocat. Sanctorum understands this only of
prayers, made whiles the Saints were on earth: In the Apocalypse the souls of
the Saints that were slain do cry that their blood be revenged, not that now
resting in the Lord they are desirous of revenge after a humane manner, but
because the Lord even after their death is myndfull of the prayers which whiles
they yet lived on earth the made for the delivery of themselves and the Church.

If we prove, that in this life we fulfill the law, do the will of God, and
obey Christ, by those words. Romans 8. v. 4 God sent his Son etc. that the
justification of the law might be fullfilled in us. Et Math. 6. Thy will be
done on earth: And Hebr. 5. verse. 9. Christ is made the cause of salvation to
all that obey him: Scharpius de Iustif. Contr. 12. answers: Out of these
places nothing follows but that the faithful fulfill the law, but it
follows not that they fulfill it in this life.

Wherefore I thus make my fourtenth argument: Who besides the foresaied
opposition to the express words of Scripture, will not expound the words of
Scripture on that time whereof it speaks, do contradict the true sense
thereof. Protestants do so. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XV. THAT PROTESTANTS OF MANY sayings of Scripture make one.
MY fiftenth argument shall be because Protestants are forced to confound many
sayings of Scripture in one, and so make one of many.

For if we prove, that God will not the death of a sinner, but wills his
conversion, by those words Ezechiel. 18. I will not the death of a sinner, but
that he be converted and live: Calvin. l. de Praedest page 706. answers: If
(as we ought to do) those twoe be read jointly, I will that a sinner which is
converted, live: the cavil is easily refuted. The some has Beza. 2 part.
resp. ad Acta Montisbel. p. 196.

If we prove, that God would have al to be saved and come to the knowledge of
the truth, because it is so said. 1. Tim. 2. v. 4. Beza lib. quaest. and
respons. vol. 1. Theol. p. 684. says: Those twoe: To save, and to come to the
knowledge of truth: are to be joined, that so God may be understood to will
that they be saved, whom he will have to come to the knowledge of the truth.
So also he answers in Respons. ad Acta Montisb. p. 194. And there p. 196. in
the same sort expounds that Ezech. 18. I will not the death of a sinner, but
that be converted.

If we prove, that Christ's baptism was different from S. Ihons, because Actor.
19. S. Luke. tells, that some who have been baptized with S. Ihons baptism,
were baptized again of S. Paul: Beza ib. ver. 5. says; that these are not
the words of S. Luke telling who were baptized of S. Paul, but of S. Paul
telling what was the baptism of Saint Ihon. Calvin. l cont. Anabap. p. 415.
says: There is said, that Paul baptized them in the name of Christ, then to
explicate what this means, is added, that he laid hands upon them and the
holy Ghost descended. Wherefore the same thing is diuersely expressed by twoe
ways as the Scripture uses. Et 4. Inst. c. 15.. 18. Luke does not tell twoe
different things, but keeps the form of relating used of the Hebrews, who
first set down the sum of the matter, and after explane it more at large.

If we prove, that we must be borne again both of water and of the holy
Ghost, by these words Joan. 3. v. 5. Unless one be borne again of water and
the holy Ghost etc. Calvin. ib. answers: It is one simple sentence: that we
must be borne a new, for to be Gods children, and that of this second birth the
holy Ghost is author. Therefore he put water and Spirit for the same thing.
And in this manner they confound many things, which the Scripture
distinguishes, and say, that either they be Synonimies, or that one
exegetically expounds the other.

Wherefore this is my 15. argument. Who besides the foresaied opposition to the
express words of Scripture, are compelled to confound many different sayings
of the Scripture in one, those are also opposite to the true meaning of the
holy Scripture. Protestants do so. Therefore etc.

And hitherto we have seen how many and what kind of Propositions of
Scripture, almost in all kinds of controversies, Protestants do change and
deprave, and that no kind of speech can be so plain, strong, and forcible, as
it can recall them from their errors, but that they break through, delude, and
deprave all: Now let us see how they deal will the words of Scripture. For as
Tertullian says cont. Hermogenen. It is the Heretics custom to wreste all
simple words.

CHAPTER XVI. THAT WORDS OF SCRIPTVRE WHICH signify the working or doing of a
thing, Protestants expound of only endeavor or desire to do it.
THE 16. argument shall be taken from thence, that words of Scripture which
signify the working or doing of a thing, Protestants are compelled to expound
of only endeavor or desire to work or do it. Thus they delude those words
of Scripture, which say that some men are just, are perfect, avoid evil, do
the will of God, love him with all their heart, fulfill the law, keep the
commandments, work their salvation, and the like.

Calvin in Math. 12. verse. 33. those words: Either make a Make good. 1. aspire
to good.
tree good etc. expounds thus: It comes of the free indulgence of God, that
he vouchsafes them so honorable a title (of good) who aspire to goodness. In
Math. 6. v. 9. Thy will be done: This suffices (says he) to testify by
desire, that we Keep. 1. apply their endeavor.
hate and are sorry for whatsoever we see contrary to Gods will, and desire to
have it destroyed. In Joan. 15. v. 10. If ye keep my commandments: The
faithful (says he) are accounted to keep Christ's commandments, when they
apply thereto their endeavor, albeit they be far from the mark. Upon that
Romans 8. v. 1. Who walk according to the flesh: He says they walk according
to the flesh, not who have quite cast of all sense of the flesh, but who
diligently labor to tame and mortify the flesh, that the desire of piety may
seem to reign in them. Et verse. 5. He testifies, that he accounts not them
carnal, who aspire to heavenly justice, but them who are wholly addicted to
the world. In Philip. 2. verse. 3. Work your salvation: We are Work. 1. aspire
to it. Just. 1. aspire to justice.
said to work it, when governed by the holy Ghost, we aspire to heavenly
life. In 1. Tim. 1. v. 9. The law is not set for the just: I answer, that Paul
here calls them just, not who are wholly perfect, as there is none to be
found, but who with a singular desire of heart aspire to goodness. Et ib. c.
4. v. vlt. Thou shall save thy self: The Pastor is said to save himself,
because that is Work. 1. Go forward.
usual, that the faithful work their salvation, when they go forewarde in
the course thereof. In 1. Pet. 4. v. 18. If a just man shall scarce be saved:
He calls them just, not who are perfectly just, but who endeavor to live
well. In 1. Joan. 2. verse. 3. If Keep. 1. Endeavor.
we keep his commandments: He means not, to keep the commandments, to
fully satisfy the law (which example can never be found in the world) but who
according to man's infirmity do endeavor to frame their life to Gods service.
And ib. v. 5. But who keeps his word, truly in him the love of God is
perfect: I answer (says Calvin) that it suffices, so every one according
to the measure of grace given to him, do aspire to this perfection. And ib in
c. 3. v. 5. There is no sin in him: They are esteemed of the chiefest part,
that is, they are said to be just and to live justly, because with a sincere
affection of heart they aspire to justice. This and many such like Calvin.

Bucer upon that Math 7. v. 21. But who does the will Does. 1. Endeavors.
of my Father: That is (says he) who with his mind does endeavor to frame
himself to the will of the Father. In Math. 12 v. 50. Whosoever does the will
of my Father: We must must note, that to do the will of the Father, is all
one, as to hear the words of Christ, and to do them, that is, to endeavor
from our heart to do them. And in Joan. 14. he says: To keep the
commandment of the Lord, here is nothing else, but to believe that it is true
and wholesome, and to love it with all our heart.

Zuinglius in Explanat. art. 14. Here we understand to do according to the
rule of Christ and precepts of God, to come near to the rule of God, and with
all endeavor to conform himself to the word of God, as far as a man can in
this mortal body. Et in Luc. 1. tom. 4. p. 183. Many trouble themselves
here, how they are said to have been just before God, whereas before him no
mortal man can be just. This knot is easily loosed, if we Just. 1. Endeavor
to be.
understand simply according to the phrase of the Hebrew tongue which calls
them just before God, who for fear of God and love of justice endeavor to be
innocent and holy.

Schlusselburg. to. 7. Catal. Haeret. page 235. expounds those words Philip.
2. ver. 12. in this sort: To work, in this place signifies to labor and to
be careful of the true way which God has proposed for to obtain salvation.

Pareus l. 4. de Iustif. c. 15. says: Job indeed is said to be just,
perfect, and fearing God, and avoiding evil: because he was a sincere
worshiper of God, having an earnest desire to do well.

Tilenus in Syntagm. c. 46. They are called just and perfect, Just. 1. Labor
to be.
who labor for justice and aspire to perfection.

Perkins upon that Galat. 6. ver. 2. So ye shall fulfill the Fulfill. 1.
desire.
law of Christ: Here the Galathians are said to fulfill the law, because God
accepts the sincere affection of the mind for the full effect. And Whitaker
libr. 8. contr. Dur. sect. 49. They are said to keep, who endeavor to keep.
And sect. 39. They loved the law with their heart, and for that cause they are
accounted just.

Musculus in locis tit. de Peccato. What other thing is it: I have kept my feet
from all ill way, but I have carefully endeavored to commit no evil? hIaue
done judgment and justice; but I have had a desire to do judgment and
justice?

Wherefore thus I conclude: Who beside the foresaied opposition to the express
words of holy Scripture, are also forced in so many and so great matters to
expound the words thereof signifying effecting, working, or doing, of only
desire to effect, work, or do, they contradict the true sense of Scripture.
But Protestants do so. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XVII. THAT WORDS SIGNIFYING A CAUSE, Protestants expound of a way or
mean: and what the Scripture attributes to one cause, they give to an other.
THe 17. argument shall be taken from that Protestants are forced to expound
words that signify a Cause, of a way, order, or mean. Thus they deprave those
words of Scripture which teach that faith or good works are the causes of our
justice or salvation.

Perkins in Cathol. reform. Controu. 4. c. 4. expounds those words 2. Corin.
4. v. 17. For that our tribulation which presently is momentanie and light,
works above measure exceedingly an eternal weight of glory in us, in this
sort: Afflictions Work. 1. are ^eans.
work salvation, not as causes effecting it, but as means leading us to it.
And he adds withal: Which we must universally and always observe and hold
of works in the cause of our salvation, to wit, that they are as a way and
certain marks which lead us to glory, but not by causing or working it.

Calvin upon those words. 2. Cor. 7. v. 10. For the sorrow that is according to
God, works penance unto salvation that is stable, writes thus: Paul
enquireth not of the cause of salvation, but only commending penance of the
fruit which it Work. 1. is as a way.
brings forth, does say, that it is like a way whereby we come to salvation.
In this sort consequence is rather signified then any cause. And to the same
place Pareus libr. 4. de Iustificat. cap. 7. answers: No efficient cause, but
a mean or condition which helps either by it self or by accident, is
signified. And Scarpius de Justification. Controuers. 12. Penance is said to
work salvation, not by making it by it virtue, but by leading as by a way to
salvation.

The same Calvin in 1. Corinthians. 7. verse. 19. Circumcision is nothing and
prepuce is nothing, but the observation of the commandments of God. Here
(says he) Paul disputes not of the cause of justice, nor how we obtain it,
but only to what the faithful ought to bend endeavor. And upon that Wash. 1.
feel.
Actorum 22. verse. 16. Be baptized and wash away thy sins: Ablution, (he
says he) signifies not the cause, but is referred to Paul's feeling; who
having received the Symbol, knew better that his sins were forgiven. And 3.
Institution. cap. 4.. 36. he says: Where sin is said to be purged by
mercy and bountifulness (Proverb. 16.) is not meant that by them it is
recompensed in the sight of God; but is showed, that they shall find God
merciful to them who forsaking vice, are turned to piety, as if he had said,
Gods wrath is appeased when we leave our wickedness. And ibidem cap. 14..
vltim. having objected to himself that the Scripture declares, that good
works are the cause that God does favor them, he answers: That which in
order goes first, he calls the cause of that which follows. In this manner
he deriueth Cause. 1. a step
sometimes eternal life from good works, not that it is given for them, but
because whom God has chosen he justifies, that afterward he may glorify, the
former grace which is a step to the later, he after a sort makes a cause --
Finally by these kind of speeches order is rather signified then cause.

Pareus l. 3. de Iustif. c. 12. says, that by those words 2. Timoth. 4. I
have fought a good fight: the order and way to the crown is noted, not the
cause. So that what the Scripture makes the cause, according to these men, is
only a mean, a way, step, or order.

In like manner, what the Scripture attributes to one cause, they give to an
other; as what it atttibuteth to good works, they give to faith only; what it
ascribes to faith or Sacraments, they appropriate to God alone.

Zuinglius l. de Provident. cap. 6. When Paul writes to Hearing. 1. Spirit.
the Romans, that faith comes of hearing, in the same manner, he attributes
that to the nearer cause and more known to us, which comes only from the
Spirit, and not from outward preaching. And in Math. 4. Oftentimes that is
attributed to the later, which belongs to the former: as to works, which
rather belongs to faith, and again, to faith, which most properly Works. 1.
faith.
and truly belongs to Gods election.

Sadeel de ver. Peccat. remiss p. 139. answering to those words Proverb. 16.
Iniquity is purged by bounty and mercy, says: That is attributed to the
effects which is proper to the cause, after the usual manner (says he) of
Scripture. That is attributed to their virtue, which properly is to be
attributed to the benefit of Christ alone.

Illyricus in Claue part. 2. tract. 6. Faith, word, and Sacraments Faith etc.
1. God.
are said to save us, whereas God alone does those things. And ibid. Thy faith
has saved thee, whereas only Gods mercy and omni pote^cie apprehended by
faith does that. And he adds. Scripture oftentimes attributes things not to
their true causes.
Oftentimes effects are attributed (by the Scripture) to not true or not
principal causes. Hereupon it comes that there is often mention of Alleosis
with Zuinglius, and of Metalepsis with others, by which figures what the
Scripture gives to one thing they transfer to an other. Which Alleosis
Zuinglius in Exegesi. to. 2. f. 350. calls interchangable speech; but Luther
in Hospin. part. 2. Histor. f. 57. terms it the Devils mask.

Wherefore thus I argue in form. Who gaynesay the express words of Scripture
in such sort as we have seen in the first book, and besides in many and
weighty matters, words which signify a cause do expound of a way, mean, or
order, and what the Scripture attributes to one cause do transfer to an
other, they contradict the true sense of holy Scripture: Protestants do so.
Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XVIII. THAT WORDS OF SCRIPTVRE Which say a thing is, Protestants
expound by ought to be.
THE 18. argument shall be because what the Scripture says Is, Protestants
expound It ought to be. Pareus l. 2. de Iustif. c. 7. those words. 1. Joan. 2.
v. 5. But he that keeps his word, in him the charity of God is Is. 1. ought
to be.
perfected: expounds thus: The sentence of S. Ihon (as others such like) is
to be understood of right or duty, not of fact: What kind of charity ought
to be, not what kind is in us. And ibid. those words. Coloss. 3. v. 14. Have
charity, which is the bound of perfection, he glosseth thus: Charity is
called the bound of perfection, not which we have, but which we ought to have,
and which we shall have in everlasting life. Et l. 4 c. 11. those words Deuter.
30. v. 6. Our Lord God shall circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed,
that thou may love thy Lord God with all thy heart. He interprets in this
sort: The promise, to love God with all thy heart, either speaks of duty,
how we ought to love God, to wit, sincerely and perfectly: or it speaks of
sincerity. And the same Pareus l. 4. de Great. and lib. arbit. c. 6. that
sentence of the Apostle 1. Tim. 3. he thus expounds: The Church is called the
pillar and strength of truth, of duty, because she ought always to be so,
albeit she be not so always in act. The same he has in Gal. 2. lect. 18.
Moulins in his Bucler. page 50. and others.

Tilenus in Syntagmate cap. 46. writes, that in those places Joan. 14. v. 21.
Romans 13. 8. and Gal. 5. 14. Where the Scripture affirms, that those who love
God, do keep his commandments, it means not of man's power to perform the
law, but of our duty. His meaning is, that the Scripture means not, that who
love God keep his comma^dements (which it says plainly) but only that they
ought to keep them.

Wherefore I thus argue. They who besides the foresaied direct opposition to
the express words of holy writ, are also forced to expound that by Ought to
be, which the Scripture plainly says Is; contradict the true meaning of the
holy Scripture. Protestants do so. Thererefore etc.

CHAPTER XIV. THAT WORDS OF SCRIPTVRE SIGnifying a true thing they expound of
an apparent or show.
MY 19. proof shall be, because words of Scripture which signify a true thing,
Protestants are compelled to expound of an apparent, or show before men. Thus
they delude the words of Scripture which teach that Sacraments or good works
do justify or redeem sins, that evil or reprobate men may believe, or be
in the Church, that reprobates may be justified, do good works, and the like.

When the Scripture says. 10. v. 10. With the mouth confession is made to
salvation: Luther apud Schlusselburg. to. 7. To salvation. 1. to a sign
thereof.
Catal. p. 234. answers: to wit, to testify salvation obtained by faith.
Kemnitius ib. p. 559. Paul speaks so, that confession saves, to show what
kind of faith obtains eternal life, to wit firm and effectual. Wigandus
ib. p. 746. The sense is: By faith salvation is apprehended, but by month is
manifested, and confession of salvation uttered. Et P. Martyr. in 1. Cor. 12.
Salvation is attributed to confession, because thence it begins to be
declared as by an outward sign. He would. 1. He made such show.


Luther in Postilla in Festo Stephani, writes thus: What he here says: How
often would I gather together thy children, as etc. signifith that God dealt so
with the Jews as no man could think or imagine otherwise, then that the
earnestly would gather them. For he behaved himself, as a man should, who
indeed would it. And Postilla in Dom. 1. Aduentus, those words: Redeem thy
sins by alms, he thus expounds: Show that they are blotted out. And Dom.
4. post Trinit. those words. Luke 6. Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: in
this sort: If I forgive, that forgiveness makes meassured of the sincerity
of my faith, and certifieth me, and declares my faith. And in Dom. 9. Make
your selves friends of the mammo^ of iniquity: that is, by outward alms
openly show your faith, whereby you may get friends, that poor men may be
witnesses of your manifest work, that you believe sincerely.

Schlusselburg. tom. 7. Catal. p. 235. writes thus. Sorrow Works. 1. shows.
according to God works penance of work to salvation, that is, according to
Luthers interpretation, is such a work as testifies of salvation. And page
seq. The saying of Joel: Every one that calls upon the name of the Lord
shall be safe, has this meaning: that calling upon the Lords name is a
testimony of salvation received by faith.

Brentius homil. 1. in Dom. 13 post Trinit. writes, that that speech of
Josias. 4. Reg. 23. He returned to our Lord in all his heart: is to be
understood what Josias was in the judgment of men for the government of his
kingdom, not what he was in the judgment of God for his private faults.

Reineccius to. 4. Armat. c. 15. those words Romans 2. Gentiles who have not the
law, do naturally the things of the law, expounds of politic,
philosophical, and Pharisaicalliustice.

Kemnitius in locis tit. de Argument. part. 2. says that those words Deuter.
6. It shall be justice to us before God, if Iustitie. 1. in title.
we keeepe his commandments, are either meant of legal justice, or that though
our justice be unclean, yet God gives it the title of Justice. He would say,
that the keeping of the commandments, is either only legal justice, or only
justice in name sake. And of the fast of Phinees he says: of it self it
could not have the title of justice, but was reputed as a deed justly done.

Herbrand. in Compend. Theol. loco de bonis oper. If the letter (Redeem thy
sins by alms) be urged, it is clear, that the sense of those words are
contrary to the scope of the whole Scripture, and to the analogy of faith.
But this is the proper and true meaning of the place of Daniel: Believe God to
be Redeem^. 1. Show ^hy faith.
be angry with sin, and to be appeased with the just, that is, the
beleiuers, and show this faith to be true by works. In like sort speaks
Hunnius l. de Iustif. p. 198. of those words Tobie 4. Alms delivers from all
sin, and from death.

Zuinglius respons. ad Confess. Lutheri. tom. 2. fol. 477. Those sayings of
Paul, which he allledgetb out of Ephesians. 5. and Cleanse. 1. Signify cleansing.
Tit. 3. of the waters cleansing by the word, and of the lauer of regeneration,
they understand not to be enallages, that is, changings of functions, by which
it uses to be attributed to signs, which they signify only.

Calvin in Joan. 15. v. 2. those words: Every branch in me etc. expounds
thus: I answer many are held by the opinion of me^ to be the vine, which
indeed have no root in the vine. In c. 16. verse. 27. We are said to be loved
of God, whiles we love In. 1. in men's opinion.
Christ, because we have a pledge of his fatherly love. In Actor. 8. v. 13. He
believed, he expounds: He thought he believed. In Just. 1. in outward show.
Ezech. 18. ver. 24. How does Ezechiel mean, that the just fall away? This
question is soon answered, because he treats not of the lively root of
justice, but of the outward show or appearance. In Ephesians. 5. v. 26. That Paul
says we are washed by baptism, is because there God testifies our washing
unto us, and with all does what he shows. In Colos. 2. v. 12. We are buried
together with him by baptism, he speaks after his manner, attributing the
efficacy to the Sacrament, lest it should in vain signify that which is not.
In Jacob. 2. verse. 23. He is justified by works: Justified. 1. Known.
that is, by the fruits his justice is knowneand approved. De Praedest. page
714. It is no marvel if (the Scripture) esteeming Saul's works by the outward
show, commends his innocence and honesty. Et 3. Instit. c. 4.. 36. That to
redeem (Dan. 4.) is rather referred to men then to God. And the same he says
of that of Solomon: Charity covers sins, and of other such places.

Beza in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 388. We say, that baptism of water is the lauer
of regeneration, that is, signifies the inward Regeneration. 1. Sign thereof.
regeneration. In 1. Tim. 4. v. 1. It is one thing truly to embrace Christ, an
other only with mouth to profess Christ with Simon Magus and Judas: and yet
these are said even to believe, to wit, according to the common use of speech,
because they seem to believe. In Math. 19. ver. 2. If thou will be perfect
etc. That is, if thou will indeed show thy self such, as thou boastest to be.

Pareus Contr. 5. col. 1009. Having damnation etc. 1. Tim. 5. v. 11. Bucers and
Martyrs opinion is true, when they take the word Damnation in this place of
Paul, for damnation which is pronounced of men against those yo^g widows who
marry again. And Mar^yr l. de votis. col. 1355. Those words of the Apostle
Damnation. 1. in men's judgment.
may be understood of men's judgment. The same Daneus. Contr. 6. col. 1187.
When Concupiscence has coceaued etc. Iac. 1. ver. 15. James speaks of that
effect of sin which appears to us men. Et p. 1205. Bellarmin answers out
of Dan. 4. v. 4. and Philip. 2. v. 12. that we can redeem our sins. But
Bellarmin is deceived, for those places of Scripture only teach what we can
and ought to do in regard of men, not in regard of God. Et Contr. 2. c. 16.
Verbes active, which are spoaken by the Scripture Causes. 1. Testifies.
of the Sacraments, do not signify cause, or action causing and effecting,
but only action testifying.

Pareus de Iustif. c. 15. 1. Joan. 3. c. 7. Who works justice, is just; That
is, he shows by works, that he is justified by faith. Et l. 3. c. 14. Joan.
15. Every branche in me: he expounds of those, who adhere to Christ in only
outward profession and show. And that Math. 24. The charity of many shall wax
could: of those who in outward appearence are just. And that 1. Tim. 1. Some
have made shipwreck of faith, of only apparent faith: Et l. 4. c. 18. says:
With James, to Justify, is to show by works before men the justice of faith.

Zanchius in Summa Praelect. to. 7. col. 276. The place 2. Pet. 1. (Forgetting
the purgation etc.) is to be understood according to the custom of holy
Scripture, which according to the judgment of charity, calls all Saints,
Just, and Cleansed from sin, whosoever are baptized in Christ, and profess
Christ, though all be not such before God. Et ib. That Ezech. 18. If a just man
turn himself from justice: Is not meant of one that is truly just, but who
to men only seems just. Et de Persevere. c. 2. Many believed in him Joan.
12. Because to themselves they seemed truly to believe in Christ, whereas
notwithstandind they do not truly believe.

Perkins in Cathol. Reform. Contr. 4. c. 4. upon that Ps. 105. It was reputed
to him to justice, writes thus: Surely not Justice. 1. a Sign thereof.
because that fact was a full satisfaction of the law, but because God ai^
accept that just work as a note and sign of justice, and of that zele which
he had for the glory of God. Et in Psalm. Happy Happy. 1. a sign thereof.
is the man who walks in the law: He says: He is happy, that he is in
Christ, of which thing the obedience given to the law, is a sign. Et ib. We
say, that works concur to justification, and that we are justified by them
as by certain signs and effects, not as by causes. And tom. 2. in Galat. 5.
They are said to fall Fallen. 1. show they never stood.
from grace, not that indeed all had been under grace and after had fallen
from it: but because God made it manifest to men that indeed they had never
been under his favor. And Apocalips. 2. When David prayed God to create a new
heart in him, Perkins says: He speaks not as he was before God and by
faith; but according to his feeling; for his faith did not put forth it self
before men and himself.

Polanus in Disp. private. p. 24. that Ezech. 18. He shall quicke^ Quicken. 1.
testify.
his own soul expounds thus: He by his works shall testify, that he is
truly regenerate. Et page 108. Faith is perfected by works, that is,
perfectly known.

Bucanus Inst. loc. 18. Zacharias in these words. Be converted to me, speaks
of outward conversion. Et loco 30. Charity covers a multitude of sins, not
before God, but before men.

Vrsinus in Catechis. p. 40. That saying of Peter: Denying the Lord who bought
them: Again: He forgot that he was Cleansed. 1. in outward Signify.
cleansed from his old sins, and such like, are manifestly spoake^ either
only of outward show and gloriation of redemption or purgation, or etc. Et q.
63. Who does justice, is just; to wit, before men. And in like sort Piscator
in These. l. 2. p. 94. expounds that place Romans 6. Who is dead, is justified
from sin.

Aretius in locis part. 1. f. 9. says to that Tobie 4. and 12. Deliver. 1.
Sgnifie.
Alms deliver from death: They deliver from eternal death, that is, are
signs and firm arguments in the godly, that they are delivered from that
death. Et Confessio Wittemberg. c. de Eleemosyna. We teach, that alms does so
blot out sin, that it is the fruit of charity toward our neighbor, by
which work we testify the faith and obedience which we owe to God.

P. Martyr in Romans 9. Nether is proved out of this place (If any shall cleanse
himself) that men can cleanse themselves, or make themselves honorable
vessels. Wherefore we must not gather more out of those words of Paul, the^
that such a cleansing is a sign, whereby we judge of the worth or
unworthiness of vessels in the Church.

Tilenus in Syntagmate c. 41. gives this rule of deluding A general of
deluding words of Scripture.
all places of Scripture, which teach that charity, hope, fear or penance
do justify, to wit, that either by these names is understood faith, or that
they only declare justification.

Scharpius de Just. Contr. 5. denies that speech Luc. 8. They believe for a
time: or that 1. Tim. 1. They have made shipwreck Faith. 1. in show.
of faith: and cap. 5. and 6. they shall depart from faith: They have fallen
from faith, to be meant of true faith: Nether will he have that Ezech. 18. When
a just man shall turn himself Just. 1. in show*
from justice, to be meant of one truly just: nor that Math. 18. When the
unclean spirit shall go forth of a man, to be meant of the Devil truly gone
forth. Nor that Math 24. Charity of many shall wax could, Of true charity:
Nor that Galat. 5. Ye are fallen from grace: of true grace: Nor that Hebr. 6.
Were illuminated, or Hebr. 10. In which he was sanctified, of truly
illuminated or sanctified: Nor that 2. Pet. 1. Forgetting the purgation etc.
and c. 2. A sow washed etc. of true purgation, or true washing. Nor finally
that Actor. 10. Simon believed, of true faith. And in like sort Contr. 6. he
denies that Joan. 12. Many of the Princes believed: and that 1. Cor. 13. If I
have all faith, to be meant of true faith: and Contr. 7. that Jacob. 2. Not by
faith only, of true faith. And Contr. 12. When any are said, to be perfect
or just, as Genesis 6. 1. Reg. 15. Luc. 1. Actor. 13. he says this is not meant
of true justice or perfection, but of apparent. So that with these men nothing
is true if it be against them, but only apparent, as is indeed their religion.

Wherefore thus I argue in form. Who beside the foresaied opposition to the
express words of Scripture, in many and great matters, words which signify
true things, are forced to expound them of appearance, outward shows,
testifications, and significations before men, they contradict the true sense
of Scripture. Protestants do so. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XX. THAT PROTESTANTS ARE FORCED to expound the words of holy
Scripture by diverse, disparates, and contraries.
THE 20. argument wherewith we will prove that Protestants do contradict the
true meaning of holy Scripture, shall be because they are compelled to expound
the words thereof by things that are quite different, yea disparate or nothing
like, and plain concrarie; of which doings of theirs amongst innumerable I
will note some few examples.

They expound the words of Scripture by things different or diverse. For thus
deals Zuinglius in Marci. 1. to. 4. p. 141. All were baptized, that is
(says he) were taught in Baptized 1. Taught.
the Gospel. In Joan. 3. v. 5. The kingdom of God, is here taken for
heavenly doctrine and preaching of the Gospel. In histor. resur. page 401.
The sense is: Whose sins you forgive, that is, Forgive. 1. Preach.
to whom you shall tell the forgiveness of sins. In Roman, 5. page 419.
Sin in this place (As sin by one man etc.) is Sin. 1. Dis^ase. Faith. 1.
Preaching.
taken for a disease. In cap. 10. page 434. Faith is by hearing: Here mark,
that Faith is taken of Paul, for the manifested will of God, and for the
manifest and public preaching of faith amongst the Jews and Gentiles. In 1.
Cor. 7. p. 463. (...): Good, is here taken for commodious and quiet. Et tom. 2.
in Elencho Faith. 1 Gods election. Which. 1. Whiles. Blessed. 1. Bad Fairewell.
fol. 34. Faith justifies, that is, the election of God. In Subsidio. f. 245.
Which is powered out for many, that is, whiles, or as it is powered out for
many. In Exegesi f 355. And it happened as he blessed, that is: bid them,
fairewell. Et in Exposit. fidei fol. 558. It is clear, that the name of Merit
or Reward is in holy Scripture, but instead of a Free gift.

Calvin in Luc. 1. ver. 15. Replenished with the holy Ghost, expounds: To be
endued with greater grace above che common vulgar sort. In c. 7. ver. 48. he
expounds: Forgive us Forgive. 1. Seal.
our tresp^sses: thus: Seal more and more mercy in our hearts. In c. 8. v.
13. They believe for a time: thus: They give an honor to the Gospel like to
faith. In Math. 7. verse. 21. By, doing Do Gods will 1. Believe
the will of the Father, he understands. Philosophically to frame his life
and manners to the rule of virtue, and to believe in Christ. In cap. 21. verse.
32. The name of Justice here signifies, Justice. 1. Doctrine.
nothing else, but that Ihons doctrine was pure and right. In cap. 23. verse. 22.
To sit in the chair of Moises is nothing else, then to deliver out of the law
of God, how men ought to live. In Ioannis 3. verse. 5. By water, he
understands, Water. 1. Holy Ghost. Charity in us. 1. Toward us.
the Holy Ghost. In Actor. 8. ver. 18. by the Holy Ghost; Singular gifts. In
Romans 5. v. 5. by the Charity of God diffused in us: he understands, our
knowledge of Gods charity toward us. In 2. Co. 2. v. 10. I have given in the
person of Christ: that is (says he) sincerely and without simulation. In 1.
Timot. 1. and 6. by Faith, he expounds: Wholesome doctrine. Faith. 1. Wholesome
doctrine.
In Tit. 1. v. 16. Appoint Bishops: that is: Be president in the choice of
them. And in Hebr. 9. v. 26. Destruction of sin, he expounds: freing from
the guilt of pain. Sin. 1. Guilt of pain


Beza in Math. 3. v. 1. by Desert, understands A hilly country. And in
verse. 6. by Confessing their sins: Professing Desert. 1. Hilly place.
themselves to be sinners. And in cap. 5. verse. 20. Upon that: Unless your
justice abound etc. by the, Kingdom of heaven he means: the Church militant:
and by Enter, Teach.

Peter Martyr in Roman. 18. says: When the Scripture Faith. 1. Gods mercy.
says that we are justified by faith, when we hear the name of faith, we
must understand the object of faith, to wit, the mercy of God. Polanus in
Syntagm. l. 6. c. 36. Faith is imputed to justice, Faith. 1. Christ's justice
that is, the justice of Christ, which faith apprehends, is imputed. Sadeel
ad art. 44. abiurat. When we are said to be justified by faith, by the name of
faith we must understand Christ: And so also Bullinger. dec. 3. sermon. 9. The
Confession of Saxony c. de Remiss. Peccat. This saying is to be understood
correlatiuely: we are justified by faith: that is, we are justified by
confidence of the Son of God.

Zanchius de Perseuerant. tom. 7. col. 143 by that: You are Faith. 1.
Confidence.
fallen from grace, understands: you are fallen from the doctrine of grace,
or from the Gospel. Pareus l. 2. de Iustif. c. 7. Grace. 1. Doctrine.
by Perfect charity, understands, sincere. Et lib. 4. c. 7. by, work your
salvation: Do those things which are necessary for to obtain salvation.

Perkins in Cathol. reform. Contr. 5. c. 3. says: In all the promises of the
Gospel, in which God does voluntarily bind himself to reward our works,
the obligation does not directly pertain to us, but in respect of the person
and obedience of Christ. Apologia Confess. Aug. c. de Implet. legis: Because
Love. 1. Believe.
she loved much, that is (say they) because she truly worshipped me with faith
and with exercises and signs of faith. Et de Resp. ad Argum. When the text
says, that eternal life is rendered to works, it means, that it is
rendered to those that are justified. Again: Alms is said to deliver from
death and to purge from sin, not in it self, but in the cause thereof, that
is, in faith. Alms. i. Faith.
Brentius hom. 1. in festum om. sanctorum. To hunger after justice, is to have
a just cause, and yet not be able to follow it in law. Reineccius to. 4.
Armaturae c. 19. by Sacrifice the Phase, understands Kill it, lest he should
be confessed that the pascal lam be was sacrificed: Illyricus. 1. Joan. 2. v.
3. The keeping Keeping. 1. Knowing.
of the commandments, in this place signifies the true knowledge of his
doctrine. Piscator in Thesibus l. 2. p. 192. 2. Pet. 2. They deny the Lord,
who has bought them, that is, whom before they had professed, that he had
bought them, Et p. 472. he Buy. 1. Profess to buy. Which. 1. As farreforth.
says that, which, in the words of Consecration signifies, As farreforth: As
(says he) the Pronoune (which) in those words: The bread which I shall give
is my flesh which I shall give for the life of the world. Moulins in his Bucler
part. 2. page 51. says that those words Jacob. 5. If he be in sin, they
shall be forgiven him, signify as much, as health shall be restored to him, all
sins being forgiven for which God had afflicted him. And he adds in the
next page: Christ does teach us Math. 9. Forgiven. 1. Arise.
that to say to the sick: Thy sins are forgiven thee, and to say, Arise and
walk; are equivalent things: Let then he and his fellow Mynisters say: Arise
and walk when they preach of remission of sins.

They expound also by disparate or quite different things. For thus Zuinglius
in Schlusselburg. lib. 1. Theol. Calvin. art. 2. Body in the words of the
Supper may be taken also for the Body. 1. Church.
Church. Et in Joan. 6. to. 4. he says: By which also the words of Christ wax
clear: This is my body, where Body is put for Body. 1. Death.
Death. In lib. de Relig. cap. de Euchar. to. 2. Now follows a rite, whereby
it appears, that this is the sense, and that Body here (Is it not a
participation of the body of our Lord. 1. Cor. 10.) is otherwise taken then
for the Symboll of his body, to wit, for the Church. In lib. de Caena. fol.
294. he says, that by Communication of the body of Christ, by Communion
Communion. 1. Sermon. Chalice. 1. Our selves.
you may understand a sermon or the Church: Et 1. Cor. 10. that the sense of
these words: The Chalice of blessing which we bless etc. is: The Cup of
thanksgiving with which we give thanks, what other thing I pray you is it but
our selves. Again: Blood. 1. Christians.
He calls the blood of Christ, those who trust in his blood. Et in Exegesi f.
359. Flesh in this place. Joan. 6. is put for the Divine Flesh. 1. Divinity.
Body and blood. 1. Faith
Nature. In Explic. art. 18. to. 1. f. 37. Thou see here Joan. 6. that the
body and blood of Christ is nothing else, but the word of faith: to wit, that
his body dead for us, his blood shed for us redeemed us. And in other places
oftentimes says, that the word Body in the words of Consecration signifies
a Figure or Symboll of Christ his body.

The same Zuinglius in Exegesi tom. 2. fol. 350. thus writes: Eat. 1. ^eleiue.
Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man etc. is as much, as who
beleiueth not, to wit, the Gospel being preached, shall be condemned. In Joan.
6. tom. 4. To eat bread and flesh is Eat. 1. Trust.
nothing else but to believe: Again: To eat, is to trust. In Elenc. fol. 30.
When faith is said to save, faith is taken for the election of God. In lib. de
baptis. fol. 61. In the 6. of the Acts, the Believe. 1. Hear.
word of Beleiuing is taken for to hear the doctrine, or to adioyne himself
to the number of the beleiuers. The same man Epist. ad Lindouer. to 1. fol.
204. Thou see here 1. Pet. 3. Baptism Baptism. 1. Faith.
has made us safe, first that baptism is taken for faith. In lib. de Relig.
c. de Baptis. to. 2. fol. 201. It was clear to him, that they had been
baptized by Apollo, that is, taught. In lib. de Baptis f. 61. We said, that
baptism was taken for the inward Baptism. Faith. Baptism. 1. Doctrine.
faith. 1. Pet. 3. Et f. 63. We must note, that the words of Baptizing in these
words of Paul. Act. 16. is taken for doctrine. Et f. 81. In what then were ye
baptized, must not be understood of the external baptism of water, but of
doctrine and instruction. In Subsidio ib. f. 254. Baptism 1. Pet. 3. is taken
for Christ, when Baptism. 1. Christ.
he says that we are saved by baptism. Et in Resp. ad Huber. fol. 107. he
adds, that Baptism 1. Pet. 3. is taken for Christ or for the very Gospel.
Moreover l. de Baptis. to. 2. fol. 73. Baptism. 1. Gospel.
he thus writes: They have oftentimes learned of us, that by water in this
place (Joan. 3.) ought to be understood the knowledge Water. 1. Knowledge.
Keys. 1. Words of Keys. 1. Faith. Keys. 1. Preaching. Loose and bind. 1.
Preach. Bind. 1. Leave in error. Bind. 1. Not believe. Forgive. 1. Assure.
of Christ and the comfort of faith. Et in Explic. art. 50. to 2. f. 92. The
keys are nothing else but the pure word of God and the sincere preaching of the
Gospel. In Exegesi. ib. f. 258. The keys are not other thing but faith of
the Gospel. Resp. ad Luther. ib f. 378. It is clear, that the keys are
nothing but the preaching of the Gospel. Again in Explic. art. 50. to. 1. f.
93. We learn, that in Luke, to loose and bind, is nothing else but to preach
the Gospel. lib. de Relig. c. de Clauibus. to. 2. f. 191. It appears here,
that to Bind, is nothing else but to leave in error. And in Schlusselb. l. 1.
Theol. Calvin. art. 9. The words of Binding and loosing, signify nothing else
but to believe, and not believe.

Perkins in Cathol. ref. Contr. 3. c. 3. writes thus: I answer, that we do
not ask remission of sins, because we are not certain of it: but rather
because that certainty is weak and infirm, that continually endued with new
grace of Christ we may daily increase and be comforted.

Daneus Contr. 7. page 1317. Saints are said to govern the Saints. 1. Christ.
world Apoc. 2. and 3. We grant (says he) that the godly both now and after
death do govern the wicked world, in so much, as Christ governs it, of
whose kingdom they are partakers, as being his members. Et to. 2. Contr. de
Baptis. c. 4. he says, that in those words: Unless a man be borne of water
and the And. 1. O^.
holy Ghost, the particle And, is to be taken for the disjunctive particle Or.
Et Contr. de Euchar. c. 10. and 11. he will have the verb Is in the words of
Consecration to stand for: Is. 1. Signifies.
Signifies, Represents, Seals.

Rainolds in Apol. These. p. 333. says that the Apostle 2. Thessalon. 2. in
those words: Hold traditions etc. by the Speech. 1. Scripture.
word Speech comprehends other Scriptures: or as Iuel in Defens. Apol. part.
2. cap. 9. sec. 1. Will have it: The very substance of the Gospel. Others in
Whitaker Contr. 1. q. 6. c. 10. will have whether, put for Also, as Beza
puts in the very Whether. 1. Also.
text of that place.

Whitaker Contr. 11. q. 5. c. 4. by Priests in those words of Priests. 1.
Chief men.
the psalm. 99. Moses and Aaron in his priests, will have to be meant: Chief
men of the people. And the same says Iuel lib. cit. p. 6. c. 11. sect. 4. and
Hunnius in Colloq. Ratisbon. sess. 2. Where he adds, that Moses did
sacrifice as a Prophet of God and not as a Priest.

Luther to 1. f. 398. writes in this sort: Paul in this place Faith. 1. Gift
of God.
(1. Cor. 13. If I had all etc. takes faith for the gift of the holy Ghost.
Et fol. 397. The sense (of these words Redeem thy Redeem. 1. Believe, leave,
apprehend.
sins etc. Dan.) is, to believe that God is angry with sin, and is pleased
with the just, and show this faith to be true by works. But Melacthon thus
expounds these words: leave, give over sinning: Et Martyr. ibid. hom. 21.
Apprehend the Messiah by faith.

Illyricus in Math. 7. v. 82. To perform the words of Christ Perform. 1.
Believe.
is to embrace him truly and from the heart, and secondly to rely upon his
doctrine well understood. Bullinger Dec. 3. sermon. 9. writes, that when S.
James says a man is justified by Works. 1. Faith.
works, he means. By faith fruitful of good works. Et l. de Orig. Error.
c. 18. These sentences: I will protect this city for my self and for my
servant David: And I will protect this city for my self and for promise made
to David are all one. Sadeel David. 1. Promise to David or Christ. Sorrow
Piety. ^ Faith.
ad Art. 57. expounds, For David, that is, For Christ. Hunnius tract. de
Iustif. p. 145. says, that by the word, Sorrow, in that 2. Cor. 7. Sorrow
according to God etc. and also by the word, Piety, in that 1. Timot. 4. Piety
has promises, is understood Faith.

But most of all this their manner of expounding by disparate or quite
different things appears in their expounding the words of Christ his souls
descent into hell: where by Soul they understand Dead body or Carcass: by
Descended, Suffered: and by Hell, Grave, Death, or Pains of hell, and the
like. For thus Zuinglius in Hofmeister in Art. Descended. 1. Redeemed.
3. Confess. Aug. He descended into hell, that is, his death re-redeemed those
which were in hell. OEcolampadius ib. It is an Descended. 1. Buried.
exposition of that: He was buried. Bucer in Math. 27. In the 2. of the Acts
for the same is put, that his soul is not forsaken in hell, and the holy did
not see the grave of corruption, to wit, for that which is; Not to be forsaken
in death. What other thing is it here to desce^d to hell, then the body to be
buried under earth? In this sorce then descended life or a lively body into
hell, that is, being truly dead was put in the grave: Again: That article of
the Symbol: He descended into hell, is an explication of that which went
before, He was dead and burried. P Martyr in locis Class. 2. p. 428. He
descended into hell, signifies nothing else, Descended. 1. In estate of the
dead. Descended. 1. Suffered death. Descended. 1. Laid in the the grave.
Soul. 1. Carcass. Hell. 1. Grave.
but that he was in the very same estate in which other souls are that have
departed from their bodies. Calvin. 2. Instit. c. 16. ser. 10. If he be said
to have descended into hell, no marvel, seeing he suffered that death which by
Gods wrath is inflicted upon the wicked. Beza in Act. 2. v. 27. To descend to
hell, properly signifies to be laid in the grave. Et ib. edit. An. 1565. In
my former edition I rightly translated it: Thou shall not forsake my carcass
in the grave. In Defens. cont. Castle. vol. 1. Theol. page 460. In the text, My
soul, I translated, my carcass: Et p. seq. I still keep the same sense.
Serranus cont. Hayum. part. 3. p. 520. spends many words to prove, that by
Soul. Act. 2. v. 27. is not meat Soul, but a Dead man or carcass, and
adds: Flesh. 1. Soul.
No man can doubt, but by the word flesh is meat Soul. So that by Soul shall
not be meant Soul, but Carcass, and again by Flesh, not flesh but soul.
Vrsinus in Carechism. q. 44. In this article Hell is taken for great
affliction. Whitaker. l. 8. co^t. Dur. sect. 7. That the Prophet says: Thou
shall not forsake my soul in hell, is as much, as if he had said: Thou shall
not forsake me lying in the grave: Et Sect. 22. It is manifest, that it is
Descended. 1. Buried.
the same sense in both words: that to be buried, is to desce^d to hell, and
that to descend to hell, is to be buried. Perkins in Explic. Symboli tom. 1.
col. 680. He descended into hell, that is, being dead and buried, was detained
captive in the grave, and kept of death for three days. Et col. 676. Others
expound it thus: He felt and bore the torments and anguishes of hell. This
(says he) is a good and true exposition. Et in Serie Causarum c. 18. The
descent into hell, is the ignominious dominion of death over him being buried.
Daneus Contr. 2. p. 161. By the name of the death Death. 1. torments of soul
of Christ are meant the torments of soul and the curse of God, which is felt
in the mind. P. 169. It is apparent out of the Acts 2. that the Greek word,
(...), is put for grave of the body. Et page 172. he says: Of the descent of
Christ to hell, that is, of the sorrow in soul suffered by Christ. Tilenus in
Syntagm. c. 6. understands by the descent to hell, the dominion of (...)
which it obtained by thy continuate death of Christ oppressed and shut up in a
grave sealed and kept with soldiers for three days together. Bucanus in loco
25. By Christ's descent into hell are meant those great torments of mind, which
he sustained in his agony and on the cross. Polanus in Syntagm. l. 6. c. 21.
We declare, that the descent of Christ into hell, is his voluntary demission
of himself to abide and wrestle out the pains of hell. Finally Vorstins in
Antibel. page 40. Writes thus: All Protetestants do not wholly agree about the
true sense of this article, whilst some accommodate this phrase properly to
the death and burriall of Christ, as an explication thereof: others
metaphorically to the inward griefs of the mind, or infernal torments which
Christ suffered at the time of his death or passion: and others metonymically
or effectiuely by a kind of prosopopeia to the fruit of the death and passion
of Christ exhibited unto us miserable and damned. Et p. 41. We say: that
speech: Descend to hell most truly does signify in Scripture nothing else,
the^ simply to dye or to brought into the state of the dead; and so buried. Et
p. 42. The sense of those words. Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, may
most fitly be expressed thus: Thou shall not leave my life in death, or thou
shall not leave me in the power of death. Albeit Soul. 1. Dead body. Hell. 1.
Grave.
nothing hinders by Soul to understand synechdochically the very body and
that also dead, and to take the name of Hell for the Grave. Expositions by
quite contraries.


They expound also the words of the holy Scripture by quite co^traries. For
touching faith when S. James c. 2. says that a man, is not justified by faith
only, they say, he means not of faith, but only of a shadow or dead image
of faith. So Fai^b. 1. Not faith.
Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza upon that place, Luther in Postilla in Dom. 9. post
Trinit. Bucer in Math. 8. Whitaker. l. 1. co^t. Believe. 1. Deceive themselves
and others.
Dur. sect. 13. and others. In like sort the word Believe in that Luc. 7. v.
13. They believe for a time, with them signifies not to believe: but to
deceive men's eyes and their own mind with a deceitful show of faith. So
Calvin. 2. Instit. c. 2.. 10. Where he calls this belief, a shadow and show
of faith, and says, that it is of no reckoning and unworthy of the name of
faith. When S. Ihon. 12. ver. 23. says: Many believed in his name: Calvin.
ibidem. thus expounds him: Their faith was preposterous: It is evident, that
their faith was not true and lawful. Luther in Postil. in Dom. Quinquagues.
says, that when S. Paul. 1. Corinthians. 13. Writes: If I have all faith etc. he
does not speak of Christian faith. In like sort: To be illuminated, To taste
the heavenly gift, and to be made partaker of the holy Ghost Hebr. 6. verse.
4. according to them, is not to have true light, or the holy Ghost, but only
to have some such thing. So Calvin 3. Instit. c. 2.. 11. and. 12. and Heb. loc.
cit ibique Beza and others. Moreover, faith to be consummated by works. Iac.
2. v. 22. in their opinion, is not to be consummated or perfect by Perfected.
1. Not perfected
works, but to be tried to be such. Calvin ibid. It is said to be perfected
by works, not that it takes thence perfection, but be cause it is proved to
be true thereby. Finally when Christ Joan. 6. calls faith a work, Zuinglius
l. de relig. c. de orat. expounds Work. 1. No work.
him: So he calls it a work, as by the contrary sense he would say, ye
shall be made happy by faith, and by no work. And in this sort they deprave
all those places of the holy Scripture, which teach that the evil or
reprobates, do believe, are illuminated, do repent, and the like.

Touching works: they deny that To work, in that 2. Cor. Touching works.
7. v. 10. Sorrow according to God works penance stabill to salvation,
signifies not, To Cause, but only to go before salvation: Calvin ib. For he
inquireth not of the cause of salvation, but only commending penna^ce as a
fruit which it works, says that it is like a way by which we come to
salvation. Likewise: work your salvation. Phil. 2. with the^ does not command
us to work our salvation, but only to do those things which become the^ that
are to be saved. For thus Zuinglius upon that place: For Paul in this place
commands not to do good works that we may get salvation by the^, but that we
may do those things which become the children of God who are saved by faith.
When the Scripture says: Fear of God expels sin: Alms purges, sin,
expels sin: By mercy sins are purged, Kemnice in locis part. 2. de arg.
answers: It speaks not of propitiation or satisfaction for sin; but
says that sins are avoided and eschewed. So that, to expel, to purge, to
extinguish sin, is not to purge sins already committed, but only to beware
of committing the^. To be doers of the word. Iac. 1. v. 22. in their opinion is
not to be doers of the word, but heartily to embrace it. Calvin. ib. A doer here
does not signify him who satisfies the law, and fulfilleth it in all points,
but who heartily embraces the word of God, and by his life in earnest
witnesses that he beleiueth. Perfect charity. 1. Ioa^. 2. v. 5. With the^, is
not perfect, but true: Beza ib. It is not inquired in this place, who loves
God perfectly, but who loves him truly. To do the will of God. 1. Ioa^. 2.
v. 17. according to the^ is not to do, but to believe: Calvin. ib. If any
object, that done what God commands, the answer is, at hand, that here is no
speech of the absolute keeping of the law, but of the obedience of faith. In
like sort: Do this. Luc. 10. v. 28. With them is not to do, but to believe.
Luther in Gal. 3. to. 5. p. 345. The meaning of this place: Do this and thou
shall live, is this: Thou shall live for this faithful doing, or this doing
shall give the life for only faith. In this sort justification, is attributed
to only faith, as creation is to the Godhead. Weomen in those words. Apoc. 14.
v. 4. These are those who were not defiled Weomen. 1. not weomen but idols.
with weomen, according to their mind signifies not weomen, but idols. Tilenus
in Syntagm. cap. 47. It is not meant of carnal copulation with weomen, but of
spiritual whoredom with idols: Forsooth least virginity might be thought to
have a special reward in heaven. Just and Justice. Ezech. 18. verse. 14. When
the just shall turn himself from his justice, with these men signifies not
just nor justice. Pareus lib. 3. de Iustif. cap. 14. My adversary wrongfully
wresteth this Scripture, from temporally just, to truly just. They do, Romans
2. v. 14. those things which are of the law, is not meant of doing, but of
commanding: Beza ib. edit. 1565. That is, they command honest things and
forbid dishonest. For Paul speaks not this of the observation of the law,
but only of that manner which even profane people followed in making laws.

Touching sins: Iniquity in those words Proverb. 16. Touching sin.
Iniquity. 1. not iniquity.
verse. 6. Iniquity is redeemed by mercy and truth, with these men, is not
iniquity or sin, but temporal punishment: Kemnice in locis. part. 2. tit.
de Argum. Mercy is an expiation, not of sin, but of temporal punishment.
Sins to be taken away. 1. Joan. 1. verse. 29. is not to be taken away, but
only not to be imputed: Calvin. ibid. Albeit sin do perpetually stick in us,
yet in Gods judgment it is none, because being abolished by Christ's grace, it
is not imputed. In like sort. To be blotted out like a mist; Esaiae. 44. is
not to be blotted out, but to be not imputed: Bidenbachius in Consensu etc. p.
724. Our sins are said to be blotted out as a mist, to be cast behind the
back, and to be drowned in the depth of the sea, not as if they were no more,
but because they are not imputed to the beleiuer.

Touching Justification: Grossius in Apol. pro Disput. Touching Justification.
writes thus: Sanctification by the blood of the covenant (Heb. 10. v. 29.) is
not the inward cleansing of the heart from sin. To receive the holy Ghost.
Act. 19. v. 2. With them is not to receive grace, but some special gifts:
Calvin. ibid. Here is not spoaken of the spirit of regeneration, but of
special gifts. In like sort by; The holy Ghost ib. Nether have we heard
that there is a holy Ghost: is not meant the holy Ghost. For thus Calvin ib.
How could it be that Jews had not heard of the holy Ghost. Et Beza ibid. It
were most absurd to think, that they knew not that there was any holy Ghost.
To be sanctified. Hebr. 10. v. 29. is not to be truly sanctified: For thus
Contraremonstrantes in Collat. Hagae p. 391. Nether yet can it be concluded
thereof, that they were truly faithful and indeed sanctified. To fall from
grace. Gal. 5. ver. 5. With them is not to fall from grace, but to fall from
the hope of obtaining it. Contrare monstrantes. loc. cit. p. 388. These are
said to fall from the grace of justification, not that ever they were
partakers thereof, but because they are excluded from al hope of obtaining it,
so long as they will be justified by the law.

Touching baptism: To be baptized. Act. 19. v. 3. In whom Touching Baptism.
then were you baptized, with them is not to have received baptism, but other
gifts: Beza ib. We must needs grant, that here is not treated of baptism,
but of gifts wherewith God was wont specially to adorn those whom he made
rulers of Churches. Gual^erus ib. hom. 125. These words must not be expounded
of the baptism of water, but of the baptism of fire. Likewise Baptism. 1.
Pet. 3. with them signifies not baptism but Christ: Zuinglius resp. ad Huber.
tom. 2. It is certainly evident, that Peter in that place by Baptism
understands no other thing but Christ. Water, also Joan. 3. v. 5. Unless one
be borne again of water, signifies not water, but the holy Ghost: Calvin.
ibid. I can no way be persuaded to believe that Christ speaks of baptism.
And in Refutat. Serueti. This pertains nothing to baptism, but the name of
water is metaphorically attributed to the holy Ghost. Zuinglius upon this
place: By water here he means not that element, but the word of God, grace of
God, heavenly water, that is the illustration of the no^^e Ghost. And in the
same manner other Protestants commonly.

Touching the Eucharist: Is, in the words of consecration Touching the
Eucharist.
with them is not, Is, but Signifies, nor Body given for us; Blood shed for
us, is the true body and blood of Christ, but only figures of them, as
appears by what has been said. lib. 1. cap. 11. art. 1. To eat the flesh
and drink the blood of Christ, so often repeated. Joan. 6. is not to eat or
drink, but only to believe: P. Martyr cont. Gardener. part. 1. col. col. 866.
We still say, that to eat, to wit, the flesh of Christ, is nothing else then to
apprehend it by faith, as given for us as price of our redemption. Which also
he has col. 863. And Luther Postil. in Dom. post Natiuit. To eat and drink
his flesh and To eat. 1. not to eat but to believe.
blood, is no other thing then to believe that Christ truly took these for
our sake, and repaied them again at death. The like has Zuinglius in Joan. 6.
and in Histor. passionis, and l. de Relig. c. de Euchar. Bullinger Dec. 5.
sermon. 9. Vrsinus in Catechism. q. 76. Flesh, in those words of Christ Joan. 6.
My Flesh. 1. not flesh but divinity.
flesh is truly meat, with them is not flesh, but the Godhead: Zuinglius in
Exegesi to. 2. fol. 333. He says; his flesh is truly meat, meaning surely
not his flesh, but his better nature which had taken flesh. The Body of our
Lord, in those words 1. Cor. 10. The bread which we break, is it not the
participation of the body of our Lord, with these men is not the body of
Christ. 1. Christians.
Christ, but Christians: Zuinglius lib. cit. Thou mights have seen at the
first, how that Communion and Body are not taken Body of Christ. 1. men.
for distribution of Christ's body, but for men themselves.

Finally Luther was so bold as to set down a Canon Luthers Cano^ of
expounding Words by co^traries.
of expounding the words of holy Scripture by co^traries. For thus he writes
in Ps. 5. to. 3. fol. 171. Let this be a Canon for thee: Where the Scripture
commands a good work to be done, do thou so understand it, that it
forbids thee do good works, seeing thou can not, but that thou may
sanctify the Lord, be dead and buried, and suffer God to work in thee. Which
Canon Protestants do well follow, as appears by what has been related in
this chapter, and before in the sixth and seventh chapter, where we showed that
in the weightieste matters they expounded the words of holy Scripture
ironically, and according to others men's mind.

These and innumerable the like do Protestants, of which we might easily
gather not only a chapter, but a book full. But out of these which we have
rehearsed, it clearly appears: First how great heretical liberty (as
Tertullian speaks) is, which turns the words of holy Scripture this way,
and that way, in to this form and that, and tosseth them up and down like
tenis balls. Secondly how easy it may be for every idiote with this liberty
for to defend what heresy soever though never so contrary to Scripture. For
who cannot expound the words of Scripture, by diverse, by disparate, and
contrary things. Thirdly, how impossible it is, if this liberty be admitted,
to refute by Scripture any heresy at all, or to prove any thing by any words
whatsoever either of God or man. Fourthly how that Protestants by this kind of
dealing, do more dishonor God and the holy Scripture, then if they should
quite reject it. For if they should reject the Scripture, they should only
reject Gods word and truth: But by this manner of dealing they do not only
reject Gods truth and meaning, but also in steed thereof foist in the
contrary untruth: and so (as S. Hierome speaks) In Galat. ^
of the word of God, they make the word of the Devil. Fifthly it appears that
these expositions of Protestants are like to that which Luther merly devised
for to show the Sacramentaries how they expounded the words of consecration, in
Defens. verb. cenae. to. 7. fol. 384. where he A fit example of Protest.
expositions.
writes thus: Surely they do a great and weighty matter: But no otherwise,
then if I should deny that God made heaven and earth, and when one should
object that of Moises: In the beginning God created heaven and earth, I should
expound Moises words in this sort: God, that is, a Cuccou: Made, that is,
devoured: Heaven and earth, that is, a Hedge sparow all and whole: It not this
a trick of art? Yes surely not unknown nor unseemly to stage plaiers. Thus
Luther, who as being best practiced in this art, could best of all others
describe it. Finally it appears, that Protestants have not only forged a new
faith, but also a new tongue, a new Grammar, a new frame of speech. For
concerning Propositions, they bid us understand an Affirmation by a Negation,
and a Negation by an Affirmation, and words they bid us expound by diverse,
by disparate, and contraries to these which they signify with other men. And
this new Grammar of theirs Luther acknowledges in these words. Gal. 3. tom. 5.
fol. 345. Those words, To do, To work, are to be taken Protestants new
Gra^mar or language.
three manner of ways, Substantially or naturally, Morally, and Theologically.
Insubstances, natures, and moral matters, these words are taken in their
usual and natural signification, but in divinity they are made plainly new
words, and get a new signification. Wherefore when thou read in Scripture,
of Fathers, of Prophets, of Kings, that they wrought justice etc. remember,
that such and the like sayings are to be understood according to the new and
Theological Grammar (of Protestants) wherefore I admonish ye again, that the
sentences which the adversaries object out of Scripture, of works and reward,
be always to be understood Theologically by the definition: As if they object
that saying of Daniel 4. Redeem thy sins by alms, straight we must run to
the Theological grammar, and not to the moral. The like he has in cap. 4.
Genes. fol. 60. Nor much otherwise writes Kemnice. libr. de origin. Jesuit.
page 47. When he says: It is most certain, that the Holy Ghost would that
in this article of Justification, not only the things themselves and the
meaning, but also the very names should be by a peculiar signification distinct
from the words of Philosophers. Schlusselburg. also Praefat. libr. Theolog.
Calvin. distinguishes between the Grammar of Nations, and of Deuines, and
says that that takes the word of Justice actiuely, but this takes it
passiuely. The like has Gesnerus loc. 2. de Iustif. page 47.

But what we ought to think of these inuentors of Luthers Censure of these new
word mongers.
a new Grammar, themselves do sometimes tell us. For thus writes Luther. lib.
de seruo. arbitr. tom. 2. fol. 435. Who will not mock or rather hate this
unseemly changer of words, who against all use endeavors to bring in such
kind of speech, as to call a beggar, a rich man -- By this abuse of speech
any man may brag of any thing. But this is not the part of Divines, but of
Cooseners and Stageplayers. And Calvin. libr. contr. Libertin. cap. 3. The
libertines at Libertines.
the first bouldly rejected the Scriptures, but when they saw that thereby they
were abhorred of all men, they meant to deal more closely and more couertely,
that making show not to cast away Scripture, they might turn it into
allegories, and wrest it into diverse and strange senses, changing a horse into
a man, and as the common speech is, feigning the horn of a lantern to be a
cloud. And capit. 7. Like as Egyptians and other vagabonds, such as those who
going out of Bohemia wander up and down the whole world, use a certain
peculiar speech, which none understand but those of their own crew and
brotherhood, So etc. -- I deny not but they use the common words, but so they
alter their signification, as no man can understand what the matter is which is
proposed, nor what they would affirm or deny.

Beza also l. de puniend. Haer. vol. 1. Theol. Satan, when he could not quite
cast the Scripture out of the Church, yet by vain allegories made it
altogether vprofitable, which course now the libertines and Anabaptists do
take. Bullinger. Concion. Anabaptiste. Arians. Seruetians. Familistes.
25. in Apocal. thus writes of the Arians and Seruetians: They turn and wind
the words of God with their Giganticall boldness, as they list. Whitaker l.
1. de Script. c. vlt. sect. 4. The Familists do leave almost no article of our
faith untouched, whilst with their allegories they turn and corrupt all
things: And Reinolds in his Conference cap. 2. sect. 2. The Familists, for to
save their phrensies, from the Scripture reject the literal sense, which is
the very edge thereof, and put that up into the scabarde of their fanaticall
dreams and allegories. The like has Perkins in Conflictu Christi. tom. 2.
This they note in the Libertines, Familists, Anabaptists, and others, whereof
themselves are no less guilty, then those be, as appears by what has been
already related. But as Luther him self says. Genes. 6. tom. 6. fol. 84. Who
would suffer this liberty in deprauing the true sense in the fables of
Terence, or Virgils Ecloges, and shall we suffer it in the Church? And
Defension. verb. Cenae tom. 7. fol. 397. Surely I cannot see, that they can be
excused by any plausible pretext as if upon a good meaning they had been
deceived by some curiofitie or spiritual blindness, as it happens to most
Heretics. But it appears that they mock the word of God upon obstinacy and
malice. For I do not think that it can be that these silly trifles and toies
should in earnest move a man in his wits, whether he were a Turk or Jew, much
less a Christian. Thus the Protestants own Prophet and Father speaks of
Protestants.

Wherefore thus I argue in the 20. place. Who not only gaynesay the words of
holy Scripture so directly and so often as is showed in the first book, but
also in so many and so great matters expound the words thereof by diverse, by
disparates, and by contraries, so that they bring in a new grammar, a new
language and signification of words never heard of before, they manifestly
contradict, nay mock the true sense of holy Scripture: But Protestants do so.
Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XXI. THAT PROTESTANTS ARE COMpelled to devise improprietie of words
and all kinds of figures.
THE 21. Argument, wherewith we will prove, that Protestants do contradict the
true sense of holy Scripture, is because when the propriety of the word is
against them, they devise improprieties and all kind of figures.

Calvin. 4. Instit. c. 8.. 2. Authority is not properly given to Not properly.
men. Beza in Confess. c. 5. sect. 27. Nether Pastors nor Doctors can properly
bind or loose any man. Zanchius de Eccles. c. 9. Power of forgiving sins is
not properly given to the Apostles or to others, for they do not properly
forgive sins. Vorstius in Resp. ad Homium p. 31. I do not say that faith it
self does properly justify us. Perkins in Cathol. Reform. Cont. 5. c. 3. The
kingdom of heaven is called a reward, not properly but by a figure. Et Cont.
10. c. 4. These words: This is my body, must not be understood properly, but
by a figure: Pareus l. 5. de Iustif. c. 3. Nether is eternal life called a
reward properly. Piscator in These. l. 2. p. 103. Faith, properly speaking, does
not purge sins. Et p. 112. We must not properly understand that Christ purged
the Church by the lauer of water in the word, but metonymically, Imperpely.


In like sort, for improperly: Calvin in Joan* 4. ver. 39. The word, Believe,
improperly signifies, that they were stirred up by the speech of the woman to
acknowledge Christ a Prophet. In c. 6. v. 29. It is evident enough, that Christ
spoake improperly, when he calls faith a work. In cap. 12. ver. 42. He
seems to speak improperly, whilst he seperateth faith from confession. In
Math. 6. v. 16. That he promises reward from God unto fasting; is an improper
speech. In illud. Math. 12. v. 33. Make a good tree. It is an improper speech:
In illud. c. 13. v. 19. He scrapeth away that which was sowed in the heart:
That Christ says: the word was sowed in their hearts, is an improper speech.
In c. 26. v. 26. The word of Body is improperly tra^sferred to bread, of which
it is a sign. In illud Romans 11. v. 22. If he remain in goodness: This should
be improperly spoaken peculiarly of any good man, that God had mercy on him
when he chose him, if so he remain in mercy. Goodness.
In illud Ephesians. 2. verse. 20. Built upon the foundation of the Apostles:
Properly Christ is the only foundation. Beza in Colloq. Montisb. page 120.
says: Baptism was heth away sins, is an improper speech. Aretius in locis.
part. 1. f. 84. There is an other improper forgiveness of sins: as is that
of the Ministers. Bullinger. Dec. 3. Sermon. 9. The Apostles improperly attribute
justice to good works, but truly and properly to faith, and most properly to
Christ himself. Piscator in These. l. 2. p. 119. It is improperly said: that
faith is imputed to justice. These and many other things they say are spoaken
improperly or not properly when the propriety of the word makes against them.

Somethings they say are to be understood tropically Tropically or Figuratively.
or figuratively. P. Martyr cont. Gardener. col 623. We say, That speech: This
is my body, is not proper, but metopharicall and tropicall. And in Hospin.
part. 2. Histor. fol. 239. The words: This is etc. cannot be taken simply and
without a figure. They are a tropicall manner of speaking. And Hospin.
himself. ib. fol. 26. says: Zuinglius expounded Christ his words; This is
etc. by a metonymie, interpreting, Is, for, signifies. Fol. 35. OEcolampadius
shows, that the figure is in the word Body. And fol. 161. Those of Strasburg
and Zurich agree, that the words are tropicall. Calvin de Rat. Concordiae. The
word Body is figuratively given to bread. Beza in Colloq. Most. page 302. Our
men deny not this proposition: Man is God, but tell how it is to be expounded,
we say, it is a tropicall speech. Daneus. Cont. de Euchar. c. 10. Bread it
self is tropically called the body of Christ.

Vorstius in Antibel. p. 394. It appears, that those words of Christ must
needs be meant by a figure. Tilenus in Syntagm. c. 64. The Apostle indeed
says, Christians have an altar, but not a material and visible, but
figuratively.

Some things they will have be expounded Symbolically: Symbolically.
Calvin in Admonition. vltim. ad Westphal. Bread is symbolically called Body.
Et cont. Heshus. p. 844. Touching bread, the speech is metonymicall, that it
may truly be symbolically called the true body of Christ. Zuinglius in
Subsid. to. 2. f. 245. The disciples understood Christ's speech rightly, but
symbolically.

Other things they understand aequiuocally. Pareus l. Aequiuecally.
4. de Iustif. cap. 4. I confess, that in Scripture, the Gospel is
equiuocally called the law of faith, the law of Christ, the law of liberty: In
which sense we grant that Christ is called a lawgiuer, a law maker, that is a
Teacher. Other things they expound Analogically. Perkins in Cathol. Refor.
Contr. 11. c. 2. Bread is the body of Christ sacramentally, by analogy, and
no otherwise.

Some things they will have to be taken Synecdochically. Synechdochically.
Luther in Hospin. l. cit. fol. 76. There is a synechdoche (in the words of
consecration) as a sword with a scabbard. Westphalus in Schlusselb. to. 7.
Catal. p. 176. Luther acknowledges a synechdochicall speech in the words of
Christ, This is etc. and the same says Adamus Francisci in Margarita loco.
16. Bucer l. de Ministerio. page 609. It is evident, that those: Take, Eat,
are synechdochicall, and are referred to twoe things. Peter Martyr contra
Gardener. col. 933. I always pretended, that I did acknowledge a metonymie or
synechdoche in those words of the Supper. And he adds: It cannot be denied,
but there is a manifest alleosis. And col. 965. I confess, that Bucer liked
better a synecdoche. Vorstius in Antibellarm. p. 42. Nothing hinders, by Soul
synechdochically to understand the body it self, and that also dead. Wigand
in Schlusseb. to. 7. Catal. p. 754. Work your salvation with fear and
trembling, is a synecdoche, that is: Do true penance. Lobechius disput. 22.
The Scripture, says that faith justifies us, and faith is imputed to justice
by metalepsis and synechdoche taking faith for the object of faith, that is,
for Christ or the justice of Christ. Scarpius also de Iustif. Cont. 1. says,
that this speech. Faith justifies, is synecdochicall.

Sometimes, that words which make against them are Catachrestically.
taken Catechrestically or abusiuely. Zuinglius l. de Relig. cap. de oration.
Christ abusiuely calls faith a work. Again: Testament is taken here
abusiuely, for the sign or symboll of the testament. In Elencho fol. 31. Paul
speaks of twoe testaments, but the one he calls catachrestically a
testament. In Respons. ad Billican: O Ecolampadius says that here (in words of
the Supper) is a catachresis or metonymie. In Math. cap. 9. That the Scripture
calls faith, that which is dead, is done by abuse of the word, as we say: the
faith of Jews, the faith of Turks. And in Hospin. lib. 2. Histor. fol. 35.
When I say, that by Catachresis: This bread signifies my body, and
OEcolampadius says metonymically: This bread is a figure of my body, what
difference, I pray you, is there in the sum of the sense. Illyricus in
Matthew. 5. verse. 12. Christ abusiuely calls future goods, a reward. Calvin.
3. Institut. cap. 2.. 9. The testimony of faith is attributed to such, but by
catachresis. Zanchius in Supplication. tom. 7. pagin. 59. That speech: To obey
their concupiscences, when it is attributed to the elect, is to be understood
catachrestically. Pareus l. 1. de Iustif. c. 15. A dead faith, is not a true
faith, though abusiuely it be called faith. Author Resp. ad these. Valent. Our
men do say truly and orderly, that the Gospel cannot be called a law, but
catachrestically.

Otherwhile they will have the words of Scripture, which are contrary to them,
to be taken metaleptically: Zuinglius in Math. 24. tom. 4. Salvation is to be
attributed Metaleptically.
to nothing how holy soever, but to the pure and mere grace of God. And if in
Scripture any thing be attributed to those things, that is done by
metalepticall and synecdochicall speeches. Vrsinus in Catechis. q. 63. Faith is
our justice: is understood correlatiuely and metaleptically, and otherwise
falsely. Again: Faith is correlatiuely imputed to justice, by metalepsis.
Scarpius Contr. 7. de Iustific. It is taken correlatiuely and by metalepsis.
Tilenus in Syntagm. c. 56. We attribute the cause of salvation not to faith it
self properly, but only metaleptically. To those I add, that Zuinglius in
Hebr. 6. tom. 4. says: We think that these things are rightly said by
hyperoches, as Christ speaks that Math. 18. of power to bind and loose. And
when the Angel prays for the people Zachariae. 1. Bullinger l. de orig.
Erroris. c. 8. says, It is in hypotyposis suffiguration of a thing present.

Oftentimes they will have the words of Scripture opposite Metonymically.
to them, to be taken metonymically. Zuinglius lib. de Pec. orig. to. 2. f.
156. This is that which I would: That original sin, is not truly, but
metonymically termed sin. That Paul says: All have sinned, the word of
sinning is put metonymically: Calvin in Math. 26. v. 26. None that is
conversant in Scripture will deny, but that a sacramental speech is to be
taken metonymically. Beza in Resp. altera ad Selnener. p. 270. The names of
Body and Blood are not attributed to bread and wine but metonymically. Daneus
Cont. 4. c. 4. This speech: Faith justifies us, is metonymicall: for the
continent is taken for the contained. Et Cont. de Euchar. c. 1. The
sacramental bread is here metonymically termed the body of Christ. Whitaker
Contr. 4. q. 1. c. 2. The Church is said to be founded in the Apostles,
metonymically, not properly. Bucanus in Institut. loco. 48. This proposition is
figurative, and that not simply metaphorical or allegorical, but
metonymicall. Piscator in These. l. 2. p. 512. God to have saved us by the lauer
of regeneration Tit. 3. either is not meant of baptism, or if it be, it is
spoaken metonymically. Again: Regeneration is made by baptism metonymically.

Sometimes they will have them to be spoaken metaphorically. Metaphorically.
Zuinglius in Subsid. tom. 2. fol. 247. We say that the figure of this speech
(of the Supper) is to be expounded by a metaphor. Thou say, there is a
metonymie, where no metonymie is properly. Calvin. in Math. 3. v. 12. The
speech of everlasting fire, is metaphorical. In Refutat. Catalani. There is no
spea^h here (Joan. 3.) of baptism, but the name of water is metaphorically
attributed to the Spirit. Musculus in locis tit. de Caena. The body of the
Lord is eaten improperly and metaphorically.

But it is wondrous how many, and what kinds of figures How many figures
they find in four words. The Lutherans.
they devise in those four plain words of consecration: This is my body. For
the Lutherans, albeit the will have the^ to be understood according to the
letter, yet in Hosp. part. 2. Hist. f. 352. say: In this proposition: This is
etc. the affirmation is beside nature and not according to nature. Selneccer.
ib. will have it to be an unusual speech. Heshusius in Beza in dial. cont.
eum. I say (quoth he) that it is an unusual kind of speech, contrary to all
the rules of Logicians and Rhetoricia^s. Hemingius in Enchir. clas. 3. says.
It is not a philosophical kind of speech, but divine. Lobechius disput. 12.
The words are taken properly, but the manner of speaking is singular and
unusual. Hutter in Anal. Co^f. Aug calls it an unusual speech, that is,
mystical and singular, and that the letter is kept in regard of every word,
but that the manner of speaking is unusual in regard of the whole proposition
Ada^ Fra^. in Margarita Theol. loc. 16. It is a speech not regular nor
figurative, but unusual, contrary to the order of nature. And the like has
Reineccius to. 4. Arm. c. 16. Finally Grauerus in Absurdis Calvin. c 1. sec. 7.
and vlt. says that it is a dominatiue speech. But in Antithes. p. 410.
says, that Lutherans put a gramaticall synecdoche, not rhetorical. Amongst
the Sacramentaries (as appeareath by The Sacramentaries.
what has been already rehearsed) some will have to be here a Catachresis,
some a synechdoche, some alleosis, others a metaphor, and others a metonymie:
Likewise some will have the figure to be in the word This, others in the word
Is, and others in the word Body. And as Kikerman writes. libr. 3. System.
Theol. p. 445. There are many that say, There is no figure nether in the
Predicate, nor in the verb, but in the connection of the Predicate with the
Subject, that is, in the form of this proposition. Polanus in Sylloge these.
part. 1. de Caena. There is a threfould figure in these words. This is etc.
Synechdoche of the gender, a metaphor, and a metonymie of the Subject. Ramus in
Schlusselb. l. 1. Theol. Calvin. artic. 22. will have three figures in these
words. Aretius ib. says, that this speech of Christ, is either metaphorical,
or catachresticall, or metonymicall. Pencier ib. In these words of Christ,
either there is a metaphor, or a metonymie, or a synechdoche, or alleosis. Et
Zuinglius in Hospin. part. 2. f. 143. These words: This is etc. are not to be
understood naturally, and in the proper sense of the words, but symbolically,
denominatiuely, and metonymically. Thus (as Tertullian said Cap. 27.
of the Valentinians) They turn all into figures and images, being themselves
imaginary men. And as Illyricus in Claue part. 2. tract. 4. writes: Nothing
is more easy, then to say: It is a trope, a figure, a phrase of speech, an
Hebraisme, as Austine gravely notes.

Wherefore I argue thus in the 21. place. Who beside their foresaied opposition
to the express words of Scripture, do also in so many and so weighty
matters delude the proper sense of the words of Scripture by so many kinds of
figures, they contradict the true sense of the holy Scripture. But so do
Protestants. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XXII. THAT PROTESTANTS ARE FORCED to coin many distinctions
frivolous, voluntary, opposite to themselves, and unheard of before.
THE 22. argument which we will make for to show, that Protestanrs contradict
the true meaning of the holy Scripture, is because they are compelled to
devise many distinctions frivolous, voluntary, contrary to themselves, and
never heard of before.

Their frivolous distinctions are of this sort. David sinned indeed, but never
committed sin: It is an other thing to sin, and an other, to commit sin.
As we related lib. 1. c. 16. art. 12.

Zanchius de Persevere. tom. 7. makes this distinction: Frivolous distinctions.
Saints slide into sin, but do not foreslide. Lambert. ib. The elect
oftentimes do err, but yet are never lead into error. Rainolds these. 2. He
insinuatcth the (the gates of Hell) shall veil against the Church, but not
prevail. Calvin de Ration. Concordiae. The word Body is by a figure
transferred to bread, but not figuratively. Beza respons. ad Act. part. 2. page
104. To every one of the baptized grace is offered, but not given. p. 123. The
elect dying children, are renouated, but not regenerated. p. 177. I did not
say, that the first man did sin by Gods will, but that he fell by Gods will.
Perkins de Sermon. Dom. to. 2. col. 575. Christ did not properly die the second
death, but yet he suffered it. Scarpius de Iustific. cont. 14. It is one thing
to keep the commandments, an other to fulfill them. Pareus l. 4. de Amiss
Great. c. 10. It is true, that Infants do not actually sin, but it ^^ false,
that they do inclinatiuelie sin. l. 1. de Iustif. c. 13. The Scripture
requires the Sacraments and penance to conversion and regeneration, but not
to justification. Et l. 2. c. 3. It is manifest, that we shall be justified, and
we shall be made Just, is not all one with the Apostle. Et c. 9. To be
constituited just, is not the same that is to be made just in this life. In
Colleg. Theol. 7. disp. 7. It is a far other thing (for God) to will that all
be saved, and to will to save all. l. 2. de Amiss. Great. c. 4. Sin and the
fall of Adam were never the same thing.

Voluntary distinctions I call those, by which for their Voluntary
distinctions.
pleasure they draw the same words into diverse senses. As when the Scripture
bids us love God with all our heart, then they will have that with all the
heart, signifies all kind of degree of love, so that this precept be
impossible for us: but when it says, that any has loved God with all the
heart, then they will have, with all the heart, to signify only sincerely and
without hypocrisy. So Calvin in Actor. 8. v. 9. Pareus l. 1. de Iustif. c. 10.
l. 2. c. 7. and others. In like sort, when the Scripture. 1. Cor. 11.
affirms the Eucharist to be the body of Christ, then the word Body is taken
for a figure; But when in the same place, it says, that unworthy receauers
are guilty of the body of Christ, the^ it is taken for the true body of
Christ. And so of innumerable other words, which they expound diuersely as it
pleases them.

Their distinctions which destroy themselves are of Distinctions destroying
themselves.
this sort. Pareus. l. 4. de Iustific. c. 4. distinguishes stipend, into a
free stipend, and a due: and says, that eternal life is a free stipend, but
not due. As if it could be imagined, how a stipend could not be due. Like to
this is their distinction of reward, into due and undue. For if it be no ways
due, it is no reward, but a mere gift. Whereupon Eucan. Instit. loc. 32.
says: Reward properly is nothing else, but which is given of debt. Et Scarpius
de Iustif. Controu. 15. In moral matters, where there is reward, there is
merit. Musculus in locis titul. de Meritis. Surely there can be no reward, but
in respect of merit. Yea and Pareus himself in Prooem. l. 5. de Iustific.
Reward properly called, is due. The same man. l. 4. cit. c. 10. adds: that
just men can fulfill the law by an inchoate fulfilling, but not by a perfect.
Which he repeateth. c. 13. as if there could be a fulfilling which is only
inchoate or begun. And nevertheless by this distinction do they delude all
those testimonies of Scripture, which teach, that some do fulfill the law,
love God, do good works, and the like. Which they interpret of an imperfect
fulfilling, loving, and doing. Beza in Dial. cont. Heshuss. vol. 1. says: The
fathers before Christ were one thing with the flesh of Christ, then to come,
but not actually. And in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 27. We confess, that Christ God
and man, was not actually a man, before his real incarnation, yet we say, that
he was truly present to these Fathers. And p. 63. I will not say, that Christ's
body was not at the time Abraham. For it was, but not actually. Gerlachius to.
2. disp. 17. Noe indeed was perfectly just: but not absolutely just.

But as for distinctions never heard of before, they have devised innumerable.
For as it appears by what Distinctions unheard of. Of God.
has been related lib. 1. cap. 2. they distinguish of God, that he will sin
for some other end, but not for it self: That he wills, that is, decrees
it, but not wills, that is, not approves it: That the hidden God wills
death, but not the revealed: That he will have all to be saved, by his revealed
will, but not by his hidden will: or as speaks Beza part. 2. respons. ad
Colloq. Montisbel. He will have all saved by his open will, but not by his
pleasure. And again: He will not the death of a sinner, by his open will, but
by his secret will. That he inuiteth all to him by words, but not by his mind:
That he punishes the faithful lest they sin, not because they have sinned:
that he justifies a wicked man remaining wicked, by the Gospel, not by law:
And many other such distinctions as may be gathered out of the said chapter
etc. To which I add these. Beza cont. Heshus. vol. 1. Alie pleases God, not
as it is a lie, but as it is a just punishment. Musculus in locis titul. de
iustific. God justifies a wicked man abiding such, in his throne of grace, not
in his throne of justice. Tilenus in Syntagm. cap. 46. God judges just men's
works to be good according to the Gospel, not according to law. Perkins in
Apoc 2. tom. 2. Gods revealed will has with it adjoined a condition, but not
his secret will.

Touching Christ; they distinguish, that he is a^ sinner Of Christ.
by imputation, but not by inherence: That he died for all, but not for every
one: That sometime he speaks as others thought, not as himself: That he is a
lawmaker, head of the Church, to be adored, to be inuocated, can forgive
sins, and work miracles, not as man, but as God only. See more l. 1. c. 3.

Of Saints: they distinguish in this new manner. They Of Saints.
wish for us heaven, but pray not: we may wish that they prayed for us, but may
not pray: They pray for us in general, but not in particular: They may be
worshipped of us after a civil or profane manner, but not after a religious.
And as Perkins says in Cathol. reform. Contr. 14. cap. 2. When Angels
appeared, they were lawfully honored, but not now.

Touching Scripture; they have coined these new distinctions: Of Scripture.
In Paulsome things are hard, not of themselves, but by accident. So Reineccius
to. 1. Arm. c. 10. In Scripture there are some things hard to be understood and
obscure to us, though all the Scripture be in it self clear. So Pareus in
Gal. 2. lect. 25. The Gospel, teaches good works, not of it self, but
borrows the doctrine of works from the law. So the some Pareus Colleg.
Theol. 9. disput. 39. The Thessalonians took not upon them to judge, or to
debate whether Gods truth were to be admitted, but only examined Paul's
doctrine according to the touchestone of Scripture: So Calvin. act. 17. verse.
13. As if Paul's doctrine and Gods truth were not all one. The Gospel in a
most large sense is taken for the whole doctrine of Christ and the Apostles:
Largely, for the doctrine both of grace and faith, and of repentance and new
obedience; but straitely and properly for the doctrine of grace by faith: So
Pareus l. 4. de Iustif. c. 3. Finally the Scripture speaks as the law, not as
the Gospel; by which distinction they delude many places of Scripture, as is
to be seen in Luther de seru. arbit. to. 2. f. 449. Calvin in Math. 19. verse.
17. Pareus. l. 4. de Iustif. cap. 2. Schlusselb. to. 8. Catal. p. 441. and to.
2. p. 270.

Of S. Peter and the Apostles, they have invented these Of the Apostles.
new distinctions. S. Peter is first of the Apostles in order, not in
jurisdiction: The Apostles are foundations of the Church, as those that found
the Church, not as those on which it is founded: or as Iunius spaketh Cont. 3.
l. 1. c. 10. The Church is founded upon Peter as upon a pillar, not as on a
foundation.

Of Pastors they distinguish: That authority is in the Of Pastors.
word which they preach, not in themselves: That they govern the visible
Church, but not the Catholic: That in case of necessity, they are made
without mission, but not otherwise. See l. 1. c. 7.

Of the Church: they have brought in these new distinctions Of the Church
That for profession of faith, there is one Church visible, an other invisible:
That she is infallible in fundamental points, but not in others: That she is
to be heard when she preaches Scripture, but not otherwise: That she is the
pillar to which truth is fastened, not on which it relieth: So says Riuet.
Tractat. 1. sec. 39. Or as Andrews writes in Resp. ad Apol. Bellar. c. 14. She
is so the pillar of truth, as that she relieth upon truth, not truth upon
her. That the Church is necessary to believe the Scriptures, not to know them.
So whitaker lib. 3. de Script. 396. That the Church is the stay and pillar of
truth, not the foundation of truth. Heilbruner in Colloq. Ratisb. sess. 7.

Of the Sacraments: they distinguish in this sort: They justify as signs or
seals, not as causes: They are received Of Sacraments
whole and entire of the good, but not of the badde: that baptism is the lauer
of regeneration, passiuely, not actiuely: So Daneus. Contr. 2. c. 12. That
baptism is but one taken wholly, but is twoe, taken by parts: So Beza. part.
Resp. ad Acta p. 44. That the Church is cleansed significatiuely by the
baptism of water, but really by the baptism of the spirit. So Beza. ib. p.
115. or as Polanus says in Disp priu. p. 37. Sins are said to be blotted
out by baptism, not properly, but in a figurative sense. The same Beza in
Hutter in Analysi. p. 54. says. I never simply said, that baptism was the
obsignation of regeneration in children, but of adoption. Perkins in Galat. 3.
By baptism, actual guilt is taken away, but not potentiall. Pareus in Gal. 2.
lect. 23. Absolutely we are all borne sinners, but in regard of the covenant,
we are borne Christians or Gods confederats.

Of the Eucharist: they have these distinctions: That it Of the Eucharist.
is the symbolicall body of Christ, but not his true body: That Christ his
flesh killed does profit us, but not eaten: That it is exhibited in the Supper
according to the virtue thereof, not according to the substance: That when S.
Paul says. 1. Cor. 11. He eats judgment to himself, he means not of
damnation but of correction: So wolfius in Schusselb. l. 1. Theol. art. 25. In
like sort they say, that Priests forgive sin indirectly not directly;
directly as it is an offense of the Church, indirectly as it an offense of God.
So Spalata. l. 5. de Repub. c. 12.

Of faith: they make these distinctions: That one is Catholic Of Faith.
or universal, or historical, an other, special. Again, that one is
abstract, naked, simple, an other, concrete, compounded, incarnate. So Luther
in Gal. 3. to. 5. That there is one habitual and actual, of men: an other
potentiall and inclinatiue, of infants: So Pareus l. 3. de Iustif. c. 14. or as
Polanus says. part. 2. these. p. 651. Infants have not altogether the same
faith that men have, yet they have some thing proportionable. Piscator in
Thesibus. l. 2. page 252. Adam before his fall had not justifying faith: or as
Pareus writes l. 1. de Amiss. Great. c. 7. Adam lost faith of the commandment,
but not faith of the promise. Bullinger dec. 5. sermon. 7. Infants are faithful
by the imputation of God. Again: They are baptized in their own faith? to
wit, which God imputes to them. Zanchius in Supplicat. to. 7. Many reprobates
are endued with a certain faith much like to the faith of the elect, but not
with the same. Perkins in Cathol. 4. c. 5. There is one general and Catholic
faith, wherewith a man beleiueth the articles of faith to be true; and an other
justifying or particular faith. Thus they distinguish of faith. And in like
sort they distinguish of the justification of faith, to wit, that it
justifies relatiuely or correlatiuely, not absolutely, and as an instrument,
not as it is a work. Bucanus in Institit. loc. 3. Faith is said to be imputed
to justice, not properly, but relatiuely, Polan. part. 2. these. page 197. We
are iustefied by faith not properly, but relatiuely. Reineccius tom. 4. Armat.
cap. 21. Faith justifies as well absolutely as considered relatiuely. Pareus
in Galat. 3. lection. 32. Faith is imputed to justice relatiuely. Again: Faith
justifies organically. And in Colleg. Theol. 2. disp. 10. We are said to be
justified by faith, but not formerly nor meritoriously, but organically.
Touching the loss of faith, they thus distinguish: Zanchius in Supplication.
citat. The elect loose faith in part, but not wholly. Beza in Prefat. 2. part
respons. ad Acta: Faith sometimes sleeps, sometimes seems to be quite lost,
but yet is not lost. Again: There is a lethargy of faith, but no loss: The
feeling or use of faith is lost for a time, but not faith it self. -- Some
reprobates do believe with a general and historical faith common to the
Devils themselves. Tilenus in Syntagm. capit. 43. The faithful become
sometimes outliers; but not runawaies or forsakers. In like sort they say,
that faith without works at the time of justification is not dead, but at other
times, if it be without works it is dead. Likewise Reineccius tom. 4. Armat.
cap. 15. says. Faith is called a work not absolutely, as it is considered in
it self, but relatiuely, as it apprehends Christ. Hunnius de Iustificat.
pagin. 157. Faith works by charity toward our neighbor, not toward God.
Finally Perkins in Casibus c. 7. That which every one is bound to believe, is
indeed true according to the intention of God who binds him: but it is not
true always according to the event.

Of good works in general: they coin these distinctions: Of good works in
general.
The good works of the just are good in part, not wholly: They are all equal
before God, but not in themselves. They are acceptable to God in his throne of
mercy, but not of justice. They are necessary to justification by necessity
of presence, but not of cause: They are necessary to salvation, not to
justification. See l. 1. c. 14. art. 15.

To which we add, that Pareus lib. 4. de Iustificat. capite. 17. says. That
good works are worthy of reward in the court of mercy, but worthy of
punishment in the court of justice of God. Et l. 1. c. 16. 23. and 24. Works
are required to regeneration, not to justification: or as Reineccius speaks
10. 1. Arm. c. 20. They are necessary to sanctification not to justification
Who also to. 4 c. 22. distinguishes a work in Giving and Receiving, and
says, that faith is a giving work, not a receiving Schlusselb. to. 7. Catal.
p. 446. writes, that obedience is necessary to salvation, but an others
obedience, not ours. And adds: The duty of obedience is indeed necessary to
salvation, forsooth if it be not freely remitted. Scarpius de Iustif. Contr.
15. Just men are worthy of the kingdom of God, by the worth of aptness, not
of perfection or merit. Riuet. tract. 3 sect. 36. There may be a relation of
Merit and Reward between men, but not between God and men. Perkins in Cathol.
Ref. Cont. 4. cap. 6. Good works are necessary to salvation, not as cause,
but only as a thing necessary following faith.

Touching good works in particular, they thus distinguish: of good works in
particular.
That to live single, is a good profitable, but not honest or virtuous: That
virginity is better then marriage in something, but not simply: That fasting is
a part of Gods worship in the law, but not in the Ghospel: That alms
delivers from sin and death, not by it self, but by the cause thereof:
That it is lawful to pray for the elect, not for others: for the living, not
for the dead, for things promised in the Scripture not for other things, as
appears by what has been rehearsed c. 15. To which we add that Perkins in
Cathol. reform. Cont. 3. c. 3. writes, that we pray not so much for the
forgiveness of sins past, as present. Confessio Wittember. says: We may
wish to the dead all rest and happiness in Christ, but we may not pray for them.
Luther in Postil. Dom. 2. post Trin. grants, that we may once or twice pray
for the dead, but not often: And at home and in our chamber, but not in the
Church. And the like has Vrbanus Regius in formulis caute loquendi to. 1. Who
also in locis. fol. 322. says, that we may pray co^ditionally for the soul
of our brother, but not absolutely. Field l. 3. de Eccles. c. 17. teaches,
that we may pray for one that is dead streigth after his death, but not
afterward, Zuingle in art. 60. says: I condemn not, if one being careful
for the dead, do implore or pray Gods mercy for them, but to define any time
for this, is diabolical. Spalata l. 5. Repub. c. 8. n. 132. writes, that God
at the intercession of the Church forgiueth little sins soon after death, but
not long after. Thus they distinguish about prayer fore the dead. Perkins in
Apoc. 2. tom. 2. The precept of repentance is directly given to the elect,
indirectly to the reprobate. Et Tilenus in Syntagm. c. 47. There is no
counsel inferred out of. 1. Corint. 7. but only a desire and wish of one
desiring the gift of continency.

Touching sin: these new distinctions they make: Of sin.
That it is imputed to reprobates and infidels, not to the faithful and elect:
That it is venial to the elect, not to others: that it may stand with justice
with some wrestling, no otherwise: that biting usury is condemned not other,
as we have related l. 1. c. 16. Besides Perkins in Cathol. ref. Cont. 2. cap.
1. says, that in justification, sin is taken away not in it self, but as
it is in the person: or as Riuet speaks Co^t. tract. 3. sect. 26. Sin
remains in part, not wholly. Calvin in Ioa^. 1. v. 29. Sin is in us but not
in the judgment of God. Beza in 2. part. resp. ad Coll. Montisb. p. 73. David
sinned, but not whole, but as he was not regenerate. p. 79. He did not retain
the holy Ghost, but some thing of the holy Ghost. page 71. Sin casts not
of the holy Ghost, but hinders his efficacy. Et p. 87. It makes the holy
Ghost a sleep for a time, but does not cast him of. Pareus l. 1. de Amiss.
Great. c. 7. Adam fell not as he was predestinate, but as he was to be
predestined: He lost the grace of creation, but not the grace of
justification. And Piscator in These. loc. 20. The elect do slide, but are not
cast down.

Touching justification, these new distinctions they Of justification.
frame. It is declared by works, but not caused: It forgiueth sins, but
takes them not away: It makes that sin is not imputed, but not that it is
no more. It makes a man just not in himself, but in Christ. And others such
like as may be seen lib. 1. c. 17. Moreover Luther in Zanchius de Persevere.
to. 7. col. 128. says: When Peter sinned, his love toward God and Christ was
not drowned, but only floated. Reineccius to. 4. Arm. c. 15. Sanctification
increases and decreaseth, but not justification. Kemnice in locis. part. 2.
tit. de Argum. writes, that when in Scripture God is required to judge us, or
reward us according to our justice, that speech is not of the justice of
person, but of our cause or controversy with other men. And again: That same:
ye are clean Joan. 13. And ye are washed and sanctified. 1. Cor. 7. is to be
understood imputatiuely: Whitaker ad Rat. 8. Camp. Faith, hope and charity do
make us just, inchoately not absolutely. Perkins de Praedest to 1.
distingui^heth grace into that which represseth; which he says is common to
reprobates and into that which renews, which he makes proper to the elect.
Et in Cath ref. Cont 4. c. 4. says: Adam had imputed justice according to the
substance thereof, but not according to imputation. Illyricusin Claue part. 2.
tract. 6. Sin is abolished by right and promise for the time to come, but not
in act and deed. Gesner in Co^p. loco. 22. In Scripture those are called i^st,
who a^ou^d with justice, according to the doctrine of the law, not of the
Gospel Scarpe de Just. Co^t. 1. Justification effectiuely is immediately of
Christ alone, but sanctification is of the holy Ghost. Justification quitteth
us in the judgment of God, not sanctification. Et Co^t. 7. There is a
twoefould ablutio^ of sin; the first is of the guilt, and this is
iust^ficatio^: the second is of the inherence thereof, and this is
sanct^fication. Bullinger. dec. 3. sermon. 9. There is a duble justice,
iustificant and obedi^nt. Polanus part. 2. these. The grace which Adam received
in creation, was not grace which makes grateful. Et in Disp. private. Sins
are blotted out by penance not causatiuely, but oste^siuely. Riuet. tract. 3.
sec. 26. We are perfectiuely imputatiuely just, but inhere^tly just, only
imperfectly.

Touching the law: they distinguish in this new sort: It is Of Gods law.
abrogated from the faithful according to rigor and imputatio^, no according
to obligation: There is a twoefould fulfilling of the law: legal and
Evangelical. Man's law binds in general, not in particular. Whitaker libr 8.
cont. Dur. sect. 96. says. The Decalogue is taken away in part, but not
simply. Calvin in Actor. 15. verse. 10. The commandments are an unsupportable
yoke for to be exacted, not for doctrine. Pareus l. 2. de Iustif. cap. 7. They
are heavy concerning perfection, not for inchoation. Reineccius to. 4. Arm.
cap. 13. They are light in respect of imputation and inchoation, but not of
perfect fulfilling. Bucan in Instit. loco. 19. To the regenerate, the law is
possible by imputation of the satisfaction of Christ, and by inchoation of
newness. Scarpius de Iustif. Co^t. 12. The law is possible for outward
precepts, not inward; in part not in whole, or by inchoation, or in Christ,
not in our selves. Musculus in locis titul. de Legibus: Christians fulfill the
law perfectly in Christ, imperfectly in themselves. Polanus in disput. private.
40. The regenerate keep the precepts of God by by imputation, but themselves
keep them not. Reineccius tom. 4. Armat. cap. 13. According to the law none is
worthy before God, but according to the Gospel, the godly are worthy
before God.

These and many such other distinctions never heard What only distinctions
Protestants say they allow.
of before among Christians, have Protestants devised, against which at this
present I object only this, that themselves teach, that no distinctions are
to be admitted in Divinity, which are not gathered out of express and plain
places of Scripture. For thus Whitaker. Contr. 4. quaest. 1. cap. 3. That rule
is much to be esteemed: That in divinity no distinctions are to be allowed,
but such as are proved by plain passages of Scripture: And lib. 2. de
Concupisc. cap. 7. We may say and defend what we will, if such distinctions be
accepted. Sadeel ad Repetit. Sophism. Turriani: It is a theological rule: All
distinctions in divinity must be proved by express places of Scripture. The
like has Perkins l. de Caena. to. 1. col. 861. and others.

Their most usual distinctions wherewith most commonly Most usual
distinctions with Protest.
they delude the testimonies of Scripture, are these, though perhaps all of
them use not the very self same terms. To wit: Before men, not before God:
or which comes all to one: It seems so, but is not: By this distinction they
delude all those testimonies of Scripture, which teach that reprobate or evil
men may believe, do good works, be in the Church, that reprobates may be
justified, that good works do justify, redeem sins or the like: Which
they expound, before men, not before God, or in show, not in deed. An other
usual distinction of theirs is: In it self, or in an other thing. By this
they delude those testimonies of Scripture, which say that good men are just,
worthy of God, fulfill the law, that baptism forgiueth sins, Alms
delivers from death, and such like, which they expound, in an other, not in
themselves: as that good men are just, worthy of God, fulfill the law, in
Christ not in themselves: that alms delivers from death, not in it self,
but in faith, as says Confessio Augustana. c. de Implet. legis, and that
baptism remitteth sins not in it self but in faith. So Calvin in Act. 2. v.
38. A third usual distinction of theirs is, Significa^tly not Causally: By
this they delude those testimonies of Scripture, which teach that Sacraments
work grace, Priests remit sins, good works do justify, do cause life
everlasting, and the like. Which they expound Significantly or ostensiuely, not
Causally. Their fourth accustomed distinction, is In part, not simply or
wholly, Thus they delude those testimonies which avouch that there is inherent
justice, that sinners are taken away, that good men's good works are good, and
such like, which they expound, In part, not simply or wholly. Their fifth usual
distinction is: A saying of the law, not of the Gospel. Thus they delude all
the sentences of Scripture, which declare that justice and life everlasting is
to be purchased by good works, that the keeping of the law is necessary to
life, and such like. For these kind of sayings, they will have to be only of
the law not of the Gospel. But their most usual distinction of all is.
Figuratively not Properly: which kind of deluding the Scripture is most ample
and contains almost all the former kinds. For what seems to be, and is not,
is figuratively not properly. Likewise what is in part, and not simply, what
is not in it self but in another, is figuratively and not properly. Yet
because this their distinction would wax stale, if it were used under the same
terms in all places, and the vanity thereof would easily appear if nakedly
it were applied to some places, therefore at least in words and with some little
differences they have divided it into diverse. Peculiarly by this distinction
they delude all those testimonies of Scripture, which teach that the Eucharist
is the body and blood of Christ, that eternal life is a reward, that the
Apostles are the foundations of the Church, that the Gospel is a law, Christ
a law giver, descended into hell, that there is in the Church an altar, a
sacrifice, and the like. These forsooth are their fine plasters which they
apply to cure all the wounds which are given them by the sword of the word of
God, which if they will let other Heretics use in such sort as they do,
nothing at all will be proved out of Scripture.

Wherefore thus I frame my 22. argument. They who besides their opposition to
the express words of holy Scripture related in the first book, are forced in
many and great matters to devise frivolous and verbal distinctions, and such
as destroy themselves, and were never heard of before among Christians, they
contradict the true sense of holy Scripture. Protestants do so. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XXIII. THAT PROTESTANTS CONFESS THE uniform consent of Fathers,
Councels, and of the Church to be against them, and neglect and condemn it.
THE 23. argument wherewith we will prove the opposition of Protestants with
the Scripture, shall be, because sometimes they be forced to acknowledge that
they contradict the uniform consent of the Fathers, Councels, and Church, yea
neglect and contemn it.

That sometimes they confess the uniform consent Protest. confess that ^hey
are against Fathers. How many soever.
of the Fathers, Councels, and Church is against them, is manifest. For thus
writes Luther in 2. Petri to. 5. fol. 490. Here stumbled how many soever
either Fathers are Doctors have heretofore expounded the Scripture, as when that
Math. 16. Thou art Peter etc. they interpreted of the Pope. Tom. 2. l. de lib.
arbit. fol 480. What avails it, if one shall rely upon the ancient Fathers
approved by the course of so many ages? Were All of them.
they not all of them together blind? Et to. 6. in Genesis c. 42. Here surely all
the Fathers, Austin, Ambrose, etc. were deceived, nor understood any thing,
Kemnice in loc. part. 1. p. 166. All antiquity with one mouth reject those
propositions: That all things that are done, are done necessarily: That men
sin of necessity. And yet Protestants teach so, as appears. l. 1. c. 2.
art. 8. etc. 21. art. 1. and 2. Schlusselburg to. 8. Catal. p. 379. We deny
that The ancient Doctors.
the ancient Doctors of the Church were Catholics every where, for they were
deceived sometimes and perverted some articles of faith. Zuingle in Respons. ad
Epist. Constant. to. 1. speaking of the exposition of Malachias touching
sacrifice in the Church, says: The exposition of the Ancient is rejected. And
l. de Baptism. to. 2. We must say, that almost all whosoever have Almost all
from the Apostles. Old and new. All Divines.
written upon baptism even from the very Apostles time, have erred from the
mark, and that not in few points. Wherefore we will see what thing baptism is
after a far other manner, then either the ancient or the new writers, yea then
those of our days have done, Ib. fol. 74. Nether they only say that (Saint
Ihons baptism is different from Christ's) but also all Divines whom I remember
ever to have read, do follow this their sentence most constantly. Ib. in
Paraen. fol. 603. They were Fathers begot the Popedom, the most wicked brood
of Antichrist. Bullinger dec. 4. sermon. 10. It is true which they say, that the
ancie^ts prated for the dead. Gualter. in Actor. 19. hom. 125. It is evident,
that the Fathers abused this place: It deceived them, that they thought Ihons
baptism of water and Christ's to be different. P. Martyr l. de votis. Surely
that I may confess that which is true, we have them (Fathers) harder against
us in this cause. In 1. Cor. 15. All the Fathers make for this opinion. Again:
We All the Fathers.
confess freely that the Fathers make differences of rewards. Zanchius de
Eccles. cap. 9. tom. 8. The Fathers exposition is not admitted in this place.
Again: The Fathers exposition is The Fathers.
not admitted in this place; Upon this rock that is, upon Peter Musculus in
locis tit. de signis. The Fathers do attribute more efficacy to our
Sacraments, then to those of the old testament, in so much as they say they be
effectual signs of grace. This error is to be beaten out of the heads of all
the faithful. Ib. tit. de bapt. The Fathers did deny salvation to the
children of Christians taken away by death before they were baptized. Calvin in
1. Cor. 7. v. 5. The Fathers.
Let no man marvel, that in this matter we freely dissent from the Fathers.
Again: Fathers erred in approving inconsiderately the vow of chastity. Ib. v.
7. The Fathers will have virginity to be a worship of God. Now therein is a
pernicious error. In Act 19. v. 9. With the Fathers that opinion had force,
that Ihons and Christ's baptismes were different. And for breuities sake to omit
his In how many points Calvin is against the Fathers.
words, 2. Inst. c. 2.. 4. he confesses, that the Fathers be against him
touching free will. c. 4.. 3. touching permissio^ of sin. c. 14.. 3. touching
Christ mediator as he is God. c. 16.. 9. touching the desce^t of Christ to
hell. Et l. 3. c. 4.. 38 39. touching satisfaction. c. 5.. 10. touching prayer
for the dead. Et l. 4. c. 15.. 7. touching the difference betwixt S. Ihons and
Christ's Baptism, and. 20. touchings laics baptizing in case of necessity. c.
17.. 39. touching the carrying of the Eucharist to the sick. c. 18.. 10.
touching Sacrifice. Et. 43. touching exufflation and chrisme in baptism. The
like he acknowledges Luc. 7. v. 13. Math. 19. v. 9. and 17. 1. Cor. 15. v. 10.
Hebr. 7. v. 9. and other where often. Beza in resp. ad Cast. vo. 1. Theol. We
see, that this place especially was wrested by the Fathers for to prove their
limbus. And the Fathers from hence also devised that descent of Christ's soul
into hell: Besides in Marc. 1. v. 4. In act. 2. v. 27. In c. 19. v. 2. In Romans
4. v. 11. and otherwhere oftentimes, he professes to disagree from the
Fathers. Dan. Co^tr. 3. p. 277. says, that the Fathers have most naughtily
expounded that saying of Christ Math. 16. Thou art Peter, of the person of
Peter. Et. p. 281. They have most naughtily expounded the place. Sadeel ad art.
abiur. 26. We hold this article (of Christ's desce^t) but we understand it
otherwise the^ the Fathers did. Whitaker Contr. 2. q. 5. c. 7. We confess
indeed, that some Popish errors are ancient, and held and defended of the
Fathers, which truly we do freely and openly profess. Lib. 6. cont. Dur.
sect. 7. Your Popery is errors of the Fathers.
mingle mangle of Popish religion is pached up of the errors of the Fathers.
lib. 8. sect. 7. Both of them justly exclude that fictitious limbus of the
Fathers. l. 2. de Script. p. 280. Luther durst dissent from the Fathers, whom
he perceived plainly to dissent from the Scriptures. Perkins in Gal. 1. verse.
8 Many doctrines From the time of the Apoles.
have been received and believed even from the time of the Apostles, of the
intercession of Saints, of the prayer to the dead, and for the dead in
purgatory, and the the like, and these doctrines have been confirmed by
diverse revelations. Spalata. l. 5. de Repub. c. 11. n. 41. That Priests do
truly and properly forgive sins Common consent of Fathers. Universally
received.
by the keys, is the most common consent of the Fathers. cap. 8. numero. 37.
It was a most ancient custom and most universally received in the Church, that
prayers and oblatio^s should be made for the dead. Sutclif. l. 1. de Eccles.
Bellarmin means any consent whatsoever with the Fathers in doctrine of free
will, of men's satisfactions for sins, of limbus, of purgatory, of prayer for
the dead, of prayer to the dead, of forbiddacne of marriage, and other such
like doctrines: This consent we deny to be a note of the Church, for in all
these things they did dot consent with the Ancient fathers with mutual consent.
Apostolical Church. Duditius in Beza epist. 1. says thus: If it be truth
which the ancient Fathers have professed with mutual consent, that is all on
the Papists side. Thus they touching their dissent from the Fathers.

In like manner they confess, that they dissent from the Church and Counsels.
For thus P. Martyr in 1. Cor. 3. That The Church alwai^s prayed for dead. The
ancient Church. The Church at 500.
also uses to be objected to us. That the Church has always prayed for the
dead: which truly I do not deny. Whitaker Co^t. 2. q. 5. c. 7. I answer.
True it is, that Calvin says and the Centurie writers, that the ancient
Church erred in many things, as of limbus, of free will, of merit of works,
and the other things before rehearsed. Again: I say that the Church which was
500. or 600. years after Christ did not hold in all points the doctrine of the
Apostles. For she held some errors. Casaubon. epist. ad Cardin. Perron. It was
a most ancient custom, that in the public prayers of the Church remembrance
should be made of the The ancient Church.
dead, and rest prayed for them of God. The ancient Church by this means
approved her faith of the resurrection to come. Zuinglius in Elencho. tom. 2.
speaking of the ceremonies In the beginning of the Church. General Counsels
of baptism, says: We know, that in the beginning of the Church these things
were used. The like they confess touching Counsels. For thus Confessio
Anglica. art. 21. General Counsels may err, and sometimes have erred even in
the things which belong to the rule of piety. Urban Regius in Interpret. All
Counsels The ancient Councels.
loc. to 1. It is more clear then the light, that all Counsels have
pernitiously erred. Calvin. 4 Insit. c. 9.. 10. There is some thing wanting
even in those ancient and purer Counsels. There was a notable example hereof
in the Council of Nice. Whitaker Cont. 2. q. 7. c 7. avouches, that the
Council of Nice and Chalcedon have erred.

Nether do Protestants only dissent from the uniform consent of Fathers,
Councels, and Church, but also they make small account thereof. For thus P.
Martyr in loc. Tit. Not Fathers even agreing.
Script.. 16. But at least (say they) then are the Fathers to be allowed, when
they agree amongst themselves. No not then always. Et lib. de votis. As long
as we abide in the Fathers, we shall always remain in the same errors.
Whitaker. Cont. 1. q. 5. c: 8. The agreing exposition of the Fathers, is no
rule of expou^ding Not witnesses without exception.
Scriptures. Cont. 2. q. 7. c. 7. We deny not but the Fathers be witness of
the truth, but so as they be not without exception, for all have erred. l. 6.
cont. Dur. sect. 3. The consent of Fathers is not sure and free from error. Et
ad Demonst. 7. Sanderi. Not the whole Senate of Fathers.
Nether will we think, that thou have demonstrated any thing, though thou
could bring the whole Senate of Fathers against us. Rainolds in his
Conference p. 151. Truth is not to Not all.
be tried by consent of Fathers. Psalm. 150. If not one or twoe of the Fathers,
but all have thought it, nor thought it only but have written it, nor written
it only but thought it, not obscurely but clearly, nor seldom but often, nor
for a time but perpetually, yet their consent were not secure. And he terms
universality, antiquity, consent, rotten posts. Yea in his 5. Thesis he will
have the Roman Church to be no true Church, because she forbids the
Scriptures to be expounded contrary to that sense which our holy mother the
Church does hold, or contrary to the uniform consent of Fathers. By which
forbiddance (says he) are often rejected those senses which the spirit by the
tenor of the words and sentences does teach to be the meaning of the holy
text. Morto^ in Apol. part. 1. l. 1. c. 69. Sometimes neglecting the persons
(of the Fathers) it is most safe to fech the prime antiquity out of the
Apostolical writings. Which is (says he) the Protest. defense, to reject the
Fathers.
prore and puppe of the Protestants defense. Calvin 4. Instit. c. 9.. 12. Let
no names of Cou^cells, of Pastors, of Bishops hinder us, that we try not all
the spirits of them all with the square of Gods word, for to find whether they
be of God. Daneus Co^tr. p. 289. Touching the saying of the Fathers, this is
our brief answer to them all: We regard not what the Fathers have said, but
how Saying of Fathers not reguarded.
truly. Et Cont. 5. p. 698. We must not look what the Fathers have written,
but what they should have written. Vorstius in Antib. p. 395. The Protestants
do not think that they ought much to care, what the ancient Fathers have
thought or written of this Not to be cared for.
matter. Pareus l. 5. de Just. c. 5. I say that Scripture is to be expounded by
Scripture, not by Fathers. Et l. 2. de Great. c. 14. Though all the Fathers
agreed well, yet were it weak. Reineccius to. 1. Arm. Not all fathers together
c. 9 When all Doctors of the Church with a common consent do teach some thing
to come from Apostolical tradition, is that to be believed to be Apostolical
tradition? No. Gerlachius disp. 22. de Eccles. The Fathers have straied from
the path of truth, not in these only wherein they disagree with themselves
and with others, but in those also which they have uniformly delivered. Celius
Secundus de Amplit. regni Dei. lib. 1. Should then the Their authority nothing
at all.
authority of so many ancient Fathers, the consent of ages avail nothings?
Nothing at all. Polanus in these. part. 3. p. 546. We cite them (^estimonies of
Fathers) ^specially when we handle points of religion controuerted with
Papists, not for our sake but for Papists, that we may refute Papists by the
Fathers, whom they have Fathers cited as Heathens.
made their judges: as in old time the, Fathers refuted the Heathen by the
testimonies of the Sybills, of Poets, Philosophers, orators, and Heathen
Historians. As therefore the Fathers used the testimonies of Heathens against
Heathe^s: So we produce the testimonies of Fathers against Papists. Muscul. in
loc. tit. de Scrip. As for me, I require not the testimonies of Fathers for to
give authority to Canonical Scripture, and to make distinction between it and
the Fathers writings, contenting my self with the authority and canon of the
Scripture it self. But because our adversaries endeavor to trouble the truth
by pretext of Fathers, I well allege them where they are against their
endeauours, but when they cite any thing out of the Fathers writings against
us, I plainly say that I will not bind my self to their authority.

In like sort they make little reckoning of the Church and Authority of the
Church avails nothing.
Councels. For thus writes Whitaker ad Rat. 3. Camp. Can the Church afford us
no confirmation of doctrine, no arguments of faith? None. Et Co^t. 1. q. 5. c.
10. The practice of the Church, is the opinion of men. The sentences of the
Fathers, is an opinion of Merely humane.
men. The definition of Councels is the judgment of me^. Vorstius in Antib.
page 1. says, that the testimony of the Church is merely humane, Et p. 382.
An Argument from the practice of the ancient Church concludes nothing.
Protest. contemn Fathers Church and Councels. Not to be regarded. Contemned.


Finally they profess to contemn both Fathers Church, and Cou^cells. For thus
writes Luther de ser. arb. to. 2. fol. 433. The Fathers authority is not to
be regarded. Et l. de Council. Twenty years ago I was forced to contemn the
Fathers commentaries. Melancthon. in loc. edit. An. 1523. I am of opinion that
in matters of religion men's commentaries are to be fled like the plague.
Reineccius to. 4. Armat. cap. 15. There are Fathers who hold the same error
with the Papists, whose testimonies we reject as false and fond. Bullinger dec.
5. Sermon. 4. We answer in one word to the ancient writers of the Church, whom
they object unto us, testifying I know not what of Peter's primacie, we do not
so much care what the Fathers thought, Little moved.
as what Christ has instituted. Calvin. 3. Institut. cap. 14.. 38. I am little
moved with those things which every where are to be found in the writings of
the Fathers touching satisfaction. Et de ver. reform. Nether care I for the
sentences of the Fathers which these Moderators bring for to tread down the
truth. What to do with Father^
Humfrey in Proregom. What have we to do with Fathers, with flesh and blood,
or what pertains it to us what the false synods of Bishops do decree.
Whitaker lib. 8. cont. Dur. sect. 62. I care little for the Fathers. Sect. 69. I
care not what We care not. What to do with Councils.
the Fathers thought of Ihons baptism. Cont. 1. q. 5. c. 10. What have we to
do with Churches or Counsels, unless they show that those things which they
define be aggreable to Scripture. Et l. de Script. c. 1. sect. 7. An argument
which is taken from the bare testimony of the Church to confirm the
Scriptures, or any part of them, or any point of our faith, I say is
inualide, ineffectual and unfit to persuade. Iuel in Apol part. 4. says,
that Way of the Church fanaticall.
the way to find the truth by God speaking in the Church and Councels, is very
uncertain, very dangerous, and in a manner fanaticall.

Thus thou see Reader, that Protestants confess, that in many and great
matters, the Fathers, the ancient, all Fathers, all from the Apostles time, the
ancient Fathers with mutual consent, all antiquity: likewise, the ancient
Church, the Church of the first 500. or 600. years, the Church in the very
beginning: Finally general Counsels, all general Counsels are opposite to
them: and that the Catholic doctrine does consist of the sentences of the
Fathers, has been believed and received since the Apostles time, and all
delivered by the Fathers with mutual consent. Moreover thou see, how little
they esteem the uniform consent of Fathers, Church, and Counsels, yea in
plain terms profess to contemn it. I dispute not now, how the uniform
consent of Fathers, of the Church, and Counsels is infallible in matters of
faith: which has been manifestly proved by many Catholics writers, only I
propose to the Readers consideration, how much Note.
Protestants do prejudice their cause in the judgment of all reasonable men,
by rejecting and contemning the uniform consent of Fathers, of the Church and
Counsels, touching the exposition of Scripture. Forsooth young me^ contemn
most ancient; few, very many; disagreing, those that most agree; men of mean
wit or learning, those that were most witty and learned: men of small
diligence, those that have been most diligent: vulgar, yea profane men, those
that were most holy: nether will admit such and so many men now happily
reigning with Christ, who nether knew us nor them, so that could not be
partial, either for judges, or arbiters, or witnesses sufficient of the sense
of Scripture, but quite reject them as insufficient to decide this
controversy. Surely hereby it is evident, that the sense which Protestants
attribute to the Scripture, is not evident, and consequently no point of faith,
seeing so many, so learned, so witty, so holy, so diligent searchers of
Scripture in so many ages could not find it. For as Andrews says in Tortura
Torti: It is monstrous, if among so many eyes, eagles eyes, eyes daily
conversant in Scriptures (I add eyes lightened by the holy Ghost) none
perceived this sense grounded as they say must plainly -- If it had been most
plainly grounded, I think some Father would have seen through a lattise at
least he would not have denied it, and taught the contrary: Yea it follows
that the sense in which Catholics expound the Scripture: is manifest, seeing so
many and so great Fathers have uniformly delivered it, nor delivered it
only, but also condemned those who followed that sense which the Protestants
embrace, as Heretics, as shall appear in the Chapter following. I add also
that Casaubo^ in his epistle to Card Perron thus writes: The King will
willingly grant, that now it is not lawful No end of controversies without
the Fathers.
for any to condemn those things, which are evident to have been approved by
the Fathers of the first ages by an uniform consent for good and lawful.
Again: If the testimony and weight of the primitive Church be taken away, the
King willingly grants that amongst men the controversies of these times will
never have an end. Luther also in Defens. verb. Caenae. to. 7. If this frame of
the world shall continue some ages, humane means will be again set down, after
the manner of the Fathers, for to take away distinctions, and laws and decrees
will be made for to reconcile and to keep agreement in religion.

In form therefore thus I make my 23. argument Who not only gainesay the
express words of holy Scripture in such sort as has been set down in the
former book, but also confess, that in many and gerat matters, they
contrary to the uniform consent of holy Fathers, of the Church and Councels,
yea reject and contemn it, they are also contrary to the true sense of holy
Scripture. Protestants do so. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XXIV. THAT PROTESTANTS CONFESS, that their doctrine was in old time
condemned for Heresy.
THE 24. argument for to prove that Protestants co^tradict the right sense of
holy Scripture, shall be because it is so manifest that much of their doctrine
was in old time condemned of the Fathers for heresy, as themselves confess
it.

For touching the heresies of Aerius, thus writes Bucan. Instit. loc. 42. Did
the Fathers rightly reckon the opinion Protest. confess they hold the
heresies: Of Aerius.
of Aerius who made no distinction between a Bishop and a Priest, amongst
heresies? No more surely, then these other his opinions. 1. That we ought not
to make prayers or offerings for the dead. 2. That dead Saints are not to be
prayed unto. 3. That there ought not to be any set days of fasting. Beza
respons. ad Serau. c. 32. Surely Serauia, if thou do think Aerius to have
been an Heretic in those three former points, all the reformed Churches this
day are Heretics to thee, as well as they are to the Papists. Vorstius in
Antibel. p. 201. Aerius was unjustly condemned of heresy by the Fathers.
Angelocrator. l. 7. de chronol. The opinions of Aerius a most learned man, that
he rejected prayer for dead and set fast, and made a Priest equal to a Bishop,
were to be borne withal, unless with Aerius he had impugned the Trinity.
Whitaker. Cont. 2. q. 5. cap. 7. Epiphanius indeed and Austin after him, put
Aerius amongst Heretics. But if he held nothing but these points, he was no
Hereike. Cartwright Replica. 2. p. 618. If it must prevail against me, that
Aerius an Heretics would make a Bishop and Priest all one, whom Epiphanius a
Catholic thought to be distinct and different by the word of God, or that
Austin reckoned it amongst the heresies of of Aerius; by this way will rise a
great prejudice to the truth, wherewith we believe, that we ought not to pray
for the dead, nor offer sacrifice for them. For Epiphanius to. 1. haer. 7.
calls this an heresy of Aerius, and of the same judgment is Austin. haer.
51. which notwithstanding is orthodox doctrine. Gratianus Antiiesuita part. 1.
pagin. 528. Surely if one take away those things which Aerius is rather feigned
then proved to have held with the Aria^s about the divinity of Christ, there
will be nothing which may be justly and deservedly reprehended in his doctrine.
Daneus in libr. Augustini de Haeres. capit. 53. The Aerians were quickly
suppressed, because they were oppugned by the common consent of all Bishops. 1.
Aerius taught that a Priest did not differ from a Bishop in order and degree.
Which doctrine I see not why it should be condemned. 2. That prayers are not to
be made for the dead, because they cannot be helped by such suffrages of ours.
Why Christians should not admit this, I see not. 3. That fasts are not be
appointed upon certain set and solemn days yearly, as was the fast of lent:
for that all this kind of aniuersarie fasts is superstitious, and not to be
used of Christians. Which surely is true. 4. That there is no pascha among
Christians which is to be kept and celebrated. Nether ought this opinion of the
Aerians to be condemned, because it is true. Wherefore we have not noted these
men among Heretics.

Touching the heresies of Iouinian, thus writes the Of Iouinian.
same Daneus l. cit. c. 82. Iouinian did equal marriage with single life, and
virginity, for that both of the^ are of themselves indiff^e^t and no part of
Gods true worship, as also because etc. This why it should be erroneus, nether
Hierome proves, nor any other of the Fathers has proved. Whitaker loc. cit.
Iouinia^ thought that the choice of meats and fasting was not meritorious. I
answer. Is the choice of meats, meritorious? Folly. To fast for this end to
merit eternal life, is to abuse fasting. We willingly agree with Iouinia^ in
this point. Iouinia^ taught that marriage was equal to virginity in dignity
and merit. So also Paul, so Christ, so we all teach. Indeed Hierome inuetheth
against Iouinian for this cause. Hu^fre. ad Rat. 3. Camp. We grant, it is true
which Sanders says of the Iouinians and Protestants: That fasting or
abstinence from some certain meats profits nothing.

Touching the heresies of Vigilantius thus Humfre loc. cit. Of Vigilantius.
He taught, that the reliks of Saints are not to be worshipped. And we also.
Vigilantius taught, that there was no need to light torches, or to wachat the
sepulchers of Martyrs. And why should not we teach the same, and much rather?
He taught that Saints are not to be worshipped, nor that men ought
superstitiously to run to their monuments: We say the same. Vorstius in
Antibel. p. 162. The heresies alleged of Bellarmin, are indeed no heresies,
for example, which he alleges out of Hierome touching Iouinian and
Vigilantius, and out of Epiphanius touching Aerius and some few others.
Angelocrator loc. cit. Vigilantius, a Frenchman, but a most learned Prelat in
Spain, denies, that Saints are to be reverenced, and would, have riches to be
preferred before poverty: Against him Hierome wrote. Beza in 2. part. resp. ad
Acta Montisb. Hierome defending an ill cause, that is invocation of Saints
against Vigilantius etc. Luther in Postilla Exalt. Sanctae Crucis: Vigilantius
wrote of this matter (worship of reliks) against whom Hierome earnestly
opposed himself; which I wish had not been done, and if Vigilantius his book
were extant as Hieroms is, I believe Vigilantius wrote more Christianely of
this matter then Hierome. Serranus cont. Hayum part. 3. The discreet Reader
sees, that Hierome in that book against Vigilantius passes not only the
bounds of modesty, but also of truth. Iuel in Defe^s. Apol. part. 1. c. 2.
sect. 3. Hierome reproves Vigilantius that he reprehended wakes, invocation of
Saints, worship of relikes, lights, and other such things. Of Origin.


As for the heresies of Origin, thus writes Spalatensis l. 5. de Repub. c. 6.
n. 44. Origin was shroudly taxed of Theophilus, because he held that the
Sacraments did not work sanctification by the work (as I may so speak)
wrought, but only by the work of the worker, and that God does not use
material and insensible creatures to importe sanctification to men. But
Theophilus whilst he does reprove this opinion or error of Origin, is all etc.
And yet herein Protestants teach as Origin did, as appears by what has been
related l. 1. cap. 10. artic. 7.

Finally Daneus Contr. 4. page 770. confesses to agree Of Messalia^s, and
Nouatia^s
with the Messalians, that habitual concupiscence in the just is sin: and
with Nouatians, that Christians are not to be anointed.

Thou see Reader that Protestants plainly confess, that they defend the
condemned doctrine, of Aerius, Iouinian, Vigilantius, Origin, Messalians,
Nouatians: and that S. Austin, S. Hierome, S. Epiphanians, Fathers, Bishops
with common consent of all, did condemn their doctrines for heresies, and them
for heretics. Whom I advise to consider well those words of Beza written of a
late Heretik epist. 81. He plainly and without dissimulation houldeth and
accounts Origin, Aerius, Heluidius etc. not for Heretics, but for maintainers
of the truth. These are such things, as that now it may only seem to be
wanting to set the Devil himself in the throne of God and of truth. And
Epist. 16. What I Good counsel of Beza.
admonished before, I admonish now in the Lord again and again, to wit, that
at lest they would consider with themselves from whom and to whom are they
gone. For that I may imitate the words of S. Austin l. 2. cont. Julian. c. 10.
Has long time so confounded the highest with the lowest: Shall light so be
termed darkness, and darkness light, that Aerius, Iouinian, Vigilantius,
become to see, and Austin, Hierome, Epiphanius be blind.

But in some I thus argue in the 24. place: whose doctrine in many and
greatest points is opposite to the express words of Scripture, and besides (as
themselves confess) was condemned of the ancient Church and holy Fathers, for
heresy, that is repugnant to the true sense of Scripture: But such is the
doctrine of Protestants. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XXV. THAT PROTESTANTS THEMSELVES sometimes confess that diverse of
their opinions be blasphemous.
THE 25. argument wherewith we will prove that Protestants contradict the true
sense of the Scripture, shall be, because it is so manifest that diverse of their
doctrines which in the former book I showed to be opposite to the express
words of Scripture, are blasphemous, as partly the very Authors of them,
partly other learned Protestants being compelled by their conscience and the
euidencie of the matter do confess it.

Concerning God: Protestants teach that he wills sin, Blasphemy: that God
wills sin.
as has been seen l. 1. c. 2. art. 1. Which doctrine to be blasphemous, thus
confesses Calvin in Resp. ad Nebulon. p. 732. Was it a doubtful blasphemy,
to make God the author of of sin, to will sin, to thrust to sin? Beza de
Praed. co^t. Castle. vol. 1. Theol. p. 372. Out of these things none of these
blasphemies follows, to wit, either that God is the author of sin, or is
delighted with sin, or also wills sin. Et p. 397. It cannot be said
without blasphemy, that God wills injustice. Ib. l. Quest. and Resp. p. 681.
What then? Shall we say, that God wills iniquity? God forbid. For this is
the most horrible blasphemy of all. Zanchius l. 3. de Not. Dei c. 4. We should
surely say; that God is the cause and author of sin, if we should say that
properly speaking he wills sin, or would have sin to be done. Hutterus in
Analysi Co^f. Aug. p. 625. The blasphemy of Sacramentaries is execrable; who
are not ashamed to refer the most doleful fall of our first parents and all
that world of evils, which thereon insued, not in regard of the punishment, but
of the sin, unto an absolute and eternal decree of God, and to his
effectual working and immutable will Et p. seq. But let heaven be astonished
and the elements amazed at such mostrous blasphemies, whereof no pious man
should suffer to hear the only outward noise without shaking, much less
should assent unto them in his heart. And Ioannes Andrae in Colloquio Montisb.
p. 422. This assertion (that man fell by Gods will) is impious and horrible to
hear, and so contrary to the express and revealed word of God.

They teach also that God wills sin even as it is That God wills sin as
sin.
sin, as has been showed lib. 1. cap. art. 2. But that this is blasphemous,
is acknowledged by Beza l. de Praedest. p. 410. in the words: If ever we had
thought to speak or write, that sins as sins proceed from the will of God,
we would confess, that we were worthy of all punishment. Lobechius also Disp.
21. This principle of Divinity is firmly to be held and to be believed with
all our heart: that God nether wills nor commands ill deeds as they are
such, much less works or helps them, or by an eternal decree does
destinate or secretly drive men to commit them.

They teach also, that God works sin and is the That God is cause of sin.
cause and author of it as is to be seen l. 1. c. 2. art. 4. And yet Calvin.
l. de Provident. p. 742. alias 736. confesses, that it is a monstrous
blasphemy, that wickedness is done not only by the will of God, but also he
being the author thereof. And page 471. Thou wranglest with me, as if I had
said, that sin is the just work of God, which in all my writings I ever
more detest. Instruct. contr. Libertin. cap. 14. God must deny himself and
become a Devil, if he did work evil, which these men do attribute unto him.
The like he has libr. de Praedestin. page 711. And in Actor. 2. ver. 23.
says: I deny that God is the author of evil, because in this word an evil
affection is insinuated. Beza in Absters. Calumn. Heshus. page 316. calls it
blasphemy: That God works the wickedness of the wicked. And de Praedest.
cont. Castle. p. 401. God forbid, that any of ours should have said or
written, as thou auonchest, that God either give, or permit, or work an evil
will, or any wicked or filthy desires: when as even our thoughts do
altogether abhor from these kind of blasphemies. P. Mart. in locis class 1.
c. 14. If God wrought sin, he were a sinner. Kemnice in locis part. 1. tit de
Causa Peccati: All men's mynds and ears do so abhor from that speech: God is
the cause of sin, that therefore the Maniches did feign an other God. Vrsin.
in Miscellan. p. 72. Thou say, that these are the speeches of many of men:
God does effectually work in the reprobate, that they sin: With all our
heart we accurse this speech and doctrine. Whitaker ad Rat. 9. Campia. That is
horrible, Campian, and not to be spoaken which thou say; that any should
make God the Author of sin, He deserves that God should streigth with a
thunder boult cast him into the bottomless pit of hell. Pareus in Colleg.
Theol. 1. disput. 2. The Fathers justly condemned that impious doctrine of the
Maniches and Libertins, ascribing the cause of fall and sin to God the
Creator. And Disput. 3. God was not, nor is not the efficient cause of sin,
which heretofore was the blasphemy of the Maniches, and now is of some
Libertines.

They teach that God does predestinate and ordain That he predestined men to
sin.
me^ to sin, as is related l. 1. c. 2. art. 5. Which to be blasphemous,
confesses Vorstius in Amica Collat. sect. 89. in the words: which doctrine
(that God does destinate men to sin) I scarce believe that thy self wilt
think to be void of blasphemy if thou do well consider it. Hutter in
Anal. Confess. August. c. 9. The troop of Sacramentaries, Beza, Calvin,
Renecher, does not fear to write with a most execrable and most wonderful
blasphemy, that some are fatally and absolutely destinated not only to their
last end, to wit, damnation, but also to the causes between, even to
infidelity it self, by an absolute decree of reprobation which goes before
all causes. Episcopius apud Hom. in Specim. Contr. Belg. p. 36. Great injustice
and hypocrisy should be attributed to God, if by a secret will he did define
and ordain that those things should be done, which by his revealed will he
forbids and will not have done. Arminius ib. says: Bellarmin obiecteth
against the opinion of our Doctors, that thereof will follow, that God is the
Author of sin, that God truly sins, that God alone sins, and that
sin is no sin: By this complainte I see no wrong done to your doctrine,
Perkins.

They teach, that God does command sin, as we have proved l. 1. c. 2. art. 6.
Which to be blasphemy confesses That he commands sin.
Beza in Resp. ad Acta Montisbel. page 182. in these words: That God commands
that which he will not, punishes that which he commands, is the author of
evil: surely all these things are full of horrible impiety and blasphemy.
And Zanchius in Depuls. calum. to. 7. col. 255. I have always taught, that it
is blasphemy, to say, that God commands, men to sin.

They teach that God does push and tempt men to That he te^pteth to sin.
sin, as is to be seen l. 1. c. 2. art. 7. And yet Calvin Resp. ad Nebulon.
p 732. says: Was it a doubtful blasphemy: that God pusheth men to sin?
And in 1. Joan. 3. v 8. It is proper to the Devil, to push men to sin. De
Praedest. page 711. If ever I had said, that it had been done by the instinct
of the holy Ghost, that the first man should forsake God, perhaps Pighius
might justly iusult over me. Beza de Praedest. vol. 1. Theol. p. 404. The name
of Tentation does not agree to God, since it signifies nothing but inticement
to evil, which God can no ways do. In Math. 3. v. 3. Tentations which entice
us to evil, come not but from Satan. And in Respons. ad Acta Montisb. part. 2.
page 186. Nether he, being infinitely good, could push a created good to evil.
Melancthon in Schlusselb. l. 1. Theol. Calvin. artic. 8. They do infer, that
God does push the mynds and hearts of men to do wickedly: this is a damned
error. Et lib. de Causa peccati. to. 2. That same Cyclopicall cauillation of
some is to be rejected, that therefore God sins not in pushing men to evil,
because there is no law for God. This Cyclopicall imagination is detestable.
Whitaker ad Rat. 8. Camp. God did not add new spurs to David and Judas for
to sin. God forbid that any Christian should so much as think so. Hutter
in Anal. page 683. It cannot be said or thought without great wickedness or
impiety and blasphemy, that God is the efficient, impelling, inclining, cause
of sin.

They say that God imposes necessity or forces men That he forces to sin.
to sin, as is showed. lib. 1. c. 2. art. 8. which to be blasphemy
confesses Whitaker libr. 8. cont. Dur. sect. 7. We have always rejected as
blasphemous, that God does force and push men to sin, and puts evil wills
into them. Kemnice in locis part. 1. page 169. condemns this proposition: God
forces to sin. And Moulins in Arnolds flights says: That God does push and
necessitate to sin, is a horrible and Devilish doctrine.

They teach that God does justify a wicked man remaining That he justifies
the wicked.
wicked, as appears l. 1. cap. 2. artic. Which to be blasphemous, is
acknowledged by Tilenus in Syntagm. c. 41. in these words: We deny not that he
is made and is just, whom God pronounces just: which surely the just
judgment of the most just judge does require, whose judgment is according to
truth.

They say that God does not care for good works, as That he cares not for good
works.
we have showed l. 1. cap. 2. art. 13. of which doctrine thus speaks
Melancthon Resp. ad art. 24. Bauar. What a horrible and barbarous speech is
this? And Kemnice in loc. part. 2. tit. de bonis oper. terms it a fanaticall
paradox.

They say that God has no will to save all, nor calls That he has no will
to save all.
all to him, as is to be seen l. 1. cap. 2. art. 19. And never the less liber
Co^cordiae c. 11. pronou^ceth that these doctrines are false, horrible, and
blasphemous: That God has no will that all men should do penance and believe
the Gospel: That when God calls us to him, he has no will in earnest that
all men should come to him: That God will not that all should be saved, but
that some, not for their sins, but only for the decree, purpose and will of
God are destinated to damnation, so as by no means they can obtain salvation.
The same opinions Herbrand. in Compend. Theol. loc. de Elect. condemns as
blasphemous. And Gerlachius to. 2. disput. 16. says: Impious, blasphemous,
and pernicious to men's salvation are the doctrines that follow: That God
wills not that every men be saved: That it is false, that God has made all
mankind for no other end then for salvation: That God does not call men to
salvation. Grauer in absurdis Calvin. c. 5. sect. 31. This opinion of
Caluinists, that God has no will that all men be saved, is extremely impious
and blasphemous. In like manner James Andrew in Colloq. Montisb. p. 421. and
422.

They teach that God of himself wills the death That he wills death and
damnation.
and damnation of men, as appears. l. 1. cap. 2. art. 22. And yet Adamus
Francisci in Margarita Theol. loco. 17. condemns as blasphemous these
opinions: That God has destinated the greatest number of men to eternal
damnation for the mere pleasure of his will: That he never loved those whom he
has destinated to damnation: That our first fathers fell by Gods decree, will,
and ordinance: That Christ died for the Elect only: That the merit of his
passion pertains to the Elect only: That the promises of the Gospel are
not universal: That God does not in earnest call thereprobates by the
Gospel: That the reprobate cannot be converted: That the elect falling into
sin, retain grace. Gerlachius also Disp. 16. cit. says that these are
blasphemous positions: The reprobate are reprobated without any desert of
theirs: That God sometime does by his word signify that he wills that which
he wills not; and that he will not that which indeed he will: That the
Gospel is promulgated to some that they may be indurated. Homius disp. 60.
writes thus: If any should teach, that God has decreed by his absolute will
without any respect of sin, to da^ne men and to punish the^ with everlasting
torments, he doubtless should blasphemously attribute manifest injustice to
God. And Remonstrantes in Collat. Hagae after they had recited this opinion of
the Co^trare monstrantes: That God does reprobate some for his pleasure and not
for their sin; so that he would not give them faith or Christ, that he might
surely bring the^ to their end by infidelity as by the fruit of this
reprobation: they add p. 128. We object, that this doctrine is of it self so
absurd and horrible, that to prove and refute the horror thereof, in a manner
sufficieth to point at it.

They teach also that God does not da^ne me^ for sin, as That ^e damneth not
for sin.
is showed l. 1. c. 2. art. 23. And yet Vrsin. in Miscel p. 87. gives this
censure hereof: This wicked and absurd doctrine, wherewith he concludes an
other no less false and absurd: That as many wicked as have perished, do
perish, or shall perish, have not perished, do not perish or shall perish for
their sins, but for incredultie only. Et Beza resp ad Acta Monti^. part. 2.
p. 215. says, that it is an intolerable speech that men are not damned for
sin.

Finally they teach that God by his omnipotency cannot make that Christ's body
should be at once in diverse places, as is showed l. 1. c. 2. art. 23. And yet
liber Concordiae c. 5. says that it is horrible to say and hear, that God
not with all his omnipotent power can make that Christ's body at the same can
be substantially present in more then one place. Thus much of their confessed
blasphemies against God.

Touching Christ, they teach that his humanity is not Touching Christ.
to be worshipped or prayed unto l. 1. c. 3. art. 3. Which to be blasphemous
thus teaches Hutter in Anal. Confess. Aug. Blasphemy: that Christ's humanity
is not to be worshipped.
art. 3. Away with that impious speech of Daneus blasphemously saying, that
Christ's humane nature albeit personally united to the divinity, is not capable
of whorshippe or religious hope. Gerlachius tom. 2. disput. 5. Now all the
faithful see the execrable impiety of the Caluinists, who wickedly blaspheme
that Christ as man is not to be worshipped or prayed unto. Reineccius tom. 2.
Armat. c. 37. says that the impiety of Daneus who denies that Christ's
humanity is religiously to be worshipped is to be refuted, not by words, but
by thunderbolts, yea with the fire of hell.

They teach that the humanity of Christ, or Christ as That Christ as man
cannot give life, etc.
man, has no power to give life to forgive sins, to work miracles, as we
related l. 1. cap. 3. art. 4. Which to be blasphemous thus confesses Hutter in
Anal. cit. art. 3. For not (as the Sacrame^taries do wickedly avouch) the of
power miracles is to be attributed only to the divinity of Christ, but to his
whole person, and therefore to both natures together. Gerlachius to 2. disp. 4.
By these now may appear the impiety of the Caluinists, for they take from
Christ power to give life. Musculus in Hospin. part. 2. Hist. f. 323. There is
none but a plain wicked Atheist, who can deny, that to forgive sins is
imparted to the finit humanity of Christ.

They teach, that Christ was overwhelmed with desperation, That he despaired.
as is to be seen lib. 1. c. 3. art. 11. Which Zuinglius, in Histor. passionis
to. 4. confesses to be blasphemy saying. Away with their doctrine out of the
Church of Christ, who affirm that Christ on the Cross despaired. And Tilenus
in Syntagm. cap. 65. They are extremely infidels who despair of their
salvation.

They teach also that Christ died for the elect only, as That he died but for
the elect.
has been showed l. 1. c. 3. art. 18. Which Lobechius disp. 6. confesses to
be blasphemous in these words: The Caluinists affirm, that Christ died for the
elect only and not for all men. By which blasphemy they not only deprive
Christ of a great part of his honor, and the Church of comfort, but also
co^tradict the holy Ghost to his face. The like has Adamus Francisci. loco
17. and Gerlachius disput. 16. And Grauerus in Absurdis Calvin. c. 5. sect. 58.
says that it is an absurd and blasphemous Caluinisticall doctrine. James
Andreae in Beza resp. ad acta Montisb. p. 212. says. It is a horrible
doctrine of Beza, that Christ died not for the sins of the whole world.

Finally they teach, that the blood of Christ wherewith That his blood is
corrupted.
he redeemed us, is corrupted, and now no more in being: as appears l. 1. c.
3. art. 20. of which doctrine thus pronounces Schlusselburg. lib. 1. Theol.
Calvin. art. 2. This is a horrible blasphemy, dishonorable to the blood of the
Son of God with which we were redeemed.

Touching the Scripture, they teach that it can be understood Touching
Scripture.
without the holy Ghost: as is proved l. 1. c. 5. art. 2. Which doctrine thus
condemns Casaubon. Exercit. 16. cont. Baron. sect. 215. Baronius adds, that
the Scriptures cannot be understood without the help of God, and this he
confirms with some testimonies of the Fathers, as if there were any
Christian who denies this or calls it in doubt.

Concerning the Church they teach that she does not Touching the Church.
perpetually continue, as is proved l. 1. cap. 8. art. 4. Which Whitaker Cont.
2. q. 3. c. 2. confesses to be basphemous in these words: Who denies or
doubts that the Church is founded for ever and is to continue for ever, he is
no Christian.

Concerning Baptism: they teach that when water Touching Baptism.
wants it may be ministered in any other liquor, as is to be seen l. 1. cap.
10. art. 1. Which as blasphemous thus condemns Hutter in Anal. Confess. p.
466. Beza is blasphemous, who affirms that he does not against the will and
pleasure of Christ, who either in administering baptism, uses milk or any
other liquor whatsoever, or in these countries where there is no use of wine,
or if be nature he abhor wine, does in the Lords supper use any other kind
of drink. Et p. 490. The license which Beza of his own head takes, was
sacrilegious, saying: If there want water, and yet the baptism of some cannot
be differred with edification nor ought not, surely I would as well baptize
with any other liquor as with water. The like judgment hereof gives Grauer
in Absurdis Calvin. c. 4. sec. 6.

They teach that Baptism does not give grace, and that the children of the
faithful are in the grace of God before they be baptized, l. 1. c. 10. art.
79. Which doctrine thus censureth Hutter in Anal cit. art. 13. It is the
madness of the Sacramentarians, who will have that the grace of regeneration
is not given by the use of Sacraments but that the children of the faithful
and elect have it before. The like says. Grau. l cit. sect. 10.

Touching the holy Eucharist: they say that it is not the Touching the
Eucharist.
body and blood of Christ. lib. 1. c. 11. art. 1. Which to be blasphemy thus
judges Hutter in Anal. cit. page 536. It is extreme impudency, desperate
boldness, horrible blaspemie, to oppose a contradictorte proposition to the
words of Christ's institution. For Christ says: This which I give you to eat,
is my body. The Sacramentaries deny it, and say: That which thou give us to
eat, is not thy body. The like has Musculus art. cit.

They teach that Christ is not in the Supper. l. 1. c. 11. art. 1. And
nevertheless thus writes. Beza in Hospin. part. 2. Histor. fol. 301. Many
think, that we would exclude Christ from the Supper, which is plainly
impious. We are so far from saying, that Christ Jesus is absent from the
Supper, that above all men we most repugne this blasphemy.

Concerning faith they teach that it is not simply necessary to salvation. l.
1. c. 13. art. 15. Which is blasphemous Touching Faith.
in the judgment of Luther in Genes. 47. tom. 6. Zuinglius (says he) wrote
of late that Numa Pompilius, Hercules, Scipio, Hector, do enjoy everlasting
happiness in heaven with Peter and other Saints. Which is nothing else then
plainly to confess that they think there is no faith no Christianity. The
like says Beza l. de puniend. Haeret.

Touching good works they deny that it is necessary Touching good works.
they should be present when we are justified. l. 1. c. 14 art. 12. Of which
doctrine thus pronounce the Electorall Ministers in Colloq. Aldel. p. 343. It
is horrible dishonor to God and a barbarous doctrine, to profess, that in the
very instant and act of justification, not only merit, but also necessity of
the presence of good works is excluded.

They say that all the good works of just men are sins and mere iniquities
lib. 1. cap. 14. art. 2. Of which doctrine Zuinglius giue^h this verdict in
Exposit. Fidei. to. 2. Some of ours have said paradox like, that every work
of ours is abomination.

They say also that we may not do good for reward. l. 1. c. 14. art. 19. Of
which doctrine Remonstrantes in Collat. Hagae. p. 95 give this censure: Who
deny that the faithful may do good works in regard of reward due to good
works, he peruerteth and denies the nature of faith, of Gods law, of eternal
life and death.

Touching sin: they teach that in the faithful it does Touching sin.
not expel grace. l. 1. c. 16. art. 6. Of which Hutter thus writes: They
plainly make the Apostle a liar, who with open mouth pronounces that every
fornicator, unclean, and covetous man is excluded out of the kingdom of
heaven: and also Christ our Savior, who pronounces this sentence against
those that deny him: whosoever shall deny me etc.

They teach that men shall not be damned for their sinful works, but only for
incredulity. l 1. c. 16. art. 10. And yet Beza in 2. part. Resp. ad Acta
Montisb. page 218. after he had recited these positions of James Andrews: Only
incredulity damneth men: Men are not damned, because they have sinned: adds:
Durst ever man before this so impudently bring into Gods Church, so false, so
monstrous, so abominable doctrine? Et p. 215. Surely your speech seemed into
lerable to us: that men are not damned for sin. The like has Vrsin. in
Miscellan. p. 84.

Touching Justification: they teach that a justified man Touching Iusication.
cannot leese grace by any sin that he commits: lib. 1. c. 17. art. 12.
Which doctrine is thus censured by Wittembergenses in Schlusselb. lib. 1.
Theol. art. 7. It is a great madness of the Anabaptists and other frantike
men, who say that the justified cannot fall, or at least not leese the holy
Ghost, and become again guilty of Gods wrath, albeit they break Gods
commandments against their conscience. Hutter in Anal. cit. p. 562. It is a
blasphemous speech of Zanchius, saying that forgiveness of sins once
obtained is not made void by sins following, and that the holy Ghost once
given to the justified remains with him for ever: And of Beza writing that
Peter denying Christ, and David falling into adultery, did not leese the holy
Ghost. Adamus Francisci. loc. 6. The Caluinists with a horrible madness imagine
that the regenerate cannot fall into mortal sin, and that if they fall,
notwithstanding they retain Gods grace, the holy Ghost, and faith. Et
Confess. August. c. 11. condemns the Anabaptists: who deny that they who
are once justified can again leese the holy Ghost.

They teach that a Sinner does not cooperate to his conuersesion, but that he
is justified doing nothing as a logge, or else rebelling. lib. 1. c. 17. art.
15. Which doctrine thus the Wittembergians condemn in Schlusselb. to. 5.
Catal. Haer. With all our hearts we abhor from that doctrine dishonorable to
God and full of Blasphemies against the Son of God: A man is converted not
only as a logge, but also resisting, and we say that by such speech not only
security, and profane contempt of God, but also horrible sins of men are
bolstered.

Of free will, they teach that man has no freedom in good or evil deeds. l.
1. c. 21. art. 2. Which doctrine Melancthon lib. de Causa Peccati to. 2. thus
condemns: We do not applaude the madness of the Stoickes or Maniches, who
are dishonorable to God and pernicious to man's life, feigning that men do
necessarily commit sin.

Finally James Andrews in Colloq. Montisb. condemned many doctrines of Beza as
blasphemous, as page 381. That the elect though they sin grievously do
retain the holy Ghost. page 393. That only the elect infants are adopted in
baptism. p. 447. That Christ died not for the sins of the whole world. p.
422. That God will have some to perish. Et p. 423. That God will not have
mercy on some, and that he created some to this end to show his wrath in them.
Vorstius also in Parasceue oftentimes condemns Piscators doctrine of
blaphemie: And scarce is there any Protestant that writes against an other
who does not accuse him of blasphemy.

Wherefore let this be my 25. argument. Whose sundry doctrines are not only
so opposite to the express words of Scripture as has been showed in the
first book, but also so blasphemous as sometimes the very Authors of them,
partly other learned Protestants their brethren do confess it, they are
opposite to the true meaning of holy Scripture But many doctrines of the
Protestants are such. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XXVI. THAT PROTESTANTS DO FRVSstrate and make void the ends of the
coming and passion of Christ.
MY 26. argument, wherewith I will prove that Protestants co^tradict the true
sense of holy Scripture shall be, because many of their positions do frustrate
and make void the coming and passion of Christ.

For one end of the coming and passion of Christ was Protest. say Christ took,
not away sin.
to take away and exhaust our sins: 1. Joan. 3. v. 5. And you know, that he
appeared to take away our sins. Hebr. 9. v. 28. Christ was offered once to
exhaust the sins of many. But Protestants (as we showed l. 1. c. 17. art.
5.) say, that Christ did not take away or exhaust our sins but leaves the^
in us.

An other end of his coming and passion was to destroy and dissolve sin
Hebr. 6. v. 6. this, that our old man is Nor destroyed sin.
crucified with him, that the body of sin may be destroyed And cap. 9. ver.
26. But now once in the consummation of the worlds, to the destruction of
sins, he has appeared by his own host. And 1. Joan. 3. verse. 8. For this
appeared the Son of God, that he might dissolve the works of the Devil. But
Protestants say that sin is not destroyed in the regenerate, but that it
abides and lives in them, as is to be seen l. 1. c. 17. art. 5.

A third end was to cleanse us from sin. Tit. 2. v. 14. Nor cleansed sin.
Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquities and
might cleanse to himself a people acceptable. Et 1. Joan. 1. v. 7. And the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. But Protestants
say that the regenerate are not cleansed from sin, but remain unclean,
impure, filthy, as is to be seen l. 1. c. 17. art 4.

A fourth end was that we might be truly sanctified, Nor truly sanctified us.
and become holy and immaculate in the sight of God. Joan. 17. v. 19. And for
them I do sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified in truth.
Ephesians. 1. v. 4. As he chose us in him before the constitution of the world that
we should be holy and immaculate in his sight in charity. But Protestants
deny that we are truly sanctified, or holy and immaculate in the sight of
God. See li. 1. c. 17. art. 3.

A fifth end was that we should follow or do good Nor made us to follow good
works.
works Tit. 2. v. 14. That he might cleanse to himself a people acceptable, a
pursuer of good works. But Protestants deny that our works are truly good,
and say that they are mere sins. See l. 1. c. 14. art. 2.

A sixth end was that we should live justly and piously in Nor mad us live in
holiness before God.
holiness and justice before God Luc. 1. v. 74. That without fear being
delivered from the hand of our enemies we may serve him in holiness and
justice before him all our days. Tit. 2. v. 12. For the grace of God our
Savior has appeared to all men, instructing us that denying impiety and
wordly desires, we live soberly and justly and godly in this world. But
Protestants deny that the works or lives of the just are pious, holy, or
just before God. See lib. 1. cap. 14. art. 5. A seventh end of Nor made us to
fulfill the law.
Christ's coming was, that the justification of the law might be fulfilled in
us. Romans 8. v. 3. God sending his Son in the similitude of the flesh of
sin, even of sin damned sin in the flesh, that the justification of the
law might be fulfilled in us. But Protestants say that the law cannot be
fulfilled in us, but only in Christ. See lib. 1. c. 19. art. 1.

An eight end was to preach a day of retribution Luc. 4. v. 19. To Euangelize
unto the pore he sent me to preach the acceptable year of our Lord and the day
of retribution. But Protestants deny that there is any day of reward or
retribution, but only of mere bounty and liberality. See l. 1. c 18 art. 1.
To these I add, that thus writes Perkins in Gal. 1. v. 3. It is the fault of
our age; that all profess Christ, yet many admit not Christ but their own
devises, to wit, a Christ who must be a Savior to deliver them from hell, but
not a Lord to give them commandments, this they cannot suffer. But Protestants
as we showed l. 1. c. art. 7. deny Christ to be a lawgiuer or Lord to give
commandments, according to Perkins admit not Christ, but their own devises.

Wherefore thus I make my 26. argument. Whose doctrine Nor preached reward.
not only in so many and so great points is against the express words of God
and in their usual sense, but also does make void and frustrate so many ends
of the coming and passion of Christ; it does contradict the true sense of
Scripture. Such is the Protestants doctrine. Therefore. etc.

CHAPTER XXVII. THAT PROTESTANTS TAKE AWAY encouragements to virtue, yea all
virtue: and in steed of them put allurements to vice and remove the impediments
thereof.
MY 27. argument, that Protestants contradict the true meaning of holy
Scripture shall be, because they take away the encouragements to virtue, yea all
virtue out of the world, and in place of them put allurements to vice and
remove the impediments thereof.

They take away encouragements to virtue: because as Protest. take away
encouragements to virtue.
we showed l. 1. c. 2. art. 13. they teach, that God cares not for good
works. art. 14. that he is not honored with the^. art. 16. that he is not
appeased with them: And c. 14. Art. 6. that there is no dignity or worth in
them. Art. 7. that there is no reward promised to them. Art. 10. that all good
works are equal before God. Art. 12. and 13. that they are not necessary to
justification or salvation. Art. 15. that they are not cause of salvation. Art.
16. Not so much as a testimony of justification or salvation. Art. 18. that we
ought not to do them. Cap. 17. artic. 15. That a sinner does not cooperate to
his justification. Cap. 18. art. 1. That salvation is no reward or retribution.
Art. 2. No crown of justice. Art. 3. That it is of faith only. And cap. 21.
art. 1. That our will is not free in moral works. Art. 3. That it does not
cooperate with the grace of God to good works. But who can deny, but that Gods
favor toward good works, their worth and reward, their efficacy and
necessity to justification and salvation, man's freedom and cooperation to
acts of virtue and salvation, be great spurs and encouragements to virtue.
Which notwithstanding all, and others such like, Protestants take away.

They take also away all virtue. For first they deny to fulfill the law.
diverse particular virtues, as faith, the root of all virtue, which they say
is vicious and unworthy the name of virtue l. 1. c. 13. art. 12. They take
away the highest degree of Chastity, to wit, virginity, c. 15. art. 2. and
the perfectest part of Temperancie, to wit, Fasting, ib. art. 5. and all choice
of meats artic. 7. They takeaway also prayer for all men art. 8. Vows art. 14.
and Eremiticall life. art. 15. Besides, they takeaway all inherent justice. c.
17. art. 8. and deny, that the justified are truly just. art. 3. or clean
art. 4. but retain sin in them art. 5. Finally they take away all virtue.
For they teach, that all the good works of sinners or of good men are sins,
yea mere sins c. 14. art. 1. and 2. that they are filth, du^gge, and stink
in the face of God art. 3. But if all If all good works be sin there can be
no virtue.
good works be sins, and mere sins, surely there is no virtue at all. For
(as Whitaker says. l. 2. de Pec. orig. c. 14.) Tell us, how sins can be
good works. Which is much more true, if they be mere sins.

They set also allurements to sin. For as is showed l. Protest. set
allurements to sin.
1. c. 2. art. 1. they teach, that God wills sin. art. 2. That sin
pleases God. art. 4. That God works sin. art. 5. That God predestinateth
to sin. artic. 6. That he commands to sin. art. 7. That he tempeth to
sin. art. 8. That he necessitateth to sin. art. 10. That he justifies the
wicked remaining wicked. artic. 17. That he will not have his commandments
kept. And cap. 3. artic. 11. That Christ was truly a sinner. c 4. art. 1. That
the Angels in heaven do sin. c. 13. art. 17. That faith being alone does
justify. art. 23. That it can never be lost. c. 16. artic. 4. That sin must
not be ouercomen of us. art. 13. That the Elect do not sin. art. 16. That
all usury is not sin. Et c. 19. art. 1. That the law of God is not possible.
art. 2. That never any kept it. art. 3. That none ever loved God with all his
heart. But what man in his wits can deny, that these Positions: Sin
pleases God: God wills, does, commands sin: He predestinateth,
necessitateth, tempts to sin: He will not have his commandments kept:
Christ and the Angels in heaven do sin: The wicked is justified remaining
wicked, faith being alone does justify, it can never be lost, sin must not
be ouercomen of the faithful, they themselves never sin, and such like be
great enticements to sin?

They take away also the obstacles or impediments They remove impediments of
sin.
of sin, in teaching (as we have showed l. 1. c. 2. art. 3.) That God hates
not sin. art. 9. That God hates not the faithful when they work
wickedness. art. 11. That he is not angry with the faithful whilst they
sin. art. 12. That he never punishes for any sin committed. art. 23. That
he damneth not men for sin. And c. 3. art. 7. That Christ gave no laws. art.
8. That he is no judge. c. 5. art. 6. That the Gospel promises salvation
without any condition of works. art. 5. That it does not reprove sin. c.
10. art. 8. That in baptism al sins, past, present, and to come, are
forgiven. c. 16. art. 1. That sins are not imputed to the faithful art. 2.
That they are not mortal to them. art. 5. That serving the flesh we may serve
God. art. 6. That no sins cast of grace. art. 7. That sins can stand with
grace. artic. 9. That to abstain from sins, is not necessary to salvation.
artic. 10. That sin is not the cause of damnation. artic. 11. That we must
not give account of sins. cap. 17. artic. 12. That justification is never
lost. artic. 13. That the justified need not fear to fall. artic. 16. That he
is to suffer no punishment at all. c. 18. art. 4. That the faithful are not to
be judged. art. 4. That Hell is no place art. 7. That hell fire is no true
fire. And cap. 19. art. 7. That the law is abrogated from the faithful But it
is most evident, that taking away Gods wrath, hatred, and punishment of sins
and sinners, taking away Christ's lawgiuing and judgment: taking from men all
fear of judgment damnation, wrath, and hatred of God, and of loss of justice
and salvation: and putting security that men even committing heinous sins,
are certain of Gods love, of grace, and eternal salvation, and free from all
punishment whatsoever, all impediments of sin on Gods part are taken away,
and if any beleiuing this doctrine, do forbear sin, it proceeds not but
from a natural engrafted horror of sin, or else from fear or or shame of men.

Yea so evident it is, that diverse positions of Protestants Protest. confess,
that some of their opinions allure to sin.
are allurements to sin, as some Protestants confess it. For thus write the
Wittembergians cited before cap. 25. That to deny a man to cooperate to his
conversion, does settle horrible wickedness. Which yet Protestants deny lib.
1. cap. 17. artic. 15. Remonstrantes apud Hom. in Specim. Cont. Belg. page 126.
say: The doctrine of their perseverance in faith who have once believed, is of
it nature and condition sufficient to engender a security in men, for to serve
them as a cushion in midst of their sins. Again: Of it self it is hurtful
to true piety and good manners. And yet Protestants teach thus, libr. 1. cap.
13. art. 23. Schlusselburg. tom. 7. Catal. writes thus: To pardon sins to
come, which one does study to commit, is surely to grant an Epicurean license
to sin: And yet this is Protestants doctrine l. 1. cap. 10. art. 8.
Melancthon in Cocleus in art. 6. Confess. August. thus speaks: Now it is
usual to speak of faith, and faith cannot be understood, unless penance be
preached: Surely they pour new wine into old vessels, who preach faith
without penance, without doctrine of the fear of God, without the doctrine of
the law, accustom the people to a carnal kind of security. That security is
worse, then all the errors under Popery were. And yet Protestants say, that
the Gospel does not reprove sin, does not preach penance, promises
salvation upon condition of faith only, as is showed l. 1. c. 5. art. 5. 6.
Hutter in Anal. Co^fess August. p. 571. writes that: The error of the
Anabaptists, who deny that men once justified can leese the holy Ghost, does
give full license to commit all kind of villainy under the absolute
perseverance of those that are once justified. And yet this is the doctrine of
Protestants l. 1. c. 17. art. 12. other Protestants in Zanchius de Persevere.
to. 7. col. 159. say: that the opinion which teaches, that the faithful
cannot fall from grace, takes away penance, loses the reins to
concupiscence, makes a man secure that he dare sin even against his
conscience. And Liber Concord. Luther. c. de bonis oper. That false and
Epicurean opinion is sharply to be reproved, wherewith some feign that faith
and grace once received or salvation cannot be lost by any sin or
wickedness whatsoever, albeit it be most freely committed. Also other
Protestants as Gualterus Praefat. Epist. Romans reports, when they think
seriously of piety, do fear, that we devise to easy a way to salvation, and
least this doctrine breed a license to sin, and open, a gappe for men to dare
to do any thing. Moreover diverse of them confess, that men take occasion to
sin by their doctrine, as Luther tom. 5. in Gal. 6. James Andrews Conc. 4. in
Luc. 21. Perkins de Sermon. Dom. to. 2. and in Gal. 5. ver. 13. and others in
Erasmus in Epist. ad Fratres. Finally Luther in Postilla domest. Dom. 1.
Aduentus says. Oh sorrow: The world daily becomes worse by The world worse
by Luthers doctrine
this doctrine: and Castalio in Calvin de Provident. These are the things
(Calvin) which thy adversaries report of thy doctrine, and warn men to judge
of this doctrine by the fruits thereof. For they say that thou and thy
disciples carry many fruits of thy God, that most of you are contentious,
reuengefull, myndfull of wrong; and endowed with such vices as thy God does
suggest.

Where thus I argue in the 27. place. Whose doctrine is not only so opposite
to the express words of Scripture as was seen in the first book, but also
takes away encouragements to virtue, yea all virtue out of the world, and
remoueth impediments of sin, and gives allurements theertoe; that is
opposite to the true sense of holy Scripture. But such is the doctrine of
Protestants. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XXVIII. THAT PROTESTANTS HAVE NO infallible interpretation of
Scripture.
THE 28. Argument to prove that Protestants must needs contradict the true
sense of holy Scripture, is because they have no sure and infallible means to
attain to the true meaning thereof. But before we prove that they have no
infallible mean to come to the right sense of Scripture, we must prove that
Scripture (at lest in some points of faith) needs some means to interpret or
expound it, to wit, either because no where it delivers some points of faith
so clearly, that the only words thereof sufffice to captiuate the
understanding: or because, though some where it deliver clearly enough some
points of faith, yet other where it seems so to teach the contrary, as
without some infallible interpreter it would seem uncertain whether of the
twoe it did teach.

That therefore Scripture does not of it self teach That Scripture needs an
Interpreter.
clearly all points of faith, so as it need no interpreter for that purpose, I
prove first out of the Scripture it self. For the holy Eunuch did read the
Scripture speaking of the passion of Christ Actor. 8. and yet being asked of
Philip whether he understood what he read, answered: And how can I, if none
shall show me. You see, that the Scripture did not clearly foretell the
passion of Christ, as that a pious man by the only words thereof without an
interpreter could understand the meaning thereof. And Luke vlt. v. 27. And
beginning from Moses and all the Prophets, he did interpret unto them in all
the Scriptures the things that were concerning him. Et v. 45. Then he opened
their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures. But if Christ's
disciples did not understand the Scriptures which spoake of him, and the
Apostles had need that Christ should open their understanding for to understand
the Scriptures, it is evident that the Scriptures by themselves do not so
plainly teach all matters of faith, as they need no interpretation for to be
rightly understood of the faithful. Besides 2. Pet. vlt. it is said, that in
S. Paul's epistles there are some things hard to be understood. And that these
hard things do contain points of faith, is clear; both because without cause
they should be limited to other things, as also because it is added, that the
learned and unstable do deprave these hard things to their own destruction:
but such things are especially matters of faith. Moreover, if the Scripture did
so clearly teach all points of faith, that for them it needed no interpreter,
it would follow, that the gift of interpretation had been superfluously given
to the Church for to expound Scripture in matters belonging to faith.

Secondly I prove this out of the Fathers: but for breuities sake I will
content my self with one testimony of S. Austin: He lib. de Vtil. cred c 7.
to one that said: When I read the Scriptures, by my self I understood them:
thus answers: Is it so? Without some skill in poetry thou dare not read
Terentian Maurus. Asper, Cornutus, Donatus, and many more are necessary for
to understand any Poet, and thou fallest upon those books without a guide,
and dare give thy opinion of them without a teacher. Lo how plainly he
says, that we can not understand the Scriptures by our selves, and by how
familiar an example he proves it.

Thirdly I prove it by the very confession of Protestants. For Protest.
confess that Scripture alone suffices not.
thus writes Whitaker Co^t. 1. q. 4. c. 1. When Bellarmin makes this to be
the state of the question; Whether the the Scripture by it self be so clear,
as without any interpretation it suffices of it self to determine and decide
all controversies of faith, he fights without an adversary, for surely in
this point we are not against him. Again: They say, that we think (but
falsely) that all things in Scripture, are plain, and that they without any
interpretation are sufficient to determine all controversies. without Behold
how plainly he denies, that Protestants think, that Scripture of it self
without any interpretation is sufficient to end all controversies of faith.
And the like has Iunius l. 3. de verb. Dei c. 3. When he grants, that
Scripture needs an interpreter. Kemnice 1. part. Exa. p. 104. It has need of
the gift and help of interpretation. And the Magdeburgia^s Ce^t. 1. l. 2. c.
4. The Apostles thought, that the Scripture cannot be understood without the
holy Ghost and an interpreter: and the same mea^ all other Protestants, who
admit that the Scripture is obscure, or that the gift of interpretation is
needful for the exposition thereof. For doubtless they mean that, as well of
such places of Scripture wherein points of faith are delivered, as of others:
and this Calvin 4. Inst. c 17.. 25. clearly enough insinuates, where, when
Catholics objected, that they had the word of God wherein he affirms that the
Eucharist is his body, he answers: Indeed, if they may banish the gift of
Interpretation out of the Church. Wherefore he thinks, that there is in the
Church the gift of Interpretation even for to expound Scriptures touching
points of faith, such as the Eucharist is. Furthermore Plessie. l. 3. de Eccl.
c. 3. writes, that the controversy of Schism cannot be properly decided by
the Scripture, because it is rather a question of fact, then doctrine. If
therefore Scripture by it self can determine nether the question of Schism,
nor yet all controversies of faith, it is manifest, that the interpretation of
some is necessary, and that also infallible, because fallible interpretation
is not sufficient to put us out of doubt. And surely Protestants must needs
teach, that Scripture by it self alone, is not sufficient to decide all
controversies of faith, both because else it had decided all controversies
amongst themselves, or between any that are not obstinate; as also because
scarce in any controversies that are betwixt us and them, Scripture does so
much as in show directly and immediately give sentence for them, but they have
need to confer places, and adioyne thereto some humane principle, and make an
argument, for to draw in what manner soever their doctrine out of Scripture:
which conference of places, adiunction of a humane principle, and discourse,
seeing it is not made by the Scripture, but by Protestants by their gift of
Interpretatation, they must needs grant, that the Scripture has need of
Interpretation for to determine all the controversies that are betwixt us and
them. And for this cause, albeit When Protest. will have express Scripture,
when consequence thereof.
when they put us to the proof, they use to cry, Nothing is to be believed
which is not expressly in Scripture; yet when they are to prove, they will
have it suffice, that it may be gathered out of Scripture by good consequence.
For so say the Lutherans in Colloq. Ratisbon. Sess 3. and 13. Kemnice in 1.
part. Exam. p. 320. Beza in Resp. ad Acta Mo^tisb. part. 2 p. 46. and l. de
Notis Eccles. Daneus Cont. 1. p. 86. Pareus l. 1. de Iustif. c. 16. Piscator de
Iustif. l. 1. c. 5. Riuet. in Contr. tract. 1. sect. 18. and others commonly.
And seeing this Inference by good consequence is not made by the Scripture, but
by themselves, by their Interpretation, they must needs say, that besides the
Scripture there is necessary some Interpreter for to know all points of faith.

Now that Protestants have no infallible interpretation of Scripture, is
manifest: First, because they confess, that Protest. have no infallible
interpreter.
that they have no infallible Interpreter of Scripture. Pareus in Colleg. Theol
2. disp. 1. The word of God cannot abide any infallible Interpreter besides
God himself who inspired the Scripture. Secondly, because they deny that the
whole Senate of Fathers, the Catholic Church or general Councels have the
gift of infallible interpretation in all points of faith, and therefore
ridiculously should they arrogate this gift to themselves. And seeing they
teach, that all Pastors, together, and all the true Church (whichsoeuer it is)
may err in matters of faith, they cannot challenge to their Pastors this
infallible gift. Thirdly, for if they do infallibly interpret the Scripture
in all points of faith, either they do it by means, or without means. Not
without means: for such interpretation were Prophetical by immediate
revelation from God, or rather Enthusiasticall by illusion from the Devil.
Whereupon says Whitaker Cont. 2. q. 4. c. 5. If the holy Ghost teach the
Church to interpret these places of Scripture without means, Protest, require
means to interpret.
this is Enthusiasticall, and Anabaptisticall, and extraordinary. For the
Spirit teaches now only by means, nether must we now look for new
inspirations or revelations. Et Co^t. 1. q. 5. c. 9. Now must we treat of the
mea^s to find the sense of Scripture. For since the Scripture has not a lively
voice for us to hear, we must use some means for to find out which is the
sense and meaning of the Scripture. Again: The Church has always used some
means for to expound the Scripture. But if they expound the Scripture by means,
then (according to their own opinion) if their means be fallible, their
interpretation also must be fallible. For thus Whitaker c. 3. cit. If by means,
then such as the means be, such must needs the interpretation be. But the
means, which Protestants have, are but humane and fallible. For (as they
grant) they are no other then such as the Catholic Church, holy Fathers, and
general Councils have used. For thus Whitaker c. 3. cit. But the means (of the
Church) to expound obscure places, are uncertain, doubtful, and ambiguous.
And they must needs say so, because otherwise they must confess, that the
Church is infallible in expounding the Scripture. Secondly, because the means
Protest mea^s, but humane.
which Protestants use, are these: Pondering of circumstances, of the style and
Phrase of Scripture, conference of places, recurring to the Hebrew and Greek
text, prayer, and the like, as ye may see in Rainolds Confer. lib. 2. diuis.
2. Confess. Heluet. c. 2. Whitaker. Cont. 1. q. 5. c. 9. Humfrey ad Rat. 1.
Camp. and others. But all these means are humane, for they be our pondering,
our conference, our recurring, our prayer. And all humane means are fallible,
as every man is subject to lie. Thirdly because no where in Scripture is there
promised infallible assistance to them that use these means. And if any say,
that it is promised to prayer, whatsoever we ask: first he makes only prayer
an infallible mean. Again, it suffices not to pray how soever, but we must
pray well and perseuerantlie. For Iac. 4. v. 3. it is said: Ye pray and
obtain not, because ye pray ill. But it is not prayed well, that every
private man by him self should understand the Scriptures; but rather ill,
because the Scripture says Malac. 2. The lips of the Priest keep
knowledge, and they shall require the law out of his mouth. and Ephesians. 4. He
has given Pastors and Doctors for the consumnation of Saints. Fourthly,
because all use these means, Catholics, Heretics, Jews, and yet all do not
attain to the right sense of Scripture by them.

Fifthly, because, Protestants themselves do insinuate Their means not
infallible.
that these means are not infallible. For Whitaker besides the words already
related, says Co^t. 1. q. 5. c. 9. and 10. That we must use these means
rightly, and thereby declares that these means are not infallible unless they
be rightly used, and yet he does not set down the mean how to use the^
rightly. Et c. 10. cit. adds, that all these means must be accommodated to
the rule of faith. Which be clearly enough shows, that of themselves they
are not infallible. Rainolds also loc. cit. says: that all their means are
vain. Unless God give eyes to see.

Sixtlie, these means are not only fallible, but also insufficient. Their
means not common to all.
For we must not only know to confer places, but also what places are to be
conferred, and what not, and with what places they are to be conferred, and
with what not. Besides, we must know how we must co^ferre. For otherwise (as
Tertullian said of examining Scriptures) we may say of conferring: As if
having ill examined all, we may not fall into error, by making choice of some
evil. But the foresaied means teach us not this.

Finally, these means are not common to all the faithful. For thus writes
Whitaker c. 9. cit. The unlearned know not how to use these means rightly: and
Rainolds libr. cit. cap. 5. diuis. 1. Because the infirm and unlearned sort
of Christians have no skill to discern the right sense of Scripture from the
false, he (Vincent) accommodateth himself to their infirmity, and gives them
external sensible means to know it. I ask therefore, whether unlearned
Protestants do truly know the right sense of Scripture by means, or without
means? If without means? they are Enthusiasts. If by means, there are others
then those which Protestants assign. I let pass, that the Lutherans say, that
the Sacrame^taries had their exposition of the Scripture from the Devil, and
that Luther professes that he was taught of the Devil: as perhaps we shall
prove an other time at large.

Wherefore thus I make my 28. argument. They who in so many and weighty
matters do expressly contradict such plain words of Scripture, and yet have
no infallible way to attain to the true sense thereof, must needs contradict
the true sense of Scripture. But Protestants be such. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XXIX. THAT PROTESTANTS ARE FORCED to admit no Judge in the Church, to
whose judgment they will stand.
THE 29. Argument wherewith we will prove, that Protestants are against the
true sense of Scriptrue, shall be, because their doctrine is so plainly against
Scripture, as they dare not admit any Judge thereof. For thus Zuinglius tom.
1. in Explanat. artic. 67. Protest admit Judge.
I suffer no man to be judge in the matter of truth and faith. Whitaker Contr.
1. quaest. 5. c. 4. God has reserved to himself the judgment of religion,
and has not granted it to any man. And Contr. 4. q. 1, c. 2. There is now no
infallible judge on earth which is man. Vorstius in Antibel. page 80. We have
proved, that only Christ or the holy Ghost speaking plainly in Scripture, is
to be accounted this supreme judge of controversies of faith. Pareus in Colleg.
Theol. 4. Disputatio. 2. The supreme judge of interpretations of Scripture and
controversies of faith, from whom there is no Appeal, is is no man now, nor
since the Apostles, nether Church, nor Council etc. Lutherans in Colloq.
Ratisb. Session. 9. Prove this, that besides the written law, there must be an
other visible judge appointed. The like says Academia Nemausiensis Resp. ad
Tournon. Eliensis resp. ad Apol. Bellarm. c. 14. Field l. 3. de Eccles. cap. 13
and 16. Moulins in his Bucler art. 3. sect. 6. and other Protestants commonly.

But that there must needs be admitted a judge in the Church to whose judgment
we must stand, I prove: First out of Scripture. For Deuteronomy. 17. it is said: If
thou perceive that There must needs be a Judge.
the judgment with thee be hard and doubtful thou shall come to the Priests
of the leuiticall stock and to the Judge that shall be at that time, and thou
shall ask of them who shall show thee the truth of the judgment, and thou
shall do whatsoever they that are presidents of the place, which our Lord
shall choose, shall say and teach thee according to the law and shall follow
their sentence, nether shall thou decline to the right hand, nor to the left
hand. But he that shall be proud refusing to obey the commandment of the Priest,
who at that time ministers to our Lord thy God, and the decree of the Judge,
that man shall die. Behold a Judge instituted in the Church under the law, and
him to be obeyed under pain of death. Likewise Math. 18. Christ says: If he
will not hear the Church, let him be to the as an Ethnik and Publican. And
Actor. 15. When the Christians did disagree about the observation of Jewish
ceremonies, they appointed that Paul and Barnabas should go up, and certain
others of the rest, to the Apostles, and Priests in Jerusalem upon this
question, and all true Christians submitted themselves to their decree, and S.
Paul commanded it to be kept. And the like practice has been ever observed in
the Church, and they held for Heretics who did not submit themselves to the
judgment of a lawful Council.

Secondely I prove it out of the Fathers. For thus S. Ciprian Epist. 55. For
nether are Heresies risen or Schisms sprung from any other root, then
because the Priest of God is not obeyed, nor believed that there is one priest
for a time in the Church, and one Judge for a time in steed of Christ. Lo to
deny, that there is a judge in the Church in steed of Christ, is the occasion
of all Heresies and Schisms. And S. Austin l. 1. cont. Crescon. c. 33.
Whosoever fears to be deceived in the obscurity of this question, let him
ask the Church of it, whom the holy Scripture does show without any doubt.

Thirdly, because it was ever the custom of Heretics Heretics deny a Judge.
to deny, that there is a Judge in the Church. Whereupon the Donatists in
Breuic. Collat. say that Christ must be the judge of this cause, stirring up
envy to Catholics because they had requested a man to be judge.

Fourthlie, I prove it by reason, because it is a plain argument of an evil
cause, that the Patrons thereof dare not submit it to the judgment of any
Judge in the common wealth. Besides, there can be no peace in any society or
commonwealth, unless beside the laws, there be some Judge, who may determine
matters, and to whose judgment men must stand. And who deny such Judges,
either mantaine an ill cause, or love not peace, but continual braules.

For these and the like arguments, Protestants sometime Protest sometime admit
a Judge in Words.
in words do admit a Judge in the Church. For thus Whitaker Cont. 1. q. 5. c.
4. I confess, that in every common wealth there ought to be Judges, who may
make an end of contentions amongst men. Et c. 7. God indeed has left a Judge
to his Church, but who it is, now is question and debate between us and the
Papists. Eliensis. cap. 14. cit. But beside the law, there is need of another
lively Judge. Who denies that? Melancthon in Resp. ad Ant. Bauar. tom. 3. We
openly confess, that there must be judgments in the Church. But indeed they
will have the Scripture only to be this Judge: For thus Zuinglius. disput. 1.
to. 1. I will never admit any other judges beside the holy Scriptures. Which
is in word to admit a Judge, and in effect But not in effect.
to deny him. For the Scripture is the law of Christians, and therefore not
their Judge, who is to give sentence according to the law. And the Lutherans in
Colloq. Ratisbon. sess 1. when they had said, that Scripture is the rule and
square of faith, afterward do add: It is one thing to show the Iudge^
another, to show the rule; Wherein they plainly distinguish the Scripture and
the Judge. Moreover the testimonies of Scriptures, of Fathers, and the reasons
before alleged do prove, that there must be a lively or speaking Judge in the
Church, which is different from the law or Scripture. Finally it is fond, to
make Protest judge can nether hear nor speak.
such a Judge, and him only, who is both deaf and du^be, and who can nether
hear those that contend, nor pronounce sentence, nor compel them to obey it.
Furthermore (as has been often said) in most controversies betwixt us and
Protestants, Scripture does not so much as seem to give sentence for
Protestants, unless it be conferred by them and joined with some humane
principle, and brought into sillogisticall form. Whereas a Judge must be such,
as by himself without any help of either of the parties, he can give
sentence. Besides, the sentence of the Judge, and especially if there can be
no appeal from him, must be so clear, as no man can doubt for whether party
it is; But such is not the sentence of Scripture in many controversies. Again
there is controversy between us about diverse books, of which the rest of the
Scripture says nothing. Finally, before Moises, the Church had no Scripture,
and for sometime after Christ, it had no part of the new testament, and yet
she never wanted a Judge. And (as we saw in the Chapter before) Protestants
confess, that Scripture of it self is not sufficient to determine all
controversies of faith, and therefore not to judge all. Wherefore we must needs
have some other Judge.

For these and the like causes some Protestants seeing how absurd it is, that
Scripture is the only Judge in the Church, say that Christ or the holy Ghost
speaking in the Scripture, is the Judge. Whitaker c. 7. cit. We say, that this
Judge is the holy Ghost speaking in the Scripture. In like sort Confess.
Heluet. c. 12. Academia Nemaus: loc. cit. Lutherans in Colloq. Ratisb. sess. 9.
and others. But seeing Christ or the holy Ghost is no otherwise in the
Scripture, then as in a sign of his will, to say that the holy Ghost as he is
in Scripture is Judge, is no other thing indeed, then to say that the Scripture
is judge. And as the King, as he is in his written laws, is not a sufficient
judge of the common wealth, because else eue^ after his death he should be
judge, but besides there must be a living judge who both hears and speaks,
who can hear the parties and give sentence: So nether is the holy Ghost a
sufficient judge is in the holy Scripture.

Others therefore acknowledge, that there must be in the Church a speaking
judge or man. For thus Eliensis loc. cit. Wherefore we all of long time demand
a free and lawful synod. Protest. admit a living Judge in words.
And Lutherans in Colloq. cit. sess. 9. We profess, that God has given some
power to the Ministers and Doctors of the Church, to judge of controversies of
religion. Nevertheless in truth they deny the very nature of the Judge. For
either they will not admit such a Judge as we are bound to obey^, as appears
by that they deny the universal Church, all Pastors, or general Councels to
be infallible, yea Moulins in the preface of his Bucler, says, that there But
not in effect.
can be no greater temeritie then to desire that men sinners may be infallible
judges of the sense of the law: And the Luthera^s loc. cit. It is simply and
absolutely certain, that the Ministry may err. But this in truth is to
deny the Judge, whose end is The judge in the Church admits not appeal.
to make peace and to compose debates: which he cannot do, unless men be
bound to obey him: and all the foresaied authorities and reasons which prove
that there ought to be a judge in the Church, prove also that he ought to be
such from whom we may not appeal. Whereupon Whitaker Co^t. 1. q. 5. c. 4.
thus writes: I answer, that those words (Deuteron. 17. cit.) are to be
understood of authority to define hard contentions and controversies, as
Ecclesiastical by the Minister, and political by the Magistrate, that there
might be in both some from whom there should be no appeal: else there would be
no end of contending. But this he means only in the Nether in outward nor
inward Court.
external or outward court, not in the inward court of conscience. For thus
he adds: A great weight of judgment was in the Priest, and what he had once
determined, was good in the external court, that so controversies and debates
might be ended. And Cont. 4. q 1. cap. 2. Controversies may be brought to the
external Court, and there defined: but conscience rests not in that Court.
But this shift is easily refuted. First, because the destruction of the
external Cour^e is without cause devised in this matter. Secondly, because
the peace of the Church especially consists in the internal court, to wit,
in faith. Wherefore in this Court we may not appeal from the Judge of the
Church, otherwise there would never be peace of conscience. Thirdly, the
practice of the Church in the Council of the Apostles, and in other general
Councels, shows, that the Judge of the Church has power to end controversies
even in the inward court of conscience. Finally, if one were bound to obey
the judgment of the Church in the outward Court, and not in the inward, it
would follow that sometimes he were bound to deny Gods truth before men, to
wit, if the Church should define against Gods truth. Besides, the authority
of the Church is spiritual and over the soul, and therefore her power of
judging extends it self even to the inward Court of the ^oule.

Wherefore let this be our 29. argument. Whose doctrine in many and weighty
matters does so contradict the express words of Scripture, as they dare not
admit any Judge in the Church, they are to be thought to contradict the true
sense of the Scripture. But such are Protestants. Therefore etc.

CHAPTER XXX. THAT PROTESTANTS DO SOMEtimes confess, that their doctrine does
contradict the holy Scripture.
THE last proof which we will make to show, that Protestants do contradict the
true sense of Scripture, shall be taken from their own confession, wherewith
sometimes they confess it implicitlie, sometimes plainly and expressly.
Implicitly they confess it diverse ways. First because they acknowledge, that
they Protest. cannot reconcile their doctrine with the Scripture.
know not how to reconcile their doctrine with the holy Scripture. Luther de
seru. arbit. to. 2. fol. 466. How this is just, that he (God) condemns those
that deserve it not, is now incomprehensible: yet it is believed till the Son
of man be revealed. Et f. 486. In the light of grace it is unanswerable, how
God condemns him, who with all his power can do nothing but sin and be
guilty. Here both the light of nature and the light of Grace teach, that it is
not the fault of wretched man, but of unjust God. Et to. 1. f. 390. It is a
wonderful problem: that God rewards justice, which himself reputeth
injustice. Melancthon in Romans 9. edit. 1. This mystery is inexplicable: that
God both wills sins, and yet truly hates them. Peter Martyr in locis
Class. 1. c. 16.. 9. It is no marvel, that we cannot understand, how it is
not contrary to Gods justice to punish sins, and by tempting to enforce
them, because God can do more then we can understand. Calvin 1. Institut.
capit. 18.. 3. By reason of the weaknesses of our understanding we do not
conceive, how (God) in different manner wills and wills the same thing.
Again: Where we conceive not, how (God) will have that to be done, which he
forbids to do let us remember our weakness. Et 3. Instit. c. 24.. 17. When
he had said, that God wills that, which he professes that he will not; he
adds: Albeit according to our understanding, Gods will be manifould, yet in
himself he wills not this and that, but by his manifould wisdom makes our
understanding astonished, till it shall be granted to us to know, that
wonderfully he wills that, which now seems contrary to his will. And cap.
11.. 11. This is a marvelous manner of justifying, that they that are covered
with Christ justice, fear not the judgment which they deserve, and whilst
justly they condemn themselves, they are judged just out of themselves. De
Praedest. page 704. Let our faith adore a far of with decent sobriety the
hidden counsel of God, wherewith the fall of man was preordained. And page
711. How it was appointed by the foresight and decree of God what was to become
of man, and yet God is not to be mad partaker of the sin, as if he were
either author or allower thereof, seeing it is clearly a secret far beyond the
reach of man's wit, let us not be ashamed to confess our ignorance. In Joan.
12. ver. 27. But it seems, that this does not become the Son of God, that
an inconsiderate desire escapes him, which he must straight renounce for to
obey his Father. I confess (says he) that truly this is the folly of the
cross, which is a scandal to proud men. Nay, it is not the folly of the
cross, but the impiety of Calvin to attribute an in co^siderate desire to
Christ. And in Math. 26. verse. 39. If any object, that the first motion which
should have been bridled, before it went further, was not temperate as it
beseemed: I answer (says he) that in this corruption of our nature there
cannot be seen the feruor of passions with that temper which was in Christ;
but we must yield this honor to the Son of God, that we judge not of him by
our selves. Forsooth the impostures of Calvin not only wanting all word of
God, but also quite contrary thereto, must be believed, though they cannot be
understood, and the Catholic doctrine of the Eucharist and the like must not be
believed because it cannot be understood. Beza in Explicat. Christianismi c. 3.
After a wonderful and incomprehe^sible manner it pleases God, that even that,
which as it is sin he allows not, yet is not done without his will. De
Praedest. cont. Cast. p. 340. When he had said, that God decrees the causes
of damnation, and that none can resist his decree, he asks: Is not then all
the falut in God? and answers: This difficulty is inexplicable for men.
Again: How God is not in fault, if he ordain the causes of damnation, we
think with the Apostle, that it is a question inexplicable for man's wit. Et in
Colloq. Montisb. p. 427. There is no part of Christian doctrine from which
sense and humane reason does more abhor. Pareus l. 2. de Amiss. Great. c. 13.
after he had said p. 358. that God does enforce me^ to sins as they are his
secret judgments: adds. p. 363. that this manner is inexplicable. Indeed
this their excuse of the inexplicabilitie of the thing were tolerable, if the
Scripture did clearly teach, what they say: but seeing it does not clearelie
teach so, as appears by the answers of Catholics; yea so clearly teach the
contrary, as Protestants are forced to confess, that they know not how to
reconcile so many of their positions with the Scripture, it is a very great
proof, that in very deed their doctrine is repugnant to Scripture.

An other manner whereby implicitlie they confess, that Protest. confess that
the words of Scripture seem against them.
their doctrine is repugnant to Scripture, is, because in many and great
matters they acknowledge, that the words of Scripture, and such as are of
purpose spoake^ for to declare unto us what we ought to believe of such
matters, seem to favor us more then them, are hard to them and torment them
shrewdly. Luther in Postill. Dom. 9. post. Trin. This days Gospel, if it be
nakedly looked into without the (Protestant) spirit, is plainly Papisticall.
Zuinglius l. de Rel. c. de Merito. None denies, but that in Scripture there
are almost more places which attribute merit to our works, then deny it. And
in Explanat. art. 20. The places of Scripture at first sight seem to attribute
some what to Merit. Bullinger Dec. 3. Sermon. 9. We acknowledge, that the
Scripture every were does seem to attribut life and justice to good works.
Rainolds in Confer. c. sect. 1. What if in that other place the Scripture in
show do favor you more then us. And he adds, that he easily grants, that
the show of the words of Scripture makes more for us then for them. Again: I
will grant, (...) the words of Christ: This is my body, in show do favor
more your real presence, then that sacramental which we mantaine. And in an
other place: In show of words our Savior seems to have promised the keys to
Peter only. Herbrand. in Compendio Theol. page 340. says: If the letter be
urged in those The letter against Protestants.
words of Daniel: Redeem thy sins by alms, they be contrary to their
doctrine. The same confesses Hunnius l. de Iustif. of those words of Tobie:
Alms delivers from all sin and from death. And the same is evident by
infinite places of Scripture, which Protestants are forced to expound
figuratiuelie because the propriety of the word is for us.

Zuinglius Epist. ad Matthaeum Rutling. to. 2. thus speaks: Now remains
that which in this matter is the hardest A hard matter for Protest. to wrest
the words.
of all, to wit, how we may wrest the words of Christ which they term words of
consecration. Here verily we must stretch all the veyns of faith. Et in Resp.
ad Billican. he says, that he uses pulleis and presses to wring out the
sense of the words of consecration, and adds: We deny, that any one They
need pullies and presses.
little drop, at least sincere and pure, will come from them, vn-vnlesse they
be pressed with the weight of other places. And again: How many had we some
years ago, who could acquit themselves handsomely of those words of Christ,
Thou art Peter etc. and show the figure of the speech? And yet it was no
hindrance, that we could not handsomely dispatch our selves of the word. Calvin
3. Instit. c. 2.. 11. I know, it seems hard to some, where faith is
attributed to the reprobates. In Luc. 3. verse. 9. As for Merit, that knot is to
be loosed, which hinders many: For the Scripture so often promising reward to
works, seems to attribute some merit to them. Peter Martyr in Dom. 4. Hom.
Protest. tormented with the words of Scripture.
21. The (Protestant) interpreters do torment themselves, in that Daniel
seems to attribute redemption or remission of sins to man's justice and
works of mercy. For they well admonish, that it is repugnant to the chief
point of our religion. Daneus in c. 67. Enchir. Aug. says, that saying of S.
James: We are not justified by faith only: does this day torment many, so
that some have rejected the epistle, others have called it strawish. Kemnice in
loc. to. 2. tit. de Argum. That saying of Daniel. c. 4. seems very hard
against free justification.

The third way by which they tacitelie confess, that Protest forced to deny
their doctrine.
their doctrine is contrary to Scripture is, because when it makes for their
purpose, they deny that they teach many of those points which in the former
book we have clearelie showed that they plainly teach. And because they do
this so frequentlie, as I need not bring many examples thereof, I will here
cite only some few. Touching God: Pareus thus writes Colleg. Theol. 9. disp.
32. It is a slander, that we simply say that God would and decreed that our
first parents should fall. See l. 1. cap. 2. art. 5. Of Scripture: thus
Whitaker Cont. 1. q. 4. cap. 1. Our adversaries attribute unto us this
doctrine, as if we said, that the Catholic Church could fail, which is most
false. See lib. 1. cap. 8. art. The same man. q 3. cit. c. 2. Our adversaries
slander us, when they say, that we make such a Church, which sometime is no
where, and can be seen of none. See l. 1. c. 8. art. 5. Touching the
Eucharist, Eliensis Resp. ad Apol. Bellar. c. 1. We agree with you of the
matter, all the contention is about the manner -- A presence (I say) we
believe, nor less real then you. Perkins in Cath. refor. Contr. 10. cap. 1.
We believe and teach a real presence of the body and blood of Christ in the
Sacrament of the Supper, and that not feigned, but true and real.
Argentinenses in Hospin. part. 2. Histor. Be they accursed, who will have
nothing to be exhibited here but a sign and figure. And Hospinian. himself.
Our men never denied, that the body of Christ was truly in their Supper. Beza
l. qq. says, that it is a slander, that they exclude Christ from their
Supper. Gratianus Antiiesuita p. 140. There is no controversy, whether the
true body and blood of the Lord be contained in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist. Et Riuet. tract. 3. sec. 12. The question between us, is not simply,
whether the body and blood of Christ be truly and really in this Sacrament.
Et Spalatensis libr. contr. Suar. cap. 1. number. 39. Who denies that the
Eucharist is the only flesh and only blood of our Lord Jesus Christ? See the
contrary of all these lib. 1. c. 11. art. 1.

Touching faith; thus writes Peter Martyr in loc. Class. 3.. 24. We make
faith, hope, and charity, three different things, nether do we confound them,
as our adversaries accuse us. See the contrary lib. 1. c. 13. art. 6. Of good
works thus Tilenus in Syntag. cap. 46. It is a cruel slander of our
adversaries, where they feign, that we teach, that all the works of the just
be properly and simply sins. Et Riuet. tract. 3. sect. 31. None of ours
says absolutely, that all works are sin, nether say we, that they are
mingled with sin absolutely. See the contrary lib. 1. c. 14. art. 2.

Touching good works in particular; thus Riuet. tract. 1. sect. 73. We reject
this position: That it is one of the conditions necessary to a Bishop, that he
be married. See the contrary lib. 1. cap. 15. art. 4. Of reward: thus the some
Riuet. 3. sect. 39. We deny not the reward of good works. See the contrary
lib. 1. c. 14. art. 7. c. 18. arr. 1. Of free will thus Serranus l. 3. cont.
Hayum. Does any of ours deny, or ever denied, that those that are not
regenerate do fall to sin of their prone and free will? See the contrary
lib. 1. c. 16. art. 14.

But finally they do plainly and expressly grant that Protest. confess
much of their doctrine to be against Scripture. Of God.
many points of Protestants doctrine are contrary to Scripture. For touching
God, thus writes Confessio Saxon. c. God nether wills sin, nor approves,
nor helps it, as it is written: when the Devil speaks a lie, he speaks of
his own: and 1. Joan. 3. Who commits sin, is of the Devil. Gerlachius
tom. 2. disput. 15. It is impossible, that God should will sin, of whom it
is said. psalm. 5. Thou art not a God that wills ini-inquitie. Et Polanus in
Disput. private. p. 235. God nether wills, nor can will the ill of offense or
sin properly taken psalm. 5. verse. 5. Melancthon in disput. to. 4. p. 623. The
conference of the continual doctrine in the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles does show, that God nether wille^^ nor works sin, as it is
expressly said: Thou art not a Gad that wills iniquity; And out of this
same place Pareus in Colleg. Theol. 1. disp. 2. proves, that Gods will is no
efficient cause of sin. And yet Protestants teach both that God wills
sin, and works sin: See lib. 1. c. 2. art. 1. 4. They teach also, that
God has ordained and predestined men to sin. l. 1. c. 2. art. 5. of which
doctrine Melancthon in disp. to. 4. p. 572. gives this censure. There are
certain frantike fellows much worse then the Stoics, who teach, that God of
himself does ordain and predestinate heinous sins, and that he wills
them, and not only suffers them. And in locis tit. de Causa Peccat. Sin is
nether done of God, nor ordained of him. They teach, that God commands,
urges and tempts to sin. lib. 1. cap. 2. art. 7. Which is contrary to
Scripture, by judgment of Riuet tract. 3. sect. 33. The Scripture expressly
says, that God will not iniquity, that he commands none to do ill, that
he cannot tempt to ill. Moulins in his Bucler. p. 97. God does not stir up
me^ to do ill, as it is said ps. 45. Thou have loved justice and hated
iniquity. Et Calu. in Math. 4. v. 1. Whereupon we gather, that tentations
which incite us to ill, come not from God. They teach that God is not angry
with the faithful when they work iniquity. lib. 1. c. 2. art. 11. Which to
be contrary to Scripture Protestants in Zanchius in Supplicat. confess in
these words: God does threaten his anger to all the transgressors of his law,
and they cite thereto that Ps. 5. Thou have hated all that work iniquity.
They teach, that God has no will that all should be saved, li. c. 2. art. 19.
Which is against Scripture as confesses Hemingius in these words in Enchir.
clas. 3. They accuse God of a lie, whosoever think that he will not the
salvation of some, as far as pertains to the cou^sail of creation. Gesnerus
in Compend. loc. 30. The Scripture does plainly testify, that God has in
earnest a will that all should be saved. Affelma^ de Praed.. 36. The Scripture
testifies by words, by oath, by telling, by oblation, that God would have all
me^ saved. They teach, that God does not call al me^ to him, nor offer his
grace to the^. l. 1. c. 2. art. 21. of which thus writes Illyricus in Claue
part. 2. tract. 4. Some by misunderstanding predestination, use hurtefully to
restrain the universal promises and callings of the Gospel, and to make
them particulars: by which error of theirs, they quite overthrow the Gospel
of Christ. Gerlachius to. 2. disp. 15. The plain testimonies of Scripture do
prove the universal will of God. Hemingius in Schlus. l. 1. Theol. Calu. art.
11. Who deny grace to be universal, do corrupt the doctrine of the Gospel,
oppose themselves and others. The like has Confess. Saxon. c. 4. They deny,
that Gods wrath is appeased by good works l. 1. c. 2. art. 16. And yet thus
has Confessio Aug. art. 11. We confess, that by good works, present
calamities are aswaged as I say teaches c. 58. The like has Apol. Conf. c.
de resp. ad Argum.

Touching Christ, they deny that he is God of God l. 1. Of Christ.
c. 3 art. 1. And yet the Ministers of Poland in Za^chius epist. 1. say it is
Iudaisme: He denies (say they) with the Jews, that Christ is God of God. They
teach, that Christ's humanity is not to be inuocated or adored l. 1. c. 3. art.
3. Of which thus writes Calvin Admonit. vlt. They pretend, that there is no
where any precept of adoring Christ's body: Surely of Christ as man it is
properly spoaken: God has exalted him, and given him etc. Wherefore Austin
rightly gathers from hence, that Christ's flesh is to be adored in the person
of the Mediator. They teach, that Christ as man is not head of the Church l. 1.
c. 3. art. 6. And yet thus writes Kickerman. l. 3. System. p. 322. There is
given also to the flesh of Christ for the union, the highest power of office,
to be head of the Church: This is that which he says: All power is given to
me, that is, full power of government in the Church. They teach, that Christ
is not judge as he is man. l. 1. c. 3. art. 8. And yet Lobechius disp. 19.
Whence it is rightly gathered, that Christ has judicial power, not only by
his deity, but also by his humanity, as it is evident by manifest testimonies
of Scripture. The like has Calvin in To. 2. v. 16. They deny, that Christ's
humanity has power to give life l. 1. c. 3. art. 4. Of which thus Hutter in
Anal. p. 293. Who shall dare to deny, that power of giving life was given to
Christ's humanity, he does manifestly accuse Christ, who, Joan. 6. oftentimes
attributes this power to his flesh. They say, that Christ did not make a new
testament. l. 1. c. 3. art. 9. of which point thus pronounces Gerlachius to.
2. disp. 14. This is no other thing, then to contradict the Apostle. Et
Schlusselb. l. 1. Theol. art. 17. The word of God teaches, that there are twoe
covenants or testaments, and not one and the same in substance. The same says
Illyricus praefat. in nou. testam. They deny, that Christ redeemed us with his
blood or corporal death. l. 1. c. 3. art. 17. Of which doctrine this censure
gives Serranus contr. Hayum. part. 3. The Scripture affirms, that we are
purged by the blood of Christ, that our sins are plainly expiated, that God,
by that price paid for us, was truly appeased. Calu. res. ad Sadolet. p. 126.
Run over all the Oracles of God, if the only blood of Christ be every where
proposed for the price of satisfaction, for pacification, for oblation, with
what bouldenesse dare thou etc. Moulins in his Bucler, p. 154. says, that
it is the sum of the Gospel, that Christ's death was a full and entire
satisfaction. They say, that Christ did not dye for those that are damned. l.
1. c. 3. art. 18. Of which point thus writes Hutter in Anal. art. 3. It is
false which the Caluinists feign, that the sacrifice of the passion and death
of Christ was not offered for all but for some only: The impiety of which
doctrine all the Scripture does greatly refute. Gerlachius to. 2. disput. 15.
They lie horribly, that God the Father did apoint the satisfaction of his Son
for some only: Against this blasphemy we oppose the most clear words of the
Scripture. Polanus part. 3. these. Christ died for all. To. 5. v. 2. Cor. 5. v.
15. And Roger Art. 3. puts it as an error in faith. They say that the blood
of Christ wherewith we were redeemed, is corrupted and now no more in being l.
1. c. 3. art. 20. Which Schusselb. l. 1. Theol. at. 20. proves to be contrary
to Scripture. They deny that the Soul of Christ descended into hell. l. 1. c.
3. art. 21. Which is contrary to Scripture as testifies Lobechius disput. 6.
in these words: We believe, and embrace with simple faith as true and aggreable
to Scripture and the Creeds, that Christ truly descended into hell. Luther in
ps. 16. According to the words of the Prophet, the Soul of Christ in substance
descended into hell. They deny that Christ entered to his disciples the doors
being shut l. 1. c. 3. art. 23. Which is repugnant to Scripture according to
Luther in def. verb. cenae. to. 7. The testimonies (says he) of Scripture are
manifest, that Christ passed through the doors shut unto his disciples, And
Zuinglius in Histor. resur. tom. 4. The Evangelist Joan does witness, that the
doors were shut, and that Jesus entered in the doors being shut. They deny that
Christ prays for us in heaven l. 1. c. 3. art. 25. which is opposite to
Scripture as Melancthon confesses in resp. ad art Bauar. saying: He is to be
detested, who denies, that Christ now prays for us, since it is plainly
written to the Hebrews: Always living that he may pray for us. Et Kemnice in
Exam. part. 3. c. de Inuoc. says that it is repugnant to Scripture and
depriueth Christ of a part of his Preisthood.

Touching Angels and Saints: They teach that the glory Of Saints.
of all Saints is equal. l. 1. c. 4. art. 3. which is against Scripture in the
judgment of Calvin. in 1. Cor. 15. v. 41. It is most, true, and it is proved
by the testimonies of Scripture, that there be different degrees of honor and
glory of the Saints. They deny that Angels or Saints pray for us: cap. 4.
art. 4. which the same Calvin avouches to be against Scripture: In Zachar. 1.
v. 12. The Scripture witnesses that Angels suppliantly pray to God for us:
Zachary says that the Angel prayed: O Lord of hosts. Apol. Conf. Aug. c. de
Inuoc. We grant that Angels pray for us. For there are testimonies Zach. 1.
Where the Angel prays: O Lord of hosts. The same says P. Martyr in Romans 8.
and Schlus. to. 8. Catal. p. 65. They deny that Angels offer up our prayers to
God. l. 1. c. 4. art. 7. Which Beza teaches to be contrary to Scripture in
Apoc. 8. v. 3. Ihon learned by this vision, that the prayers of Saints in this
world, to wit, of those that daily offer to God pure sacrifices of prayers and
good deeds, are offered to God by the ministry of Angels. They deny, that we
ought to pray to Saints lib. 1. c. 4 art. 8. Which to be repugnant to Scripture
thus confesses Luther to. 1. de 1 precept. f. 12. I say that in any case we
must recurre to the suffrages of Saints, as in Job it is said: And turn thy
self to some of the Saints, and as Solomon alleges his father: Remember
David O Lord. And also the Patriach Jacob said of Ephraim and Manasse; let my
name be inuocated upon these children.

Touching Scripture: they teach, that there is nothing Of Scripture.
hard in it. lib. 1. c. 5. art. 1. Which is against Scripture as confesses
Christian ad Portum lib. cont. Verron. We confess (says he) plainly with S.
Peter, as in the Epistles of S. Paul, so in the Scripture, that there are many
things hard to understand. Whitaker lib. 6. cont. Dur. sect. 22. I confess, as
Peter says, that there in Scriptures many things hard to understand. The
like says Pareus in Gal. 2. lect. 25. They teach, that the law is contrary
to the Ghospel. l. 1. c. 5. art. 7. Of which doctrine thus Serranus co^t.
Hayum. part. 3. With a more gross and dangerous ignorance does he oppose the
law of Moises and the law of the Gospel like twoe principles of Maniche, as
if they were contrary.

Concerning S. Peter: They deny, that the Church was Of S. Peter.
founded upon him, l. 1. c. 6. art. 2. Which to be against Scripture thus
confesses Whitaker. Cont. 4. q. 2. cap. 2. We deny not, that Peter was the
foundation and governor of the Church, and if they require, we will grant
also, that this was promised to him in these words. Et. l. 5. cont. Dur. sec.
4. Who does not confess, that Peter is the rock and foundation of the Church?
They deny, that the keys of heaven were given to Peter l. 1. c. 6. art. 3.
Which is against Scripture. For thus Spalatensis l. 1. de Rep. c. 7. Christ
expressly says to Peter: I will give the keys: wherefore fairewell they and
let them be gone, who using force to the letter, will have the keys to be given
or promised not immediately to Peter, but excluding Peter's person, either to the
whole Church, or to some other that is not Peter. Et Whitaker. Cont. 4. q. 2.
c. 4. I grant that the keys were promised to Peter, for the place does
convince that, and I will never repugne. Elie^sis in resp. ad Apol. Bellar. c.
8. Who doubts that the keys, were promised to Peter? They deny that the
Apostles were foundations of the Church l. 1. c. 6. art. 5. Which Rainolds in
his Confer. c. 2. sec. 1. acknowledges to be against the Scripture in these
words. The 12. Apostles are called 12. foundations Apoc. 21. v. 14. Et Serran.
co^t. Hayum. part. 3. All the Prophets and Apostles are termed (in Scripture)
foundations of the Church.

Concerning Pastors of the Church: They deny that there Of Pastors.
are always some, l. 1. c. 7. art. 1. which thus censureth Melanctho^ apud
Luther. 10. 1. f. 483. Where the Church is, there must be the right ordering of
Ministers, because the ordination of Ministers is one of the proper gifts of
the Church, according to that Ephesians. 4. He gave Pastors etc. Kemnice in Exam.
part. 2. tit. de ordine: The Son of God himself will have the Ministry of
those that teach the Gospel to be conserved with a continual vocation in the
Church. So Paul says Ephesians. 4. Et Calvin in Ephesians. 4. verse. 13. Here (Paul)
admonis heth, that the use of the Ministry is not for a time, but perpetual
as long as we live in the world.

Touching the Church: they deny that she does perpetually Of the Church
endure. l. 1. c. 8. art. 4. And notwithstanding Whitaker Co^t. 2. q. 3. c. 2.
says: Who denies or doubts, that the Church is founded for cuer, and to
co^tinew for ever, he is no Christian. They deny also, that she is always
visible l. 1. c. 8. art. 5. Which thus condemns Daneus l. de visib. Eccles.
Who denies the true Church of God and her to have been visible from the
beginning of the world, he doubtless shows himself to be ignorant of the
first page of the Bible. Et Reineccius to. 4. Arm. c. 3. The testimonies of
Scripture teach, that the visible company never perishes quite. They teach,
that the Church can err even in fundame^tall points. lib. 1. c. 8. art. 6. And
yet Calvin writes 4. Instit. c.. 10. By which words Paul does signify, that
to the end Gods truth fail not in the world, the Church is a faithful keeper
thereof.

Touching Baptism: they deny that either water, or Of Baptism.
the naming of the B. Trinity is necessary thereto l. 1. c. 10. art. 1. 2.
And yet Reineccius to. 4. Armat. c. 18. thus writes: Beza most fondely
imagines that in want of water, we may use other liquor. And Beza l.
quaestionum. and resp. vol. 3. If any should not baptize in the name of the
Trinity, or for water, (especially wittingly) should use some other thing,
surely this would not be the baptism which Christ instituted. Pareus in
Colleg. Theol. 9. disp. 22. There is no Christian that doubts, that the
baptism of water according to Christ's institution ought to be administered
only in the name of the Father etc. They deny that baptism is necessary to
Infants. l. 1. c. 10. art. 9. Of which thing Melancthon in Catechesi tom. 3.
gives this judgment: I answer, that baptism is necessary to Infants,
because Christ's commandment is universal, Joan. 3. unless etc. Vrbanus
Regius in Epist. ad Heminges to. 2. The Catholic Church does rightly believe
out of the Scriptures that Baptism is necessary to salvation. They deny that
the children of the faithful are in state of damnation before they be
baptized. l. 1. c. 10 art. 9. Which thus condemns Schlusselburg. l. 1. Theol.
art. 18. It may be proved many ways out of the word of God, that the children
of the faithful are not holy from their mothers wombs. They say that baptism
is not the lauer of the soul, nor purges sins. l. 1. cap. 10. art. 6. And
yet thus writes Beza in Prae. 2. part. resp. ad Montisb. Did ever any
Christian deny, that baptism is the lauer of regeneration, which the Apostle
witnesses in express words. Et Shlusselb. l. 1. Theol. art. 18. This
blasphemy of the Caluinists (that Baptism does not purge sins) the holy
Ghost in many places refuteth. In like sort Grauer in Absurdis Calvin. c. 14.
ser. 10.

Touching the Eucharist: they deny, that it is the body Of the Eucharist.
and blood of Christ. l. 1. c. 11. art. 1. Which is against Scripture. For thus
Muscul. in loc. tit. de Caena: I may not say, the bread of the Supper is not
the body of the Lord. For in so saying I should contradict the Lord saying:
This is my body. Again: Otherwise bread should not be the body of the Lord
against his express word. Beza in Hosp. part. 2. f. 300. being asked whether
he disliked that one should say: The bread of the Supper is the body of
Christ, answered, No: for they are the words of Christ. Et Hosp. ib. f. 136. We
deny not, that bread and wine are the body and blood of Christ: For Christ
himself said: This is my body. They say, that those words: This is my body,
must be thus expounded: This signifies my body. Of which exposition Musculus
in Schlusselb. l. 1. Theol. Calvin. art. 22. gives this judgment: We must
beware of that exposition, wherewith Christ's words are thought to be the same
as if he had said: This signifies my body. For this is not Christ's meaning,
to show that this bread signifies his body. They deny, that Christ gave us
his body to eat or his blood to drink. l. 1. c. 11. art. 2. Which doctrine
thus censureth Calvin l. de Neces. ref. Christ said in plain terms that he
gave them his body. Beza epist. 5. But I answer, that is all one as to make
Christ a liar, as who in clear and plain words says, he gave them that
body which was delivered for us. Et Apol. 1. contr. Saintem. p. 292. To deny
all eating of flesh, were plainly to deny the very words of Christ. They
deny that the Cup is the new testament l. 1. c. 11. art. 4. And yet Simlerus
in Hosp. part. 2. f. 348. says: The proper sense of these words, is: The
Cup is the new testament or the blood of the new testament. James Andreae in
Colloq. Montisbel. p. 38. To me it seems altogether new and unheard of that
the Supper is denied to be the testament of Christ, against the plain words
alleged out of Luke. Et Musculus in locis titul. de Caena: In Luke and Paul it
is said of this Cup, that it is the new testament. They deny, that the
Cup of the Eucharist was shed for us. l. 1. c. 11. art 6. And yet Illyricus
in Luc. 22. v. 20. writes: Which is powered out for you, in the Greek text must
needs be referred to the Cup.

Touching Matrimony: they deny that it is a Sacrament. Of Matrimony:
c. 12. art. 5. And yet thus professes the Confession of Wittemberg. c. de
Coniugio: We confess, that Marriage is a kind of life instituted and approved
by God, and a mystery, as commonly it is expounded, a great Sacrament in
Christ and the Church, as Paul says.

Touching faith: they deny that it can be without good Of Faith.
works l. 1. cap. 13. art. 8. which doctrine thus condemns Schlusselburg. l.
1. Theol. art. 15. Aretius says, that faith and good works are conjoined as
the species and her propriety, as a man and reason; But we out of the word of
God teach and learn that this doctrine is false. They deny that faith it
self is imputed to us for justice. l. 1. c. 13. art. 19. And yet thus judges
Vrbanus Regius in loc. fol. 46. Sincere faith on the mercy of God and Jesus
Christ, is our very justice. Faith is imputed for justice to the beleiuer.
Abraham believed and it was imputed to him for justice. They deny that the
faith of the Hemorroissa was pure libr. 1. capit. 13. articul. 25. And yet thus
Bullinger in Marci 5. The power of true faith is singularly expressed

Touching good works: they deny, that they are necessary Of good works.
to salvation. l. 1. c. 14. art. 13. And yet Piscator says in These. loc. 10.
The Scripture teaches, that good works are necessary to salvation. The same
say the Electorals in Colloq. Aldeburgico. They deny also, that good works are
cause of salvation lib. 1. cap. 14. art. 15. And yet thus writes Illyricus in
Claue tractat. 6. titul. de Var. bonum operum praed. We hear that to many
effects and praises, and even salvation it self is attributed (in Scripture)
to good works, -- It is plain, that oftentimes somewhat to much praise is
ascribed to good works, which does not agree to them, nor is to be ascribed to
them, if we will speak exactly, truly, and properly. They deny, that they
are meritorious lib. 1. cap. 14. art. 8. And yet thus professes Apollog.
Confession. in Melancthon. tom. 3. Seeing works are some fulfilling of the law
they are truly said to be meritorious, reward is rightly said to be due to
them. Again: The text of Scripture says that life everlasting is rendered to
them. Which Protestants deny lib. 1. cap. 14. articul. 7. They deny also that
they are to be done for God. lib. 1. cap. 14. art. 20. Of which point thus
judges Kemnice in locis tit. de bonis oper. The testimonies of Scripture most
clearly teach, that good works are to be done for Gods sake.

Touching virginity: they deny that it is counseled in Scripture l 1. c. 15.
art. 4. And nevertheless Vrbanus Regius in locis fol. 372. says: Virginity
is counseled in the Gh^spell, not commanded. And in Interp. loc. 49.
Virginity is only a counsel, not a precept.

Concerning sin: they teach, that it can remain with Of sin.
justice l. 1. c. 16. art. 17. Yet thus pronuonceth Luther in Gal. 3. These are
directly opposite: That a Christian is just and loved of God, and yet with all
is a sinner. Again: How are these twoe co^tradictories true at once? I have
sins and am most worthy of the wrath of God, and the Father loves me. They
deny that sin puts a man out of grace. l. 1 c. 16. art. 6. And yet thus
writes Hemingius in Enchir class. 2. If a penitent sin against his
conscience, as David did with murder and adultery, he casts of the holy
Ghost, and becomes guilty of Gods wrath, and unless he do penance falls
into eternal punishment. It is a horrible madness to say that such retain
the holy Ghost, when as Paul says plainly Gal. 5. The works of the flesh
are manifest, and they that do such, shall not possess the kingdom of God.
They deny that the widows (whereof S. Paul speaks 1. Timoth.) did sin in
marrying l. 1. c. 16. art. 15. And yet thus Bullinger in Tim. 5. Surely to
marry, of it self, is no sin: But because they have once given their
promise to Christ the spouse and to the Church, and of their own accord have
left marriage, hereupon their marriage turns to the disgrace of Christ, which
is that which Paul terms to become wanton against Christ. Bucer lib. 2. de
Regno Christi c. 23. They who have given their first promise to God, of a
single life, have indeed judgment and reprehension. Calvin upon this place
says that these widows: gave away their liberty to marry, and did free
themselves from the bound of marriage for all their life, and did deprive
themselves of the liberty to marry. How then did not they sin by marrying.

Touching Justification: they teach, that it is never last. Of Justification.
l. 1. c. 17. art. 15. Which is contrary to Scripture to Scripture, as
Confess. Saxon. cap. 11. confesses in these words: By the saying of Luke: He
goes and brings other spirits, and the like sayings, it is manifest, that
some regenerate do contristate and cast of the holy Ghost, and are afterward
cast away of God, and become guilty of his wrath and eternal punishment.

Touching eternal life: they deny that it is a reward. l. 1. Of eternal life.
c. 18. art. 1. And yet thus speaks Apologia Confess. Aug. in Melancthon:
tom. 3. The Scripture calls eternal life, areward: Again: The name of
reward in this manner agrees to eternal life, because eternal life rewards
good works.

Touching Hell: they deny that it is a place. l. 1. c 18. act. Of Hell,
7. Which to be contrary to Scripture thus confesses Bucanus loc. 4. Hell is
a certain place hid and horrible, appointed of God for damned men and Angels
to their eternal pain. Nu. 16. 30. Math. 8. 12. Et Piscat or l. 1. loc. 22.
The Scripture every where testifies, that the damned shall suffer these
torments in hell, to wit a place under earth appointed for their punishment.
And Regius in loc. tit. l de Peccato. The Scripture expressly deputeth twoe
places for souls, heaven for the good, and hell for the badde.

Touching the law of God: they deny that we may pray Of Gods law.
for the fulfilling of it. lib. 1. c. 19. art. 5. And yet thus writes Perkins
in Explic. orat. Dom. Be done, that is, let obedience be given to it, let it be
fulfilled of all men.

Concerning man's will: they deny that it is free in evil Of man's will
l. 1. c. 21. art. 2. And yet thus writes Regius in locis tit. de Peccato: To
say with Maniche; that man cannot avoid sin; this error is heresy. Rogers
on the 10. Article. The Maniches affirmed how man is not voluntarily brought
but necessarily driven unto sin.

These and many more Protestanticall doctrines Protestants themselves confess
to be contrary to the true sense of holy Scripture. Why then may not we
conclude, that Protestants do contradict the holy Scripture, seeing besides all
the foresaied arguments, they themselves plainly confess it of many points
of their doctrine: Which was the end and scope of this work.

PERORATION Or Conclusion to the Reader.
Thou have seen (good Reader) in this work, Catholics advantages for,
Scripture over Protestants.
what great advantage Catholics have over Protestants even for the written word
of God or holy Scripture. Thou have seen, that the Catholic doctrine in more
then twoe hundred and sixty points of controversy relieth upon the express
word of God; whereas the Protestants Doctrine relieth upon humane principles,
humane conferences, humane consequences, that is, upon the word of man. Thou
have seen, that the holy Scripture in all these foresaied articles gives
sentence for the Catholic doctrine, and condemns the Protestant, in express
words, and those purposely spoaken, and in their plain and usual sense, in
which such words use to be spoake^ and taken of men: then the which no sentence
can be given clearer or manifester. Thou have seen how many, how voluntary,
how intolerable corruptions both of the words and sense of Scripture
Protestants are forced to make, lest they should seem to be condemned by the
sentence of holy Scripture. They have now that Judge to whom alone they
appeal, let them hear him, let them submit themselves to his sentence. He
speaks plainly, directly, and purposely, and (as I said) in the plain and
usual sense in which men use such words, that I may not say also in the sense,
in which he is understood of the holy Fathers and the Catholic Church. Now all
and the only pretext of Protestants touching the Scripture is taken away. For
who, unless he will shut his eyes, does not see, but that they are most
plainly condemned of the Scripture, who are condemned of it in so many, and
so weighty articles, in such plain words, and so clear sense, and that it is
but a vain struggling to seek to obscure the clearness of such a sentence by
humane glosses and expositions, such as were never wanting, nor ever will be
wanting to any Heretik? The Protestants have often cried, that the Scripture
is the only rule and foundation of faith, that faith relieth only upon
Scripture: which I would to God they would follow in the foresaied 260.
articles, and let go their own glosses and consequences, which are not sound
in Scripture, and follow them who produce the express word of God against the
word of man. Which counsel though it of it self be most reasonable, yet
because they will more willingly follow it when they shall hear it approved
by their own Masters, I will here set down the words of some of them. Luther
in Postilla in Festo Assumpt. Always Protest. advise us to follow them that
follow Scripture.
stick to th^se things, which are clearly delivered by the Scriptures: and
rely not upon that which has not manifest authority in Scripture. The
Protestante Princes in Praefar. libr. Concordiae. In true simplicity of faith
they shall firmly insist in the plain words of Christ: which is the surest
manner and fittest to teach the ignorant. Melancthon in Actis Wormat. tom. 4.
When the letter is plain, it is manifest we must not go from it. Et ib. in
Resp. ad Staphilum: Nether is it to to be doubted, but that the letter, when
there is no obscurity or anbiguitie, is to be preferred before all the decrees
of all men. Again: Where the word is manifest, and without obscurity or
ambiguitie: it is impiety to teach or think the contrary. And in Hospin.
part. 2. Histor. fol. 115. What will be in time of tentation, Harken to this,
Protestants.
when the conscience shall ask what cause it had to go from the recaued
doctrine of the Church: Then these words: This is my body, will be lightnings.
What will the terrified mind oppose against these, with what Scripture, with
what word of God, will she strenghthen and persuade her self, that it was need
to interpret them by a metaphor. They seem not to be well acquainted with
these disputes, who so much delighte in wit, as them more admire subtly
devised reasons then the words of Scripture. James Andrews in Colloq.
Montisbel. page 456. Let them examine and judge the doctrine of both parts,
not by humane glosses, but by the word of God. Zuinglius libr. de Author.
sedit. tom. 2. As often as thou see Christian Doctors to contend and
disagree, stick to him who brings a clear, evident, and express oracle of
God. Calvin. l. de ver. ref. p. 326. We deny, that it is lawful for us to go
from the certain words of Christ. And 4. Instit. c. 17.. 35. Our souls rely
upon the only certain word of God, when they are called to account. Sadeel
libr. de Human. Christ. I cannot sufficiently admire them, who by those things
which are not extant in Scripture, will take away the things which are
approved by most certain and evident testimonies of Scripture. And de ver.
peccat. remissio. No opinion is Theological, which is against the express
places of Scripture. Fulk. in Hebr. 6. not. 3. Nether is the exposition of any
man to be received, that goes directly against the words of the text, and the
manifould testimonies of the Scripture. Vorstius in Amica Collat. sec. 101. Who
simply so affirm and teach al these things, they are secure before God,
because they can safely retire themselves under the shield of the holy
Scripture; But who deny them, or by marvelous glosses obscure or corrupt
them, thy find no where sure footing. There is nothing more secure, the^
simply to stick to the clear word of God expounded by it self: and
contrariewise, nothing more dangerous, then to add or detract never so little
of our own, especially in matters of so great moment. Thus the chief
Protestant masters, which if either themselves would have followed, or their
disciples yet would follow, soon would there be an end of these controversies.

With what assurance (o God) may Catholics appear Confidence of Cath. for
their faith.
before thy tribunal for to answer for the faith which they maintain against
Protestants, seeing they find it is avouched in so many and so great articles
by thy express words spoaken not by the way, but of set purpose to tell us
what thou would have us believe of these matters, and in their clear and
plain sense, which they manifestly bear, and in which such words use to be
taken of men, so that unless thou do deceive then or be deceived, they cannot
in these points be deceived? But with what distrust Desperation of Protest.
or rather desperation will Protestants appear, seeing they have left that
which so express words of God do avouch, and follow that which they most
clearelie condemn, and only humane consequences, humane glosses, humane
subtilities do vphould? Then these words of God, will be (as Melancthon said)
lightnings, or as S. Austin speaks, thundrings Lib. 1. contr. Parm. c. 2.
and heavenly lightnings, and Protestants co^sequences, figures, and glosses,
will vanish to nothing. Then it will clearelie appear, that Protestants
without all word of God, without all divine authority, but only upon their
own fancies have preferred their consequences, their conferences, their idle
reasons before Gods express word, and that they might not seem to have done
so, have changed the true and native sense of Gods words into a strange,
figurative, and violent sense. And shall we Never any so contrary to
Scripture as Protestants.
think, that these men are Ghospelers, restorers of the Ghospel, or sent of
God, and their doctrine the pure Gospel? Whereas never was there doctrine
more opposite to the Gospel, nor ever any who in so many and weighty
matters, so directly opposed themselves to the plain words and open sense of
the Gospel. O boldness of men that durst do thus against the express word
of God himself. O impudency of them who would avouch such doctrine, for the
Gospel. And o blindnesses or madness of them, who suffer themselves to be
deceived of such men in a matter so evident. O bewiched and blinded me^, awaken
at lenght, open your eyes, consider your estate, search the Scriptures here set
before your eyes, and compare them with the doctrine of your Masters, and
consider whether they who in so many and so great matters speak so contrary,
can speak with the same spirit, think the same thing. Demand of your Masters
1. by what authority Demands to be made to Ministers.
of God, by what word of God, they dare speak contrary to the words and
phrase of Scripture, of so many and so great matters: 2. by what authority or
word of

If they can allege no express authority or word of Ministers draw men from
Gods express word to their consequences.
God for their so doing (as in truth in most of these Articles they can give
no color of Gods express word) but oneliepretend their consequences, their
conferences, their reasons, suffer not your selves by this most deceitful and
fond humane pretext to be drawn from Gods express and their manifest sense.
Let us (says S. Austin) hear our Lib. de peccat. mer. c. 20.
our Lord not the ghesses and suspicions of men. But that God speaking to men,
speaking according to the manner of men, speaking of divine and supernatural
things which cannot be known of us but by his words, and speaking of them
purposely for to declare his mind concerning Note.
them, should so often and in so many and so wheigtie points, think otherwise
then he speaks, or otherwise think then his words do show, or otherwise then
men to whom he speaks use to understand them, and yet not once should
expressly say the contrary, is not Gods word but the ghesses and suspicions,
yea the impostures and lies of men. In this point therefore consists almost
all the The Sum whether Catholics or Protest, be to be followed.
sum of deliberation whether Catholics or Protestants be to be followed, to
wit, whether in supernatural matters, which cannot be known but by Gods
express words, we ought to follow rather the express words of God purposely
spoaken of him for to tell us those matters, Is whether Gods word, or man's
reason.
rather then the consequences, conferences, and reasons, of some new slart up
men not well agreing among themselves: Then the which consultation none can be
easier. For if even in matters which are subject to sense and reason, we ought
to prefer Gods word before reason of what men soever; how much more in things
which far surpass the reach of men's sense or reason, ought we to prefer it
before the reasons of a few, new, and iangling fellows? Let that faith live,
flourish, and triumph, which Let that faith prevail which Scripture most
favors.
in divine matters that cannot be known but by Gods words, is authorized by
Gods express word spoaken of purpose to declare Gods mind, and in the plain
and open sense wherein men use to take such words, and against which sense no
other express words are directly contrary: And let that faith, or rather
infidelity, fall, perish, vanish, which in more then 260. articles is
condemned of such words of God and in such a sense, and in most points is only
supported by humane consequences, humane conferences, and humane reasons or
arguments.

These are the points (Christian Reader) taken out of How Protest. handle the
letter of Scripture.
the first book, which I desire to fasten and engraue in thy memory: which
yet will be more forcible, if thou add to them things which I have set before
thy eyes in thy second book. For there I have showed, that the holy Scripture
does so manifestly condemn the Protestants doctrine, as that touching the
letter thereof, they are forced to reject some openly, others privily to
scrape out, to call some in doubt, to add some, to translate some wrong, and
change the order of others: Touching the propositio^s How the sayings.
of Scripture, they are compelled to say, that some of them were certainly
known of God himself, others not spoaken according to his own mind, others
spoaken ironically, mimeticallie, hyperbolicallie, by fiction and
amplification: and to change universal propositions into particulars,
unlimited into limited, absolute into conditionals, these that were spoake^
simply into those that were spoake^ in part, and those that were spoaken of
one time, into those that were spoaken of an other. Touching the single How the
simple words.
words of Scripture, they are forced, those words which signify the doing of a
thing, to expound of endeavor to do it; those which signify the cause, to
expound of the way or means to an end: Which signify that a thing is, to
expound that it ought to be: Which signify a true thing, to expound of an
apparent or sign thereof: to expound words, by diverse, by disparate, or
unlikely, yea by opposites or contraries: to devise all kind of figures when
the propriety of the word is against them: to find out new and and never heard
of distinctions: to reject the unanimous exposition of Fathers, Church, and
Councels: to frustrate the ends of the passion of Christ: to take out of the
world all true virtue, and to open the way to all vice: to confess, that they
hold opinions her to fore condemned for heresies of the Church and Fathers: to
acknowledge that some of their opinions are plainly blasphemous: and finally
(which is the end of this work) directly opposite to holy Scripture. Who (I
say) in more then 260. articles of controversy, not only oppose themselves
to the express words of Scripture, spoaken of purpose to tell us Gods meaning
concerning matters that far pass all ma^s reach, in their proper sense, and
in which men usually understand them, and to which no other places of
Scripture are directly opposite: but also, lay violent hands upon the sacred
letter or word, change almost all the kinds of propositions which the Scripture
uses, impiouslie deprave the sense of the words, reject the exposition of
Fathers, Church, and Counsels, make void the ends of Christ's passion take
away all virtue and bring in vice, and finally confess, that diverse of their
opinions are blasphemous and contrary to scripture, they are to be accounted,
avoided and eschewed, not only as Heretics condemned by the Scripture and
holy Church, but even of themselves.

A note to the Reader.
I HAVE not set down the editions of the Protestants books which I cite in
this work, because I have done that in my book de Authore Prot. Ecclesiae put
forth An. 1619. Where he that list may see them, as also he may there see the
laws which I prescribe to him that will answer either that book or this.
Moreover in this English work I do not cite the English words of our English
Protestant writers because I had not their English works at hand, but translate
them out of their Latin works. Besides I am not so curious to cite the leaf or
page as I was in the Latin edition, because the unlearned will not be able to
seek the Latin, and the learned Reader will rather (I suppose) peruse my Latin
copy, where he shall find the leaves or pages as carefully cited as I could
do by the errors of the Scribe or Printer, whose fault no discret reader will
impute to me; and whose error I hope is no where to be found both in the number
of the chapters, and of the leaves or pages together: So that the one of them
may bring the Reader to the place which I allege, if the other chance to be
misprinted.

Laus Deo Virginique Matri.
AN INDEX OF THE CHAPTERS and Articles contained in the first book.
CHAPTR 1. Of the owners of Scripture.
Whether Catholics or Protestants be true owners of the Scripture.

CHAP. 2. Of God.
ARt. 2. Whether God wills sin. page. 45. 2. Whether sin pleases God. p.
49. 3. Whether God hates sin. p. 50. 4. Whether God works sin. p. 51. 5.
Whether God ordains sin to be. p. 33. 6. Whether God commands sin? p.
56. 7. Whether God tempts to sin? p. 57 8. Whether God necessitateth to
sin? p. 59. 9. Whether God hates all that sin? p. 61. 10. Whether God
justifies the sinner remaining a sinner? p. 62. 11. Whether God be angry with
the faithful when they sin? p. 65. 12. Whether God be delighted with good
works. p. 67. 14. Whether God be served by good works. p. 69. 15. Whether God
esteem of good works which are not commanded? 70. 16. Whether God be appeased
by good works? p. 71. 17. Whether God will have his comma^dements kept. p. 73.
18. Whether God loves all men. p. 75. 19. Whether God would have all men to be
saved. p. 77. 20. Whether God would have some converted who will not convert.
p. 78. 21. Whether God call all men. p. 80. 22. Whether God of himself will
the death and damnation of men. p. 81. 23. Whether God da^neth men for sin?
p. 85. 24. Whether God can do all things. p. 86. 25. Whether God can make a
Camel pass through a needls eye. p. 88. 26. Whether God can do that which
shall never be. p. 90. 27. Whether Gods miracles be a sufficient proof of
truth? p. 91.


Chap. 3. Of Christ.
Art. 1. Whether God the Son had his being of his Father. p. 96. 2. Whether
Christ was predestined the Son of God. p. 97. 3. Whether Christ as man is
to be adored. p. 98. 4. Whether Christ as man could work miracles. p. 100. 5.
Whether Christ's humanity be every where. p. 102. 6. Whether Christ as man be
head of the Church. p. 104. 7. Whether Christ as man made laws? p. 105. 8.
Whether Christ as man be Judge? 107. 9. Whether Christ made a new testament? p.
109. 10. Whether as man he were ignorant? p. 111. 11. Whether as man he were a
sinner? p. 113. 12. Whether he refused to do the office of a Redeemer? p. 116.
13 Whether he was assured of his salvation? 118 14 Whether he had commandment
to give his life for us? 120 15 Whether he merited any thing for himself? 121
16 Whether he sufficiently redeemed us? 123 17. Whether he redeemed us with
his blood? 125 18. Whether he died for reprobates? 127 19. Whether he died
for all? 129 20. Whether his blood be corrupted? 131 21. Whether his soul
descended to hell? 132 22. Whether he suffered the pains of hell? 134 23.
Whether he entered to his disciples, the doors being shut? 136 24. Whether he
penetrated the heavens? 138 25. Whether he prays for us in heaven? 139


Chap. 4. Of Angels and Saints.
Art. 1. Whether Angels and Saints do the will of God? 144 2. Whether Saints
enjoy their felicity? 145 3. Whether the glory of Saints be equal? 147 4.
Whether Angels and Saints pray for us. 148 5. Whether Saints have care of us?
150 6. Whether they hear our prayers. 152. 7. Whether Angels offer our
prayers to God? 153 8. Whether they be to be prayed unto? 155 9. Whether God
be to be prayed unto by the names of Saints? 156 10. Whether God have mercy
on us for Saints sake? 158 11. Whether Angels or Saints be to be bowed unto?
159 12. Whether Saints be to be imitated of us? 161 13. Whether holy men
receive us into heavenly tabernacles? 162 14. Whether any Saint may be
termed our hope? 163 15. Whether any had power to work Miracles? 164 16.
Whether Saints do reign with Christ? 166 17. Whether any was full of grace?
167


Chap. 5. Of the Scripture or word of God.
Art. 1. Whether any place of Scripture be hard to understand? 170 2.
Whether Scripture can be understood without the holy Ghost? 172 3. Whether
the Ghospel contain any law? 174 4. Whether the Gospel preach penance? 167
5. Whether the Gospel reprove sin? 178 6. Whether the Ghopell promise
salvation without condition of works? 180 7. Whether the Gospel be contrary
to the law? 182 8. Whether the law of Moses commanded faith in Christ? 184.
9. Whether any unwritten traditions be to be kept? 186


Chap. 6. Of S. Peter and the Apostles.
Art. 1. Whether S. Peter were first of the Apostles? 189. 2. Whether the
Church was built on S. Peter? 190. 3. Whether the keys were given to him?
192. 4. Whether his faith failed? 193. 5. Whether the Apostles were
foundations of the Church? 195. 6. Whether the Apostles were simply to be
heard? 196. 7. Whether they were sufficient witnesses of the truth? 198 8.
Whether they learned any point after Christ's ascension? 200. 9. Whether
Judas was truly a disciple? 201. 10. Whether Judas was a Bishop? 202.


Chap. 7. Of Pastors of the Church.
Art. 1. Whether Pastors always continue? 204. 2. Whether authority be in
the Pastors? 206. 3. Whether one Pastor can excommunicate? 208. 4. Whether
Pastors can make laws? 209. 5. Whether Bishops be rulers of the Church? 210
6. Whether they rule the Church? 211. 7. Whether Pastors be to be called
Priests? 213. 8. Whether a Pastor can be without calling? 214. 9 Whether a
Pastor may have temporal jurisdiction? 216. 10 Whether Moses were a Priest?
218.


Chap. 8. Of the Church.
Art. 1. Whether the Church be one? 220. 2. Whether ill men be of the Church?
223. 3 Whether reprobats be of the Church? 225. 4 Whether the Church ever
continue? 226. 5. Whether it be always visible? 228. 6. Whether it be
infallible? 230. 7. Whether it be simply to be heard? 231. 8. Whether truth
relieth on the Church? 232.


Chap. 9. Of Temples or material Churches.
Art. 1. Whether Churches be for private Prayers? 235. 2. Whether Churches be
to be adorned? 237. 3. Whether Images may be set in Churches? 4. Whether
Heatens thought their idols to be Gods? 240


Chap. 10. Of Baptism.
Art. 1. Whether water be necessary to baptism? p. 242. 2. Whether invocation
of the Trinity be necessary to baptism? p. 243. 3. Whether baptism be
necessary as by precept? p. 245. 4. Whether it be necessary as a mean? p.
246. 5. Whether Simon Magus and such were baptized? p. 248. 6. Whether
baptism be effectual in reprobats. p. 150. 7. Whether baptism cleanses
sin? p. 252. 8. Whether it pardonneth sins to come? p. 256. 9. Whether
before baptism children be in state of damnation? p. 258. 10. Whether the
baptism of S. Ihon and of Christ were different? p. 261. 11. Whether certain
Ephesians had received S. Ihons baptism? p. 262. 12. Whether they had heard
of the holy Ghost? p. 264.


Chap. 11. Of the Eucharist.
Art. 1. Whether the Eucharist be the body and blood of Christ? p. 266. 2.
Whether Christ's flesh be to be eaten, and his blood to be drunk? p. 280. 3.
Whether Christ gave the blood of the new testament to be drunk? p. 283. 4.
Whether the Eucharisticall Chalice be Christ's testament? p. 284. 5. Vhether at
the time of his Supper his blood was shed? p. 286. 6. Whether the
Eucharisticall Chalice was shed for us? p. 288. 7. Whether bread be necessary
to the Eucharist? p. 289. 8. Whether the Eucharist be to be made of azime
bread? p. 290. 9. Whether bread and wine whereof the Eucharist is made, be to
be blessed? p. 292. 10. Whether there ought to be any preparation to the
Eucharist? p. 293. 11. Whether there be any Sacrifice in the Church? p. 295.
12. Whether is there any altar in the Church. p. 296. 13. Whether the
Paschal lamb was sacrificed? p. 297.


Chap. 12. Of the other Sacraments.
Art. 1. Whether Priests can forgive sins? p. 300. 2. Whether we must
confess our sins. p. 302. 3. Whether grace be given by imposition of hands?
p. 305. 4. Whether hands be to be imposed upon those that are baptized? p.
305. 5. Whether Matrimony be a Sacrament? p. 306. 6. Whether one may marry
after divorce. p. 307. 7. Whether the sick are to be anoiled? p. 310. 8.
Whether the new Sacraments excel the old. p. 311.


Chap. 13. Of faith.
Art. 1. Whether faith be a work? 314. 2. Whether faith believe only God
his promises. 315. 3. Whether to believe that Christ is God, be justifying
faith? 317. 4. Whether faith be one? 319. 5. Whether all articles of faith
may be believed without the holy Ghost. 321. 6. Whether faith differ from
hope and charity? 322. 7. Whether faith be greater then charity? 324. 8.
Whether faith be without charity? 325. 9. Whether it be without confession?
328. 10. Whether without good works it be dead? 329. 11. Whether faith
whereof S. James speaks be justifying faith? 331. 12. Whether any faith be
perfect? 333. 13. Whether faith be perfected by good works. 331. 14. Whether
by faith we only know that we are justified? 336. 15. Whether faith be
necessary to justification or salvation. 338. 16. Whether faith be any cause
of iustificatien? 340. 17. Whether faith alone ca^ justify. 342. 18. Whether
faith justify, as it is belief. 344. 19. Whether faith it self be imputed
to justice. 346 20. Whether faith be proper to the just. 348 21 Whether it be
proper to the Elect? 350 22. Whether faith come by hearing? 352 23. Whether
faith be ever lost? 353 24. Whether faith be rewarded? 355 25. Whether the
faith of those who touched Christ's garments, were pure? 356


Chap. 14. Of good works in general.
Art. 1. Whether any work of a Sinner may be good. p. 360 2 Whether every
good work, be sin? 362 3 Whether good works, be a sweet smell to God, 364 4
Whether good works be fully good? 366 5 Whether they be just or justice in
the sight of God? 369 6 Whether in good works there be any worth? 371 7
Whether eternal life be promised to good works? 373 8 Whether good works be
meritorious. 374 9 Whether there may be glory in good works? 376 10 Whether
all good works be equal before God? 378 11 Whether good works be commanded of
God? 379 12 Whether they be necessary to justification? 381 13 Whether they
be necessary to salvation? 384 14 Whether they be profitable to salvation or
justification? 387 15 Whether they be any cause of salvation? 390 16 Whether
they be a testimony of justification or predestination? 393 17 Whether they
be a cause of Gods love toward us? 395 18 Whether we ought to do good works?
396 19 Whether they may be done for reward? 399 20 Whether they be to be done
for the glory of God? 401


Chap. 15. Of works in particular.
Art. 1. Whether it be good not to marry? 406 2 Whether virginity, be a
virtue? 406. 3. Whether the state of virginity be better then marriage? 408
4. Whether God would have men to live single? 410 5. Whether Fasting be a
virtue? 412. 6. Whether fasting be a preservative against the Devil? 414. 7.
Whether choice of meats be laudable? 415. 8 Whether we may pray for all? 416.
9. Whether we may pray for the dead? 417. 10 Whether we may pray for that
which God has not promised? 419 11. Whether any obtain for the worth of
their prayer? 421. 12. Whether we may pray in an unknown tongue? 422. 13.
Whether we be commanded to say our lords prayer? 423 14. Whether we may make
vows? 424 15. Whether alms deliver from death and sin? 426 16. Whether we
may give all to the poor? 427 17. Whether penance be commanded to all? 428
18 Whether affliction of the body be a part of penance? 429. 19 Whether
penance of the Ninevites was good? 431 20. Whether Eremitical life be
lawful?


Chap. 16. Of Sins.
Art. 1. Whether sins be imputed to the faithful? 435. 2. Whether any
sin be mortal to the Elect and faithful? 437. 3. Whether only
incredulity be sin? 438. 4. Whether sin ought to be ouercomen of us? 440.
5. Whether any that serve the flesh, can serve God? 441. 6 Whether by
grievous sins we fall from grace? 442. 7 Whether sin can stand with
justice? 8. Whether sin may be redeemed by good works? 447. 9. Whether to
abstain from great sins, be necessary to salvation? 448 10. Whether sin
be the cause of damnation? 451. 11. Whether we must give account of our
sins? 453. 12. Whether the justified commit ill? p. 454. 13. Whether the
justified commit sin? 455. 14 Whether the justified ever do sin wilfully?
457. 15 Whether the widows 1. Tim. 5. did sin in marrying? 458. 16 Whether
usury be sin? 459. 17. Whether all sinned in Adam? 460. 18. Whether there
is original sin? 461.


Chap. 17. Of Justification.
Art. 1. Whether Justification be of works? 465. 2. Whether it be of faith
only? 467. 3. Whether the justified be just in Gods fight? 469. 4. Whether
the justified be clean? 472 5. Whether sin remain in the justified? 474.
6. Whether sins be simply forgiven? 477. 7. Whether all the justified be
equally just? 478. 8. Whether there is any inherent justice? 478. 9. Whether
inherent justice can be imputed. 481. 10. Whether the justified be infallibly
certain of their justice? 482. 11. Whether penance go before justification?
845. 12. Whether justification can be lost? 487. 13. Whether the justified may
fear to fall? 489. 14. Whether justification be proper to the Elect? 492. 15.
Whether we cooperate to our justification? 493. 16. Whether after justification
any punishment remain? 496


Chapt. 18. Of life and death everlasting.
ART. 1. Whether life everlasting be a reward? p. 499. 2. Whether it be a
crown of justice? 501. 3. Whether it be of faith only? 503. 4. Whether all
men be to be judged? 505 5. Whether eternal life be to be rendered to any?
506. 6. Whether the souls of the Reprobates do now suffer in Hell. 507. 7.
Whether Hell be any place? 509. 8. Whether Hell fire be true fire? 510.


Chapt. 19. Of Gods law.
ART. 1. Whether Gods law be possible? 513. 2. Whether ever any kept Gods law?
515. 3. Whether any loved God in all the^^ heart? 517. 4. Whether Gods law be
in the heart of any? 519. 5. Whether we ^(...)^ that we may keep Gods law?
520. 6. Whether the keeping of Gods law be necessary to salvation? 521. 7.
Whether the law of God be abrogated from the faithful. 522.


Chapt. 20. Of man's law and superiority.
ART. 1. Whether there be any Superiority among Christians? 526. 2. Whether
man can make laws? 527. 3. Whether man's law binds the conscience? 529.


Chapt. 21. Of free will.
ART. Whether man be free in indifferent matters? 532. 2. Whether man be free
in moral matters? 534. 3. Whether man cooperate with Gods grace to good? 536.


Chap. 22. Of man's Soul.
ART. 1. Whether man's Soul be immortal? 539. 2. Whether Man's soul be the
form of his body? 545. 3 Whether there be any resurrection of the dead? 547.


THE INDEX. OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED in the second book.
CHAPTER. 1. That Protestants contradict the tru^ sense of Scripture, because
i^ so many points they gaynesay the express words thereof. page 549. Chapt.
2. That Protestants confess, they contradict the sense of those words, which
the Cathol. Church long since, and many of themselves now, believe to be the
words of God. p. 611. Chapt. 3. That Protestants are forced to use violence to
that part of Scripture which they receive. p. 615. Chapt. 4. That Protestants
overthrow all force of the words of Scripture, yea contemn and deride them. p.
620. Chapt. 5. That Protestants say, that words of Scripture which make against
them, were not spoaken of certain knowledge. p. 630. Chapt. 6. That
Protestants say, that many weighty sayings of the Scripture were not spoaken
according to the mind of the speakers. p. 633. Chapt. 7. That Protestants are
forced to say, that the Scripture speaks ironically, etc. p. 640. Chapt. 8.
That Protestants are forced to turn the most general speeches of the
Scripture into particulars. p. 647. Chapt. 9. That Protestants limitate many
propositions, not limitated by the Scripture. p. 654. Chapt. 10. That
Protestants change many absolute speeches of Scripture into conditionals. p.
665. Chapt. 11. That Protestants change conditional speeches of Scripture into
absolute. p. 668. Chapt. 12. That Protestants change many causall speeches of
Scripture into not causal. p. 670. Chapt. 13. That what is simply spoaken of
Scripture, they make to be spoaken in part. p. 674. Chapt. 14. That they will
not understand the speeches of Scripture of that time of which it speaks. p.
678. Chapt. 15. That of many sayings of Scripture they make one. p. 681.
Chapt. 16. That words which signify effecting a thing, they expound of
endeavoring. p. 683. Chapt. 17. That words which signify a cause, they expound
of a way or mean. p. 686. Chap. 18. That words which signify a thing to be,
they expound, that it ought to be. p. 689. Chapt. 19. That words signifying a
true thing, they expound of an apparent. p. 690. Chapt. 20. That they are
forced to expound the words of Scripture, by diverse, by disparats, and
contraries. p. 696. Chapt. 21. That they are forced to devise improprietie of
words and all figures. p. 712. Chapt. 22. That they are forced to coin many
distinctions, frivolous, repugnant, and unheard of. p. 719. Chapt. 23. That
they confess that they teach against the uniform consent of Fathers, the
Church, and Councels. p. 731. Chapt. 24. That they confess that they teach
old damned heresies. p. 740. Chapt. 25. That they confess that some of the
Protestants opinions are blasphemous. p. 744. Chapt. 26. That they make
frustrate the ends of Christ's incarnation and passion. p. 755. Chapt. 27. That
they take away all virtue, and open a way to all sin. p. 758. Chapt. 28. That
they have no infallible interpretation of Scripture. p. 763. Chapt. 29. That
they admit no Judge to whose judgment they will stand. p. 769. Chapt. 30. That
sometimes they confess their doctrine to be contrary to holy Scripture. p.
757. Peroration or Conclusion to the Reader. p. 791.


FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing.
In the Preface to the book.
Page 5. line 8. let is. Correction, let us. ibid. l. 26. sixte. cor. sixty.
p. 8. l. 15. is most. cor. is a most. ib. ease. cor. easy. ib. l. 38 dele. all
p. 9. l. 10. gods. cor. God. p. 12. l. 2. thief. cor. these. p. 15. l. 34. for
as cor. so for as. p. 17. l. 37. like most etc. cor. like boost of them all.
But this most. etc. p. 19. l. 7. proporse is cor. propose. p. 20. l. 37. Word.
cor. work. p. 23. l. 31. proportions cor. propositions. p. 25. l. 27. Works.
cor. work is. p. 26. l 10. if cite. cor. I cite. p. 27. l. 20. thaught cor.
taught.

In the book.
Page 2. line. 18. hold cor. hold. p. 3. l. 28. herie cor. heir. p. 6. l. 1.
with cor. with them. p. 10. l. 28. for better cor. far better. p. 14. l. 20. be
cor. he. p. 20. l. 19. rock. cor. the rock. p. 23. l. 21. right cor. night.
ib. l. 27. image cor. of Image. ib. l 28. not cor. nor. p. 25. l. 2. whas head
cor. washed. p 28. l. 36. sweel cor. sweet. p. 48. l. 3. damnations cor.
damnation. p. 49. l. 33. dath cor. does. p, 50. l. 23. aboues cor. above. p.
51. l. 13. un cor. unto. p. 52 l. 10. is cor. his. p. 53. l. 21. it cor. is. p.
55. l. 11. to will cor. to wit. p. 56. l. 25. for cor. for to. p. 65. l. 5.
punishes cor. he punishes. ib. l. 16. has anger cor. has no anger. p. 68. l
17 Manlins cor. Moulins. p. 69. l. 19. to will cor. to wit. p. 74. l. 31.
declare cor. deelared. p. 80. l. 13 came cor. come. p. 81. l. 22. burdered cor.
burdened. p. 82. l 32. shat cor. that. p. 92. l 36. as once cor. at once. p
102. l 22. forgiven cor. forgiving. p. 105 l. 3. know cor. bow. p 123. l. 26.
obut cor. but. p. 138 l. 14. cannot be cor. cannot but be. ib. l. 35. bought
cor. brought. p. 145. l. 27. came cor. come. p. 146. l. 19. enjoined cor.
enjoyed. p. 155. l. 19. two cor. to. p. 156. l. 17. any cor. an. p. 177. l. 16.
workesse cor. works. p. 182. l. 3 mayes cor. ways. p. 191. l. 24. opposition
cor. exposition. p. 193 l. 23. affirms cor. denies. p. 194. l. 1. affirm
cor. deny. ib l. 3. deny cor. affirm. p. 202 l. 5. one cor. are. ib l 26.
deny cor. affirm. p. 209 l. 23. devil cor. dwell. p. 210. l. 24. priests cor.
priest. p. 211. l. 13. whether do, cor. whether Pastors do. p 313. l 17.
follows cor. fellows. p. 215. l. 17. port cor. part. p. 218. l. 20. as cor
was p. 260. l. 1. roshly cor. rashly. p. 269. l. 26. if cor. of. p. 271. l. 34.
of pastie cor. or pastie. p. 274. l. 35. if the cor. of the. p. 278 l. ^8. them
cor. then. p. 289. l. 10. he cor. be. ib. l. 20. ad cor. and p. 305. l. 17.
descricbed cor. described. p. 309. l. 1. of cor a. ib. l. 25. husband cor her
husband. p. 315 l 20. to God cor. God. p. 317. l 27. beleuie cor. believe. p.
328. l 22. with cor. with heart. p. 331. l. 6. faith says cor. since faith. p
341. l. 1. Catholics cor. Protestants. p. 342 l. 4. not cor nor. p 343. l. 12.
strange cor. strong. p 346. l. 12. derswasion cor. persuasion. p 349. l. 17.
this cor. they. p. 355. l. 15. leefe cor leese. p. 357 l. 16. saving cor.
saying. p. 365 l. 18. art cor. are. p. 377. l. 5. Com cor. Romans p. 396. l. 19
youehall cor. you shall. p. 409. l. 3. of self cor of it self p. 420. l. 21.
promise cor. promised p. 426. l. 26. suo cor. sua. p. 444. l. 9. him, not cor
him not. p. 448. l. 22. eath cor. death. p 458. l. 23. faith cor, says p. 460
l. 9 with cor. which p 465. l. 17. then cor. them. p. 487. l. 22 as cor. of. p.
489 l. 18 let cor. let. p. 490. l. 17. to cor. to be ib. l. 20. that cor.
then. p. 514 l. 8. the cor. then. p. 522. l. 5. bu^od cor. bound. p. 542. l.
19. alone cor. all one p 543 l 17. styme cor. slyme. p. 545. l. 12. thoum, y
cor. thou, my p. 550. l 22. as cor. of. p. 634. l. 3 there cor. their. p. 636.
l 30 prayed cor. prayers. p. 639. l. 12. and time dele time. ib l 24. boasting
cor. that boasting. p. 656. l. 13. fourth cor. forth. 657 l. 29. vniusall cor
universal p 659 l 6. of cor. if p 662. l 18. conceive cor. conceived. p. 664 l
27 as cor. as to. p. 673. l. 28. of kind cor. kind of. p 690. l. 27 month cor.
mouth p. 691 l. 2. the cor. he p. 698. l. 29 be confessed cor. confess. p.
704. l 2. to cor. to be p. 709. l. 22. merly cor merrily p. 728. l. 29
perfectiuely cor perfectly. p 732. l. 4. are cor or. p 734. l. 21. forbiddacne
cor. forbiddance. ib. l. 32. dot cor. not p. 743. l 14. must cor most p. 748.
l. 31 men cor. man. p. 750 l. 25. of power cor. power of. p 764. l, 10. learned
cor. unlearned. p. 773 l 6. is in cor. in p. 774. l. 4. destruction cor.
distinction. p. 775 l. 28. wills cor. wills not. p. 790. l. 20. last cor.
lost. p 793 l. 18. them cor. they. p. 794. l. 19. then cor. them.

In the Margents.
Page 20. not rock cor. not the rock. ib keyos cor. keys p. 27. diuarce cor.
divorce. ib aduantrie cor. aduoutrie ib. to work cor. a work p. 65 ever cor.
Eve. p. 118. the cor. he p. 146 heaven cor hear. p. 161. followed cor.
followed p 223. bod cor. bad. p. 226. hane cor. have. p. 240 theirs cor. their
p. 258. sote cor. state. p. 276. ward. cor. word. p. 278. thou cor then. p.
309. liuing^ cor. living. p. 327. thou cor. then. p 350. all cor. at all. p
361. sinners cor. of sinners. p. 367 perfiled cor. perfited. p. 403. ghost cor.
good p 475 reted cor. remitted. p. 539. returnet cor. returns. p. 659. thing
cor. think p. 695. general of cor. general way of. p. 713. imperpely cor.
improperly.

FINIS.

