THE SWEDISH INTELLIGENCER.

The Second Part.

WHEREIN, OVT OF THE TRVEST and choysest Informations, are the famous Actions
of that warlike Prince Historically led along: from the Victory of Leipsich,
unto the Conquest of Bavaria.

The times and places of every Action, being so sufficiently observed and
described; that the Reader may find both Truth and Reason in it.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Nath: Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1632.

The Preface. TO THE FAVOVRABLE AND JUDICIOUS Reader.
THen is a Book thoroughly allowed, when Seen and Allowed: when the Readers
have approoved it, as well as the Licencer. With this favourablenesse (as I
thankfully must acknowledge) have my former Books been entertained: yea, most
favorably, by the most Judicious. In an humble hope therefore, of the like
acceptance; does my Dedication in the same Style, again prefer it self to
its old Patrones-generall, The Favorable and Judicious Readers. The King of
Sweden (though armed but in Paper) cannot but Conquer. I mean affections.
Since then I no ways could presume, that my Style or simple performance,
should in any degree inveigle your Judgments; this only became my
encouragement, That though this Story should go out of my hands, poorly
enough and weakly endited: yet that the prevailing Fortunes of the King of
Sweden, would so potently assist and go along with it; as that by that time it
came into your hands, it would so prevail with your affections; and so gently
in the reading, captivate the attentions of all the favorers of his actions,
that their Judgments (for the time) should become deprived of this part of
their due liberties; and forbear the power, though, not of seeing yet of
censuring, my errors.

The First Part I undertook, to cheer up the long-exercised expectations of
such well-affected English, as desired in their days, to see some ease and
consolation, to the miserably afflicted Churches of Germany. In that poor
Book, our Nation first read, That God had begun to send a Deliverer unto His
people. This (me thoughts) in a time of my leisure, was a work not altogether
beneath me: and that to bring Glad tidings, was next unto the Preaching of the
Gospel. To the going on with this Second Part, has the united and repeated
desires, of well-disposed people provoked me: I could not take so many
expectations of my Betters, for less then a Command; and that it was a Duty to
satisfy them.

My Book has many men's Stories: but I have labored most upon the Kings. In
penning of the whole, I had these two ambitions; Truth and Plainness. The
compassing of the First, (besides the chargeablenesse of procuring the
Jntelligence, out of the Armies and elsewhere) has cost me much more pains,
then the bare writing: my care was, to learn out, and get acquainted with such
understanding Gentlemen, as had been personally present in the Actions. To
some of these, has my Margent been already thankful: and here, especially,
am I again, to that Gentleman of curious observation, whom you shall find
named Page 46, in the Margent. I will not be much displeased, if Gallobelgicus
shall anywhere differ from me: this by his former Books I perceive, that he
has made use of but few things, which I have not seen before his Mart: and my
diligence (I believe) has not been behind his; and my Intelligence, I know to
be far better. Truth is the pearl, I sought for; which I have still
preferred before favor: and had the Imperialists well beaten the Swedish now
and then; I would not have omitted it. Variety, is some ornament to a Book:
part of which mine now wants; as running altogether upon the victories of the
King of Sweden. If then any contrarily-affected shall give out, That I have
omitted their victories: besides this answer to them, That they should have
done well to have sent me in their Intelligence: I further demand, What
victories these were, which suffered the King of Sweden to march up and down
so many hundred miles in Germany: and that I never read, (in the compass of
the time of this Story) of any enterprise he undertook, but he prevailed in
it: his fortunes never receiving any remarkable or considerable check, but at
Ingolstat only. This truly I believe; That all their supposed victories, which
they have so often here given out, will hardly (yet) make up a Second Part of
the Laurea Austriaca. Errors, I cannot but have: but they are casual, and not
affected ones; they are my ignorances, not my purposes. And if those that know
better, (and be sure they do so) will add to, or control this; I shall
thank them for satisfying my Readers, in what I would have served them; had I
either known more Truth, or more Circumstances.

As for my second Ambition, Plainness; that have I also labored upon. I
affected not to be too concise, or too sententious. My care was, not to hunt
for praise; by the corrupting of our noble Language, with fine new phrases, and
unhappily coined words: the presumptions of an over-bold fancy. Some military
Terms, may perchance be obscure, because proper: which being their
commendation, I would not (in this) descend unto every capacity. In a many of
these, may the Reader satisfy himself, in my Swedish Discipline: and for
understanding of the rest, my Book must wait the improvement of its Readers
industry. To make all more Plain, I have noted the places of every Action.
The King of Sweden cannot fly: therefore have I specified the distances and
lyings of the Towns; that you may perceive the orderlinesse and probabilityes
of the Kings Proceedings: and that there was no impossibility in his Conquests.
I have been careful, (if not too curious) in this point: and have taught
those Readers that have Mapps, how to turn them. This commodity because all
have not; and that in the same Map there be many towns of the same names;
therefore have I been so particular in my Descriptions.

This one addition had I purposed to have made unto my Story: the Iournall,
namely, or Diarye of the Actions of the Lower Saxony. And that, between the
Armies and Generals of the two adverse Leagues, the Protestants and the
Catholics. That is to say; Betwixt the Lord Marquess of Hamilton, Duke
William of Saxon-Weymar, the Lord Achatius Todt, Sir John Banier, and Bauditz:
all Generals for the King of Sweden, the Head of the League. Together with the
two Dukes of Mecklenburg, the Dukes of Lunenburg and Saxon-Lawenburg, the
Landgrave of Hessen, and the Bishop of Bremen; all Generals for themselves,
and the Protestant-League, respectively: on the one party. And, the Earls of
Pappenhaim and Mansfeld, the Barons of Gronsfelt and Virmont; with Reinacher,
Boenickhausen, and other Governors and Commanders: for the Imperial party.
But this have I been forced to leave out, for want of conference with such
Gentlemen, as had personally been employed in the Actions: an instruction,
which I much prefer, before all written Intelligences. My Preface, was only
to make the Readers understand my purpose; and I hope I have done it. The
Readers must be allowed the liberty of their several verdicts: and though they
should differ, yet must all pass for Judgment. The pleasing of them, must be
put to the venture: but if I might not be thought partial to mine own; I
would freely enough confess, That having taken treble pains in This, more
then in my Former; I had in This given my self so much the more satisfaction,
then in the Former. With this comfort do I now part with my Book; That I have
not yet entered upon a foyld Story. God turn the wars to a happy issue: I
had much rather write of Peace, then Victory.

The Contents and Method of the whole.
I. THE King of Swedens own Story, till the time he received the News of
Tillies putting Gustavus Horn out of Bamberg. II. Gustavus Horns Proceedings,
apart: from the time of the Kings leaving him about Wurtsburg; until the
former business betwixt Him and Tilly. III. The General Tillyes Preparations
and Proceedings; from his defeat at Leipsich, until his putting of Gustavus
Horn out of Bamberg. At the end of this, have you the Duke of Bavaria's Story.
IIII. The Kings March up into Bavaria against Tilly: with his Conquest of that
Dukedom, and final Overthrow and death of Tilly. To this is added, the
Actions of Sir Patrick Ruthven and others, about Vlm. V. The Duke of Bavaria's
Manifest in favor of the Catholic Party. VI. The Duke of Saxonyes taking, and
losing again of Bohemia. VII. The Actions of Albert Walenstein, Duke of
Fridland: both against the Duke of Saxony, and the King of Sweden; until his
encamping before Norimberg.
Errata.
Page 43, line 23 in some copies. for, Scarcely was the King from Hebron,
read, the King gone from Hebron page 157. line 24. for, upon the fourth of
April, Read, upon the Fourteenth. In stead of page 177, read 167. Literal
faults, we desire the Reader to bear withal. page 115. Line 5. for Haibron
read Hailbrun. page 138. line 24. for Schneidewin, read Redwin.

THE SWEDISH Intelligencer. The Second Part. From the Victory of Leipsich, unto
the Conquest of Bavaria.
FROM Victory to Conquest: these are the two Terms of Progression of the King
of Swedens (hitherto) fortunate achievements. The Victory of Leipsich, we have
for their sakes that are curious, taken pains the second time to describe in
our book of the Swedish Discipline: where that famous action is far more
largely and punctually set down, then our Intelligence would at first serve us
to do; at the setting forth of the former part of this Story. The Conquest of
Bauaria is the terminating Term; with which our purpose is to cloaze up this
second Part of our Intelligencer.

We left the King of Sweden in our Former part, where even the ablest General
(especially before the beginning of any great Action) must not despise now and
then to be present: at a Council of war, namely; together with his Highness
the Elector of Saxony. Single advice, ends in double dangers: whereas even the
wars themselves receive as much strengthening by an Union of heads, as by an
uniting of hands. What the Conclusions of that Military Consultation were;
though in express terms we know not; yet by the next Actions of war may we
collect thus much amongst the rest, to have been then at Hall agreed upon.

^guesse at ^at was a^ed upon be^xt the King ^d the Duke Saxon.
1. That the fleeing enemy being so far already escaped, should at that time
be no further pursued.

2. That the chief Army of the Catholic Leaguers being now broken, the Lands
of the Leaguers themselves that refused to make their peace, should in the
order as they next lay, be also set upon: that so by singly disabling of the
Leaguers, the League it self might universally at length be shaken.

3. To cut out the more work at once for the Emperor; Saxony, after he had
cleared his own Lusatia, was also to fall into the Kingdom of Bohemia.

4. Care was also had, of the ruinated estate of the Town and Bishopric of
Magdenburg: in which Diocese, together with that of Halberstat, the King of
Sweden even now appointed Lodowicke Prince of Anhalt for his Governor;
committing the military command in those parts unto Colonel Schneidewin: a man
that both knew the country well enough, and that had been faithful and
forward withal unto his former Master, the unfortunate Administrator.

Things being thus agreed upon, and the Kings Army by the middle of September
come together again; his Majesty having intelligence of Altringers and Fuggers
(two of the Emperors Generals) late being about Erfurt: ^e King mar^es into
Du^gen.
shapes his first course toward that City, which was the next good town on
that side belonging unto any of the Catholic Leaguers. Directing his march
therefore to the South-west, and crossing the River of Sala; into the Country
of Duringen or Thuringia he goes: leading an army of 20000 men (more some
write) along with him. Keeping then the River of Vnstrut close upon his right
hand, unto the town of Gross Someren, (upon the Eastern bank of the said
River) he comes: where for that night, (September 17.) he sets down with his
Army. From this Town he immediately dispatches his letters unto the great
City of Erfurt, demanding to have it forthwith delivered unto him. This town,
Erfurt sumnned.
situate upon the River Iera, is for compass one of the greatest of Germany;
being ennobled with an University withal: both at this time belonging unto the
Archbishop Elector of Mentz (the first spiritual person of the Catholic
Leaguers:) unto whose town of Mentz, the old Bishopric of Erfurt, and the
temporal dominion withal, had long since been translated. Back the next day
come the Kings Messengers with this answer of the Citizens, That they held for
the Elector of Mentz, to whom they had taken the oath of fidelity. The King not
taking this for satisfaction, presently with his army advances toward it: yet
in the mean time were his second Summons sent unto them, either forthwith to
yield their town, or to stand to the hazard of the wars. Out come the town
Deputies to treat; desiring, but 3. daves respit to consider of it. This being
denied them, and they offering to return into the town; the King sends Duke
William of Saxon-Wymar along with them; Fayrely taken
who with some troops of horse entering the outter Port, together with the
Deputyes; presently makes good the place, by staying his horses and wagons
between the two Ports. After which, having disarmed the soldiers of the next
Courts of guard; and nine other troops of Swedish horse, having by this time
possessed themselves of the other gate also: he with his first companyes rides
immediately up into the market place. Causing now the chief Burgers to come
before him, he after much arguing to and again, wrings the town keys out of
their hands; in stead of which, he in the King of Swedens name tenders them
these twelve Propositions, forthwith to set their hands unto.

and the Con^tions of it.
1. That they should renounce their fealty unto the Bishop of Ments. 2. Take an
oath of Fidelity unto the King of Sweden, the Electors, and Dukes of Saxony. 3.
Accept of a Swedish garrison of at least 1500. men. 4. And procure that
garrison to be maintained, at the common charges of the Subjects of the
Countyes of Schwartzenburg and Gleichen. 5. Suffering their City to be new
fortified in places convenient. 6. The charges of which fortifications they
laying out, should be again paid them by the Princes of the House of Saxony.
7. That in case of necessity, the Town should be still open for the House of
Saxony to retire into. 8. That in stead of the Elector of Mentz his Court of
Justice, the Elector of Saxonyes Chancery should be received into the City:
which should be maintained out of the revenues of the Cloisters. 9. That the
government of the town should still be left unto their own Senate: which
might in numbers hereafter be increased, as necessity required. 10. That the
Roman Catholics should either change their Religi^n, or forsake the Town:
and that leaving their estates, they should demand License for their departure.
11. For the better assuring of the Citizens fidelity, should the Queen of
Sweden come to reside among them. 12. that the charges of fitting the palace of
Stotternhem for her Majesty's residence, should be levied out of the goods of
the Roman Catholics that had forsaken the City.
Thus became Erfurt accorded with the King, September 18. 1631. without
bloodshed. The next day came his Majesty's self into the Town, with some
10000. of his men after him: whom he billetted in the Dom Petersberg and the
Jesuits Cloister. With the Priests and Jesuits did the King vouchsafe some
conference, as it is said: to whom he both promised nd proclaimed, that if they
would acknowledge him for their Liege Lord, they should no ways be molested,
either in goods or Conscience. To the Magistrates he promised, that for their
quiet and solemn receiving of him, he would continue them their former
privileges, and his own Royal protection. The Governor which he appointed to
leave with them, was he that so handsomely took in the Town, and their near
neighbor, Duke William of Saxon-Wymar aforesaid: with whom he left for
garrison partly, and to begin an army; two Regiments of Foot, and one of
Horse. In this Town the King staid a whole weeks space, taking a view in that
time of such places, where it was most necessary to have the City fortified:
which work was thought likely to amount unto two Millions of Dollars.

And now is his Majesty determined for an expedition into Franconia. The King
moves into Franconia.
The two chief spiritual members of the Catholic League in that Country,
are the Bishops of Wurtsburg and of Bamberg, unto whom either in the while that
he staid at Erfurt, or a little after: the King sends his Letters of
Invitation, or of Summons, to draw them off from the League, if they pleased;
and to free thereby their Countries from invasion. And this might serve them as
a Herald at Arms, either to desire their amity; or if that were refused, to
forewarne them of his coming. And that he did thus fayrely deal with them, I
find it mentioned in his Majesty's own Declaration published afterward at
Wurtsburg Taking leave of Erfurt therefore, September 26. old style: and
bending his course due South from thence, and along the western shore of the
said River of Iera; toward Arnstat in the little County of Schwartzenburg he
marches: lodging the same night in a fair Castle there, belonging unto Gunther
Earl of Schwartzenburg. The next day September 27. unto Ilmenau he comes; a
Town upon the River Ilm, in the very edge of the Forest of Duringen, or the
Duringer Waldt: where he rests his army again till the next day toward
evening. Hence was the valiant Field-Marshall Gustavus Horn, together with
Baudissen Leiftenant-Generall of the Horse, dispatched away. Eight or 10000.
men they were said to lead along with them: one part of their design being
reported to be, to seek out Altringer and Fugger, with whom one of the Earls
of Mansvelt had now also conjoined his forces. These 3. ^avus Horn abroad.
being heard of to be together beyond Isenach upon the frontiers of Hessen,
(betwixt the rivers of Nesa and Werra) in search of them do the 2. Swedish
Generals go as far as Waltershausen first, and so onwards unto Isenach, both
Westward of the city of Erfurt. But Altringer was not to be spoken withal; his
men were afraid of the very name or shadow of a Swede: whom they had not so
much mind to meet withal, as to conioyne themselves with Tilly: for which
purpose they were already marched from Isenach unto Munden, whither shortly
after, Tilly had appointed them to come. But Horn and Baudissen, as they made
no long stay, so lost they not all their labor; seeing in their return they
took in the city of Gota first, ^es in Gota and ^e County of ^neberg.
(some 4. leagues to the West of Erfurt:) and that part of the little County of
Henneberg, (on the South-west side of the Duringer Waldt) afterward; which the
King had left untouched: conioyning their forces last of all unto the Kings
army at Konigshoven; which way we left the King now going.

September 28. toward evening he sets forward from Ilmenau again, even into
the thickest of the Duringer Forest. And for the soldiers better seeing of
their way in the night time, were there wisps, and cresset lights made in pans,
etc. hung upon the trees, ^ King passes Duringer^dt, into ^nkenland, Franconia.
with other such like provisions. This Forest being in a right line passed
through, the army arriues at Schleusing in Franconia; whence they directly
marched toward Konigshoven: before which (being 4. leagues and an half
distant) they the next day presented 4. Regiments, whenas they were there least
looked for. This strong town of Konigshoven, is the chief Fortress and
Storehouse of that plentiful country; the Seat and Court, (for the most
part) of the great Bishop of Wurtsburg; and one of the chief keys, on that
side, unto the Bishoprics of Wurtsburg and of Bamberg. The Swedens giving
summons to the town in their Kings name, were vouchsafed no other answer, then
what was by the report of the Canon returned them: The Summons being refused,
the Seige is laid. Where he b^seiges Konigshoven,
The King having run his lines, and raised his batteries before the town;
beats hardest upon a certain strong and high tower, from whence the town
Ordnance did mostly annoy him. This being sore shaken, and ready for assault,
the King next of all by a trumpet sent into the City, gives them fair advice
to send away all their women and children: seeing if he must needs be put to
take the place by assault, he would give their houses for pillage unto his
soldiers, put all the people to the sword, beat down the town about their
cares, and afterward turn it all into Cinders. The garrison perceiving no
succors ready to relieve them from their Bishop (whom it most concerned) fall
to capitulate for their lives; presently yielding up that strong place unto his
Majesty. And takes it.
Here were found great store of Ordnance, and a wonderful plenty of victuals,
provisions and Ammunition of all kinds.

Entrance being thus happily gained into Franconia in the end of September, the
fame of the Kings taking so principal and strong a Fort, struck such a terror
into the Country thereabouts; that the Catholic Commissioners now assembled at
the Diet of Frankford on the Maine, with all speed forsake the place; without
staying to dispatch any of the Emperors or Catholic Leaguers business, which
they came thither for. This Konigshoven being very strong before, does the King
(as his custom is to do, with all conquered places of importance) cause to be
more fortified after his own manner: leaving a garrison in it, and the Duke
Ernestus of Saxon-Wyma^ for their Governor.

From this place our Conqueror moves toward Schweinf^rt, a pretty Imperial
City, some 6. leagues to the South of Konigshoven; and seated upon the
North-West bank of the river of Mayn before mentioned. ^weinfurt ta^.
Here (to begin the Month of October withal) was he admitted without
resistance: the garrison going out thence into Wurtsburg, some two days march
(or 6. leagues) distant from this Schweinfurt. October the second, the King
with some 18. troops of Hor e comes into the town, where he has the Oath of
fidelity made him by the Citizens. Observing in his view of the City (where he
stayed not above an hour in all) how commodiously it was seated for the
passage of the Mayn; he gives order to have it new fortified: leaving 3.
Companies of Foot, and two troops of Dragooners in it for garrison. Sending
his forces now several ways about at one instant, he has diverse places at
once, upon easy terms delivered up unto him in the Bishopric of Bamberg; ^e
Bishopric ^amberg ta^ in.
as Hasfurt, Gemund, Lohr, Volcach, Kitzing, Oxenfurt, Remling and Karlstadt,
all situated upon the Mayn: which river his Majesty was now very desirous to
make himself Master of. Very well did this wise King perceive, That the
method of War was the same (in this point) with the method of Nature; and
how a country is by the same means and degrees to be conquered, by which it
was at first peopled: and that was, by the great and navigable rivers. For
besides that the richest and the strongest Cities be ever situated upon their
banks; and that at those Cities, be still the Bridges and Passes over into
other countries: by their streams also, up and down, are the riches and
forces of the Kingdom co^veighed; which will quickly beat the Land-conqueror out
of the field, ^e King ^kes toward ^e river of ^ayn.
that is not Master of those waters. These, with other considerations of the
excellent advantage of having a good river to friend; as the neerenesse of
fresh water, both for horse and man; the commodiousnesse of carriages; the
natural fortification to the army on that side, whereby all sudden Camisado'es
and fallings on of the enemy are prevented: are some of the maine reasons that
no wise warrior ought to think himself a Conqueror, until such time as he
has the command of the water, as well as of the land. And therefore has the
King of Sweden (if you mark the orderlinesse of his proceedings) still coasted
it along upon the Rivers. Thus whereas He at his first coming into Germany,
sought to land in the mouth of the Oder; he so long pursued the course of that
stream, until it brought him into the river Havel; and that, into the Elb:
the banks whereof when he had lately left unto the Duke of Saxony; then seeks
he to the Mayn; as he afterward did unto the Rhine and Danubie.

The same first of O^tober that Schweinfurt was yielded unto the King; his
Majesty (it seems) sent abroad his letters of general Summons unto the
Country. The King summons the country: and wi^ good success The Empire
divided into 10. Circles: of which this Ci^cle of Francon^ is the first.
The Date of them is from Madenhausen, a village near unto Schweinfurt, where
his Majesty's head-quarter, perchance, at that time lay. The Direction is, To
all the Cities of and about the Circle of Franconia. The Purpose, That whereas
the Protestants were every where oppressed by the Papists; and that his coming
had principally been for their deliverance: therefore those Protestant towns
and others that had any Imperial or Leaguish garrisons in them, should drive
them out and open their gates unto the Swedish forces. Those that so did, he
would protect; those that refused, or delayed, he would pursue the Law of Arms
upon: protesting himself to be innocent, of whatsoever evil should betide
upon their refusal. Their answer he would expect by the next morning. And now
became the King as victorious with his pen, as formerly he had been with his
pike: for upon promise of protection, freedom of conscience, and from
garrisons: many towns and Cities at that time committed themselves unto his
mercy. The Bishop of Bamberg makes his peace with the King:
The great Bishop of Bamberg himself, with his Chapter of Dom-herren or
Prebendaries of the Church, sent with as much speed as might be, their
Ambassadors unto the King, from the strong town of Forcheim whither they were
retired. The price of their peace, must be their assent unto these 4. Articles.

1. To pay the King 3. tons of gold, down upon the nail. 2. And forthwith
deliver him over their 2. strong Fortresses, Forcheim and Cronach. 3. And
contribute so much a month unto his wars, as they had before done unto the
Catholic Leaguers. 4. Recalling all their forces out of the Catholic army;
utterly renouncing that Confederation.
These conditions, though the Bishop was for his peace sake contented to submit
unto at the first; yet for all that, so soon as ever himself and people had
gotten in more forces together, and breaks his ^rticles.
and made up their fortifications: they brake these Articles again, causing
their Bishop afterward to go to invite Tilly into their Country. This became
a great hinderance unto the King afterward; enforcing him to send Gustavus
Horn with an army into Bamberg: for whom he might otherwhere have had better
employment.

The Kings next design was upon Wurtsburg, which Francis Hatzfeldt the new
elected Bishop of the place, and Duke of Franconia (for so his style is)
hearing of; he being a better Orator then a Soldiour: with all speed packes up
his best Jewels and Treasure; shifting himself unto Franckford on the Maine
first, and so into the Rhine at Mentz: and from that place down the stream
toward Bon unto the Elector of Cullen; whence in the name of all the
Catholicke-Spirituall-Leaguers, he was in January following, sent Ambassador
toward the French King.

The taking of this Wurtsburg, would be well worth the labor of a King of
Sweden; The King besieges Wurtsburg.
to this therefore does he now convert his Arms: his strength being said to
be seventeene Regiments of Foot, and 8000 Horse, of which, I believe, he had
but two third parts His power he first presented before the City, upon Tuesday,
October 4. 1631. by nine a clock in the morning. The Town it self lies upon
the River of Mayn; the form of it being a just Semicircle; the River making
the Diameter unto it. Within the City is there an University, and two
Colleges. Beyond this River, toward the West, and upon a very steep hill,
stands there a goodly Castle: some buildings and walls being at the foot of it
along the Rivers side, facing the Town as the Bankes-side does London. The
East side of the Town, is for three parts of it compassed about with a
handsome Suburb: and that also walled and indifferently fortified. The middle
gate of this Suburb the King finding to be shut against him, makes it fly open
with a powder, The Suburb
(as they say) by clapping a Petard, in stead of a Key, unto it. The Town
within the walls perceiving the King to have thus boldly knocked and come in,
without bidding; send out to desire respit of his Majesty, until 8 a clock
the next morning. This was but a trick of the Burgers to gain time and
darkness withal; which they that whole day and night made use of, for the
conveighing of their best men and chiefest treasure up into the Castle.
Wednesday morning being come, and town take
the Ports are opened: and the Boores (which the City had for their defense
taken in) are put out at the back door, as the Swedens are let in at the
fore-doore. The King being thus peaceably admitted, not a soldier of his was
complained of to have done wrong unto any of the Burgers; nor so much as to
have asked or begd any thing; all expecting the courtesy of the townesmens
charity. Here the King tendering an oath of fidelity unto the Citizens, is
not denied it: his own lodging being taken up in the Duke-Bishops Palace
behind the Cathedral.

The King thus in possession of the Town, could not yet think himself Master
of it, so long as the Castle of Marienburg (for so is it called) could at
pleasure beat it about his ears. This piece is mounted upon so high a hill,
as was to be commanded from no other ground: it having the Town below at its
own feet. The Castle described.
And as strongly was it fortified by Art, as advantageously situated by nature.
The hill is a maine rock; whereof one side is craggy and barren, and the other
covered with vines: the whole top of the little mountain being crowned with
the Castle, and with the ditches and outworks of it. Nor wanted here any
inward fortifications; 800 or 1000. fighting men, being there in garrison: and
as for victuals, money, and Ammunition, Troy it self was not better provided
for its ten years siege, then this Fort was. The Castellan or Governor, was
one Keller; esteemed till now a good brave fellow: and known generally by this
brand, That he mortally hated all Protestants and their Religion. All together,
finally, made the place appear so impregnable, that the Kings preparations to
attempt upon it were rather scorned then feared, by the garrison: who verily
believed, that unless the Swedes had wings, as well as Arms, they could never
get up thither. Those difficulties that serve for bridles to the sluggish,
become spurs unto the industrious: the more insuperable therefore that the
place seemed to be, the more desirous was the King to overcome it. Full well he
knew besides, that the consequence would as much avail him, as the conquest:
for what should hereafter become unpossible, unto him, that had by fine force
taken in the (supposed) impregnable Castle of Wurtsburg?

The King being thus resolved, gives order first to have the Castle summoned:
which is the only Complement or Courtship, that the wars of course admit of.
That being refused, he next prepares for the assault. The garrison that retired
out of the town into the Castle, had themselves broken down one or two arches
of the bridge over the Mayn, between the town and the Castle, ^he manner of
^saulting the ^astle.
leaving a planke only over the broken place, for their own leisurely
passage. All their boats, had they likewise drawn over to the other shore of
the river: so that this was the first difficulty, how to get over the water,
and how to come at the Castle. The King having there a Scottish Gentleman that
spoke excellent good Dutch, (one Master Robert Ramsye a Leiftenant under Sir
James Ramsyes Regiment) him the King puts upon the business: to pass over (as
a Dutchman and one of theirs) upon that planke, and to truck with some Boore or
soldier, to conveigh over one of those boats unto the King. The Leiftenant
performs his charge to the purpose; but being afterward discovered by his
long coat, was apprehended for a spy, and made a prisoner: whence at the
taking of the Castle he was redeemed. The King having thus procured one boat;
sends men in that to bring over more: by which at last he set over as many
soldiers as he pleased. Keller the Governor was ready at the foot of the hill,
to entertain them: for feign would he have staved them off there, and have
kept the Scottish led by Sir James Ramsye and Sir John Hamilton, from coming
nearer. Here began the first skirmish, which indeed proved but a skirmish:
the defendants being after a while beaten up the hill unto a great Halfe-Moone
they had before the Castle; where the Scottish for that night gave it over.
Keeping that footing, therefore, which they had the first day gotten upon the
climb of the hill; they under favor of that, brought forward their own
trenches nearer still and nearer to the Bulwark. All that night and the two
next days, did the Ordnance thunder from the Castle; and for as long a time
were the garrison kept in continual action and Alarmes: a besieged enemy being
like an unmade hawke, to be reclaymd with watching. The Trenches or Lines being
finished, The valor ^ the Scottish ^tion, in these wars.
the King commands Sir John Hamilton and Sir James Ramsye to fall on with
their Regiments: for if a Foit be to be stormed, or any desperate piece of
service to be set upon; the Scottish have hitherto had the honor and the
danger, to be the first men that are put upon such a business. This
Halfe-moone therefore upon the vineyards side, right before the bridge (which
was over the moate of the Castle) do the Scottish now full resolutely fall
upon: the defendants likewise for two hours together (as it is said) as stoutly
fighting for their work. Here was Sir James Ramsye shot in the arm: and very
many of his, and of Sir John Hamiltons men, slain and spoiled in the assault:
but they by fine force at length prevailing, drove the defendants to the
retreat. The King had thought at the same time to have possessed himself of
the Castle-bridge of stone aforesaid; and of the Port consequently, that it led
unto: commanding other of his men for that purpose into the very Graff or moate
it self: but from that design were they for that time put off, by the
defendants. By five a clock the next morning, (Saturday, October 8.) was there
a general assault attempted: at which time a certain Lieftenant of Leifland,
(borne of Scottish parents) coming in the dark (with only 7. men at that
instant behind him) unto the drawbridge that entered into the Forehoff or
outter-court of the Castle, and being overheard by those that had the guards
on the inside (who were near upon 200. men) was by one of them demanded in
the form usual among soldiers, Was vor volcks? What are you for men? Swedes,
cries the Leiftenant. The enemies hearing this, presently lay hold upon the
chains to hale up the drawbridge: which the Leiftenant perceiving them about,
with a strange courage and resolution leapes lightly upon the bridge and his 7.
^perate at^t of a ^enant.
men after him; keeping it down by that means. Those within now verily
imagining all the Swedish to be already at the bridge, most basely run away
into the Castle: of which the Swedish by this time having notice, presently
enter into the Forehoff, even close unto the Castle. And here (as it is written)
does the merciful King once again offer fair conditions, unto as many as
would lay down arms: but this being refused, and the Cannon all this while
thundering against his men; the King causes the Ordnance which he even now
found upon the conquered Bulwarks, to be turned upon the inner gate, which
leads into the very Castle it self: which he presently therewithal breaks
open. Sir John Hamilton having done so much good service before, is now again
as ready to fall into the Castle: but from this the King called him off:
pretending the preservation of his men, which had been so shattered in the
former service. But the valiant Colonel made another interpretation of the
Kings meaning. ^e Castle ^ne.
The Swedish now thronging in amain through the broken gate, utterly there
overlay the defendants. And now began the execution; and now the conquered
begin to cry for Quarter: but the enraged Swedens yet in the heat of blood,
bid them look for no other Quarter, then what the Protestants found at
Magdenburg. All that resisted, suffered. Among the dead, were there some skore
of lusty sturdy Friars found armed: who had their crowns (poor men) new
shaven with a sword, in stead of a razor: and receiving here their ultimam
tonsuram, had no other complement of Anointing to it, but that of their own
bloods. The sword devoureth one, as well as another, said that famous General
of old: nor had these men dyed amiss, had it bin in defense only of their
Prince and Country; and not upon an erroneous Conscience of their Religion: and
an over-bold conceit of Merit and of Martyrdom. Diverse of the garrison leaping
over the rampires into the vineyards, mended themselves no better by it then
other runne-awayes usually do; to be killed further off from their fellows. The
Ladies, Nuns, and women, were safely sent into the town. The Governor (as
it is said) saved his own life, by begging it at the Kings feet: the obtaining
of which favor, might perchance make him to love a Protestant the better, ever
after. A Rit-master (or Captain of a troop of Horse) there was, that redeemed
his own life, with a Kings ransom: by showing, namely, an inestimable mass
of treasure, which lay hid in a Cave or cleft of the Rock. The chief of the
slain and prisoners, were rifled and stripped by the conquerors: and the
Castle for one hour, permitted to the pillage: where an unvaluable booty was
obtained by the soldiers. Here was found about 34. The booty.
pieces of brass Ordnance; some of which had the Palsgrave Frederickes Arms
upon them. Many a hundred wayne-load of wine there was: with Ammunition, and
some kind of victuals for the Bishops Court, enough (if it would have kept) for
20. years provision for such a garrison. Some 200. of the Swedish lost their
lives upon the service: all the defendants being either slain or taken
prisoners.

The General Tilly hearing of this siege, was coming as far as Fulda to
have raised it; (as it was given out:) but hearing it to be taken; he made the
more haste to reenforce himself by joining with the Lorrayners. And thus was
this goodly, rich, strong, and pleasant Castle of Wurtsburg taken in, by eight
a clock on Saturday morning, being the eighth of October: as which, the King
yet never came to so rich a breakfast. A Palace it was, for any Prince in
Christendom: which having been something defaced by the Cannon, the King
caused to be forthwith repaired; and with new fortifications to be made much
the stronger. The town redeemed it self from pillaging, by the payment of 4.
tun of Gold; or of 300000. Floren, is a^t 3. shillings ^glish.
Florens, as others reckon it: So that the King and his soldiers, never went
so rich away from any place. Here was found a princely stable of goodly horses;
with which the King was very much delighted. And here his Majesty stayed, till
the beginning of November: in which time he also caused himself to be invested
Duke of Franconia; taking an oath of homage and fealty, both of town and
Country. In justification of which proceedings of his, he upon October. 26.
publishes his Declaration or Manifesto: which for the Readers ease we have here
abbreviated.

That seeing his own coming last year into the Empire, had been for the
relieving of the oppressed Protestant Princes of Germany, ^e Kings Ma^sto set
upon Church-^res at ^rtsburg.
and that God had so far already, beyond his own power, and all humane
expectation, blessed him therein; as that having first of all cleared the two
Duchies of Pomeren and Mecklenburg, together with the Electorate of
Brandenburg; and at the earnest request of the Duke of Saxony afterward,
obtained that memorable victory of Leipsich: he had thought that even the
enemies would have acknowledged the hand of God to have been with him; and
that the Catholic Princes of the League would have not only been desirers,
but promoters too of a fair peace, for the good of their own native Country.
But whereas he now perceived, that notwithstanding it had in the late Diet of
Ratisbone been acknowledged, how the war made against him in Germany by the
Emperor, was without the knowledge, and against the will of the Princes and
Electors; yea quite against the laws and privileges of the Empire: yet did
the Catholic Leaguers for all this, still go on in their pernicious
Combinations against him; yea even after they had by their own letters,
(oftener then once) avowed themselves to become his firm friends; and that he
thereupon had passed his promise unto the French King, that would they but sit
down as Neuters, he would offer no injury at all unto them. And whereas he had
pursued the victory of Leipsich with no other purpose, then of bringing the
disturbers of the peace unto equal terms and Conditions; and had before the
bringing of his army into Franconia, both fairly and timely signified that his
purpose unto the two Bishops of Bamberg and Wurtsburg; with desire of a
friendly treatment from them again. Now, whenas these his offers had been
despised, and his messengers answered from the Bishop of Wurtsburg with the
mouth of the Cannon: had he not reason to mend himself upon his Country, and
to take his Castle from him? Whereas, again, he had both opportunity and power
put into his hands of serving their subjects as hardly, as the harmless
Protestants had otherwhere been used by the Leaguers: yet, his Princely mind
much despising all desire of revenge, had only disposed it self to the means
of establishing a good peace once again throughout the Empire. That he at this
time found the greatest part of the Bishopric of Wurtsburg and Dukedom of
Franconia, not bound by oath unto any Master; For that the Bishop was but newly
elected; and not completely perchance as yet established: and that the Nobility
and Gentry of Franconia (very great) acknowledges no superiors, as being only
subject to the Empire.
and that those subjects that had been obliged, were now without cause
forsaken by Bishop Francis; who had the means yet left, of fairly compounding
with him. Therefore was he now ready (as necessity required) to take the
Country and people into his care, and to re-estate them all again into as good
a Condition as he could: having for that purpose lately set forth a form of
government for them, and appointed fit Officers over them. Wherefore, his
Majesty's express pleasure at this time was, That all Officers and Burgers
should, upon the first notice given them of this Mandate of his, repair unto
the place appointed them in it, take oath there, unto that his form of
government, and dutifully hereafter to obey it. Upon hope, therefore, that so
they would do, he would graciously from hence forward take them into his
protection, permit liberty of Conscience unto them, and by his Judges appointed
for that end, maintain them in all their several laws and privileges. Those
that humbly sued for his help, should graciously have it: and those that
neglected or despised, he would execute the law upon.

Whilst here at Wurtsburg the King stays, some forces of his newly levied for
him about the Country, were come to Carlstat, ^illy first ap^ea^es near ^he
King.
the place appointed for their meeting. Tilly then upon the wing; feared it
might be, that because he was not able to relieve Wurtsburg, yet for that he
would not do nothing, he would have a flight at these raw soldiers: and
news was brought, ^ome new for^es raised for ^he King.
that some of his were even then come as near Carlstat, as the Neustat and
Rotenfels (in the Speshart forest on the other side of the Mayn) toward them.
Of this the King having notice, toward the end of October goes from Wurtsburg
thitherward, with some 33 Cornets of horse in his attendance. But Tilly came
not.

Some troops of his, had before this been dispatched also toward Werthaim in
the little County of the same name, belonging unto the Counts of Lowenstein;
bearing due West of Wurtsburg upon another Bowte of the Mayn, where the Tauber
falls into it. The town was kept by the Italian Colonel Piccolomini, who had
been at the battle of Leipsich. He now issuing out of the town, and making
there the best resistance that he could; had all his men that escaped not by
flight, either slain upon the place, Werthaim taken
or carried away prisoners. The King caused 14. Companies of his own men to be
put into the town; of whom the General Tilly having a mind to be revenged,
upon Sunday morning, October 16. sends some 3000 horse and foot out of his
own head-quarter (then near unto Selingstat and Babenhausen beyond the Mayn)
to make an Anslaught or Enterprise upon the place. The King having an Item also
of this match, sends against the time appointed some of his men to lie in wait
by the way for these Tillians. 3000. of Tillyes men beaten.
The Swedes coming to a valley upon the river Tauber called the Tauber-grond,
dress there a double Ambuscado for the enemy. The Governor of the town had
likewise his directions to leave the place, and to retreat in good time, if he
should perceive the enemies to be too strong for him. But before it came to
that, the Tillians were already fallen into the ambush: whence they gate not
out, but with the loss of 2700 men, 800 horses, 14 Ensigns and Cornets, 10
Sumpter Mules, and all their baggage: which together with the arms and pillage
of the dead, helped to pay the Swedish for thus beating of them.

About October 21. old Style; others of the Kings troops fly out as far as
Rottenburg; an Imperial town near the head of the river Tauber, some 8 or 9
leagues to the South of Wurtsburg. Hither had the Imperial Commissary Masen (a
great Officer) either fled or retired from the Swedish: and yet here could he
not be long safe from them. The town and he being both in danger, 3. Regiments
more of Tillians defeated,
Tilly for their sakes sends out 3 of his Regiments to oppose the Swedish: but
the fortune of the wars now altogether unlucky for the Tillians; their 3
whole Regiments are either wholly rowted or slaughtered. The town garrison
perceiving this defeat, fall presently into mutiny against the Commissary,
whose office was to pay them their wages: so that he now being for some while
behind hand with them for their means, Gelt, Gelt, money, money, money, they
now begin to cry; and Rottenburg taken.
and tearing the Ensigns from off the staves, they immediately set open the
gates unto the Swedes; the most of them also entering themselves into the Kings
service. Much about this time too, some Swedish forces in another place
lighting upon a Partee of 3 troops of Lorrayners, take away two Cornets, 2
Cornets of Lorrayners defeated.
and bring home a Sergeant-Major prisoner with them. How these Lorrayners came
there, see the whole progress of their army, which was newly come into Germany
against the King; in our particular Story of them.

Now were the Swedish in several small running Armies, dispersed at once over
the Country. Some of them for very fear drive the Imperialists out of
Nordlingen (an Imperial City in Schwaben on the Eastern frontiers of
Wirtenberg) into Donawert near Bavaria. ^me actions ^ut the Da^y.
Some report, that the Burgers rose against them for the King of Sweden. Those
of Schorndorff upon the small river of Rems in the Duchy of Wirtenberg, being
also frighted at the same time, remoove away 100000 dollars in ready money,
which had been raised out of the Contributions of that Country, and belonged
unto Commissary Wolfstein then at Munchen in Bavaria. Now whereas the Convoy of
100 horse and as many musketeers, were gone a little before the money; the
Swedes on the sudden chopping in between, seize upon the treasure, and carry
it sheere away with them. This was done within a Dutch mile of the City of Vlm
upon the Danuby.

Those nearer home, after the taking of Rottenburg, surprise Bishofsheim upon
the Tauber, ^shofsheir, and ^ergentheim, ^ken.
near the place where it runs into the Mayn. And Mergentheim or Mergenthall,
after that: a town about the middle of the course of that Tauber; which
belonged unto the Master of the Dutch Order, who is a great man in Germany.

His Majesty of Sweden is all this month of October in Wurtsburg for the most
part, though at Carlstat now and then with the new Army. You may perceive that
he sent to take in the towns upon the Mayn; both those that lie upon it
Eastward toward Norimberg, and those Westward too, toward Franckford. Both
these great Cities were Passes of mighty importance: and the Catholic Leaguers
had lands both ways: the Temporal Princes lay mostly toward Norimberg, and
the three Spiritual Electors lay all beyond Franckford. So that much
deliberation had the King with himself, The King in doubt whither to go next.
to which of these two places he should first turn his Armies: both being
(upon the point) now equally almost distant from him. The importance of these
two Passes very well appears by Tilly also: who when he supposed the King
likely to go toward Norimberg, then turns he down toward Hanaw and
Franckford, and sollicites them to take in his garrisons: but when again he
perceived the King making toward Franckford, then goes he with all speed and
blocks up Norimberg. But God now became the Kings Counselor; He presently
helped him out of this doubt. The Norimbergers having been solicited by the
King, now send their Ambassadors to accord with him: so that to Norimberg now,
he need not go. But how should he get to Franckford? The mighty strong City of
Hanaw lay full in his way, and was the pass to Franckford: yea and Tilly with
his whole Army lay now also about Hanaw. There is no leaving of an enemy behind
ones back: so that though Tilly were out of the way, yet must Hanaw first be
had, or else no coming at Franckford. And to increase the difficulty of
getting of Hanaw time enough to serve his turn; was the great strength of the
place first: upon which had the City formerly been so confident, that having
had some differences with the Emperor, it would never (as the proverb is) give
him a good word; yea when some 3 years since one of his Leiftenants had blockt
it up, he was feign after 17 weeks to rise and go without it. The second
difficulty was, that the enemy had a party already within the City: 6 companies
of Imperial soldiers (some 1200 in all) and Brandeis that commanded them in
chief, had even already laid the plot with Tilly, for the sudden surprising of
it. The Kings haste and manner of warfaring, is not to lie long at a siege:
Hanaw, therefore, which it was thus difficult to conquer by strength, was by
private friendship all on the sudden made his; and the slow enemy (now standing
betwixt wooing and forcing it,) had his nose wypt of it. The Duke of
Saxon-Lawenburg, first of all presses the City to take in more forces of the
Emperors: and Tilly is earnest to have 4. Companies (into which he would have
put 1000 men) taken into the town. This being denied, threatenings are added:
and because the way of force would of it self be too tedious; and in the King
of Swedens neerenesse, no less dangerous: Brandeis the Captain is practiced
withal, to let Tilly by night into the City. Philip Lodowick, Earl of Hanaw
(a Protestant) being not ignorant of all this; and even now also angered with
Tilly for taking of the town and Castle of Babenhausen, (a neighbor town
belonging unto the Earls of Hanaw Buxviller, but empawned unto him:) privately
sends unto the King of Sweden, That he could be content to have his town
handsomely surprised by his Majesty, rather then by Tilly; so that if he would
send upon such a night, he should have the Castle gate set open for him.

^^naw descri^d. ^d here I ^rne my Rea^ of 2 errors ^all vulgar ^ps, concer^g
this river That it is ^tten Bintz, ^tead of ^tz. 2. That made to fall ^o the
Mayn Hoest: where does so, ^d by Stein^.
This fair City of Hanaw being seated upon a level, (and therefore strong)
has the small river of Kintz running through it; and the great river Mayn
within a quarter of an hours going of it; into which a little from this town
the Kintz falls. It is divided into the Old, and New towns. In the Old, (in
which was the Earls Castle) were there two Companies of Imperial soldiers;
and four more in the New: in all, some 1200. The General Tilly with his whole
Army, lay also about Aschaffenburg, Selingstat, and Steinheim, on either side
of the Mayn: who by the intelligence held with Brandeis, expected within 3 or 4
nights after, to be let into the town: or if that plot failed, to have
assaulted it without, whilst Brandeis should both by force and stratageme,
have exercised and amuzed the Burgers within. All this was by the Earls and
the Kings diligence thus defeated.

^e famous ^y of the ta^g of Hanaw.
Upon Monday the last of October, is Christopher Haubald one of the Kings
Colonels, (a wise and valiant Gentleman) employed upon the Anslaught. His
forces were some 600 chosen horsemen and dragooners, and no more; whatsoever
Gallobelgicus writes. With these, he in one day and nights continual flying
march, hastens from Carlstat unto Hanaw; the 2 towns being full 12 common
Germane leagues distant; each league, here and throughout the story, meant to
be four English miles: with these was he by four or five a clock upon
Tuesday morning, November 1. 1631. gotten to the gates of Hanaw, or ever his
enemies dreamt of it. His way to come at the town, was through the wood that is
beyond the Kintz: in which wood hewing down poasts; he by pitching them on
either side the narrow river, and by fastening two roapes to them, and laying
boords and rafters over these roapes; both silently and suddenly passed over
the water. Coming to the Castle gate next unto the Kintz, he has that by the
Earls direction (upon the watchword given) immediately opened unto him, by
which he enters into the Old Town. The first work he did, was to clap to the
gate that led out of the Old town into the New; by which means those of the
New town were barred out, from ayding their neighbors of the Old City. The
Swedish foot getting up presently to the top of the walls or Bulwarks, run
immediately two several ways at once, to make themselves masters of the other
two gates on either hand of the Castle gate: those three, being all the ports
that belong to the Old Town. The horsemen at the same time possessing
themselves of the market place, hinder thereby the townsmen from gathering to a
head: by which means was the whole town (both within and without) in a trice
assured unto them. The two Companies of Imperial soldiers, being thus taken
sleepers, could not so soon get themselves armed: and some of the Burgers
(that had not been made acquainted with the plot) now taking the Alarm and
offering to resist, have some 8 of their company slaughtered. The Swedish upon
the walls, run every way up and down, shooting at random in the dark; to
fright thereby whosoever should adventure to come near them. The Earl of
Hanaw also, (whose Countess lay in at the same time) is presently taken
prisoner, and a guard set upon his Castle and person. This was done in a
seeming good earnest, to put off all suspicion of a plot, from him.

By that time it was toward daylight, were the 4 Companies in the New town
up in arms also, though they all this while had attempted nothing for the
reskue of the Old City. Said it was, that Brandeis went merry to bed the night
before; and that when being awakt by five in the morning, he was by one of the
Burgers told of the Swedes being in the Old Town; he was so far from
believing it, as he forbade the Alarm to be sounded. And when one of his own
Officers a little after that, told him the same tale; They are not the Swedes,
says he, they be our own friends of Aschaffenburg, for whom I wrote yesterday:
not suffering the Alarm to be struck up yet. But when he by break of day
perceived his error; The Swedes be devils (quoth he,) how was it possible for
them so soon to get in hither? Starting up presently thereupon, and all
vnbuttoned as he was, out comes he into the street; running for life up and
down; and even till he swet again in that frosty morning, to set on his men.
Two thousand armed men (what with soldiers, Boores and Burgers) had he by
daylight gotten together: which Haubald now perceiving, draws his Swedes
along upon the wall that looks into the New town; whence both with Pistols
and Carbines, he lets fly amongst them: by which, two men and one woman were
slain outright, and some others wounded. By this time had the Swedes brought
a small piece of Ordnance to the place; which they also bending upon the New
Town, demanded them to yield immediately. The Citizens answered resolutely,
That they would not yield up the town, till they had their Princes consent
first. Haubald at first denies it, telling them that he was their Earl. They
demand it again, telling him that till then, they had nothing but bullets for
him. The Earl hereupon being brought with a guard about him, upon the wall;
tells them, That he being now a prisoner, could give them no better counsel,
then to yield upon as good terms as they could get. This moved not Captain
Brandeis any thing: but first would he have had the Burgers to have gone on
against the Swedes: which they bidding him do himself first, he durst not.
Then would he have had the Ordnance brought down thither from the walls, and
discharged upon the Swedes: but neither would the Burgers suffer that, for
fear of spoiling their friends and friends houses in the Old Town. Then would
he have sent one of his own servants over the town ditch, to have run to
Steinheim: whereabouts Colonel Eynot had some good forces: but this is also
crossed by the Citizens; for that it would have brought Tillyes whole Army upon
them; which lying hard by it at that time, might have endangered the plundering
of the whole City. A just fear: seeing Tilly might very lawfully have done it;
as having reskued the City from his enemy. Haubald once again demanding up the
town, and that presently; is answered, That the Magistrates could not so soon
come together to consult upon it. He grants them half an hour, thereupon:
mean while his men gave over shooting. Full three hours after it was, ere the
townsmen had resolved: which done, (the town continuing still in arms) about
11 a clock, is the Major of the City, The son o^ this Daniel D^ Latre, a
Merchant now dwelling in London, was that time, wi^ his Father in Hanaw: from
whose courteous relation, have receive the certaynes^ part of this story.
and Daniel De Latre (one of the chief Aldermen or Magistrates) sent to parlee
with the Swedish Colonel. Haubald now meeting them between the two gates of
the Old Town, tells them that he had nothing to say against the Burgers: and if
they pleased to retire peaceably, let him alone with the soldiers. Here after
a while is the yielding concluded upon.

Captain Brandeis seeing now no remedy, desires for himself and for his men,
that they might have soldiers conditions, and go out with full Arms, etc. No
(says Haubald) your self with all your Officers and soldiers in the town,
shall immediately repair unto the gallows before the gate between the two
towns, trayle your Arms and Ensigns thither, lay them down there, and
absolutely submit your selves unto my pleasure; either for life or death,
favor, or not favor That which cannot be resisted, should not be refused:
they lay down Arms, and Haubald in courtesy returns them their swords
again. Thus their Colors being gone, their military oath unto the Emperor was
by this means void; which Haubald taking advantage of, invites them into his
pay: of which all save thirty or forty (that were more Popish then the rest)
presently accepted. Brandeis the Captain refusing, is made prisoner: and so is
Merci, Sergeant-Major unto Piccolomini; two Ritt-masters, with diverse of
Tillyes Commanders more; who had retired into that Town to be healed of their
wounds received at the battle of Leipsich. Brandeis was kept in his own house,
under a guard of some 5 or 6. soldiers: the rest had the liberty of the town,
but not to go without the Ports.

Haubald having thus mastered the Town by his valor; provides to keep it by
his wisdom. First sends he two Companies into the Castle: then takes he order
for some new Fortifications; of which, himself being a skillful Enginier,
draws the Platform. Next lays he out to have 5 or 6 new Companies raised;
which were made up of those that had lately yielded, and some others gotten out
of the Country: Casting about in the last place, how to have all these
maintained. For this last purpose, no sooner was Tilly gone out of the Country
(which he did presently after he saw himself defeated of his hopes, both of
this town and Franckford) but that Haubald dispeedes about his letters (in a
style imperious enough) unto his amazed neighbors of the land of Darmstat, and
the Wetteraw; as also to the Towns of Steinheim, Selingstat, Dieburg, Hoest,
Konigstein, Orb, Hausen and others, belonging partly unto the Elector of Mentz,
and partly unto other Lords: That without denial or delay, they bring unto him
into Hanaw, all the Contribution money, corn, hay, and oats, which they had
before paid unto the Catholic Leaguers; and that they never hereafter either
pay or aid, the enemies of the King his Master. They that did otherwise,
should hear from him in another kind.

And thus was this fair City of Hanaw, handsomely surprised by this
quick-spirited Colonel: even before Tillyes own nose (as we say) who was but
newly passed the Mayn. His army lay at that very time, in all the neighbor
Countries thereabouts. Some of them were yet in the land of Darmstat; others
were advanced further, even as far into the Bergstraes, as right against
Oppenheim in the Palatinate: into which Country verily believed it was, that
he would now have gone; and there have stayed for the defense of it. Others of
his were gotten up to Franckford: which Imperial City he mainely solicited to
accept of a garrison from him: which being denied, was one of the mainest
reasons, that he stayed not in the Palatinate: which indeed he could not
safely do, unless that City were either Friend or Neuter to him.

The General Tilly now perceiving by the taking of Hanaw, Tilly returns wards
Fra^co^
that the King of Swedens purpose was to drive down the Mayn into those
quarters: and that, seeing there were many Protestant Princes thereabouts,
others were likely enough to do as the Count of Hanaw had: he immediately
turning faces about, marches directly back into Franconia. Without ever
crossing of the Mayn, therefore; first of all toward Miltenburg and
Bishofsheim he goes; whereabouts the Lorrayn army yet was. Taking in Mergentheim
The town of Mergentheim he takes in again by the way; the Swedish being
retired. From hence he goes directly on to Oxenfurt; a pretty town upon an
Elbow or Bowt of the Mayn, some three or four leagues to the South of
Wurtsburg. Of the taking of this town by the Kings forces in the beginning of
October, we have before told you. It was Sir John Hebron that had done it; and
who yet kept it, though with weak forces. The King fearing Tillies falling
upon this town (which the standing made to be a Pass of some importance)
comes with all speed himself in person thither. and going to Oxenfurt when the
King then was.
Against the Count of Tillyes coming (which was with his whole Army) had Sir
John Hebron laid his Out-guards about the town. Scottish men they were of
Colonel Lumsdells Regiment; and some 6 Rotts, or 36 Musketeers there were of
them; and those (while Leiftenant-Colonell Muschamp commanded the rest of the
Regiment within the Town) now led by Sergeant-Major Monipenny. These 36 giving
a salvee or volly of shot unto that Partee, which Tilly had ordered should
first fall on upon the Town. He by this perceiving their readiness and
resolution for defense; and imagining the garrison to be much stronger then
indeed it was; immediately turns faces about to the right, Whence being
frighted away he goes toward Norimberg.
and marches directly toward Norimberg: before which we shall next find him
sitting, upon November. 18. following. Of which, and of what else may concern
our story, we shall speak more, in our Relation of the General Tillyes
particular proceedings. Had the Count of Tilly then known the King to have bin
in Oxenfurt, and how weak the place was; he would not, I suppose, have bin so
soon frighted away. And had he fallen on with his whole Army, the King was in
the mind to have quitted the place, and to have retired over the bridge into
Wurtsburg again. But his enemy never staid to put him to it.

The General Tilly being thus parted from the King, upon whose motions he
seemed hitherto (though at a safe distance) to have waited; the King of Sweden
now leaving Gustavus Horn with part of the army in Franconia, to look there
unto the Bishop of Bamberg, Commissary Ossa, and the General Tilly; and to
settle some orders withal in the new conquered places: and the General Banier
being before dispatched with other forces toward Magdenburg; ^e King sets
^wards to^rds Hanaw, ^d the Palati^te.
(of all which we shall tell you in their due places,) the King with the rest
of his Army now sets forward toward Hanaw. The forces he at this time brought
with him, were but five Brigades of Foot, besides some of General Baniers
Regiment, which were afterward left at Aschaffenburg. There ought to be 1800
men in every Brigade: but these of the Kings, were not (I believe) so complete
now. that a Bri^de is, see in ^r book of the ^wedish Disci^line. What forces ^e
King ^rings along.
Several pieces of broken, and not yet Recruited or Reinforced Regiments with
their Colonells, were put into one Brigade. These Brigades of the Kings, had
their names from the chiefest Colors belonging to the eldest Colonel of the
Brigade. There were but five of them now: and these they were. First, the
Life-Regiment, or the Guards for the Kings own body; commanded ever since
Baron Dyvels death, by Grave Neeles, a Swede. Secondly, the Green Regiment;
led by Sir John Hepburn (usually called Hebron) a Scottish Gentleman, and the
eldest Colonel. Thirdly, The Blue Regiment, whereof Winckle is Colonel.
Fourthly, the White Regiment, conducted by Colonel Vitzthimb: and fifthly, the
Red Regiment, whereof Colonel Hogendorff has the leading. Amongst all these,
The King w^ so weak in horse at the Leipsich Batt^ that he had none for the
Reere of his left wing wh^ Hall commanded. See ou^ Figure of the Battle, in
the Swedish Dis^pline, how the that part is.
were there but few (scarce any) natural borne Swedens: those were gone
otherwhere with Gustavus Horn and General Banier. His Horse (which he had
well increased since the Battle of Leipsich) might be some 4000: or something
more perchance. And that he had no greater Army then this at his coming
toward the Palatinate, was plainly to be s^ene at his passing through
Franckeford: where were told but 74 Ensigns of Foot, and 71 Cornets of Horse.
So that allowing a full 100 to every Foot Company, and 60 to every troop of
Horse (which is good allowance to so shatterd an Army) you will not find above
7500 Foot, and 4000 Horse at the most: Scanderbeg never desired above 9000 men
in one Army: and these are the numbers with which Gustavus Adolphus enforced
the Catholic Leaguers, to desire either Peace or Neutrality of him.

And with these few forces, but great strength; his Majesty sets forward
toward Hanaw: for whose entertainment, Haubald was now providing of the
Castle. About some two days after the first taking whereof, and whilst
Tillyes army was yet thereabouts: two troops of his horse show themselves
before the Town: amongst whom Haubald letting fly his ordnance; they
immediately retired. Some five days after that (November eighth in the night
time) the Imperial garrison of Steinheim Castle, Some action betwixt Han^ and
Steinheim
(which is about three quarters of an hours march from Hanaw) begin to cast up
the earth and to erect a Skonce-worke, just upon the Chanells side, which was
cut out of the River Mayn, to carry smaller vessels up to Hanaw. Their purpose
was, to hinder the Hanaw boats, and the Swedes from coming in them, to
assail their Castle. Against this work of theirs, Haubald the next day raises
up two Brestworkes, in the two Churchyards belonging unto the Old Town. One
work, was at the corner of the Chanel; and the other at that Angle, where the
Kintz falls into the Mayn. Into these he brings three pieces of ordnance, two
into one, and one into the the other. Between these works, fell there out a
skirmish for three hours together: but Haubalds ordnance driving out the
Imperialists at the last, falls with his men into their work, half demolishes
it, and so leaves it. The Imperialists being desirous to renew their work, but
loath to come under the Command of Haubalds ordnance in his two breast works;
devise to come into their own Fort again, underground and by myning. Their
working might easily be discerned from the walls of Hanaw: and sure they would
have brought it to perfection; had they not been made to give it over by the
Kings coming, within some few days after.

His Majesty having by this time shipped his carriages down the Mayn, ^e King
^nes down Mayn;
and divided his forces on either bank of it (himself in person marching on
the Southern side) comes all along in this manner. And that he might lose no
time, and drive the Country withal before him; he takes in Procelden,
Miltenburg, Klingenburg, and Trenfelt by the way, some being on one side of the
River, ^king towns both sides
and some upon the other. At Aschaffenburg (or Aschiburg) upon the Northern
bank of the River, has the Elector of Mentz a very stately Palace, where he
mostly used to reside. The place was kept by one Regiment of Tillyans, and two
of the Electors own Regiments of Train bands: all which by night quitting the
place, the King puts in Baniers Regiment for the keeping of it.

There passes he the bridge, unto his army on the other side of the River.
Those of his men that still kept the Southern shore, fall upon Steinhem
aforesaid. This Town is indeed but a Dorp; the Castle was the strength of it;
and that had a garrison of 850 in it, which having been soundly rattled with
four pieces of Cannon on the evening of November 14. 600 of the 850 yield it
the next day unto the Kings Soldiers, and themselves into his Majesty's
service. The other 250 that refused, were upon the agreement conducted by the
Swedes unto the Franckfurder-waldt, ^einhem ta^n.
a league or two to the West of them. This Castle does the King bestow upon the
Earl of Hanaws Mother: unto whose family, it had formerly belonged. This Earl
stood always firm after this, unto the Kings party: levying Soldiers for his
service afterward, with which he took in Drusenheim and other towns about
Strasburg and Hagenaw for the King, in January following; the first of which
the King also bestowed upon him. He put himself at the very first, into the
Kings protection, among the seventeen Lords of the Weterau: he followed the
Court at Mentz, all the Christmas after; where in a Masquerade; he was one of
the Maskers together with the King. All which shows some good service he had
privately done; which obtained so good a degree in his Majesty's favor and
familiarity. And that the other side also understood the correspondency which
the Count held with the King, about his giving way to the surprising of Hanaw;
appears by Tillyes taking the Town of Babenhausen from him.

November 15. after Steinheim was taken, The King go^ through Hana^
the King makes his entrance into Hanaw: unto which town he would suffer his
Army to be no further troublesome, then by staying to suppe in it. That very
evening does his Majesty set forward again toward Franckford; which was to
be the chiefest Pass to all his future great actions, in those quarters. About
12 at night toward Offenbach (near Franckford) he goes, a league and a half
from Hanaw, where his lodging was provided for him in the Castle: which having
anciently belonged unto the Counts of Isenburg, had been taken from them of
late by the Bishop of Mentz. Here at Offenbach he staid all the day, October
16. the cause being, for that heretofore having had some parley with the
Deputies of the Commonwealth of Franckford, which had before been with him
upon the way; toward Franckford.
and that the Count of Solms had now been some 3 days since sent from
himself unto them; he here expected their answer. The Kings message was, His
demands to those of Franckford.
Whether the City for setting forwards the cause of the Gospel, would
peaceably and speedily set open their gates unto him, accept fairly of his
garrison; or stand to the hazard of a siege? ^s demands those of ^anckford.
loath was the Town to yield: and yet fearful were the Townes-men to resist:
so that their Poasts which passed to and again, (in which were some 2 or 3
days spent) ever bringing one and the same resolution from the King; their
deputies are feign, after dinner on the same 16 of November. to come to Offenbach
Castle, and to consent there, unto these three propositions.

1. That the King should have free passage for his Army through their City,
which are as^ted unto by ^m.
to and again. 2. That for the Kings better assurance of the City, 600 of his
men should be received for garrison into Saxenhausen; (which is the strong
Suburbs to the City, lying on the other side of the water.) 3. That both
Magistrates and people should take an oath unto his Majesty.
And thus was this fair Imperial City of Franckford on the Maine gained to
the Kings party, by good words, and the sight only of an Army. The next day
being Thursday, November 17, the Kings Army passing through Saxenhausen over the
bridge: marches quite through the City, and so out at the gate of Bockenheim
again. There were told fifty six pieces of Cannon: ^e King pas^ through the
^wne.
seventy four Ensigns of Foot; forty five Cornets of Horse; twenty six
Cornets more, the next day likewise following after. Such fair order was kept
by the soldiers in their passing along, that no man complained of injury: and
whereas two of them only flew out into the highway, they had martial law
presently, and were hanged for it. And as little complaint was there of the
garrison in the Suburbs, whereof Colonel Vitzthimb (a very able Gentleman, for
such a purpose) was left Governor. The King himself rode bareheaded through
the streets; who with the comeliness of a Majesticall personage, and the
courtesy of a gracious behavior; generally attracted the beholders affections
toward him. He staid not long in it, but taking leave of the Nobility and
Gentry of the Country, that came to see and wait upon him; he went to his
lodging at Nidda, to be the nearer unto his Army. Going to the siege of Hoest.
His men by ten a clock the same night were set down to the siege of Hoest:
a good town belonging unto the Elector of Mentz, and about a league from
Franckford. This is the town, where, upon Whitsun-Munday 1621. the General
Tilly overthrew the late Duke of Brunswike. November 19 the garrison of Hoest
being above 400 men, deliver the place unto the King: unto which their own
fears, and the townsmens persuasions had jointly drawn them; Hoest taken.
these being doubtful of the plundering of their houses. The King having put
diverse Companies there over on the other side the Mayn, (for all marched not
through Franckford) presently filled the next smaller towns by the Rhine, with
his forces.

The next day being Sunday, November. 20. his Majesty returns into Franckford
again, bringing the two Landtgraves of Hessen along with him: one of
Hessen-Cassel, which is the elder family, and usually called Landtgrave of
Hessen: and the other of Hessen-Darmstat; commonly styled Landtgrave of
Darmstat. Hither likewise came the 17 Earls of the Wetteraw to do their duty
to his Majesty; who was now feasted in Franckford in the very same room, where
the Emperors at their Coronation use to be entertained There may be a sign of
good luck in that: The Landtgrave comes with an Army unto the King.
and perchance this may not be the last time, that he shall there be feasted.
The Landtgrave of Hessen (his country being now cleared of General Tilly,
Fugger, and the Imperialists) brings his Army (of 12000 men, as some say,
though with the most) to have joined with the Kings forces: they being in the
Rhingaw at this present, within 3 leagues of Franckford. But the King now
hearing how the Count of Tilly had besieged Norimberg ever since the eighteenth
of November; the Hessen Army was immediately directed thitherwards: the King
himself (rather then fail) having a purpose to go likewise to the relief of
it. The Hessen Army being already beyond Hanaw upon their march; and there
hearing Tilly to be remooved; return back again to their former Quarter in
the Country called the Rhingaw, belonging for the most part unto the Elector of
Mentz, and bordering upon the land of Hessen.

On Tuesday (which is his usual Sermon day) his Majesty went to Hoest again;
The Kings Thanksgiving ^or the taking ^f Franckford.
where, in the Chapel of the Castle he causes a solemn Thanksgiving to be
made, for that he had obtained the fair Town of Franckford without bloodshed.
And truly it was Gods work to incline the hearts of the Magistrates of that
City, to hearken unto the King: especially since they even the other day denied
Tilly the same favor. When Spinola in the year 1620. came toward the
Palatinate; he very respectfully both by letters and m^ssengers, wooes the
Commonwealth of Franckford: so that the King now prevailed more with them, then
these two great Generals ever could. And well worthy of a Thanksgiving was the
obtaining of this mighty Pass. There runs a Proverb in Germany to this
purpose.

"He that lies before Franckford a year and a day,
"Is Master of the Empire for ever and aye.
Presently after this did the Landtgraves forces advance out of the Rhingaw,
into the neighbor Countries of the Wetteraw and Westerwaldt: anciently
belonging unto seventeene Lords, but much of late days encroached upon by the
Electors of Mentz. The place of these Countries is on the East of the Rhingaw,
betwixt it and the County of Hanaw. Here, in the Kings Name, does the
Landtgrave take in Falkenstein and Reiffenburg; with the two Castles of
Cronenburg and Ernfelt: the strong Castle of Konigstein (some two Dutch leagues
from Franckford) only holding out for the Bishop of Mentz.

Most of these towns from whence these Earls have their Honors; are in these
two Countries.

There be 17 small Earldom^ of them in all whereof one family has 2 or ^
sometimes: lik^ as also there b^ several Earl at once of the same Family. The
Earl of Hanaw has 5 Earldomes, and 700 villages under him. A^ the rest also
have their towns and villages with their Boores under the^; some more some
less.

The Wetteraw is that part tha^ lies next the water; that is, the Mayn: and the
Wester-waldt signifies the Western wood: i^ being a woody country upon the
West of the Wetteraw, and is a part of the Forest of Arduenna.


The Lords of these two little Countries having a long time been oppressed by
the Catholics, and therefore glad of any Deliverer: being by religion
Protestants; and therefore the easilyer drawn to accept the King for their
Protector: and having, in the last place, their own disability to resist, for a
fair excuse for their yielding: at Franckford about this time, both treated
and concluded a full agreement with the King. These were the Lords that made
it. First, 3 Earls of Nassau and Catzenelbogen with their brethren. 1 Earl of
Nassau, Warburg, Ietzstein and Wisbaden. 2 Earls of Hanaw and Muntzenberg. 4
Earls of Solms, and Lords of Muntzenberg. 2 Earls of Stolberg and Conigstein.
3 Earls of Isenburg and Budingen. 3 Earls of Sagen and Witgenstein. 1 Earl
of Wied. 2 Earls of Lemingen and Westerburg. 2 Earls of Waldeck. Besides
diverse of the Nobility, Gentry, and Corporations: who all consented and signed
unto these following conditions.

The Treaty begins with a Preface, unto this purpose. That seeing the King of
Sweden had never deserved of the Empire or Emperor to be provoked to this
war; which the King was forced to enter into for his own defense, the
Electors themselves having heretofore acknowledged so much for him: and that
these Earls also, as members of the Empire, having ever been regardfull of
their duties unto the Emperor their Head; never having either done or intended
hitherto, any act in prejudice of him: yet nevertheless the said Emperor
having, without ever denouncing of war, several ways assaulted Us the King
of Sweden; oppressed our Cousins and Allies; undone many Princes of ancient
families (giving their lands and honors away unto new men;) violated all the
privileges of the Empire; purposed to introduce an absolute government into
Germany first; and by help of that, the easilyer to enthrall the neighbor
Princes afterward: even therefore (says the King) have We by way of
prevention, and for our own security, been enforced to come thus armed into
the Empire. Whereas, moreover, the Princes of the Catholic League, have
against our expectation and desert; both before the battle of Leipsich, and
afterward^ with an armed hand continually opposed themselves against our
proceedings: even therefore have We, with the assistance of God, and by the
right of war, taken in the country of Franco^ia, and all the towns upon the
Mayn, even unto Franckford; which belonged unto those Leaguers. And whereas, on
the other side, We the Earls aforesaid, have by woeful experience found; how
that under the Emperors name, the Protestant Princes have still been abused:
and that notwithstanding their own often submissions and the Emperors
revocation of the proceedings; yet still under some pretense of justice, or
other; their Consciences have been oppressed; their Lands and Royalties
invaded, their subjects pillaged, and no remedy to be gotten: therefore We now
perceive no other course to be taken, but to oppose force by force; and being
forsaken of all other assistance (the Catholics having often broken all
leagues and promises with us) then to put our selves under the protection of
the Kings Majesty of Sweden: whom We clearly perceive to be qualified with
many Royal and imcomparable virtues; put into the business, merely out of a
holy zeal for the releiving of the distressed Princes of the Religion; and
apparently (without doubt) assisted by the hand of God Almighty. For the honor
of God, therefore, the cause of Religion, the restoring of the course of
Justice; and the preservation of our Country; have We, upon good and mature
consideration, accepted of his Royal prote^tion; both parties freely
consenting unto these following Articles.

1. We the King of Sweden, do hereby receive the foresaid Earls, etc.
(whether Lutheranes or Calvinists) into our Royal protection: promising to
pursue as our enemies, whosoever shall disturb them for this their agreement
with Us: to maintain them all in their due privileges: never to make peace,
but upon condition they be comprehended in it; and have first received
satisfaction.

2. Whereas these Earls have this long time stood dispossessed of the most
part of their estates, by the Catholic Princes; We promise our assistance to
the recovery of them: both in regard of their Religion, and of the many
services they have heretofore done for the Gospel. And if by any misprision
they should fall into suits with their neighbors concerning particular
interests; We shall do our best to compound the controversy.

3. If during these wars, the enemy should deprive any of these Earls, or
otherwise ruinate their dominions; We shall right him the best We may, and
force their enemies to restitution.

4. If any of them shall be taken prisoners; We shall do our best for the
recovery of his liberty.

5. We will do our uttermost to preserve their houses and Forts: and take
order to defend them.

6. And if We find it requisite to place any forces, in their Forts or Passes;
We will take care that the soldiers be not troublesome.

7. Whereas the usual contribution cannot forthwith be fully paid by some of
them, until such possessions of theirs as be at this present in the enemies
hands, be cleared; We will recover them as soon as may be; and without any
other clogge or condition, restore them to the right owner.

8. That the said Earls may the better promote the common cause, and yet their
subjects not be too much overlayed with contributions: We are content that the
Ecclesiastical goods may be also ass^ss^d to contribute: and that upon
refusal, so much may be distrained by the Earls, as shall satisfy the
contribution.

9. We permit them also to take back again into their own hands, all such
Cloisters and Monasteries, as have of late days been wrung from them by the
Catholics.

10. that these Or^s be, see our ^oke of the ^edish Disci^e.
We will forbear, as much as may be, to make any Rendezvous, enquartering, or
marches in or through their Countries: But if necessity so requires, we will
have our Orders of war very strictly to be observed: and that all the time
our forces are among them, a horseman of ours shall receive but 2. dollars and
an half a day, with a certain competency of hay and straw, etc. and every
footman two dollars a months pay, until the muster. All which shall
afterward be defalked out of the Contribution.

11. This confederation is no ways intended for the prejudice of the said
Earls or their Estates: but for their protection rather, against the common
enemies.

And we the Earls, etc. aforesaid, do for our parts declare our selves as
follows.

1. First, whereas it is as clear as day, that God Almighty by the Arms of
his Majesty of Sweden (of whose Christian and just intentions we nothing doubt)
has prevented the enemies of the Gospel in their bloody purposes: We
therefore do here with all thankfulness acknowledge, the King of Sweden to be
our Deliverer and Protector, next under God; submitting our selves henceforth
unto his protection, without any respect to the common enemy, how-ever called.
And we do hereby bind our selves, bodies and goods: to stand for him to the
uttermost of our power; never to fall off from him; to do nothing in prejudice
of him; never to have treaty, or to make peace with his Majesty's enemies,
(whom we acknowledge for our own:) but by his Royal assent, and except his
Crown be therein comprehended, and himself fully satisfied.

2. Therefore do we henceforth promise, to hinder by all our best endeavors,
his hurt; and to promote his good: neither by counsel nor by action, directly
nor indirectly, doing any thing against his person, Crown or Dignity; but
faithfully to assist him rather.

3. And whereas nothing is more requisite, then that his Majesty have the
absolute command of the wars: we therefore as his other Confederates have
done, most humbly entreat him to take that care wholly upon him; which we
without contradiction will altogether leave unto him.

4. Therefore have we delivered up into his Majesty's hands, all our Cities,
Forts, and Passages: and I the Earl of Hanaw, have freely put my City and
Castle of Hanaw into his power; to fortify, arm, and dispose the same, as the
reason of the wars shall require.

5. We do further promise, not to open our holds or passages unto the enemy;
nor to receive in any of theirs; but keep them out rather unto the uttermost:
opening them on the other side unto his Majesty, to lodge or enquarter his
troops in.

6. We will also suffer his Rendezvous in our Countries: provided, that the
charges be defalked out of our Contribution.

7. And for all the time of these wars, we jointly promise to contribute
25000. Florens a month: beginning the next December. 1. Old style 1631. to be
paid at Franckford. And if any of us shall be negligent in paying of his part,
(according to the Roll of each man's Assessment hereunto annexed) we promise to
distraine for it by a military execution.

8. We undertake also, if need be, to arm our subjects for his Majesty's
service: to call home those that at this time serve the enemy; confiscating all
their goods that refuse to obey us.

9. We permit all provisions and exportation of victuals, Artillery, and
Ammunition, for his Majesty's service.

10. And to keep the same things from the enemy; whom we promise for his
Majesty's service every where to pursue, as the Common adversaries to Us and to
the Gospel.

11. And in case there be any man found in our Dominions, that has forsaken
his Majesty's Colors, or otherwise offended; we will neither give him
entertainment, nor passage: but either punish him our selves, or deliver him
over unto the next of his Majesty's garrisons.

In testimony whereof, We the King and Earls, have mutually set to our hands
and Seals. Given at Franckford, etc.

By this agreement was the Imperial Commissary Ossa utterly defeated of his
hopes: who a little before this, had demanded of these Wetterawish Earls; a
great quantity of provisions, and many hundreds of Carts and Wagons, to be sent
him in unto Selingstat in the County of Darmstat. The Landtgrave of Darmstat
(their neighbor, ^e Landt^ve of Darm^ agrees with King.
) much about this time (which seems to have been about the middle of
November) made his agreement likewise with his Majesty. Hereupon did the
Landtgrave consigne over his chiefest Forts and Passages into the Kings hands:
as the strong Town of Russelheim upon the Mayn, some 5 English miles from
Mentz, first; (into which the King presently put Sir John Hamiltons Regiment,
which was commanded by his Sergeant-M^jor Magdugall) and Darmstat after that,
the town of his own residence, he remooving his Court upon it unto the Castle
of Hessen.

By this time was the Swedish army advanced beyond Hoest, and a standing
Leaguer formed at the villages of Costum and Cassel right against Mentz, though
on the other side of the rivers. At Walb a small Dorp upon the Rhine, (some
league or less from Cassel) was there so narrow a passage into the Country of
the Rhingaw, ^trance gotten ^o the Rhin^^.
that 1000 Spaniards of the Bishop of Mentz his men, thought themselves
sufficient for the guard of it. Wafting themselves therefore over the Rhine;
and calling in the Country Boores to be their Pyoners in casting up of some
works; they are presently there entrenched. Against these the King now sends:
and the Swedens rushing in upon the Spaniards with a power too great for them;
after a hard Bowte or two, drive them from their Ordnance and new made
batteries: lay some 500 of them dead upon the earth; enforcing the rest into
the river: where though they dyed not (like their fellows) a bloody death; yet
can they not be said to have dyed a dry death.

The next country people presently yielding thereupon, are amerced by the King
to pay him the same Contribution, and to swear unto him the same fealty; which
they before had done unto their Lord the Elector of Mentz: and to redeem their
Country from present pillage, by a ransom of ready money.

The Passage being thus gained, the Kings purpose was, to send out some strong
Partees to keep the Country in action and Alarm, whilst himself might
undisturbed lay a bridge over the Rhine at the said Walb, and go directly unto
the siege of Mentz. The Swedish thus sent abroad, range along upon the rivers
side as far as Bingen: where lighting upon the Custom House which was right
against the town on the contrary side of the water, at which, such boats as
passed the Rhine and Nau, (here falling into the Rhine) were made to pay Toll
and Custom: they there kill 150 of the garrison, and carry away some stoare of
ready money, which they there found in Banco. And this, (though an Action of no
great moment) yet would I not pass it over, because it was the furthest place
that the Kings people meddled withal, The King turns back again.
on that side of the Rhine. For the Kings bridge at Walb not fadging according
to his mind, (the Elector of Mentz with such great forces opposing him on the
other side of the river) the army is called off from those parts; and the
Landtgrave of Hessen being left in those quarters, both to secure that bank of
the Rhine; and to keep, withal, what was already conquered in the Rhingaw and
the Wetteraw: and that, lastly, he might be near unto his own Country upon all
occasions: the King devises upon another course; which, though in respect of
going to Mentz, it were the furthest way about, yet it at last prooved the
nearest way home.

And now begins the Army to gather together about Franckford: over whose
bridge of Saxenhausen, December 1. they are passed: with a resolution (as his
Majesty's own self affirmed to my Lord Ambassador Sir Henry Vane) to go to
the siege of Heidleberg. ^oing into the ^rgstraes, and toward the ^ege of
Heidle^erg.
His forces being directed into the Bergstraes; himself fairly follows
after; lodging the same night at Langen, a village belonging unto the
Landtgrave of Darmstat. This Bergstraes is (as the word signifies) a street or
way of hills: the whole Country being a continued ledge of indifferent high and
even mountains, trending along even from Franckford town almost, quite through
the Landtgrave of Darmstats country, part of the Bishopric of Mentz, and the
Prince Palatines Dominions; even until you come to the very gates of
Heidleberg. Betwixt these mountains, and the goodly river of the Rhine (which
runs along by them almost in a straight line) is there a narrow long country,
with a many of handsome towns (and some weak Spanish garrisons in them) which
were to be cleared by the way. The names of them (as they lie in order) are
Gersheim, Stein, Swingenberg, Diverse towns taken in the Bergstraes.
Bensheim, Heppenheim, Weynheim, Starkenberg, and Ladenburg: all which were in
this march taken in; the Spanish garrisons easily quitting the places, as too
weak to be defended. And now was the King almost come unto Heidleberg; when,
upon consideration of a certain strong Fort he had passed by; (which lying
upon the Rhine on the Bergstraes side, served for a Blockhouse to defend
Oppenheim; that was right against it on the other side of the water) he quite
on the sudden altered his determination. Considering, therefore, that if he
should engage himself upon the siege of Heidleberg, and leave this Fort enemy
behind his back: then might the Spanish forces under the favor of that Fort,
easily there pass the Rhine: and at their own pleasures both cut off all his
provisions, and hinder his retreat besides, back again unto Franckford.

This therefore (and that worthily) quite altered his resolution; which is now
fully bent for the taking in of this Fort. The King altering his dete^mination,
The piece was kept by 1000 Italians and Burgundians: and those such old
blades, as the King had never yet met with the like since the Battle of
Leipsich. No Colors had they with them: those were left with their Comrades in
Oppenheim. Upon Sunday, December. 4. Grave Neeles with the Kings Lifeguards sets
down before it: who being the next day relieved by Sir John Hebron and Colonel
Winckle with their two Brigades; he rises, and leaves them to pursue the
business.

The Fort was encompassed with a double Graff or Moate; goes and bes^ges the
Fort Oppenheim.
and Hebron and Winckle being set down, and immediately falling to their work
with the spade, were ready by Wednesday at night, to make both their lines or
rolling trenches, to meet in the outter-most Graff. So soon as this should be
done, the King about 5 a clock at night, gave command unto Sir John Hebron
(who being the eldest Colonel, commanded there in chief) to Storm, or give
an assault unto the Fort, before the morning. Scarcely was the King from
Hebron; but there was a letter brought him from a Gentleman of the Palatinate,
that dwelt above upon the river, that he would send the King some boats that
very evening. whither havi^ some boats sent him,
Upon this was the Storming countermanded: and about 9 or 10 at night, the
boats came indeed. One Hild a poor Fisherman of Gersheim was the man
employed by the Gentleman; who not only brought two great boats down the
stream with him from about Wormbs; but showed the King also where the Spanish
had sunk another very great Rhine-ship, in the bottom of the river. In these
three boats, the King first of all (with as much silence as might be) sends
over his own Guards, or his Life-Regiment. All this which had hitherto fallen
out so hopefully, had like to have been quite dashed by an odd accident. A
certain soldier (a Sweden borne) having gotten into a little boat by
himself (which upon that river are only made of 3 boords,) was skimming
himself at the same time also over the river. But the stream carrying him
about 12 or 20 score too low toward the town, he there chops upon some 500
Spanish horse, which had their guards at that place. These taking the Alarm at
the Swedes coming and strange language; ^ passes over Rhine in ^m,
presently march up to the place where the Lifeguards were even now newly
landed. But the Swedes having there chanced upon some advantage of ground, as
hedges, bushes, and the like: the Spanish horse were by these things so long
kept off, until the other could well put themselves into order. The Spanish
charging thereupon with their pistols, are saluted again with such a volly of
muskets; that they are forced to retreat, the better to recover their order
again. It was about midnight by this time; when as the boats being now come
back again, the King had shipped over Colonel Hogendorff with the Red Regiment
in them: His Majesty's self passing over likewise with it. By the time that
the King was landed, the Spanish having gotten more forces together, renew
their charge again with more fury, yet with no better success, ^d beats off
3. ^aults of the ^aniards.
being the second time beaten off again also. By this time is Colonel
Vitzthimb come over with the white Regiment or Brigade: and the Spanish now
again reenforced, give a third charge upon the King: but being now repulsed
with greater slaughter, they perceive their enemies to be too strong for them,
and never fall on again. Thus the King having 3 of his Brigades safely landed;
and the Spanish being finally retired: marches immediately toward the Town of
Oppenheim: where for a while we leave him at his Thanksgiving, for having thus
passed the Rhine.

Hebron all this while before the Fort, (his command of Storming being
contradicted) suffered continual sallyes and Alarmes from the valiant
besieged. About 11 at night, 200 of them sally out with great bravery, and fall
into Hebrons Quarter; and a very hot service they made of it: until with much
importunity, and some loss, they were persuaded at last to retire again.
About half an hour after, out upon Winckles Quarter they fall likewise; who
at length also beats them into the Fort. The purpose of these strong and
frequent sallyes, first upon one, and then upon another, was, to hinder the
meeting of their lines, now ready to be perfected. But hearing a little after
this, of the Kings third volly on the other side of the water; and that He had
made good his ground; and how the Spanish coming now on no more, the King was
marched up to Oppenheim: they had no more comfort to sally. Fearing therefore
that their passage of retreat over the Rhine would be utterly cut off, The
Fort yee^ded unto Sir John Hepburn
they about 7 a clock in the morning send out a Drum unto Sir John Hebron to
parley: with whom they at last concluded upon these Conditions.

On the Spaniards part.

1. They were at 7 a clock at night (Thursday December 8. The Condition
) to march out with bag and baggage, Colors flying, Drums beating, Matches
lighted, and Bandeliers filled.

2. To be assured by the King, not to be molested in their way, by any of his
forces; nor by the Landtgrave of Hessens men, or any others.

3. A Captain should be given them for hostage, (they leaving another with the
King for him:) and their garrison to be convoyed with 1000 Musketeers, to a
village the same night half a league distant from thence: and the next
morning, unto the banks of the Mayn.

4. His Majesty to furnish them all their march, with victuals, etc.

On the Kings part.

1. All of the Fort shall take their way toward Bingen.

2. They shall first pass the Mayn, and the Rhine afterward.

3. They shall not go into Mentz: but to some other place, where there is a
Spanish garrison.

4. They shall carry away none of their Ordnance.

5. Nor pillage any town or village in the way: nor offer injury unto any
soldier at that time serving his Majesty.

Two hundred Scots of my Lord Reayes and Colonel Lumsdells men, (which
belonged unto Hebrons Brigade) were put in the Fort, so soon as ever the
Spanish were gone out of it.

We left the King lately marching toward Oppenheim: where he yet lay, within
Cannon-shot (almost) of the very walls of it. Summons had already been given
unto the town: which, upon the taking of the Fort, sends out their keys, and
yields gladly enough unto his Majesty: ^e Town of ^enheim ^lded.
and for that they knew him to be a friend unto the Prince Elector their Lord
and Master, they receive in a garrison of 200 Scots unto them. These 200, were
all (or almost all) that were left of Sir James Ramsyes Regiment: himself lay
yet at Wurtsburg to be cured of his wound, ^his relation Oppenheim; as ^o in
those of ^ntz, the Lech, ^d other acti^ about the ^latinate and ^varia: have
received ^ne instructi^ from Mr Ro^t Marsham, ^o personally ^companied ^olonell
He^n in all these ^ctions.
which there (as we told you) he received. Upon an hill, a little above the
edge of the town, was there a large vast Castle with a garrison of 600 or 700
men in it; which yet stood out against the King. There having been 107 boats
found under the town wall, upon the river; of these the King sends over enough,
to fetch Winckles Regiment first, and Hepburnes after him: with the Cannon,
baggage, and Cavallery last of all. The stream carrying down Hepburn and
Winckle something lower then the town; they upon their landing advance up the
hill, to meet the Kings forces: whom they now saw standing in fair Battaglia,
ready to give a general assault upon the Castle. And now those 200 Scots that
had been put into the town at the yielding of it; fall immediately thereupon
to Storm the said Castle at the Towne-port, which is betwixt the Castle and
the Town. The Scots fell in with such a tempest and resolution, The valor o^
the Scots.
that they instantly forced the garrison into the inner port; they Storming in
together with them: so that by that time the King was ready to assault on one
side, and Hepburn on the other; they meet (to their great admiration,) diverse
of the garrison that had already leapt over the walls, thrown away their Arms,
and crying Quarter; as the rest also now did, that had not yet gotten out of
the Castle. The Castle ^ken by assault
In both these actions (about the Fort and Castle) were there some 200 Spanish
(though few of them Spaniards) cut down, and 8 Colors taken: which were the
first Colors that ever the King took from the Spaniards; this being the first
time that ever he had to deal with them.

Here fell there out a pretty merriment, which some Readers may perchance be
pleased withal. Whilst the most of the Spanish were begging for Quarter, a
certain Officer with some others of his men, not daring to trust the courtesy
of an enemy; fairly slips away from the Scots that had so ferryted them:
running out of the town for life, even close besides the Kings army. It
chanced that an Hare starting out of the bushes about the ditch, ran directly
before the Spaniards: and within a few pases after, two other Hares also ran
as directly after them. The Swedish laughed heartily to see what a Convoy the
Spaniards had gotten. It Is ill luck (says one of the soldiers) to have ones
way crossed with a Hare; and that ill luck is now ours: for we are likely to get
but little honor by them, should all their Countrymen run away in the like
manner.

The next day, the King was purposed to go toward Mentz; and the Army being
advanced to the top of the hill; the weather fell out so bitterly cold, snowy,
and windy, that they were even feign to turn back again, leaving their
Ordnance behind them on the hill top On the morrow morning, they put themselves
upon their march again; and the towns being not above 3 Dutch miles one from
another; the Army by 5 a clock at night presented themselves before the view
of the City. Mentz besieged
They of Mentz out of a Fort they had, let fly their Ordnance a maine upon the
Kings folk: but it now growing dark, the King with the most of the forces
making his approaches along the rivers side; sends Hebron to make his, close by
the gallows Port. Hebron lodging his Brigade in a place commodious enough,
within musket shot of the Port; that very night (notwithstanding he were
extremely shot at) runns his Lines even to the very Graff or town ditch. The
King, on his side, found much more fierce resistance; the garrison still
sallying out upon him to hinder his working: who for all this, having once
gotten the advantage of the Suburbs; with the loss of 100 men, (or such a
matter) brings his approaches also close unto the wall. The second day the
town gave hot fire upon the Kings side; and the Ordnance from the Castle
thundered as lowdly against Hebron: whom Colonel Axel Lillye coming now to
visit, had his leg shot away by the shinne bone. The next day being Sunday,
the shooting continued very fiercely on both sides: the King having by this
time raised some Batteries in a garden, and mounted his Ordnance upon them. By
Monday morning, the King with his ^ Brigades on one side; and Hebron with his
upon the the other, being gotten close under the walls; the town desires to parley:
which the King denies them, unless the Cittadell will parley also. The Castle
at first refuses the motion; but considering a little better upon it, how that
notwithstanding they found themselves strong enough on that part of the Castle
toward the enemy, ^entz yielded.
yet being conscious of their weakness of the part toward the town, (should
the King first take that) they agreed also to parley.

These were the chiefest of the Conditions.

1. To depart next day with flying Ensigns, bag and baggage, and 2 pieces of
Cannon. 2. Have leave, some to go into Franckendale, some into Creutznach: and
some to be conveyed toward Luxemburg. 3. These last not to serve against the
King in three months.
Thus the next day, Tuesday December. 13. about 4 a clock, the garrison marched
out, after they had the second time well pillaged the townsmen and the
Cloisters. Some of the Germans become the Kings soldiers. They left behind
them a very great store of Ordnance, and 120 lasts of powder; with a wonderful
plenty of all other provisions. The City redeemed it self from pillage, by
giving the King a ransom of 80000 Dollars: 220000 more being drawn from the
Spiritualty and the Jews: which last people paid 180000 Dollars of the money,
for the redemption of their houses and Synagogue.

And thus was this fair City of Mentz conquered: which is there seated upon
the Southern bank of the Rhine, where the river Mayn flows into it. By the
taking of this town, has the King won all upon the Mayn, even to the very
place where the Mayn looses it self. Mentz is honored with an University and
an Archbishops See: and He with an Electorate and the Chancellorship of
Germany. These Honors, together with the great Estate belonging unto them, had
made the Bishop Elector of Mentz a very prime and a potent Prince, among the
Catholic Leaguers. No friends had neither he, nor his two predecessors, been
all this while unto the Prince Elector Palatine; nor to their neighbors the
Earls of the Wetteraw. These had been some of the Kings reasons to move
against him. This present Elector ( Wambold by name) having in October before
heard of the Kings atchivements upon the Mayn, had then entertained 2000 of
those Spanish, into his City and Country thereabouts, (though much against the
minds of his subjects) which under the leading of the Count of Solms, Roverot,
and Wittenhorst, had brought some Wallons and Burgundians out of the
Low Countries to reenforce the Spaniards in the Palatinate. Wittenhorsts
Regiment being received into the City, had very basely plundered and abused the
townsmen. The Elector asking them whether they thought themselves yet strong
enough to keep his Town against the King of Sweden? You show your self
(says a Spanish Commander) to be but a Churchman by your fearful question:
seeing we are strong enough to beat off three such Kings as the King of
Sweden. Spanish brag.
For all which confidence of theirs, the Elector perceiving by their getting
ready their horses, by loading their baggage upon their wagons, and by making
all ready to be gone, so soon as ever they heard of the taking of Oppenheim;
that there was little trusting himself unto them; he with tears in his eyes
protested, That the Spaniards had abused him: immediately thereupon packing up
his treasure and jewels; and shipping himself away down the Rhine unto
Cullen: which has been the common Refuge and Receptacle in these late wars
for the expulsed Catholic Princes; even as the Papists heretofore ieered that
the Hage had been, for the Protestants. To see what God can do! It Is very
wonderful to observe, how much the greatness of the Electors of Mentz, is
within these few years abated! Bishop Schweichard feasted Spinola at his
coming into the Palatinate: since which time, he and his two next Successors
have encroached upon the Prince Elector Palatine, and other Protestants: and
now Bishop Wambold is glad, for the saving of his dear life, to quit all
again, at the Kings coming into the Palatinate.

The next day, being the King of Swedens birthday, December 14. (which made
him 37 years complete, and began his 38th year: The King en^ers Mentz in
Triumph.
) would his Majesty honor his own Nativity, by entering in state into the
town; being waited upon in the triumph, by Landtgrave William of Hessen, with
very many other Lords and Princes. His lodging was provided in the goodly
Castle, the sometimes Palace of the Bishop.

Friday next was the day appointed for the Thanksgiving, which is a duty, that
this pious King never uses to omit, after any notable achievement. The Sermon
was preached by his own Chaplain; and this Psalm or Hymn of Luthers was
ordered to be sung after it, beginning, Preserve, o Lord, to us thy Word. The
rest of it being chiefly against Popery, and Popish practices. By this may the
Reader see, the Kings zeal and soundness in Religion. The goods of such
Citizens as fled, were presently confiscated: those that staid under the Kings
protection, received the freedom both of goods and consciences; having nothing
at all taken from them.

This City did the King make choice of, for his place of residence, to keep
Christmas in; staying there, the most part of the winter following. Here did
his Majesty hold so Royal and Magnificent a standing Court, as no Prince in
Christendom (perchance) had such a State and Presence. Here have bin seen at
once, 6 sovereign Princes (that is, chief Princes) of the Empire; 12 or 13.
Ambassadors of Kings, States, Electors and Princes; besides Dukes and Lords of
second houses, and the martial men of his own Army; which were none of the
worst shows, as being the men that procured all the rest of that glory. The
Kings next care was for the fortifying of the place, which as fast as could be,
was in this order performed. Whereas there were some hills neere-hand that
commanded the Town, Mentz fortifi^ and how.
those the King directs to have taken into his new works; which were of
circuit large enough to lodge an Army of 20000 men in. Two bridges were also
laid over the two rivers. That over the Rhine, was builded upon 61 great
flat-bottomd boats; each lying the distance of an Arch one from another: many
families of people living sometimes in the boats under the bridge, like as in
the Low Countries. Beyond this bridge toward the land of Hessen, was there
another great work drawn; able to lodge 10000 men in, for the securing of
that passage. The other bridge over the Main, was founded upon fifteen great
flat-bottomd boats; where, namely, the current runs strongest: the rest
being builded upon great piles of wood. Upon that Angle or corner of ground,
where the Mayn falls into the Rhine; was there a royal Fort to be builded,
with 6 Bulwarks unto it: which should guard the passage out of the land of
Darmstat, and give the law besides, unto both the Rivers.

The Lorrayners in the Imperial City of Wormbs in the Palatinate betwixt
Oppenheim and Franckendale, hearing of this news of Oppenheim and Mentz,
provide instantly to be packing. Osseland their Colonel would needs shake
hands with the townsmen upon these terms: 3000 Dollars they must presently
give him for his farewell. And that coming something easily, he demands 10000
more. A sackefull of silver plate he also laid hold of: and two Burgers would
he carry along with him, till the 10000 Dollars were sent after him. Into a
vault behind St. Andrews Church, were 50 barrels of powder stowed, his men
being not able to carry it away. Unto this the soldiers threaten to put fire,
if they might not have what they pleased. Yea they did it, to the miserable
spoiling of the innocent neighbors and their houses. The like outrages did
other of their Countrymen commit, when about this time they fearfully shifted
away out of other places of the Palatinate. Wormbs being forsaken, the King
sends, ^rmbs accor^d with the ^ing.
and it accepts of his protection. Whereas we have often heretofore mentioned
these Lorrayners: Let us, whilst the King refreshes himself in Mentz,
digress a little to tell you of their unfortunate Expedition a few months
before undertaken against the King of Sweden: this being the very time that
they returned home again from him.

^he Story of ^e Duke of ^orraynes expe^tion, from the ^eginning to ^e ending.
The Duke of Lorrayne (a great Prince lying betwixt France and Germany) had
been drawn into action by the Emperor. The reward for his service was
reported to be an Electorate (of Saxon, or Brandenburg) of which, Lorrayne
being a Prince of the Empire, was very capable. Another instigation also might
be, an edge which he bare against the French King; Colleague with the King of
Sweden, and the drawer of him into Germany. The Duke of Lorrayne being
appointed the Emperors General on that side of the Rhine, next unto him: The
Duke of Lorrayne is by ^irth, Count ^e Vaudemont ^n Lorrayne: and ^y marriage
of the old Duke of Lorraynes ^aughter and heir, Duke Lorrayne. T^ Prince or D^
of Lorraine-Pfaltzburg (^ small countr^ in the Forre^ betwixt Lorr^ and
Alsatia) had married this Count o^ Vaudemonts sister: and s^ brother in l^ unto
him.
about July and August 1631. gives out Commissions for 4000 horse, and 14000
foot. His brother in law the Prince or Duke of Pfaltzburg accepts also of
being his Lieftenant-Generall: and Harincourt is made one of the chief
Directors of the expedition. The forces being raised, the Duke sends to Zabern
in Alsatia, (the first Town of Germany beyond the forest of Pfaltzburg, and
within some nine English miles off Strasburg) to be supplied with wagons and
carriages; that being his way into the Palatinate. He demands also to have his
4000 Horse enquartered for a month, in the County of Mompelgart; which
belongs unto a Duke of Wirtemberg. To prevent this, is Ascanio, Governor of
Germersheim, about the beginning of September commanded thither, with
sufficient forces.

About mid September these Lorrayners put themselves upon their march: and
General Tillyes Army being now defeated at Leipsich; Ossa (who had to do in
Alsatia and those parts) is sent to be Commissary-Generall unto the Lorrayners:
that is, To direct the actions of war, to appoint the General which way to
march, and what to do; and to provide and pay the Army, by the Contributions
in the Emperors name exacted from the country. The office o^ an Imperial
Commissary
This is the office of an Imperial Commissary. Now whereas these Lorrayners
should at first have marched up to Tilly; Ossa'es desire (at first) was to
conioyne them unto Altringer and Fugger: for which reason they now marched
directly through the Palatinate toward the land of Hessen. The Lorrayn^ pass
the Rh^
They were gotten to Wormbs and the Bergstraes, by the end of September: and
about the first of October (old Style) the Count of Sultz, with 26 Companies of
Imperial Foot, and some few horse, avoiding out of Gelnhausen and Fulda (by
Hessen) for fear of the Swedish; marches with great speed through Slicter and
Salmunster in the County of Hanaw, and so along through the Speshart Forest,
unto Aschaffenburg: intending thence to go by Franckford into the Wetteraw,
whither he hoped the Lorrayners would within a day or two come unto him. But
this journey of his was shortened; the Lorrayners meeting him at Babenhausen
near the said Aschaffenburg; at which bridge their purpose also was, to have
passed the Mayn into Franconia.

October the fourth, Harincourt passes his horse over the Rhine at Wormbs, to
go toward Steyn in the Bergstraes, and so onwards by Franckford into
Franconia. going into Franconia.
Hither unto Wormbs the Duke of Lorrayn comes: and now he begins to devide his
forces. Some two troops of horse, and three Companies of Foot, are sent into
Heidleberg, some are put into Stein, 5 others into Wormbs; 10 Ensigns are by
Ossa convayed into Heilbrun: 1500 were put into Creutznach and thereabouts 4000
of them were by this time run away: and 8000 sent toward Franconia. Tilly
being come to Aschaffenburg, thither about October tenth goes the Duke of
Lorraine in person. Their conference was; about the Emperors taking on of these
forces, and how to get pay for them. To do the first, is Altringer sent by
Tilly: who October 11 passes the Mayn toward them: but as for the second,
Tilly was not so flush of money; the Duke gate only good words; and hopes of
pay within 14. days. The Lorrayne Army followed their Duke through the
Ottenwaldt, warily and fearfully: so doubtful of the Swedish Land-lopers;
that every night they cut down the trees to barricadoe up the way against
them. Being gotten up as far into Franconia as Heibach and Miltenburg upon an
elbow of the river Mayn, and ^camping by ^e Mayn,
(half way betwixt Wormbs and Wurtsburg) thither (about October 17) comes the
General Tilly from Aschaffenburg; both to requite the Dukes former visit
performed to him; and to give some order withal unto the Army. And now were
the Imperial and Lorrayne Armies so near together, that they might be said to
be conjoined: betwixt which two resolved it was, that whilst he went toward
the Palatinate, they should lie in the wind, between the Circle of Schwaben
and the Swedish: but by no means venture to assault them.

This last clause, the Lorrayners liked well enough. And Tilly needed not to
have put in that; for the Swedish sought all opportunities to begin first, and
to be still beforehand with them. ^here they are ^ften beaten by ^he Swedish,
About the first week in November, ( Tilly being now gone, and the Lorrayners
left alone) 4 Regiments of them are defeated by the Swedish at Gutterish, near
unto Mergentheim and Buttell. A few days after that, the Swedish falling into
their Quarters betwixt Mergentheim and Bishopsheim; cut in pieces 26 troops of
their horse, beat up their whole Leaguer, put them unto a disorderly retreat;
and followed so hard upon their reere, that the ways side by the river Tauber
was strewed with their dead bodies. and driven ou^ of Franconia again.
And thus were the Lorrayners driven out of Franconia; and about the end of
November forced over the Rhine into the Palatinate again: where the Duke
hearing the French to be fallen into his Country, gathers the remnants of his
army together, (which had been left in several garrisons of the Palatinate,)
and homeward he returns; carrying the dead body of his said brother in Law the
Prince of Pfaltzburg along with him, who lately dyed at Munchen in Bavaria.
Marching therefore (scarce with 8000 men) along the Eastern bank of the
Rhine, They pass t^ Rhine,
unto Drusenheim (near Strasburg and Hagenaw) he comes: where (having first
asked leave of the Strasburgers) he passes the Rhine by the two new skonces,
toward his own Country: much about Christmas day, recovering home to his own
town of Nancy. Some of these Lorrayners behaving themselves untowardly
afterward; (for they all went not immediately home with their Duke) were cut
off by the Strasburgers: others were knocked down by the abused Boores of the
County of Hagenaw: others, by the new forces levied for the King of Sweden in
Alsatia: for in all these quarters were some of them left behind for a time.
returning in their own Country.
And this was the end of this Princes unfortunate expedition. The loss of most
of his Army abroad; and of some part of his own Country at home: and of his
Brother in law into the Bargain. Thus dearly had this Prince bought his hopes
of the Emperors favor, the promise of the living Lions skin, the Electorate:
and the sight of a small part of Germany. And this is the fortune of the wars,
That every man cannot be fortunate in the wars.

Return we now to that Favorite of Mars; the ever (hitherto) victorious King
of Sweden; whom upon Friday December 16 we left in Mentz at his Devotions:
which were within two days blessed with a new victory. A strong Imperial
town in the further parts of the Wetteraw, (fronting likewise upon Hessen and
Hanaw) there is, Friedberg by name; which had layne out till now, and been
kept by a Spanish garrison. ^ridberg sum^oned.
It had been summoned in the Kings name before; and conditions offered, That
if the Spaniards would leave the City in the same estate they first found it;
they should go out with full arms, bag and baggage, every way like soldiers,
and be convoyed over the Rhine into whatsoever place they desired. The Citizens
were likewise commanded to accommodate them with carriages and other
necessaries for their remoovall. But Lewis de Verreicken the Governor,
returned this answer unto the Kings Trumpet; That concerning the giving up of
the town, he had received no directions from his General Don Philip de Sylva:
who being now at Creutznach, the Trumpet might go thither to understand his
pleasure; until which were known, he purposed to defend himself, and not to
go out upon such easy terms. A fair answer. But the Burgers knowing the
strength of the place, not to be answerable to the high words of the Spaniards;
so far prevail with the Governor, as to promise another, and a final
answer to be sent unto the King within 10 days after: and that some of their
City should in the mean time be sent unto Don Philip. The Governor consents,
and the Burgers are dispatched unto the General: from whom they return with a
peremptory command unto Verreicken, to defend the place unto the last drop of
blood. How prodigal men are of other men's lives! and how valiant, when
themselves are not in the danger! Verreicken, for all this, perceiving the
place not to be tenable against such forces as had so quickly taken in
Oppenheim and Mentz: in the night time December 18. sends his soldiers out of
Fridberg into Braunsfels, (a town and Castle upon a hill in the Wetteraw, not
far from Fridberg, and of very much importance: himself and family still
remaining within the town. ^idberg taken.
Colonel Haubald (the Conqueror and Governor of Hanaw) getting an inckling
of the matter; flies in upon him the very next day, with a lusty partee of
Dragooners; seazes upon the town for the King, chops a garrison into the
Castle, arrests Verreicken, and imprisons him; the Color being, for his having
broken with the King, in not sending to him at the 10 days end, as he had
promised upon the former Summons. Done like Haubald.

Three days after (December 21) was the strong Castle of Konigstein in the
Wetteraw (some two Dutch miles to the North of Franckford) surrendered unto
William Landtgrave of Hessen: which had till now held out for the Elector of
Mentz. Konigstein taken
The high and hilly situation of it, and the wonderful store of provisions in
it; had made it to be (by some) esteemed impregnable. This procured the
garrison to be wondered at; that having 30 pieces of good Ordnance in it, with
provisions for a whole years siege: they should so easily yield up such a
place, as commanded the whole country about it. But they liked not their cause
perchance, now that the Elector was fled; or had rather serve the King of
Sweden: into whose pay, 3 Ensigns of the 4 that were in it, presently betook
themselves. Some say, that the Landtgrave had one of his brothers here slain
with a shot, which (if true) much abated the contentment that he might
otherwise have taken, for so notable a piece of service. The Landtgrave of
Hessen returns home.
Thus did the Landtgrave take a good farewell of the King, of whom he
presently after takes his leave: going with his Army into his own Country
first; and so along toward the river of Weser, as we shall hereafter tell you.

The town of Bingen upon the Rhine (where the river Nau falls into it: Bingen
) was much about this time forsaken by the garrison: the strong town of
Creutznach standing upon the same Nau, being by this means left the nakeder.
And not to take too much pains in writing the Story, where there was not very
much pains taking in performing of the action; the towns of Altzeim, Neustat,
Kaisers-lauter, and diverse other towns in the Palatinate forsaken by the
Spanish.
and others; were much about this time voluntarily also forsaken by their
Spanish garrisons: whom a Panick fear almost every where now surprised.

Before this time, and a little after the taking of Mentz; was the Rhinegrave
Otho Philip (of the family of the Princes Palatine) dispatched with 20 troops
of horse toward the river of Mosel. The Rhinegrave ^ent toward the Mosel.
The design being, to keep off the Spaniards that then lay in the Bishopric
of Triers; or that might hereafter come out of the Low Countries: whence (as
the news was) some were now about to march, under the command of Prince
Barbanson. These Spaniards having about Christmas time passed the Mosel at
Triers; The Huntsruck ^s not a town, ^ut a ledge of ^ountaines, ^omething
^notty on their ^op, like the ^idge or chine^one of a Grey^ounds back, whence
the ^ame to the Country, Huntsruck, signifies a Dogs ^acke.

The Rhinegrave defeates the Spaniards,


took their way through the Huntsruck; first marching unto Trarbach, and so
into the Palatinate. Here (by Trarbach) the Rhinegrave encountering with them,
put them to the rowte; the most of the spoil lighting upon Wittenhorsts
regiment: who being by agreement at his turning out of Mentz, to go into
Luxemburg, and not to serve against the King in 3 months; had now been met
withal by the other Spaniards, and persuaded to turn back again with them.
And thus was his breach of Articles justly now requited: he at this encounter
losing all that pillage, which he had so uniustly sharked away from those of
Mentz. Three Cornets were here taken by the Rhinegrave, and at Mentz presented
unto the King.

The Spaniards being thus forced over the Mosel again; the Rhinegrave converts
his Arms toward the North-westerne part of the Palatinate, into the Duchy of
Simmern, namely: whence Prince Lodowick Philip brother to the King of Bohemia,
and takes some frontier towns in the Bishopric of Triers.
has his Title of Duke of Simmern. Hereabouts took he in the town of Simmern
first: and of Bachrach next: (whence the good Rhenish wine is named) as also
Caub, Boppart, and Over-Wesel; all in that corner; some of them in Simmern, and
some in the Bishopric of Triers: and all till that time kept by Spanish
garrisons. This Don Philip was General of all the Spanish in the Palatinate,
and in the Bishoprics of Mentz and Triers.
The Rhinegrave presently upon this marching toward Franckendale, chances upon
a Partee of 9 troops of Don Philip de Sylva'es horse, that were going out a
boote-haling: whom after a long fight, he rowtes and overthrowes, taking 5
Cornets away from them. The neighbor Boores assembling together at the noise
of the fight; way-layd, and gave chase unto those Spaniards that escaped: with
clubbs, and flayles, and pitch-forks, and some with better weapons, showing
their love in this sort unto these their old neighbors: their quarrel to them
being the same their wives had unto the wolves and foxes, for stroying of their
Lambs and Pullen.

As much Country-courtesie did other Boores show likewise unto the garrison of
Heidleberg, who now slew out also: of whom, the Friday before Christmas day,
they were said to have knocked down the best part of 200.

Before this time had the fair Imperial town of Spiers (on the South edge of
the Palatinate, and upon the Rhine, Spiers accorde^ with the King
where the Imperial Chamber, and Pleadings of the Crown are kept) accorded
with the King, and accepted of his garrison, as the Imperial City of Wormbs
had before done. The Citizens now raising 3 new Companies for the Kings
service, made the Swedish pretty and strong in these parts: whereupon, December.
21. they fly out and surprise Eyserstal, belonging unto the Prince Elector
Palatine. The Spanish garrison of Germersheim, (some 2 leagues to the South of
Spiers, and upon the same side of the Rhine) perceiving the danger to be near,
and their friends to be far off; voluntarily forsake the town. The same do
their Countrymen (more Southerly) in Lindau, Weissenburg and Sultz; pretty
towns all: and all near upon the Rhine, and toward Strasburg. The garrison
of the strong town of Vdenheim (newly by the Spaniards called Philipsburg)
lying right almost against Germersheim on the other side of the water, think
presently to reprise Spiers again. The actions about Spiers.
Two hundred of them therefore, secretly, in the last night of the year,
wafting themselves over the river at Rhinehausen; lie there in close ambush for
such Partees, as should come in or out of the City. But Colonel Horneck (the
Swedish Governor of Spiers) having an inckling of their forces and lodging,
sets unawares upon them first: kills eight; wounds ten; takes 18 prisoners;
drives a many into the river, and compells all to get them packing.

To begin the New year withal, was the strong town of Manheim, (yea the
strongest of all the Palatinate) there seated upon the Rhine, where the river
Neckar flows into it; by a pretty Stratageme surprised on this manner. Duke
Bernhard of Saxon-Weymar upon New-yeeres day at night, goes out with well-neere
500 men after him. The plot was so laid, that he might come to the Ports of
Manheim an hour or two before daylight the next morning. There he pretended
to come in great haste, naming himself to be a Commander of some town of
their side; that having been out upon a Partee that night, was thus beaten in
thither by the Swedish, who were now even ready to fall upon his Reere, as he
fained. This was the tale he told to the Guards and Sentinels at the gate;
^nheim sur^ed.
desiring for Gods sake to be let in presently. Being believed and admitted;
he cuts in pieces the next Court of guard, and to be brief, kills well-neere
300 of the garrison: lays hold upon Maravelli the Governor, and his
Lieftenant-Colonell; giving quarter to none but to the Germans. Maravelli
having (after a while) paid his ransom, must needs pay for his folly too;
which going afterward into Heidleberg, he did: having his whole head there
stricken off, for the fault committed only by his ears; which had, indeed,
been too credulous in a trust of so much consequence.

Heidleberg and Franckendale blockt up.
And thus became Heidleberg and Franckendale to be blockt up: the towns were by
this time taken round about them, and the Kings horse every where laid upon the
passages. The garrisons, indeed, were very strong in both of them; by reason so
many had thrust in thither, that had been turned out of other places. And yet
this blocking up being not strickt enough; these 2 garrisons, together with
that of Vdenheim, stealing out sometimes; did much mischief ever and anon
among the neighbor villages. There was reported to have been a dissension
within Heidleberg, betwixt the Spanish and the Bavarian soldiers. Certain it
is, that many Ensigns of the Bavarians shortly after this forsook their
garrison, and went and put themselves into Vdenheim. About this time also, was
much of that goodly Castle of Heidleberg set on fire; either by the mischief,
or by the negligence of the soldiers.

I must for brevities sake here omit the taking of the strong Castle of
Brunsfels (which is indeed something out of the way) into which I told you,
that the garrison of Fridberg went. The taking of the strong Castle of Stein in
the Bergstraes must also be passed over; as likewise some other actions about
Strasburg, and Zabern: for I undertake not to relate every victory of the
Kings, but the famousest only.

And here are we to turn the Scene: to leave our discourse of wars for a
while; and to acquaint you with the treaties and overtures of a peace, desired
by the Catholics.

His Majesty, you may observe, had not been personally abroad in the field (or
not much) since his coming into Mentz: where his time was chiefly taken up,
with giving of Audience and Answers, unto those many Ambassadors which there
waited upon him. There were the several Ambassadors of France, of the 3
Spiritual Electors, (the Bishops of Mentz, Triers, and Cullen) and the
Ambassador of him too that writes himself Elector, the Duke of Bavaria. The
chief business of all these Ambassadors, was but one and the same
negotiation: to importune the King, namely, for a fair Neutrality for the
Catholic Leaguers; and if a Truce could not be obtained, The story o^ the
Neutral^
yet to procure a Cessation of Arms (or Still-stand) at the least, whilst the
conditions were a sending unto the Leaguers. The potentest mediators (and
indeed the earnestest) were the two French Ambassadors; one of which (Charnace)
was reported to have spoken in some high language unto the King; and to have
mentioned the greatness and power of his Master, and the Army that he had now
on foot. Unto this, the King was said to have returned as courageous an
answer: That he confessed the greatness of his Master; and yet if the French
King would but give him a days march before him, he would meet him at Paris.
It was spoken also, that one of the Ambassadors should have objected unto the
King, his breach of the league betwixt his Master and Him; namely, by his
coming over the Rhine: and that the King of Sweden should have answered that
again, with breach of Articles on the French side; in his failing of some
payments agreed upon. But whereas (says the King) two Armies will never agree
well together in Germany; better therefore it were, that his Majesty of France
would be pleased to turn his Arms against the Spaniards, somewhere else: and
leave the correction of what is amiss in the Empire unto my self. And thus (or
somewhat this way) became this controversy compounded: and the French King did
indeed send half his Army (which was at that time about Metz in Lorrayn) into
the Elector of Triers his Country; to keep the Spaniards from passing over the
Mosel, or encroaching upon that Electorate. And thus the former Ruffing being
fairly over-smoothed again; the Ambassadors returned with more mildness, to
the solicitation of their former business. Thus the King of Sweden for his
Colleague and brother of France his sake, was drawn to consent unto the
Neutrality, upon these terms following: which himself, in wisdom, caused to
be published, for fear lest some cunning adversaries should for their honors
and advantages, have scattered abroad false copies and rumors of them. Which
for all that, was done notwithstanding. The true Copy whereof we here at large
afford you, as we have it out of the Latin.

Here follows the true Articles of the Neutrality. With which I also
forewarne my Reader, not to give credit unto other Copies of these Articles,
many having been dispersed. And in particular, those 2 Copies in Gallobelgicus,
pagg: 91. and 92. which be both false. As those of his likewise page 105.
concerning the Neutrality with Cullen.
HIS sacred Majesty of Sweden, taking special notice of the desire which the
Duke of Bavaria and the Catholic Leaguers have for obtaining a Neutrality;
although by their making themselves parties with the Emperor in the Wars,
they had deserved nothing of him but hostility: yet upon the earnest
intercession of the most Christian King presented by his Ambassadors; and to
testify withal his own brotherly affection unto him: he is contented to
conclude the Neutralitie, upon these following conditions.

1. Let this Neutralitie be religiously and inviolably kept with his sacred
Majesty of Sweden, his Kingdoms, The true A^^^cles of the N^^tralitie.
Dominions and Subjects, as well those that are hereditary to him, as those
that have in Germany The King especial (Is^^ pose) mean^ Franconia; which
himse^^ had incorpo^^ted and mad^ Dukedom. Yea his Sou^diours also c^led
Mentz, (...) Dukedom of Mentz, more frequently the The Bishopri^^ of Mentz.
been conquered by him: as also with his Confederates, the Electors, Princes,
Nobles, Cities, Commonwealths, Communalties and States, and with the Elector
of Saxony in particular; by the Duke of Bavaria and his Associates the
Catholic Princes and States of Germany: who shall also give sufficient Caution
unto His Majesty for the sure keeping of it.

2. Let the said Duke of Bavaria and the Catholic Princes of Germany his
Confederates, forbear all acts of injury and hostility; both toward His
sacred Majesty of Sweden, his Army and Dominions now in his possession; and
toward his Confederates the Evangeliacall Electors, Princes, Earls, Nobles,
Cities, Communalties, States, and all other Evangeliacall Professors of what
condition soever: and let them not by their Soldiers be troublesome hereafter
unto them in their Dominions, upon any pretext whatsoever; nor suffer them to
be disturbed by any forces of the Emperors.

3. Let the Duke of Bavaria and the said Catholic Princes of Germany, as many
as are of the League, restore unto the Evangeliacall Princes and States of what
condition soever, all and singular Strengths, Fortresses, Castles, Cities,
Territories and Countries how many soever, which in all the time of this War,
begun in the year 1618, they have taken and kept from the Evangeliacks in the
lower Saxony: and leave them in the same state they were in, before the
beginning of the War.

4. Let the Duke of Bavaria, with the Catholic Princes of Germany his
Confederates, withdraw all their Armies out of the Countries of the
Evangeliacall Electors, Princes, and States, so soon as may be; sending for
the Soldiers into their own Territories.

5. Let the Army of the Duke of Bavaria, and of the Catholic Princes of
Germany his Confederates, be reduced to the number of 10000 or 12000 men: all
the rest being presently cashiered. Which Army, let it be distributed and
enquartered here and there among the Cities and proper Dominions of the said
Princes, and not be kept together in one entire Body.

6. The Duke of Bavaria and his Associates, the said Catholic Princes of
Germany, shall not with the said Soldiers (being either cashiered or
distributed among their Territories) give assistance either openly or
underhand, unto the Emperor or any other Prince, enemy unto His sacred
Majesty of Sweden.

7. Nor let the Duke of Bavaria and his Confederates the Catholic Princes of
Germany, give leave unto the House of Austria or any other whatsoever enemy of
His sacred Majesty of Sweden; to raise soldiers, appoint places of Muster or
Rendezvous, buy up Arms, or make any other Military provisions within their
Dominions: but let them every where observe an inviolate and sincere
Neutralitie.

8. Let all their Passages be without deceit either open to either party, or
shut up, as it shall be agreed upon: provided it be without all injury and
damage unto the owner.

9. His sacred Majesty of Sweden with his Confederates in like manner, shall
in no ways offend the Duke of Bavaria, nor any Prince or State of the
Catholic League, whose Dominions he is not yet Master of; The Bishop o^
Bamberg exce^ted out of the Treaty.
excepting only the Bishop of Bamberg: nor shall he lay any other kind of
Military impositions upon them: but shall keep and observe a sincere
Neutralitie with them.

10. All those places of the Lower Palatinate whatsoever, now taken away from
the Duke of Bavaria, will His sacred Majesty restore unto the said Duke of
Bavaria again; until by the mediation of the Kings of Great Britain and of
France, there be some friendly composition made betwixt the Duke and the Prince
Palatine; for which some short day shall be appointed. So likewise will his
Majesty restore unto the Archbishops of Triers and By the Landgrave of Hessen
in Cullens Bishopric of Paderborn.
Cullen, whatsoever places are taken from them: the City of Spiers and the
places now remaining unto it, being Salva civitat^ Spirensi, sibiqu^ relicto.
left entyer unto it self.

11. All other countries and places of the Catholic Princes and States
(besides those forenamed) already possessed by His sacred Majesty: shall not
the Duke of Bavaria, nor the Catholic Princes of Germany his Confederates,
make demand of again in any kind; either by themselves or by others: but
shall leave them in His Majesty's hands until some general Treaty.

12. All States, Princes, Earls, Nobles, Cities and Communalties Evangeliacall
whosoever will, may be under the protection of His sacred Majesty of Sweden:
nor shall they to the prejudice of the said protection be disturbed any manner
of way, either directly or indirectly, by the said Catholic Princes of Germany.

13. Let all Commerce with his sacred Majesty of Sweden, his Subjects and
Evangeliacall Confederates on the one party; and with the Duke of Bavaria and
the Catholic Princes of Germany his confederates on the other party; be free
and open every where, and no ways hindered.

14. Let all prisoners on both sides be delivered without ransom, and in
particular, let the Administrator of Magdenburg taken by Tilly, be forthwith
set at liberty, without prejudice.

15. For the better security shall the most Christian King of France engage
his Royal word, that the Duke of Bavaria, and all other Catholic Princes,
States, and Cities of Germany his Confederates, shall religiously observe this
Neutralitie in all the Articles of it: which if they shall infringe; then shall
he declare himself for his sacred Majesty of Sweden, and fall with all his
power upon the violaters, until he has compelled them unto satisfaction.

The Articles being delivered unto the Ambassadors, were with all post-hast,
to be dispeeded away unto the several Princes whom they concerned: and till
such time as their answers could be brought back again (provided it were
within 14. days) a Cessation of arms was also assented unto by the King for
his party; and undertaken for by the Ambassadors, for the Princes and Armies
on their party. The King therefore to show his sincere meaning, thus signifies
his pleasure unto his Generals and Lieftenants wheresoever.

Gustavus Adolphus by the Grace of God King of the Swedes, etc.
The Kings Letters to his Lieftenants for a Truce.
RIght trusty and wellbeloved, etc. We will not conceal from you, how that
the King of France has made a kind brotherly suit unto Us, by his
Ambassadors, for a Neutralitie betwixt Us, and the Elector of Bavaria and the
Catholic League. Forasmuch as We have thereupon framed certain Articles, and
delivered the same to the said Ambassadors, who have promised to bring Us
within the space of fourteen days a plain declaration and confirmation
thereupon; And in the mean while by virtue of their power to take order, That
Pappenheim shall forthwith withdraw himself with his troops out of Westphalia
and the Bishopric of Magdenburg: And likewise, That the forces of the
Electors of Bavaria and of the Catholic League, should forthwith be called and
drawn out of Bohemia, if any there should be. For this reason, and for the
furtherance of such a work, and to gratify withal our said good brother the
King of France: We have thought good to yield them so small a time, and to
abstain from all hostility, during the said fourteen days, against the
said Catholic League and the Duke of Bavaria: If so be that (according to the
said promise) they do behave themselves in like manner; withdraw their forces,
and use no hostility against Us. Whereof We do hereby give you notice: and
withal do will and command you, Forthwith to publish this said Cessation of
arms for fourteen days, throughout the army which you do command, (to
which end We have dispatched this Trumpet unto You) And thereupon to cease and
abstain from all hostility, pillage, robbing, and other deeds of enmity,
against the said Elector of Bavaria and the Catholic League, and during the
said time to remain quiet. But yet We have expressly excepted (as the said
Ambassadors do know) and We do intend, That such Towns, Places and Castles
which are now by Us besieged and blocked up, shall so remain besieged and
blocked up: And that the besieged shall have liberty during the said time, to
treat, conclude, and compound with Us; to deliver up the said places, and to
depart from thence according to the agreement that shall be made with them.
This you are to observe, and to govern your self accordingly. And if some one
or other place be at this present by you besieged or blocked up; you are by no
means to remove or depart from the same, but rather to continue and finish the
design, with all your best endeavors; As being a thing no ways contrary unto
the said Cessation of arms by Us granted, etc. Given at Hoest the 10 of Ian.
1631.

These Letters of the Kings were (as you may perceive) dated at Hoest betwixt
Mentz and Franckford: through which His Majesty now went toward Hanaw, there
to meet with his Royal Consort the Queen of Sweden, whom for twenty months
before he had not seen; that is, not since his coming out of Sweden. Of her
Majesty's arrival at Wolgast in Pomerland, we told you in our First Part. Her
Majesty therefore having in the beginning of Winter parted from that place to
follow her Lord; and having since that passed away the time in Leipsich,
Dresden and Ertfurt, (at which last place she was by agreement to have her
residence:) arrived this very Tuesday night Ian. 10. ^he Queen (...) Sweden
^^mes unto the ^^ng.
at Hanaw aforesaid. The Queen (as it is reported) at first meeting taking her
Lord in her arms, Now, says She, you are my prisoner. Which pleasantness of
hers was turned into earnest, by that time it came into England: diverse of
those that would have had it so, confidently here giving it out, That the King
of Sweden was taken prisoner.

But let us take notice how the Truce was observed, in these 14 days interim,
by those that so much desired it: surely the King was not well used, The
Neutrality ^ot observed
either by Bavaria, Pappenheim, the Duke of Newburg, or the Archbishop of
Triers his subjects.

As for the cunning Duke of Bavaria, verily believed it is, that he merely
made use of the authority and favor of the French King in procuring of it;
never purposing to accept of such conditions as the French Ambassadors thought
convenient for him: the maine of his policy being to gain time by it, ^^y the
Duke of ^avaria;
and to make these three advantages (among the rest) of it.

1. To set forward his own preparations (which he never intermitted) whilst
the King should leave off his prosecutions.

2. That the Archduchesse forces, (whom he had now intelligence to be upon
their march) might in this time get over the Mosel into the Palatinate to
entertain the King there; ^ho makes advantages of it.
that so himself might not as yet be looked after. This plot took.

3. That he might in the mean time get the better terms of the Emperor, for
fear he should fall off, or become Neuter: unto whom at this very present he
had dispatched an Ambassador. The contents of whose Embassage we will (as we
received it) communicate unto you afterward; namely, where we relate the Dukes
own Story, at the end of the General Tillyes Proceeding.

The Emperor esteeming (as it appears) Bavaria more likely to serve his turn,
then Wallenstein; gave such satisfaction unto that Duke, as he was presently
accepted of, and Wallensteins employment for a while went on the more slowly:
which affront how so vast and haughty a spirit as Walsteins would put up, let
time discover. This was the use that Bavaria made of this treaty of Neutrality.

And as for the Earl of Pappenheim; he either had no notice of this Truce at
all; or no purpose to take notice of any. For though he withdrew (indeed) his
troops out of Magdenburg; Pappenheim observes not the Truce,
yet was it not before he had spoiled it the second time. Nor were his forces
utterly drawn out of Westphalia: he playing Rex about the latter end of the
Truce in the Duchy of Lunenburg, the furthest corner of Westphalia. Yea so late
it was ere he stirred out of the Bishopric of Magdenburg, that the King was
upon his march as far as Gelnhausen (some 5 leagues to the North-East of
Hanaw) to have gone against him, as it was reported.

Neither in the Archbishopric of Triers was there a sincere Neutrality
observed: nor those of Triers.
seeing the Spaniards in the Truce time had ready passage through that Country.
The Archbishop Elector himself, seemed, and was too, most glad of this
Neutrality: and no ways, perchance, consenting for his part to this Passage of
the Spaniards: he having before this put himself under the French Kings
protection. Both which observations we may collect out of this his following
letter of Declaration, written from his strong Castle of Hermanstein, unto the
City of Triers and the rest of his subjects, as here follows.

I cannot conceal from your Honors, The Elector Triers letter u^ on the
Neutr^lity.
how graciously it has pleased Almighty God of late, to deliver both our
selves and Bishopric, from our apparent, cruel and terrible enemy, the King
of Sweden; as in like manner also from that most lamentable and unchristian
persecution, exercised upon us by the Spaniards; which deliverance has been
occasioned by means of the Duke of Bavaria: who by the well-meaning and
heroical mediation of his Majesty of France, has not only agreed upon a
Neutrality with the said King of Sweden for the said Duke, but for others also.
In which matter Our selves have not been negligent; but have by the mediation
of the said King obtained, that both We and our Archbishopricke are now
declared to be Neutrall: by which means, may the Princes of the Empire in
general, and your selves in particular; be freed both from the Swedish and the
Spanish. To the end therefore that this Neutrality may inviolably be kept, both
for Our good, and Our subjects; the said King of France (as Interponent) has
offered his assistance royal: and for the remooveing of all encumbrances from
us, has promised (if need were) to bring his Army into the Empire. Take
comfort therefore, give God thanks, and pray unto him, that the promise may be
seconded by the performance; and that this heavy punishment now lying upon us,
may thereby be removed. Your care in the mean time it must also be, that
those daily insolences and persecutions committed upon us by the Spaniards,
may for the time to come be resolutely put by, and their yoke shaken off
effectually. For this purpose shall you cause this Neutrality in all places to
be proclaimed: after which if any notwithstanding shall persecute us (as in the
diocese of Mentz it has happened:) or if upon occasion and pretense of Spanish
assistance, our Archbishopric should fall into the hands of the Swedish: Our
selves shall remain guiltless of the matter; and the occasioners shall be
bound to answer for the same, unto God, the Pope, and all Christian Potentates.

Hermanstein, January 14. 1631. Signed underneath Philippus Christofer.


Together with this Declaration, The Articles (...) Neutrality off^red to those
of Triers.
were these 4 Articles following, propounded unto the City of Triers; as being
the terms upon which the Neutrality must be obtained from the King of Sweden.

1. The passage over the Rhine at the bridge of Coblents, to be granted unto
the King.

2. The strong Fort of Hermanstein, with all the Ordnance, etc. This Fort
(which is the Archbishops Palace) stan^ on the other side of the Rhine, right
over against Coblentz, just Lambeth hou^ is against W^^^minster.
to be also delivered up unto him.

3. The soldiers there in garrison, to take the oath of fidelity to his said
Majesty.

4. A reasonable competent sum of money to be contributed by the country,
toward the payment of the Kings soldiers.

But the City of Triers would in no wise accept of these conditions; but
immediately called in the Spaniards thereupon unto their assistance; granting
passage withal unto as many as would, over their bridge, to march into the
Palatinate. Thus began the Spaniards to incorporate the chief towns of the
Archbishopric, the people siding with them against their own Prince the
Elector. So, notwithstanding that the former letter were wisely written unto
them; both for making of them sensible of the Spanish insolences (as he terms
them;) and to prepare them withal for entertaining of the French forces: yet
had the Spaniards so great a power and faction in the Country, and in the
Archiepiscopall Chapter of the Church of Triers likewise; that they procured so
much bandying amongst the Clergy against their Archbishop; as near they went,
afterward, of depriving him. And had not the French army (under the command of
the Marshall De la Force) presently struck in upon it; both Bishop and
Bishopric had been in danger, to have at once been swallowed up by the
Spanish.

The Elector perceiving his former letters to do no good among his subjects;
sends forth his second Proclamation for the ridding of the Spaniards out of his
Country: dated the fourteenth of February following.

^he Elector of ^iers his Pro^^^mation a^^inst the ^^aniards,
Whereas so much is by this time apparent, as the most Reverend and Illustrious
Prince Philippus Christofer, Elector, etc. has timely enough heretofore
misdoubted, how that the enquarterings of the Spaniards, and the offering of
their service in his Archbishopric, would minister occasion unto the King of
Sweden, to draw nearer and nearer unto the country, (some of them, indeed,
having already very near approached unto his town of Coblentz) and that his
Electorall Highness was afraid thereby to be bereaved of succors convenient
for his Castle of Ehrenbreitstein; ^^mely, when (...) Rhinegrave ^^ke Boppart:
^ich is within (...) leagues of ^lentz.

^^renbreitstein ^^stle, is the ^^ne with Her^nstein Castle.


in regard that on the one side, the Spaniards had already made themselves
Masters of the chief Quarters and Passages; and that on the other side, the
Swedish had thereby been invited into those places: to prevent therefore all
further mischief, it was by his said Electorall Highness at this time
required, That all and every Spanish officers of what condition soever, shall
immediately with all their troops march forth of his Archbishopricke; some
reasonable satisfaction being by them given unto his subjects, for the domages
sustained by them. His Highness can see no cause or reason, why hereafter he
should accept of any Orders or Commanders, (contrary unto the Constitutions of
the Empire) either from the Spanish or Imperial Commissaries: he well
trusting to be as able now, as heretofore he has been, to keep up and
maintain his own Forts and passages: provided, that his means were no longer
dreynd away, his necessary succors hindered, and his passages not encumbred.
If therefore after all this warning, the Swedish party (now growing daily
stronger both in Horse and Foot,) should come to assault the said Spanish or
Imperial forces; or his own subjects driven into despair, should fall foul
upon them: his Electorall Dignity hereby protests himself innocent in the
matter; and to stand excused for it, by this his fair and friendly admonition.
And thus much has his Highness thought good to publish, for every man's
direction.

As for the Duke of Newburg, though he as yet personally did nothing against
this Neutrality; yet he afterward suffered Tilly to take his town of Newburg
in Bavaria, and then sent his Ambassador to the King, to justify that it was
not against the Neutrality.

Thus have we seen how badly this Neutrality was observed: and had it not by
much importunity been wrested from the King, What hopes the King of Sweden
lost, by yielding to this Truce.
Heidleberg and Franckendale (it is verily believed) had been his own; and
Cullen too, perchance, after that: Gustavus Horn might by that time likewise,
have made himself Master of Forcheim, and then might Tilly have cast his cap
at him. Nor would Hessen, Lunenburg, Todt, Bremen, and Banier, have suffered
Pappenheim so freely to have roaved up and down at his own pleasure: nor had
the Spaniards, finally, so quietly advanced themselves over the Mosell. But the
French Kings honor then lay upon it; he to retain the opinion of still being
a Catholic, must needs do something for that Religion; and the King of
Sweden out of an abundant goodness of nature, knew not how to deny such his
importunity. These inconveniences, do wise men suffer themselves to be
sometimes put unto by their Friends; even after they have warned those Friends,
of their foresight of these inconveniences. Thus came this Treaty of Neutrality
unto a mere nothing; the only advantage which the King of Sweden made of it,
was the resting and refreshing of his Army: which is a duty of nature that all
men owe unto their bodies. For though the affections and motions of the Soul,
be (like the Soul it self) restless and Spiritual: yet were it extremity of
injustice, to exact so much labor and continuance of a corpulent and restive
body, which is but mortal; as the Soul were willing at all times to require
of it, which is vntireable by being immortal. Turn we from Words now, unto
Deeds again.

Ian. 20. toward evening, his Majesty of Sweden returns with his Queen into
Franckford: The King re^urnes into Franckford.
which was some 4 days before the expiring of the Truce. No sooner were they
out, but the Rhinegrave falls upon Kirckberg in the Huntsruck, and takes it in
by assault; where 147 Italians and Burgundians were put to the sword: 100
Germans requited the saving of their lives, by becoming the Kings soldiers.
The Germans (we are to know) are every where spared: the delivery of their
nation, being the thing that the King professes to come for, into Germany.

In this time of the Truce, had 10000 Spaniards with long and continued marches
gotten out of the Low Countries, up to the river of Mosel; The Spanish ^asse
the Mosel,
and had already passed betwixt three and 4000. men: the two Regiments, namely,
of the Count of Nassaw, and Torquato. The Rhinegrave thereupon drawing all his
forces out of Boppart, Overwesel, and other places in the Duchy of Simmern, and
country of Triers; sets amain upon these 2 Regiments: and ^re defeated by the
Rhinegrave.
whereof one he utterly overthrew, forcing the other to retire into the
fastness of a wood. Here were 7 Colors obtained, and afterward presented
unto the King at Mentz: and about 3 days after, Rit-Master Humes a Scottish
man, brings in the eighth. The Spaniards resolving not to put it up so;
suddenly pass over 1800 horse, and disposing one Foot-Regiment in close
ambush; with the rest of their strength, tempt the Rhinegrave unto the
encounter. He hoping of the former fortune, They defeat the Rhinegrave again.
though he had but 600 horse in all with him: lost in the cloze of the
business some 300 men; himself and all the rest being put to the retreat, and
the young Earl of Nassau of Sarbrucken left behind him, wounded and taken
prisoner. The Spaniards after this, advanced more boldly through the Huntsruck;
and so onwards toward Franckendale. But news being Febr. 4. brought unto the
King at Franckford, of the Spaniards second passing of the Mosel, and of the
Rhinegraves defeat; his Majesty with all speed passes unto Mentz, to go after
his Army: which upon the first hearing of the Spaniards coming, had been sent
onwards toward the Mosel. The Horse which lay enquartered along the
Bergstraes, had been set over the Rhine by Oppenheim: some Regiments of Foot
having order presently to pass down the stream of the same river, toward
Baccharah. Upon the fa^^ of the Kings coming again retirin^
Of the near approaching of these forces, and of the Kings coming after them,
the Spaniards now hearing; voluntarily and of themselves, retire over the
Mosel, back again into Luxemberg. And here they contain themselves from
coming over again, until Easter following: at which time they heard the King
to be utterly gone out of the Palatinate.

And now begins the valiant Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar, to employ his time
and forces, The remain^ of the Bishopric of Me^ taken.
against the remnants of the Electorate of Mentz: by taking whereof, that whole
Country became universally subject unto the King of Sweden.

Upon Thursday Febr. 9. Babenhausen covered, by a Count of Jsberg.
was the Count of Isenberg (as I take it) sent to reprise Babenhausen: which
Town and Castle, Tilly had before taken from the Count of Hanaw. Upon the
sight now of 50 Swedish Rutters or Horsemen, and assurance of more forces that
followed; the garrison came to composition, and yielded to the Count of
Isenberg. The King restores it unto the Count of Hanaw.

The better to keep the Country toward the Mosel hereafter, the King resolves
upon the taking of Creutzenach, a fair town of the Palatinate upon the river
Nau; in the very Frontiers of the Duchy of Simmern, and belonging unto Prince
Lodowick Philip Duke of Simmern, brother to the Elector Palatine. Unto this
work whilst the King was a preparing, his Majesty of Bohemia, Frederick
Prince Elector Palatine, timely and safely there arrived. His Majesty was
waited upon by my Lord Craven; The King of Bohemia com^ unto the King of Sweden.
and had been lovingly accommodated by the Lords the States General for such
a journey, and honorably convoyed at their command with 2500 horse, which
waited upon his Majesty out of the Low Countries, till he had passed all the
danger. This Prince passing through Hessen, Hanaw, and the Wetteraw; recovered
into Franckford by Friday 10 a clock, Febr. 10. going the next day unto the
King of Sweden then at Hoest; betwixt whom there was a most loving interview.
The 2 Kings and Queen of Sweden, returned in all fair manner the same
evening, into Franckford. Sunday next (being Shrove-Sunday) he was royally
feasted by both their Majesty's of Sweden; who at every word gave him the Style
of King of Bohemia: which respect the young Landtgrave of Darmstat once
omitting, (whose Father had been no good neighbor to this Elector) the King
of Sweden expressed much displeasure at him for it. Wonderful welcome was this
Prince unto his own subjects of the Palatinate, who every way ran out to see
his Majesty, with infinite expressions of joy and contentation; (...) welcome
to (...) own people.
with many a hearty prayer, and tear, and high sounding acclamation. The King
of Sweden (it is said) in one of their first discourses, told the King of
Bohemia, of the enemies great strength, and the difficulty himself had
thereupon; to hold the countries which he had already overrunne: and that he
was constrained therefore, to keep many and strong garrisons in the towns of
the Palatinate. But this he assured his Majesty withal, that he desired
nothing more, then to be able to restore it wholly unto him; and to see him
once again well settled in it.

These entertainements being overpassed; the King of Sweden strives to prevent
the Spring, by bringing an earlier show of Colors into the field, then Flora
had yet put forth any. Upon Thursday Febr. 16. he first sets forward from
Franckford to Mentz, and so onwards toward Creutzenach: the King of Bohemia
following, and lying at Oppenheim. Before the Kings arrival at Creutzenach,
had the Boores of the Country taken up all the passages upon the hills, and
kept a very orderly watch against the enemies in the town: thus showing their
love and diligence to do some service for their new-come Prince. On Saturday
Febr. 18. the King first presented a small army of 1800 foot, some few troops
of horse, and 4 half Cannons, before the town; because he supposed to make but
an easy work of it. This town is situated 5 little Dutch miles from Mentz,
and 10 from Franckford; in as pleasant and rich a soil, as any of the
Palatinate. The river Nau or Nah, runs through the midst of it; which being
crossed by a Bridge, betwixt two Market places, gives name unto the Town:
Creutzenach, signifying Crossing the Nah. A fair Castle it has upon the hill,
which before these Wars was a dwelling house only: the lofty situation
giving it the command over the Town. Both Town and Castle had some 600 men in
garrison: The siege of Creutzenach. The Story whereof we have received partly
from a Letter written by a Scottish Commander unto my Lord Reay: and par^ly
from the R^lation by wo^^ of mouth mad^ by Sir Jaac^ Ashlye, at h^ late being
in England.
whereof one half almost were Germans, and the rest Wallons and Burgundians.
They had a Magazine of bread and wine, for twelve months provision. The first
view the King took of the Town, was upon the lowest side; and where he had
thought to have begun: but that he found so well fortified with Outworkes,
Seconds, and Retreats, one work within another, that he called them the Devils
works. He quickly discovered, that there was no attempting that way: yea
judged by the best soldiers it was, that it could not have been a business
of less then a fortnight or three weeks time, to have mastered all these
works, and so to have come at the Town. Altering his course therefore, and
deviding his little Army into two parts, he by fair day light brings them on
by another side, and lodges them within Musket shot, or 150 pases of the very
walls: yea Lieftenant Colonel George Douglasse (a brave soldier then newly
come up to the King) having first run his lines, sets himself down with
some three hundred men, (the most of them being the same Scottish that had
stormed Oppenheim Castle) even in the very Port. Here lay Douglasse all the
night following: notwithstanding the place were so hot, that the enemy killed
him some 47 men, with their shooting upon him; both from the walls, and Port
above him.

On Sunday, the King took a full view of the Castle on the lands side; which
he found to be regularly and modernly fortified, and so well flancked with
small works one within another, that he called it the Devils head. His
Majesty now finding, both Town and Castle likely enough to dispute the matter
with him; immediately sends to Mentz for more arguments: whence the next day two
more Regiments and all his Cannon both great and small came unto him. Two of
these Cannons the King causes to be planted before the Ports: wherewith there
was a breach made, through which the Town was entered. Skaling ladders are
immediately set unto the Breach, and diverse gotten in, whereof whilst some are
earnest in beating away the garrison, ^he Town ^onne.
others are as busy with shovels and pickaxes to throw away the horse-dung
from the inside of the Sally-port, with which it had been mured and damm'd up.
This Port Lieftenant Colonel Dowglasse immediately forcing open, brings in his
men that way also.

The garrison perceiving the Town to be won, run immediately toward the
Castle: fleeing so fast, that they had no time to break down the bridge. One
thing was here very remarkable and wondered at, by such strangers as were not
before acquainted with the exact justice of the Swedish Discipline: namely,
that the Kings soldiers being now Masters of the Town, marched so civilly
through the streets, and so quietly placed themselves in their order upon the
Market places; that no man so much as offered to stir out of his rank, to
plunder or ransack any house or person: nor once to knock at a door which
they found shut. The civilitie of ^he Swedish ^ouldiours.
The Burgers admiring at this civilitie in the soldiers, begin to put off all
fear of having their houses rifled; and after an hour and half (or such a
matter) begin to take so much courage unto themselves, as to look out at the
windows; and the sight of the soldiers becoming more familiar unto them,
they open their doors, and with much plenty and heartinesse, unaskt; bring
forth bread and wine unto them; making wonderful expressions of their joy,
that they were so well rid of their overburthensome garrison; that their town
was now fallen into the Kings hands; and above all, that their natural Prince
the King of Bohemia, was now so near at hand with them. In sign of all
freedom, were their doors set open; and diverse Gentlemen were even invited
into their houses: Yea a Commander of our Nation going into a house to write a
Letter, found himself even disturbed with their pressing of courtesies upon
him; with urging him to eat and drink with them; with expressing their joy;
and with asking questions about their Prince.

The town thus won, the enemy from the Castle on the hill (which hung over
the town) shot amain into the streets, This was not Lieftenant Colonel
Dowglasse.
and there was Captain Dowglasse shot through the heart. That men might
therefore go up and down unaym'd at, was there a Blind drawn cross the
street next unto the Castle. The Castle hill is very steep; and so near unto
the Town, that the foot of it even touches the very houses: nor is there any
wall between. The Castle it self was of no strength; it was the situation
only, and the continued works, (from the very top unto the bottom almost)
which made it so strong a place. The Second view of it, was at a distance taken
by the King the same Monday night; when himself going prying up and down at
the foot of it, was the foremost man; his great Commanders coming all hard
behind him. All this time did the Enemy out of their next works, shoot and
fling stones and firebrands amayne at him: The King in some danger i^ viewing
of the Castle.
one stone being said to have hit him upon the head, and missed but little of
having brayned him. The Kings sight being naturally none of the sharpest at a
distance, he looking behind him, spies a Sergeant (whom he very well knew) to
whom he immediately calls by his name; Come hither Thou, such a one; thou
shall have 100 Dollars to go up and see what the enemy does in the next
Traverse, and to bring me a perfect view of what thou there discoverest. The
Sergeant did so, came down safely, and had his money. Being down, the King
laying himself along the sloape of the hill; upon his back almost, (that is,
more upon his back then upon his side) commands the Sergeant to come and lie
upon him, and to show him what he had discovered. The Sergeant did so: laid
himself so upon the King, that his back lying upon the Kings bosom and
breast, and his further arm over the Kings shoulder, (both their faces being
toward the enemy) he there points with his other hand toward the Traverse,
to describe the enemies posture unto the King. But the Kings Judgment (which
is a Curious one) being not yet satisfied; he commands off the Sergeant, and
clambers up himself to the very corner of that Traverse: where having
satisfied himself, he at his coming down speaks it aloud unto his army, Now
will I have this Castle by to morrow five a clock.

Instantly thereupon was there order given to begin the Approaches: and that
night they brake the ground about three pikes length from the rising of the
hill, under the enemies works. The Appro^hes begun by Rolling Tren^hes.
A line being here run, 80 Muskettyers were lodged in it before morning. The
hill being stony in many places, the soldiers were feign to break it with
pickaxes; and to climb up that steepy place with great difficulty, scarce
able to hold their feet many times. At the end of this first line, was there
(the next morning) another line run, even unto the point of a great Ravelin
of the enemies. In this Trench, my Lord Marquess Hamilton (out of his desire
to satisfy and inform himself) being something far advanced alone by
himself; was friendly advised by the King not to be so hazzardous, nor to
adventure his person singly, so near unto the enemies.

The lines being by Tuesday night perfected, a mine was presently dug;
directly under the Ravelin aforesaid. This being the next day finished, the
King caused about three a clock in the afternoon to be sprung. The mine, it is
true, sprung not altogether so clearly forward, A mine Sprung.
as it might have done, but something backwards withal; whereby some of the
soldiers passages were encumbred with loose earth and rubbish. And yet all
considered, it wrought well enough: seeing it blew open the point of the said
Ravelin, huffing up many of the Defendants into the air, and leaving the rest
more naked and open within the work. Hereupon was the assault given, in this
following manner:

Colonel Winckle commanding in Chief over the foot; three Captains of his
Regiment with some 350 men, and diverse English and French Gentlemen volunteers,
The assault.
came first into the breach: among all which, my Lord Craven,
Lieftenant-Colonell Talbot, Master Robert Marsham, and Master Henry Wind,
marched in the first File. The Hill was so steep where they approached, that
the enemy by darting down of Partisans and Halberts, casting down of great
stones, flinging of Firebrarnds, The Swedes b^ing beaten (...)
and rolling down of great pieces of Timber, forced the assaylants unto a
retreat. And whereas other soldiers would roundly have come running off;
these only turned aside a little under the enemies Ravelin, where they stood
safely enough. In this first service, was Lieftenant-Colonell Talbot shot in
the Shoulder: who being rolled down the Hill, was fetched off by Master
Marsham, and led into the Town. The King, (then at the Foot of the Hill)
perceiving his men to be beaten off; call them Pultrons, and all to
be-cowardied them: presently commanding the skaling-ladders to be in another
place, fall on again.
set unto the Rampire of the Ravelin. And here his Majesty having taken notice
of the valor of my Lord Craven, in a familiar and encouraging manner claps him
upon the Shoulder, bidding him to go on again. The young Lord did so: and was
the very first man, that gained up to the top; where he valiantly came to push
of pike with the enemy: himself receiving an honorable wound with the thrust
of an Halbert in his thigh; which was not found to be dangerous. Those of our
English Gentlemen before named, behaved themselves right courageously; being
next unto my Lord Craven, and in the very heat of the danger. And this was the
manner of the fight, for two hours together almost; the defendants bearing
themselves like tall Soldiers. At last, the High Dutch being in mutiny with
the Wallons and Burgundians, (who were resolved to defend the place) one of the
enemies began to speak of Quarter, and of Terms of yielding: A very good
service done by the Lord Craven.
which the Lord Craven (who was still the formest man) wisely apprehending;
reaches out his hand unto one of the enemies Captains, and undertook upon his
honor to bring him to the King. The enemies Muskets hereupon gave over
playing; though the Kings ordnance (of which he had gotten two small pieces
mounted from the bridge of the Town) still continued shooting. The besieged
^^rly.
The King told the Captain to this purpose. That he and his fellows had made
him lose his time, had killed his men, and that they deserved but ill conditions
at his hand: yet nevertheless he was contented upon their submitting to his
mercy, and present laying down of Arms, to let them go out with bag and
baggage, and with their swords; but not with their Colors: which, says the
King, and yield.
you shall leave all furled up together in one Chamber, and so march forth of
the Castle. These hard conditions were consented unto: for which, the
imputation must rest upon the Commanders, and not upon the soldiers; who did
their duties like tall fellows. The King hereupon calls off his men from the
assault, and sent a guard presently into the Castle. The next morning being
Wednesday, Ianu. 22. the King entered the place; giving the enemies leave to
depart with their Arms and baggage, but not with their Colors: adding again
this further condition, That they should not serve against him in six months,
on this side the Mosel: marry if they found him on the other side, let them do
their worst and spare not. To convoy them over that River, the King now
assigned them horse and carriages: where they might tell their fellows the
Spaniards, that it was now too late for them to come to the relief of
Creutzenach; which, it was given out, they would again have passed the Mosel
to have done. The Germans took present pay for the Kings service.

There were lost on the Kings side, those three Captains of Colonel Winckles
Regiment, Lieftenant-Colonell Talbot, who was the very next man unto my Lord
Craven: Captain Dowglasse, The losses on the Kings side.
a French Marquess, Brother to the Duke of Mambrun, with two or three other
French Gentlemen of quality: and of common soldiers 250. Hurt men: Colonel
Winckle himself, who was shot in the foot; my Lord Craven, wounded in the
thigh, etc. Sir Francis Vane, (brother to the Earl of Westmerland) shot in the
huckle bone; Master Robert Marsham, hurt with a Firebrand, and a large stone on
the thigh; Master Wynd, shot in the shoulder: with some others. Captain Ramsye
Quartermaster to my Lord Marquess Hamilton, was made Governor of the Town.
The King gave order for new fortifications, leaving 300 men in it: and
directions where to have 300 more, upon occasion. The Magazine or Storehouse,
he would not have opened nor meddled withal, but to be supplied only by
exchanging new for old, either of wine or victuals. The soldiers in the mean
time, he wills to be fed by the Burgers. All this being done, the King returns
again toward Franckeford.

By this time had Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar, The rest of Bishopric Mentz
taken
taken in the residue of the Bishop of Mentz his towns. In the Duchy of
Wirtenberg, bordering South of the Palatinate; all things likewise wrought
successively. Gustavus Horn had taken Hailbrun with other Towns of that
Duchy, the Christmas before. The Imperial garrison of Shorndorff in January
after, begins to trusse up, carrying their ordnance with them to Diensburg:
removing their office of Receipt or Imperial Exchecker (which had been there
settled for the paying in of the Military Contributions, Some action^ of the
Swed^^ in Wirtenber^
raised out of that Duchy) unto Munchen in Bavaria. Many of the soldiers
turned to the Kings party. Elwang is also taken, the garrison marching into
Dunkelspiel; whither the Swedes begun presently to follow them: as resolved not
to suffer an Imperialist to roost any where. Glad were the Protestants: the
pressures having layne sore upon their Country, ever since the Count of
Furstenberg had brought then under contribution.

Now began there some levyes to be made for the King, The Palatine of
Birckenfel^ makes some new levyes f^ the King.
in this Duchy, and in the lower Alsatia: even all the Country over, from the
River of Neckar in Wirtenberg, unto Strasburg upon the Rhine. The Count
Palatine Christian of Birckenfeld (of the Palsgraves family) whose Town and
Honor lies in the little Country of the Hunstruck, so often heretofore
mentioned, was to be their General.

These new levied men, though they took in some smaller Market Towns as they
came along to their place of Rendezvous, (which was to be about Strasburg) yet
were they rather robberies; then Warfarings. By Rotenburg, a Town in
Wirtenberg upon the Neckar; they pillaged Mule, and the Abbey of Marchtall:
near Strasburg, some six troops of horse of them, and one company of foot,
pass the Rhine upon Friday, Feb. 10. where they drive the Imperialists out of
some little Towns of Gersheim, and Appenwyer; and in revenge of the death of
four of their fellows, they burn Commerswyer. They offered to take
Offenberg, a pretty strong Town (which was the best thing they did) but having
no Ordnance to do it withal; the Imperial garrison rather laughed at them.
They spoiled the fort of Faussenburg (Stauffenburg some write it) belonging to
William Marquess of Baden. Their General hearing of these Freshmens tricks
of theirs, called them off presently; whereupon the next day after our
Ashwednesday, they pass the Rhine at Strasburg again, all to be laden with
their new gotten luggage. Their General, the Palatine Christian, the next
Friday, Feb. 17. going before to carry his Lady to wait upon the Queen of
Sweden at Franckford; leaves his Lieftenant-Colonell to bring up the troops
after him, to be joined with the Kings: where, no doubt, they learned better
discipline. All this did but stir up the Imperial Commissary Ossa, to do
the more mischief in those parts after they were gone. In this time, had the
Count of Hanaw taken in the Town of Drusenheim; with the two new Forts (built
by the Imperialists) upon the Rhine. ^usenheim and ^ichtenaw ta^^n by the ^arle
of Ha^^w.
And the Town of Leichtenaw after that: both being near unto Strasburg. This
Drusenheim, did the King bestow upon the Count of Hanaw for his labor.

To draw nearer home. At Spiers, were 700 new Swedish Soldiers received, which
were billeted both upon the Lawyers and Friars, as well as upon the Burgers.
The first service they did, was the saving of this fair City from burnning,
whereunto ten Boores of Lauterburg had been hired: for which they were
afterward executed. The State of Spiers,
Their second service was, the quieting of a mutiny in the City; raised by
occasion of the Spanish garrison of Franckendale; who upon confidence of some
Correspondency in the Town; had been bold to come before it: and being
strengthened with their fellows of Vdenheim or Philipsburg, had well hoped to
have taken in this City. But of this purpose they were defeated: and the Monks
being discovered to have laid the plot with the Spanish, have Soldiors put into
their Cloisters.

By this it appears, that Heidleberg, Franckendale, and Vdenheim were not
hitherto so straightly blocked up, but that the Spanish would go out with
strong Partees now and then. And as for Franckendale, and of Heidleberg,
Franckendale, and Vdenheim.
Don Philip de Sylva had by letters assured the Archduchesse, that he had both
men and victuals enough to hold out a siege of nine months; in despite of
the King of Sweden. Nor do I believe Heidleberg to be in worse case. And this
was the State of the Palatinate, and of the Kings Army, at this present.

Believed generally it has been, that the King of Sweden (now after the
taking of Creutzenach) would have put Don Philip to it, to make good his word.
And feared by those of Cullen it likewise was, that he would have had a blow at
them too, in the next place. But the King at this time, hearing of Tillyes
being upon the wing again; and that he had lately flowne upon Gustavus Horn
about Bamberg: was enforced to let the Conquest of the Palatinate alone for a
time; to countermand his Horse, which were already upon their march to besiege
Franckendale; and to accept of a kind of submission from those of Cullen. The
story of which business, is the time now to communicate unto you.

Ferdinand the Archbishop and Elector of Cullen, Bishop of Paderborn, etc.
brother to the Duke of Bavaria, and a prime member of the Catholic League; is
a Prince of great means, and of very large Jurisdiction. He was the man that
set out Pappenheim: to whom when the Catholic Leaguers had given a Commission
for a flying Army, the Elector of Cullen furnished him both with men and money,
in his Dominions. He, whilst the Swedish tempest was yet far off from him in
Franconia; wisely begins to think how to keep it off, should the wind once
blow it that way. In a bodily fear of his Bishopric he was, and could have
wished that the Emperor had not proceeded so roundly against the Protestants,
and so far provoked the King of Sweden to repay the Catholics in their own
coin again for it: Was there ever such an Imperial Decree (says Cullen) to
cause all Cloisters to be restored, for which we are now losing whole
Bishoprics? About the end of October, therefore, 1631. he agrees with the
States of Cullen for the summoning of a Diet, to consult together about the
means of defense: to whom his Electorall Highness made this following
proposition. That seeing the Empire was now brought into such a strait; there
was no remedy fairly to relieve it, but for the State to agree upon a good
round Subsidy. They consent to levy 200000 Dollars: with Condition, that the
moneys should be expended no otherways, then for the necessary defense of the
Bishopric; Diet at Cullen
and for the paying of the soldiers, which they then agreed to have raised,
over which one of the Counts of Isenberg was to be General. The money, by
three even portions to be levied upon the Gentry, the Cloisters, and the
several Cities of the Bishopric. The King of Sweden working down lower
toward them, this Subsidy now proved too little: whereupon in December 14
following, the Elector sets out a Brief for the drawing of a voluntary
Contribution out of the richer sort: That for Gods sake, his Mother, and Saints
cause; they would give what they could spare, toward the upholding of the
Roman religion: promising that the money so given, should be to no other
purpose employed: but be put into a chest with 2 locks in the Carthusians
Church: of which the Prior to have one key, and his Highness Steward the
other. The Brief he commands to be first read in every Church, and then the
Copy to be set upon the Church doors.

The same day Sennight did the Town of Cullen set out another Brief something
contradictory to the former; for they would have a Chest placed in the Chamber
of their City, to put the Benevolence into: which was to be expended for the
safety of the City alone.

But for all this, neither Bishop nor City durst longer trust unto their own
strengths: the Elector joining with the other Catholic Leaguers in sending the
Who went from Cullen Ian. 7. 1631.
Bishop of Wurtsburg their common Ambassador unto the French King, to desire
his protection, or mediation at least, with the King of Sweden in their
behalf. At which very time, both the Elector had his Ambassador with the King
of Sweden, for a Neutrality; and the City their Agents, that they might not be
infested. The Elector being a member of the Catholic League; the Treaty of
Neutrality with him came to nothing, but the town of Cullen obtained their
desire of Neutrality, upon these following Conditions.

The King of Sweden in his Preface to the Articles, The Kings A^ticles of
Neutrality, with t^ City of Culle^
gives them to know, That seeing his own Expedition into Germany, had
principally been for the deliverance of the Protestants, from the cruel
oppressions which they endured from the Papists, and that He very well knew,
how hardly they had been used, even in this City of Cullen: upon this
Condition, first of all, would he condescend unto a Neutrality with them;
namely, that those persecutions, under whatsoever color or pretense inflicted;
should with all speed be released, and that,

1. First, Free exercise of Religion should be granted unto them; wherein they
should no ways be hindered: and that the ordinary Process which used every
year to be set out by the Ecclesiastical Court, for the forbidding of such
Exercises of the Protestants, should be taken away from thenceforward.

2. That the Protestants should enjoy the freedom of the City, and of their
private Wards and Companies; and be received into their Colleges, equally with
the Catholics: and that Act of Common-Counsaile made some years to the
contrary, to be cancelled.

3. Which former Article, is likewise to be understood of the Protestants
Children, that are borne free of the City.

4. All liberty of trade and Commerce in the said City, shall be left as free
for the Protestants, as for the Catholics.

5. Protestants shall not be bound to be married by Popish Priests.

6. Nor shall their youth be enforced to be taught or brought up, in Popish
Schools.

7. The City shall not make it self partaker with the Kings enemies, in any
counsel or act of hostility: and shall give all aid of Contributions unto
him, and withdraw it from his enemies: whose Bills of Exchange that City shall
not accept of.

8. The City shall either grant free passage and thorow-fare, both by their
town and territories unto both parties, (the King and his enemies) or else
deny it unto both parties.

9. It shall be free for his Majesty's Officers and Servants, to pass and
repasse through their Town and Territories: and have free leave of staying
there, for the dispatch of their business.

10.The City shall give way to the King to settle an Agent of his in their
Town; who shall take care that no fraud be committed in the observation of
these Articles of Neutrality.

11. That unto whosoever has obtained of his Majesty, free liberty of
trafficking in the parts near the Rhine, now subject unto him: as also unto
those that are subjects unto his Majesty, or Confederates, or that do traffic
with them; the City shall allow all manner of free and undisturbed liberty of
trading, within their said Town and Territories.

Upon these easy terms did the great City of Cullen divert their so much
feared invasion; which they may thank the General Tilly for: for had not he,
at this instant, fallen on upon Gustavus Horn; Gustavus Adolphus, perchance,
ere long had fallen upon Cullen. But now was it believed all the Kings Camp
over, (yea and feared by the King himself too) That the Count of Tilly had
utterly defeated Gustavus Horn, and beaten him all to pieces. The story of
which business, we will here afford you, from the hands and relations of the
Generals on both sides; Horn, and Tilly.

Most gracious King:
I shall here rightly inform your Majesty, Gustavus Horn letter to the King,
concerning the action betwixt him (...) Tilly at Bamber
of all the proceedings at Bamberg. This City, though spacious, yet so open on
all sides it lies; has such slight walls about it, and so to be commanded from
diverse hills thereby; that my self and others made it a great question,
whether the place were to be held or no: or whether it were possible to be so
fortified, as to be fit for us to enquarter in. But the reasons for the keeping
of it prevailing, (especially after we made our selves sure of the He means
Duke William o^ Saxon-Weymar
Duke of Weymars succors) we thereupon gave order for the making of
retrenchments; casting out to every Regiment, how much they were to make up.
Herein the Colonels and Companies of the old Regiments, did their parts: and
much better would the work have gone on, had the Count of Solms his Regiment
been used unto labor, Tillies vant curriers appear.
and not have loitered it so much. The enemy having first dressed an ambush,
presented some certain horsemen very near unto the City, Febr. 28. betwixt 12
and one a clock at noone: of which I being advised, gave present order for
every man to be in readiness; instantly dispatching away the Count of Solms
unto our Horse-guards without the Town, that they should by no means engage
themselves in fight with the enemy. My self in the mean time, hastened to go
the Round about the Trenches; commanding such places to be enclosed, as were
yet open: and sending the Lord Kochtitzky withal, unto Colonel Bauditzens
Regiment, to put themselves into readiness; which Regiment was in their
quarters at that time within the City. ^orne prepares ^r resistance.
But Kochtitzky not meeting with any of the Officers, sent the word unto
Lieftenant-Colonell Bilaw by a horseman of the Regiment: whose message Bilaw
misunderstanding, marched presently into the field, even very near unto the
Ambush. When I coming to the Horse-guards saw the Regiment so far advanced,
I imagined them to be in very great danger, and that they would put us all into
confusion, should they be once forced to the retreat: whereupon I gave present
order for them to retire again into the Suburbs. In the mean time, (seeing
none of the enemies to appear, but a few loose horse only, which had at first
showed themselves before the little wood near the town side) my self and the
Count of Solms, went to give order to every horse-Regiment for their place of
Alarm: at which instant, those horse-troopes which I had before sent over the
water for discovery; came back with news of the enemies being at hand with
his whole Army, ^illy comes ^ith his whole ^rmy,
even very close unto the City. Upon this news, I sent present order unto
Lieftenant-Colonell Bilaw by the Quartermaster of his Regiment, that he should
retire himself behind the Work, which Count Solms his Regiment were now
laboring upon; and there to stay for the safeguard of the Pioners. This my
Order was executed indeed; but so late ere they went about it; that in their
turning faces about to go thither, two Regiments of the enemy charged them
upon their croopes, ^^d takes part (...) Horns works.
and disordered them. At which sight, the Regiment of Solms, (who were to have
made good their own trenches) being much affrighted and confounded; presently
quit their station thereupon. And notwithstanding that my self, (so soon as I
was informed of the matter) made haste with the Count of Solms unto the very
place where the enemy was already fallen in; and with some few men (whom we
made to turn faces about) drove the enemy quite out again; Horn beats them
off again
recovered our ground, and round beset it again with some of the Count of
Solms and Colonel Mufflers Regiment: for we could not possibly so soon bring
on any of the old Regiments, out of their Quarters within the City, and the
other Suburbs. Yet was all this to no purpose, seeing that no sooner was my
back turned to give order for other places; but they presently left their
ground again, running at last quite over the bridge into the City: yea do
what I and their own Colonel the Count of Solms could, Henry William Count of
Sol^ wounded. Which woun^ putting him into a fever, died in Marc^ following of
at Swinford.
(who was now shot in the thigh) yet were we not able to make them to stand
their ground a little, nor give on again upon the enemy. Hereupon, one
Foote-Regiment of the enemies, (which we judged to be Farenbachs) pressed over
the bridge into the Town; whom I, with a few musketeers of the Count of
Thurns Regiment, (which were quickly seconded by the Swedish musketeers) once
again drove off; and that with remarkable loss on their party. Thus
recovered I the bridge again, which presently causing to be broken down; I
there disputed the point so long with the enemy, They get ov^^ the bridge; a^
Horn drives the^ over again^
until I could send away the dross and baggage keepers of the Army, and had
taken all our Ordnance off the Carriages, and gotten them a ship-boord.

This done, I in good order marched off with the Infantery, the horsemen of
Bauditzens Regiment, and the Dragooners: which last, missing their way in the
dark, gat into Kitzing afterward. All our Company, safely recovered into
Eltman: at which town passing over the bridge, Horn retires out of Bambet
over the May^
I kept me on this side of the Mayn. The enemies Dragooners and Crabats,
followed us a far off; not much desiring to engage themselves with us. As for
the other Regiments of our horse, who were enquartered part on this side of the
Mayn, and part at Halstat and Kemeren, (who likewise marched away on the North
side of the Mayn) they having according to my direction, broken and burnt down
the bridge of Halstat, retired into Hasfurt. For this reason, my self having
first broken down the bridge at Eltman, ^eaking the ^ridge behind ^m.
drew also to that place with those troops I then had with me; where I
recollected our Army together again; those only excepted, which out of fear
were quite run away. But the enemy being readily furnished by the country
people with timber and other necessaries, he presently caused the bridge of
Halstat to be repaired again: ^illy repaireth ^^e bridge, and ^^llowes Horn.
beyond which having lodged himself, with diverse Regiments of horse, he the
second of March again showed himself unto us at Tzeill, a mile from Hasfurt.
Upon sight whereof, I immediately sent forth a troop of horse to discover the
place, where it was possible for the enemy so suddenly to have passed the
river, now that the bridge was broken down. This troop brought back 3
prisoners with them; of whom I learned, how that the enemy had come over at
Halstat with 4 Regiments, and the manner how they were lodged. Of them I also
further enquired, which way I might come to surprise them at unawares; so that
I sifted out thus much from them; That it was not very difficult for me to
march through the woods, and by ways, and so to come upon them. Having gotten
this Intelligence, I set forwards with the Cavallery; and some 2 hours before
day, gave a Camisado upon one of their Quarters, which was lodged by Oberheyd
within a mile of Bamberg. It was the Quarter of Planckharts Regiment, and young
Merodi, all which, (excepting 4 troops which some half hour before were gone
out upon a Convoy) I utterly ruinated with fire and sword, Horn surprises and
cuts in pieces 2 Regime^ts of Tillies horse.
obtaining 2 Cornets; the rest, together with the baggage, being all burned.
The Crabats which lay in the head of the Quarter, so soon as ever they
perceived the business, betook them to their heels; some venturing through
the Mayn, where a many of them were drowned: others betaking themselves into
the mountains; of whom diverse were afterward slain, I getting one of their
Cornets: the rest gate up to the Dragooners Quarters, in the village of
Staffelbach; where they recovered a Churchyard environed with a very high wall.
These thought I to have destroyed by fire, for that I had no musketeers with
me: but perceiving my self unlikely that way to prevail, and that they might
easily have been relieved from other the enemies garrisons, (which were hard
at hand) I was enforced to give them over, and return again unto our Quarters
at Hasfurt.

The fourth of the same month did the enemy again show himself, near unto
Tzeill, Tilly intends be revenged
about one a clock in the afternoon; marching presently with his whole army
toward Hasfurt: with an intent (no doubt) to revenge himself of the late
slaughter we made of his two Regiments. Whilst therefore I sent the Scullery
and Drabblers of the army away before, with the baggage and heavier luggage
toward Schweinfurt; my self retired after in good order: without the loss of
any one man, recovering into Schweinfurt also. Here having given order for all
necessary provisions, and left there in garrisons the Regiments of Carl Hord,
of Colonel Truchses and the Count of Solms: and lodged the Horse conveniently
in the villages about Schweinfurt; (some, half a mile off; some, a mile; and
some, a mile and a half from the Town, and behind it) my self with the rest
of the Infantery, took up our Quarter at Geltersheim; attending there the
enemies further purposes.

Geltersheim, March. 7. 1631.

Having thus by Gustavus Horns relation, learned what was done on his side; we
will also afford you the other part of the action, and what was done on
Tillyes side. And that out of his own Relation too, printed afterward at
Auspurg: leaving nothing out that may make for the Relaters glory.

General Tilly report of the same action.
After the Swedish had taken Bamberg, February 11. 1631. the Lord Marshall
Gustavus Horn, together with George Bernard Duke of Saxon-Weymar, settled their
Quarter in the same City. But long they here stayed not: for his Excellency the
Count of Tilly marching with 12000 men out of Forcheim, Observe that Horns
letter ^eares the old ^tile; and Til^es the new. ^illy (again) ^as deceived:
it ^as not Duke ^ernard of Wey^ar, (he was ^ow with the ^ing:) but his ^rother
Ernestus
March 8. toward Bamberg; the same night about 4 a clock he showed himself
before the same City; as likewise the Swedish Cavallery did unto him, near
unto the gallows. The Tillyish Horsemen stood not long considering upon the
matter, but the Crabats, the Dragooners, and the Regiment of Cronenberg, fell
with such fury upon the Swedish, that they utterly dispersed them; forced five
Regiments to run away; took five hundred prisoners (amongst which were some
chief Officers) killing a great many. The Swedish retired themselves into the
Suburbs, but they were so followed with our Ordnance, that they were glad to
leave both City and Suburbs: Gustavus Horn with a few horsemen, betaking
himself into Schweinfurt. Here was the noble Count of Sultz slain on our
side, besides another Lieftenant-Colonell of great note. The next day being the
ninth of March, the General Tilly entered into the City with his Ordnance.

By comparing these two relations together, you may observe, that Gustavus Horn
omits his loss of 500 prisoners; and General Tilly is content to pass over
his loss of the two Regiments, which was 4 times so much. One thing is
defective in Tillies relation: that he says Horn immediately retired into
Schweinfurt: which was not till 3 or 4 days after. Tilly had the better of it,
in that he put Horn unto the retreat, and continued after it, Master of the
field.

And yet was all this but a mere Cacade, a Squirt; as the King called it: which
was, for all that, the first action of any considerable honor or comfort, which
those of that party could cheer up their drooping hopes withal, since the
going down of their side at the great Battle of Leipsich. Much noise, was
there made of this little. They that make much of little, it is a sign they have
not much. By Gustavus Horns letter may the Reader find, where the fault on the
Swedish side was: in the Count of Solms his Regiment, namely; who had not been
long enough under the Swedish Discipline, to learn either to You may perceive
by the 45 Article in our Book of the Swedish Discipline, that every Band and
Regiment were to be their ow^ Pyoners, to make up their own Trenches and to
fortify their own Quarters: which Solms his men were not yet used unto.
labor, or to fight. Horn (me thinks) was to blame too, to be so careless, as
to have no skouts abroad. The King having heard of Horns forsaking of Bamberg,
some 4 or 5 days before the receipt of his letter; resolves to succor his
Felt-Marshall, and to be revenged of that Veillard (that old man) as he called
the Count of Tilly. Whilst therefore his Majesty is employed in drawing his
old soldiers out of their garrisons near unto him; in putting of new levied
men into their places; and in dispatching away Messengers unto Duke William of
Saxon-Weymar, and the General Banier, to come and meet him with their forces
upon the way: it shall not be amiss to go back again, to fetch up Gustavus
Horns Story; even from the time of the Kings former leaving of him in
Franconia, until this last business of Bamberg, betwixt him and the Count of
Tilly. For this has been our Method in the First part of our Intelligencer.

Gustavus Horns Story.
THERE is (at least) a show of force, as well as a reality of wise carriage and
gentle usage; required to the settling of a Country, as there has been to the
conquering. Whereas, therefore, the King of Sweden in his late Declaration or
Manifesto at Wurtsburg, had endeavored to reduce the Dukedom and Bishopric of
Franconia into the form of a Province; by introducing (as the Romans used) a
new order of Government among the subjects of his new Duchy: to see these
Orders there well observed, was one of the reasons why Gustavus Horn, the
Field-marshall, or second person unto the King himself; was at his Majesty's
coming away left with an army of 6000 or 7000 men about Wurtsburg. And this, I
collect, by the stillnesse of actions in those parts; to have been the first
of his business. I find no mention of any motions of his, all that month of
October; in the beginning whereof the King parted from him. Another reason for
which quietness of his, may likewise be; that he was not to stir from those
parts, till the General Tilly were gone out of them; and that for fear of his
attempts, or the peoples desire of alterations.

But the Count of Tilly being now in the end of November past beyond Norimberg;
his divided army gone toward Bavaria and the upper Palatinate; and the
Subjects of Franconia withal, in an indifferent posture of quietness: then
begins the Swedish Marshall to look about him. Tilly in his late march from
the King toward Norimberg, had with small labor recovered the towns of
Mergentheim, Winsh^im and Rotenburg from the Swedish: these Towns therefore,
so soon as Tillyes back was turned, are in the first place set upon. The City
of Kitzing (a good Town, some twelve English miles to the East of Wurtsburg)
is by the beginning of December brought to composition: Kitzing takes the oath
of fidelity. This Town, anciently belonging unto the Marquess^ of Onspach, wa^
Anno 1629. taken from them by the Emperor, and given to the Bishop of Wurtsburg.
upon the fourth of which month, it takes the Oath of Fidelity, unto the King
and Crown of Sweden. This (that I may tell you once for all) is the form of
Oath generally tendered by the King, unto the Germans: and this is the clause
that sticks in their stomakes most, and makes a many of them to boggle at it;
in that (namely) they swear not unto the Roman Empire, but to the Crown of
Sweden; as if hereafter they were to be mere Provincialls of that Kingdom.
Whether this were solely the impulsive, or but the assisting cause only, I
cannot tell: but this is sure, that the Kings broad Seal and Commission for
the said Oath, was the same night privately torn down from the door of the
Guildhall or Statehouse, where it had been affixed. This Act discovering, that
there were some Imperially affected in the Town, and casting a jealousy upon
all; the Citizens are therefore generally disarmed.

Winshaim, in the next place, Winshaim take in a garrison.
a free City upon the small River of Aisch (some ten English miles to the
South-East of Kitzing) accepts of a garrison of 400 Swedish. More Westerly
also, and toward the head of the said River, and near unto Rotenburg, is
Gebsattle (as I find it written) presently upon that, likewise taken. The Town
of Mergentheim, seated more Westerly upon the River Tauber; is now about the
middle of December, again set upon. Here did the Tillian garrison make some
resistance at the first: but the Marshall Horn fetching more men and Cannon out
of Wurtsburg; first of all defeats 800 new-come Imperialists, who had thought
to have forced a Quarter, and to have thrust themselves into the Town.
Mergentheim recovered.
The garrison after this being more roundly besieged, and for two or three
days battered; perceiving by the defeat of the former, no more succors likely
to relieve them: they on Friday, December 16. come to a composition. The next
day, having obtained Soldiers conditions, of Arms, Bag and baggage, etc.
they march out toward Nordlingen: whereabout their General Tilly then was.

The Imperill City of Rotenburg upon the Tauber, in which Count Tilly had also
left a very good garrison of Altringers people; is daily now infested by the
neighbor Swedish, out of Winshaim and Gebsattle. Those of Winshaim, keep
their gates open both day and night, to be the readier to go out upon Partees
against the Rotenburgers: ^^^enburg bloc^ up
and the Tillians of the Town wanting Horsemen (as it appears) were cut
short by that means of those excursions and Cavalcadoes, which they were
formerly wont to make out upon the Country. The Town being thus (in a manner)
blockt up by the Swedish; general Altringer (then with Tilly at Nordlingen)
prepares to relieve his soldiers within it, or else to get them out of it. For
this purpose, had he already drawn some of his men together in the upper
Palatinate; with whom, and with eight Pieces of Ordnance, he put himself upon
his march: threatening, that when he had done with that Town, to go further
and fall into the Duchy of Wirtenberg also.

^d yielded.
But his men had yielded before he could come; and Gustavus Horn, to be
beforehand with him, was gone to besiege Hailbrun; the first good Town that
way-ward, of all the land of Wirtenberg. Upon this news, Altringer in the end
of the month retired back again over the Danuby toward Ausburg: where I find
him the seventeenth of January following. He gone, the Swedes left by Horn in
Franconia, fly out as far as Guntzenhausen; a good town at the end of the
forest, a little South of Onspach; in the way toward Norimberg and the upper
Palatinate.

This City of Hailbrun is an Imperial Town, but of the Protestant
Conversion: and is the place, where the Princes of that Union used heretofore
to keep their Diets. Guntzenhausen taken.
It stands in the Duchy of Wirtenberg upon the River Neckar; within eighteen
or twenty English miles of Heidleberg. Into this Town, had the Imperial
Commissary Ossa about the end of November before, thrust some ten Ensigns of
Lorrayners: which were the Duke of Pfalzburgs own Regiment. Hailbrun bes^ged.
For the maintenance of whom, was there a Contribution of 4000 Gilders a month,
laid upon the Gentlemen of the Country: and the Townsmen charged to find them
Bread, Wine, Salt, Firing, Candles and House-roome. Toward freeing of this
Town, Gustavus Horn now converts his forces. Upon Tuesday night, December. 20.
he all on the sudden and in the dark, encompasses the City: to which he the
next morning gives summons by a Trumpet. The Lorrayners answer was louder then
the Trumpets demand; for they set their Cannoniers to make it. Horn falling to
work with the spade, and to bring forward his Approaches, he a little after
dinner, dispatches two Trumpets more with letters unto the Burgomaster and the
Townsmen. The Contents were, to persuade them to get the Lorrayners out of
their Town; and to do their best to dispatch them quickly too: for long he
would not tarry upon it, and loath he was to use extremities to a Town of his
own Religion; which they should do well not to put him to. The Lorrayn
Governor labors, on the other side, to hold the Citizens in their obedience
to the Emperor; and encourages then to resist the Swedish. But they being
careful to save their houses from spoiling by the Cannon and Grenades, and
from being plundered by the Swedish, if they should be taken by Scaladoe;
refuse to manne their walls, or to join with the Lorrayners. Horn by the next
morning, had brought his Lines as far as the watermill, a little without the
Walls, wherein some sixty or seventy Lorrayners were lodged. The mill being
blown open with a Petard, is entered by the Swedish: and the execution begun
among the Lorrayners: but by the mediation of a French Captain of Dragooners,
then serving among the Swedish, was the slaughter stayed. Before this mill the
Swedish casting up a Brest-worke and a Battery: sorely beat upon the Fort or
Citadel of the Town, lying right over against it. Perceiving after a few
hours, that his Cannon would make a breach fit to be stormed, he once again
demands up the place by a Trumpet. The garrison by this time, jealous both of
the Townsmens fidelity, and of the weakness of the place (which indeed is no
strong piece) begin to show a willingness to capitulate: taken.
and their conditions being accepted, half of them march out, and the other
half take oath for the King of Sweden. Horn enters to keep his Christmas in
the Town: and the first Holy Days being over, and in the neerenesse of the
Kings army, no more need of him in those parts; leaving five hundred
musketeers in the City, and Colonel Schmidberger for their Governor: he with
the rest of the Army, returns back again into Franconia.

His first work there, was a preparation to fall into the Bishop of Bambergs
country: ^rn prepares go into ^nberg.
who had by this time more apparently broken his former faith unto the King,
and received of Tillies garrisons into his strongest Towns of Bamberg,
Forcheim, and Cronach. More of the Tillians and others, began now to assemble
about Hasfurt upon the Mayn; there to be mustered and entertained into the
Bishops service. Gustavus Horn, after his coming back from Hailbrun, goes
first unto Winshaim; to which place he gathers all his forces together, that
had been engarrisond, between that and Rotenburg. Thence goes he to Iphoven,
a small town but one Dutch mile to the East of Kitzing; where he holds a
general muster: and to which place he had brought his Cannon along with him.
Here I find him, January 14: which was in the time of the 14 days Truce
aforesaid. And hereabouts (as I collect) might the Kings letters for a
Cessation of Arms (dated at Hoest 4 days before) come first unto his hands.
And from these parts, (having little else to do) went he unto Norimberg, to
give order there for the Fortifications of the City. Here was it agreed, ^es to
see ^imberg.
that Henry William Count of Solms should bring his Regiment out of Norimberg,
to join with him against Bamberg. This is the Count, that had so resolutely
defended Norimberg against Tilly, in recompense of which service, the King had
honored him with the Earldom of Swartzenberg in the Forest of Duringen.

Horn made no long stay in Norimberg; seeing that some few days before the end
of the Truce, I find him at Schweinfurt upon the Mayn, full six leagues back
again beyond Iphoven, and upon the edge of the Bishopric of Bamberg. Hither
now called he all his Army; and hither did Ernestus Duke of Saxon-Weymar, whom
the King had left Governor of Konigshoven (six leagues to the North of
Schweinfurt) come to join with him Duke. William of Saxon-Weymar should
likewise have come to him. That some of this Dukes forces that had been left
about Erfurt, were already sent unto his brother Ernestus, I believe: but that
himself was in the end of December passed by the Duringer-waldt, as far as
Mainigen toward Horn; and that he had 4000 horse and 8000 foot with him, (as
the short and false I find the Co^tinuation of the Arma Suecica to be little
el^ then an abbreviation of the Corrantoes hu^dled together, without much
judgment. Lik^ as in this plac^ where for a second error he puts Memmingen for
Mainig Horn falls into Bamberg.
Arma Suecica says) I believe not: seeing he had but 1500 horse to bring unto
the King afterward at Donawert. But whether it were, that Duke William were at
this instant diverted upon the taking of Passages in Voitland, to keep the
Tillians from coming out of the Upper Palatinate into Misnia, (his cousin the
Elector of Saxonies country) as I hear it by some excused; or that he was
still about Gottingen in Westphalia, which I judge rather: or whatever else
were in it: Horn, certainly, complains to the King of it, That those Saxon
forces which he so much relied upon; were not time enough sent unto him, before
that Tilly beat him out of Bamberg.

Gustavus Horn being gone by, there was a conspiracy detected in Wurtsburg for
the bringing in of Tilly again. The intercepted letters desire Tilly to come
with all speed, for that now was his time to take both Town and Castle again
very easily; the most of the garrison being now drawn out toward Bamberg.
This caused some of the Citizens to be laid hold of, and the place to be better
guarded afterward.

No sooner were the 14 days of Truce expired, but Gustavus Horn falls into the
Bishopric of Bamberg: which he might have sooner done, for that the King had
refused to grant any Neutrality at all unto that Bishop. The country was much
affrighted at his coming; and the Bishop sends for aides unto the Count of
Tilly: making means unto Colonel Slammersdorff of Norimberg, to take off
Horn, if it were possible. Horns first design was upon Hochstat; a pretty
Town upon the river Aisch, betwixt Kitzing and Forcheim. Toward this, he upon
Saturday, January 28. sending a small Partee or forlorn Hope before; they were
set upon and beaten back by 50 Imperial Horse: who being come out of Bamberg
to seek their adventure, had disposed themselves in close ambush in a small
Dorp upon the way. More of the Swedish now coming in to the reskue, the
Imperialists are forced to flee the next way into Forcheim. Horn bringing his
men before the Town, beating it a little with nine Pieces of Cannon, and by a
casual shot wounding the Mayor; ^ochstat taken.
the garrison (who were three hundred men) the next day give up the place: the
most of them also becoming soldiers unto the Swedish. But before the yielding
up, out of Forcheim comes the Imperial Colonel D' Espagni, with some five
hundred Horse and as many Foot, hoping to relieve it. Three Cornets of the
Count of Solms his Horse, being on the other side of the river on which the
Town stands; were now resolutely charged by D'Espagni. Solms his men sending
to call in the Bohemian Baron Kochtitzki, the Imperialists retire upon it; not
making head at all, till they came within a mile of Forcheim. Hereabouts the
five hundred Imperial Foot finding an advantage; dispose themselves into an
Ambush: part thereof being in a Dorp, and part in a Churchyard; where they
waited for the Swedish. Hard it went with the Swedish, at the first Encounter;
diverse common soldiers, two Lieftenants, three Cornets, two Rit-masters, and
forty or fifty Horsemen were either slain or spoiled. The Lord Kochtitzki
(their Colonel) being after a while shot in one of his arms, and in some
danger; was bravely reskued by his Lieftenant-Colonell: and his men, now all
enraged, charging more fiercely upon the Imperialists, beat them after a while
out of the village; kill diverse both of Horse and Foot; and keep a great many
prisoners. The Imperialists forsake Bamberg.
This defeat of D'Espagni being known to the garrison of Bamberg, they
immediately fall to pillage the City and to forsake it: retyring themselves into
Forcheim, as into a place much stronger.

Upon Wednesday, February 1. Gustavus Horn sends five Cornets of Horse, and two
Ensigns of Foot, to demand up the City of Bamberg, the chief Town of the
Bishopric, though not the strongest. It Is seated upon the Northeasterly bank
of the Main, over which it has a bridge. The Citizens being guilty of the
weakness of the place, and the day before forsaken by their garrison; begin
to enter into capitulation with the Swedish, absolutely agreeing to yield up
their Town unto them. Just whilst this was a doing, five hundred Boores of
the Traine-bands of Cronach and thereabouts, thrusting themselves on the
contrary side into the Town, fall presently aboard with the Swedish, laying
lustily at them to beat them out again. The Townsmen perceiving this, they
strike in with their Boores likewise: and whereas there were some more of the
Swedish, by this time come before the walls; they shut to their gates against
them, with Cannon and Musket shot letting fly amain amongst them. This
continued until midnight; by which time the Swedish Horse within, beginning to
prove too hard for the Boores; and those without, now also breaking in,
terribly affrighted the perfidious Townsmen with a fear of having their
throats cut, every Mothers son of them. But they now throwing down their
Arms in the Marketplace, and running to hide themselves where they could:
Bamberg wo^^ by the Swedis^
the Swedish being indifferently appeased by the pillage of their houses,
scorn in cold blood to meddle with a Citizen. Thus fatal has it been, to
those of this City and Bishopric; to break their faiths unto the King of
Sweden. News of all this is sent immediately unto Gustavus Horn at Hochstat;
who coming into the City, takes up his lodging in the Geierswer, and leaves
the Bishops Palace for Duke Ernestus. The Country hereupon to avoid plundering,
send to Bamberg to make their agreement; out of whom, one or other, Gustavus
Horn drew a present ransom of 400000 Rix dollars.

February-fill-dike (as if he feared to lose his good name) began now so
naturally to play his part; and the season hereupon proved so rainy; ^orn
hindered ^y the rain.
that Horn was not able, (especially with his Cannon and Carriages) to stir
any where abroad into the Country. The chief service he could do, was this,
that his Horse upon a fair day now and then, fell out against those of
Forcheim. This one accident, hindered the King of Sweden, of finishing the
conquest of the Bishopric of Bamberg.

The Bishop hearing of the taking of this Town; flees with all speed toward
the upper Palatinate. February 3. he went to Vilseck; the next day to Amberg:
and in the end of the month, unto Ratisbone, and so into Bavaria. It was his
chance upon the way, to meet with Lieftenant-Generall Cratz and the Count of
Sultz; who with 3000 men, and some pieces of Ordnance, were come from Amberg
and Weiden, to relieve Forcheim: which they had heard (but falsely) to be
besieged. They were already advanced as far as Averbach and beyond it; within
some thirty English miles, ^atz coming against Horn, ^^turned back ^gaine by
the ^^ing Bishop (...) Bamberg.
or less, of Forcheim. Here understanding by the Bishop, that Gustavus Horn
was too strong for so small a number; they retire their forces back again
unto Averbach. This was upon the third of February: which very day the Bishop
went forward unto Vilsech, six English miles beyond Averbach.

Gustavus Horn was feign to contain himself within Bamberg all the rainy
season: able to do no other service, but to fortify the Town a little; which
was not indeed to be made sensible. No injury at all did he unto the Clergy of
Bamberg: except this might be mistaken for an offense; To have endeavored the
saving of their souls, by causing the Protestant Religion to be publicly
preached in their Cathedral. Toward the end of the month, it began to
freeze; so that no sooner were the earth and ice become hard enough to bear
his Ordnance, but he prepares for the siege of Forcheim. While Horn provides to
go against Forcheim, Tilly comes against him.
From which design how he was taken off by the Count of Tilly, we have before
told you.

Since, now, that we have twice before made mention of the General Tilly; it
shall not be amiss, in this very place, to bring up his Story from the Battle
of Leipsich, unto this meeting of his with Horn: and then leave him a while
again, till he be ready for his second and final overthrow. The first part of
his Story, might (it is true) have been brought in before the first mention of
him, when in October he drew near unto the King: but for that it would have
too much broken off the Kings Story, I thought better to put it here all
together.

General Tillyes Proceedings.
NO one Act of this brave Chieftaines has made him so much spoken of, (and
with respect too) as that misfortune of his at the Battle of Leipsich. Vulgar
people dye, and are forgotten: but this shows how great a part of the world,
and how principal a personage this man was, who still gave occasion to the
first question of News, Is Tilly yet alive? To satisfy the Readers that he
was not dead, (no nor never lay by it) we will here present you with the Diary
or Iournall of his first shiftings up and down. And these be the Gifts of his
Progress.

He was defeated at Leipsich, September 7. 1631. From whence turning himself
to the Westward (like the declining Sun) and keeping along by the River Sala;
he flees first unto Hall: The way of his flight.
where he gat his wounds dressed; and whence together with the Counts of
Furstenberg and Pappenheim, away the next day he hasted. Bending then a little
to the North-West-ward; to Ascherleben he hyes: where upon Friday, September
ninth, he arryved. Hence wrote he unto General Altringer: and this was the
Copy of his Letter.

His Letter unto Altringer.
My Lord, I am now arryved at Ascherleben: where I have a purpose and resolution
to r'allee as many of our scattered and dispersed troops, as we can possibly
get together again in this Dukedom Of Brunswicke.
. I now write this my fourth letter unto you, to acquaint you with my desires:
and earnestly withal to require you, that you keep your self in a continual
readynesse, and stand upon your guard with your whole army, in the best manner
that you can. We cannot yet learn, which way the enemy is likely to turn his
Arms; he may perhaps make toward you: for which reason I could advise you,
that for your better safety and security, you would hasten to join your
self unto those troops of ours which are already in Hessen; and altogether to
assault the Landtgraves forces, as lively as possibly you can. I desire you,
that as time will give you leave; you acquaint me with the news of your parts,
and the order of your proceedings. Your letters may be conueighed to me by the
way of Halberstat: whereabouts I am as yet, and am likely for a while to
continue.

Ascherleben, September 9/19. 1631. Your very well affectioned, John, Count of
Tilly.


Hence goes he onwards into the Dukedom of Brunswicke, unto Halberstat: which
is full fourscore English miles from the place of the late battle. Here finds
he 18 troops of his own horse, which had been gotten thither before him. Now
(in Brunswick-land) was Tilly at home, (as it were:) for hereabouts had the
Emperor bestowed diverse lands and Lordships upon him, which had belonged unto
Christian late Duke of Brunswick and Bishop of Halberstat, whom Tilly had
overthrown. Upon the Church doors all hereabouts, sets he up his Si quisses
and his Patents: Tilly gathe^ his army a^
to give notice unto such of his Colonells and Captains, as were yet fleeing
they knew not whither: where they might find him, and such fragments of their
own troops, as were already heard of. Perceiving himself not yet safe enough
hereabouts, for that some of the Swedish Horse were even now skowring the coast
up and down, even upon the frontiers of this Brunswick-land and Magdenburg; so
nettled he was at the news of it; that even old and wounded though he were,
yet upon Tuesday, September. 13. (the sixth day after the battle) away from
Halberstat he speeds for life. The (new) Administrator of Halberstat, John
Reinhard Metternich, he takes away with him; and all the Soldiers of the
neighbor garrisons.

Thence scapes he to Osterwick, four leagues further: and so along in the
Bishopric of Hildesheim. Bending here a little more southerly; unto Alfeldt
(ten or eleven leagues further) he comes, ^e continues ^s flight.
upon Satterday September. 17, just ten days after the battle. In which time,
(allowing him the nearest way, and by a line too) he had gone full seven score
English miles of ground. The relics of his army had run as fast as he too;
so that well might it be called a flying march. But to make it more possible to
believe; namely, that his Foot should have gotten thus far in this short
time; you are to take notice, that they had been well lightened of their Arms
and Luggage: so that hither they recovered, all light and unarmed.

Being here out of Gunshot, he now makes his second stay, for the gathering up
of more remains of his army. Hence after a while sloaping a little to the
South-West, to Huxter he goes in the Bishopric of Corbey in Westphalia:
whither he recovered, September. 25: having first laid a bridge over the fair
River of Weser, for the passage of his people. Here begins he to form an Army
again; to augment which, he has a re-enforcement of 3000 Foot, and 2000
Horse (as some write) out of the diocese of Cullen: which might indeed easily
enough come up to him through the County of Waldeck. Here also he recruits his
old shatterd Regiments with some few levyes; ^ly forms a (...) Army.
and hither from Hamelen (a Town some six leagues to the Northward of Huxter;
and on the same side of the Weser) came there twelve pieces of Cannon, and such
other necessaryes of war, as that Magazine afforded. All these he had before
sent for, to meet him there. It is a very good place for an army to be formed
in; for hereabouts are abundance of pretty fine Towns, a rich Country, and
which had not of late been rifled. By this time, was he said to have an Army of
10000 men together: which supposing to be true; then it plainly appears, that
he never, hitherto, had re-assembled full 5000 of his old army. This
observation is to be made good by this argument: that the 5000 which were sent
him from Cullen, and these other new levied men too; are all to be discounted
out of those ten thousand.

Perceiving a likelihood of some stirs hereabout (which did indeed break out
By the risi^^ of the Duke Lunenburg an^ the Bishop o^ Bremen, and the Landgrav^
of Hessen.
a little after that) he leaves the Count of Gronsfelt in that new made leaguer
with part of the forces, to be his Lieftenant in the parts upon the Weser.
Within two or three days after, himself with the greatest part of the Army,
marches unto Warburg in the Bishopric of Paderborn; which stands upon the
river Dimel, that parts this Bishopric from the land of Hessen. The reason
of his drawing toward these quarters was, to meet with Altringer, Fugger and
Mansvelt, whom he had written unto: as also to be nearer to the Count of Sultz;
who was on the other side of Hessen, betwixt Fulda and the Mayn. And these were
the forces which Tilly mentioned in his Letters to Altringer, to be in the land
of Hessen. The Duke of Lorrayn also with his Army, was now upon the march
thitherward; and unto all these, had Tilly written to come and meet him.
Having perfecter notice at this place of the Kings being gone beyond Erfurt
toward Franconia; and that he had left pursuing of him: he turns more
Southerly upon it. Keeping himself therefore upon the very edges of Waldeck,
and Hessen (a small River being his guide) he comes first unto Gudersberg, two
miles West of the River of Fulda: which his men plunder and burn. Thence more
Southerly still, Tilly falls into Hessen.
unto Fritzlar in Hessen, twenty English miles from Warburg: which the
Landgrave had newly taken from the Elector of Mentz. Takes Fritzlar
This was the last day of September. October the second, forward he moves
again: spoiling Bercken the same day, a Dutch league from Fritzlar. This he
did, to flesh his soldiers upon an enemies country. That night, was there a
Partee sent to Bischehausen; a small open village, a league beyond that. Hither
had the country Boores driven their cattle; for that the village is on three
sides fenced by two small rivers, which meet at it. A troop of the Landgraves
Horse, had the poor people also for their protection. The Tillians fly upon
this booty, beat the Boores and their guards; and begin to drive away their
cattle.

The garrison of Zigenhaim (a good strong town of the Landgraves, some five
English miles to the South of that) coming time enough in to the rescue, beat
off the Tillians again. Both parties being reinforced by their own; some 300
are slain on one side or other; and Tilly being onward on his march, those of
his were feign to leave the skirmish, and follow after the army. Thus the fray
parted, the Tillians marching off, with the Hessens cattle. The next day,
Tuesday, October 4, going on still Southerly; he effects what he so much
desired, ^e ioynes with Altringer, etc.
the uniting of his army with Altringer and Fugger: with whom the Count of
Mansvelts forces were now also conjoined. To fetch up whose Story, let us now
go back again, and so go with them along altogether.

This Henry Otho Lord Fugger, is one of the Fuggers of Auspurg, who are the
greatest Family of Merchants and Bankers of all Europe. As for Altringer, his
good parts merely had preferred him: a thing rare in the Empire, where Gentry is
so much stood upon. The Story of Altringer and Fugger.
The son he was of a Towne-Clerke, or such like Pen and inckhorne-man, which
kind of vocation is too much dis-respected in Germany. His education was first
in the Universities: and after that, in the Chancery at Prague; where he was
first a Clerk, and then an Advocate. His rare learning, (for he has one of
the best penns of Germany) and his sharp wit, preferred him quickly from that
place.

Applying himself unto the wars; he was (to omit the rest) with Command
employed into Italy, in the late wars of Mantua: which being ended, he
returned with his army into Germany. How he pieced in with Fugger, and how upon
the hearing of Tillies defeat at Leipsich, they both retired through the
Duringer Forest; I leave to be read in my First Part. Some 6000 men, they were
both together said to have at that time: with whom they first of all retired
unto Isenach. About Fulda lay one of the Counts of Mansfelt (of which there be
5 Families) with whom they now conjoined. Their army they more increased, with
some new levies of such poor and young people, as they could in that haste and
fear, ramble up together. Altringer, upon the receipt of Tillies letters,
begins to turn that way toward him. Keeping the river of Werra close upon
their right hand, they upon Tuesday, September 27. arrive at Munden, They march
join with T^
in the Northern edge of Hessen-land; where the river Fulda falls into the
Werra. Through this Town, they were marching from 8 to 4 the next day, and were
reported to be 54 Cornets of Horse, and 82 Companies of Foot; some 10000 or
11000 men in all perchance: of which, a many were observed to be boys and raw
soldiers.

About half a league without Munden, they the same day pitched their Camp:
expecting that Tilly should thither have comne unto them. Tilly, to the same
end, was some 2 days since, comne as near to them as Warburg; some 18 or 20
English miles to the North-East of Munden. The armies now hearing one of
another, and that the Landgrave of Hessen was with his forces, at that time,
near unto his own Town of Cassel upon the river of Fulda; they determine
both together to fall into his Country; Tilly on the West side of the river
Fulda, and Altringer upon the East; to spoil that first, and then to conioyne
their forces. This last, they the 4 of October thoroughly performed.

Being united, they might altogether make up some 18000 men, Horse and Foot;
but ill clothed and armed, God knows. Their first march was to Grebenaw; a
walled Town some 4 English miles from the river Fulda, which runs through
the midst of Hessen. Here they pitch, and rest some night or two, to consult
and order their business. Thence go they to Schlicz: a good town, so named
of the river it stands upon. Hence, October 6 to Fulda, a great Abbey where they
again stay and muster. I take no notice of Gallobelgicus his numbers; who as
he allows 18000 men to Altringer alone, so he affoords 182 troops of Horse
unto both together, beside a very great number of Foot also. Gallobelgicus (I
perceive) goes by Geometrical proportion, makes London measure now and then,
and tells sixescorce to the hundred: he gives too much credit (I mean) to great
reports every where. ^^at forces ^^^ly now had.
A hundred eighty two troops of good Horse, ( Tillies were very good) and a
full hundred to each troop, will come to 18200 men: which (had Tilly had the
leading) would have gone near at that time, to have over-runne all Germany.
The King of Sweden was but very weak in Horse at the Battle of Leipsich; nor
had he as yet very much increased them: and had Tilly now had but half so many
Horse as 182 troops; he would never have turned his head from the King of
Sweden. A hundred eighty two Cornets and Ensigns of Horse and Foot together,
might be the list of all their Armies: and might make up 18000 men; which
Gallobelgicus allows Altringer alone. And these two numbers might confound
him. But this by way of discourse.

Here having news of the King of Swedens beleagring of Wurtsburg, the
Imperial Generals consult how to levy the siege; but hearing again of his
taking the Castle, and of the other Towns he had gotten upon the banks of the
Mayn: ^^lly goes to^^rds the Mayn
they make the more haste to conioyne themselves with the Lorrayn army.
Marching with good speed, thereupon, unto Aschaffenburg upon the Mayn, some
three days march from Fulda; hither October 10 came the Duke of Lorrayn to see
the General Tilly. The next day, is Altringer sent over the Mayn toward these
Lorrayners: so that upon Monday, ^ynes with ^c Lorrayners.
October 17, was that conjunction made also. More of this, we have before told
you, in the Story of these Lorrayners.

Whilst here (about Aschaffenburg) he lies: he October 16. sends 3000 toward
Werthaim, which were defeated: and so are three Regiments more of his about
Rotenburg, October 21. as we have before told you. In this Interim too, he
sollicites Hanaw: and being denied, he passes the Main, Takes Babenhausen.
and takes in Babenhausen Town and Castle, belonging unto the Count of Hanaw
Buxviller: but empawned unto the Elder Count of Hanaw. The Lorrayners being
comne within three leagues of him (which is near enough for uniting) part of
his forces about that very day, roave up and down as far as Franckford on
the Mayn: many of them went into the very Town, more being without the Ports;
a great part of them very poor, and as yet unarmed. They came now as friends
or Neuters, or Passengers to the Town: for Tilly had not yet solicited
Franckford to take in a garrison: Sollicites Franckford.
nor till five or six days after. At which time he requesting, and the Town
denying; he goes by Selingstat toward the Bergstraes: which is that part of
the Palatinate on the same side of the Rhine with him. All along hereabouts
(namely in the land of Darmstat and the Bergstraes) for certain days he lay:
and verily believed it was, that he would have gone along the Bergstraes to
Manheim and Heidleberg, and there have staid for the defense of the Palatinate.
Goes into the Bergstraes.
Some of his men (if not himself) were advanced that way as far as right
against Oppenheim, in the beginning of November: whenas judging by the taking
of Hanaw, that the King would also come down toward Franckford, and so
hazard to coope him up into the Palatinate; he all on the sudden, about the
fou^th or fifth of November, turns back again toward the Lorrayn army at
Miltenburg. And here, Turns back into Franconia.
the Mayn crooking away many leagues to the Northward; he leaving it upon the
left hand, goes directly unto Oxenfurt: where the Mayn comes about as low
again, as at Miltenburg. What he did in the way; and what passed at Oxenfurt,
we have before told you in the Kings Story.

Here the King and the Count of Tilly part again: and Ossa, who had been
Commissary to the Lorrayn Army before, goes now along with Tilly toward
Norimberg: a little before the end of November, coming back again from
thence, Ossa goes a^ong with Til^y.
unto his charge, the Lorrayners. Ossa by virtue partly of his Commission
(which was Imperial) and partly by virtue of some of Tillyes forces; takes in
the Imperial City of Rotenburg upon the Tauber, and takes Ro^enburg.
which the Kings men had before taken. Twelve thousand Dollars he drew from the
Magistrates; nor could he hinder his soldiers afterward from plundering of
the City: which I impute not unto the Injustice of the Generals, but unto the
hunger and unrulynesse of the Soldiers; who having had no pay in a long time,
could not here be so well governed. With the same sauce, they served all the
Dorps and smaller villages, thereabouts.

And now, it seems, was the Army divided; not marching all together in one
gross: for part of it at the same time took in Winshaim, and Winshaim.
an Imperial City toward the North: and another Division, went to
Guntzenhausen: almost forty Euglish miles from that, toward the South: both
Armies meeting again about Norimberg. Those that took Guntzenhausen, went
thence unto the Imperial City of Weissenburg, about four or five English
miles more to the South-East, where Tilly left a small garrison. About an
English mile from which, and upon an hill on the North side; Tilly takes
Weissenburg.
stands the strong castle of Wilsburg, belonging unto the young Marquess of
Onspach, Pupil unto his Cousin the Elector of Brandenburg. This being the
strongest Pass of all those parts, the Marchioness Dowager (Mother unto the
Young Lord) is mainely laid at by Tilly, to cause her brother the Count of Solms
(Governor of the Castle) to deliver it up into his hands, with all the Ordnance
and Ammunition in it. And this, though not presently; yet he after a while
wrung from her: into which he put the young Count of Pappenheim (Cousin to
General Pappenheim) whose Castle is a neighbor unto it. Nor yet did the Lady
find any whit the more favor for it: seeing Her Sons own Town of Onspach,
and rifles the Marquisate of Onspach.
with the Villages of the Marquisate, were by the Tillians taken and plundered,
and above 5000 head of great Cattle gotten away from her Country Subjects.
Some villages, both here, and in the County of Hohenlo, were fired also. Yet
was all this, but some of the civilest: most Soldiers (if enemies) would have
done as much. The next is barbarous: for coming to the Cloister of Haibron,
(twelve English miles from Norimberg) where some of the Marquesses of Onspach
(who are of the Electorall house of Brandenburg) lie entombed: the sacrilegious
soldiers break open the vault, and rob the dead corpses of the Marquesses,
George Frederike, and Ioachim Ernest, of the Jewels, Rings, and other rich
ornaments, with which they were entombed.

Hence went the General Tilly unto Swabach; within seven or eight English
miles of Norimberg. This goodly City of Norimberg, was the Pass that Tilly all
this while aymd at; and which he hoped to enforce to a composition with him.
Making his head-quarter therefore at this Swabach, which is on the South of
Norimberg; he sends out other of his forces to take in Altorff, Lauff, and
Hersbruck, all on the North and East of it. Tilly sets do before Norimberg.
Having thus surrounded the Country about it, he begins, November 18. to bring
his army nearer to the walls, as if to besiege it. Having thus showed them his
power, he sends withal his Messengers into the City, first to have such a
proportion of bread etc. given him, and then, to have some Counselors and
Doctors sent out to treat with him. The Doctors went to Swabach and there
dined with him: unto whom were these demands in the Emperors name propounded.

1. His deman^
That the Magistrates should deliver the Count of Solms into his hands; as an
officer belonging unto the Emperors enemy, the King of Sweden.

2. That they should license all their forces, and suffer their soldiers to
serve under his Colors.

3. That they should stand to their promise lately made, and renounce the
Conclusions of Leipsich.

This if they yielded to him in, he promised to pay them honestly, for all such
provisions, as he should demand of them: and if not, then would he force them
to it. The Doctors receiving these demands, promise an answer unto his
Excellency the day following. And indeed he had it; for the Count of Solms,
(whose body he so much desired) made a p^rsonall tender of himself before
Tillyes trenches, by a resolute sally the next day: where, with his Regiment of
Swedish horse, he defeated that of the young Prince of Anhalt, and took
himself, with some thirty of his officers, prisoners. This John George Count
of Solms, with his brother William Henry, had each of them a Regiment in the
City; the first of Horse, and the second of Foot; both newly levied for the
Kings service. Here were also two Counts of Hohenlo: and another Regiment of
Colonel Five Regi^ents says ^e short and ^^lse Arma ^ecica.
Slammersdorffs: so that they had a garrison of some 3000 Horse and Foot: which
the Burgers with their sons and servants in the town, could well make up
10000 able fighting men. Some Engineers had the King of Sweden newly sent unto
them; who with such haste and skill perfected up the Works they had begun
before Tillyes coming, that they now much cared not for all his threatenings.
Tillyes approaches went on but slowly; as if he had intended to skare the
City, rather then besiege it. And indeed it was too big and strong; every way
too well supplied, for Tillyes raw and ill provided army to meddle withal.
He wanted both victuals and ammunition for such a siege; besides which, winter
was too nearly a coming on, to sit down to it. Tilly surely was too wise to
make a Work of it. Yet some bravadoes, for his honor sake, did his men make
against it: which were with loss daily repulsed by the sallyes of the Counts
of Solms and others. He lost Slabata a Colonel of the Crabats, before the
town; with many Officers and Gentlemen of worth more. Perceiving now his men to
begin to run away into the town (which they daily did, by tens and twenties
in a company:) and that there was no other contribution to be expected but
powder and shot (if he liked it: (...) raises his (...) from No^^erg.
) he sends to Altringer (who then commanded before the town, to draw off the
troops, and to be rising. Leaving therefore some 2000 dead, and wounded, and
sick, and half starved men behind him, either in the trenches or neighbor
villages; he upon the 22 and 23 of November, dislodges with his Army. That
which made this sudden rising of his seem the stranger, was, That it was done
in the night: and in such haste too, that his men left some of their
baggage-wagons behind them. And if this may be excused, as being done for want
rather, then for haste or fear; for that namely they wa^ted wagon-horses: yet
surely his men wanted not stomakes for the sheep and other victuals left
behind them ready dressed, (as I find from 2 several hands written) and upon
the tables too: which verily argued some needless fear or haste in them.

At Rot, a Town some seven English miles to the South of his Head-quarter of
Swabach, lay part of his store of Gunpowder: which being charged upon the
wagons, and ready now to march after the army, was by negligence set on fire,
and 12500 weight of powder blown up; some pieces of Ordnance spoiled, with
other mischief done to the ammunition. The Count of Tilly hearing of this
mischance, Now says he (with a deep sigh) do I evidently perceive all my
good fortunes to begin to fail me, Tillyes heart begins to misgive him.
and every thing (me thinks) goes awkwardly with me. The man perchance thought
of Magdenburg (or might have done) at the same time. This was reported in
Norimberg by one of the officers of Tillyes Ordnance; who had very good means
to know it.

Count Tilly now perceiving his Army (this dear and dead time) too great to be
kept together; He devides his Army, and puts them into garrison.
which would be needless too, no enemy being near; devides his forces
thereupon: part whereof he kept with himself; and part he sent another way,
with Cratz and Altringer. The Division reserved to himself, marched from
Swabach first of all to Rot; where the powder miscarried: and where he lodged 2
nights to get all things fit again. Thence went he in the end of the month to
Donawert upon the Danow; where the Duke of Bavaria met him: and so to
Nordlingen in Schwabland, where he stayed. The other half that went with
Altringer and Cratz, were put into garrison nearer hand: as in the towns of
Lauff, Hersbruck and Altorff, hard by Norimberg; and some in Sultzbach, Amberg,
and Newmarckt; all Towns of the Upper Palatinate. Colonel Cratz (who having
been General of the Ordnance, Cratz made Field-Marshall unto Tilly.
was now made Felt-Marshall) took up his garrison at Amberg, the chief City of
the Upper Palatinate; whither all the Officers were to resort for order unto
him; that they need not journey to the Duke of Bavaria or the General Tilly.
The Count of Sultz, lay with his men about Weyden upon the river Nab, to the
North of Amberg. Merodi and Breda, with their Regiments; were put into
Averbach, Grafenwerd, and into the Towns and Dorps between them. All these
towns are on the Northside of the Upper Palatinate, and toward the Bishopric
of Bamberg. The General Tilly engarrisond his men in the Territory called Ries
next unto Donawert: and about Giengen in the Diocese of Elwang, and in the
Jurisdiction of Haidenhaim in Schwabland, upon the frontiers of Wirtenberg, the
next Western neighbors unto Nordlingen; where himself lay.

In this deviding and lodging of his army, the provident Tilly had two respects
especially. The King of Sweden had 2 Armies then on foot; of which, 2 of the
Catholic Leaguers were in danger: the Bishop of Bamberg namely; who stood in
doubt to be every day invaded by Horn: The reason why Tilly thus devides his
army.
and the Duke of Bavaria, in fear of the King himself. To guard the Countries
of these 2 Princes, had Tilly to the most advantage thus disposed of his
armies. Those forces that he kept with himself, were for the safeguard of
Bavaria; and the Frontiers of Schwabland and Franconia: against whom, if the
King should come the nearest way, through the Dukedom of Wirtemberg (in which
Country he had already some towns and friends; and there at this present, some
forces a levying for him) then lay Tilly at Nordlingen right in the Kings way
to oppose him. The other troops were laid in the Upper Palatinate, so near
unto Bamberg; that if Horn should fall in there, they might strike in, time
enough to the reskue. And these were the 12000 men, with whom Tilly put
Gustavus Horn out of Bamberg afterward. Along with Tilly, Saxon-Lawenburg made
General of the Ordnance.
went Rodolph Maximilian Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg; now upon Cratz his
preferment, made in his place General of the Ordnance. The Duke conveighing
his Gunns into Donawert, staid himself there as Governor of the Town, until
the King beat him out. A thousand of his Horse and 500 Foot, he would feign
have thrust upon the Imperial free City of Ausburg near to Donawert, to be
billeted among them for the 3 winter months. This the City put off, by sending
some victuals to the soldiers.

This goodly Protestant City of Ausburg, Popish practices upon Ausburg.
was much practiced upon, to be wholly gained to the Catholic party. The
better to bring about which plot, had the chief Officers and Magistracies of
the City, been by the Emperors authority and private working, remooved from
the Protestants, and conferred upon the Papists. The Duke of Bavaria (their
next neighbor) likewise, pretending I know not what dangers, had by the
Papists means skrued in some of his new levied Boores. Thither, thereupon,
comes Altringer; to take order for the Militia in that City, and Bishopric,
and in the Lordships of the Fuggers. Hitherwards in the beginning of January
following, he remooves all his own Regiment out of the Upper Palatinate, which
he enquarters about Auspurg. Altringer presently upon this, hearing that his
men which he had left in Rotenburg in Franconia, were now endangered by
Gustavus Horns people; prepares to relieve them. Much feared he was likewise in
the Duchy of Wirtemberg, which began to arm against him. But Rotenburg was
taken, and his expedition stayed.

About this time of the year, the Count of Furstenberg, The Count of
Furstenberg resignes his charge.
who had not been with Tilly since the battle of Leipsich, gives over
following of the wars. Pappenheim had been taken off by the Leaguers, and
employed into the Lower Saxony. Tillyes self was resident for the most part in
Nordlingen: whither Altringer went now and then also. In the beginning of this
January, Tilly goes to Donawert, there to meet his old Master the Duke of
Bavaria. And there being a likelihood of some motions upon the frontiers of
Bohemia and the Upper Palatinate: Tilly makes a journey from Donawert unto
Amberg. Two thousand horse he was to take along with him, and his Foot and
Ordnance he sent to Weiden, upon the very Western frontiers of Bohemia, whence
they were to march onwards unto Egra: toward which town, the Saxon forces
began now to turn them very strongly. The Imperial Colonel This is he ^at
destroyed aswalk: as you ^ay see in our first Part.
Gotze, Don Balthazar, and the Felt-Marshall Diepenbach had requested Tilly to
this: hoping to drive the Saxons into the midst of them. But this plot, Arnheim
prevented. Tilly about January 10, returns to Nordlingen again. January 18,
he takes 13 Pieces of Ordnance out of Wilsburg Castle, which (as we told you)
he had wrung from the Marchioness of Onspach: and these he sends unto Ossa,
for the furnishing of Constance and Lindaw.

Neither Tilly, nor his armies, stirred much abroad after this, till the Frost
began about February 20: about which time he goes to that part of his Army in
the Upper Palatinate. February 22. He is at Newmarckt, one of the fairest
towns of all this Palatinate; and thither all his Horse out of their several
Quarters assembled. Thence goes he to Altorff: where he lodges, Febr. 24.
himself, Altringer, the Baron of Cronenburg and other chief Colonells,
quartering themselves in the Castle. Here is an University: the Students
whereof were courteously enough used by the Soldiers. Hence marches he away
not far off from Norimberg: whither he again sends in the Emperors name and
his own, to be of courtesy furnished by them with some provisions. Now was
his march directly intended against Gustavus Horn; toward whom he led 12000
men, and 22 Pieces of Ordnance: besides some of the Bavarian Boores, which the
Duke their master had put into the Army to learn something. February 27. Tilly
enters into Forcheim, the strongest town of the Bishopric of Bamberg: whence
the next day he went against Gustavus Horn. The story whereof having before
told you; we shall leave him about Hasfurt in the said Bishopric, till he
voids it of himself, upon the Kings coming against him. So that the other
part of Tillies Proceedings, you are to look for in Our relation of the Kings
march into Bavaria. Whereas, therefore, we have heretofore mentioned the Duke
of Bavariaes meeting to confer with Tilly; his joining of some of his men
with the Tillians: and for that both the Armies were shortly after this put
into one body; it shall not be amiss, here to bring in the preparations made
by this Duke also; who has been so great an Actor and Sufferer in this
Germane tragedy, especially seeing that the Scene is next to be laid in his
own Bavaria.

This Prince has by many been taxed, The Duke of Bavariaes sto^
(and by some of his own subjects too) how justly I dispute not: to have been,
if not the plotter and Incendiary; yet the promoter and Boutefeu of a great
part of these present troubles. A crafty wise man he is; witness those subtle
conveiances of his own ends, for 12 years together: whereby he has made
himself both rich and potent. The skill he is said to have, of imposing a
Reservednesse upon his own expressions; and the same art of palliating his
pretenses, which Statists call Policy; though in Morality it be, but a
Magnificent dissimulation. These, with some other Cabinet Doctrines, has he
learned at the Jesuits Lectures: whose Disciple he is, and in the highest
form too.

When after the defeat of the Catholic Army at Leipsich, and the coming
down of the Conqueror among the lands of the Leaguers; the Princes of that
Confederation were put to the end of their Counsels: the Duke of Bavaria is the
man, upon whose greatness and credit in the Empire, the hopes of that side
were pitched, for the setting of all right again. He, He summons his people to
defense.
to give good example to the rest, su^mons al his subjects generally, all that
were able to bear arms (tagg and ragg) to be ready to stand upon the
defensive. Some of his Boores he arms too; who for that, when they were
Day-laborers, they had been used to stopping of gaps; now when they are become
soldiers, he employes them (most naturally) to the stopping of passages. These
he lays upon his Frontiers. By the end of October, had he gotten some 10, or
12000 of them armed and trained: and was resolved (as it was given out) to have
sent them to the Emperors Army in Bohemia, against the Saxons. This expedition
was arrested by the news of the Saxons taking of Prage; and He put unto new
Counsayles. The danger growing nearer upon his country, by the King of Swedens
taking of the Bishoprics of Wurtsburg and Bamberg; the Duke procures a Diet of
the Catholike-Leaguers: which for the more honor unto him whom they so much
relied upon, was held at Landshut in Bavaria, and in November. Here do the
Princes resolve, upon the levying of a new Army at their common Charges:
whereof his Highness the Duke of Bavaria, was to be Generalissimo; ^s
appointed Generalissimo of the Leaguish forces.
and his Creature the Count of Tilly, General, as before. To this Army of the
Leaguers, was his Imperial Majesty pleased likewise, that some of his Forces
should be conjoined: so that both Imperial and Leaguish forces, went
henceforth to the making of one Army.

The Duke hereupon reenforces his own levyes, for which Donawert is the
Rendezvous. By this time (as it appears) had His Highness been solicited by
some of the contrary party, to come over to their side: the greatness of the
King of Sweden, able to do him wrong; the oppression of the Princes of
Germany, whom that King sought but to deliver; the ambitious rising of the
Emperor and House of Austria, now aiming more at Monarchy, then at the
propagation of the Catholic Religion; and the Dukes own disliking of diverse
of the Emperors actions in that kind; were urged for some of the arguments to
draw him on, and to break off both with the League and Emperor. I suppose
that the French Ambassador then resident with him, was one of the Orators to
persuade with him. It seems likewise, that some hopes of prevayling were
conceived; yea and some speeches too, given out to that purpose. But the Duke
now taking regrett at the hearing of it, and sorry that his honor should be
traduced, by the mistaking of his constant purposes to the other side and
cause: he immediately thereupon sets out a public Manifesto or Declaration of
his resolution; which, Set out his Manifest.
(to show the earnestness of his intention) was penned in a high and sharp
streine: and by the furious undiscreet zeal shown in it to the Saints and
Romish religion; the spightfull pen-and-inck-horne terms against the
Protestants: the quotations of Scriptures, and some such other Characters: the
Readers will collect that the Dukes Confessor had a hand in it, as well as his
Secretary. It Is well worth the reading: but being something long, I have
referred it till the end of the Kings Story; that we might not here make too
long an interruption.

To go on. About mid-December the Duke procures another Diet at Ingolstat: A
Diet at Ingolstat.
where himself was present about the twelfth of that month. The Diet
continued until after Christmas: and in it was the Proposition made among the
Leaguers, He sends one Ambassador unto the King and another t^ the Emperor at
the same time.
upon what Terms (by means of the French King,) they should desire, and
accept of the Neutralitie. Now are their Ambassadors dispatched unto the King
of Sweden, then at Mentz. They treated, as a distinct party from the Emperor:
and for that the Duke of Bavaria was the chief person; the negotiation was in
his name, or he (at least) was the first man named in it.

The crafty Duke (that he might have two strings to his bow) privately sends
another Ambassador (his Chancellor Donnersberg namely) unto his Imperial
Majesty at the same time: of whose negotiation, these were the Requests or
Propositions made unto the Emperor.

1. That Caesar would be pleased not to take it ill, that the Duke his Master
had no more potently hitherto assisted his Majesty in these Wars; seeing it
lay not in his power, His propositions to the Emperor.
to repress the King of Sweden. Yea, and that by the Archduchesse he had been
advised not to meddle with that King, without sufficient preparations: but so
long to spinne out the time, until the Army of the Roman Catholics could be
ready to assist him. Furthermore, his Duchy of Bavaria was so weakly by nature
situated; as it was no ways sufficient to hold out against such a Power, as
that King had at present.

2. He very well hoped, that He means Vallenstein. ^ou see what ^ood blood
^ere yet was, ^etwixt these ^o.
That man, whom at the instant request of the Electorall College in the Diet
of Ratisbone 1630, Caesar had cashiered from his Generalship; he would not now
call to the place again, without the knowledge of the same College. And
notwithstanding that the Duke his Master for his part had been constrained to
wink at some things, by reason of the present danger; yet he humbly entreated
in the mean time, that if a General must of necessity be sent into the
Empire, the Imperial Army might neither pass through, nor be sent into his
Duchy of Bavaria.

3. And because things in the Palatinate seemed to foreshew an alteration, (the
King being already Master of so many places there) he humbly requested of his
Imperial Majesty, that that part of the Archduchy of Austria called ^upra
Anisum. For the ^^kes charges (...) the late ^arres of Bo^mia: which ^e
Emperor ^ting again, ^d in Lieu of ^m granted (...) Duke those ^ces in the
^latinate.
Ober-Ens, which had before been * empawned to him; His Majesty would now
please to return again unto him.

4 Hereupon he promised to assist his Imperial Majesty to the uttermost of his
power; and to keep off all molestations from the Archduchy of Austria. For
which purpose, he had already blockt up the passages upon the Danuby with his
Boores, and made all provisions for the defense of Ober-Ens.

The Duke being gladly entertained by the Emperor hereupon, and having made
his advantages of the Treaty of Neutrality with the King, (of which we before
told you) still continues his warlike preparations. About the end of January,
and beginning of February; he sends some forces toward Amberg in the Upper
Palatinate: (...) sends men ^o the Upper ^latinate.
intending to keep some 5 or 6000 men thereabouts. When Tilly was afterward
driven that way, he then mixes his new-levyed Boores, among Tillyes old
Legions: of whom, when any numbers marched in a body by themselves; Tilly was
feign to send some of his old soldiers along to be their Keepers, ^ynes with
^^lly.
and to stave them off from ravaging of the Country. When (after this) the
King was gotten into Bavaria, feign then would he have treated to compound the
matter: but neither would the King lose more time, nor trust him that was too
much governed by the Jesuits. The first overture to the Treaty, Would treat
with the King.
was made by the French Ambassador: and the second, by the Duke of Newburgs:
both times as by mediators or third parties, to save the Dukes honor. But most
eagerly was the King pressed to it, by the French Ambassador, then resident
with the Duke: who angered his Majesty now and then, with his importunity.

After his army was beaten at the Lech, his chief rendezvous and retreat, was
Ingolstat: where when the King was on one side of the Danuby, the Duke and his
army were upon the the other. There, Retires to Jngolstat and R^genspurg.
had he gotten some 14000 men together again: with whom, when the King rose
from Ingolstat, then went he to Ratisbone, in Dutch called Regenspurg.
Thereabouts he keeps for a while: and invites Wallenstein to join with him.
Those of Regenspurg complain, of the ill disciplining of his army; whom His
own presence and justice, in executing diverse plunderers, could not yet reduce
into good order. To draw the King the sooner out of his Country; he sends his
Lieftenant General Cratz, to take in Weissenburg: himself in the mean time
continuing about Ingolstat and Regenspurg. Hither when Cratz was come again,
Bavaria marches with his whole Army into the Upper Palatinate; where, upon
confidence of Wallensteins being at his back; he about Schwandorff, thrusts
himself before the Kings face, just betwixt him and Bohemia. In which posture,
we for this time leave him to expect Walenstein, and turn again unto the King
of Sweden.

The Kings March up into Bavaria.
WE left his Majesty of Sweden lately providing for his going against the
General Tilly: drawing his old Regiments out of their garrisons, and putting
new levied men into their places. Of the old troops, that forces ^ere left in
the ^^latinate.
were the Rhinegraves Horse, Colonel Hogendorffs Brigade of Foot, and
Colonel Vitzthimb with his 600 men at Franckford; only left for the guard of
the Dukedom of Mentz (for so in the Army it began now to be called) and the
Palatinate: over all which parts and forces, that wise Statesman the Swedish
Chancellor Oxenstiern was to command in chief: whose charge moreover was, well
to wait upon and guard the Queen of Swedens person, then left in the City of
Mentz.

From which Town the King sending the Army before, March the fourth, himself
set forward the next day, together with the King of Bohemia, Prince Augustus of
Sultzbach, etc. March 6. the Army encamps a mile beyond Franckford. Thence by
Steinheim, to Aschaffenburg, where they pass the Mayn: and whence March 7. in
the morning they parted. ^^e way that ^e King took.
That day went his Majesty before the Army through the Speshart forest, unto
Lohr, thirty English miles from Aschaffenburg. Here he staid all the next day
too; going the next (Thursday) morning back again up the Speshart Hill, to
meet his Army: who that night marched up to Lohr also.

Friday, March 9, the Army before day brake up, and marched to Werenfelt on the
Mayn; a league to the North of Carlstat. This day came in thirty six troops
of horse of the Duke of Saxon Weymars. Within a day or two, comes the General
Banier also; whose way out of Magdenburg, was thorough Mansfelt, Iseleben, and
Sangerhausen: and so by Erfurt thorough the Duringer-waldt, into Franconia.
Next day, March 10, their Majesty's of Sweden and Bohemia, going ten miles
further to the North-East; come to Arnstein to meet with Gustavus Horn: who
next day comes from about Schweinfurt and Geltersheim, unto them at Tettelbach,
ten miles further. Thence went the King onwards with three Brigades of the
Army, unto Kitzing; and Colonel Hepburn with other two, unto Oxenfurt; four
English miles from Kitzing. This was upon Monday, Ma^ch. 12th.

March 15. Gustavus Horn went before with the Vantgard to Winshaim, twelve or
thirteen English miles further: whom the King and General Banier, the next
day followed. Here at Winshaim, all the three armies of the King, Gustavus
Horn, and Sir John Banier; together with the new levied Regiments drawn out of
Franconia, were put together and mustered: which all together made not above
14000 Foot. The Horse were thought to be some 120 Cornets: but they being
advanced toward Norimberg before, and in several places now dispersed
(because of the enemy) were not at this time drawn together. These might
perchance be some 10000 or 11000 men besides, so that all together, How strong
King march up.
might make up an army of twentyfoure or 25000 strong, and no more: which is
far short of 45000, as was given out every where. From Winshaim the King went
directly Southward to Dunkelspiel, about thirty English miles further: his
intent being to follow Tilly into Bavaria; whither at first it was believed he
would have gone. This was, March 19. But finding now that Tilly retreated from
him toward the Upper Palatinate; the King turns faces about to the right, and
marches directly toward Norimberg.

For the General Tilly, having hitherto stayed himself about Hasfurt in the
Bishopric of Bamberg; (all the time namely that Gustavus Horn was about
Schweinfurt and Geltershaim) now understanding the King of Sweden to be coming
against him; and finding himself too weak to abide the encounter with him
that had before beaten him; ^^lly retires ^m the King,
he presently thereupon remooves himself toward the other part of his army in
the Upper Palatinate. Upon Monday, March 12, he calls a Council of war at
Hasfurt: the same day remooving with his army unto Bamberg. His
Quarter-master-Generall being dispatched with directions unto Cratz, in the
Upper Palatinate: was slain by some Swedish Horsemen betwixt Norimberg and
Lauff; and his letters sent unto the King. Tuesday, March 13. Tilly goes
forward as far as Forcheim, (16 English miles from Bamberg) where all his
forces in those quarters met with him. Drawing out all the soldiers, and
leaving the Bishopric to shift for it self; he upon Thursday, March 15 goes
to Erlang, midway betwixt Forcheim and Norimberg: where he that night makes
show of his army in full Battaglia. Thence marches he to Norimberg, where in
the Emperors name and his own, he desires of courtesy to be furnished with
some provisions. Colonel Gallas, Colonel Holck; and some Horse of Don
Balthasars, had he before sent for out of the hither parts of Bohemia; where
they as then waited upon the Saxons. These came to Cratz first, ^^ching into
Upper Pa^^ate.
by the way of Amberg; whence they all together went by Weydhausen and Averbach
to meet with Tilly, at his entrance into the Upper Palatinate: into which
Tilly pierced farther still and farther, after that Norimberg had this second
time denied him. Those forces of his, that had hitherto lain about Nordlingen
and Donawert; came now also toward him as far as Hochstat: he likewise
drawing toward them, by Lauff, Altorff, and Newmarckt: whereabouts he stayed
and fortified, expecting there the Kings motions. This was about March 18, or
19. And this middle part of the Palatinate, was the best guard that Tilly could
lie at: for should the King have desired to have marched into Bohemia, then was
he right in his way to stop him: and if into Bavaria, then could he be there
before, to keep him out.

The King being at Dunkelspiel (or Dinkelspuhel) was then within 30 English
miles of Donawert; and might without opposition have marched thither, whither
he made so much haste within a few days after. It may seem something strange,
Why Tilly wen into the Palatinate.
that Tilly marched not thither before him. But this was Bavariaes policy; who
had newly sent a command unto him, that he should by no means retire into
Bavaria, for fear of drawing the King of Sweden in thither after him: and of
laying the field of war in his country, which he had rather should be in the
Prince Palatines Dominions. By this device, thought Bavaria both to save his
own country, and to force the King of Sweden to spoil the Palatinate; which
he would be glad enough to see ruinated. Therefore did Tilly play thus like the
Lapwing, to draw the King from his own nest.

His Majesty now perceiving, which way Tilly retired from him; alters his march
(as has been said) and faces about directly toward Norimberg. The King
encampes by Norimberg
From Dunkelspiel therefore marches he unto Furt; a pretty town some 3 English
miles to the West of Norimberg, where, upon Tuesday, March 20 he arrived, and
encamped. That night was his Majesty expected to have comne into Norimberg: out
of which City when multitudes of people came flocking to his Leaguer, Then
says the King (laughing) I perceive I must needs see Norimberg. This City is
one of the greatest and richest of Germany; and the chiefest Pass of all those
countries. It had condiscended unto the King, when he most stood in need of it;
twice opposed and denied Tilly, since that: and therefore they might well
expect, the King should honor them with his presence. He made his entrance
into it, about 10 in the forenoone, March 21. The morning was observed to be
rainy and lowering; but no sooner were the 2 Kings feet set upon the bridge,
but the Sun began to make a fair day of it: which diverse took notice of, as
a cheerful presage of more halcyon days a coming. I need not tell, how
welcome his Majesty of Sweden was; how solemnly received, or how nobly he
behaved himself again. The King of Bohemiaes person likewise, was as much
desired to be seen, by his own Subjects of the Upper Palatinate, next
neighbors unto Norimberg: whose gracious deportment unto them again, I must
here also pass over. His entertainment in Norim^erg.
The King of Swedens first complement to the Magistrates was, to ackowledge
their good will toward his service; and to thank them for their bountiful
entertainment of his Field-Marshall Horn. At table, his Majesty fed, (like a
soldier) upon the substantiallest and plainest meats only; scarce touching a
bit of any of the rarities, or forced dishes. After dinner, gave he audience
unto some Protestant Lords of Ausburg, comne thither to him from those of the
Religion of that City: who presented him with 2 fair horses. After that,
followed the Norimbergers presents: which were, four very great Pieces of
brass Ordnance, with their furniture. Two Globes of the world of a reasonable
bigness, all of silver; and filled, one with new Ducates; and the other with
new Gold-Gilders: together with six wagons of Oats, Fish, and Wine: which (in
lesser quantities) is the ordinary and general present of Germany unto Princes
and Ambassadors. With these Presents, there is (of course) an Oration ever
presented: unto which of the Towns, the King (who is an excellent Speaker)
presently returned this following answer.

The Kings Oration at Norimberg.
I do graciously accept of, and thank you for this Present, but withal I do
assure you, That the most acceptable gift you can bestow upon me, is your
constancy for the Evangeliacall and common cause. From which I here pray you,
that you never suffer your selves to be withdrawn; and that you neither yield
unto fea^e or hope, neither to fair promises, nor fierce threatenings; neither
to pleasure, nor to vanities; nor yet to any other particular passion or
affection, which men are usually subject unto: or by which they are wrought
upon, and persuaded: and in these dangerous times especially, where Mammon the
Prince of this World so much domineereth. With-stand you therefore, all
avarice, and love of riches: wherein the enemy, I know, will not be wanting,
but will every way attempt you: they will promise, they will threatten, they
will do their very uttermost, to entangle you in their springes. But for this,
your selves and all the world well know, what subtle and powerful enemies we
have against us; and how strictly they be leagued and banded together, for the
rooting out of all the Evangeliacall States and Princes. That way are all their
devices, actions, and endeavors driven: to that Butt, aim all their attempts
and their designs: and to that purpose, is all their mightines and great power
employed: and in a word; All they commit, and all they omit; all their
thoughts, and all their wishes, tend wholly to our destruction. True it is,
that outwardly they make show of suing for peace: but it should be such a
peace, as that you, your State, and all other Protestants whatsoever, would be
utterly and assuredly ruined and undone by it.

God has preferred you to be Governors, has put into your trust, many
thousands of souls; and it is so populous a City which you rule, that I have
scarcely seen the like of it: all which depend wholly upon you, and wholly
does obey you: and I do not doubt but you will so rule them all, as you hope
to give an account of it before Gods great Tribunal, and before all
Christendom. You are of noble Families, your Ancestors have, time out of
mind, been of honorable reputation in the world: walk you therefore in their
worthy steps, and follow you the goodness of their examples. As good Patriots,
do you your duties at this time; and consider withal what God might suffer to
come to pass, if you neglecting his help, should now give over your selves
into the hands of your enemies. How, think you, would they use you and yours?
God has already suffered you to see many things; has already laid some
troubles upon you; so that you have had your share in these miseries, by which
God has showed us our sins and our deservings: but yet withal has God
still saved, defended, and most powerfully preserved you. So that I cannot
enough wonder, and must acknowledge it to be a visible assistance and work of
God; that the enemies hitherto have been so blinded, and so kept back; that
they have not all this while gotten this and such other Cities, which (as the
world truly thought) they have had these 2 or 3 years day, fully in their own
powers. Truly God has marveilously preserved you; as he has also bin pleased
to call me to this work: for sooner should I have thought the last Judgment
would have comne, then that I should come into Norimberg; and (as you your
selves said) leave so far behind me mine own Dominions, good subjects, and
whatsoever else is loving and dear unto me; and to bring along with me so many
brave Worthies to expose their lives, as I do mine, for the restitution,
safety, and preservation of the common Evangeliacall cause, and the liberttie
of Germany. With this purpose I do intend ( God willing) to go on, and to do
whatsoever shall lie in my power, and as God by his special grace shall conduct
and enable me, both for you and all the rest of our friends: and I will, I Will
assure you, both keep and perform whatsoever I have heretofore promised,
either by my Ambassadors, my Deputies, or my Letters.

Consider you therefore, I desire you, the consequence of this business, and
for the mercy of Gods sake, remain you constant; be not moved at any thing
whatsoever: but rather encourage you your neighbors, and such Towns
especially as depend upon you.

I have not said thus much all this while, by reason of any doubt I have of
your faithfulness and honesty, but rather to make you, who are already quick
and willing, more willing and quick yet, by this spur as it were of my
words. God will not every day send you such a Preacher as I am, who am now
here, with a desire to help and comfort you: to do you all good, and to
further your cause, so far forth as God shall strengthen and enable me. Have
patience a while therefore, and suffer a little more yet, remain constant,
perform your duties at this time, and God Almighty; who has hitherto been
with you, and so marueilously showed His help unto you, will assuredly give
you his Grace also: that your City shall further flourish and increase, your
renown shall be spread all the World over: and we all together shall honor,
laud, praise, and bless our Lord God, both here and for ever.

His Majesty getting intelligence the same afternoon, of Tillyes sinking
deeper still and deeper into the Palatinate; The King a^ters his purp^ for
followin^ of Tilly.
with a purpose ever as the King came nearer unto him, to hitch further still
and further toward Wallenstein (who was then heard of upon the Frontiers of
Bohemia and the said Palatinate) the King upon these and such other reasons
following, quite again alters his former resolution for the further pursuing
of him.

1. The first reason was this. His Reason
That seeing Tilly would not be fought withal single; he thought it no policy
to drive him up to Wallenstein: which two if they should have joined with
Bavaria, and then all three have turned again upon him; they might possibly
have been too hard for him: especially in that place, which they knew and not
he.

2. By this means, he should for the time, have laid the seat of the war in
his friends the Prince Palatines dominions: which would utterly have ruined
them.

3. Bavaria being still entier and untoucht, supplied his enemies both with men
and money: whereas were but the field of war removed thither; himself should
get his share of that, and cut so much of it off from the enemy: yea and the
enemies part of it too must of necessity be destroyed, by calling in Tilly to
defend it.

4. This would utterly defeat the Duke of Bavariaes project, (which the King
by intercepted letters came to understand) that he would not have Tilly for
this reason come into Bavaria; and that he had desired of the Emperor, that no
army might be sent into, or through his Country.

5. It would kill the very hearts of the Bavarians, to see an enemy in their
own Country. For it is commonly seen, that people who are valorous enough
abroad, and to keep out the war; are danted and amazed to see it brought
home unto them. The firing of the beacons (where any are) or the ringing of the
Bells awck, (where that is used) will hardly draw them together to make head:
and their hearts are quite done, notwithstanding all encouragements of fighting
pro Aris et focis: for the people will give one half, to save the the other; the
Cities will yield; and the enemy in a short time, will be as strong as the
Prince himself, in his own Country.

6. Should he not now hasten into Bavaria; he could not have gotten in
thither at all; or at leastwise neither so soon, nor so near a way. There
was a Fort now a building at Donawert; which should he stay till it were
finished, he must then go by Vlm many a league about, to get over the Danubye.

Upon these reasons (among the rest) His Majesty now turns directly (almost)
back again; and that with expedition too: going the same night out of
Norimberg unto Swabach; eight English miles to the South of it. Tillyes Forces
were at the same time about Newmarckt and beyond it; between twenty and
thirty English miles to the East of Swabach. For the discovering of whose
strength and lodging, the King immediately sends out some strong Horse-Partees:
who upon Friday, March 23, defeating some of those Tillians: return presently
again unto the Kings Army. Upon our Lady Eve, the Kings forces come to
Pleinfelt, Weissenburg, and Oetingen; three pretty towns betwixt Norimberg and
Donawert: upon the top of an hill, some English mile to the North of this
Weissenburg, See for these towns, either in the South erne edge of the Map of
Franconia; o^ better in the Western edge of the Map, of the Upper Palatinate.
stands the fair and strong Castle of Wiltsburg, the chief Pass and Command
of all that Country: into which the Count of Tilly had put the young Count of
Pappenheim (Cousin to the General Pappenheim) for Governor. To him the King
sending first of all, requires to have it peaceably restored again unto the
Marchioness of Onspach and her children; if so be he expected to have his
Fathers Lands and Castle of Pappenheim, (the very next neighbors to that
place) to be well used. The message being answered by the Cannon, up goes the
King the same day toward the Castle, which with eight troops of Horse, and
some six hundred Musketeers, he presently surrounded. Some of these
Musketeers are brought within Musket shot of the very walls; who with their
continued volleyes were to amuse the enemy, until the King had round about
taken his full view, of the Fortifications of the Castle. Finding the place to
be strong, The King leaves Wiltzburg Castle.
and Tilly to be near, He concludes with himself, That it more concerned him
to leave the design, and to march with expedition unto Donawert; then to lose
his time about the strength of that Castle; whilst Tilly might in the mean
time have finished his Fort, already begun upon the hill before Donawert.
Leaving therefore three hundred men under Colonel Sperreuter in the town; he
marches with the Army directly the same day unto Donawert: where, according to
his intelligence, he finds the already begun Skonce but half perfected.

This continued expedition of his in the march, was of such consequence; that
had he but stayed three days longer, whilst that Fort had been made
defensible; he might have been enforced to have marched about as far as Vlm
for his passage: where he had all this ^ime imagined that he must indeed have
passed over the Danuby. And thus if any Army were ever said to have run post,
this of the Kings now did: even all the way from Mentz unto Donawert.

March 26 in the morning, His Majesty takes in the town and cloister of
Kaishaim, Kaishaim take
four English miles short of Donawert: unto which City he the same night
marched. This Donawert has sometimes been an Imperial town, though now at
the Kings coming, in possession of the Duke of Bavaria; to whom it came by the
occasion of its having been proscribed of late years, by the Emperor
Rodolphus. It is seated in the Circle of Schwaben, upon the Northern bank of
the famous River of the Danuby or the Danow: which gives the name to it. This
town, and the bridge it has over the Danuby, are the Key and Pass into that
part of Schwabland beyond the River, first; and through that into Bavaria, by
the river Lech. There were some 1200 Foot, 500 Horse, and 500 of the Bavarian
trayn'd Bands, at this time within the City: and ^onawert be^ged.
the valiant Rodulph Maximilian Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg, (who had reskued Tilly
at the Battle of Leipsich) being their Governor.

The before-spoken of, now a building Fort; was upon the top of a little hill,
on the Northwest side of the town. The hill reached from the very walls of
the Town, unto the Danuby: the Fort it self being betwixt the town and
river; and within Musket shot of either. It was not as yet able to do the
Kings folk any annoyance; it had no batteries finished: by it therefore did
the King think fittest to approach. On the bottom of the hill, close to the
rivers side, was there a handsome Suburb, and through it, a Port into the Town.
In this Suburb, the King about nine a clock in the morning, March 26, first of
all causes 500 good Musketeers to be lodged. His next work was, on the same
side of the hill, to raise up a Battery, and to mount twenty Pieces of Ordnance
upon it: from whence he so flanckered the bridge, both with his Cannon and 500
Musketeers; that the same men were able both to annoy the Town, and to
disturb all passage over the said bridge, inward and outward. The Kings small
and great shot, continue playing all this whole day after, upon the Port, the
bridge, and a great Storehouse likewise on the side toward Bavaria; in which
there were two troops of horse, and some Foot of the Tillians lodged. About
nine at night the King beginning to perceive, that could he but flancker the
bridge on the other side of the Town also, he might utterly cut off by that
means, both their relief and retreat; he instantly, to this purpose, sends
Colonel Hebron with his Brigade, round about the Town over Harburg bridge,
(five English miles from Donawert toward the North) which stands upon a
little River that runs through Donawert into the Danuby. Hebron sent to
besiege the town on the other side.
Sir John Hebron having passed this bridge, marches down to the West side of
the Town; where having a little after midnight, silently disposed his men in
covert along in the gardens and most advantageous places under the Wall: he so
orders the matter thereupon, that no man could pass either over the Danow
bridge, or out at the Western Port, but he must of necessity fall under his
advantages. Those within the Town, now perceiving (to their terror) that they
were neither able to resist the King, nor to stay the expectation of relief;
thought a little before break of day, to have under favor of the darkness
marched out of the Town over the bridge, into that part of Schwabenland toward
Bavaria. This design of theirs, was hindered by Colonel Hebron; who now
flanckering the bridge much nearer then the King on his side did, gave them
such uneasy passage: that though Saxon-Lawenburg and some few with him got
safely over, yet the rest that would have followed, were by those volleyes so
cut down; that their dead bodies even covered the most part of the bridge; and
foulely encumbred the whole passage of it. The rest yet within, seeing their
retreat that way to be cut off; made a salley out at the West Port, upon
Hebron: and were to their loss repulsed.

The King thundered all this while upon the other Port with his Cannon; and
they within, still fearing his entrance that way; were resolved once again to
venture the forcing of their passage through Hebron; who they knew to be the
weaker. Boldly sallying thereupon, they were by Hebrons Brigade so courageously
the second time entertained: that betwixt three and 400 of them being cut
down, and 400 taken prisoners: Hebron enters the town.
Hebron in the height of this heat, at the same time enters that Western Port
also. There were of English Volunteers that waited upon Colonel Hepburn in
this action (and with the formest) my Lord Craven, Master Nicholas Slanning,
and Master Robert Marsham.

Sir John Hepburn being thus gotten in, and having first cut in pieces all
resistance; his soldiers fall immediately to plundering: where many a gold
chain, with much other plate and treasure of the enemies, were made prize of:
they having wanted leisure before, for the conveighing away of their riches.

By this time, was the King likewise entered at his Port; who immediately gives
command, The King also ^nters the ^owne.
that none of the Burgers houses should any more be plundered, (which some of
the Soldiers had already begun to do) only what they could find of the
Bavarian Soldiers, should be lawful booty. All things after a while being
quieted, the King sends for Sir John Hepburn; unto whom, before the King of
Bohemia, the Palatine August, and diverse other great personages, he ascribes
the honor of this action: as being the man who had first counseled him, that
he might be sent about by Harburg bridge; and for having had so good success,
with so little losses. The Count of Solms his Foot Regiment, was put into the
Town for garrison; and Colonel Schneidewin left Governor. Order was also
taken for the free exercise of the Protestant Religion, to be restored in the
Town the Easter following.

Donawert being thus taken upon the 27 of March; (which for all the days in
the year was the Duke of Bavariaes Birthday) about ten a clock, the same
morning, are there 500 Dragooners first, and twelve Cornets of Horse after
them, sent out with all speed to pursue those of the enemies troops, that
between five and six in the morning had escaped over the Bridge, with the
Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg. These Horse and 500 Dragooners being dispatched away,
Colonel Hebron with his Brigade marches over next of all; with order to lodge
himself by the aforesaid Storehouse, at the South end of the bridge. Here he
immediately raises up a very large Halfe-Moone, for the guard both of his men
and the bridge, should the enemy now fall upon him.

The Dragooners and Horse aforesaid, advance all along a goodly champion
country, toward a Castle of the Fuggers; which was some 3 English miles from
Donawert, and another from the Town of Rain. Within it, were 400 soldiers and
12 Pieces of Ordnance; and about it, was a very deep Graff or moate. A Castle
of the Fuggers taken.
The defendants now perceiving the Swedish-troopes thus to approach them; and
finding by the example of Donawert, no expectation of relief: they had thought
at first to have quit the Castle, and to have made their retreat over the
bridge at Rain. These the Dragooners now intercepting, kill 200 of them upon
the place; the Horsemen making prisoners of the residue. The Swedish
Horse-Partee, was commanded by the Grave von Hochtuitschy (as I hear his name
pronounced) which I suppose should be the Bohemian Baron Cochtitscky, who had
been at the Battle of Leipsich, and with Gustavus Horn since that, at Bamberg.

Upon the Danuby, (some 15 or 16 miles to the East of Donawert) stands the
town of Newburg: from whence Wolfgang William, (one of the Princes Palatines
and cousin to the Elector,) has his title of Duke of Newburg. He had heretofore
been a Protestant: but since he was turned Papist, and becomne one of the
Catholike-Leaguers; he had much hindered his Mother and 2 brethren, in the
exercise of their religion: which see complaind of, in the Diet of See page 24
of our First Part.
Leipsich. The elder of these 2 Brethren, Prince or Palatine Augustus of
Sultzbach, (often heretofore mentioned) now desires the King to send him out
with 1800 horse, and 2000 Foot, to the town of Hochstat and other places, in
the Duchy of Newburg: which had been preserved from Popery, Hochstat taken.
by the courage and authority of their Mother, the old Duchess of Newburg.
This town of Hochstat, does Prince August now seize upon: and full of joy were
the people, to be thus freed from their fear of the threatened Popish
persecution. From this town, Vlm, and Lawingen, was the Kings camp so long
supplied with Provisions, until their entrance into Bavaria. A little after
this time, and Lawingen.
was the said Lawingen taken by the Swedish forces, that lay about Vlm. It is
seated in a most fruitful plain, having the Danuby on the South, with a
bridge over that: and belonged unto the said Wolfgang William, the eldest Duke
of Newburg. And thus was he begun withal for having showed himself an enemy,
by relieving of the Imperialists, after he had treated a Neutrality.

March 30 has the General Banier, a great mind to take in Newburg also: for
which purpose is there a strong Partee of Commanded men drawn out of the whole
army: An Aenslaught upon Newburg miscarried.
one Rott being taken out of every Company. They might make about 3000 Foot,
and 1000 Horse; and were divided into eight troops. All these marching away
upon the North-side of the river, (the town standing on the South,) find the
place too strong to be in so short a time surprised. General Banier, upon hope
of prevailing by the terror of the King of Swedens name, directs his letters
into the Town: which not taking, he was feign to turn back again into his
Quarter. The King was something pleasant with his General, for having lost his
pains: and asked him, if he thought to take in the town by a skurvy letter?
The town was voluntarily afterward forsaken by the Tillians, after the Kings
victory at the Lech. Had Banier at this time taken in the town: the King by
that bridge had gotten into Bavaria.

The General Tilly, (whom about the 18 or 19 of March we left about Newmarckt
in the Upper Palatinate) having notice of the Kings making toward Bavaria; was
by this time come by the way of Ingolstat bridge, into the said Duchy of
Bavaria. Tilly comes into Bavaria.
By the beginning of April, has the King drawn all his army also an English
mile out of Donawert, unto Northeim, namely, some 2 miles more from the river
of Lech: which divides the Circle of Schwaben from Bavaria. Tilly now
perceiving the King to have the mystery of getting of bridges; breaks down
that, in his power, over the Danuby betwixt Newburg and Rain; and that other
over the Lech at Rain also, which is more then Musket shot beyond the town.
This Rain he fortifies; and the better to keep the King from passing any where
over the Lech, he lays his army all along upon the Bavarian shore of it,
betwixt Rain and Ausburg. The length it reached, was near upon, if not
altogether, sixteen English miles. Not that his Army was then so big, as in
one continued body to reach out sixteen miles together; but that several
Companies and Regiments, were laid here and there scatteringly at a distance;
with some Guards and Sentinels now and then between, all the way from Rain
unto Ausburg.

The King perceiving, how Tillyes maine intention was to keep him out of
Bavaria; sees no better means how to get into it, then by forcing a bridge over
the Lech aforesaid. To find out the most aduantageous place for that purpose,
and in the providing of necessaryes for the bridge, are the first four days
of April employed. In the mean time, comes Duke William of Saxon-Weymar from
about Erfurt in Duringen, with those 10000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, which he
should before have joined with Gustavus Horn in Bamberg.

The Duke, April second, marching through Donawert; conjoynes them the same day
unto the Kings army: then encamped about Northeim.

The next day, April third in the afternoon; was there a Trumpet brought
blindfolded into the Kings presence: his message (as I find it written) was to
require Letters of safe conduct for the French Ambassador, then resident with
the Duke of Bavaria. The Duke, perchance, would feign have treated: but I do
not find that the King was very forward to suffer himself to be the second
time abused with that stale trick of entertaining such a Treaty, as he might
suspect to be intended, merely to delude action.

Whilst some are employed about finding out this best place of advantage for
the bridge; the King gives order unto the Swedes The Swedes ^nerally one ^h
another, (...) all Carpen^^^: and the (...), being a ^ne, simple (...) droyling
^e of peo^^^ are more for the ^^e, then for Sword: not^^^^standing have here
^^d so much, ^e great ^oyts of (...) Finlan^ The ^^^les and ^^nders, ^ly, are
not ^est souldi^^ of the Ar^ it is the (...) and Ger^ that have ^t: and ^e both
^ner, done ^arts also.
his Carpenters, and unto the Fins, his Pioners; to break down the houses of
the neighbor villages; and to bring such timber, plancks, and boords, as might
be fit for a bridge-worke. The place appointed for the working of the bridge,
was at Oberendorff; a small Dorp some half an English mile from the very
point, where the King intended to lay it over. The place resolved upon, was
betwixt Rain and Thierhanbten; just upon a point of land: made so, by the
crooking or bending of the River. The ground on the Kings side, was a pikes
length higher banckt, and playner withal, then that on Tillyes: which was both
lower, and woody. There was a trial made first of all, to lay a floatebridge;
but the River would not endure that: for notwithstanding it be not above thirty
or forty paces over at the most, yet by reason of the straight course of it,
the stream sets very swift and violent.

All the materials being now prepared; the King about nine at night, upon the
fourth of April, advances some 1000 Commanded men, unto the place aforesaid.
Two hours after, they begin to work a running Trench round about the crooked
bank of the River, that the Musketeers out of that, might with more security
give fire into the Wood on the other side of the River. This Line or Trench,
had a great Battery at each end of it, for half and quarter Cannon: together
with many lesser Batteryes between, all along about the Point, for the smaller
field pieces to play upon: which were everywhere intermingled with Musketeers
also. Whilst the Pioners are thus a working, the King in diverse other places
(both above it and below) gives false fires and Alarms, both with Muskets and
smaller fielding pieces, for to amuse the enemy; that till the morning they
could not imagine where to find him.

^ost fa^ Story, of ^ings pas^ ^he river
By six on the Thursday morning, April 5. was this work finished, the Cannon
mounted, the Arches or Tressels for the bridge, with the planckes and other
materials, all brought; and ready to be laid into the River. These Tressels,
were to have great stones or weights tied unto their legs, to sink them
withal; and were to be no longer, then to reach just unto the bottom of the
River, so that the planckes were to lie even almost with the very Water. The
longest Tressels were about four yards long: which were for the channel of
the River. By that time it was daylight, General Tilly begins to perceive the
Kings design, Tilly opposes the King.
and falls to work against him in the Wood: whose Pioners when the King heard
chopping down the trees, he gave order immediately unto his men, to give them
a Salvee or a Good morrow (as he called it) both with their Cannon and their
Muskets. About 8 a clock the same morning, the King in two small Boats that he
had, sends over the Swedes and Fins his Pioners and Carpenters, unto the other
side of the River. The design was, to have them make up a small Halfe-moone,
with a Stocket or Pallisadoe unto it: which should both answer that small work
that Tilly had made for his Musketeers to lodge in, almost right before the
said point of the River: and to cover the Bridge withal, from the greater
shot; which this Halfe-moone still latched. The Fins and Swedes labored upon
the work, and made good the place; till that about 4 a clock in the
afternoon, both it was finished, and they relieved.

The King all this while, is diligent in laying over his bridge, and Tilly as
busy to raise up Batteryes to beat it down again. The King himself stird
not all that night, nor the next day, from the very end of the bridge: nor the
King of Bohemia from him, for the most part. Tilly upon the edge of the
thicket, close unto the River, raises up a Trench first, to lodge his
Musketeers in, as we told you: and about Musket shot further within the wood,
gives order for the making of a very great Work: that if the King should put
over his bridge, he might by power of that Work, and by cutting down of the
trees about it; have been able (at least) to have hindered his further passage.
The small and great shot, go off incessantly on both sides all this while; and
they continue thus with extreme hot execution upon one another, till about
eleven a clock at noone the same day. About which time, the General Altringer
with the shot of a Fieldpeece (which grased upon his temples) was spoiled and
carried off in the Duke of Bavariaes own Coach. Whether he dyed of the blow,
shortly after, was not a great while known in these parts: though now it be
sure he is indifferently well recovered, ^^ltringer ^unded,
and with Walenstein. Some say, that he became crazed in the brain upon it:
for mine own part, I would be loath it should be so: for then has that shot,
spoiled one of the best Head-peeces of Germany, one of the neatest Scholars of
the Empire.

and Tilly mortally.
The Bavarian Captains found this so hot a service; that Tilly himself was
enforced to come up to the point, and into the very face of the danger, to give
directions: where within half an hour after Altringers mis-chance; he also
received a Musket shot in the thigh a little above the knee, which prooved a
mortal wound unto him. This fatal accident of this brave old General, did so
amaze, not the Common soldiers alone, but the Duke of Bavaria himself also;
(who now staid behind in the groave with the Infantery:) that so soon as ever
the sad news was brought unto him, notwithstanding he were Generalissimo over
the whole Forces; yet he instantly took horse upon it, (...) Duke of ^^^^ia
flees,
posted with all speed into Ingolstat; not staying so much as to give order,
either for the continuing of the begun design, or for the marching away of the
army.

Tilly being carried off, and the Duke gone: the afternoon is spent on the
Kings side, as the forenoone had been; which was with uncessant thunders and
volleyes of small and great shot. Among the Bavarians, those that understood of
the spoiling of their two Generals, and the flight of the Duke, and ^^^men by
(...) after (...).
by degrees and disorder, they one after another retreated from their Charge:
whilst others that knew not of it, stoutly maintained the encounter. Little
dreamt the King of it all this while: whose men still continue their working.
By four in the afternoon, is the bridge finished: The King finishes his Bridge.
as 2. hours after, the little Halfe-moone and Pallisadoe also are, on the
other side of the water before the end of the bridge. This done, the Kings own
Company of his Life-guards is sent over the bridge, for the manning of the
Halfe-moone; for fear the enemy should have fallen upon it. In the beginning
of the night, other of the Bavarians begin to retire, and to draw off their
Ordnance; and that in such haste, that they forgot to command off their
Out-guards, which lay all along upon the side of the River.

The next morning, the King sends over a Partee of some thirty Scottish
Musketeers commanded by Captain Forbes, to see what the Bavarians were doing
in the Wood; for that he had lately heard no more of them. Here could Forbes
find but two Horse-Sentryes upon the edge of the Wood; whom he took prisoners:
who when they were brought unto the King, protested that they were ignorant of
the retreat of the rest of their fellows.

But to return a little back. The King not knowing of Tillyes wounding, or
the Dukes fleeing; durst not adventure that evening to put his forces over the
bridge: but spends the rest of the night in drawing up his army before it. This
being done, order is given unto the Infantery or foot, to march over in the
first place: and of all them Sir John Hepburn with his Brigade was to have the
honor of the Vantguard; The King understanding by Forbes of this great and
unhoped for news; he alters thereupon all his former intended resolution:
commanding the next morning, April sixth, 500 Horse first, and 300 more after
them, to pass over into the Bavarian forsaken Quarters. The King, sends after
Tillyes
The first 500 being advanced through the Wood, and into the plain beyond it;
there cut down a many of the Bavarian straglers, that had been too slow in
following of their fellows. Some other Swedish troops are instantly also
commanded toward Rain; which though Tilly had left reasonably well fortified,
yet this former fear amongst his party, made it nothing so resistable to the
Swedish. They presently entering the Town, find some wagons, and many horses,
ready laden with the enemies goods; which are made good booty: but the Town
paying 30000 dollars to the King, (...) taken.
are freed from pillaging. This was the first Town, that the King took in
Bavaria. There was it understood, that both the Duke of Bavaria, and the two
wounded Generals, parted the night before toward Newburg; whither they first
retired: and from thence with as many of their Army as were then comne to them,
unto Ingolstat.

To return to the King and his Leaguer. The rest of that Friday, Aprile sixth,
is spent in the marching over of more Horse, and of three Brigades of
Infantery: together with most of the Artillery. The Infantery already marched
over, encampt that night upon the edge of the plain, a little without the
Wood: the rest that were left behind, sitting down just before the bridge.

And now for that such as are skilled in the Arts of war, will desire to be
satisfied with the reason, as well as to hear the success of the Action (in
which oftentimes Chance may have as great a share, as Wisdom:) we will
therefore affoard them a brief discourse upon the Kings great Judgment, as
well as we have done the relation of his fortune.

The reason of the Kings putting over his bridge at this place was, that he
might have the better convenience, both by flanckering it on either side to
defend it from the annoyance of the enemy; ^^e Kings rea^^s for the ^oyce of
the ^^ce of his ^^dge.
and that being as it was, just upon the Point: it could not be touched by
Tillyes batteryes, which were on each hand of the bridge, though he very often
removed his Cannon to that purpose. For notwithstanding Tilly had (with as much
judgment and advantage as possibly might be) raised his Batteryes, not cloase
unto the Rivers side, but at a distance from the bank: yet were all his shot
so kept off by the round and sudden shouldering away of the bank of the River
at either end, that his Ordnance could not possibly come to bear upon the
bridge; but that either the bullets fell short and were latcht by the little
Half-moone, or hill upon the high bank above the bridge; or else flew quite
over the whole leaguer. As for the raising of a Battery right before the face
of the point; that could not Tilly on the sudden come to do: for besides that
he was hindered by the wood; the fury of the Kings both small and great shot,
would at so near a distance have spoild him as many men, as had adventured
upon the service: and the Kings Batteryes being first up, would not suffer
Tilly to mount any of his Cannon right before him.

And yet for all this, there appears to be more then a humane direction in it:
seeing the King was made constant against all the minds and judgments of his
greatest Commanders. For when the day before, he asked the advice of his ablest
Generals; and they, notwithstanding they saw him so far already engaged in
the action, as he could not come off with his honor; had freely (all of them)
professed their utter dislike of the design: yet did the King plainly tell
them, that he continued against all their reasons, constant unto his own
purpose. Yea, there appears not only a more then humane direction, but a
benediction also, in the easiness of the attaining of the passage: which very
much exceeded all the Kings own hopes of it. For when the day before he
perceived Tilly to begin to work against him; he apprehended so much danger in
his own design, that should he loose but 2000 men in winning of his passage,
he should think (as he confessed) that he had made a thrifty purchase of his
entrance into Bavaria. When the next day (in like manner) that himself being
marched over with the Horse, The Kings judgment of the difficulty and
consequence of the action.
had with his own eyes perceived how sufficiently Tilly was providing to
entertain him; he blessed himself for his good success in it: saying to the
King of Bohemia, and diverse of his Commanders then about him; That this days
action was near of as great a consequence, as that of Leipsich.

And so indeed it is worthy to be esteemed by all soldiers. When Cardinal
Pasman (the Emperors Ambassador with the Pope) had the first news brought
him of this victory, and of the manner of it: he to his friends pronounced
Actum est, There is an end of all: which some interpreted to be meant of the
Empire, and of the Romish religion. Caiaphas (you know) did once prophecy. All
this, as it gives us cause to admire Gods great providence, in creating such a
place as this crooking of the Lech, (and God surely had a purpose in it:) so it
wonderfully likewise commends the Kings judgment, for so suddenly and so
solidely apprehending the advantage of it. And yet, for all this, had not the
King escaped so cheap, as with the lives of two thousand brave men; had not He
that directed David's sling-stone into Goliahs forehead; guided one bullet unto
Altringers forehead, and another into Tillyes thigh bone: had not this brave
old Count been thus spoiled, the King had found but an unfriendly well-come
into Bavaria, from that second and greater Work, which Tilly had labored
upon, from six in the morning to eleven, but not yet finished. That work I
mean, which is before mentioned in the wood. And yet would there have fallen
out another difficulty, which the King could never till then come to know of.
Thus. Suppose he had peaceably passed the bridge; and Tilly had let him do it
without disturbance: yet would not the place, (he being over) have suffered
him to have charged the Bavarians, with above two Brigades in front; and that,
by reason of advancing through the Woods, necessarily in disorder too; neither
of which two could possibly have been avoided: As for the Bavarians, they
could have answered him from the Plain, with six Brigades in front; and by
advantage of the plain ground, all in order too. They might also have had the
advantage of their already planted Batteryes; especially if that great one had
been perfected: when as the Kings on the other side of the River, must
necessarily all this while have been silent, or have shot into the enemy,
through his own people.

And this is the Story of the Kings bridge over the Lech: the description
whereof we have thought worthy to be here in Figure imparted unto you. A Piece
it is, though not of so curious an Architecture as that of ten days work over
the Rhine, wherein Caesar Lib 4. de Bell Gallico: circa medium.
so much pleases himself in the large and accurate description of it: though,
doubtless, it will prove as famous. We by this also see, what the loss of a
brave General is. Constantinople held out manfully against the Turks, so long
as Justinian the General was unwounded: but he fainting at the loss of his
own blood, and going from the walls; and the Emperor after him, (as the Duke
of Bavaria now did after Tilly) that famous City was at that assault
conquered, and the Eastern Empire too, presently after it. And this is the
Action of Thursday the fifth of April, a day almost as famous as Wednesday,
the former seventh of September.

The Explanation of the Letters in the former Figure of the Bridge.
A The King of Sweden: and the King of Bohemia by him. B The Bridge. C A Trench
or Brestworke; in which the Kings Musketeers were lodged: betwixt the several
Batteryes of the great Ordnance. Which Musketeers, are represented by the
small strokes, made right forwards. D Diverse little Field-peeces. E
Plat-formes or Batteryes for the Kings greater Cannon. F The Halfe-moone with
its Pallisadoe or Stocket, beyond the Bridge; and for the guard of it. It was
scarcely big enough to lodge a hundred men in. G A little Underwood, or low
Bushy place. H A place void of Wood: which was a Bache, sometimes over-flowne.
I A Brestworke, for Tillyes Musketeers. KK Tilly and Altringer: or the place
where they were shot. L The high Wood, where the Duke of Bavaria stood. M
Tillyes great Batteryes to shoot down the Bridge. N A small riveret running
through the Wood. O Tillyes great Brestworke; not yet finished. Begun at six in
the morning; and left off when he was shot. P Some Horse-guards of Tillyes:
laid scatteringly here and there all along the river, from Rain to Ausburg. Q
The Kings Horse-guards, and Horse-Sentryes. R A hole in the earth, or casual
advantageable place; wherein some of the Kings Foot were lodged. S The Hill
behind Tillyes great Work. T. The fashion of the Tressels, or Arches for the
Kings Bridge.
Upon Saturday, April 7, that part of the Cavallery which had marched over the
day before, advanct further into the country, under the command of Gustavus
Horn; Horn sent abroad.
and the Infantery yet on the further side, marched over to the other troops
already in Bavaria: with whom, in the plain before the wood, they were all
drawn up into Battaglia. This done, The King goes toward Ausburg.
and the King with his whole Army now come over into Bavaria, and a small
garrison left hehind him in the town of Rain; he marches forward toward
Ausburg. Order is likewise given to the Cavallery yet left behind, to advance
onwards upon the Schwabland side of the Lech (where they yet were;) and to
bring the greater Cannon along with them; which the King as yet durst not
adventure over his new made bridge. That same Saturday night, Takes
Thierhaubten,
the King takes and lodges in, the Town and Cloister of Thierhaubten, a pretty
Town on the East side of the small riveret Aicha: which is the same that
runs along by the Lechs side, through the Wood where Tillyes late Quarter was.
The next day the Vantguard of his Majesty's Horse, and Friedberg.
took in the Town of Friedberg: the Magistrates bringing out the keys to
them.

Whilst the King was upon his march toward Ausburg, there came an Ambassador
to present himself unto him. His message was, to excuse the Duke of Newburg,
concerning his admitting of Tilly into his Town and Country; and to justify
it to be no breach of the Neutrality. An Ambassador from the Duke of Newburg.
The King gave him a round answer. That they had deceived him, promising much
both by letters and Ambassages, and keeping no promise: but giving leave rather
and aid unto the enemies, to pass and repasse; sending him Ordnance and
Ammunition: receiving his garrisons; advancing forward, helping and favoring
him in all things: nothing respecting my letters, (says he) but threatening my
Trumpet and shooting at him. The Ambassador being much perplexed at this
answer, with a trembling voice, and more humbled posture, replies; That he had
letters from his Highness his Master: whereunto his Majesty very suddenly
returned, Your Master is like you, and you are like your Master; you do
nothing but devise together, how to deceive us Protestants: but I hope to pay
you for it. The King went onwards again; and the Ambassador having letters
also unto Prince August, desires his mediation unto the King, Bavaria offers to
treat.
for the admittance of a Bavarian Ambassador one Spierinck: but no answer would
the King vouchsafe unto it. At length the King sent him word back, that he
should cause 200000 pound of bread, and 300 tons of beer, to be forthwith
delivered unto his army: and if for the time to come they would show themselves
true friends, they should then expect his Majesty's further pleasure and
declaration toward them. Soon after this, the King receives tidings of the
enemies final quitting of Newburg Town; and that they had broken down one of
the Arches of the bridge, for fear of being pursued: and carried away 6
Field-peeces, and some powder and shot along with them. Hereupon is Colonel
Landsberger with five hundred Horse, Newburg taken.
dispatched away to take possession of that City: to repair the bridge; and to
suffer no body, (especially of the Council or chief Magistrates) to go out
of the gates of it.

Sunday, April 8 about 5 at night, the King arrived at Lechhausen, The King
besieges Ausburg.
a small Dorp within less then 2 English miles of Ausburg.

This famous City, 10 English miles distant from Donawert, is seated in
Schwabland upon the river Lech, over which it has 2 bridges into Bavaria. It Is
one of the greatest and richest of Germany: and has this honor above all the
rest, that it gives title of distinction to the Protestant Religion: which,
ever since it had by learned men been agreed upon at this town, has been
called the Augustane Confession. The hinderance of the exercise of which
Religion in it, had been complained of by the Sea the Diet of Leipsich, page
24.
Leaguers of Leipsich. Since which time, the privileges had likewise been
infringed; Popish Magistrates and garrisons put upon them; and the Protestants
disarmed. Thus then, the King, who professes himself most principally, to be
the friend and Patron of all the wronged Imperial Cities in general; had
more especial reasons to deliver this above all the rest: for if Judea of old,
were accounted an holy Land; and the wars for the recovery of it, Holy
wars: and that principally for reverence unto the Law, which first went out
of Sion: Esaias 2.3.
then was there a good degree of piety also in this endeavor of the Kings, for
the deliverance of this City.

The King at his coming before the town, found 4500 soldiers in it: which by
these degrees came up to this number. Unto their former garrison, are 1500
Bavarians thrust in, March 15. The Lord Otho Henry Fugger being Governor,
brings 4 Companies more of the Fuggers soldiers, into the Suburbs of St.
James. March 25 are 2 other Bavarian Companies put in. April 3 both Tilly and
Altringer come into the town, to take order for the souldiory: and Colonel
Breda, then preferred to be General, has order to strengthen his garrison
with 600 Foot, and 400 Horse more. In the end of March, were the Protestant
Citizens disarmed: their Arms being fetched from house to house by 40
musketeers. And this was the present state of the City.

The King being encamped at Lechausen, first of all beats in their Out-guards,
which those of Ausburg had laid thereabouts. They thereupon burn down their
bridge before Lechausen; raise up a work to keep the King from coming over
there, and shoot incessantly at his people. He sending out some Dragooners to
answer, and beat them off; pitches his camp immediately in the plain
Campagnia, at such a distance from the walls of the City of Ausburg, as a Cannon
might even almost range her bullet at random to it. The rest of the day, and
the Monday following; the King labors about the laying of 2 bridges over the
Lech: one above the Town, and another below it. This same Monday, he likewise
causes some intercepted packets of letters to be opened; by which he understood
the present constitution of the City: the double fear that the garrison had;
that is to say, of the Protestants within, (should they recover their Arms) as
well as of the enemy without the City. Some prisoners affirmed also, the hopes
they had of Tillyes or Cratzes coming to relieve them. The King exceeding loath
to deface this fair Town, which his care of it had rather receive upon fair
delivery, writes his Letters the same day unto them. The Contents were, The
Kings Letters to the Town.
An admiration of His Majesty at the Townes-mens behaviors in these Wars;
that whereas they needed not to have meddled, yet had they sundry times
received in his enemies. For which, although he had just cause to requite
them, by destroying them and their City; yet giving way unto his natural
clemency, (which tended always to preserve all he could from their own
destruction) He therefore did now make proffer unto them of his Grace, if so be
they did presently discharge their garrison, and declare themselves for his
Majesty.

The Cities Answer.
The Citizens answer was, They were extremely perplexed that His Majesty had
conceived any offense, at their receiving a garrison into their City: which
they protest to have been done, not to oppose him, but that they had been
enforced to it by their obedience unto the Emperor. And had His Majesty
prevented that Imperial command, and offered them a Swedish garrison first,
they would never have refused it. And whereas the licencing of their garrison,
was a thing above their power: they humbly besought His Majesty to make them
some gracious offer, and advise them to depart q^ietly. A fair Answer.

Together with the Kings Letter, did Gustavus Horn (now come back unto the
Kings army) send this word unto the Governor of the Town, Horns Letter to them.
that he supposed him to be a Gentleman, who desired to show himself no less
prudent and profitable, then resolute and courageous for his Masters service.
And therefore he thought him far enough from so dangerous an ambition, as
might induce him to hazard so renown a City of the Empire: whereby instead of
preserving it with reason, he should lose it rather and overthrow it, by a too
late repentance, and a course unevitable. And if he trusted upon the numbers of
the people, yet he could not be confident upon the strength of his
Fortifications: and as the valor of his men had as yet gained no renown, so
could he no ways expect any succors from the Duke of Bavaria; who upon the
last defeat received near Rain (where he lost both his highlyest esteemed
Generals Tilly and Altringer) had no greater care at that present, then to
save his own head. Therefore do I (says he) offer my self to intercede for
you with the King my Master, to make a fair and a reasonable accord with you:
wherein, (were I but once assured, that the Town would be forthwith freed of
her garrison) I doubt not to prevail with him.

To the Townes-mens answer, the King thus replied. The Kings reply to their
Letter.
That he was glad to hear they were not willing to hazard their flourishing
estate; nor to make conjunction with his enemies, or opposition against him:
but yet did he once more advise them to discharge their garrison, which he
knew well enough were no way able to withstand so numerous a people as the
Burgers were; much less to fight against such an Army, as himself now had.
Yet nevertheless in favor of the City, would he not refuse them some
equitable agreement, but was willing to condescend unto some reasonable
conditions with the said garrison.

This gracious answer received, the Popish magistracy now calling in the
Protestants; The Citizens second Answer.
cause them (which they knew would have more Credit with the King) to witness
with them unto his Majesty, that the garrison had been forced upon them, by
the earnest commandment of the Emperor; and that by threatenings mixed with
promises, had the absolute command both over the soldiers and the Citizens,
been put into the hands of that present Governor. Wherefore, seeing the
discharging of the garrison was not in their power, and that they feared, the
Governor would not out but upon fair terms; unless which were granted, the
business might run to such extremities, as might tend to the destruction of
so noble and flourishing a State. Therefore did they most humbly beseech his
Majesty to consider, that all the Protestants being now disarmed, and disabled
thereby to assist the well inclined Catholics, in any forcible attempt against
the garrison: he would let this be an argument unto him, to grant so gracious
conditions unto the said Governor, as might induce him to depart presently. And
so by the bounty and Clemency of his Majesty, should their City be preserved
from the threatened ruin and desolation.

All this moved not the Governor nor his garrison; therefore had the King other
arguments to persuade them. All this time went his two bridges on, which were
no sooner finished, and the King ready to march over, and to bring his men to
approach the walls; but they who had thundered all this time with their
Ordnance, as if they intended to work wonders; send out to the King to desire
a calm parlee, ere ever they came to shot of Musket. The garrison parlies, and
yields.
It Is best treating (you may perceive) with a man's sword in his hand: and to
join an armed Orator in Commission with a Gowned.

The next day, Aprile tenth, the Bavarian garrison of 4500 Horse and Foot,
march forth of the City; being all for the most part, new levied people. The
King himself now asking them whether they would forsake the Emperor, and serve
him; 500 of the old soldiers presently came over and took pay of him. The
rest marched away with complete arms, and were convoyed unto Landsberg. Into
their rooms, did the King put 24 Companies of Foot, and four Cornets of
Horse which were enquartered round about within the City, next unto the walls
of it. The Count of Hohenlo or Hollock was appointed Governor, and young
Oxenstiern had the Command over the Militia.

Wednesday, April eleventh, the King being yet in his Quarter at Lech-hausen,
commands the Catholic Council, the Protestant Deputies, and the Guards of the
City (which last were all Papists) to appear before him. The Roman Catholics
he displaced, restoring the Protestants to their former offices. The
privileges were still continued unto the Town, without any diminution of
their Charter.

Whilst the King was at this siege, Some Boores appear, and are dispersed.
some 2000 Boores (or thereabouts) having gotten together in the Woods and
Mountains, were now coming down toward Ausburg. The King hearing of their
approach, does them the honor to go out in person against them with a Partee
of 500 Horse; before whose coming the Boores were already fled, and dispersed:
Captain Hobb had taken fright at the sight of certain small troops of Horse,
ere ever the King could come near him. These Country people being displeased
with the new contributions; r'allee more of their fellows together upon the
same quarrel. All assembling toward the end of the month about
Schrobenhausen, (midway betwixt Ausburg and Ingolstat) overlay and kill some
fiftty Swedish Soldiers; and not kill them only, but like Boores indeed,
mangle and misuse them, savagely cutting off their noses, etc. In revenge of
which and other the like prankes; the Swedish burn 200 of the Boores Dorps and
houses. The Boores having now no houses to go to (such is the misery of the
wars) run with open mouth and stir up their Cosins and neighbors of
Schwaben and Tirole: the event whereof we shall anon tell you.

Upon the fourth of April, betwixt eleven or twelve at noone, his Majesty made
his Royal entrance into Ausburg: where the first thing he did, was to go into
Saint Annes Church, which had formerly been taken from the Protestants. Being
here accompanied by his Majesty of Bohemia, The King enters the City.
and waited upon by Palatine August, Duke William of Saxon-Weymar, John Duke of
Holstein, Christopher Marquess of Baden, with many Princes, Lords, etc. He was
entertained into the Church with the Organs and Quire singing. After which was
sung the 103 Psalm: and then followed the Sermon, preached by Doctor Fabritius
the Kings own Chaplain, upon Psalm 12. verse 5. The words were fitted to the
occasion. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy: now
will I arise (says the Lord) I will set him in safety from him that puffs at
him. After the Sermon, followed a most solemn Thankesgiving for the victory.
Makes his Thanksgiving.
Many tears were shed, and many a heart leapt for joy, at this Exercise. After
the Sermon and Thankesgiving, was Te Deum, or We Praise thee O God, sung in
High Dutch; the Organs playing as before: the like being done throughout all
the Churches of the City.

From thence, both their Majesty's, etc. went to the great market place, called
The Wine market: where there was a guard made of some soldiers, whilst the
Citizens took their Oath unto the King. It was read by Philip Sadler,
Councellor of State and Secretary.

The Contents were. 1. To remain faithful and loyal to his Majesty, and the
Crown of Sweden.

2. To further the good and welfare of the same; and to hinder and prevent all
prejudices and domages of it.

3. To do all those things, and perform all those Duties to his Majesty:
which Subjects owe unto their natural Prince, and lawful Magistrate. So help
them God, both in souls and bodies.

Hereupon, the new Council of the City being sent for, and the King
consulting awhile with them apart: went to his lodging at the Lord Marquard
Fuggers house, where dinner was provided for him. After dinner, followed the
Presents; which received, his Majesty went to the State-house and the
Storehouse; wherein besides plenty enough of all military provisions, he found
a magazine of Arms (all modern fashioned and good) sufficient for 30000 men,
as they of the Town have written it. The King gives order to have the Town
new fortified; to have fourteen Skonces and Bastiles built about it: and the
City to be restored to the exercise of their own Augustane Confession.

The King goes ^owards Jngol ^at.
Ausburg being taken order for; the King April 15. leaves the City, and
marches by Friedberg unto Waho: which (as I take it) the Mapps write Aicha, as
one Relation also does. This Aicha is a walled Town, and 10 English miles
onward of his way to Ingolstat, whither he was now marching. Hereabouts was the
King met by an Ambassador from Duke Albertus of Bavaria, second brother unto
the ruling Duke Maximilian. The Ambassador humbly presents unto his Majesty,
that his said Master Duke Albertus, had always hitherto behaved himself as a
quiet Prince, having never been a partaker in all these differences. For which
reason his hope now was, (which favor he also craved) that his Majesty would
spare his poor Children, Subjects and Country; and not trouble them with any
military charges or molestations. To all which the King replied, That the King
of Bohemiaes Mother and Brother had not been spared, by the other party;
notwithstanding they had no ways engaged themselves in these wars: but on
the contrary, all their estates had without all justice and reason been taken
from them. The Gentleman perceiving the Kings resolution by his answer,
returns with it to his Master: who presently packs up, and retires with his
Lady and Children into the neighbor Bishopric of Saltzburg: whither the
Duchess of Bavaria, wife to the Duke now in action, was withdrawn beforehand.
Duke Albertus is glad after this, to send another messenger unto the King, to
compound for the rating of the contributions of his Country.

The next day, April 16. the King continues his march toward Ingolstat: with
his whole Army both Horse and Foot, now put into Battaglia; the Cannon marching
upon their right hand. In this order he still advances, till he comes within
sight of Ingolstat: where by reason of a certain Morasse, he is enforced to
quit that form of marching. Leading them therefore forward still, (according
as the place would suffer him) he comes within 2 English miles of the town:
where for that night in plain Campagnia he encamped. The next day he advanced
further; passing in the way by 3 or 4 bridges, over some little brooks that
run that way into the Danuby. Passing on therefore beyond Stinne, till the
Vantguard were comne within musket shot almost of the very walls of Ingolstat:
The King lies down before Ingolstat.
he close by the gallows bridge began to cast up a Redoubt and a Halfe-moone,
upon that side of the bridge, namely, which is nearest unto the Town. The
reason of the Kings approaching so near the walls, was; because of a hope he
had upon some Correspondents in the town, by whose means he trusted to have
it rendered. This day and the next, were spent in working: not at the Gallows
bridge only, but in casting up a regular Trench for the safeguard of the whole
Army, which was now brought within Cannon shot of the Town.

This Town of Ingolstat (which has an University of Jesuits in it) is one of
the very strongest pieces of all Germany. It belongs unto the Duke of Bavaria;
notwithstanding the Danuby be betwixt it and his Country. The Approaches
toward the town, be troublesome; and the Fortifications about it, very good.
Two bridges it now had over the Danuby; one within the town, and another
without it; which last is the same we called the Gallows bridge, right before
which, the King was encamped. This was guarded with 2 great Works, on the same
side the King lay on.

The Duke of Bavaria, was by this time marched quite through Ingolstat: The Duke
of Bavaria lies encamped beyond the river.
and lay now encamped with his whole Army on the other side of the Danuby: hard
by the bank of it, and so onwards toward Ratisbone. So near the King, that
he might well discern them out of his Leaguer: though he could not come at
him.

They of the town, shot very fiercely all this while with their great
Ordnance, into the Kings Trenches: with which first and last, they killed him
some three hundred soldiers. The first night after, (which was Thursday, April
19.) some of the Town issuing out, A sally
made a show of themselves by one of the Forts near the Gallows bridge. The
King upon sight of them giving out a wish, that he had some brave fellows
which would undertake them: diverse troops both of Horse and Foot presently
making out, beaten in.
beat them back into the said Halfe-moone, and enter it pell mell together
with them. But the piece being open behind, no sooner were the salliers
received that way into the town; but that the Ordnance from the walls beat the
Swedish out again: it being not to be holden, and the Swedish beaten off.
by reason of that lying open behind unto the Town Ordnance.

On Friday morning, April 20, the King going out to give some directions to his
Horse-guards, that lay before one of the enemies bridges a little without the
town; The Kings horse shot under him.
had his Horse shot under him with a Cannon bullet of 14 pound weight. The shot
took him about the hinder skirt of the saddle; with the force of it turning
both Horse and King over and over. The King with this tumbling up and down,
having only hurt his leg a little; was quickly gotten upon his feet again.
The first word he spoke after it to the Squire of his body that then waited
upon him, was, How could they possibly come to hit me? I thought I had been in
covert. Mounting forthwith upon his Squires horse, he comes riding off unto his
Quarter. The same day the young Marquess Christofer of Baden (otherwise called
Durlach) had half his head shot off, as he was commanding his troops close by
the same place, The Marquess of Baden slain.
where the Kings horse was shot. Just the same hour of the Marquesses death,
dyed the General Tilly within the town: Tilly dies.
and that of the wound received at the Lech, after the taking of 4 Splinters
out of his thigh. There was a mortal enmity of old, betwixt Tilly and this
Marquess: which caused the King to make observation, How fatal one place and
hour, proved to 2 such enemies. The Marquesses death, made the King more
apprehensive of his own danger and delivery: the meditation whereof, formed it
self into this religious Oration, publicly uttered by his Majesty before
diverse of his chief Commanders in the Camp before Ingolstat.

The late and unfortunate death of the Marquess of Baden (whose fall I am most
heartily sorry for, The Kings oration upon his escape.
because of those rare virtues that were eminent in him, not unfit to be
published to the world) and that thundering Cannon shot withal, do put me in
mind that I am but mortal, and subject to the same mischances, which the
meanest of my subjects are liable unto. It is an universal decree, which
neither my Crown, my Birth, nor my Victories, are any ways able to reskue or
exempt me from. What therefore now remains, but that I wholly resign up my
self unto the providence of the Almighty? who though he may please to call me
out of this world, yet will he not for all that, abandon this so just a cause,
as I have now undertaken for the re-establishment of the Germane liberties. He,
doubtless, will raise up some other more wise, more courageous and valiant
then my self; who shall put a period unto this war. I know that the good
success which it has pleased God to afford me in my enterprises, has made
some to envy me: who also labor to persuade the simple, that I endeavor
nothing more then mine own profit; by the robbing and spoiling of others. But
I in this case call all those Princes to witness, whom I have again
re-established into their own rights and inheritances: and those Creditors
also, of whom I have borrowed such hugy sums of money, as at Franckford and
elsewhere: yea and the dangers too, which I daily expose my Person unto;
whether or no I have left mine own kingdom, and those that are Dearest to me
in this world, for any other end, or with any other intention, but only to
pull down the tyranny of the House of Austria, and to obtain a solid and a
settled peace unto all men.

This Oration of the Kings was here interrupted, by the joyful acclamations of
the Auditory, and the cheerful promises of their best assistances: all of
them with tears beseeching his Majesty, to be more careful in time to come of
adventuring his Royal Person; and to continue his first resolutions: as they
for their parts there vowed, to persist in their fidelities.

Upon Sunday, April 22. had the Danish Ambassador his Audience of the King. The
French Ambassador Monsieur de St. Estienne, resident with the Duke of Bavaria,
was come from Munchen to the Kings Leaguer, to mediate the conditions of a
peace. That night went the King of Sweden unto Newburg; The King goes to
Newburg.
whither he was accompanied by the King of Bohemia, Prince Palatine August,
John Duke of Holstein, etc. They took a particular view of the Fortifications
of the Town; of the Church, College, and Magazine. There they lodged that
night; and returned very early next morning unto their Leaguer.

The King having been 4 or 5 days already before Ingolstat, and perceiving
now his correspondency to fail him within the town: he having at all no
purpose of making a long siege of it, resolves to rise and go toward Munchen.
Upon Monday therefore April 23 first sending abroad Gustavus Horn with six
thousnad men, Horn sent to spoil the Country.
to make some spoil upon the Dukes Country; he gives order to his army to be
ready for their departure. The next day, Tuesday 24. The King rises from
Ingolstat.
The whole Army rises: of which, this was the order. First, are some Horse sent
away before; and after them the Baggage; and then the Cannon and Infantery. The
rest of the Horse, together with 600 Swedish Musketeers, were left behind with
the General Banier, to make good the Retreat.

The last men still left behind upon the Point (that is, in the Halfe-moone and
Redout by the Gallows Port) were no sooner drawn off; but the Town garrison,
(even before the Swedish were gone full musket shot from the place) by degrees
possess themselves of the Kings Works: for now one comes stealing and peeping
in, to see if all the enemies were gone; and then comes another or 2; and so
more, one after another. With this, do the Town Horse sally likewise, A sally
repulsed by Banier.
(about some 12 troops of them) and upon an advantageable place, which was
just upon the passage of the second bridge, and when the Forlorn Hope of the
Kings Horse (who still manned the Reere) were to pass the said bridge, do they
fiercely charge the Forlorn Hope aforesaid. They giving the Alarm thereupon
to the next Body of the Reere; General Banier instantly faces about toward
the Sallyers, with his Cavallery: bringing forward some of his Musketeers
withal, to m^^e the enemy give something back from the Pass. Banier being
thus returned back again over the Pass toward the enemy, they retire
skirmishing: till they had led the Swedish on to a second place of advantage,
at the Morasse before mentioned. Here making Halt or a stand; Banier so presses
upon them, that he beats them from this advantage also. Banier having passed
over beyond this place, and with three troops of Horse only; the
Ingolstadians retreat with their whole Body to a third advantage, more then
Musket shot from the Morasse: where they on both sides continue skirmishing
betwixt the two Bodies, for the space almost of a whole hour together.

Banier perceiving they would no more come on, retires back again in order;
without any more difficulty, marching after the King to Geisenfelt: a walled
Town some two Dutch miles from Ingolstat, onwards of the way to Mosburg. The
King ^odges at Gei^nfelt.
Here the King for that night encamps with his whole Army; having spent the
afternoon, in doing the Funeral Rites unto the Marquess of Baden.

The King thus retired from Ingolstat; those of the Town make diligent search
for the carcass of his horse, which they had shot under him, and He had caused
to be buried. The Horse being found, Those of Jn^olstat dig up ^he Kings dead
horse.
and dug up (which no doubt was a sweet finding) his hide was very curiously
taken off, stuffed with straw, and hanged up in Ingolstat for a Trophee, they
triumphing over it very gloriously, and insulting upon the Kings Rising. The
horse was a white ambler, which the King very much delighted in: it was his
Ronsarte, his Bucephalus, on which he used to ride about his Army: and yet did
he never think, his horse should have been so much made on. Now much good do
it my politic Masters, the Fathers of the Jesuits College of Ingolstat: for
their deep device no doubt it was; our Parliament House knows them for old
diggers. Yet they wrought but for a dead horse,) as the proverb is. And this
is all, which they had for their brave, and worthily renowned General, John
Tserclaes Count of Tilly: who dyed the same day in Ingolstat, Tilly dies.
that the Kings Horse was shot under him. The King can allow them a Horse for a
General, at any time. It Was a brave Palfrey indeed; but (me thinks) they might
have had a better project with his hyde, then stuffed it: had they but made a
Drum of it, the sound of that, would (no doubt) have driven away all the
horses of their enemies. But now they have stuffed the skin, what will they do
with the bones? They should do well to use them as the Turks did Scanderbegs
bones at Lyssa: which they digd up, and set in Rings and Jewels. Certainly
there was virtue in that Horse, virtualis contactus (they knew) had coueighed
it into him. But their spite chose rather to use this horse, as those of Breda
did the Boat, by which their Town had been taken: they whipped the boat up
and down the streets, and then hanged it up for a Trophee. But we have enough
(too much will some say) made our selves merry with the Jesuits; who before
the King of Swedens coming into Germany, laughed in their sleeves at all the
world besides.

The next day (which was Wednesday, April 25) the King marches from Geisenfelt
to Mosburg upon the River Iser; The King comes to Mosburg.
which is some 20 English miles to the South-East of Ingolstat. Hither did
Gustavus Horn come again unto the King: who in his passage back from burning
part of the Country villages, that would not readily give him money; had easily
brought the two walled Towns of Hohnwart and Pfaffenhoven, to a composition.
By this time had the Abbot of Saint Georges (in the way toward Munchen) sent
in his excuse; Protestant Churches and Schools restored.
that he was not able to build up again the new Church of the Protestants,
which had been lately taken from them and broken down: but he was willing and
ready to deliver them up his own Church, so that he might keep but one
Chapel for his own use. The Abbot of Saint Maurice, he also sent word, that
he was willing to build up the Protestants Church again, which they lately had
in his Jurisdiction. Thus both Churches and Schools were again restored unto
the Protestants in those parts of Bavaria: yea and their Arms, (though much
empaired) which had before been taken from them.

About April 27, are Gustave Horn and Sir John Hepburn, sent with 3000 Horse
and 5000 Foot; to take in Landshut: Horn and Hebron take in Landshut.
a very dainty little Town upon the River Iser (though the glory of it be
chiefly in two Streets) some eight English miles to the North-East of Mosburg.
At the first coming of the Swedish forces before the walls, one of their
Lieftenants of a troop of Horse, with some few others of his Cornet, were shot
from an Ambush in the gardens. That morning, had some 1300 Bavarian Horse
(after a very hard march of nine Dutch miles together) put themselves into the
Town: so that they seemed yet to be resolute upon the resistance. But so soon
as ever they perceived the gross of the 5000 Foot, to be come up, they
retreated out of the Town unto the further side of the River Iser; breaking
the bridges down behind them. The Town paid 100000 Dollars to the King for
its ransom; and gave Gustavus Horn 20000 besides, for a gratuity. Landshut
being thus taken, and Sir John Hepburn (for the time) left Governor, Gustavus
Horn went back again to the King; who two days after the taking, Land sperg
taken.
comes and lodges in it. The day before this, was the handsome Town of
Landsperg upon the River Lech, taken by Colonel Slammersdorff with 300
Dragooners: sent (as I collect) from the Governor of Ausburg. After Landsperg,
were the two good Towns of Fuessen and Schonga; both more Southerly and higher
up the Lech taken also. In Landshut, the King staid some five or six days.
Some of the reason for which (besides the refreshing of the Army) may be a
thought the King had toward Ratisbone or Regenspurg: whence (as it is written)
diverse had sent to solicit him to come thither. And indeed the whole Country
betwixt Landshut and Regenspurg, for four Bavarian Leagues together, was all
the way open. Some Partees are about this time sent that way ward, who had
diverse skirmishes with the Bavarians, that had comne out of Ratisbone. For the
Duke of Bavaria and Cratz (now General in Tillyes place) were gone by this
time from Ingolstat into Ratisbone: which Town, now surprised by the Duke, was
also foulely plundered by his soldiers; whose reason for it was, As good they
do it, as the Swedish. But the King now understanding Wallenstein to be about
Passaw, upon the frontiers toward Bohemia, and that though upon a military
emulation, he had never heartily affected Tilly; no nor the Duke of Bavaria
neither, since he had at the Diet of Ratisbone wrought the Emperor to cashiere
him: yet now for the common causes sake, and upon Cratz his entreaty, (who had
been one of his Colonels last year in Pomerania) he might (as the King
judged) be drawn to do something for Bavaria. His Majesty thus misdoubting
the worst; esteems it not fit for his design, to adventure one against two;
and resolves withal to pass no further to the North or North-East at this
time. Purposing now to tickle Bavariaes Minniken string; so soon as ever he
had received his money from Landshut, He, May 4th, turns back again toward
Mosburg, and through that unto Freising: a City and Bishops See upon the same
River, two Bavarian Leagues onwards of the way toward Munchen. Here lay he all
night, May fifth: The King goes to Freising,
the Town paying 50000 Dollars for its ransom; and the whole Bishopric
quietly yielding to a Contribution.

May sixth, the Army removes again toward Munchen; 18 miles South of
Freising, and upon the West of the Iser. This Munchen (pronounced Minniken) is
one of the neatest of all Germany: and the Dukes curious Palace, and so to
Munchen.
with the Jesuits sumptuous Church: a second Escuriall, as some term it. It
had been the Nest and Office of Receipt for the richest and ^eatest pillages,
that the Duke himself, or his General Tilly, have for many years wars
together, gotten from the Protestant Princes. The Duke of Bavaria was still
about Ratisbone: and there much troubled with sore eyes, caused by the smoke
of his own Country. And yet out of a hope to see himself once again Master
of this Palace, had he been so careful to preserve it, that he had sent a
command unto his Chancellor to deliver it over, whenever the King should make
toward it. The Deputies of the Town likewise, had been at Freifing with the
King, May 5th, and had made tender of 200000 Dollars for their ransom: which
would not be accepted. Upon Monday in the forenoone, May 7th, the King showed
himself in fair Battaglia before it: although by that time he were come
within a Dutch mile: the Deputies had again met him, and there presented the
town keys unto him, with a promise of 300000 Dollars. The chief condition
which they requested was, that their garrison might march out without
disturbance: which was indeed in the Kings power to have hindered, his Horse
lying every where up and down in the Country. The King enters the town the
same day; accompanied by the King of Bohemia, Palatine August, and 3 of his
Regiments, taking up his lodging in that sumptuous Palace: the rest of his Army
being enquartered in and about the City.

The next day, the King went to see the Magazine and Armories; where great
store of arms and ammunition were found, but no Ordnance: at which the King
not a little wondering; espied by and by diverse of the carriages; by which he
guessed, as the truth was, that the pieces were buried underground. These dead
ones (as he called them) he caused the Boores with ropes and leavers, to raise up
without a miracle. There were 140 fair Pieces of brass Ordnance; and in one,
30000 pieces of gold, said to be found. Among the rest, were 12 eminent ones;
by the Duke called the 12 Apostles: though surely the Apostles were never such
sons of Thunder. Some pieces had the Palsgraves Arms upon them; which caused
the King of Bohemia both to sigh and smile, at the sight of them. But the
Kunst-Cammer, or Chamber of Rarities, was the thing that affoorded most
entertainment: where the beholders admired rather, then looked upon, the
incomparable varieties and curiosities, both of Art and Nature. The Jesuits
Church, was a piece of admiration also: and the Images among the rest, made by
Brouse that famous Artist; together with the manufactures, and silver works of
diverse kinds. The King went into this Church, just when the Jesuits were at
their Mass: and the Father Rector coming toward the King, his Majesty
entertained a discourse in Latin with him, about the Lords Supper. The King
after this, calling the Citizens together; asks them whether they would
hereafter fight against him, or pay the Contribution from time to time, that
should be imposed upon them? They much complaining of their Dukes avarice and
former hardness toward them, and especially for his now forsaking of them;
faintly promise, what they durst not deny: wholly to submit themselves to his
Majesty's good pleasure, and to take oath unto him.

On Wednesday, May 9th. the King held a general Muster before the City:
himself (to show some content to the Bavarians) drilling and exercising his
soldiers: teaching them especially how to give a Charge or Salvee; some upon
their knees, others behind them stooping forward; and the hindmost rank
standing upright, and all to give fire at once, the hinder man over his
foremans shoulder. The next day, May 10th, was Ascension day: on which the King
caused the first Protestant Sermon to be preached, in the Castle: the King
himself (as it is written) giving order for this Psalm of Doctor Luthers.

Rejoice ye now O Christians true,
Your hearts now leap for joy:
Now sing without annoy,
What wonders God has done for you, etc.
After dinner; the King went to Saint Maryes Church to see the Popish
ceremonies, in celebrating the Feast of the Ascension. That evening whilst the
King was at supper, were some twenty Bavarian horsemen brought in prisoners to
him. These, with a thousand, others, had been sent out of Ratisbone to fall on
the sudden upon the Swedish garrison of Freising. Here having timely been
discovered, they were provided for; and had such Welcome and Entertainment as
usually the Wars afford, which is, to beat their Visitants out a doors
again. They could tell no certainty as yet, of any likelihood of their Dukes
joining with Wallenstein. And herein they said truth: for Wallenstein (it
seems) purposing to play^ his own game, was now going toward Prage; which he
took shortly after. The King pleasantly said to these Horsemen. You now suffer
what you would have made others to suffer: thus you see, none is forbidden to
strike again, that is first stricken.

By this time has the King word brought unto him, of Commissary Ossa (lately
made one of the Emperors Generals) his coming out of Alsatia, with 7000 men
after him. Part of these, were some of Ossaes and the Archduke Leopolds (the
Emperors brothers) old Army; part were brought by Harincourt from the Duke of
Lorrayn; The King ^oes to deliver ^brach from ^ssa.
and part were come out of Italy by the Val-Teline passage. The Boores of
Bavaria, Schwaben, and Tirole, were also up in Commotion, and Ossa was now
become Head unto them. Ossaes chief charge, was, the defense of Leopolds
Country of Alsatia; of the Austrian Lands in Tirole (of all which Archduke
Leopold is Administrator) and of the Circle of Schwaben. This Ossa about this
time, marches up to Bibrach; a weak Imperial City in Schwabland toward
Donawert, about five English miles South of the Danuby, and eight from
Memmingen. Hither had he secretly been invited by the Burgomaster and the
Popish Clergy; and upon this Town, two assaults he made: but so well did the
Citizens put him off, that he both times lost his labor, and 400 men into the
Bargain. That which added shame unto his loss, was; that no small part of the
slaughter was made by women: these Viragoes with scalding water, stones and
such feminine weapons, beating his men from the walls of their City, and
encouraging their husbands. The King having notice of these proceedings of
Ossaes; gives order with all speed for the marching away of 5000 Horse, and
about 4000 Foot: himself likewise immediately following to go along with
them. Leaving Munchen therefore, and Colonel Hebron Governor in it: he taking
his way by Ausburg (where he was about May 20) marches directly toward
Memmingen. Here he first of all lays a bridge over the River Iler: which
running from hence toward Vlm, falls thereabouts into the Danuby. Ossa hearing
of the finishing of this bridge, retires with so much speed to the Quarters he
came last from, (which were toward Lindaw and the Bodensee near the
Mountains) that he left his Ordnance behind him. Ossaes Correspondents were
carried prisoners into Vlm.

The King having thus delivered Bibrach; leaves the Army thereabouts, under the
command of Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar, himself with some few guards
returning toward Ausburg; where he was about May 27. Here receiving the news,
that Wallenstein had advanced toward Prage and taken it, and forced the Saxons
out of Bohemia: and that Cratz withal, was gone from about Ratisbone and
Ingolstat, and fallen with his forces into Bavaria first, and into the frontiers
of Franconia and Schwaben after: and had there taken Weissenburg: (which is the
Pass betwixt Ausburg and Norimberg:) He out of his care to this last named
City, which so much concernd both his honor and his designs; resolves to
leave Bavaria, and to go with his Army into those quarters. Speeding back
therefore again unto Munchen; The King draws his forces out of Bavaria.
he gives order to those troops which had till now been left thereabouts; to
march with all speed toward Donawert: where the rest from about Memmingen,
should meet and join with them.

Cratz, indeed, with 2000 Foot, and the valiant Baron of Cronenberg with his
Regiment of Horse (which was the flower of the Army:) upon the hearing of the
Kings going toward Bibrach, were fallen again into Bavaria. Their design, was
to recover Munchen; and from Ratisbone, they were already advanced as far as
Pfaffenhoven: where getting advice of some Swedish troops that were coming to
encounter them, they fair and timely retired into Ingolstat. The Kings hearing
of their making toward Munchen; was the cause that he made thither, so soon
as Ossa was skared from Bibrach: ^^atz takes ^issenburg,
when Cratz and Cronenberg hearing of the Kings coming toward that way, they
go the clean contrary, unto Weissenburg. This Imperial City we have before
described, in the Kings march up to Donawert: but in what Province or Circle of
the Empire it is placed, the Geographers and Mapp-makers themselves doubt of.
Some 24 English miles it is to the North-West of Ingolstat; and in it, had the
King left some forces: and by it, was the strong Castle of Wilsburg, with a
Tillian garrison. Cratz now lays siege to Weissenburg; and the Swedes stand
upon the resistance: but more Gunns being brought out of Wilsburg Castle, and
bent against them; they parley and yield. What quarrel was picked, I know not:
but sure it is, that the Swedes refusing to turn to the Bavarian party, had
all their throats cut. The Town is also plundered, the chief Citizens and
Preachers carried away prisoners, two Gates of the City burnt down to the
ground: and then news being brought of the Kings coming; ^d forsakes it.
the Bavarians forsake all again, and hye them back into Ingolstat.

In this Interim, had Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar so well behaved himself;
that in the pursuit of Ossa, he had light upon one of his bravest Regiments,
(which he had put into a fortified place) consisting of 2000 men, and conducted
by Hannibal Count of Hohen-Ems: all which he had utterly routed and defeated;
taken the Count, with 400 prisoners, and 8 Ensigns. ^ernard Wey^ars good
ser^^ce.
The Count was sent prisoner to Isne first, and to Vlm afterward. This feate
had Duke Bernard done, time enough to meet the King at Donawert.

His Majesty now about to leave Bavaria; takes the best order that he might,
for the quiet of the Country behind him. Garrisons he left none (except in Rain
only,) because there is never a town defensible in all the whole Duchy. To
supply which defect, was the General Banier left with some 8 Regiments about
Ausburg: and diverse Waine-loades of Priests, Jesuits and other chief persons
brought into safe custody within Ausburg, to be pledges and hostages for the
fidelity of the Bavarians. Against the Boores, the Leopoldish and Ossaes forces
in Schwabland, Tirole, etc. was Duke William of Saxon-Weymar left with 12000
men, about Memmingen. What forces the King left behind him.
At Vlm, was Sir Patrick Ruthven Governor; who had a small Army also. And Duke
Julius, Administrator of the Duchy of Wirtemberg, having about the 20th of this
month been at Ausburg with the King; had promised him to levy 8000 men to
second his forces, and to observe the motions of Archduke Leopold and the
General Ossa. To prevent (last of all) the coming of more forces out of Italy
to the aid of Ossa; the King, much about this time, writes his letters unto the
Switzers: who upon the receipt of them, going from their Diet of Lucerne, unto
another at Baden; resolve there to give no more passage to the Spanish through
their country into Germany. This was the Kings letter.

Srs:
Being informed how that the King of Spain does labor by all possible means,
The Kings letter to the Switzers.
to persuade you to grant him a free passage out of Italy, into these parts of
Germany against Us; for the advancement of his pernicious and unjust designs,
and for the favor and furtherance of our enemies and their proceedings: I have
thought good to exhort and admonish you most lovingly by these presents, to
remember with your selves, That your Commonwealth has ever hitherto most
gloriously flourished, and renownedly maintained its liberty, against all
opposers whatsoever; and especially against those of the Houses of Burgundy and
of Austria: which 2 Houses, have striven oftentimes to deprive and bar you of
your liberties. Yea of that liberty, namely, which is the best of all the rest,
the freedom of your Consciences: this would they have taken away from some of
you, and the liberty of Government from you all. I would desire you likewise to
be mindful of that good Correspondency, which I have always hitherto
maintained with your State: for which reason I cannot but forewarne you, that
you become careful hence-forward, to remain firm and constant within the
terms and bounds of Neutrality, and of that good agreement and correspondency,
which yet is betwixt us; no ways yielding or affoording, either passage,
favor or assistance, unto the enemy. Otherwise if you do, I shall then be
constrained to begin before them, and to commence war against you, which
should it so fall out: it is your selves then, that by your own faults have
drawn it upon your own heads; together with such ruins consequently,
desolations and calamities, as usually do accompany it. But I have conceived
much better hopes of you: as for mine own part, I do hereby assure you all in
general, and each one in particular, of my best love and affection toward you.

Signed, Gustavus Adolphus.


This letter became a bush against the Spanish, which helped the Switzers to
stop the gappe against them, through the Alps out of Italy. A Secretary is also
about this time sent from the King, Strasburg accords with the King.
unto the fair and Imperial City of Strasburg upon the Rhine in Alsatia:
near the walls, and through the Jurisdiction whereof, Colonel Harincourt had
lately brought his Lorrayners unto Ossa. And this City now, after some
deliberation, is drawn also to the Kings party: and that much upon the same
terms, which the great Cities of Vlm and Norimberg, had heretofore accorded
with him. This was something toward the security of the lower Palatinate also;
on the hithermost side whereof, this Strasburg lies.

And thus has this victorious King of Sweden, either conquered or drawn to
his party, all the middle part of Germany: himself in Person having run
through it, from the Northern or Baltic Sea, even to the very Alps almost and
mountains on the South, next unto Italy: a Course of full 500 English miles
together. And now turns he back again. The largeness of the Kings Conquests.
The breadth he bears in these last mentioned parts, is half the Circles of
Bavaria and Schwabland; even from the river Iser in Bavaria Eastward, all
overthwart to the Danuby and beyond it, toward the West. In Bavaria, could he
march 50 or 60 miles square every way. Along the Lech from Donawert to Fuessen,
North and South; full 80: and along the Danuby from the gates of Ingolstat (to
account no further) on the North-East, unto Vlm and beyond it, on the
South-West; as much more. In Bavaria all was his own: not all that is in the
Map of Bavaria (for that contains a tenth part of the Empire) but all the
lands of the Dukes of Bavaria, were either conquered, or under Contribution: no
power or place being left, (except Ratisbone, where the Duke with his Army now
was) being able to resist any 2 Brigades of the Kings, should he but have sent
them thither. Nor was there here any considerable appearance of resistance, at
the Kings coming out of the Country.

As for that portion of the Circle of Schwaben betwixt the Lech, the Danuby,
and the line or Degree of 48 in the Map, (which 3 make a complete Triangle)
it is wholly the Kings; and quietly now too: especially since Ossaes late
repulse from Bibrach: which touches upon the outside of the Degree 48
aforesaid. How now all this part came to be the Kings, and in what estate he
left it now behind him; we shall briefly tell you. A Conqueror must keep, as
well as win: and either leave no enemy at his back, or a force sufficient to
oppose him, that he may not be able to disturb the Master of the Field, in his
future proceedings. And then may a Country be indeed said to be conquered.

This Portion of the Circle of Schwaben came thus to be the Kings. Diverse of
the Imperial Towns in it being Protestant, (as Vlm, Memmingen, Kempten, etc.)
having once assented unto the Conclusions of Leipsich; The Story of the Actions
about Vlm and Schwabland.
notwithstanding they had been enforced in part to renounce them, by Eggon
Count of Furstenberg, General for his Imperial Majesty for this Circle: yet
after the King of Swedens prevailing about these parts, they eftsoons
recovered their former resolutions. Of all these Cities, Vlm upon the Danuby
being the principal, the Admiral Gally as it were; she carried the Lantern
unto all the rest; which way she led, they followed. About the end of October
1631. 12 Imperial troops coming that way out of Italy, desired (imperiously
enough) to have a relief from this City, of 10 Dollars for every Horseman, and
6 for a Footeman: and when threatenings were added, the Vlmers beat them out of
their Territories into Leopolds Country, and made the Archduke keep them. The
King a little after this, sollicites them unto his party: and Colonel
Rhelenger is presently sent upon it, (as Commissary for the King,) to agree
with them. He in his journey thither, lighting upon a Wagon-full of Monks and
Friars; made them pay a ransom of 40000 Dollars. In January after, the
Commonwealth of Vlm publicly declare, what they had privately before
resolved, to stand to the Conclusions of Leipsich, and levy 450 new men upon
it. The same does Memmingen also. Now do the Protestants every where about
this time, begin to resume more courage: and for the defense of their liberties
and Religion, diverse of their Cities (as Norimberg, Strasburg, with some of
Wirtenberg) assemble in a Diet at Hailbrun, which Gustavus Horn had lately
taken. Vlm accords with the King.
In February after, Vlm accepts of a Swedish garrison; and begins to
fortify; toward the rivers side especially. About the beginning of March,
that Gallant old Cavalier Sir Patrick Ruthven, a Scottish Gentleman, (lately
made Sergeant-Major-Generall of the Army) is sent from Mentz to be their
Governor. Sir Patrick Ruthven made Governor of Vlm.


Sir Patrick Ruthven presently begins to make some new levies for an Army: by
little and little, getting some 6 or 7000 men together. He first demands the
resolutions of all the chief Cities and Towns about him: whether they would
be Friends, Foes, or Neuters: stand either for the King, or against him. One of
the first towns he began withal, was Kurchberg upon the river Iler; some 4
English miles to the South of Vlm. This town having the honor of an
Earldom, the King (as I find writing for it) bestowed upon the Conqueror.
But of this I can say no more. At what time the King lay betwixt Donawert and
the Lech, (which is about 48 or 50 English miles from Vlm: His action.
) Sir Patrick advances up the same river Iler beyond Memmingen, unto Kempten,
(near the river Lech) where there is an Abbey: the first in order of all these
of the Circle of Schwaben. Guntzperg, a fair town upon the River Guntz,
betwixt Vlm and Lawingen, is presently likewise taken. From this town, a
little after this, are 8 troops of Dragooners sent from the Kings army over
the bridge at Lawingen; to rufflle the Cloisters in the neighbor Marquisate of
Burgaw; to bring them under contribution; and to lie in wait for 500 Horse of
Ossaes, that were to come from Lindaw. At this Guntzperg is there a fair
Palace, of right belonging unto the Marquesses of Burgaw: though at this time
the Archduke Leopold had invaded it. The lands of the Lords Fuggers, are now
also brought under contribution. Erpach is likewise over-runne, belonging unto
the Chancellor Von Vlm. The 500 Tillians who had been left at Nordlingen,
about 30 miles to the North-East of Vlm, presently forsake the Town: upon the
news, namely, of the Kings passing of the Lech. In the beginning of April, Sir
Patrick Ruthven puts some of his soldiers into Memmingen: out of which, he a
little after that expels the Jesuits: whom he found complotting with the
Imperialists. About Leutkirken, others of his defeat some of Ossaes guards.
Ravensperg and Bibrach, 2 other Imperial Cities, declare for the King: and
diverse Lords and Gentlemen, daily send their Deputies unto our Governor of
Vlm, to compound for their contributions. This if they did not, their lands
were plundered. He a little after this, disarmes the Citizens of Elching and
Weissenhorn, (both near Vlm:) and takes 14 pecces of Cannon and 2 Murderers,
away from them. Presently after which, he sends, and defeates Schwendy (or
Schweaden) and his Boores, (which, he being a Gentleman of the Country, had
stirred up) and takes himself prisoner. Having thus advanced so far to the
Southward, the Bishop of Constance is glad to send to him to make his
agreement. And thus is all the Country, for the while, cleared; even to the
gates of Lindaw and the Bodensee, under the very Alps: which so continues,
until Ossa (now gone thence to the Switzers Diet of Lucerne, to procure
passage for the Spanish out of Italy, over the Gotthart Alps) returns about
the beginning of May with his 7000 men, and besieges Bibrach, as we before told
you.

Whether Colonel Sperreuter, who took Dunkelspach and Elwang, on the
Northside of the Danuby, were sent by him, or immediately from the King; I know
not. After Slammersdorff had taken Landsperg: the town of Mindelhaim, upon the
river Mindel, betwixt the Lech and the Danuby, almost right against Landsperg,
made also her composition. And thus (to be brief) did all those good Towns,
which you shall find in the Map of Wirtemberg, in the South-East corner: most
of which Country is called Overland.

Upon the last Monday in April, Sir Patrick Ruthven defeates some Imperial
troops, and takes 4 Ensigns from them. The Boores also rising the second
time, again incensed by the Bavarian Boores coming amongst them, Schwendies
second provocation, See the Mapps of the Circle of Suevia, or of Wirtemberg,
for these towns.
(let loose upon his ransom) and the heartning on of Ossa and Harincourt; are
again defeated. A many of these Boores, first rise about Gensburg and the
mountains: who sending word to the rest, appoint their meeting place about
Weingarten, some 30 miles to the South of Vlm. These in the beginning of May,
coming up; surprise Wangen an Imperial town, Ravensperg and others, betwixt
Vlm and Lindaw. Against them, Sir Patrick sends 3000 men, many of them
Dragooners: who May 12 killing some of them near unto Kempten, (25 English
miles East of Wangen) make the rest swear to go home and follow their
clodding again, and pay their contributions quietly. Others of them being
busy otherwhere, 400 more are slain about this Bishopric of Kempten: which
their neighbors perceiving, go and deliver up their Arms at Kempten. At
Zippersriden, are almost 800 more cut in pieces, and (which was the way to
cool them) are diverse of their Dorps fired: which the poor wretches seeing,
went and cut their Landlords throats, that had first stirred them up, and
then forsaken them. Colonel Rhelinger (who had done many other good services
in these parts) affrights and disarmes 300 more of them, with a small Partee of
Horsemen. Rhelinger proceeds so far, that Ossa being afraid of his falling
into Tirole, is feign to send 2000 men thither, to ensure the passages. About
the end of April, Sir Patrick Ruthven goes into the Duchy of Wirtemberg; where
he receives an aid of 2000 new men, from Duke Julius the Administrator. In his
absence, the Lord Druches of Waldburg with other Gentlemen and some Abbots;
began to stir again, in the further parts toward Weingarten: who did much
trouble unto the Swedish soldiers in the towns next to them. To repress
them, went the Swedish Dragooners that lay in and about Bibrach: who fell in
among the lands of the said Lord Druches plundered the Towns of Wurtbach and
Waldsee, near unto Weingarten, and dispersed the Commotion. The good Town of
Ehingen also, on the contrary side of the Danuby, to Vlm, and within 6 English
miles of it, is brought likewise to a Composition: That part of Schwabland,
brought by Sir Patrick Ruthven, etc. under Contribution.
as all this part of Schwabland by this time was. At this town of Ehingen,
whilst Lodowick Eberhard Count of Hohenlo, with one of the Kings Secretaries
and some other Commissioners were, (having been thither employed about taking
the Citizens oath for the King of Sweden) they were all surprised and carried
prisoners into Tirole, by a Partee sent out from Ossa, at the time of his being
about Bibrach. To be a ransom for whose liberties, the King causes some great
men of the Country to be laid hands of. The Imperialists that did this at
Ehingen, and staid there; fell out and troubled the Country now and then: and
upon the first of June following, when the King was gone toward Norimberg;
they drove away diverse head of Cattle even from within 2 English miles of Vlm:
there being at that time no Horsemen in the town to make out after them. But
these are since sent packing. Thus is all that country the Kings, by conquest:
and for the keeping of it quiet, were the Armies of Duke William of
Saxon-Weymar, and Sir Patricke Ruthven, left thereabouts: the Duke of
Wirtembergs forces being at hand too; who is their very next neighbor upon the
other side of the Danuby. And in this estate the King of Sweden left this
Country, in the beginning of June; when he took his leave of it, and of
Bavaria: whom when we have waited upon from Donawert to Norimberg; we will for
this time conclude our Story of him.

The occasion of his Majesty's so sudden parting out of Bavaria, we told you,
was to relieve Weissenburg. General Cratz had now taken it; The King in his
march from Donawert,
upon a hope by that means to cut off the Kings retreat to Norimberg. The King
in his way thither, cleeres (as his manner is) the whole Country before him.
For whereas (to begin withal) the town and Bishopric of Aichstat, ^^takes
the Bishoprics of Aichstat and Dillingen,
16 miles to the North of Donawert, had not all this while brought in their
contribution, which Colonel Sperreuter had heretofore made them to submit
unto; the Kings soldiers now distraine upon whatsoever they can get for it. So
is the Bishopric of Dillingen likewise served: both are plundered, and
disarmed, and the best Ordnance sent to Auspurg. Pappenheim Castle likewise,
and the Castle of Pappenheim,
2 leagues to the West of Aichstat, (which belongs unto the old Count of
Pappenheim, who by inheritance is Earl Marshall or second Marshall of the
Empire) was besieged, battered, and taken. This is hard by Weissenburg; to
which the King so much hasted: and from which Cratz had as much speeded, when
he knew the King to be so near him.

His Majesty having nothing more in his way to delay him, marches immediately
toward Norimberg: near which, namely, in his old Quarter at Furt, about June
7 he arriveth. What his intention next was, appears by his answer unto the
Norimbergers, now inviting him into their City: which was, That he had rather a
great deal see Wallenstein, then Norimberg. Against whom he immediately
advancing into the Upper Palatinate, was not able to go further, through a
destroyed country: and hearing withal, both Wallenstein and Bavaria to be
coming against him; he retires back again, finally encamping by Norimberg.
and entrenches himself by Norimberg. Since which time, though the Armies have
layne long near one another; yet for that at the finishing hereof, there had
nothing been done betwixt them; I must leave that to a Third Part: and if you
please, to a better instructed Intelligencer.

Here follows the Declaration or Manifesto of his Highness the Duke of
Bavaria; which we before mentioned and promised you. Received from a good
Friend: and already translated by an able Gentleman.
FOR as much as among the multitude of false rumors, that are promiscuously
divulged, as well within, as without the bounds and territories of the Empire;
concerning those affairs that are now presented upon the stage of action, in
this scene of War: those that ring lowdest, (though with least semblance of
truth or credibility) are such as deeply trench upon the candor and sincerity
of my intention. The which seem not so much to have been first broached, by
the inventers of feigned novelties; and such light spirits, as are enamoured
with false curiosities: as to have been set on foot, by the capital enemies
of my renown and reputation. Such as have fixed the eye of their intention,
upon a higher (though more ignoble and malicious design) then to amuse the
world, with the relation of unprofitable fables. In regard whereof I was forced
to believe, That I could not neglect these injurious calumnies, without doing
deep wrong unto mine honor: and that I stand obliged, to avow and give a
manifest declaration to all the world, of the certitude and sincerity of my
most private intentions. Which therefore I now resolve to do, by this public
Act and open Protestation: even as from the beginning of this war I have
endeavored to have done, by the clear testimony of my public and undoubted
actions; a great deal more effectually, then I possibly can do by weight of
words, or by any tenor of verbal protestations.

Now then, having first invoked and called down upon me, the direful wrath
and just vengeance, both of God and man; if in this serious business, I either
feign or dissemble: I do protest, that the most powerful and sovereign
motives, that have been the chief conductors of all my actions (as well in the
times of peace, as in this of war) have been from their first origin and
beginning, and at this present are, and by Gods gracious assistance hereafter
ever shall be; no other, then the zeal and fidelity, which I owe and have
solemnly sworn to his sacred Imperial Majesty, and the reestablishing of the
Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Faith in the territories of this Empire; from many
fair parts whereof, it has been treacherously exiled; with no less impious
Sacrilege, then cruel tyranny. So that in this, my designs have not aimed at
any other end, then the glory of God, and the discharge of my own conscience.

I put on arms, at the first commotion of the treacherous revolt in Bohemia;
and have not yet laid them down, in the preservation and defense of so noble
and just a cause. And how I have comported my self in them, I need not
remember: for all Christendom will bear record with me, that with just cause,
this age has given already, and all succeeding ages shall give hereafter;
immortal thanks to the God of armies, for the glorious achievements with
which he has blessed us. A part of which memorable exploits, his divine
goodness has been pleased to execute by my weak hands; and his sacred
Imperial Majesty has received such satisfaction in my endeavors, that he
has been pleased to afford me a large occasion to receive much greater from
him, in the heap of massy honors; wherewith he has vouchsafed to recompense
the weak services I have done to the state of this Empire, and that of Gods
Church; the advancement of both which, are linked and chayned together, in the
inviolable bond of one common interest.

Wherefore I verily believe, that no reasonable man (that does not suffer
himself to be wilfully coozened with malicious conjecture, and groundless
divination) can frame his judgment to conceive, that I would now change my
first resolutions, and alter my designs: at such a time especially, as when I
have so important a Subject, and binding obligations, to renew and reenforce
them more then I could foresee, or imagine at their first undertaking. For if
that be true, which now passes for current in a great part of the World: that
the prime and chiefest aim in this new combination and conspiracy, is to
reinvest my Cousin Count Frederick in the dignity of his Electorship, and estate
of his territories; from which he has been most justly thrown and dejected,
for having falsified his oath and loyalty to his Imperial Majesty, by the
religious bond of a sacred oath not long before confirmed to him; and
rebelliously sought to dispossess him of his Crown and dominion: I say, if
this be the true cause of these bloody commotions (as they would make the world
believe it is) then I am the man, against whom they should have discharged the
gall of their intemperate fury. And therefore to imagine, that I would join in
league and confederacy against them, that have no cause to take arms, but in
defense of my right: is to presume against the nature of things, and to frame a
dictamen, contrary to the principles even of common sense it self.

And if there be nothing but this to rectify, what concerns it my Lord the
Emperor, and the whole noble family of Austria; that I should rather enjoy the
dignity of an Elector, then my foresaid Cousin; or that I should possess a part
of that estate, of which he has been so justly deprived? Or to what end
should they endeavor to prejudice the pretended restitution of them both, if I
were pleased to yield my consent thereunto? Verily it would seem a pleasant
and sportfull war, that should be undertaken to force me to be more rich and
powerful, then I my self desired.

But men may say (peradventure) that the King of Spain also possesses a good
part of the Palatinate; which I grant he does: but this is so far from
engaging me to relinquish any part of my just claim, that it is rather a
powerful reason more firmly to oblige me, to uphold and maintain mine own
claim and just title; seeing him borne down with the concurrence of so
puissant The French King.
a Monarch. Wherefore, if we rest in the principles of reason and humane
prudence, it can neither have likelihood, appearance, nor color of truth; that
I should now be changed and become another man, then heretofore I have been.

And if any man have fancied so prodigious a change and alteration in me, for
that they have known me less pleased with some designs and proceedings of
the Austrian Family, in some cases, wherein the cause of Religion was no way
interessed; he might from thence have groundedly collected, that in case the
Cause debated, were only concerning the raising of their particular
greatness, and extent of their fortunes; there yet survived in my breast,
sufficient sparks of freedom and generous worth, to have opposed their wills,
and contradicted their intendments (I not judging them justifiable, rather then
have made this strained and ridiculous inference upon it, that I framed a
resolution to band it with the route of their enemies: they especially, being
such, as with all the stream of their strongest endeavors, make profession to
pursue and persecute the faith I profess. I know very well, in what esteem
and honor I am obliged to hold the race of that The House of Austria.
renowned Family, and I think also, that the higher exaltation thereof, may in
time become prejudicial to the repose Well confessed.
and general freedom of the Empire. But that which touches my heart with
highest strains of just fear, and that whereof great and good Princes (in my
opinion) ought to be most sensible, and (if I might be believed) is, that that
illustrious Family (as ancient and noble as it is) should by the world be
conceived to have a straighter obligation, and greater interest in the defense
of Religion, then concerns other Princes that are truly Catholic. ^ine.
Verily, this is all the jealousy I have of this glorious and Majestique
Family. This is the only point of honor, which I could find in my heart to
debate and maintain against it. And if this Family shall allege the plenteous
showers of prosperity and temporal blessings; wherewith God has heretofore,
and does yet most especially oblige them to the peculiar defense and patronage
of his glorious cause: his Divine goodness forbid, that I should oppose my
self to the honor and happiness of so just and holy a fortune: ^igh.
although there-hence should ensue the diminution, yea even the fatal ruin of
me and all mine.

A thought it is, unworthy to be lodged in the breast of a Christian Prince; to
conceive, That the glory of Gods Church (which is inviolably linked with that
of his eternal Majesty) should not likewise by him be esteemed the vertical
and highest point of his honor; and that if these two could possibly be
separated (as by a long and approved experience I find they cannot) yet the
case is such, that I hold it for a most uncontrolled Oracle of certain truth,
yea and an approved Article of Faith, that all humane respects and
considerations ought to be even sacrificed, and nothing regarded by every
generous mind, when the Cause of Religion and piety to God shall be esteemed to
require it. For certainly, no subject is so straightly obliged, to set aside
and forgo the peculiar affairs of his own private estate, for advancement of
the public and common good of his King and Kingdom (when cause shall so
require it) as all Sovereign Princes are tied in the supreme bonds of highest
duty, Religiously said.
to renounce whatsoever may in this World be dear unto them; when the glory of
Him, of whom they hold their Crowns and Soveraigntyes, shall come in
competition, and be balanced with it.

I say not this, to brand them with notes of impiety, that under pretense of
humane policy and Principles of State, He handles the French tender
have entered into a league and strait combination with heretics, against the
sound and Orthodoxe party: Let this be accounted for an error in judgment, or
some deep misfortune, rather then an heinous crime. I will frankly leave the
whole world at liberty, to direct and accommodate it self, to such rules of
Conscience, as themselves shall like of, and value to be upright and just. Nor
will I pass any rash censure upon their proceedings, but will force my self
to believe, Neatly put of
that God has revealed some secret principles to them, which have hitherto
been unthought of in all ordinary Theology. For my own part, I will not
hinder their being esteemed true Catholics; seeing they themselves desire to
appear and be esteemed for such: only this I will allege, (that the whole
world may bear witness, that my inclinations and motions do not run level
in the same line with theirs) that in the light of my simple judgment, it is
all one to become an Apostata from the Religion of our holy Ancestors, and to
foment and nourish their rage, that endeavor to destroy it. I have had no
ancient Alliance with any person: who under the fair pretense of well-wishing,
might seem to have allured me to favor this combination: and if I had, I
should esteem it no less lawful to break all bands of ancient amity with
them in this case, then I do hold it most unlawful to contract any new ones.

I am well acquainted with the form and tenor of ancient Oaths of Fidelity;
which were customarily exhibited to Supreme and Sovereign Princes, upon the
solemn days of Inauguration and Installment: and I well remember that also,
which I my self have taken upon like occasions. Nor do I know any one point,
which would not be directly infringed and violated, by the contrary practice in
this confederacy; whereunto some would seem to induce me, and impute unto me
whether I will or no.

To say that the war now waged, no way concerns Belike the Catholics
The cause of Religion, but is merely for the interest of temporal state and
honor, ^^emselues ^ave this opi^^on of the ^arre: and have ^^ught it the
^rotestants.
were wilfully to hoodwincke our selves, and to become voluntarily blind, in
the affairs that concern the estate of this Empire, and the universal good
of Christendom. For, to take no notice of the insolent rumors, with which the
Protestant partisans have filled the world, since the Battle of Leipsich: to
have no regard to the common Ballads and songs of joy, which triumphant Heresy
has precipiticiously caused to be chanted in each corner of their public
streets and private families. To omit their glorious boasts and vain brags,
That the Papists are reduced to such terms, as they are become just equal
with Protestants, in their undutifull attempts and treacherous complots: who
knows not, that the most fair and plausible pretenses of the King of Sweden,
the Duke of Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenburg, the Landtgrave of Hessen,
and other their confederates; have been to hinder the restitution of
Ecclesiastical livings, decreed in a solemn Diet to be restored to the
Church? And if this be no point of Religion, I know not what is. If I believe
(as indeed I do with all the powers of my whole heart) that the Catholic
Church is the dear Spouse of Christ Jesus; can I put any maine obstacle, yea
or so much as interpose the least diversion, to the execution of so just a
Decree, without incurring the note and censure of horrible prevarication, yea
even of detestable Sacrilege: uniustly thereby ravishing from Her, the lawful
endowments and revenues, of her ancient patrimony, and inheritance of her
Children? Can I suffer, or rather can I have the heart to procure, (retaining
still the name and quality of a Catholic) that the goods devoted and
consecrated by our pious Ancestors, for the maintenance of Gods Altar, and for
the ornament and due reverence of his divine worship; should wickedly be
distracted for the levying and payment of Lutheran forces: who wheresoever they
prevail, demolish and ruin the Altars themselves, banish the holy Sacrifice,
trample the blessed Sacrament under their profane feet, massacre their
Priests, and insolently triumph in the shame and spoil of this most sacred and
spotless Dove? What? can this in any Catholic Language be styled, the
preservation of the liberties of the Empire, which is indeed the maintenance of
that bloody tyranny, which frontlesse Heretics desire to execute against the
Church of God? And what were this, but by Communication both of Arms and
Councels, to concur to the setting up of Heresy: even in those places, which
the goodness of God, and the wakefull vigilance of their Princes, had to this
hour preserved as pure and unpolluted? And to speak more calmely and gently
of the violent cruelties, that in the times of these wars, have been daily
practiced, by the continual outrage of merciless Heretics; were but to mock
God, and abuse the credulity and patience of men.

The Landtgrave of Hessen, has he not demolished the Scutcheons of Arms of
the Catholic Bishops and Princes, He means t^ Bishop of Cullens Arms, which
the Landtgrave took down Nienbus, by Paderborn.
in all those places which he has brought under his subjection, and planted
his own in their rooms and places? practicing that boldly, which the holy
Prophet David so much reprooved in the person of his barbarous forerunners.
They have, I say, advanced their Arms by their Armies, in all those places
they but seem to have subdued. Their Ministerial Preachers, with what loud
voice have they made show to give thanks to God, for the happy success of
their bloody victories? What furious Alarmes, have not resounded in Wurtsburg,
in diminution of the honor of Gods Church? since with more then Turkish and
barbarous cruelty, it has been sacked and pillaged, contrary to the law of
Nations and Articles of agreement. Have not their Pulpits at all hours
proclaimed, That the King of Sweden was sent from Heaven, as a particular
instrument: to advance their new pretended Religion; and for the final
abolition and utter overthrow, of Idolatrous Papistrie, as they impiously
mistearme it? A thing, which such persons as would colourably excuse the
intentions of great Princes; might perhaps attribute to the indiscreete and
passionate zeal of the common people: unless the direful effects, (recorded
and registered in lines of blood) did bear record, That all those disasters and
public calamities, were derived from no other sourse and Fountain.
Certainly, it is not the House of Austria, which alone does suffer in this
their desperate fury; it is the Catholic Church, which they endeavor to rend
and tear in pieces, by the cruel attempts of their inveterate malice: It is
God that suffers; and howsoever they seek to obscure it with Pilates
principles; yet, in effect, it is Christ that is crucified. Wherefore, let the
King of Sweden, and those of his faction; delude the world no longer with
pretenses, that they intend only to abate the greatness of the House of
Austria, and not to trample in the ruins of Religion. The battery and spoil
of Towns and Cities; the forage and desolation of entire Provinces; are not
secrets that can be concealed. The barbarous Cruelties of the debauched
Soldiers, with no mantle can be covered: and much less, the high-voyced
outcries of the swollen Ministry, will be put to silence.

Truly the ancient histories of the Goths and Vandals, of the Arrians and
Saracens; who have crowned so many glorious Martyrs with eternal Trophies,
(whose ashes are yet reverenced, and whose memories yet flourish amongst us in
everlasting Blessings) do make no mention of greater Barbarismes, then are
daily practiced at this day, by their faithless posterity. We do not read,
that in those days, there were any State-mysteries, or Reserved Cases, True:
for the ^esuites have brought them ^n since.
by which He touches ^he French King; who has ^he Style of most Christian: and
is ^n league with ^he Swede.
Christian Princes could be countenanced and secured, to join in Arms with
them that were commonly styled The very Scourge of God, and chief Captains of
Antichrists Conquests. Let all the world conspire and unite their endeavors,
as much as humane policy can contrive they should do; yet is it certain, That
the attempts of heresy shall never prosper; except in the strength of our
sins: and the Counsels of their chiefest Favorites, shall never win
greater approbation from God, then that, which by the same interpretation, may
be given to the successful prosperity of Turks and Infidels. Miserable and
unfortunate may they ever be, that ground their imaginary greatness, upon the
foundation of such unstable and distracted abuses.

We have heard and read much, of the unfortunate disasters of precedent ages;
but truly in this one thing, The Bavarian Jesuits are angry, that other have
gone beyond them in their own trad^ of Statizing.
these of ours outstrip and go beyond them; that in those, there wanted these
subtle and elevated Spirits, that forge distinctions where none are; between
affairs of State and Religion. Neither were there then found many Christian
Princes, that could lend an inclining ear, to such nice distinctions. Or, if
perhaps, any such was then found amongst them, his memory is buried in obscure
oblivion, or his name made odious and hateful to all posterity. God of his
divine goodness, sooner strike me dead with a fearful Thunderbolt; and blot
my name for ever out of the memory of men: then permit it to be registered in
the lists of funestious examples, of the fine niceties and subtleties of these
miserable days of ours. If in the field, mine eyes should be cast upon mine
Ensigns; and behold them there bearing the reverend Image of the glorious
Mother of God: and should reflect withal, that they were mixed with their
Standards, that would dispitefully spit No good Protestant will do so.
in her face: what repose and content is it possible my heart should find;
seeing my self engaged in such a strange kind of Alliance? With what
confidence or assurance could I beg her succor, that is the most auspicious
protectresse of the holy Church, and of the Princes that serve her, against
whom I am banded? With what forehead, or with what vows, durst I implore her
intercession, (without which notwithstanding I dare undertake nothing) when I
see the victories I should atchieve, must needs prove pernicious and
prejudicial to Her honor, and that of Her dear Son? Is it possible I
should pray for taking of Towns, into which I know the Conqueror will be no
sooner entered; then with extreme violence he will pull down the Images of the
glorious Saints, tread under their foul feet, the blessed blood of our dear
Lord Jesus, which we believe to be piously reserved on our Altars? O you
Catholic Princes pull off the mask of your counterfeit profession; or once
for all, afford us some solid ground, to justify your intentions; that in
outward face appear so absurd and graceless.

You cannot have the same desires and wishes in the Church, which you conceive
in your Cabinets: for there, you cannot, without blushing, beg at the hands of
God, and of his blessed Mother, and of the other Saints whom you reverence and
invoke; you cannot, I say, without blushing beg at their hands the patronage
and protection of such a cause, as (like the other heresies of our times, that
have been planted by fury and persecution of the faithful) cannot subsist;
but by the ruin of the Church, and final extirpation of the religious and
true worship of God. Rid your selves, if you can, from the maze of these, not
only intricate, but just scruples; and make us capable of those other secrets,
and mysteries, and principles, the which I ingeniously confess, I have not
strength of wit to conceive.

And on the other side; in the truth which I have been bred in, and to which I
have been molded: I can find no difference, betwixt those that anciently bare
arms in the service of Attila: in that time when in Rhemes he He gives the
French nation, an example of their own.
cruelly beheaded St. Nicasius: and those now, which by the hands of the Swede,
do massacre Gods Priests, expel his Bishops from their flock and residence,
and sacrilegiously spoil and destroy his sacred Temples. Certainly, what
modesty soever these people may strive to counterfeit in their extortions; and
with what disguise soever, they seek to color the face of their violence:
being convinced by the evident testimony of their own manifest tyranny, they
cannot deny, but that they are of the rank They will deny it, surely.
of those Princes, of whom the Royal Prophet in these express terms long
ago foretold: That all their Princes concluded among themselves, and by
express decree resolved; They would possess the Sanctuary of God upon earth,
as goods appertaining to their own inheritance, which is, in a word, nothing
else, but expressly to say: Let us maintain our selves in the possessions of
the patrimony of the Church: which long since we have confiscated, and
appropriated to our selves; and which now is a part and member of our own
demeanes. And those that favor this wicked design, under what pretext soever;
though they seem to shroud themselves, under never so colorable reasons of
fair appearances: yet can they not fail to see themselves clearly pointed at
in the fearful predictions of the Prophet Obadiah: where their prevarication
and looseness is branded with the note of eternal infamy, in the list of
maledictions, which he bestows on them. What then, says our Lord? Obadiah,
verse 8. to 11.
shall I not one day destroy the politikes of Idumea? Shall I not utterly
subvert the wisdom of the mountains of Esau? The strong and bold spirits
shall tremble with fear, that shall surprise them from the parts of the South;
and this through the default of him, that will appear so great a person upon
the mountain of Esau. By reason of the murders and injustice, which thou have
committed against thy brother Jacob, thou shall be shaken and crushed with
confusion, and shall perish everlastingly, in revenge of that day, wherein thou
liftest thy hand against him. Then when those who professed a strange law,
enforced the armies to pass under their yoke, and the excommunicate did even
force the gates of their Cities, and were partakers in the spoils of
Jerusalem. And thou He touches the French.
also were united to that party, and were no whit better, but more covert and
concealed then they. O representation of our miserable times! not allegorical,
but most express and lively! O cruel and unnatural jealousy of Christian
Princes! O heresy, more faithful to side it with their party, then the
faithful are constant to assist one another! I had rather say with the holy
Prophet David, these words full of holy and religious zeal: Early in the
morning, (that is, in the beginning of my thoughts and actions,) I had no other
care, then to employ my forces to the destruction of sinners: Which by
excellence, and in a rank above others, all Heretics are. Wherefore, the
course of things passing in this manner; and my affection and sense of them,
being such as I have declared: it appears manifestly, that by no
consideration either of State or Religion; I could esteem it either expedient
or lawful, to adhere to this faction; which were but to consent to the spoil
and rapine of the Protestant party: but am rather obliged, to commiserate and
condole at their successes; and to oppose their progress. And therefore I
protest again and again, before God and men: That I have now my sword in my
hand to do it; and that in this quarrel, I will most cheerfully hazard my
estate, my goods, mine honor, and my life.

After which protestation, which heretofore has been, and hereafter shall be
followed, with all suitable effects and actions, by which I am possibly able to
approove and verify the same: if yet there be any, that rest doubtful of the
integrity of my intentions, I shall have no other esteem nor regard of him,
then of one whom I account an obstinate calumniator, and my professed enemy.

The Elector of Saxonyes Proceedings.
HIs Imperial Majesty, after the Leipsich-losse of so goodly an Army, (which
was one of the fairest Pillars of the House of Austria) seems like a wise
Architect of Fortune, to have consulted especially upon the means; both how to
shore up the side, by repairing of his own army; and to abate the stresse, by
weakening of his adversaryes. It stood not either with an Imperial or Austrian
greatness, to go less now, then when his army had been victorious: nor so
far to satisfy so mean a Prince as the King of Sweden; as either at his
instance, or for his Arms, to restore their own unto the oppressed. That
would have argued fear in him; had drawn an implicit confession from him,
that he had hitherto been injurious. It was more honorable (he was advised)
to work out his own ends, by continuing on his old courses, and whilst he by
force, undid the weaker Protestants; by Courtship and Ambassages so long to
impose upon the cr^dulity of the greater, till the Eagle were ready to show her
pounces To make our stoutnesses, yield and comply with our business; goes for
a note of Wisdom. That late affront and shrewd turn, which John George the
Duke and Elector of Saxony had so freshly offered him; is not seasonable now to
be remembered: it was an unkind part indeed; The Duke of Saxony attempted to be
turned.
but yet was his Imperial Majesty full of graciousnesse: Austria could forget,
and Saxony might make all whole again by turning. That's now attempted.
Marquess Cadaraita, then Spanish Ambassador at Veinna, was both the Councellor
and the Agent in it. He in the name of the King his Master, sends Colonel
Paradis with instructions unto Dresden; to make way for the compounding of all
former unkindnesses with the Duke of Saxony. The Minutes of whose negotiation
were to this purpose.

To expound unto the Elector, the great desire the King his Master had, ^he
Spanish ^mbassadours ^^oposition.
and the diligence he had used in it; to restore a happy and an universal
peace, unto the Roman Empire. That his Majesty had most expressly commanded
his now present Ambassador, to be most observant of all such pregnant
opportunities, as might either maintain or make up that memorable and ancient
amity, which had so many years continued betwixt the two houses of Austria and
of Saxony. That the King had at this time also most straightly charged his said
Ambassador, to interpose the Authority of the Crown of Spain, for the
sodering up again of these late breaches: which might (if not looked into)
seem to make a rupture in that amity. That would but the Elector now be
pleased to hearken to a friendly Treary, he (the Ambassador) came furnished
with such instructions, as might with fullness of content, compound all the
controversies. That his Master, (as he protested) desired nothing more
earnestly, then that his Highness (the Duke) with his whole Electorall family,
might be honored with more additions of happiness, then their predecessors
ever were: and that there might be a perpetuated correspondency of all good
offices between their two Houses. That his Majesty of Spain thought in his
high wisdom, this to be the best course for all this; that the Elector would
in writing deliver his greevances: and that a certain place might be
appointed, for Commissioners on both sides to treat upon them. Which if his
Highness would for peace sake be pleased to condescend unto: then would he
(the Ambassador) persuade with his Imperial Majesty, to send two Ambassadors
about it: and himself in the King of Spaines name being Interponent, would
take any pains about making up the breaches.

Unto this Proposition, the Elector returned this answer. Saxonyes Answer.
That the purpose of his Majesty of Spain seemed to have been intended,
toward the making of a peace betwixt the Houses of Austria and Saxony alone;
and not of Germany in general. That none of that side could be so ignorant, as
not to have observed how sincerely, faithfully, obediently, discreetly,
peaceably, and in the highest degree patiently, he had carried himself,
throughout all the time of this most important and weighty business: and how
hostilely (on the contrary) both the Count of Tilly; Sergeant-Major-Generall
Altringer, and Felt-marshall Diepenbach had used him and his Countries; which,
without any desert at all, they had not invaded only; but after a barbarous
and inhumane fashion ravaged and plundered, and with fire and sword
depopulated. That he for his own part was not a little afflicted, that things
were now comne to so troublesome, so dangerous and so desperate an issue: from
being any occasioner whereof, his hope was, that he could fairly excuse
himself, before God and the whole world. That he now desired nothing more,
then that such fair means might both be propounded and apprehended, for the
speedy restoring of so good and solid a peace within the Empire; as that a
blessed agreement might be made up, betwixt the Head and the Members: the State
surely settled: the miserably afflicted Empire, from this threatened ruin
delivered; and all once again restored, unto its former strength and Majesty.
That he could by no means conceive a reason, how things in this desperate
condition of the whole Empire in general, could any ways be bettered, by
these personal and particular treatyes. That during the time of these
troubles, it had by variety of examples been manifested; that no general
concord could by these private Leaguings be procured: but that more dangerous
consequences daily brake forth upon it. That should he now condescend to his
Majesty of Spain in this; he were no ways able to excuse himself unto the
King of Sweden, and the Protestant States of Germany. But if their Majestyes
(the Emperor and of Spain) were pleased to intend a just and universal
peace; then would he show himself most willing and most ready; to do
whatsoever lay in his power to perform in it.

A fair answer; relishing of a public spirit, and becoming a Prince and
Elector of the Empire. Saxony wisely found out the drift of this Austrian
courtesy: which pretended private friendships, whilst they intended him
public enmityes: and as wisely considered, that he could not long be safe in
his private Cabin, whilst the whole Ship were on fire under him. This Treaty
was made, in the beginning of October 1631.

Nor yet whilst the thoughts and words of Peace were in motion, had the
actions of war on his Imperial Majesty's side, any cessation. For so soon
as ever the terror of the pursuit of the Victory of Leipsich was well over,
and the Imperialists in Silesia assured, both of the King of Swedens expedition
into Duringen (quite another way from them) and of the stay of the Duke of
Savonyes army, The Imperialists fall into both the Lusatia's.
yet about Leipsich: do Feild-marshall Diepenbach and Colonel Gotse, prepare
to fall into the Duke of Saxonyes Lands, both in the Upper and Lower Lusatia,
which in the year 1623, this very Emperor had bestowed upon this same Duke of
Saxony. The Duke, indeed, seems to have consumed too much time after his
recovering of his City of Leipsich; and to have been something too precise and
punctual in examining and punishing such, as had either by their cowardice or
affections, given occasions of the sudden rend^ing of the Town unto the
General Tilly. The goods of the offenders (whether absent or present) were
condemned: and out of them, 30000 Rixe Dollars allotted, for the repairing of
the Suburbs, which themselves during the siege had burned.

Gotse in the mean time coming over the River Spree, out of Silesia into the
Lower Lusatia; takes, plunders, and burns the town of Luben, close upon the
said river. So is Dam also served, standing a little more Westerly. Gutterbock,
about a league from that, is pillaged: and 30000 Dollars and Dollars-worth,
fetched out of those of Libenaw. His Horse also take in the little town of
Schlieben, in the Jurisdiction of Hertzberg: and all the towns, finally,
betwixt the rivers of Spree and Elster; Cotwitz, namely, Spremberg, Hoierswerd,
Finsterwald, etc. and all this was done before Michaelmas, and in the Lower
Lusatia.

In the mean time had Field-Marshall Diepenbach undertaken the Upper Lusatia:
which lies nearer to the Sun, then does the Lower. This little Country is
usually called The six Towns; because of so many eminenter Towns in it;
which are Bautzen, Gorlitz, Sittaw, Camitz, Lauben and Luben; all belonging to
the Elector of Saxony. To solicit Bautzen, is Colonel Four sent; and
Colonel Illo, to Sittaw: which two, together with the three other on the West
side of the Spree; are feign to accept of, what they could not avoyde, the
taking in of the Emperors garrisons. Unto Gorlitz, (on the same side of the
Spree next to Silesia) Diepenbach sends an Imperial Commissary first: and he
not prevailing, some of his armed troops presenting their Ordnance before the
Town; compel the Citizens to discharge their Saxon garrison, and to take in
whom he appointed them. Thus were all the six towns by the middle of October,
become Imperial. Nor had the Duke of Saxonyes own Home-stall (as I may say)
been secure from them. September 30. five hundred Crabats breaking into
Meissen or Misnia, approach unto old Dresden, upon the Eastern bank of the
Elb; and within less then a Dutch league of New Dresden; where the Electors
own Palace is. Here had they thought to have surprised the old Iaggers Castle;
but were discovered, and beaten off with the Ordnance of it: after which they
were scared out of the Country by the Saxon Army. For now the Elector having
notice of all this, September 27. he first sets out with his Army from
Leipsich toward Torgau upon the Elb; the next frontier town toward Lusatia.
The fame went of 22000 men in the Army: and that the Lord Marquess Hamiltons
forces, (then about Custrine and Franckford upon the Oder) should be also
joined with them.

The Duke of ^axonyes forces ^tive the Impe^ialists out of Lusatia.
The Imperialists, upon the news of Arnheims, and the Saxons coming; make
toward Hertzberg bridge, where the Saxons were to pass over the Elster to
come at them. Arnheim here forces his passage; beats Gotse back from thence:
who was feign thereupon to leave all he had gotten in the Lower Lusatia, and
retreat with his whole Army into the Upper. By the seventh of October, had
Arnheim again reduced all the towns of the Lower Lusatia; and then follows
Gotse into the Upper: who hearing of his coming, leaves Diepenbachs garrisons
only in the Six Towns; and retires his forces into Bohemia partly; and
partly again into Silesia. Those that went into Bohemia, do much spoil by
the way in Walsteins Dukedom of Fridland (which is upon the frontiers of
Lusatia and Bohemia) not sparing his own Lands and Territories. They were
afterward enquartered in the Earldom of Glatz. Those that made toward
Silesia, did Arnheim give chase unto: who so hardly pressed upon them, that they
in confusion passing the river Neiss at Gorlitz, were feign for haste to leave
their Ordnance in that City.

Then falls Arnheim upon the Imperialists in the Six Towns: which being none
of the strongest, and the Townsmen willing withal; are as soon reduced now,
as they had been before surprised. All this was done by the twentieth of
October; by which, the Duke of Saxony himself was come to Bautzen, with the
other lesser part of the Army: and Arnheim having thus cleared both the
Lusatiaes, is preparing to fall into Bohemia.

Arnheim marches into Bohemia.
October 25. he first sets forward: taking in Schlukenaw Town first of all;
where the river Spree has his original. This is a Romane-Catholike town upon
the Northern frontiers of Bohemia; which the Emperor had heretofore given to
the Earl of Mansvelt. Thence marches he on to Tetschin: where the river
Pulsnitz falls into the Elb. This being a wonderful well provided place, makes
countenance of resistance: but changed their copy by and by, so soon as
Arnheims Ordnance, and the gross of his Army, presented themselves before it.
Crossing the Elb at this place, to Ausich, and takes towns all the way.
or Ausig, he comes: two Germane leagues and a half distant. Upon the first
news of the Saxons being past the Elb, one hundred Horsemen of this Ausich,
presently run and tell those of Tepliz; a town just so far also distant
toward the West. Those of Starahor, a strong Castle upon a hill kept by four
hundred Imperialists, hearing likewise of the same news; poorly quit the
Vestung or hilly Castle aforesaid. Thence, October 28, hyes he unto Leutmeritz
on the East side of the Elb; within 7 Dutch miles or 28 English, of the City
of Prage: to which the chief of the Citizens and the garrison of Leutmeritz,
had before Arnheims coming retired. Marching more Southerly next day up the
Elb. the Austrian Baron Hoffkirck is by him sent with 1000 Horse unto Raudnitz,
ten or twelve English miles further, and upon the other side of the river:
which he surprises. The Inhabitants being all Papists, have their houses
plundered: some of the chief Burgers being carried away prisoners, for their
ransom, and the fidelity of their fellows.

Arnheim having thus far advanced into Bohemia, Henry Mathias the old Count
of Thurn, began to stir also. His town of Thurn, is upon the very frontiers
of the Duke of Saxonyes Misnia, and Bohemia: The old Count of Thurn makes a
party in Bohemia.
and thereabouts (I perceive) he began first of all to rise. He had his
Commission for Lieftenant General, and some forces, from the King of Sweden;
some aids he received from the Duke of Saxony: besides a party of diverse
banished and discontented Lords and Gentlemen with their Tenants, which he drew
into the action. That there were two several Armies about the end of this
October in Bohemia; and those severally led too, by Arnheim and old Thurn, I
find expressly. With the Swedish troops, does Count Thurn, first of all take
in Ioachimsdale: a town with a pretty Jurisdiction belonging unto it, upon the
West-frontiers of Bohemia, midway betwixt Thurn and Egra. Here the people
choose the old Count for their Governor: who bringing the Country as he goes
along, under Contribution, marches toward Prage to join with Arnheim.

This great and Imperial City of Prage, (which is indeed three several
Cities in one) hearing of these proceedings; begins to lose the company of the
Emperors great Officers and Jesuits, there residing: all begin to pack away
toward Budweiss first, and so to Passaw and Vienna. Nor did Walenstein Duke of
Fridland, Don Balthazar, (then General in those parts) the Count of Michna and
Colonel Wangler, stay behind: but faining to go out of the town, to meet
with the Count of Thurn and capitulate with him; they all together shifted for
themselves other-where. These Commanders being immediately followed by the
soldiers (lately sent for thither for the defense of the City, and said to
be two thousand men) and the Citizens thereby left to themselves; yield
immediately unto Arnheims first friendly Letter and Summons, upon the first of
November sent unto them by his Trumpet. Himself at his coming accorded the
whole matter with them, upon these conditions.

Prage taken.
1. First, That the Saxon soldiers from their very first admission into the
City, should behave themselves peaceably and quietly; without offering
violence or injustice unto any man.

2. That none of the three Cities of Prage should any way be charged: nor any
Monasteryes, Colleges, or Churches pillaged. And that free leave of continuing
in the town, should be permitted unto the Monks and other Ecclesiastical
persons; who shall no ways be injuryed by the souldioury.

3. As for the Gentry and Magistrates of the said three Cities, neither should
they be burdened with any enquarterings or billeting of soldiers upon them:
nor should any ransom or other forfeiture be wrung from them. And if in case
any of them (which is not to be supposed) should so be used by the soldiers:
then should they be protected by the Lord Arnheim, or who-ever should be the
Governor residing in that City, where they be so molested.

4. For that the three Cities aforesaid have made an earnest request of it,
that they may be suffered to continue in the homage, which they once took
oath upon unto the Emperor: and that it may be free for any man to depart the
City, without paying any ransom or Fine for it: this condition was for the
present accepted of by the Lord Arnheim, until his Highness the Elector of
Saxony should resolve otherwise of it.

5. For that the several abilities of the Citizens, were most particularly
known unto their own Magistrates: it should be left to their choice, in what
houses to billet or not billet the Saxon soldiers.

6. That the Jews as well as the Christians, should have freedom of religion;
and all free protection both for their lives and goods.

7. That the three Cities should submit themselves to the protection of his
Highness the Elector of Saxony: and that every man should make promise to live
peaceably; and to give no occasion of sedition: but with a good and true
meaning, to observe whatsoever is contained in these Articles: which were by
both parties thus signed.

John George Arnheim. The old, The new, The little,
City.

Within a week after the rendering of Prage, The Duke of Saxony enters Prage.
came the Duke of Saxony into the City: taking up his lodging in that goodly
fair Palace, lately built by the Duke of Fridland, upon the ruins of an
hundred houses. The Count of Thurn contented himself with taking possession of
his own house again; which the Emperor had bestowed upon the Count of
Michna: He forthwith caused the heads and limbs of such Protestant Lords and
others, as had been executed by the Emperor, to be taken down, and
honorably buried. The Catholic Lords, Gentlemen, and Imperial Officers of
the neighbor Cities, make as much money of their estates as they can, and the
most of them depart the Kingdom. Those that stayed behind, as also the
inferior people, being afraid of ill usage from the soldiers; the Count of
Thurn gives out a general Protection in the King of Swedens name, for the
security of the Subject. Thus.

The Count of Thurn gives a protection to the Subjects of Bohemia,
We Henry Mathias, Count of Thurn, Baron of Ballastrino and Creutz,
Lieftenant-Generall to his Majesty of Sweden, etc. do in his said Majesty's
name, give free leave, power, and authority to the Noble Gentleman John Host
Theysel, to protect and defend you and all the subjects of Bohemia, from all
injuries, etc. The Boores begin to appear on the Swedish and Saxish party, and
kill as many Imperial soldiers as they could singly meet withal and master.
They pillage Postelberg upon the river Egra: with Brustwald, and other towns
thereabouts. They murder two great Imperial privy Counselors; the Earl of
Thallenberg Lord President: and the Count of Trautmansdorff. The troublesome
estate of the Country, may best be read in the Count of Thurns Proclamation,
for the redress of it.

and sets out a Proclamation, to restrain diverse insolences.
We Henry, etc. Count of Thurn, etc. understanding, how that diverse Boores have
begun, not only to rob upon the highways side, but also to pillage Castles
and Gentlemen's houses: and that no honest man is able to go about his
business, for fear of being robbed by them: therefore do we hereby fairly
request first of all, and advise them, to give over these insolences: and to
pray to God rather to send them a good Magistrate, under whom they may enjoy
peace and quietness: that every man may fearelessely return to his vocation
again, and leave off these idle courses. For this army is not come to ruin or
undo, but to redress the country rather, against such injuries as it has
heretofore endured. My hope therefore is, that you will not revenge your former
wrongs upon these our soldiers: and I for mine own part will still continue,
as heretofore I have been, your good Patron and Protector. As for those of
the Gentry, none I hope will become partakers with these extravagant fellows;
but be a means and a help rather, to suppress and hinder them in their
naughty purposes. My further hope is, that both one and other will apply
himself, to this our well intended admonition: which (let me tell them) will
be a great deal better both for their quiet and for their profit. But
whosoever he be, that after this, shall be apprehended for the like faults
again; let him be assured that I will proceed with that severity against him,
as his demerits shall require; making him an example unto the rest, that none
hereafter may impute their punishment, to any but their own disobedience. Thus
much shall the Lord Adam of Chinitz and Tetaw, cause to be made known unto
you.

By this time had Thurns part of the Army, The actions after the taking of
Prage.
taken in all the North-westerne part of the Kingdom, from Ioachimsdale
aforesaid; along upon the river Egra, to the County of Satz, called the Satzer
kraiss; together with the towns of Satz, Commothaw, Prisen and the rest, upon
the West of the City Prage. Arnheim with his Saxons, did what he pleased upon
the rivers Elb and Multaw, on the South and East side of the City: which he
might easily enough do, for there was not an Imperialist nor strong Town, to
resist him. So easy was this goodly Kingdom to be taken. Toward the middle
of November, is the Imperial Colonel Gallas sent in with some troops against
him. In the end of the month, when Tilly after his rising from Norimberg, had
sent part of his army into the Upper Palatinate, toward Weyden and Egra: he is
requested to fall in with his troops on the Western side; whiles Don
Balthazar, Diepenbach, Gallas and Gotse should set upon them on the North-East
side. Arnheim hearing of the coming of Diepenbach, Gallas and Gotse out of
Silesia, and their being joined with Don Balthazar: resolves to go against
them, before the Tillians should be marched up too far into the Country, and
he endangered to be hembd up into the middle of them. By the 26 of November,
^he Imperia^^sts make head ^gaine in Bo^^mia,
were 15000 Imperialists, (both out of Bohemia and Silesia) met together at
Limburg upon the North side of the river Elb, some 25 English miles from the
City Prage. Against these, advances Arnheim, November 28: very secretly and in
the night, without sound of Drum or Trumpet. Yet not so secretly neither, but
that the Imperialists by their espials had notice of their approaching. Arnheim
now within 2 or 3 English miles of Limburg, begins to put his men into order;
and to give directions for the assailing of the enemy (as he thought) in their
Quarters. This whiles he was doing, the Alarm is brought home to him; and word
that the enemy had already charged his Van, and disordered it. With that, might
he perceive the Imperialists in fair Battaglia; and his own men beginning to
take the rowte at it. Persuading thereupon the Regiments next unto him, To
remember the cause of religion and the public liberty, which they came thither
to fight for; the military oath taken to their Lord the Duke of Saxony; and
their own honors and former victories: he presently leads them on against the
Imperialists. Drawing his Sword withal, upon those which he met now fleeing,
and vowing to let fly his Ordnance amongst them, unless they returned into
the battle: he brought all in order again, and altogether renewed the
encounter. The fight was long; but the Imperialists having brought no Ordnance
with them, (their design having been only to surprise Arnheim upon his
march) and the Saxon Ordnance doing much spoil upon them on the other side:
(...) are over^owne by ^^nheim.
they were feign to retreat in much disorder toward Limburg. Many of them
were cut down by the pursuing Saxons; and the most of their Regiments routed.

Arnheim summoning Limburg upon fair terms, and being refused; shootes
Grenades, and Fire-workes into the Town: whereupon the Imperialists
perceiving all like to be burnt down, quit the City, and burn the bridge
behind them, for fear of being pursued. But the Saxons finding a convenient
foord or passage neere-hand over the River, pursue them on that side also. Some
6000 or 7000 men, were said to be slain in this battle: whereof there might
perchance be little more then half so many. Diepenbach was at first reported
to be killed also: but he saved himself by flight, and recovered with Gotse into
Silesia: Don Balthazar escaped into Budweiss, on the other side of the Country.

The Duke of Saxony himself about Prage in the mean time, has the Town of
Melnick upon the Elb, Other towns taken.
to the North of Prage: and the Towns of the Countyes of Podberder and Multaw,
to the South of Prage, delivered over unto him. Whilst Arnheim is coming
back again, those of the Army with the Duke, with some of Thurns forces; make
Westward toward Egra: there to prevent the Tillians. Some few correspondents
and well-wishers to his cause, the Duke then had within the City: the rest
generally being Popish. Upon confidence of whom, he presented about 900 Horse
and Foot (one with another) before their City upon the Gallows hill, on
Satterday, December 3d, old style. The Magistrates perceiving this, first cause
the Alarm to be struck up, and commanded every man, that was able to bear
Arms, to repair unto their guards: but a very few there were, that would make
a muster of themselves. Egra taken.
The Magistrates calling their Common Council together into the Statehouse, to
consult either upon the means of resistance, or Composition: might have better
saved the Town, by putting to their helping hands, then by laying their heads
together. For whilst they are there consulting; one of the Saxons
correspondents by discharging of a warning piece, both calls those without, to
press upon the bridge-Port; and his fellow-Combyners within, to break open
the said Gate for them. The Saxons marching immediately up to the market place;
there make a prison, of what Master Mayor and his brethren had made a
Parliament House: locking them all in, and setting a guard upon them. The
soldiers presently fall to plunder the Jury or street and houses of the
Jews: and those ranker and more practical Papists, whom they pleased to
mistake for Jews. For the Protestants and their Correspondents sake, they
forbear the rest of the Citizens: and were content to accept of such Billet
and Quarterings, as the still pinfolded Magistrates (more for fear then love)
were forced to assign them. Two days after, the Citizens take oath to the
Duke of Saxony: that they would stand firmly to the Elector, the Cause, and
the Protestant Religion. About this City, were some 8000 Saxons for a while
kept; until they saw whereabouts the Tillians would settle: who hearing after
a while, how Diepenbach was defeated; betake themselves into their winter
garrisons, Tillyes self returning unto Nordlingen.

The Count of Thurn now went to besiege Budweiss; a good strong City upon the
very Southermost frontiers of the Kingdom, sixty English miles from Prage.
Hither was Don Balthazar retired: and this place, he with twenty two Ensigns
maintained. The Count of Thurn falls sick.
But the Count of Thurn fell sick not long after; and the siege came to
nothing. Whilst the Duke, and Arnheim and Thurn, were abroad with the Armies;
the Austrian Baron Hoffkirck was left Governor of the Greater town of Prage,
and Philip Reinhard Count of Solms of the Lesser. The Imperial Horse (and the
Crabats especially) made diverse excursions about the Country; yea even near
unto Prage it self, in the absence of the armies. For the Duke of Saxony was
now preparing to go keep his Christmas at home: where at Dresden he arrived,
December 16, and his Felt-Marshall Arnheim with him.

Diverse attempts upon Prage, by the Imperialists.
December 13, (old style) diverse troops of Crabats made a show of themselves
before the Weissemberger gate of the greater Town of Prage: hoping of some
Correspondents or tumults within, who might help them to reprize it. The Baron
of Hoffkirck discharging three pieces of Ordnance hereupon (which is the sign
for the soldiers to take the Alarm) and sending out some troops of Horse
against them; drove them to the retreat. The next day, (being Christmas Eve at
Prage, according to the New style) the Imperialists came on with greater
forces: the Crabats light horse being backed with 1000 Musketeers, and flanked
with as many Dragooners. The Saxons well aware of their coming, had first
dressed an ambush of Musketeers in a lower place of covert for them; and then
sent out two troops of Arnheims own guards and some others, to entertain
them. These feigning to flee, draw on the Imperialists into the ambush, where a
many of them were entrapped by this stale stratageme. By this time, more of the
Imperialists appeard in sight; and with a reasonable good army. Hereupon, do
the Saxons retire into the City; looking that it would forthwith be assaulted.
But the Count of Sultz and Colonel Gallas (who led the Imperialists)
perceiving the walls and bullwarkes to be already manned, and the Ordnance
busy amongst them: call off their men, and faces about to the right hand. The
Towne-Horse perceiving this, fall (as usually they will do) out upon the Reere
of the Imperialists: which as they were about to do, all on the sudden the
bells in the two Jesuits Colleges (one in the old town, and the other in the
Lesser) began to ring out. The Jesuits hold a practice with the Imperialists.
The Imperialists hearing this signal, offered presently to return again
toward the City: but the Ordnance now thundering upon them, no Correspondents
appearing, and the short winters day being far spent: they bethought
themselves, and marched off again.

The Governors and Magistrates speedily sending to the Jesuits Colleges, to
know the reason of the ringing of their bells; found diverse Arms and Muskets
there hidden: which were ready to be used both by the Jesuits (who would for
that time have been Ex militia too) and by the Imperially-affected within the
City; had but their friends without, once made themselves Masters of any gate
or bullwarke. These Arms were taken away: the Military Jesuits three days
after, turned out of the Town; and their 2 Colleges given away to the
Carmelites and Franciscans; two kinds of less pragmaticall fraternities. The
Saxons perceiving how often they were likely to be assaulted; stand better upon
their guards: the Count of Solms causing the Burgers watch, every day to break
the ice of the river Mulda; for fear of the enemies coming over it.

December 22. the Baron Hoffkirck had the first Protestant Sermon and
Communion, in the Dutch Church of the Old town, that had in ten years before
been publicly preached in the City. And by this time, were the exiled
Protestants (both Clergy and Laity) in most places of the Kingdom, Religion
restored in Bohemia.
again returned; and liberty of Religion restored.

December 24. the Imperialists, and three Ensigns of Wallons amongst them;
Five troops of Saxons defeated,
fall upon five troops of Colonel Steinaw his Horse; then lying at Rakonick,
thirty English miles to the West of Prage City. The Saxons being surprised,
are knocked down: scarce 120 of them escaping with their lives, and loss of
two Cornets. The Imperialists advancing nearer toward Prage, take short two
other Saxonian Lieftenants ( Hauguis and Wenzor as I find them named: and two
more.
) who being gone out upon espyall to discover these Imperialists; found them
too soon, and lost their own liberties and companions lives, for their
labors. Many such excursions and attempts were made on either side this cold
weather, scarcely worth the writing. The Saxons, (of whom there were seven
thousand now in and about Prage) being aforehand with them, stirred little
abroad: but by sitting still and bibbing in the warm Stooves all day-long,
they proov'd so lazy; as that they were ever now and anon, (though in small
numbers) surprised by their more active enemies. Gallas and the Count of Sultz
lay still in the lurch for them; even as near as Beraun upon the river Watta,
within twelve or fourteen English miles of Prage, and on the West of it:
others of them lying more Westerly at that time, toward the Upper Palatinate.
For this reason, was the Duke of Saxony constrained to send more new levied
forces, with some Ordnance; toward the good town of Pilsen, and those
quarters: which lie some six or seven leagues more South-Westerly, toward the
head of the same river, and in the middle of Gallas his Quarters. This strong
town of Pilsen (as I should have told you) was by accord rendered unto the
Duke, before his going out of Bohemia. Colonel Swalbach General of the Saxons
artillery, now lay in the County of Luitmertz.

The time of the year being too cold to fight, The Emperor sends again to
draw off Saxony
the Emperor sends to the Duke of Saxony to treat. Julius Henry, one of the
Dukes of Saxon-Lawenburg (who had some years before turned Papist,) was the
man employed; and about Christmas was the time. His Imperial Majesty by this
Ambassador, protested himself to be very sorry; to have any occasion to
withdraw his affection, from so worthy and so beloved a Prince: friendly
advising the Duke, that in case he should still continue constant to his
purposes, and that if any hardship of war, or judgment from God should fall
upon him for it; He (the Emperor) should be altogether innocent of it. But the
weather was cold, and so was Saxonyes answer. These motions were several times
renewed from the Emperor, both by this and other messengers.

About the beginning of January, do the Saxons, under the leading of Baron
Hoffkirck, defeat 900 Crabats, 900 Crabats defeated.
and take 11 Cornets from them: which they send unto their Duke at Dresden.
Prage after this defeat, was held much the quieter.

About the 15th of January, the Imperialists of Mer^dies Regiment, have a
design for the plundering and burning of Slackenwald, in the County of Egra.
Prince Ernestus of Anhalt, (who then had some good Saxon forces thereabouts)
hearing of it; comes immediately upon them, and drives them to take Sanctuary
in the strong Castle of Betscha, The Imperialists attempt Slackenwald,
(from whence some of them came) about 2 English miles to the South of
Slackenwald. Other Imperialists at the same time, make daily excursions even to
the very gates of Prage. and Prage,
Those 3 Ensigns of Wallons, among the rest, that had before cut off 5
Companies of Colonel Steinaw's at Rakonick; were almost every man of them cut
in pieces, with loss.
by those of Colonel Bindthauffs Regiment, before the gates of Prage. This
Regiment of Bindthauff (who was slain at the Battle of Leipsich) was now
bestowed upon Vlrick, Prince of Denmark and Duke of Holstein.

The Duke of Saxony now levying more new forces, about Torgau in his own
Country; Ian. 18. sends some 10 pieces of Ordnance thither: 4 of which were
Demi-Cannon, and drawn with 10 horses apiece; which Tilly had left behind him
at Leipsich. Himself was all this while at home at Dresden; and Arnheim with
him: whither the Lord Chancellor Oxenstiern likewise came, from the King of
Sweden. The town of Egra about this time, desires of the Elector, to free them
of his unruly garrison. Prage it self likewise was so sorely oppressed by the
Saxons; that the poor Bohemian Protestants, lately returned to their own
homes out of exile: choose rather to forsake their native Country again, then
to endure the heaviness of such taxations, The Saxons ^ard dealing with the
Bohemians.
as the masterly Saxons enforced upon them. Thus by the middle of February,
were there 1700 houses found empty in the 3 Cities: the easing of which
hardship; the keeping of the Duke and Arnheim, from harkening to the Emperor
and Walenstein, (who laid hard at them:) to hasten forward the Saxon levies;
and to renew the former league with the Duke, was the chief part of Chancellor
Oxenstierns Embassage.

In the beginning of February, Prince Ernest of Anhalt with the 8000 Saxons he
had in and about Egra; makes show of rising thence; and of going against Cratz
into the Upper Palatinate. The occasion, was a fear conceived upon the Count
of Sultz his going out of Bohemia: which he thought had been to fetch in Cratz
thither. This made him bristle up. But hearing of Cratz and Sultz their going
to the relief of Forcheim, (a clean contrary way from him) he stays his
expedition, and looks to the Imperialists nearer hand. Within Egra, was
Colonel Starschedel, left Governor. February 3 (old Style) there was a great
Hubub sent into Prage from Brandeis (a town upon the Elb, some 10 English
miles to the North of it) that the Imperialists were with diverse pieces of
Ordnance, coming very strong against them. Hereupon does the Baron Hoffkirck
make toward Brandeis, to prevent the enemy: who falling on upon the town,
Febr. 8, were put by their design, and retired. The next day, would a
Horse-Regiment of the Crabats (with some Foot) needs make another brave before
the Town; as if they had meant presently to have attempted it. This the
Governor perceiving, Brandeis attempted, and reskue
thrusts some bands of selected musketeers (for an ambush) into the Castle,
(on the same side of the town next unto the enemies) and with some few of the
residue, sallies (in policy) out upon the Crabats. These perceiving the
sallyers to be but weak, fall instantly upon them, and beat them back to the
very walls of the Castle: presently whereupon the Saxon Musketeers issuing out,
and the sallyers returning upon the Crabats again; kill 300 of them upon the
place: defeat, and disperse the whole Regiment. Here (as they heard at Prage)
was the Count of Slyck either wounded or taken prisoner. The same third of
February did some loose troops of Crabats and others, put themselves (for the
seeking of pillage) over the river Mulda, toward Pilsen: of which the Boores
having notice, gather 600 of them together, sink the boats first of all in
which the Crabats had passed the river; and then set upon, The Boores kill the
Crabats.
and cut the throats of the plunderers. Thus the Boores served the Crabats
oftentimes; whose very name was more odious unto them, then any other of the
Imperialists. These Boores undertook the keeping the Western bank of the
Mulda: which about this time, they had cleared for 40 English miles together.

February 13, Don Balthazar turns the Skales again in Bohemia.
was Colonel Marezan sent from Don Balthazar di Marradas, (now lately returned
from Walenstein with 8000 men into Bohemia) to fall upon the town of Satz, upon
the North of the river Egra: and about 40 English miles to the West of Prage.
Marezan brought but 1000 musketeers and 500 Horse, to do the feate withal;
his trust was upon his Correspondents within the town: who indeed opened the
gates in the night time unto him. The Saxons which were of Bindthauffs old
Regiment, took the Alarm, and had three several charges with the
Imperialists. In which service, ^^atz recovered ^y the Impe^ialists,
1200 of them lost their lives, the town was won, and 6 Ensigns sent unto
Prage unto the Emperor.

And this return of Don Balthasars, gave the first jogge; which turned round
the wheel of Fortune again in Bohemia. Some Saxon forces (as if they had
meant to give way to their enemies and misfortunes) were gone a jolly voyage
into Silesia: to pillage and triumph certainly. There, about mid February,
they fall foul upon Colonel Illo and his Regiment: which they almost utterly
defeated. They surprise other Imperialists at Politz: and with a running pull,
had like to have taken in Glatz also. Some of them fly out as far as
Gorlitz. Thus whilst the soldiers gate some slight pillage in Silesia; the
Duke their Master, lost what they had before gotten him in Bohemia. For quickly
now had Don Balthazar driven other of the Saxons out of Comotha, Prisen, Rade
and Caden: and diverse other towns.
which last, the Mapps falsely write Lada. The Marquess of Gran, he also
expulses them out of Slackenwald and Carlsbat.

And thus through the idleness, covetousness, and deep security of the
Saxons, (now in the absence of their Duke and Arnheim, and the sickness of the
Count of Thurn;) was all that North-westerne corner of Bohemia, next unto
Misnia and the Upper Palatinate, quite recovered by the Imperialists. These
being Masters of that woody frontier, cut down the trees upon all the Passes
thereabouts: to hinder by that means the Duke of Saxony from sending any
Horsemen, Ordnance or Ammunition-wagons, that way into Bohemia. Yea, and had
not the snow now hindered the Imperialists, they had even then marched into
Misnia. The plague and famine, now increased in Prage and other places; and all
things seemed to threaten an alteration. The Saxons had not used their
brother-Protestants, so kindly as they should, or might have done: which
alienated the Bohemians hearts, that should have assisted them.

His Highness the Elector himself, was at a meeting or Diet at Torgau, about
the end of this February. There was his Arnheim too. There were the Marquess
Elector of Brandenburg in person: and that wise Statesman, the Swedish
Chancellor Axel Oxenstiern. A Diet at To^gau, where the Catholics moove for a
Peace.
The Emperor with other Leaguers, had their Ambassadors there also. Thus
whilst one Imperial General (Walenstein) is providing; and another (Don
Balthazar) is already fallen against Saxony into Bohemia; is there an Imperial
Ambassador sent toward Saxony, unto Torgau. Now whilst the wars are hotest,
the Leaguers and Imperialists make motions for a peace (that was their
business) which by Oxenstierns and the Protestants demanding, to have the
charges of the war repayed; were put by for that present.

February 29. 400 Companyes of Polackes pass the River of Mulda near unto
Soltzan and Pribus; (some 30 English miles to the South of Prage) to go
toward Pilsen. Seven hundred more of them, are bold to venture their passage
over the same River at Konigsal, within five English miles of Prage also.
Against these, are three Saxon Captains, Stram, Liechwies, and Toner sent;
with five troops of Horse, and three Companyes of Foot, to hinder their
passage, if it might be. By the beginning of March, were almost all the
passages about Prage blocked up: those only excepted toward Dresden, which
the Saxons made a shift to keep open.

And now began they (and it was more then time) to look better to themselves
at Prage. They fortify the Horse-market; raise a skonce over the bridge there;
plant some Ordnance upon all places of advantage; The Saxons at Prage grow
jealous of the Catholics.
and toward the waters side especially. Now begin the Saxons to grow jealous
of the Catholic Burgers, in all the three towns of the City: many of them are
committed, for that some letters of suspicion were found about them; others
executed, for sending letters to Budweis, and entertaining practices and
correspondencyes with the Imperialists. All Catholics are by sound of Drum
forbidden, to appear upon any Alarm abroad in the streets; yea or to be seen
out at their windows, terrasses, or Balconees, upon pain of great punishment:
but all the Protestants should upon like occasion, resort unto the small side
Ring upon the said Horse-Market-place.

The Diet of Torgau being ended, the Duke of Saxony draws his new levied
forces together to the frontiers; to be ready to march with the first of the
Spring, into Bohemia. This list of his Army was given abroad. Of his Horse
Regiments were these 8 Colonels, with each 1000 horse under him. The Duke of
Saxon-Altenburg. Vlrick, Duke of Holstein and Prince of Denmark. Ernestus
Prince of Anhalt. Baron Hoffkirck. Colonel Tauben. Colonel Steinau. Colonel
Kalkstein, and Colonel Vitzthimb. besides 2000 Horse of the Country
Gentlemen's; and two troops more of 150 apeece, under Vitzthimb and Truckses.
In all 10300. Of the Foot Companyes, were there 9 Regiments under these
Colonels: whereof eight had 3000 apeece, and the last 2500. The Life-Regiment,
The list of Saxonyes new ^evyes.
Arnheim, Swalbach, Starschedel, Loser, Klitzing, Wilbersdorff, Vitzthimb, and
Maschnitz. To these were added 500 Volunteers under Colonel Appelman, and 600
more, under three other Captains. In all 27600. Horse and Foot in all, 37900.

This List, if ever it were filled up; and had the Forces been mustered and
brought together; hardly could the Saxons have been excused from the
imputation of errant Pultrones, and Cullions, so quickly to lose so brave a
Kingdom as Bohemia: and to suffer the wars so suddenly to be brought home to
them, into their own Misnia and Lusatia. But Walenstein came sooner upon them,
then was expected. The Elector of Brandenburg, had some 8000 men, now also in a
readiness; unto whom the Swedish Colonel Dubalt being afterward conjoined,
those few made better work of it in Silesia; then all these Saxons did in
Bohemia. This caused both the Duke and his Felt-marshall Arnheim to be
suspected, of what they were no way guilty. Some aspersions wypt off, from the
Duke of Saxony and Arnheim.
The suspicion was partly occasioned, by Arnheims going from the Duke to treat
with Walenstein: but the Duke answered honorably; and Arnheim has prooved
himself an honest man; refusing such terms as Waelnstein (it is said) offered
him.

Whilst Saxony was a pruning his feathers, the Imperialists were again upon
the wing. The siege of Elnbogen raised by the Saxons.
April 3d. they assault Elnbogen upon the River Eger; a little to the North of
Slackenwald and Falkenaw aforementioned. Twelve hundred men they brought
against it; and two days and nights together, they batterd it. All which time,
Vitzthimb with his garrison, and the Citizens help, defended the Town, and
put off one or two assaults, very manfully. April 5th, the Imperialists fell
very furiously on again; and were again as bravely repulsed. By this time the
neighbor Regiments of Saxon-Altenburg and Anhalt, resolve either to remoove
the siege; or else to beat up a Quarter, and to thrust some succors into the
Town: upon whose coming, the Imperialists gave it over, and retired.

The rest of April, was spent with loss unto the Saxons. Falkenaw taken by
the Saxons, and forsaken.
By the end of it, the Elector of Saxony advances with part of the Army into
Bohemia: and May 3, Arnheim and Philip Reinhard of Solms, march up after him
with the residue. Arnheims employment was, to go for Pilsen: and the Count of
Solms was to return into Prage again. May 7th, Some Actions betwixt the
Saxons and the Walsteiners.
the Saxons set upon Falkenaw, on the Eastern bank of the River Eger, and
betwixt Egra and Elnbogen. The Town they take in by Scaladoe; and prepare
likewise to storm the Castle: which whilst they were about to do, the
Imperialists from thence setting fire upon the Town (with fireworkes which
they flung down) enforced the Saxons to leave it also.

Walstein advances into Bohemia.
About the fourth of May, had the Saxon Regiments of the Duke of Holstein and
Klitzing, with other their Associates: defeated three of Walensteins new
Regiments near unto Commotha. The Saxons of Swalbachs Regiment that lay at
Leutmeritz upon the Elb, now burn down their bridge there, to prevent the
Walsteiners coming at them: who then lay at Budin some two leagues from them
to Prage-ward.

Walenstein with his whole great Army, was by the beginning of April 1632,
upon his march toward Bohemia: who quickly recovered Prage, and forced the
Duke of Saxony and Arnheim home into Misnia: as in His Proceedings we shall
tell you.

And thus being able for this time to do the Saxons no greater honor, then to
say no more of them: we leave the rest of their losses, to be pursued in
Walensteins Story: and the recovery of their honors in Silesia and elsewhere,
we cave unto the Third Part.

The Military Preparations of the Lord Albert Walstein Duke of Fridland, etc.
against the Duke of Saxony, and King of Sweden.
HIs Imperial Majesty by the middle of October 1631: perceiving the small
hopes he had of drawing the Duke of Saxony unto his party again, by the
Complements of an Embassage; and that the said Dukes forces had by this time
driven the Imperial army under Gotse, out of Lusatia; were too hard for
Diepenbachs in Silesia; and becomne a terror now unto Don Balthasars in
Bohemia: begins to consult (as it was high time) upon the setting forth of
another Army to oppose him. Those that were the advisers, became also the
advancers of his Counsels. His Majesty the King of Spain, contributed 300000
double Pistolets. Diverse voluntary Contributions, toward a new Army.
His Majesty King Ferdinand of Hungary, laid down so many Rixe Dollars. Prince
Eggenberg Duke of Crumau (the Emperors chiefest Counselor) underwrit for
100000 Dollars. The Cardinal and Prince of Diederickstein, for so many
Gilders. The Bohemian Count of Michna, for 100000 of his Country Dollars. The
new Bishop of Vienna, (late Abbot of Cremsmunster) for 80000 Rixe Dollars: and
the Lord Stralendorff, Vice Chancellor of the Empire, undertook for 18000
Ducats. Other Gentlemen likewise, that either had received, or that now
expected any Court favors or preferments; might not be behind-hand with their
Largess.

To solicit the Popes bounty (rather then his benediction) is the Hungarian
Of Strigonium, or Gran in Hungaria.
Cardinal Pasman employed: who for being a Cardinal, the Court of Rome would
not acknowledge for an Ambassador: nor that the war he came about, was a
war of Religion. So that Saint Peter's Successor having no favorable
inclination toward Caesar, saved his purse by this trick and avoided (very
Romanly) the treating with the Cardinal upon that chargeable argument. The
Lord Rabata, Governor of Gradiscia in Hungaria, goes at the same time, with
Pasman, unto the Princes and Gentlemen of Italy: carrying blanke Commissions
along with him, to give out to such as would levy for the Emperor: and an
empty purse, for such as would contribute toward it. After them in May
following, goes the young Duke of Eggenberg unto Florence to muster, and to
bring the Italian forces into Germany. And thus was the first of the three
Principles of War (the Matter of money) taken order for: which is worthily
called the Sinews of it: for that by the Languidenesse or vigorous activity of
this same money, the war becomes either a Giant or a Lame soldier.

There had no meaner General all this while be^^ (...) then the Emperors own
son, Ferdinand King of Hungary. Eggon Count of Furstenberg having a good
friend of his Kinsman President Ferstenberg at Cou^^ (...) for the Preferment:
or to be Adjutant or Director at least, unto King Ferdinand. He had left his
troops with Tilly, presently after their joint overthrow; and hearing of
another man's calling to the place a little after this, he leaves the wars,
and retires unto a privacy.

For the Lord Albert Walenstein Duke of Fridland was the man, that had the
voices of the Courtiers for it: such Counselors especially, as being lovers of
his vast bounties; knew by experience, that if Fridland chanced upon a good
Mayn, struck a lucky hand of it, he would pay the box well for it. Walenstein
(they knew) was no such slight Captain, as those that had scarce heard of him,
supposed. He had heretofore done good service against the Turks; beaten the
Count of Mansfeld and the Duke of Brunswicke, severally, in the year 1626; and
borne down, since that, all before him in Mecklenburg and Pomerania. Caesar's
memory needed not to be refresht, with any new mention of Walensteins old
services (the Emperor knew him to be for his turn:) but the discontents, that
Bavaria and other Princes (whom his Majesty had present need of) would take, at
his calling in again; became the difficulty. But these being by the art of
others, either quickly made less; or argued down; as if private respects,
must of duty give way unto public necessities: the same Lord Questenberg,
Walenstein invited to the Generallship.
who had been sent from the Diet of Ratisbone to discharge him; is now
dispatched again to invite him. It was in the beginning of November, a time of
Walensteins good leisure; he then living at his own fair Castle of Znaim in
Moravia: as being by the Saxons the other day, chased out of Bohemia.

His old friend Questenberg could not (it seems) prevail with him at the
first; it was the month of December ere Walenstein would accept it: and then
(as himself professed) at the persuasions of Prince Eggenberg. And herein (me
thinks) appears a strange mixture of spirit, in this Walenstein; that being
supposed as haughty and ambitious of Command, as any man in the world; yet was
he so far forth master of the greatness of his own desires; as that he
could with as much moderation now refuse the Generallship, as he had before
resignd it: he would not have authority, but with freedom, and his own
Conditions. Others have censured this for Pride in him: though nothing (me
thinks) looks liker Honor. Walenstein (sure) would have proved an excellent
Scholar, he keeps himself to his Terms so well. In the Letter of his
acceptance, he was thus free with the Emperor. That his deserts, had bin fuller
of merit; then his usage had bin either of reward or acknowledgement. That
small encouragement had he therefore to hazard his quiet, his state, his honor,
or his person again, for any service of the Emperors. But yet had Prince
Eggenberg such an obligation upon him, ^ccepts of it ^^r a time.
that at his request he was contented to be brought on again. Yet not so, as
absolutely to accept of the Generallship; otherwise then upon certain
conditions only: and those would himself have the liberty of propounding.

1. First, he would entertain the place, but for three months only: nor
would he take his Commission, for longer then the first of March following.

2. He would not have it expected, that he should wage battle in that time
with the enemy.

3. The service he would do the Emperor, was, to levy as many soldiers for
him, as would repair unto his Ensigns.

4. After all which, he would be contented that another man should be
appointed General over them: or rather (which was his private wish) that a
good peace might be treated upon.

The Imperial Commission being sent him unto Znaim in Moravia; he there began
to hang out his Ensigns, to beat up his Drums, and to give out his Patents
for a levy. Not yet as General; for King Ferdinand (for the more credit to the
action) still kept the Title of Generalissimo to himself. To lay the
groundwork for the new Army, was Diepenbach (either voluntarily or by
command) brought to resign up his Silesian troops unto Walenstein.

The levyes went on; and the intention was known to be for the recovery of
Bohemia; His first levyes.
for which exploit, Walenstein had golden mountains promised him. But for such
a work, all things went not on, as he desired: he would come into the field
like himself, or not at all. The moneys already raised, were too small a
sum for him: and he would have his men in the best manner accommodated. He
demands three millions of gold, for the raising of 70000 men: propounds to have
5 000 Curiassiers or men at arms, raised in the Low Countries: and that Baron
Dhona should bring him 10000 Cosacks: He desires Quarter for twelve Regiments
in Moravia; for fourteen in Silesia: for six in the Upper and Lower Austria:
and for the rest in Bohemia, till the Army were ready to go into the Field. In
the end of January, he gives out a Command unto all his Colonels and
Captains, to have their Regiments and Companies complete, by the first of
March following. Upon the first of February, he sets out a Proclamation to
call in all such soldiers, as were then in service of the enemy. This was the
Brief of it.

We Albert.
Albrecht by the Grace of God, Duke of Mechlenburg, Fridland and Sagan: Prince
of That is, of Rugen, Vsedome and Wolin; three I^ in Pomerani^ called ^^e J^ of
the Vand^
Wenden or of the Vandals; Count of Schwerin, and of the Countries of Rostock
and Stargard, etc. Whereas we hear of diverse Officers and common soldiers
belonging heretofore unto the Armies of his Imperial Majesty, to be at this
present in service with the enemy: we therefore give notice unto them by these
presents, That whosoever of them will come back within 6 months, He calls t^
Germans fr^^ the Kings se^vice.
shall be pardoned and entertained. And we command all our Officers of war to
entertain them, and never to reproach them with their former offenses; but the
kindlier rather to entreat them.

Given at Znaim, Febr. 1. 1632. Stylo novo.

In the end of December, and beginning of January, had there been a meeting of
the States at Vienna: where there was an enlargement of contributions agreed
upon for the army: For money was scarce as yet, nor were the soldiers half
armed. Upon the 11th and 12th of January (old Style) the Regiments already
levied in Moravia; were drawn together from about Brin, and Olmuntz, unto
Znaim: where being mustered, they were sent among the Emperors Tenants of
Austria to be enquartered. This they complaining to his Imperial Majesty of,
are referd for their redress unto Walenstein. There seems to have been some
rub in the business, that discontented our Duke of Fridland, about this middle
of January: whereupon he boldly gave it out, that he would continue General
but till May Day following. Moneys (it seems) came not in currantly; nor the
aides that he expected out of Hungary: (...): Hungari^ refuse to ^e the Em^our.
for the Hungarians had broken up their Diet or Land-day at Thirnau, without
one Subsidy toward the Emperor. Esterhasy the Hungarian Palatine was answered
by the States,

1. That they had evident and present employment for their own moneys and
forces: the Turks being ready to fall into their Country.

2. That they were not bound to send any forces out of the Kingdom unto their
King; for that they knew no enemy he had: and it more concerned them, to
strengthen their own Frontiers.

3. That they knew no other enemy, either within or without the Kingdom, but
the Turk only.

But Walenstein by the end of January had better content (it seems) his name
was said to be set into the Commission before the Duke of Bavariaes; and Arnold
Secretary of State is sent from Vienna to Znaim unto him: whence he went to
solicit the old King of Poland. The Imperial levies went on afterward
something cheerfullier; both in Moravia, Austria, and Bohemia: the Archduke
Leopold raises one Regiment of Horse toward it; and the Count of Michna
another: which last man knew how to make himself a saver well enough, for that
he was now appointed Commissary-Generall unto the Army. Toward the end of
February, Walenstein sets out his Proclamation for provisions for the army: by
which every Freeholder is commanded to furnish him daily with 2 pounds of
bread, one of flesh, 2 pints of wine, and 2 Crowns a month contribution;
together with lodging for the soldiers: besides 2 bottles of hay, and as much
straw a day, with 2 bushels of oats weekly, and five Crowns a month
besides, for every Horseman. This went hard with a many of the poor Farmers of
Austria. The States of Silesia send in their moneys, for the maintenance of the
Regiments imposed upon them; that they might so be free from their unruly
company.

By the beginning of March, had Fridland gotten 20000 men together: and the
first week of that month, he commands all his military Officers to wait on
him at Znaim for their directions.

The army presently after this, began to congregate and come together: and
Brin the chief town in Moravia, is their first Rendezvous: where being
mustered, they were sent to be otherwhere enquartered. The King of Hungaria had
not all this while given over the title of Generalissimo: but still the voice
went, of his going into the field. By April, is there another Counsel taken;
and the Duke of Fridlands Commission being renewed, Walenstein mad
Generalissimo.
he has the title of Generalissimo, or General of Generals, conferred upon
him. Of his entertainment of the Generallship, these Conditions went abroad.
Which for that the strangeness of them, may make some wise men to misdoubt
them: therefore, as I would be loath to be taxed for concealing any safe part of
my Intelligence from my Readers; so will I not by arguments oppress any man's
credulity. Here they are barely propounded, as they were word for word
translated out of the printed High Dutch copy: which I doubt not but I shall
find, in some after Stories.

The Contents of the Conditions, whereupon the Duke of Fridland has re-accepted
of the Generallship: which in the name of his Imperial Majesty, has by diverse
Privy Counselors (both of War and State) been offered unto him. But
especially and in most solemn manner, by the Duke of Crumau and Eggenberg.
1. THE Duke of Fridland shall be Generalissimo, The condition upon which, h^
accepts of the Generalshi
not only for the Emperor, but also for the King of Spain, and the whole
house of Austria: and for ever so continue.

2. The Generalship shall be wholly and plenarily conferred upon the Duke of
Fridland, in the most absolute form that may be.

3. His Royal Majesty Ferdinand the third, shall not be personally present in
the army: much less have any command ever it. But when the Kingdom of Bohemia
shall be again recovered, his Majesty shall personally keep Court at Prage;
and Don Balthazar di Marradas for his better security, shall wait upon him
with 12000 men in Bohemia; until there be an universal peace established in
Germany. For the Duke of Fridland well perceives, that the Bohemians both must
and will have their King to be personally resident among them. By this means
also, shall both the Emperor and his General rest the better assured, that no
rebellion shall there be attempted.

4. His Imperial Majesty shall give him security in the best manner, that he
shall have some Lordship given him in inheritance in Austria, for his ordinary
recompense.

5. He shall for his extraordinary recompense, have the highest Royalty, in
any of the recovered Countries of Germany.

6. He shall have the disposal of all the He means it, the lands ^^d goods
of ^^h only as ^^mselfe should ^^nquer.
Confiscations in the Empire, after the most absolute manner. So that neither
the Imperial Council, nor Exchequer, nor the Chamber at Spiers, shall pretend
any Interest in them, either in part or in whole: nor have any thing to do
with the decision of them.

7. The Duke of Fridland shall have absolute power to dispose, not only in
matters of Confiscation, but of Pardons also. And notwithstanding there should
from the Emperors Court, be granted any letters of Safe Conduct or of Pardon:
yet that without the Duke of Fridlands confirmation, they shall be of no value:
and extend no further then unto Life and Honor, and not unto Goods or Estate:
the real and absolute pardoning whereof, shall be granted by him alone. For
his Imperial Majesty is too gracious and too good: and pardons every one,
that sues to his Court for it. Which if it should be so still, then should the
higher and lower Colonells and Officers of the Army, have their rewards taken
away; and the soldiery, that which should give them content.

8. And if there should ere long happen to be a peace treated upon in the
Empire; that then the Duke of Fridlands own Interest to the Dukedom of
Mecklenburg, should be contained in the capitulation.

9. All the charges and expenses for the continuation of the war, shall be
given unto him.

10. All the hereditary Dominions of his Imperial Majesty, shall at any time
be open unto him, and his Army; to retreat into upon occasion.

If any thing may seem to make these Articles less credible, it is that a
many will hardly be brought to suspect, that the Emperor should ever
condescend to the creating of such a military Dictator; for so he is upon the
point. But let the Duke of Fridlands mighty vast spirit be considered; the
Emperors present and pressing necessities weighed; the King of Hungariaes
giving over remembered, the absolute authority exercised by the General
observed; and other accidents and circumstances considered: and then will not
the belief of it come so impossibly: as at first sight it appears. It might
be judged to be as beneficial for the Empire at this time, to have a Dictator
created; as it has often been for the State of Old Rome; who did thus, in all
their extremities. But I here leave every man to his own ingenuity: for mine
own part I conceive, that his Imperial Majesty did not weakly, but wisely,
yea very wisely in it. This both made the General the more awful to the
Country, and his own soldiers; and provided against the loss of many a fair
opportunity, whilst new orders upon every occasion, must otherwise be sent for
to Vienna. Presently after this, and about the beginning of April, he
appointed some of his to enter Bohemia: He advances unto Bohemia.
their first Rendezvous being at Konigsgratz upon the Elb; directly East almost
of Prage. Himself met with the rest of his army, at Sweinitz in Silesia, about
the same time: for whom victuals had been bought at Breslaw.

He was reported, all together, to have had an Army of 50000 men: and to be
sure, Wallenstein would not come into the field without as good provisions for
them, as the Empire could at that time afford them. His numbers.
There went Lists abroad of 99600 men, in 42 Regiments, that he should have in
his Army. But these perchance, were given out but for terror: nor do I think,
he had full 40000 together in one Army. To omit smaller Rencounters of his. He
toward the end of April, sweeping along upon the Northern parts of the
Kingdom, betwixt the Duke of Saxonyes new Conquests in Bohemia, and his own
hereditary Country of Misnia; passes his men over the Elb, about Budin, some
twenty English miles to the North of Prage City, and near the place where the
River Egra falls into the Elb. He takes and burns Budin.
This Budin had either made resistance, or given some distaste or other unto
him: and therefore to show other places, how ill he meant to take the like
usage, he turns Budin into ashes. Thence advances he Southward unto Schlani, a
Shire-Towne almost right against Prage: which he takes, and encamps at. Hence
sends he a Trumpet with his Letters unto the Duke of Saxony; To inform him of
the Commission he had from his Imperial Majesty, He propounds a Peace unto
Saxony.
fully to treat upon and conclude a fair peace with him: wherefore his advice
was, that there might be some Commissioners deputed on both sides, to meet and
treat upon the terms of it. The Elector of Saxony sends his Felt-Marshall
Arnheim (who is an excellent Speaker) unto Walenstein, then at Schlani: and
Walenstein sends Colonel Sparr back with Arnheim, unto the Elector. The
conditions that Sparr brought, were much to the same purpose, with those the
Spanish Ambassador had before propounded: namely, For a private league betwixt
the Houses of Austria and Saxony; and no way toward an Universal peace of the
Empire; or mention of any other Protestant Princes. The Dukes answer was, That
he very lately had renewed his former league with the King of Sweden; and had
bound himself to conclude nothing without the privity and consent of his said
Majesty. Sparr returning with this Answer, is sent back again for a better:
but Saxony desired his Excellency the Duke of Fridland, to rest satisfied with
the former: seeing, Saxony refuses the condition
that unless there might be a Cessation of Arms, until the King of Swedens
pleasure might be known; he was able to give no other.

Walenstein all this time refreshed his Army; and perceiving the Dukes
resolution, advances in one of the first days of May, toward Prage City. He
first presents himself on the side which was easiest to be approached; upon
the Starre-Parke, right before the Lesser City. Some 7000 Saxons (or
neere-upon) there were in all the three Cities: whereof 2000 now were in this
Lesser. Summons being given and denied, Walenstein brings forward his
Approches. Walenstein besieging Prage,
Some Sallies and Rencounters there passed: for all which, Walenstein gat up a
very large Battery, and mounted twenty pieces of good Ordnance upon it. A vast
breach and a saultable, he made, and commands it to be stormed. The Saxons
maintained it very stoutly: and beat off the Assailants many times (ten
times, some say) from their walls. But Walenstein resolving to spare for no
mans-flesh; makes his Horsemen drive on, and keep up the Footmen, and so
overlayes the defendants with numbers and repeated attempts, takes the lesser
City by assault
that he by fine force enters this Lesser City. Those in the New and Old Towns
perceiving this, fall upon the first Summons to capitulate: but could obtain
no other conditions of him, that knew the weakness of the Cities as well as
themselves: then, and the other two by composition.
That they should go out with their lives, and baggage, only with swords by
their sides, and leaving their Colors, and other Arms, and Ordnance, behind
them. The Saxons being forced to assent, leave twentyone, say some; twenty
four Ensigns, say others; unto the Conqueror: who presently sent them to
Vienna unto the Emperor. Who, to reward his General for this, and to
encourage him to future Services; sends him the Title of Duke of great Glogau
in Silesia, for it. The Saxon-garrisons were convoyed out of Prage, unto
Leutmeritz.

Prage thus taken about the fourth of May, old style: the Conqueror sends
another messenger unto the Duke of Saxony, ^alenstein re^ewing the ^reaty with
^axony,
to renew the former treaty: his forces in the meanetime, fairly putting other
of the Saxons, out of the next towns of Bohemia. The Curriers passing to and
again, betwixt Prage and Dresden, Saxony (at last) consents to take a view of
the Imperial Propositions: which the easy taking of Prage, he perceives, to
have made much the harder. These four they were said to be: and Sparr carried
them.

^ends him these ^ard conditions.
1. That whereas the Elector had demanded restitution of the domages, done by
the Tillyans in his town of Leipsich, and otherwhere in his Country: he
should cast up those spoils too, which his Saxon Armies had done the Emperor
in Bohemia; and set the tone against the the other.

2. That he should make downe-pay, of two months means unto the Imperial
Army.

3. And freely and speedily give over the Bishoprics, Churchlands, and
Cloisters; which he yet held impropriated.

4. And endeavor to get the King of Sweden out of Germany.

These four demands if he satisfied him in; then would his Imperial Majesty
be pleased, To condescend unto the granting of free exercise of the
Evangeliacall Religion, thorowout the Kingdom of Bohemia.

But the Duke of Saxony not holding himself yet brought so low, by the taking
of one City; which Saxony refuses.
as to stoop to such disadvantageous conditions: utterly refuses to treat upon
them. It Is an old trick of State, That when a stronger enemy purposes either to
pick a quarrel with a weaker, or otherwise to gain upon him; to propound
impossible conditions, or extremely dishonorable, unto him. Walensteins plot in
it,
And thus did the Duke of Fridland, now serve the Duke of Saxony: offer him
such Terms, as he had small hopes, that the other would ever yield unto.

The use that Walenstein would have made of the time, that the Treaty should
have taken up; was a very handsome one. The Saxon soldiers, being now
over-mastered in Bohemia; began to judge of their Cause, by the speeding of it;
and a little entreaty, would have made a many of them, turn to the stronger.
This was one of the plots, that Walenstein had upon Saxony; to take advantage
of the mutinies or discontents of his soldiers, and to inveigle them away
from him. But his second design was yet better. The Saxons having forsaken by
this time, most of the further towns of Bohemia: and drawn their forces unto
Leutmeritz upon the Elb, just betwixt their own Country and Prage City:
Walenstein had now almost gotten betwixt them and home, ere they were aware of
him. This had he done, he would either have cut all their throats; or have
forced the Duke and them, unto any conditions. To this last purpose, had he
privately sent out some Regiments, to fetch a compass about toward the North,
to pass over the river Pulsnitz, and to take Brisen: and all on the sudden in
the next place, to have chopped into Aufig upon the Elb, betwixt Leutmeritz
(where the Saxons yet were,) and Dresden. Then had he been Master of both
banks of the Elb; and they had been in a coope. But Arnheim, by the mooving of
these Imperialists, beginning to smoke Fridlands drift; out did him at last,
in his own finenesse. which is preve^ted by Arnheim.
Arnheim seems very forward to have the treaty go on; plyes Fridland with
Curriers daily: suffers people to believe, that he was in earnest. But yet in
the mean time, he privately sends some troops before, to assure Ausig and the
Elb; gets up his Baggage and Cannon: and all on the sudden, Satterday, May 26.
in the night, sends these away before unto Ausig, and so onwards unto Pirnau
upon the Elb in Misnia, The Saxons forsake Bohemia.
near unto Dresden. The next morning, Arnheims self marches away with his
whole Army: there, (at Pirnau) lays he a bridge over the Elb, and entrenches
strongly.

Walenstein swear by no beggars (he uses not to stick for that) to see
himself thus over-reacht: and resolves to be revenged upon the rest of the
Saxon garrisons, yet in the country. The first week of June, therefore; part
of his Army he sends out under Colonel Holck, to take in Egra; and so to beat
out his way into the Upper Palatinate, to join with the Duke of Bavaria,
against the King of Sweden. The Saxon Colonel Starschedel, as yet kept Egra:
where he had once before held out a siege; as has in the Saxon Proceedings,
been told you. Holck, having laid his siege, loses 200 men in the Approaches.
The Walsteiners take Egra.
But nine whole Imperial Regiments, now encompassing the City; Starschedel
being first conscious, of the unsensiblenesse of the place; and out of all
hopes of being relieved; parlies and yields, upon Barnabe the brights day,
marching out upon soldiers conditions, and being convoyed into Saxony.

Elnbogen,
Holck, after this turns to the Northwards; and besieges Elnbogen. The town
was kept by the Saxon Colonel Vitzthimb, with part of those raw and new-levied
forces: and altogether unprovided besides of Ammunition, and what was necessary
for a siege. Yet some show of resistance he made, though not with a purpose to
keep the Town, but to obtain the better conditions. A Commission-Dormant he
had also in his pocket to give up the town, if he were pressed to it. Thus is
that town also rendered unto Holck, upon Thursday June 14: Vitzthimb being
conducted home into Saxony.

Fridland in the mean time with the other part of the Army, marches up from
Prage, and takes Leutmeritz, and Leutmeritz.
which the Saxons (as we told you) had voluntarily forsaken. This caused such a
terror in Misnia, for fear he should fall into those parts; that those of
Leipsich and other towns of trading, conveyed their goods into the Elb, and
so away for Hamborow. The Duke of Saxony himself came to Birnau aforesaid,
making all strong there, to keep out Walenstein. But He had other irons, now
upon the anvile: his thoughts were now turned against the King of Sweden; who,
as he by this time heard, was far already advanced into the Upper Palatinate:
Walenstein go toward Egra,
in pursuit there, of the Duke of Bavaria. This Duke, had earnestly now again
solicited his speedy assistance: who, (to the wonder of the world) having made
such quick dispatch in Bohemia: now leaving some Regiments at Leutmeritz,
turns with the rest toward the Frontiers, unto Egra; much nearer to Bavaria.

This was much about the 16th or 17th of June. to join with Bavaria against
the King of Sweden.
The Army he now led with him, seems to be about 110, or 112 Cornets of Horse,
besides some troops of Crabats light-Horsemen; and about 140 Ensigns of Foot:
in half of which, (if the list of his Army, that I have seen, be true) there
were to be 300 in a Company. These numbers I collect, His forces.
by the general view both of his Army and Bavariaes together, at their first
coming before Norimberg: where were told 246 troops of horse (besides
Crabats,) and 197 Foot-Companies. Of these, the Duke of Bavaria at his joining
with Walenstein, had 134 Troops of horse, and 58 Foot-Companies, only: so
that the rest, were Walsteiners. Saxony thus freed of the feared invasion;
sends Arnheim into Lusatia first; and so into Silesia, after that was cleared:
where he recover^d the Saxons honor lost in Bohemia: and within 2 months,
overthrew Diepenbach and Gotse, with the whole Imperial Army.

The Duke of Bavaria having surprised Ratisbone, under a pretense of exercising
his soldiers hard by it: and the Duke ^f Bavaria goes (...) meet him.
so soon as Cratz was returned from Weissenburg, advances into the Upper
Palatinate toward Egra, to conjoyne with Walenstein. He in the beginning of
June, marching full Northward from Ratisbone, quite through the Upper
Palatinate: goes to Amberg first, the chief City of this Palatinate. Some five
English miles to the left hand of this Amberg, is the Town of Sultzbach;
belonging unto the Palatine Augustus of Sultzbach; so often heretofore
mentioned. To this Town, the Duke sends a sufficient part of his Army: and
John Eberhard Count of Schomburg led them. ^avaria takes ^^ltzbach,
He besieging the place, has it, after some days of opposition, delivered up
to him on these conditions.

1. That two Captains of Foot, with their Captains, should be admitted into
their Town for garrison.

2. This Bavarian soldiery, was to be governed by such justice and military
Discipline; as that they should no ways molest or do injury to any Burger.

3. The Counselors, Officers, and Servants of the Prince, should have free
leave to depart the Town, with all their goods, wives, and children.

4. The Princes Castle should be free from being plundered.

5. Billets and lodging should be assigned to the garrison, according as the
Citizens could among themselves agree upon it.

The Bavarians thus becoming masters of the Town; were not so of their own
words. For, first, in stead of two Companies, they thrust 700 Foot, and 400
Horse, into the City. 2. The houses of the Princes Counselors, and of the
richest Citizens, were not plundered and rifled only, but spoiled too:
whatsoever was worth carrying, being destinated to be sent thence into Amberg.
3. The Princes Castle was foulely plundered and misused. 4. And 6000 Florens,
with much terror and threatenings; wrung out of the Princes Servants and the
Citizens. This was not Grecian faith, but Bavarian: and it may well be
believed of them; for so had they lately before, served Weissenburg. This was
done, about the 6th or 7th of June. The Duke of Bavaria with the other part of
the Army, went and took in Amberg: and advance toward Wal^stein.
where was not much resistance. Hence after some few days, he advances over
the River Nab, toward Durschenreyt in the way to Egra and Bohemia. The King of
Sweden (he heard) was by this time coming against him, from about Norimberg:
and he thought it not best to abide his coming. Some 36 Cornets of Walensteins
Horse were likewise near at hand to join with him, and those he now went to
meet withal.

And indeed the King of Sweden was now coming against him: whose March up, and
Retreat back again; A touch (by the way) of t^ King of Swedens pursuin^ of
Bavaria.
we will now in Walensteins Story briefly touch upon; because Walensteins
coming, now put him to it. The King arrived at Furt, 3 or 4 English miles from
Norimberg, on Thursday June 7th. Friday and Satterday, he there held a general
muster: the numbers then found, we shall by and by tell you. Satterday night,
into Norimberg he went: where the King of Bohemia had been a week before him.
The next day, the two Kings, together with the Lord Marquess Hamilton, John
Duke of Holstein, etc, there rested, and heard a Sermon in Saint Laurences.
June 11th Saint Barnabees day, about one in the morning, out went the King to
his Army at Furt again; and there propounds his going to pursue the Bavarian.
The Army advances; and that Monday passes by the Louvergate of Norimberg, in
this order. First, marched 10 Regiments of Foot: then, The Kings fo^ces, and
ord^ of marching.
20 pieces of great Ordnance, Cannons, Demicannons, and pieces of Battery: and
20 lesser Field-peeces after them. The greatest, were drawn with 20 or 22
horses a piece: and the Lesser, with 6 or 8. Next marched 100 brave Cornets of
Horse: and the Baggage and Ammunition-wagons last of all. By the Hospitall-Gate
on the other side the City, marched 50 Cornets of Horse more, 60 Ensigns of
Foot, and 30 smaller Fielding-peeces. They were marching by, all that Monday.
That night, lay the Kings at Lauff upon the River Pegnitz; some 9 English miles
to the North-east of Norimberg. June 12th, the Army arrives at Herschpruck, due
East up the same River, and as much further. All this, was in his way to
Amberg. This day the King sent the Palatine Augustus of Sultzbach his
Lieftenant, ( Prince Augustus himself, being before this, sent to quicken the
Elector of Saxony) to recover his Lords Town of Sultzbach again. Four
hundred Horse, had he with him: who presenting themselves toward Evening upon
a hill before the Town, and demanding to have it rendered: the Bavarians
answer them with their Ordnance. But perceiving after a while, some
Foote-Companies to be comne up to second the Horse: ^tzbach ^overed.
they parley, yield, and go out next day. The Bavarian Governor, was shot dead
at his coming out, and that in revenge of the Bavarians former usage, of this
Town and Weissenburg. His guilty soldiers fearing the like justice, sting
away their Arms, fall down upon their knees; and offer to become the Kings
soldiers. June 13, the King sets forward toward Sultzbach: 15 miles from
Herschpruck. Midway betwixt these 2, is the Town of Hartmanshoven: not great,
but very advantageously situated for a Pass of strength; as standing where 2
small riverets fall into the Pegnitz; and having a wood and hill, right before
it. The King much wondered, that Bavaria had neglected this Passage: who had,
indeed, but forgotten it, and was even this day sending some troops to hinder
the King at it. But they came an hour or 2, too late.

That night, was the King purposed to lodge in Sultzbach Castle: ^^e King
hea^^^g news of (...) enemy,
but was put besides the pillow, by the news of the enemies being seen about
Hambach, four miles to the North ward. This made him send out some
light-horsemen, to discover the faces and motions of the enemy; and to draw
with his whole army in Battaglia, toward that Quarter. These were the Bavarian
Vant-curriers; of some of whom, there taken prisoners, the King learnd; that
their Duke had already received 16000 Walsteiners; and that Fridland himself,
was already in the Vpper-Palatinate. This news, causes the King to resolve
upon the retiring back to Norimberg. Some light skirmishes, ^^tires
betwixt his men and the Crabats, I omit: for all this of the Kings, is not
upon the Main, but upon the By only: and brought in, to bring down
Walenstein, the more methodically.

The King now counter-marching; recovers to Norimberg again, upon Tuesday,
June 19th. There he now resolves, to expect his enemy; whom he was (for number)
far too weak to meet withal in a pitched battle. From hence he sends
about, to hasten his Generals to him. to Norimberg.
Should not the King have sat down by some friend-City; Walenstein would have
followed him ever. And of all Cities, this of Norimberg, was the best for the
Kings purpose. It Was nearest: the Kings royal word was engaged to defend it:
it was strong; and exceeding well victualled; both for their own use, and supply
of his Army. Round about this City he rides, both to view the Fortifications of
the Town, and to lay out the ground for his own Retrenchments. These began at
the River, and were a mile compass round about the town, with skonces and
Redoubts, wherever need was. His Works, The King encamps about Norimberg.
were strongest upon the South side: because he judged, the Enemy would encampe
on that side, as indeed he did. The Graff or Moate about his head-workes, was
12 Foot wide, and 8 deep. Eight thousand men, labored daily upon the
Fortifications: and yet was not all complete, when Walenstein came against
him. But of this slightly, because beyond my Title.

The Duke of Bavaria, after that Don Balthazar was comne with the Aides from
Walenstein unto him, returns boldly over the River Nab, unto Nabpurck: Bavaria
turns back, against the King.
and there confronts the Kings Army. Some also he sent more Southerly, as far
as Schwandorff, upon the same River. Those forces of his which the King heard
of about Hampach, were sent from that division of his Army at Nabpurck. These
having some skirmishes, with 2 or 3 troops which the King sent to discover
them: were after 2 or 3 charges, driven back upon their fellows. But the
Swedes too far pursuing, Some Swedes defeated.
fell into an ambush: and were to a man almost, there cut in pieces.

By the middle of June, was Fridland himself fallen into the Palatinate: and to
show who it was, that was now a coming. He came like Jupiter in the Poet;
Walenstein comes into the Upper Palatinate,
all in thunder and lightning. Walenstein must be dreaded. All in fire and
tempest he takes and destroies the Prince Palatines Dominions, and other the
poor Protestant towns, before him. The same spoil, had Don Balthazar
committed in the Upper Marquisate of Parent; which belongs unto a Prince of
the Electorall house of Brandenburg. which he destroys before him.
There, is Kemnath taken again; which the Austrian banished Baron Keffenhullo,
had a little before taken, with the Kings forces. Bondesilia and Tirschein are
over-runne: and this last, burnt to ashes. There were prayers in all Churches
and Cloisters now made, in Austria and other Catholic countries, for the good
success of the Armies: the zeal of which, (it seems) was so hot, that (like
a Burning-glasse at a distance) it set fire upon the Upper Palatinate.

These 2 Armies being conjoined; sat down a while about Amberg; and
Sultzbach. There they mustered, and contrived their business. Walenstein and
Bavaria join.
Upon Tuesday June 26, by one in the morning the Armies rise: marching with
much silence toward Newmarkt, full South-west from thence, and about 18
English miles distant. At Sindlebach in the way, 6 miles short of Newmarckt; 7
of their Regiments about 6 a clock in the morning; fell upon a Swedish
Regiment of Dragooners under 7 Cornets, which were Colonel Dubalts; and 4
troops of Horse, of Colonel Sperreuters. A Swedish Regiment of Dragooners
defeated.
The Swedish at first, made indifferent good work with them; and laid some 40
Crabats upon the earth, that made the first Cavalcado, and fell into their
Quarters. But being by such a multitude surrownded; they were alomst all
slain, and the gallant Dubalt taken prisoner: whom Walenstein very honorably,
A noble Courtesy of Walensteins.
set presently free again without ransom. This fight was almost 20 miles from
Norimberg: whither word by noone, being carried unto the King; he with all
speed drew out his best Horse, advancing that very evening, to make the
reskue. But the news of the defeat, turned him back again. Diverse such like
Rencounters passed betwixt the Horse of either side, with enterchanged
fortunes; before Walenstein came to settle.

Thus came the Armies along: and their purpose was, to besiege and starve up
the King of Sweden. His other Generals with their Forces, were not yet come up
to him; and they knew themselves too strong for him. Part of their Army,
skowres all along the river Pegnitz; which runs through Norimberg. These going
due West from Sultzbach; take Herschpruck, Lauff, and Altorff: to hemb in the
King on that side, and to keep his victuals and aides from him. Upon the
Southern side of Norimberg, came the other part of the Army: and both the
Dukes with it. About June 27 or 28, they from Newmarckt, first send to
Freyenstat; a town in a morasse some 10 miles to the South-West; where they
appoint their chiefest Magazine. The Army advances unto Rott, due South from
Newmarckt, and 15 English miles to the North of Norimberg: Here Tillyes
Magazine sometimes was, when he besieged Norimberg; and where his powder
miscarried. Some Regiments are here left: so that this was Walensteins first
Quarter. Walensteins several Quarters.
Here passes he the Rednitz; which runs thence within 4 English miles to the
West of Norimberg; and so due North to Forcheim, and into the Mayn at Bamberg.
This river, would Walenstein now possess himself of. Down along therefore
upon the Western shore of it he goes, unto Swabach; 7 miles from Rott, and 8
or 9 from Norimberg. Here had Tilly also sometimes enquartered; and here, the
Dukes now made their second Quarter. Betwixt this and Furt, (almost 10 English
miles further, beyond Norimberg, and wide of it) lay his Horseguards all the
way, with some Foote-Regiments here and there. Their safety, was the river
Rednitz: which parted them from the Kings Army. To this Swabach, they came June
30th: where they put 17 goodly Foot-Regiments, into Battaglia. The Armies
confront one another.
To confront these, the King brings out his Horse: but the rivers being
between, forbade all coming at one another.

Walensteins chief Quarter was at Furt: where July 4th he sat down; and
entrenches; where, the fastness of the woods; the tops of the hills; and the
advantage of being between the 2 rivers Rednitz, and Pegnitz, (which a little
from thence make an alliance betwixt their Issues) made his Leaguer very much
the stronger. Thus did the Dukes put themselves, betwixt the Kings camp, and
the Country of Franconia: whence his forces and victuals were to come. All the
towns on the other side, had they taken: and left him a breathing-place of
some 4 English miles only, round about his Quarters. He must now trust to be
victuald out of Norimberg: and it comes not far short of a miracle, that one
town should be so well provided, as to do it. What forces the King now had in
his Trenches
The King now had 132 Ensigns of Foot: which made up 10767, in the
Muster-booke: and 152 troops of Horse: which came to 7676. In all, 18443 men,
as I have seen it written out of the Army. These were too many, for one town
to maintain: and yet too few, not to be bidden battle by 2 such Armies. But
their purpose being to Diet Him, and to avoid blood-letting in themselves:
forbear to assault him. Not perchance, because Walenstein durst not, but for
that he would not: he durst not put all Germany and Italy, upon the fortune of
one Battle. But the King to give them their welcome into the field, the very
first night, and next day, July 5th cut in pieces 3 troops of their Horse, The
King cuts off 3 Cornets.
and brought off 3 of their Cornets. And here I leave them.

FJNIS.
A Table drawn by way of a Iournall or Dia to show where the King, Horn,
Tilly, Bavaria, and Walenstein were, and what they did upon those days, that
are mentioned in the Margent.
September. The King September. Tilly September. Gustavus (...) 16 Sets
forward. 8 Flees to Hall. 18 Takes Erfurt in Duringen. 9 To Ascherleben. 13
Moves from Halberstat. 27 Sent against Altri^ 26 Lies at Arnstat. 17 Comes to
Alfelt. 27 Comes to Ilmenau. 25 Passes the Weser. 29 Takes Gotha. 28 Passes the
Duringerwaldt. 26 Goes to Warburg. 30 Comes to the King. 29 Comes to
Schleusing. 30 Comes to Fritzlar in Hessen. 30 Besieges Konigshoven in
Franconia. October. October. October. 1 Takes Schweinfurt. 2 Goes from
Fritzlar. 2 Enters it. 3 Spoils towns in Hessen. 3 Writes letters to Bamberg.
4 Ioynes with Altringer. 4 Comes before Wurtsburg. 6 Musters at Fulda. 8 Takes
it. 10 Is at Aschaffenburg. 10 Levies forces about Wurtsburg. Sends troops
abroad to take towns in Wurtsburg and Bamberg Diocesses. 11 Sends Altringer to
the Lorrayners. With the King a^ month. 11 Levies forces about Wurtsburg.
Sends troops abroad to take towns in Wurtsburg and Bamberg Diocesses. 16
Sends 3000 toward Werthaim. 12 etc Levies forces about Wurtsburg. Sends
troops abroad to take towns in Wurtsburg and Bamberg Diocesses. 17 The
Lorrayners join with him. 18 Goes toward the Palatinate. 16 Defeates
Tillians, and takes Werthaim. 20 Is about Darmstat. 17 His forces still about
the Country. 21 Some of his defeated at Rotenburg. 18 etc His forces still
about the Country. 22 Takes Babenhausen. 21 Defeates more Tillians and takes
Rotenburg. 23 Sollicites Franckford: And goes into the Bergstraes. 22 Defeates
some few Lorrayners. Duke of Bavaria levies. ^^ ^^shofsheim, ^ergentheim ^d
other towns taken 30 Tilly still about the Panate. With the King all this
while. ^s Declaration at ^urg. November. November. November. ^w taken. 5 Turns
back from the Palatinate. ^g about Oxenfurt. 6 Is at Oxenfurt. ^es toward
Franck^. 7 Takes towns in the way to Norimberg. ^ons about Steinheim. 8 Takes
towns in the way to Norimberg. 5 Left about Wurtsburg. ^ng comes down the
^yn, taking Procel^, Miltenburg, Klin^berg, Trenfelt, and ^chaffenburg. 9 Takes
towns in the way to Norimberg. 6 Left about Wurtsburg. 13 Takes Rottenburg. 14
Takes Winshaim, and Guntzenhausen, and Weissenburg. 15 Takes Winshaim, and
Guntzenhausen, and Weissenburg. ^rs Hanaw. 16 Is about Onspach. ^es at
Offenbach. 17 Comes to Swabach. ^ers Franckford. 18 Before Norimberg. ^es
Hoest. ^rnes to Franckford. 22 Rises from Norimberg. Thanksgiving at (...) 23
Rises from Norimberg. ^s league with the ^etterawish Earls. 24 Lies two nights
at Rott. 25 Lies two nights at Rott. ^e leaguer at Costum ^th the Actions about
^e Ringaw and Bingen ^s Army returns to ^ford. 26 Puts his men into garrison,
and goes to Donawert. 27 Puts his men into garrison, and goes to Donawert. 28
etc Puts his men into garrison, and goes to Donawert. 29 Is still in Franconia.
December. December. December. ^ses through Franck^ to besiege Heidle^ 2 Meets
Duke of Bavaria. 4 Takes Kitzing. 2 Takes Towns in the Bergstraes. 4 Goes to
Nordlingen, where he stays. 10 And Winshaim this time. 3 Takes Towns in the
Bergstraes. 4 Besieges Oppenheim Fort 12 And Gebsattle. 7 Passes the Rhine. 8
Takes Oppenheim. 16 And Mergenth^ Rotenburg, ab time. 13 Takes Mentz. 14 Enters
Mentz in Triumph. 12 Duke of Bavaria at Ingolstat Diet. 16 His thanksgiving. 18
Fridberg taken. 20 Takes Hailbrun. 21 Konigstein taken. 22 Spaniards forsake
some Towns in the Palatinate. 26 Returns into ^nia. 23 Spaniards forsake some
Towns in the Palatinate. Bavaria sends one Ambassador to the Emperor, and
another to the King of Sweden. 24 Spaniards forsake some Towns in the
Palatinate. 26 etc Rhinegrave defeates the Spanish about the Mosel. 30 Takes
Guntzen. Spiers City accords with the King. January. January. January. 1
Manheim surprised. 1 Altringer prepares to relieve Rotenburg. 1 About Winshai^
3 Heidleberg and Franckendale slightly blockt up. 2 Busy about his ^^sters. 4
Heidleberg and Franckendale slightly blockt up. 3 Tilly goes to Donawert and to
Amberg, purposing to send against the Saxons. 3 Busy about his ^^sters. 5
Heidleberg and Franckendale slightly blockt up. 4 etc Tilly goes to Donawert
and to Amberg, purposing to send against the Saxons. 4 Busy about his ^^sters.
10 The 14 days Truice begin. 10 The Truice beg^^ 14 At Iphoven. 12 (...) goes
to Gelnhausen. In Truice time, Spaniards pass the Mosel. 9 Cratz made
Felt-Marshall in the Upper Palatinate. 16 Goes to Noriml^ 21 Returns to
Sofurt. 20 King returns to Franckford. 10 Tilly returns to Nordlingen. 11
Tilly returns to Nordlingen. 22 Actions betwixt the Rhinegrave and the
Spaniards. 18 Sends some Ordnance out of Wilsburg Castle, to Ossa. 25 Prepares
to go Bamberg. 23 Actions betwixt the Rhinegrave and the Spaniards. 24 etc
Actions betwixt the Rhinegrave and the Spaniards. Duke Bernard takes towns
about Mentz. Bavaria sends forces to Amberg. 29 Takes Hochstat February.
February. February. ^epares to go against ^^niards. 2 Cratz goes to succor
Forcheim. 1 Takes Bamberg. ^^ing of Bohemia ar^es. 4 Tilly busy in fortifying
on the Danuby. 5 Tilly busy in fortifying on the Danuby. Rainy weather, that
he can do nothing. ^easted. 6 etc Tilly busy in fortifying on the Danuby.
^^es to besiege Creutz^h. Palatine Birckenfields levyes. 20 Goes into the Upper
Palatinate. 20 Provides to besiege Forcheim. ^reutznach taken. 22 At Newmarckt.
^ing returns to Franck^d. 23 Provides to go against Horn. 24 Marches to
Alto^ff. Actions about Spiers. 27 Enters Forch im. 28 Tilly comes against him.
28 Comes before Bamberg. March. March. March. ^eiues news of Horns ^^nesse. 1
Enters Bamberg. Forsakes Bamberg: and passes the Mayn. ^es his Army together.
^s them on before a^st Tilly. ^selfe sets out from ^ckford. (...) at
Aschaffenburg. Lohr. Werenfelt.
Stays about Hasfurt in the Bishopric of Bamberg. 12 Calls a Council of War
at Forcheim. 13 Musters at Forcheim, and marches toward the Upper Palatinate.
2 In sight of the enemies. 3 He defeats two Regiments. 4 Again in sight of
the enemy. 5 Goes to Schweinfurt. 6 Busy in disposing (...) my. ^mes to
Arnstein. 15 At Erlang. 7 Writes to the King. Tettelbach. 16 At Newmarckt. ^
Kitzing: and Hep^^ to Oxenfurt. 18 Still at Newmarckt. 11 Comes to the King.
Winshaim. Dunkelspiel. ^^camps at Furt. ^es into Norimberg. 20 Draws toward
the Danuby. 15 Goes with the Vantgard to Winshaim. ^ne skirmishes with
Tillians. 24 Comes to Oetingen and Pleinfelt. 26 About Ingolstat. Stays with
the King. 26 Takes Kaisham. 27 Takes Donawert. 28 Hebron sent out: and Fuggers
Castle taken. 29 Prince August sent out. 30 Banier sent to Newburg. 30 Goes
into Bavaria. 31 King passes through Donawert. April. April. April. 1 Army
drawn to Northeim. 1 About Rain. 2 About Rain. 2 Duke William Weymar comes. 3
Encampt along the Lech. 3 Place for the Bridge over the Lech sought and found.
4 Encampt along the Lech. 7 Sent to pursue Til^ 4 Place for the Bridge over the
Lech sought and found. 5 Defeated at the Lech; and Carried away wounded to
Newburg. 5 The day of the great fight. 6 King passes into Bavaria. 7 Goes
toward Ausburg. 8 Encamps at Lechausen. 6 Bavaria with his Army flees toward
Ingolstat. 9 Summons Ausburg. 7 Bavaria with his Army flees toward Ingolstat.
10 Takes it. 8 Bavaria with his Army flees toward Ingolstat. 14 Goes into it.
15 Goes to Waho, toward Ingolstat. 16 Comes before it. 17 Spent in working. 18
Bavaria surprises Ratisbone. 23 Sent from before stat to spoil Bava^ 18 Spent
in working. 19 A Sally. 20 The Kings Horse shot: and Marquess of Baden slain.
20 Tilly dies in Ingolstat. 25 Comes again King. 22 Goes to Newburg. 24 Rises
from Ingolstat. 27 He and Hebr^ Landshutt. 25 Takes Mosburg. 29 King goes to
Landshutt. ^nes back to Mos^^g. ^es Freis^^g. ^ances ^^^^rds Mun^. ^^rs it.
^usters there. ^t Ausburg, to go a^^st Ossa. 20 Crats falls into Bavaria.
^livers Bibrach. ^ne back to Ausburg. 27 Takes Weissenburg. June. June. June.
^ng advances toward ^^mberg. Bavaria goes into Upper Palatinate. Sent toward
the Palatinate. ^kes Aichstat 5 Takes Sultzbach and Amberg, ^d Pappenhaim. 6
Takes Sultzbach and Amberg, 10 Goes toward Walstein. ^ives at Furt. 13
Returns upon the King. Musters. 14 Returns upon the King. 15 Walstein comes.
Norimberg. (...) Lauff, 26 Goes from about Amberg. Herschpruck. 27 Defeats
Dubalt. ^^zbach recovered. 28 At Freyenstat. ^res to Norimberg. 30 At Swabach.
^^mps at Norimberg, July. 4 Encamps at Furt.

A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS.
AGreements, see Articles. Altringer, his Breeding and good parts, 110 Ioynes
with Tilly, 111 troubles Hessen, ibid. Resolves to releeve Rotenburg, 119
spoiled at the Lech, 144
Arnheim beats the Imperialists out of both Lusatiaes. 200. Marches into
Bohemia, 200. Takes Prage, 202. the towns he takes after it, 205. overthrowes
the Imperialists at Limburg, 206. A good Speaker, 229. over-reaches Walenstein,
232. Excused, 217 Arnstat, the King comes to it, 5 Articles Agreed upon by the
King and Saxony at Hall, for the pursuing of the War, 2 with Erfurt City, 4
with the Bishop of Bamberg, 9 with Imperialists of Hanaw, 25 of the King with
Franckford, 32 betwixt the Earls of the Weteraw and the King, 36 Hepburns with
Oppenheim Fort, 45 with the Spanish at Mentz, 48
Articles of the Neutrality, 63 offered by the King to Triers, 71 and to
Cullen, 87 with the Spanish at Creutznach, 82 offered by Tilly to Norimberg,
115 propounded by Bavaria to the Emperor, 124 The Kings with Ausburg city, 158
and with Munchen, 168
Arnheims with Prage City, 202 Articles on which Walstein would accept the
Generalship, 222 those, on which he did, 225 propounded by him to Saxony, 230
by Bavaria to Sultzbach, 234
Aschaffenburg taken by the King, 30 Attempt, a desperate one of a Leiflander,
14 Ausburg, Popish practices upon it, 119 The King goes toward it, 151 sits
down before it, 152 takes it, the King comes thither, 171

B
BAmberg Bishop, the King sends to warn him of his coming, 5, 17 he makes his
peace with the King: and the Terms, 9 he breaks it, 10
Bamberg Bishopric, diverse towns taken in it, 8 Bamberg town, Horn takes it,
103 recovered by Tilly, 91 the Bishop flees, 104
Bamberg, the Actions there, betwixt Horn and Tilly, 89, etc. Banier, General,
sent to Magdenburg, 28 his Regiment put into Aschaffenburg, 28 his service at
Ingolstat, 163
Bavarians deal treacherously with those of Weissenburg, 172 and with
Sultzbach, 234
Bavaria Duke; his Story, 121 summons his people, ibid. Appointed Generalissimo
over the Catholics, 122 Sets out his Manifesto, 123 calls a Diet: and sends
Ambassadors to the Emperor, and King of Sweden, 123 his Propositions to the
Emperor, 124 joins with Tilly, 124 overthrown at the Lech, 125 would treat
with the King: and retires into Ingolstat, 125 what advantages he made of the
treaty of Neutrality, 68
Bavaria goes to join with Walstein, 234 his forces then, 233 takes Amberg and
Sultzbach, 234 Receives aids from Walstein, 235 returns against the King, 237
joins with Walstein, 237
Bavaria, the Kings march up to it, 126 the King draws out of it, 171 what
forces he left in it, 173 the largeness of the Kings conquests in it, 175
Bergstraes taken by the King, 42 Bernhard of Saxon Weymar, how he surprised
Manheim, 60 takes the Count of Ems prisoner, 172
Bibrach, besieged by Ossa, 170 delivered by the King, 170
Bingen forsaken by the Spanish, 57 Birckenvelt levyes for the King, 83
Bishofsheim taken by the King, 20 Boats sent the King to pass the Rhine, 43
Bohemia, entered by the Saxons, 200 The Story of the Actions there, 201, etc.
Religion restored in it, 210 forsaken by the Saxons, 232 The Skales there turned
by Don Balthazar, 213
Boores rise in Bavaria, 157 they abuse the Swedish soldiers, ib. defeated in
Schwabland, 179
Brandeis an Imperial Captain, deceives himself, 24 Bridge over the Lech,
the figure, 150 Brigade, what it is, 28 How many the King brought with him into
the Palatinate. 28

C
Cardinal Pasman sent from the Emperor to the Pope: but not acknowledged for
an Ambassador, 220 Carlstat, the King levyes about it, 18 Catholics desire a
Peace, 215 Commissary-generall, his office, 33 Conditions, see Articles.
Conquests of the Kings, how large, 175 Contributions of the Imperial Courtiers
toward a new Army, 219 Cratz, goes to relieve Forcheim, 104 made Felt-Marshall
unto Tilly, 118 falls again into Bavaria, 171 takes and spoils Weissenburg,
172
Creutznach besieged, 77 the town won, 78 The Castle besieged, 79 taken, 82
Cullen, a Diet there, 86 they desire Neutrality, 87 the Elector afraid of the
King -- his Judgment of the Imperial decree, 86

D
DE Latre, befriends the Author, 25 Diepenbach takes the ^pper Lusatia, 199
Beaten out by Arnheim, 200 Donawert besieged, 136 taken by Sir John Hebron, 138
Don Balthazar flees out of Prage, 202 Turns the Skales again in Bohemia, 213
Spoils the Upper Palatinate.
Drusenheim bestowed on the Earl of Hanaw, 84 Duringen, the King marches into
it, 2^ Duringer-waldt, the King passes it, 6^
E
EGra taken by the Saxons, 207 recovered by Walstein 13^ he comes thither, 233
Elnbogen besieged by the Imperialists and relieved, 21^ Taken by Walstein, 23^
English Gentlemen their forwardness at the siege of Creutznach, 8^ and at
Donawert, 13^
Erfurt, taken, upon what terms, ^
Ernestus Saxon-Weymar, left Governor at Konigshoven, joins with Horn, 10^

F
FAlkenaw taken by the Saxons; an^ they beaten out again, 21^ Forcheim, the
Imperialists retire th^ther out of Bamberg, 10^ Tilly comes into it, 12^
Franckendale blockt up, 6^ the State of it after, 8^
Franckford, the Kings demands to i^ 3^ it assents to the King, 3^ the Kings
Thanksgiving for it, 3^ King returns out of the Ring a^ through it with his
Army, 42
Franconia, the King mooves toward it, 5 writes to the Gentry and Cities of
it, 9
Freising taken by the King, 167 Fridberg taken by Haubald, 56 Friedberg taken
by the King, 151 Fugger an Imperial General, 110 puts a garrison into
Ausburg, 153
^urstenberg resignes his Generallship, 119 His hopes to be General in stead
of Walstein, 220
^urt, the King encamps at it, 129
G
GVntzenhausen taken by Tilly, 114 recovered by Horn, 98
^ustavus Horn sent abroad, 6 takes in Gota, 6 See Horn.

H
HAilbrun taken by Horn, 100 Hall, what was concluded there, betwixt the King,
and Duke of Saxe, 2 Hanaw, solicited by Tilly, 21 the Earl befriends the
King, 22 takes towns for him, 84
Haubald surprises Hanaw, 22 summons the Country, 26 takes Frydberg, 56
^eidleberg slightly blockt up, 60 the State of it after, 85 the Kings purpose
of besieging of it diverted, 43
^epburn or Hebron, Sir John, takes Oxenfurt, 8 Keeps it against Tilly, 27
Takes Oppenheim Fort, 45
Hochstat, taken by Horn, 102 Hoest taken, 33 Hoffkirck, Governor of Prage,
208 Defeats the Crabats, 211 relieves Brandeis, 213
Holck takes Egra and Elnbogen, 232 Horn put out of Bamberg, 91 his Letter of
it to the King, 89 defeats two Tillian Regiments, 92 retires to Geltersheim 93
recovers towns in Franconia, 97 goes to see Norimberg, 100 prepares to fall
into Bamberg, 101 the Rain hinders him, 104 sent to pursue Tilly, 151 takes
Landshutt, 160
Horse shot under the King, 161 dig'd up by those of Ingolstat, 164
Hungarians refuse to aid their King, 224 Huntsruck what it is, 58
I
Jesuits turned out of Memmingen, for their practices, 177 And out of Prage,
209
Ilmenau, the King comes to it, 5 Imperialists, overthrown at Limburg by
Arnheim, 206 Attempt Prage, with loss, 208, and 211 They recover Satz, 214 and
other towns in Bohemia, ibid. They besiege Elnbogen, and leave it, 217
Ingolstat, the King goes toward it, 158 his Horse shot there, 161 the King
rises from it, 163
Italians, invited to aid the Emperor, 220
K
KAisham Cloister taken, 135 King of Sweden doubtful whither to go, 20 sets
forwards toward Hanaw, 28 his Birthday and Age, 50 advances against the
Spanish, 74 in danger at Creutznach, 79 marches up toward Bavaria, 126 how
strong, 127 encamps at Furt, 129 Goes into Norimberg, 129 his Oration there,
130 Pursues Tilly no longer. His reasons, 133 overthrowes him at the Lech, 144
reasons for laying his bridge, 146 his judgment upon the action, 147 musters
at Furt, 235 advances against Walstein: his forces, ibid. takes Herspruck.
Retires, 236 encamps at Norimberg, 237 what forces he then had, 240 the
welcome he gave Walstein, 240
King of Bohemia comes to the King of Sweden. 75 His welcome to his people, 76
and to Sweden, ibid. goes toward Bavaria with the King, 126 with the King at
the Battle of Lech, 143
King of Hungaria voiced to be Generalissimo for his Father, 220 Kitzing
recovered by Horn, 97 Konigshoven, taken by the King, 7 Konigstein taken for
the King. 57
L
Landgrave of Hessen brings an Army to the King, 3^ lies in the Ringaw, 3^ goes
home, 5^
Landgrave of Darmstat accords with the King, 40 Landshut taken by the King,
16^ Landsperg taken for the King, 16^ Lech river, Tilly guards it, 14^ the King
seeks a fit place to lay bridge over it, 14^ The place found, and described,
14^ The famous story of the Kings passage over it, 14^ Letters.
Of the King to Franconia, of the King to his Generals concerning the
Neutrality, 67 of the Elector of Triers to his Subjects, 6^ of Gustavus Horn to
the King, 89 of Tilly to Altringer, 10^ of the King to the town of Ausburg,
15^ Horns letters to them, and their answers, 155 The Kings letters to the
Switzers 17^

Leutmeritz taken by Fridland, 23^ Lord Craven, his valor and service, 81 and
138 Lorrayners, 3 Cornets defeated, 19 their Story, 52
Lusatia, taken by the Imperialists, 198 cleared again by Arnheim 200

M
MAnheim finely surprised, 60 Manifesto, of the King at Wurtsburg, 16 of the
Duke of Bavaria, 182
Mayn river, the King makes toward it, 8 and why, ibid. takes towns by it, 30
Memmingen declares for the King, 176 the Jesuits expelled out of it, 177 the
King makes a bridge there, 171
Mentz yielded to the King, 48 fortified, and 2 bridges made at it, 51
Mergentheim taken by the King, 20 recovered by Tilly, 27 reprised by Horn, 119
Mosburg taken by the King, 165 Munchen taken by the King, 168
N
NEutrality, the Story of it, 61 The Kings letters about it, 66 not observed by
the Catholics, 68 what the King lost by it, 73
Neutrality desired by the Elector and City of Cullen, 87 Newburg Duke,
observes not the Neutrality, 73 sends to excuse it, 151 his town taken, 152
Newburg town, an Aenslaught upon it miscarried, 140 The Duke sends an
Ambassador to the King, 151 The town taken by the King, 152 The King goes to
see it, 163
Nordlingen forsaken by the Imperialists, 19 Norimberg, assents to the King, 21
the Kings care to raise Tillies siege, from it, 33 the King goes to it, 129 the
King encamps by it, 181, and 237

O
OAth offered by the King to the Germans, the Form of it, 97 and 158
Oppenheim Fort besieged, 43 taken, 45 the town taken, 46 and the Castle too. 47
Oration of the Kings at Norimberg, 130 at Ingolstat, 161
Ossa, an Imperial Commissary, 53 takes on the Lorrayners, ibid. goes with
Tilly toward Bavaria, 113 his charge, 170 besieges Bibrach, ibid.
Oxenfurt taken by Hebron, 8 the King goes thither, 27 Tilly comes thither
then, 27
Oxensteirn Chancellor, left Governor at Mentz, 126 sent Ambassador to the
Duke of Saxony, 212

P
POpe shifts off aiding the Emperor, 220 Prage taken by Arnheim, 202 diverse
attempts upon it, 208 reprised by Walstein 229
Protestant Churches and Schools restored in Bavaria, 165
Q
QVestenberg sent to Walstein, 221
R
RAin taken by the King, 146 Rhine, the King passes it, 44 Rhinegrave sent
toward the Mosel, 58 beats Spanish over the Mosel, 58 takes towns in Simmern
and Triers country, 58
Ringaw, entrance gotten into it, 40 River, the benefits of it in war, 8
Rotenburg, taken by the King, 19 reprised by Tilly, 114 recovered by Horn, 119

S
SAxony recovers Lusatia and Silesia: and overthrowes Diepenbachs army, 233 his
proceedings, 195 The Duke attempted to be turned, 195 The Spanish Ambassadors
Proposition to him, 196 his answer, 197 he recovers both Lusatiaes, 200 he
enters Prage, he refuses to treat with Wal^ and with the Emperor, ^^ a List of
his forces, ^^ excused, ^^
Saxon-Lawenburg, sollicites Ha^^ made General of the Ordnan^^ Tilly, ^^
Governor of Donawert, ^^ beaten out by the King, ^^
Scottishmen, their valor in wars, 13. Schwabenland, how much of i^ Kings,
^^ the Story of the actions abo^^ 176
Schweinfurt, taken by the King, ^^ Sir John Hepburn takes Donawert ^^ The King
acknowledges it, t^ ^nour him, ^^ helps to take Landshut, ^^ left Governor at
Munchen, ^^
Sir Patrick Buthven his actions a^ Vlm, and in Schwaben, 177 defeates the
Imperialists Boores, often, 177 brings Schwabland under cont^tion, ^^
Sir James Ramsey wounded, ^^ Sir John Hamilton his valor, ^^ Spanish beaten
by the Swedes, the Kings fight with them, ^^ passing the Rhine, ^^ forsake
towns in the Palatinat ^^ commanded out of Triers,
^aine defeated by the Rhinegrave, 74 ^^ey defeat him, ibid. ^^ire over the
Mosel, 75 (...) accords with the King: the acti^^s about it, 59 ^^ore actions
about it, 85 ^heim, some actions about it, 29 ^ken by the King, 30 ^^burg
accorded with the King, 174 ^bach taken by Bavaria, 234 (...) covered by the
King, 236 ^^campt at by Walstein, ibid. ^^ish soldiers their civility, 78 ^les
defeated by Walstein, 238
T
Hierhaupten taken by the King, 151 ^n the old Count rises in Bohemia, 202 ^s
acts there, 202: and 205 ^s Proclamation in Bohemia, 204 ^s letters of
Protection to the ^ountry, ibid. ^lls sick, 208 ^ans, 3000 slain, 18 (...)
Regiments defeated, 19 (...), would relieve Wurtsburg, 15 ^ppeares near the
King, 18 ^^sses the Mayn, 26 ^ollicites Franckford, 26 ^^pes into the
Palatinate, 27 (...) turns into Franconia, 27 ^^kes Mergentheim, 27 ^arches to
Norimberg, 27 The way of his flight from Leipsich, 106 his letters to
Altringer, 107 recollects his Army, 107 continues his flight: and forms a new
Army, 108 Falls into Hassia, 109 Ioynes with Altringer, 110 number of his Army
then, 111 goes toward the Mayn: and joins with the Lorrayners, 112 goes into
the Bergstraes, and turns back into Franconia, 113 joins with the
Lorrayners, 112 sollicites Franckford, 113 takes Weissenburg, and rifles
Onspach, 114 sets down before Norimberg, 115 Rises from thence, 116 his heart
mis-gives him, 117 devides his Army, and puts into garrison, 117 his reasons,
118 Retires into Nordlingen, 118, 120 sets out against Horn, 120 Puts him out
of Bamberg, 91 his own Report of the manner, 93 retires from the King, 127 why
he goes into the Upper Palatinate, 129 comes into Bavaria, 140 fortifies Rain,
141 His fight with the King at the Lech, 143 mortally wounded there, 144 Dies,
161 Treaty of Wetteraw Earls with the King, 35 Triers Elector, accepts the
Neutralitie, 69 his Proclamation against the Spaniards, 72

V
VLm accorded with the King, 176 Sir Patrick Ruthven made Governor, 176 The
Story of the Actions about it, ibid.
W
WAlb, the Kings attempt to lay a Bridge over the Rhine at it, 41 Walstein,
refuses the Generallship, 221 Accepts it upon conditions, 222 Begins his
levyes, ibid. his many Titles, 223 protests to hold the Generallship no longer:
but is contented, 224 Made Generalissimo: and on what strange conditions, 225
He advances into Bohemia, 228 Propounds a treaty to Saxony, 229 and 230 Takes
Prage, 229 His plot upon the Saxons: overreacht in it by Arnheim, 231
Walstein goes to Egra, 233 His forces then, 233 falls into the Upper
Palatinate, 237 joins with Bavaria, 238 nobly releases Dubalt, 238 comes along
the Rednitz, 239 his several Quarters, ibid encamps at Furt, 24^ forbeares to
fight, 24^
Walsteiners, three Regiments of them defeated by the Saxons, 217, 218
Weissenburg taken by Tilly, 11^ and by the King, 13^ taken and plundered by
Cratz, 17^ and recovered by the King. ibid
Werthaim taken, 1^^ Wetteraw Earls Treaty with the King, 3^ William Duke of
Saxon-Weimar take Erfurt fairly, left Governor there,
Wilsburg Castle wrung by Tilly from the Marchioness of Onspach, 11^ viewed by
the King, 13^
Wirtenberg Dukedom, some action in it, 8^ Wormbs, accorded with the King, 5^
Wurtsburg Bishop, the King sends t^ warn him of his coming, 5, 1 Wurtsburg,
the town won, 1 the Castle besieged, 1^ the manner of the taking, 1^ a
conspiracy against the King, d^tected in it, 10^

FINIS.

