THE CHRISTIAN Manuell, or of the life and manners of true Christians.

A Treatise, wherein is plentifully declared, how needful it is for the
servant of God to manifest and declare to the world: their faith by their
deeds, their words by their works, and their profession by their conversation.

Written by Ihon VVoolton Minister of the Gospel, in the Cathedral church of
EXCETOR.

Imprinted at London by I. C. for Thomas Sturruppe dwelling in Paul's Church
yard, at the singe of the George. 1576.

To the r^^^te worshipful Sir William Cordell Knight, Master of the Rolls.
John VVoolton wissheth prosperus suecesse in all worldly affairs, and in the
life to come, joy and immortal felicity.
Amongst those seven wise Men of Greece, there was one that commended A
Philosophecall posy.
to his hearers this Posie, Follow God: Which sentence he willed them, to have
continually before their eyes: to the end that they might be stirred up with an
earnest desire, to know, love, and serve God, who is the last and perfect end
of true wisdom. For whereas there be two principal Two principal parts of
wisdom.
parts of true wisdom, after the opinion of Philosophers: the first, that a
man should know himself, the second that he should know God, wherein true
felicity is (as it were a mark or goal) proposed and offered unto us: the
wise man had good cause, and great reason, in that pithie clause: to commend
the last and perfect end, of true wisdom unto his Scholars and disciples.

The precept therefore is most commendable and profitable: but when he came to
the actio^ and execution of this immitat^^^: the wise man swarued very much,
from that scope and mark The Philosophers ignorante in the practice of their
precepte.
which himself had purposed. He could not by his wisdom attain to the
knowledge of God: neither find out the right way: neither yet had he any
guide, to lead him out of that deep darkness in the which he was more then
drowned: whereby it came to pass, that he wandered miserably, sometime on the
left hand, and sometime on the right hand from God, whom he willed his
disciples to follow. For the wisdom of this world is so weak and infirm:
that it cannot bring man unto the sou^taine of goodness, and felicity, even
whose fruicion is his right and perfect blessedness. Which thing is found true
both by experience in all worldly wise men, and also by the testemonie of Saint
Paul, who speaks out of Gods mouth. I will destroy the Esai. 29. 33. 1. Cor.
1.
wisdom of the wise and will cast away the understanding of the prudent.
Although the^ the wise man gave a good precept, yet no man came to blessedness
thereby: which thing should have commen to pass, if he had been hable to point
out the way unto his followers. This True wisdom is only in Gods. church. 1.
Cor. 1.
true wisdom the Church of God only has and knows. Whereof the same
apostle speaks after this manner. For after that in the wisdom of God, the
world through their wisdom knew not God, it pleased God through folishnesse
of preaching, to save them that believe That is to say, because that men in
the frame and woorkemanship of the world (wherein the singular wisdom of God is
ingraued, and open to the eyes of men,) did not know God: It pleased God of his
free and infinite goodness, to deliver unto the world his wisdom before time
unknown: even the gospel of his son Jesus Christ, whereby he purposed to
save al believers, that they might there by through Grace, atteine to the
perfect end of their condition, which by reason of their corrupt nature,
through original sin they could of them selves never come unto: Of this light
spoke the prophet David saying, In thy light, Psa. 36.
shall we see light: and Christ himself more plainly. I am the light of the
world, he that follows me shall not in any wise walk in John, 8.
darkness, but shall have the light of life.

In which sentence our savior Christ calls his servants from the immitation
of all others: and wills them, to set him before their eyes, Christ is a
perfect example for us to follow in faith and lyffe.
as a perfect pattern, and absolute example for them to follovv. The ancient
writers and best expositors have well observed that in the holy scripture
Christ is proposed and set out as an example and rule to follow two manner of
ways. First they teach us that he is the author and giver of remission of
sins, justice, life, and eternal salvation to all believers. Which thing is
so proper and peculier unto him, that no part or portion thereof, may be in any
respect imparted unto others, without manifest sacralege and blasphemy.
Secondly, they discribe him as an exquisyte tipe and rule of a godly and
christian Christ an example in our liffe.
life framed after Gods most holy law: which as he taught with mouth and
voice, so did he fulfill the same in his own life and proposed him self as an
example to al those that would be accoumpted, and be in deed Christians,
whereof we have a plain testimony in the gospel of Saint John, I have given
you John. 13.
an example (says Christ) that you should do as I have done unto you.

This our heavenly Master was much unlike those whom Saint Paul describes,
to have a form of godliness, but deny the 2, Tim. 3. Romans 2.
power thereof, and again: Thou know Gods will, and allowest things that be
excellent, and have the form of knowledge, and of the truth of the law, thou
therefore which teach another, teach not thy self, and making thy boast
of the law, through breaking of the law dishonorest God. But Christ said,
and did, taught and followed: to thend that all his scholars might learn to
perform in work, that which they profess in word. The Apostles of Chrste
also the best expositors of their masters will, as they always teach men to
believe and trust in him being the fountain and welspringe of justice and
life: so do they every where urge them with earnest exhortations to follow
his life and conversation. Saint Paul says, 1. The. 4
That he has not caled us to vnclenenes and filthynes of life, but to holiness.
Neither 1. Cor. 1.
was he made to believers, wisdom and justice only, but also sa^ctification and
redemtion. For as by his wisdom and justice he has expelled darkness, naturaly
bred in man's breast, and has kindled the true light of the knowledge of
himself, and his father, and forgeuing our sins, does adorn us with his
own justice wherewith we being covered and clothed please God his Father: even
so does he give unto us the holy ghost, who does regenerat and renew our
minds, whereby they do conceive holy desires, and affections, which at the
last are plentiful and fruitful in bringing forth good woorks. A godly life
is alvvaies conjoined with a lively faith, in such sort that these two cannot
be separate one from another, no more then light can be divided from the sun,
or heat from the burning fire. For Christ as the apostle says, gave himself
for us to purg us a peculier people to himself, reasons of Tit. 2.
good woorks, and to redeem us from all iniquititie. And if Philosophers give
rules and Christian philosophi^, most perfect.
precepts of manners, not so mutch to make men learned, as to make them
virtuous: how mutch more ought christian philosophy to proceed further not
only to put into men's minds the knowledge of piety and god lines, but also
sanctimonie and holiness it self. Every one therefore endued with a true faith,
ought to feel Christ so woorking in him by his holy spirit: that he may say
with the Apostle, Now live not I, but Christ lives in me. And as the body
endued Gala. 2.
with a living and reasonable soul receives, feels, and practices the
actions thereof: so he that is ingraffed in Christ, and is his member, cannot
choose but be pertaker of his spirit, virtue and holiness. VVhereupon, the
apostolic and cathoik faith, names the body or society of the church, the
Communion of Saints: plainly importing thereby that those men only appertain
to that society, who meditate and study how they may live well, and labor
with all their might, that they may be that whereunto the Apostle exhorts the
Thessalonians altogether sanctified, Perfect in spirit, 1. These. 5.
and such as may be blameles against the coming of our Lode Jesus Christ. And
al those that are otherwise affected, and frame not their life to that end,
and yet desire to be named Christians: they dissente from them selves, and with
their life argue their tongue of untruth and falsehoodde.

Moreover a man's profession is not so much to be weighed by his tongue, and
talk, as by his Profession approved by conversation. Titus. 1.
deeds and life. The Apostle speaks of such Impastours, saying: That they
profess them self to know God, but with their deeds they deny him. And
that holy Martyr Saint Ciprian has a fine saying* That the Dezelo et liuore
e^ aliis locus.
testimony of a man's life, is more effectual then that of his tongue: and that
works have after a sort, their lively speech and eloquence, albeit the
tongue be silent, and move never a deal. And he that professes with his
mouth, and walks contrary in his life: may right well be compared to an
unwise builder, who lays on mortar with the one hand, and pulls down stones
with the other, of such kind of builders, our Lord and Master Christ speaks
after this manner. Therefore whosoever hears my sayings and does them, I will
lyken him unto a wise man, who Math. 7.
buylt his house upon a rock: and the rain descended, and the flooddes came,
and the vvindes blewe and beete upon that house, and it fell not, because it
was grounded upon a rock. And every one that hears of me these sayings,
and does them not: shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house
upon the sand. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall of it,
etc. Saint Augustine speaking against carnal and lypgospellers, says thus. In
vain does he assume the name of Christ, that follovveth not Christ. To what
purpose is it, if thou In lib. de vita Chriana, qui falso ascribitie August.
be called that which thou art not, and to usurp a strange name? But if thou
delight in that name, then do those things which appertain to Christianity,
and then thou may with good cause challenge the name of a Christian.

Now if we view Christians after this rule, if we examine men's daily life
and conversation, and try the same with the touch stone, The small number of
perfy^te Christians.
of Gods commandments, that number will appear small, and a true Christian
vvil almost be as rare as a black Swanne upon the earth. For neither the
negligent and voluptuous Magistrate, nor the idle Bishop, nor the cruel
husband, nor the bitter wife, nor the careless Father, Math. 12. Mar. 3. Luke.
8.
nor the rebellious child, nor the merciles master, nor the unfaithful
servant, with many other of that sort, can not by any means be rightly named
Christians. But those rather even The fruits of true Christians.
by the testimony of Christ him self are so to be called that hear his word
and keep it. And although our salvation issues from Gods grace and goodness,
yet he requires at our hands trust and confidence in him, a prompte and
ready will to obey his word, diligence and industry in our vocation, prayer
and invocation of his holy name, accepting our imperfect disobedience, and
forgeuing our infirmities for his son Christ's sake. Al those that then
desire to be true Christians, ought to be sorry for their sins, to fly unto
Christ, and to repose sure trust and confidence of salvation in the mercy of
God through him, to bring forth worthy fruits of repentance, and to lead a
life agreeable to the Gospel. For those that be true Christians, do always
wrestle with vices, and fight with concupiscence and lust, they endeavor to
bridle wicked affections: and co^temning earthly things, do bend and fix
their minds upon heavenly things. Whereof Chrisostom vvriteth Chrysostom. in
Hom.
thus. O Christian, thou art too delicate a souldior, if thou think to
vanquish without battle, and to triumph without fight: wherefore call to
mind thy condition, and that vvarrefare wherein thou have professed thy self
a soldier, which if thou do, then shall thou well perceive, that al those
worthy vvightes, whom thou do so much esteem, and reverence, have by
fight and battle, vanquished and triumphed, etc.

And because true Christians cannot worthelte requite almighty God for his
innumerable benefits, neither satisfy them selves in piety The care and study
of Christians.
tovvarde him: yet they are careful and endeavor to their uttermost, never to
aliuate Gods grace and favor from them, neither to do that which vvylbe
displeasaunt unto his majesty. But contrariwise, through the aid of Gods
spirit, they labor to do those things which are acceptable unto him:
workinge their salvation with trembling and fear: and frame all their actiods
not so much after the liking of humane reasons as after the prescript of Gods
holy will and commandment. And because in actions no man can determine what
is good, unless he first know what is true: and for that the same cannot be
otherwise had then from the mouth of God in his word: they turn over the
holy Bible, they study the mo*niments of the prophets and Apostles, and
meditate Gods law both day and night. VVherby Christians only come unto the
knowledge of the truth, and understanding of Gods will: which to know is
perfect vvisdome, which to do is true virtue, and wherein to cont^nue is the
only and eternal felicity. Those then that know not the will of God as the
Ethnicks in times paste, and Turks and Jews now a days, cannot have any
sure and comfortable vvarrantise of their life, and learning. For the
Christians only taught in Gods school, know his will, and in all their life
rather respect the same, then their own will and reason, and repute it to be
the greatest virtue to please, and obeie him, and to follow his precepts and
commandments. The repentance of Christians.
And if at any time through humane infirmity and weakness, they offend and
slide awry: by and by they desire pardon and forgiveness of God through
Christ, and apprehende by faith mercy promised in him, and comfort them
selves with a quiet and cheerful mind in the same. O happy is that man that
so staieth him self in an assured trust of Gods mercy in Chricte, that
humbly and heartily agniseth his faults and offenses, that carefully
endeavors to walk in newness and holiness of l^fe. But O most unhappy are
those that wander in diffydence and distrust, that think too well of them
selves, boasting with the Pharisees their acts and deeds, that neglecte an
honest and godly life. Unto whom Math 7. et. 25
the Lord will say at the last day. I never knew you, depart from me you
workers of iniquity, into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil
and his angels. VVheras Math. 25. Luke. 19. et. 21.
on the other side, the true Christians shall hear that joyful speech. Well
done thou good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over few things,
I will make thee rular over many things, enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord. Come ye blessed children of my father, enherite the kingdom which is
prepared for you from the beginning of the world.

Of the which two sorts of men, to wit of false Christians in name and
tittle only: and of true Christians in word and work, I have written more
largely in this Treatise following. Which I thought good to present unto your
worship, moved thereunto for diverse and sundry causes. First with the common,
and universal report of that great wisdom, and justice wherewith God has
indewed you by the one, discerning between right and wrong, by the other
putting the same in execution, in your office and calling: which is said by
Cicero to be the Lady and Queen of all virtues: and of Aristotle to be more
bewtifull and bright then the Day star it self. Secondly in respect of that
great care which you have now a long time used, for the good estate of
Collegies, and houses of learning in the University: Which thing Plato said
especially to belong unto a good Magistrate, to provide that children borne to
common society, should be well brought up for the common commodity. Thirdly
for that it has pleased God to appoint me the Paster and shepherd of men's
souls in one of thos^ Manners, where the title and interest of temporal
Lords and lyuinges, together with the regiment of men's manners in a Cyuile
life, is under the Prince committed unto your worship. Where the states of
many of your poor Tenauntes being tyckle and doubtful: yet you join pity
and clemency, with justice and equity: Which as that reverend father Saint
Augustine writes, Is the inheritance of children, the joy of the Commons,
and the comfort of the poor. And as no time in this world shall be able to
consume this true honor and virtue of yours: so will not the same be
unrewarded, in that great day, at the kandes of the almighty and eternal
God, whom increase you in all honor and dignity.

At VVhymple the xx. of November. Anno. Dom. 1576. Your worshippes humble, John
VVoolton.

A Christian Manuell.
THe very name of The honor of the word Christian.
a Christian is most bewtifull and honorable, and the bare word caryeth a
certain majesty: but as our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, rebuked the Jews
vainly vaunting of their father Abraham, John. 8
If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do^ the works of Abraham: so will
he answer wicked men, with sharp speech, at the great day: If ye had been
Christians, ye would have followed Math. ^
my example: I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. And
albeit we read that the Apostles gave many excellent tytles, unto those yt
believed in Christ, embraced his gospel, and joined them selves to his church
and congregation: as the name of Brethren, Saints, and Disciples: yet at
Antioche they obtained first that noble and royal name of Christians: as a
title which in honor and dignity, not only comprehends, but also far
passes al other styles and inscriptions.

Eusebius Pamphilius, commending The foundation of Christian religion was lay
de long before Christ's incarnation.
Christian faith and relygion unto the world, ertolleth the same not only for
the reverend Majesty, which the name imports: but also for the antiquity
and auncientnesse, as having been always since the creation of the world, and
whereby only all holy men, have pleased God, and atteyned to everlasting
felycitye. Whose sentence and judgment may happily seem strange, to some
simple and unlearned persons, carried with that vain opynion, that Christian
relygion did first begin in the days of Tiberius Caesar: moved as it is
lykely, Luke 3.
with Saint Luke his gospel: where it is written, that John the Baptist began
to preach, in the fifteenth year of Tiberius: and also because Historyes
generally almost, consent that Jesus Christ the savior of the world, was
crucified, the eyght^enth year of the same Emperor.

It can not verily be denied, but Christ's treasures more plainly opened after
his incamation.
that all Prophecies were complete: and true salvation perfected in that time.
And it must needs be granted that Christ's most precious treasures, were
then opened and communicated unto the world, more plainly and plentifullye
then ever before. Yet the same salvation was shaddowed long before by the
Prophets, and promised unto the Fathers in Christ Jesus: where it came to
pass, that they did foresee in their spirit Christ to come: and as we now
do, put their whoale trust and confidence in him only. These things are
proposed, offered, and exhibited in deed most absolutely and clearly unto us,
under the new Testament, and in the time of grace: which they under the Law
had in hope, and that certain, albeit Esa. 9. 1. Pet. 1.
somewhat more obscurely, then we now have: and looked for the same with most
constant and ardent minds: The words of Eusebius touching this matter, are as
follows.

Now least any man should think that Christ's doctrine is strange, or
latelye devised, of some new fangled fellow: we mean to write of this
matter somewhat more largely: VVheras now a good space the coming and
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, began to shine as it were to the world: a
new nation and profession sprung up, not few in number, nor weak in strength,
not shut up in a corner of the world: but gathered of all countries, who in
serving and honoring of God, were most zealous and religious, obtaining the
name of Christians. Which thing was spoken Esa. 66.
of before by one of the Prophets: who ever heard or saw (says he) any such
things, does the ground bear in one day? or are the people borne all at once,
as Syon trauelleth in childbirth, and bears her sons? and in another place:
Then shall the Gentiles see thy rightwisnesse Esa. 62.
break forth as the shyning light, and their salvation as a burning lamp,
thou shall be named with a new name: which the mouth of the Lord shall show,
Therefore making a supputatio^ upward, even from Abraham, unto the first man
Adam: albeit they had not in very letters the bare name, yet in effect and
truth they were Christians. For in four years Act. 11
after Christ's ascension, the disciples obtained the name of Christians. Now
if the name of a Christian imports one that believes in Christ, and that
pursues faith, pity and justice by his word: surely the holy Patriarchs
were such men, and therefore to be accoumpted amongst the number of
Christians. Hitherto Eusebius.

But touching the word Christians, it The name Christian, given by God.
may be gathered by that which has been spoken before, that the faithful
were so named first at Antioche, because they professed Jesus Christ, to be
the son of the living God. And although Act. 17
that may seem to have common to pass, by an imytation of the Philosophers,
who were divided into diverse sects, and received names after their Masters:
yet no doubt this name was given to the faithful, by the inspiration of Gods
spirit, the doctor and guider of his church. For after the gospel was carried
out of the borders of Iewrie, and spread it self far abroad: the faithful
reioysed in this name, as it may appear by the saying of king Agrippa, moved
with S. Paul's oration. Thou do almost perwade Act. 26 1. Pet. 4
me to be a Christian: and S. Peter, See that none of you be punished as a 1.
Pet. 4.
murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busy body in other
men's matters: If any man suffer as a Christian man, let him not be ashamed, but
let him glorify God on this behalf.

The wicked men were carried with a wonderful malice and hatred against This
name was hateful to the wicked. Act. 24.
this name, Tertullus that prating Sicophant, termed odiously the profession
of the gospel, The heresy of the Nazarites. And it appears by Iustine the
Martyr, Tertullyan, Eusebius, and such like, the very profession of this name
was accoumpted a thing worthy of condempnation: and the denial of the same
obtained absolution: as though the name carried with it an offense, to be
continued, or deposed with the same. Which was nothing else, but a blind
furor, in those whose eyes Satan the God of this world had put out, so that
they could not see the clear light. Neither consider as Athenagoras wittely
answered, That names are not worthy hatred, but the fact and fault: Or as
Justinius the martyr writ, That the bare name ought neither to procure credit
nor discredit. Such was the opinion of profane men, of the name Christian,
even the green herb and first spring of the gospel.

But the sense and judgment of the godly was far other wise: who accounted no
name or title more reverend and honorable. They were persuaded that this The
effect or working of this name.
name was invented and given by God himself: partly for a difference between
them of the old and new Testament, and partly to kindle and inflame their
faith in Christ, being by the remembrance and recytall of the very name, moved
to be thankful, for his unspeakable benefits. For every man ought to consider
with himself, ye he has the name of a christian, because he is ingraffed in
Christ, as the branche in the stock, or as the member in the head: and so to
receive of his moystnesse and life: and to be partaker of his benefits. For
there is no other word, that does more significantlye express, Ephesians. 5.
the entyre conjunction, which is between Christ and his Church, (which is
lively set out in the parable of ye marriage, whereby we are said to be flesh of
his flesh, and bone of his bones) as does ye word Christian. As soon as we
hear that sweet sound, we call to memory, that we are made a 1. Pet. 2. 1.
lively Priesthode, to offer spiritual sacrifices. So that this word, is as it
were a sacrament assuring al professors of the gospel of the accomplishment,
of that holy Unction, whereof David makes Psa. 113.
mention: for God is good and true, and does not deceive them that put their
trust in him. And he gave the name of Christ to his only begotten son, and
answered the same in deed: He anointed him with the oil of gladness above
his fellows. He therefore has also anointed us his fellows heirs, and
brethren with the same oil: albeit not so plentifully as their elder brother.

The title therefore is honorable and comfortable, as all those right well
perceive that have any taste and feeling of Gods mysteries. What a sweet
speech of God is this: Touch not my Christ's: does he not plainly declare that
he dearly Psa. 105
loves those, whom he adorneth with that name? Surely S. Hierom thinks this
to be that name, which the living God by the mouth of his Prophet, promised to
give his servant, that in place of ye manifold names of Israel, Ephraim, Isa.
65. A poo^e Christian is more honorable then an heathen Prince.
Joseph, Jacob, they should be called Christians. Howsoever therefore this name
has been contemned and hated of profane men: yet amongst the servant of
God, it has always been accoumpted most honorable, and preferred to all other
tytles. Saint Hierome writing to Hieron. ad Furiam.
Furia, happening to make mention of her father: adds expressly, that he
bonored him more for the name of a Christian: then because he had either been a
Senator or a Consul.

But we ought always to use this The name of a Christian may not be
blemished with wicked deeds.
concord, that we be in deed such men as we would be accoumpted and called.
For the very name does admonish men, not only of their honor and dignity, but
also of their office and duty. And as by Sacraments, which S. Augustine
calls visible words, men are put in mind of their calling: even so are
Christians by that name admonished of their parts, and functions. And as the
unworthy partakers of Sacraments, receive the same to their own damnation:
even so those that usurp this noble name, and perform it not in their living
and manners, shall feel the heavy hand of God for their presumption and
wickedness. Whereof Saint Paul renders a reason, Romans 2.
saying: For the name of God is evil spoken of amongst the Gentiles through
you: And the Prophet, My name is always blasphemed: And in another Esa. 52.
Eze. 63.
place, They came unto the Gentyles and profaned my name amongste them: And
again, My name is great amongst the Gentiles, but you have profaned it. In
which place the people are charged, with two great offenses: first that they
made God as a reproach: secondly, that they abused his name and law, wherewith
in his mercy be vouchsafed to honor them. Whereby we may easily perceive what
an heinous offense it is to brag and boast of the name of Christians, and of
the word of God, and yet in daily violating, and transgressing the same: to
profane Gods name amongst the people: which is no other thing, but to play
and dallye with his reverend name and majesty. This is nothing else, but the
subtyle practice of our enemy the Devil, who by his sleyghtes and
temptations, brings it to pass: that those things which should serve to
Gods glory, and our own salvation: we by profanation and abuse, convert to
our own destruction. Which thing we see to often veryfyed in these our
sinful times, whiles many lyppe gospellers, and protestants have commonly in
their mouths. Jesus Christ his gospel, and faith: and yet so live that the
name of Christ and his gospel, is evil spoken of. Christians always of two
sorts.


But this grievous accusation of carnal gospellers, is ancient and general,
used as we see by the Prophets against the Jews, and by the Apostles against
the Gentyles: So that we may easily thereby gather, that the professors of
God, and true religion, have been always of two sorts. Christians in title
and name only: and Christians in words and works: between whom there is no
small or obscure difference. For the former sort bend, all their study and
endeavors to cheerishe their carnal carkase: and desire to excel others in
honor, wealth, riches, power, aucthority, and dignity, neither are they led
with any fear of God, to bridle and restrain their fylthie desires, and
concupiscenses, but in their whole life do run Ephesians. 2
headlong into all mischife: and as the Apostle says, Being yet alive, are
dead in their sins and trespasses. The second sort, led with the holy
spirit: seek God with all their heart, and lifting up their souls to him,
covet heavenly things, and contempne earthly things: their chief care is not
for riches, honor, and worldly glory: but they put of the old To. 13 Gala.
3. 4 Ephesians. 4 Romans 6
man, and cloathe them selves with the new man, they dye to sin, and live to
righteousness: or at the least do not suffer original sin and corruption to
rule in their mortal bodies.

Of this difference between the carnal man, and the spiritual: or between A
difference between false and faithful Christians.
the false and faithful Chrystian: that ancient father Ireneus writes
excellently: whose words being somewhat prolixe and long, I have in some and
effect gathered. Those (says he) that Irenae^^. lib. 5.
bear the earnest and pledge of Gods spirit, renouncing the flesh, and
submytting themselves unto the spirit, are aptly called by the Apostle,
spiritual. But those that profess them selves believers in God, and yet never
meditate his word, nor cloth them selves with the works of righteousness:
but like swyne and dogs, give over them selves to all sensuality, and
wickedness, are called of the Apostle, carnal: of the Prophets beasts: and
in the law, unclean things: and Christ himself pronounces such men, dead
already. Let the dead, says he, bury the dead, for they have not Gods
spirit quickening them. We see then that false Christians and carnal
gospellers, have been always from the beginning of Christ's church. And now a
days all men brag and boast of faith, but few declare it in godly life and
conversation. All of us would be named and accoumpted Christians, which very
name should stay us from violating Gods holy law: But few of us frame our
lives after Christ's example. We confess God in word (as the Apostle says)
but in deeds we deny him, and cause his name to be evil spoken of amongst
the Nations. For how can the Turks be persuaded to think well of Christen
religion: when they behold us by commytting manifest Idolatry: or how can they
favor our profession, which we deface, with our wicked and abominable
behavior. There is nothing that has The Turks hate us for some gross
opinions.
so greatly insenced, and kindled the immortal mallyce, and deadly fiende of
the Saracens and Turks against Christians, as the presumptuous and manifest
breaking of the second commandment, in making and worshypping of Idolles and
dembe Images: and in teaching the impanation of God, and that Capernaticall
opinion, in deuowring In metaph.
of him. Aristotle being very godless in many things, yet could he not
abide that God should be represented with any corporal likeness. The Turks
and Saracens can not bear any Si^on Paulus in truth. locorum com.
Image in their Synagogs: and as some write, have appointed great punishment
for the Caruers and makers of the same. And even so they have detested that
opinion of carnal and real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and have
abhorred from peace and society in relygion with the Christians, for that also
amongst other causes. For as Cicero writes, who is so Denat. eorum. lib. 3.
Auerrois. in 12. Metaph.
wytlesse to believe that to be God which he eats? And Auerrois because the
Christians eat that God whom they worship: my soul shall be with the
Philosophers. He conceived by means of that gross doctrine of Rome, that the
Lords Supper, was like Polyphemus banquette, fooming with read blood about
men's mouths. For so Nycolas The recantacion of Beringarius in concilio.
vercell. In decretis de consecrat, distinct. 2. ego Beringarius. Glosator
cecretorum.
the Bishop of Rome compelled Beringarius with blooddy words, to recant and
confess, That the boddie of Christ is handeled and broken sensuallye, and
bruised with the teeth: Which words the gloss mysliketh, and admonysheth the
Reader to understand the same warely, least he fall into a greater error then
Beringarius held.

And as the Heathen have myslyked The corrupt life of Christians has made some
contempne their religion.
our religion, by reason of such gross and absurd opinions: so have they been
more and more alyenated from the same, by reason of the dyssolute and fylthy
life of such as desired to be accoumpted the principal and chief amongst
Christians. And here it is worthy to be noted what befell to Innocentius the
fourth Bishop of Rome: who by Ambassadors moved the great prince of Tartary
named Batus, to cease from the cruel persecution of Christians, to acknowledge
God the creator of all things, and to receive Chrystian religion. The
Tartarian as as they say, when he had demissed the Byssops Ambassadors, sent
his own Ex Ferr. mont. de republ. lib. 4.
to Rome, and other Cities of Italy: to search the form of their belief, the
manners and conversation of Christians. Who at their return brought him word,
The corrupt life of the Papists in Rome.
that they were an idle people, wicked in life, and worshipped they knew not
what Images, so much disagreeing from the doctrine they did profess: that they
appeared rather to be a flocking together of beasts, then an assemble of men.
At which report the Tartarian straight way received the Saracens, who easily
persuaded him to neclect Christ: and to receive in to his domynions the
abominable religion of Mahomite, as a mystres of manners.

O great wickedness and ingreatytude worthy destruction. That which our
savior Christ manaced unto the The ponishment of lyppe gospellers.
Cities, which contemned his dyuyne miracles, wholesome doctrine, and would not
repent: shall fall upon such prophaners of Gods name at the last day. It Math.
10. Luke 10.
shall be more terrerable for Sodom and Gomorra at the day of Judgment, then for
you. O dear brethren, let us not with like thanks quite almightye God for his
great benefyts bestowed upon us in these our days: as for the glad tidings
of our salvation, so plainly and plentiful, uttered by the restytution of his
holy word. Let us remember that when we lay drowned in our sins, and were
not able to lift up our selves: God of his mere mercy saved us in his son
Jesus Christ. And to bring the same to pass, he gave his only and most dearlye
beloved son to the vile and shameful death of the cross. His goodness and
favor was so great toward us, that he choose us, and predestined us to be
inheritors of his eternal life, before the beginning of the world: Let us be
moved with these his incomprehensible benefyts, to live in this world honestly
and godly. For he has not done these great things for us, that we should
still wallowe and toumble in wickedness. When Aulus Fuluius had A. Fuluius.
taken his own son as he was running to the camp of rebellious Catilinae,
and commanded him to be executed with death. I (quoth he) begot the not to
serve Catilinae, but thy country: Even so God has regenerated us from sin,
not that we should henceforth come in to the same again: but that we should
dye to sin, and live to righteousness.

Let us then in every of our vocations, rejoice in that faith, which works
Gal. 5.
through love: let our faith (as S. James says) Be made perfect with works:
Iac. 2.
For as the body without the spyrite, is dead, eue^ so faith without works is
dead. In that he would have us to make perfyt our faith by works: he means
as Saint Augustine and Aquias expound August. de spir. et lib. cap. 29.
Aquinas. in. 2. cap Iacobi.
it, that we should declare our selves to the world, to be Justified by our
works, and by the fruits, to testifye abroad that we have a lively faith.

For although we are justified before God, freely, without works, either going
before, or coming after: through, and for the meryts of Jesus Christ, only our
mediator, which we apprehend by faith: yet the immutable will of our God is,
that all justified men should walk in a new obedyence, doing those works
that are acceptable to God, beutifying their profession with a virtuous
conversation. But because in these Men ought to show good works as tokens of
their faith.
latter days, charity waxes cold, and iniquity every where abounds: those
preachers and writers cannot choose but lightlye please God, and good men: that
press the world to wear their badges, and to show forth as it were their
pasport in this their peregrination: in eschewing vice and following virtue.
albeit neither merit nor Justification, nor salvation came thereby.

For as Saint Paul writes, these are the days which are perelous, and men
love them selves: Having a show of godlynes: but have denied the power
thereof: wherefore to the end that the 2. Tim. 3.
effectual causes may be known which may stir men to pittye, virtue, and
innocencye of life: I have thought good to comprehend in this Treaty, the
duetyes of every vocation and calling: and The effect of this work.
as virtues, which as ornaments and precious stones do bewtefye and garnyshe
the same. But before I come pertyculerly to every estate and condition: I
judge it most conuenyent to put down in few words the causes and commodyties
of good works, so mouch the rather? For that I said before, that works do not
deserve neither meryt, Iustifycation, nor salvation: whereby, my readers may
happily be discorraged, from that whereunto I bend all my studdy, to move, and
inflame them, or at the least to leave occasion to the Papists to cry out
with open mouths that our doctrine is a doctrine of lycencyousnes and liberty.

What we teach and think of good works: those Homelies written in our
English tongue of Salvation, Faith, Cranmer his Homiles.
and works: by that light and Martyr of Christ's church, Cranmer,
Archebyshoppe of Canturburie, do plain testifye and declare: which are buylt
upon so sure a foundation, that no Sycophant can deface them, nor Sophyster
confute them, while the world shall endure: unto whom I remytte the Reader
desirous of an absolute dyscourse in this matter. As for the reproachful
speeches of the Papists, who cry out and say, that the Position, Only
faith iustifyeth is impious, blasphemous, and new, never used of any
Evangelist, Apostle, or Doctor of Christ's church, and very pernicious,
because it excludes good works, and mynistreth occasion to lycense and
lybertye: all this (I say) I might answer in one word, as Cicero said: Pro
Cluentio magunm, et impudens mendacum: They are impudent sclaunders, and
untruths: For my purpose at this time, is rather to instruct then to
convince: yet I will shortly put down what all godly men think in this
matter.

And first: where as many take offense with this proposition, which we preach
and teach: That men are justified The doctrine of faith iustifiyng expounded.
by faith only in Christ: It is because they do not understand our
doctrine in that behalf. For we mean nothing less, then to reiecte, or take
away good works, and honest actions: but we only exclude confidence, and
trust in men's works, which have no place at all in iustyfication. And Good
works not rejected.
that dignity is ascrybed to faith, because it is as it were an instrument to
apprehende Christ: and is much like a Coundyte pype, whereby, as by a mean,
the water of life, that is, justice in Christ is conueyghed, and communycated
unto us: by whose merytes we have remyssion, and forgiveness of sins, and
are adopted, and made the children of God. Faith by her own dignytie and
worthynesse, does A similytude decl^ring how faith apprehends justification.
not demeryte Justice, and righteousness: but receives and embraces the same
offered unto us in the gospel. So that in the free mercy of GOD, and merytes
of Christ, who in sheedding of his precious blood, has made satysfaction for
the sins of the whole world, we ought to repose all our trust and
confidence. But our adversaries obiecte, saying: if you do not exclude the
promyses: why do you say, that faith only iustifyeth? and they add. Let
faith iustifye in The objection of the adversary.
Gods name, so that you say not faith only iustifyeth: Whereunto we
answer. That we speak after the usual manner, without deuyse of new
terms and Phrases, following the aucthorytye of the brightest light, that
have since Christ's time, shyned in the Church.

For the words of Christ our Master, and of his Apostles, carye the same with
great efficacye and force in sense: albeit The proof of this doctrine out of
the scripture.
in form of words, and stamp of letter they have it not. Christ him self
speaking to the sinful woman, says: Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace.
And to Iayrius the rular of the Synagogue. Math. 9. Luke 8.
Fear not, believe only, and she shall be made whole: And to the blind Luke 18.
man. Receive thy sight, thy faith has saved thee. And Saint Paul, Where is
the rejoicing? it is excluded, by what law? of works? Nay, but by the law
of Faith. Therefore we conclude that Romans 3,
a man is justified by Faith, without the works of the Law: And again, we
know that a man is not justified by the works of the Law: but by the Faith
of Jesus Christ: And again by Grace Gala. 2.
are ye saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of
God, not of works, least any man should boast. Besides this, that phrase is
usual and Ephesians. 2. The consent of the Fathers. Origin. ^^. 3. ad. Romans
common in the works of ancient writers. For we find in Origene: He says
unto the woman, by no works of the law, but by faith only: thy sins are
forgiven thee: And Saint Hierome, God Hieron. in Romans 10.
iustifyeth us by faith only: And Saint Ambrose, All ceremonies are taken
away, Ambr. in Romans 8.
and we are justified by faith only: And again, Grace is so given in Christ
Jesus, that whosoever believes in him, Ibidem. in 1. Cor. 1.
should be saved without works, receiving remission of sins by faith
only: And Theodoretus, Neither have we gotten Theod. li. 7 de sacri.
these heavenly blessings, by our own merits, but by faith only: And
Giselbertus. What should we conjecture Giselbertus in lib. abter. cap. 1.
of their salvation, that dyed before the eyghteenth day, we must believe that
they were saved by faith only: And Saint Barnarde. I confess my self
Bernardus Epist. 77.
either to understand a right, or to be deceived with those, who think that
faith only is able to save a man. And S. De natura et gra. cap. 1
Augustine, who was S. Ambrose his scholar, and a dilygent reader of the old
writers, says. If justice came by the Law, therefore Christ dyed in vain:
but if he dyed not in vain, the sinful man is justified by him alone, to whom
believing faith is imputed unto righteousness. Many other aucthorites are
cyted, by that famous man P. Martyr, and yet he has not gathered al: which
might be aledged to this purpose. But amongst the ancient writers, there is
none that has written more earnestlye of this matter, then Chrysostom. I am
able (says he) to show a faithful man that has lived, and commen to the In
hom. de fide et lege naturae.
kingdom of heaven without works. But never did any man, at any time obtain
life without faith. The thief believed only, and was justified of the
merciful God: neither is their reply to any purpose, that he wanted time to
work righteousness: the controversy is not in that point. But this I
constantly affirm, that faith only saves. For if he had lived yet longer,
and had neglected good works, he should have fallen from salvation. Surely
Saint Ambrose has excellently set out this our iustifycation, by faith only in
Christ: by an example of the blessing of Jacob: for as Jacob deserved not the
birth right: but hyding him self in the habyte of his elder brother, and
clothed with his apparel, which gave a sweet sent, did insynuate him self to
his Father, and for his gain feigned him self another person, and so
obtained the blessing: Even so it behooves us to lie hyd, under the hemme of
Christ's vesture, that by him we may be justified in Gods sight. But because
the words carye with them an especial comfort. I thought to express them.
which are as follow: In that Isaak did smell the sweet odor of the garments,
Lib. ^. de Jacob. et vita beata cap. 2.
happily the meaning may be, that we are not justified by works, but by
faith: for man's carnal infirmytie, is an impediment to our works: but the
fair whiteness of faith, hides the error of our deeds, which procures
pardon for our offenses. If then in so many testimonies, they can not content
them selves, but continue their severe censures, over our phrases: let them
condemn the ancient writers of the same fault: and if they list, let them
set Christ, his Apostles, and the Fathers of the Primatyue Church to school,
for such speeches. If there be any inconueniencie therein, we have learned and
received the same from them.

Now when we have made the people acquainted with the phrase used in effect by
our chief Master Jesus Christ: and in very form of letters by the best, and
most sincere written, and expositors, of the holy scripture: and told them
that this dignity of justification is not of faith it self: but by virtue of
the object which it respects, to wit Christ: and that is not the work of
man, but the gift of God. August. Enchir ad Lau. cap. 31. et eccle. dog. cap.
42. Ephesians. 2.
We call upon them for good life, and tell them again, and again: that faith
will not, nor can not be a barren mother: but as Chrysostom deuinely calls
her the 2, The. 2.
Nurce of all good d^edes and actions, and working always through charity.

We say that faith can not be in that man that lives ungodly, and walloweth
in wickedness against his own conscience. And that neither murderers, nor
thieves, nor adulterers, nor covetous persons, nor proud men, nor
dronkardes, (without repentance) can enter into the kingdom of God. And
whereas the believers, as Saint John says, overcome the world: such as
Again an hipocritical faith.
persevere in wickedness, are not conquerors thereof: and therefore there can
be no faith in them, but a kind of Hypocrisy, and a vain dream of faith
only: and finally, that faith is lame and imperfect, if honest actions, good
life and conversation be wanting: But we exclude only from good works, hope
of demeryting, justification, and propiciation for sins, which comes unto
men by faith only in Jesus Christ, and that by the free mercy of God, without
any worthynesse on man's part.

And touching lybertye, and lycenciousnesse An answer to the objection of the
Papist touching liberty life.
of life, whereof they complain: and impute the occasion to the word of God,
so plentifully preached unto the world. One of their objections is too true,
whereof we complain as earnestly as they: the other is utterly vntrur, and
sclaunderous. For it comes to pass by the mere maliyce of the Devil, that
our hearers walk not in that path, which out of the Monumentes of the
Prophets and Apostles, yea, and of Christ himself, we open and show forth
unto them. We exhort our hearers always to repentance and amendment of life,
to fly from the vengeance to come, and to bring forth the fruits that belong
to repentance. And we Admonishions used in Pulpits against all kind of
sins.
give unto them, to have always in readynesse against all kind of sins,
certain remedies: as it were against sicknesses and disseases. For he that
bears mallyce and envy against his neighbor, hears. Every man that
hates his brother, is a murderer. The backbyter 1. Ioh. 3.
hears: Whosoever says to Math. 5.
his brother thou fool, shall be guyltie of hell fire: And cursed speakers
shall 1 Cor. 6.
not possess the kingdom of God.

The impacient, and he that desires to Math. 6.
revenge, hears: Love your enemies, pray for them that curse you, do good
to them that hate you, etc. that you may be the children of the highest: And
if you do not forgive other men their offenses, neither shall your heavenly
Father forgive you your offenses. He that is altogether given to ryotous
voluptuousness, hears the parrable of the rytche Glutton, and the poor man
Lazarus: Luke 16
He that is busyed in heaping together riches, hears the parrable of the
rytche man, fylling his Barnes, Luke 12.
and purposing to take his ease for many years: and that which the Apostle
says. Having food, and wherewithal to cover our selves, let us be
therewithal 1. Tim. 3. 1. Tim. 6.
content. For those that would be rich fall into temptations and snares, and
into many unprofitable and hurtful desires, which drown men in perdicion and
destruction. Those that keep no Heb. 13.
hospitalytie, hear this saying. Be mindful of hospitality: for hereby have
many unawares, received Aungelles into their houses. The proud and ambicious
Luke 18. Math. 23.
man hears: He that exalts him self, shall be brought low: And God
resysteth the proud, but gives grace unto the humble. The babbler and
talkatyuen man bears: Men shall give Math. 12.
an accoumpt at the day of judgment, of every idle word: and let no filthy
communycation proceed out of your mouths. The secure and careless Ephesians. 4.
Colos. 3.
man hears: Be you therefore ready, because the son of man will come in
an hour, you know not. The Vserer hears: Lend, looking Luke 6.
for no reward, and great shall your reward be in heaven. The droonkarde
hears: Ouerwhelme not your selves Luk 22.
with wine, wherein there is ryotte, and beware that your hearts be not
ouercommen with surfeiting: and woe be to you Esa. 5.
that arise early to droonkennesse, and to Carowse until the evening, that
you 1. Pet. 5.
may be hot with wine: And be sober and watch, because your adversary the
Devil, walks up and down like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may deuowre.
The fornycatour, and adulterour, or he that is spotted with any like crime
hears: 1. Cor. 6.
That neither fornicatours, nor adulterers, neither softlings, shall have the
inheritance of the kingdom of God. And again: For you know this, no
whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, nor he that is a worshipper
of Images, shall have any inherytaunce in the kingdom of God and Christ. And
Marriage is honorable amongst all men, and the bed undefiled, Heb. 13.
but as for fornycatours and adulterers, God will judge them. Those that
neglect the works of charity, hear: Depart from me you cursed, into
eternal Math. 25.
fire, which is prepared for the Devil, and for his Angels. For I was hungerie,
and you fed me not: I was thyrstie, and To. 14.
you refreshed me not: I was a stranger, and you lodged me not: I was naked,
2. Cor. 5.
and you clothed me not: I was sick, and you visited me not. To be short,
we repeat and urge earnestlye, that of the holy Apostle: We shall all
appear before the Tribunal seat of Christ, that every one may receive as
he has done in his body, either good or evil.

Moreover, we admonish and call upon every vocation, for the fruits and
virtues appertayning to their estate, The Prince and Magistrate hears: You
carry nor the sword in vain, To. 13.
for the Magistrate is Gods mynister, to Exhortations used in Pulpyts to
inflame men to virtue.
punish the evil, and to cheerishe the good: And Princes are not a terror to
those that do well, but to those that do evil. The subject hears: There
is no power but it is of God, whosoever therefore resists power, resists
Gods ordinance, and we ought not to obey for fear only, but also for
conscience: And again, Pay trybute Romans 13.
to whom trybute belongs. The Husband hears: You Husbands love your
wives, and be not bitter Ephesians. 5. Colos. 3.
unto them, and so men ought to love their wives, as their own boddies. The
Wife hears: You Wives be subject to your husbands, as unto the Lord,
because the Man is the vvomans headde: and as the Church is subject to
Christ, so ought vviues to be subject to their husbands in all things. The
Parents hears: Provoke not Ephesians. 6.
your Children to wrath, but bring them up in the dyscipline of the Lord.
Children hear: Obey your Parents in the Lord. The Servants hear: Obey
those that are your Masters, according to the flesh, with fear and
tremblinge, with symplycitie of your hearts, as it were to Christ. And
Masters hear: You Masters use your servant with courtesy and gentleness,
knowing that you have a Master in heaven. The Preacher reads: Feed the
flock of Christ, as much 1. Pet. 5.
as in you lies: not taking care thereof by coaction, but vvyllynglye: not
desirous of fylthie lucre, but with a ready mind. The Publycane hears:
Require no more then that which is appointed for you. The Souldyour hears:
Stryke no man, neither speak evil of any Luke 13
man, but be content with your stypendes.

These and many such textes of the same sort, we repeat and inculcate
most earnestlye, and with all our diligence, exhort the people to virtue and
godliness: which do playnelye prove and argue, that we are free from those
crimes which our adversaries most vntruelye chardge us with all.

There are some kind of works, in deed, that we wryghte and speak A
difference of works, taken of the persons working.
against, because they can not be accoumpted amongst the number of good
works: and to the end our dealinges herein may be more evident. It shall not
be from my purpose, to dystinguyshe between Three sorts of men working.
the diverse orders of men, bringing forth good works: and between works
them selves, whereby the process of my matter will be more facill, and easy,
and touching the persons workinge, they may be reduced to three sorts.

Of the first kind are Myscreantes, Romans 2.
unto the law. Wherefore albeit the works of Heathen men are not to be
compared, with the good works of faithful men ingraffed in the Church of
Christ: yet for many causes, and pryncipally, for that without all
controversy, all good gyfts, and indewments, even in the Paynymes, are Gods
good gyfts, they have the tyttle and name of good works in some respects
given unto them.

Of the second sort those are, whoo have received the Sacraments, and The
second sort of men working.
are written as it weere in the Regester book of the Church of God: amongst
whom there is also some dyfference: for some are very Atheysts, and with
their abominable life, deny him in their deeds, whom they confess with
their mouth, and are in name only Christyans: others are Hyppocrites,
received in Iustifycation and regeneration is fruitful, and effectual. Now
let us view these men's works, that are in the fellowshippe and Communion of
Christ's church: for of the works of Infidels and Gentyles, I will speak
somewhat afterward.

First, the Atheistes, who think in their heart, that there is no God: do
Atheists.
loose the raygnes of lybertye, to all filthy lust, and beastlye pleasure,
contempne all honest, and godly actions, and with the Sicophants plainly
grant: We know no other God but our bellyes, unto whom we vvvll offer
sacryfices, Euripides.
Oxen, Sheep, and all other delycious things. Of the which Epecurysme, the
holy Prophet David Psa. 14.
complayneth: The foolyshe boddie has said in his heart, there is no God: And
afterward accuses and bewayleth the pyttyfull corruption of humayne nature,
carrying about daily, either ygnoraunce not knowing GOD, or securytie
neglectyng GOD, or dystruste, runnynge away from God: of these men's works I
shall not need, to speak any thing in this my exhortations to good works,
seeing they bend them selves only to work wickedness.

Hyppochrites albeit now and then Hippocrits and their works:
they show sum works of mercy and pytie, and observe the commandments
according to the outward letter: yet most commonly, their whole studdye is
occupied about supersticious ceremonies, rytes, and external exercyses:
wherein they think that a Christyan man's life does chieflye consyst. Of the
which sort, are to go in Pylgrimage barefooted, hanging Iewelles upon
stocks and stones, offering of incense and wax Candles, invocation of
Saints, and many other like toys, conjoined either with great impietye and
Idolatrye, or with great lyghtnesse and follye: which were never ordained by
GOD, that we should walk in them: against which kind of works we preach,
and teach most earnestly, as we are commanded in the holy scripture.

Hyppocrytes have also an especial delyght and pleasure in other works,
Hippocrits delyghte chiefly in works ceremonyall.
(good doubtless in some sort) but such as belong to discypline, and exercise
of the body, rather then to true godliness: as an abystnence from deynty
meats, in often fastinges, watchinges, lying upon the ground, and to live
after some one man's prescripte and order: whereby the loftynesse, and
courrage of the flesh is somewhat abated, and subdued. Which exercises we like
very well of also, although we ascrybe not so much unto them, as the vulgar
sort were woonte: but we prefer very much those works, which come more
nighlye to sincere Godliness, of the which I will speak hereafter.

And the common and ignorant people The judgment of the vulgar, touching
works ceremonyall.
undoubtedly, if they see any men lean with abstynencie, broken with
labors, spent with watching, they wonderfully esteem such, and conceive an
especial conceyte of their sanctymonie and holiness.

And yet it commech to pass oftentimes, both that men swell in their own
opinion, of that creedyte which they have with the vulgar, for those external
shows: and in continuance of Hippocrits puffed up in their own co^^eyte.
time do observe the same with superstycious, yea, Iudaical mind, as though
true godliness did consyste therein: whereas in very deed they are of no
moment, onelesse those perfyt works which Christ and his Apostles do so
often require, be annexed unto the same. And it may be, nay, usually we have,
and do see it so to be, that those who chastyce their bodies with abstinence,
labor, and watching, that of their own accord have renounced in diet,
flesh, and strong drink: do not abstain from woman's flesh, ambicion,
envy, and malice, emulation, and such like: and yet in the mean time have
stolen the hearts of the simple, into their great admyration, and tickled with
the vain applausion of the ignorant, are taken in amaze, and forgot them
selves.

Hippochrites sometime do the works Hippocrits sometime do morral works, and
after what sort.
outwardlye of the commandments, they pray and hold up their hands to
God, but from a fylthy and corrrupte heart, against whom the Prophet Esaias
cries very sharplye: When you shall stretche out your hands, I will turn
mine eyes away from you: and when you shall multiply your prayers, I Hagg. 2.
Esa. 1. 58. Pro. 15.
will not hear you, for your hands are full of blood: wash you, make your
selves clean, and take away the wickedness of your cogitations. These men did
all things to be seen of the world, against whom our Master Christ is
Mat. 6. 16 23.
most earnest, and shows that they are detested of God. They are no better
then the Gentyles, but rather much Hippocrits worse then Infydels.
worse: first because they have obtained more ample knowledge then they, and
yet are no whyt better: Secondly, because they do not g^d in good order, and
manner, and yet ambiciouslye seek the title of sanctity and holiness:
wherein they are twyse guyltie, for it is well said of Gregory: Counterfaite
holiness Gregory.
is a double iniquity. Against such kind of works we preach and teach,
and that as you see not without many aucthoryties, and grave examples. Let us
now come to the works of Infydels, and unbelieving persons, and consider how we
ought to esteem of them also.

Concerning the Infydelles, whether Works of Infydels.
we view their excellent, and noble knowledge and skyll, in Arts both
lyberall, and manuary: or their honest actions and virtues, in cyuile life, we
may not gaynesaye, but that they are the good blessings, and gifts of God:
which he collateth upon, whom Bezeleel and Oliab could not buyld the
Tabernacle, before they were taught by God.
it lyketh him, for the publyque profit of all mankind. And if it were
needeful that Beseleel and Oliab, should have understanding and wisdom powered
into them by Gods spirit, that they might be able, to frame and perfyte the
Tabernacle: much more we ought to think, y^ those things Exo. 31. et 35,
which are most excellent in humane society, spring and show from the spirit
of God. Neither ought that place of Scripture to make any man stagger, Romans 8.
1. Cor. 3. Ephesians. 3. 2. Tim. 1.
which affyrmeth that the spirit of God dwells in the faithful: for that is
to be understand of the spyrite of sanctyfication, whereby we are
consecrated the Temple of the living God. For he does move, replenishe and
quicken, all creatures with the same spirit, according to every of their
properties, which he gave unto them in the law of creation.

And in like manner, we ought to think of their worthy actions, and virtues:
For we ought not to be so dull and senseles, to think that there is no
dyfference between Cata and Catalyne: between the Lactan. li. 3. ca. 19. The
great wisdom, learning, and virtues of the Heathen, are the gifts of God.
justice, equytie, and moderation of Titus and Traiane: and the sauadge, and
cruel lousenesse of Caligula and Nero: or between the beastly lust of
Tiberius, and Vespasians contynencie: between the conservation and contempt of
Laws. What thing can there remain in good order, if we should hold such a
confusion? God therefore has ingraued in God recompenseth morral virtues with
temporal blessings.
man's heart, a distinction between honest and dishonest actions, and as it were
ratyfie the same, with the dispensation of his providence. For we see him
bestow temporal blessings upon those that follow virtue: not that the
external Image, and show of virtue does deserve any thing at all: but it
pleases him to make manifest unto the world that way, in what price he has
the true and internal justice of the heart, whiles he suffers not the
external to go unrewarded: whereof it follows, that those virtues, or
rather images, and shadows of virtues in the Infydels, are Gods gifts,
because there is nothing lawdable and praise worthy in any respect, but that
only which comes from him.

And yet let us take Saint Augustines lesson with us, which he gives touching
Lib. 4. contra Iul. The virtues of the Infidels be to no purpose in matters of
salvation.
their works after this manner: All that are strangers from the relygion, of
the one and euerlyuing God, howsoever they seem wonderful, through the
opinion of virtues: not only deserve no reward, but rather punishment,
because the pure gifts of God are spotted, in their filthiness. For albeit
the virtues of the Painymes, in outward show be great, and may cause many
Christians to blush, when they see them selves so far excelled of them, in a
cyuile life: yet there are many defectes, and filthy spots in their deeds
and actions.

That principal point which is all in all, I mean the knowledge of God and
Defects in the virtues of Infidels, and especially the ignorance of God.
right religion, was so wanting unto them: that all other things were they
never so excellent, could proffite them nothing to salvation: for as is the
body without the head, so weere the virtues of the Ethnikes without the
knowledge of the living God. Some of them happily weere half persuaded, that
there is a God, who both created, and yet conserueth the world, whereof those
dyuyne sentences of theirs dispersed here and there, in their works are found:
concerning God, Religion, faith, and such like (so with some knowledge of
divinity seemed to be bred, in them naturally) yet they were not certainly
persuaded of one God, and they wanted that dyuyne wisdom wherewith the Fathers
and prophets were inspired: which is to be had only out of the holy
scripture, and to be understood by the aid of Gods spiryt, wherein the
salvation of mankind is contained. They knew nothing of God as he reveled
They knew nothing of God as he reveled him self in his word. True faith hope
and prayer wanted in them.
him self in his word, even from the beginning, then the which benefyte, none
can come, or be, more wyshed of mankind. These chief and princypall virtues
then, the true knowledge of God, love, fear, and reverence of God: together
with perfyt trust and confydence in God, calling upon him in distress and
necessity, was wanting unto them.

Besides this they knew nothing of Infydels ignorant of original sin, the
cause o^ man's misery.
original sin, and natural corruption: they knew nothing of the cause of
sin: nothing of man's mysserie: nothing of true and effectual consolations,
either against calamityes, or against death it self. They knew nothing of the
redemption of mankind They knew nothing of man's redemption end regeneration
by Christ: nothing of the tyranny of the Devil: nothing of the reparration
of Gods Image: name nothing of the old man in Adam, and new man in Christ.
They knew nothing of the resurrection of the dead: nothing Ignorant of the
resurrection.
of the day of domme: nothing of the eternal bliss, and immortallytie with
the faithful, shall enjoy in boddye and soul in the heavenly kingdom.

Albeit then, the acts and deeds of the Ethnikes, give outwardly a godly
show: as Aristides and Phocion in justice and equity: Socrates in pity:
Xenocrates in contynencie: Lucretia in love of Chastytie: which they pursued
(let us grant so much) to some good end: admyt not for any desire of glory
and renown: but first because the very face and countenance of virtue seemed
honorable unto them: secondly to leave unto their country men, domysticall
examples which they might follow: lastly, to stir up in others, an
emulation and desire of virtue: if I say all these good things were in them,
yet we see how far they were from perfection.

The crown and garland, as it were wants in their works: to wit, the
knowledge of God, and an heart puryfied by faith. Wherefore Saint Augustine
spoke of them, after this manner: Lib. 4. contia Iu^.
There is no good thing without the chief goodness: and where the true
knowledge of the eternal truth wants, there is no true virtue, no not in
the Prosper. de vocatione gentium.
best manners. And another: Without the relygion of the true God, that which
seems to be virtue, is vice: neither can any man please God, without God,
etc. For those that are ignorant of the true God, can not have true and
perfyte virtue, but only a show or shaddowe thereof vanishing away. And
whereas Reason and Will, do concur in all Reason and Will corrupt.
honest and good actions: the one admonishing what men ought to do, or not to
do, the other pursues and practyseth the same: It is most certain, that
human reason after his fall, is oppressed with great ignorance and error,
and therefore most commonly judges corruptlye: and Will also to be carried to
the worst, in the execucion of all things. The knowledge of God then puryfying
the heart, is doubtless the orygion and fountain of all virtues, which is
pleasant and acceptable unto God. It is that which illuminateth and informs
Reason rightly, and correcting corrupt will, renews a man after God, in
justice, and true holiness. Moreover, the Infydelles in their actions, never
respect the last end.
Ethnikes in their deeds respect not the right end, which make a true and
perfyt difference between all actions* for example sake. To relieve and give
alms to the poor, is acoumpted, and in deed is a virtue if it proceed from
the love of God and man: but if it proceed of a desire to purchase praise, and
commendation of the world, it is sin and hipochrysie.

We do not reject in the mean time their Polyticall virtues in humayne How
the virtues of Infydelles are commendable and profitable in humane society.
society: but commend and embrace them so far forth, as they swerve not from
right, reason and Judgment of the mind: and especially from the ten
commandments. But we admonysh therewithal, that Chrystians ought to have a
far other respect then the Ethnikes had. For they avoided vice, and followed
virtue, through desire of praise, honor, and glory, or through desire of
dygnity and aucthoryty, or for common concord and quietness: or else through
reverence of men, and fear of the laws, or some such like matter. Whereas
the Christians dyrect all their doing, to the glory of God, and What Christians
ought to respect in their actions.
profit of their neighbors. They weigh more the fear of God, then worldly
glory: the love of Justice, then deceytful praise: and eternal bliss, more
then temporal pleasure. The Ethnikes if there were any notable thing in them:
vaunted as of their own gyfts: but the Chrystians acknowledge God to be the
geuer and aucthour of all good gifts. The virtue of humilitye, then which
Christ so earnestly requires of us, was wanting in the Infydelles.

The same that has been said generallye Of the works of Jews, Saracens, and
Turks.
of the Ethnikes, may be perticulerly extended to the Jews, and Turks: who
would seem to acknowledge one God only, to detest all Idols, and to excel
in holiness of life: yet because they worship not God as he has reveled and
appointed in his word, neither believe that Christ is the son of the living
God: al their works, must needs be foul, in Gods sight. For without that, there
is no true virtue, no knowledge of God, nor synceere worshipping of God: no
pure love toward God, nor toward our neighbor. They feign unto them selves a
God, or rather an Idol, who is not the Father of our medyatour, and redeemer
Jesus Christ. Therefore they worship not God a right, (for, He that knows
not the Ioh.
Son, honoreth not the Father) nor yet calls upon his name. And because the
holy ghost is given for the Sons sake unto believers, to stir up new
motions in their hearts: it is evident how far from all goodness, Jews,
and Turks are: whiles they despise the son of God: who only sends the
holy ghost unto men, to breed in them all perfyte goodness: Moreover, for
that the true love of God (from whence all love toward our neighbor is
deryued) ryseth in us upon that aboundaunt mercy, which he has showed, in
giving his only son Christ, to be crucyfied for our sins: whom the Jews
and Turks contempne, and blaspheme: it can not be that they contempning him,
should syncerely love God: or their neighbor for Gods sake.

So then both Jews and Turks, want the chief and principal virtues of
Christians, the true knowledge, and fear of God, faith, Charyty, hope,
invocation of Gods name, gyuing of thanks, obedience in sorrows and myseries,
with others of that sort. And if happily there be any shows or pyctours of
Politic virtues in them, those are so defiled and spotted, with impure
affections, that they loose all their bewty. We see in beasts them selves, some
thing resembling virtue: A similitud
as in the Lions clemency, toward suppliants: in the Dog, faithful toward
his Master: in Sheep, softness and meekness, and yet these are not true
virtues: it is even so almost in the Infidelles, whose reason being void and
destitute of the light of Gods spirit, wandereth in Ignorance and darkness,
and can do no true and sinceere virtue: but happelye now and then some vain
mask and show of virtue: and thus much of the works of Paynyms and Infydels.

Thirdly and lastly, those good works are to be considered, which are done of
Of the works of faithful Christians.
those, who from the bottom of their hearts, embrace true holiness, and
righteousness. And it were requisite if a man would prosecute every thing
exactly, dyligently to consider the signifycation of ye word Works: but
because that matter in Englysh, would rather seem to be vain ostentation,
then serve to edification: I will omit the same for this time: and with some
description, The definicion of good works.
open the meaning or signification of good works. Good works are actions:
which are don of men regenerat, by the aid of Gods spirit, through faith,
according to the rule of Gods word having their respects as chief uses, and
ends to wit: The honor and glory of God, the ornament and honesty of our
lives, and the profit and commodity of our neighbors: I will open every part
of this description largelye: after I have showed how earnestly almighty God
in his word, requires of his servants good works, which are established, and
not reiectted by faith.

First therefore al sinceere and faithful professors of the gospel, ought
most certainly to persuade them selves: that Good works are established, and
not rejected by the doctrine of justification by faith.
they are adopted freely by God, and already justified through Christ by
faith, and regenerate and sanctified by Gods spyrite, that they might in word
and deed express, and somewhat resemble, the nature and disposition of their
heavenly Father: and therewithal declared unto the world by their works,
that they are the sons of God. For that cause I have again, and again
repeted before that a Christian faith ought to be garnished with all kind of
good works. And therefore as the Apostle S. Paul, after that proposition: We
gather therefore that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the
Law, In the way of questioning says: We make the Law therefore in vain
through faith? He answers by and by: God forbid, Naie, we establishe the
Law. Even so I presently affirm, that we do not now a days, dissolve good
works, by ye doctrine of faith: Iustifiynge, but we rather establishe the
same. For without faith there can be no good works: and faith cannot be
unfruitful or idle, in those that are justified.

Moreover, almighty God him self requires of his servants, the good works God
requires good works of his servants.
of a true faith: and grievously accuses, and condemns by the Prophets and
Apostles, those that are neglygent and slothful. Moses says in the Law:
And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require Deuteronomy. 10.
of thee, but that thou should fear thy God, and walk in his ways, and love
him: and serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
keep the commandments of the Lord, and his ceremonies, which I command
thee, that it may be well with thee. What should I speak of that, that the
Law of God is given from heaven, that it may show unto them their infirmity
and offenses, their natural corruption and just condemnation: and so leads us
as it were by the hand, from trust and confidence in our selves, to depend
upon Christ. And yet that is but one scope or use of the Law: which was given
to the end that it might be a rule of man's life, exhybiting a perfyte
dyscipline to those that are justified by faith. So says the Prophet in the
book of Psalms. Blessed is that man, whom thou O Lord instructest Psa. 94.
in thy law. And again: He has given a testimony unto Jacob, and a law
unto Israel: that the posteritye may know and put their trust in God, and
not forget the works of God, but keep his commandments.

The Prophets every where teach a true faith in God, and his son Christ:
and also call for good works, of the true worshyppers of God. Blessed is he
(says Jeremy) that trusts in the Lord, he Iere. 17.
shall be like a tree planted by the waters, which sends his moisture unto
the roots, and he shall not fear when summer comes. And his leaf shall be
green, and he shall not be in danger in the time of drought, neither shall he
cease to bring forth fruicte. Which word he translated no doubt out of the
first Psalm. And in Esai the Prophet, Esa. 5.
mention is made of a Vineyarde, that was planted to bring forth fruicte. And
Luke 3. Math. 3. John Baptist.
John Baptist the foreronner of the Lord, appointed dyscipline and order of
life, to those that asked of him what they should do: and amongst other
things he spoke thus to the Pharisees, and Saduces: Ye generation of vipers,
who has taught you to fly from the vengeance to come? bring forth the
fruits of repentance. And Zachary his father, song and said before: That
we being Luke 1.
without fear, and delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve
him: in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our life.

Our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, in that his Sermon made unto his
Disciples, in the Mountain: exhorts them, Math. 5. 6. 7.
and in them all, the faithful to good works: but especially in the end,
concluding with these words: Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord,
shall enter Christ.
into the kingdom of heaven: but he that does the will of my Father, who is
in heaven. And immediately after, he subioyneth two Parables, of one that buylt
his house upon a fyrme Rock: and of him that laid his foundation upon the
sand. The hearers and doers of the word of God, are like unto them: the
hearers only resembled unto the others: And when a woman cried out saying:
Blessed is the Luke 11.
womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck. Our savior
answered: But blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it: And
even the like answer he gave unto the Jews, bosting that they were Abraham's
sons. If ye Ioh. 8.
were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham: you are of your
father the Devil, and fulfill the desires of your father. And again: I am the
Ioh. 15.
true vine, and my Father is the husbandman: he cutteth off every branch,
that does not bring forth fruit in me: and every one that brings forth
fruit, he purges, that he may bring forth fruit more plentifully.

In like manner the holy Apostles, The Apostles call for good works.
commending the doctrine of their Master to all Nations, do most earnestlye
call for good works. As obedient children, not fashioning your selves, unto
the former lusts of your ignorance. But as he which called you is holy, even
so be ye holy also, in all manner of conversation. And if so be that ye
call 1. Pet. 1.
on the Father, which without respect of person, judges according to
every man's work, see that ye pass the time of your dwelling here in his
fear. For as much as you know how that you were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation, which ye received by
the tradition of your Fathers. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
Lamb undefiled, and without spot. And in his latter Epistle, after the
rehearsal of certain virtues, he adds: 2. Pet. 1.
For if these things be among you, and be plenteous, they will make you, that
ye neither shall be idle, nor vnfruictefull, in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. But he that lacks these things, is blind, and can not see far
of, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. Wherefore
brethren give the more diligence, for to make your calling and election sure,
for if ye do such things, ye shall never fall.

Saint Paul in like manner writing to the Thessalonians says: We 1. These.
4.
beseech you brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that ye increase
more and more, as ye have received of us, how you ought to walk and please
God. For you know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. For this
is the will of God your holiness, that ye should abstain from fornication.
That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in holiness
and honor, etc. And in his Epistle to Timothy. 2. Tim. ^.
This sure foundation of God endures, having this sign, the Lord knows who
are his: and let every man that calls upon the name of the Lord, depart
from iniquity. If a man therefore purge him self from these things, he
shall be a vessel sanctified to honor, applied to the use of the Lord, and
prepared to all good works. But speaking of the hyppocrits, he says thus:
They profess Tit. 1.
that they know God, but in their deeds they deny him, being abominable and
disobedient, and reprobate to al good works. The blessed Apostle and
Euangelyste, says thus: If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in
darkness, we 1. Ioh. 1.
lie, and do not the truth. And if we walk in the light, as he is in the
light, we have mutual fellowship with him. And S. James: Be you doers of the
word, and not hearers only, deceyuing your selves. For if a man hear the
word, and Iam. 1.
express not the same in his deeds: he is like a man that beholds his face
in a glass. For beholding him self, he goes his way and forgets his
similitude. Judas also the brother of James, and Apostle Iud. 1.
of Christ, is very angry with those that abuse the grace of our God to
wa^tonnes, and says: That such have already, manifestly denied God, and his
son Christ.

This doctrine of good works. I have specifyed, and collected out of the holy
Prophets and Apostles: Least some might report of us, that we are very copious
in the doctrine of Justification by faith. But bare and barren in the other
part of Christian doctrine concerning good works: and principally least
Sicophantes might cauell that we are despysers, and enemies to good works. The
Apostles of Christ the Lord: and namely S. Paul the doctor of the Gentyles,
and vessel of election, have notablye set out Gods grace. And very often
inculcate, that men are justified before God by faith, and not by the law, by
grace, and not by works: and yet notwithstanding, they urge most ernestly ye
works of faith. Ye were sometime darkness, but now are you light in the Lord:
walk as children of light: For the fruit of the spirit is in all goodness,
righteousness and truth, approving that which is acceptable unto the Lord. And
have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather rebuke
the^.

And as the preaching of Gods grace, is now a days objected unto us, as a
reproach: The preaching of grace reprochful to the wicked. Romans 3. 5.
even so was it in the time of Paul the Apostle, when many objected and said:
that the Apostles taught men to do evil, ye good might come thereof. There were
moreover, Hippocrits, and false gospellers, who abused ye preaching of grace,
faith, and Christian lyberty, to satisfy their carnal lusts: and yet the
Apostles continued most consta^tly, and earnestly, in teaching that doctrine:
neither did they inhybite the doctrine of iustifycation, because ye some men
had no regard of good works. But they sharply rebuked such, and admonished
the faithful to beware of such perverse liberty. In consideration whereof S.
Peter is thought to have uttered these words. And suppose that the long
suffering of the Lord is salvation, even as our dearly beloved brother Paul
also, according unto the wisdom given unto 2. Pet. 3.
him, has written unto you: speaking of such things, amongst which are many
Peter's judgment touching Paul's Epistles.
things hard to understand, which they that are unlearned and unstable,
pervert, as they do also the other scriptures unto their own destruction. Ye
therefore beloved, seeing ye be warned aforehand, beware least ye also being
led away, with the error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness:
And the same Apostle in another place. For so it is the 1. Pet. 2.
will of God, that with well doing ye may stop the ignorance of foolish
men. As free, and not as having the liberty, for a cloak of naughtiness, but
even as the servants of God.

Hereunto agrees the saying of Saint Paul. Brethren, ye have been called into
Gal. 5.
liberty, only let not liberty be an occasion unto the flesh, but by love
serve one another. And almost the like was uttered before of our Savior
Christ: Against the abuse of Christian liberty.
Verelie, verelie, I say unto you: that whosoever commits sin, is the
servant of sin. And the servant abides not in the house for ever: but the
son abides for ever. If the son therefore Ioh. 8.
shall make you free, then shall you be free in deed. Wherefore Chrystians
who are made free in true Christian True Christian liberty.
liberty, are delivered from the Devil, sin, and condemnation, that sin
may not rule in their mortal bodies, (albeit the dregs and remnaunts of
natural corruption remain in them) neither are they subject to the sentence
of eternal death, albeit they deny corporally, and to be short that they may
not serve sin and Dyuell, but Grace and Christ.

And having spoken thus much of the necessity of good works. It consequently
follows, that I returning to the definition of good works, should show
what works are allowed or disalowed in Christ's Church. And first The origin
of good works.
we do not deryue the same out of the decr^es of men: but acknowledge God to be
the fountain and aucthour of the same. For all men by nature are liars corrupt
and sinful, and how can that which is evil bring forth good, therefore from
God only who alone is good, all good works do spring. The blessed Apostle
Saint James says. Every good Iam. 1.
gift and any persyt gift, is from above descending from the Father of lights.
Saint Peter also writes to the same 1. Pet. 5.
end. The God of all grace who has called you to his eternal glory through
Jesus Christ, strengh then and confirm you. And Saint Paul. It is God that
works in you both the will and the Phili. 2.
deed. Our Lord and savior Jesus Christ says. He that abides in me, and I
in him the same shall bring forth Io. 15.
much fruit: And in another place. He that does truth comes unto the light:
that his works may be manifest, that Ioh. 3.
they are done by God. The Prophet Esaye, also inspyred with Christ's Esa. 26.
spyrite, says: Lord thou shall give us peace, for thou have wrought all our
Good works are of God, and yet in some respect they are ca^^ed our own works.
works.

Now although we hold that good works proceed from God, as the fountain and
origyn: yet he does not these things without us, but rather works by us,
and in us, so that the works of God done by us, are also our own works. For
GOD does regenerate his elect and choosen servants with his spirit, and
gives them faith. Then they being so regenerate, like Gods obedyent children,
do yield and apply them selves, to please him with a holy life and
conversation. And How good works are wrought.
the holy spirit which is in them is effectual, styrring up their power and
will to all good works in all parts and course of their life. Faith also
whereby men's hearts are purified, is not idle and sluggyshe, but does her part:
and is a vigelent and diligent keepers of integrity of mind, and virtuous
conversation throughout all their life. And does as it were put them in mind,
that they being once purifyed, in the blood of Christ, through the holy ghost:
should keep them selves unspotted in the filthy world from all pollution of
the flesh: never to abuse the gyfts of the body but to preserve the same as a
vessel of honor* The regenerate therefore watch and work righteousness, neither
do they make a small accoumpte of sin, as wicked wordlyngs do: for they
right well and deeply consider, that God who sent his son into this world to
be a propiciation for sin, and gave him to death, even the death of the
Cross: does both hate sin as a thing abominable, and also love Justice and
purity of life. And for that cause they also hate sin. and love
righteousness, detest impiety, and embrace pyty, and so study to practyse the
same all the days of their life.

But in this labor and endeavor of the children of God, there are many
Impedymentes of good works.
lets and hindrances: and holy men are afflicted, as it were with a grievous
and daily battle which is never ended before the day of death for that deadly
A continual battle.
and crafty envy of ours, Satan the Devil rusheth upon us with great
vehemence, and vndermyneth us with a thousand temptations. And he is assysted
with many mighty confederats. For our own flesh is slow and dull to all
goodness: and prone to all viciousness. The flattering and disceytfull world
also urges us mightily, with company pleasures, honors, which are most vain.
There are also many wordlings, who with their pernicious examples, do carry the
simple sort into destruction. What should I say of fear and hope, which do
exceeding exercise and afflyct the mynds of the regenerate: in such sort, that
unless Gods spirit did every hour assyst them, and confirm their faith, they
could do no good work at all. Against these and all other temptations, that
disciple so dearly God aydeth us every moment.
beloved of Christ, do comfort us saying, This is the love of God that we
should keep his precepts, and his commandments are not heavy. For every 1.
John. 5.
one that is borne of God overcomes the world. And this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even your faith. Who is he that overcomes the world,
but he that believes that Jesus is the son of God? And S. Paul: If his
spirit that raised up Jesus Chirste from the dead, dwell in you: He that raised
Romans 8.
up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by the power
of his spirit dwelling in you. By the which word all faithful men may
easily gather, the carke and care with Gods spirit dwelling in the hearts of the
faithful, takes that Justice may overcome and Injustice be vanquyshed. And
Christ our savior promyseth that he will power his spirit most plentyfully
upon us: and does also command us, to ask the same of him with ardent and
continual prayers. The faithful therefore, and such as are regenerate, by
Gods spirit, continue in prayers without intermyssion. They keep their bodies
in subjection, with moderate fasting and abstinency, that their prayer may be
more zealouse. For prayer and fasting, are as it wear preparatyues to good
works.

Now as these impedimentes above specefyed, do hinder men from doing of Helps
and furtherantes to do good works.
good works: even so there are many things which further, and help us toward
the practyse of the same: amongst the which is especially Gods spirit, then a
true and perfyt faith, and afterward continual and earnest prayers. Whereunto
we may add, the sinceere doctrine of all fymes, and ages, as well under the
old, as new testament. And moreover the innumerable examples of the servant
of God, and of Christ, the Lord and savior of the whole world, who amongst
other things says: I have given an example unto you, that as I have John. 13.
done so should you do. Besides these things the very filthiness of vices
terrefying us from sin: and the praise and fair beautye of virtue, inuiting
us to the studdy of pyty. The wrath of God also and the severity of his
Judgments: the fearful threats of pain and torments as well temporal as
eternal, will pluck us from vices. On the other side the favor of God, the
merciful countenance of that eternal Judge, his bountiful promyses and hope
of blessings, as well temporal, as eternal will encorrage us to pursue, and
practyse virtue. For the faithful will not be ingrat for Gods innumerable
benefits: neither will they offend their brethren with their filthy lives, for
whom ye lord Jesus suffered such gre^ous pains and torments. These, and such
other like consideratious, do both stay men from vice, and further them to
virtue.

But the godly use, a choice, and discretion What manner of works the godly
do.
in doing works (as I have once or twyse already spoken) accoumpting of those
only that are appointed by God: Wherein that elect vessel S. Paul gives us a
good lesson, writing to the Ephesians. We are created in Jesus Christ to do
those works, which he has prepared Ephe. 2.
for us to walk in. First he affyrmeth notably, and with great weight of
words, that we were created in Christ Jesus to do good works. We answer not
then our end if we rotte, and putryfie evil and fylthie sin, and return
not to God by true faith, and hearty repentance. And confess we draw our
lyuelye moisture from him, w^e can John. 15.
never bring forth any good fruit: for so Christ him self bears witness.
The Apostle therefore speaks with great weight and effycacie, in that he
says: that we were created in Christ Jesus to do good works. Then lest we
should be ignorant what good works the Apostle would have, he adds: Which
he has prepared us to walk in. What be those which he has prepared for us to
walk in: but those which he has revealed unto us in the holy law: of his
commandments. And therefore our savior Christ demanded in the gospel by
a certain man: What shall I do to possess eternal life: and what is the
greatest commandment in the Law: He aunswering, sent him unto the law:
whereof this is the sum. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is Math. 12. Luke 10.
the first and great commandment. The second is like unto this: thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self: for in these two commandments consist the
whole law, and the Prophets. The ten commandementes are an absolute rule of
good works.


I repeated once or twyse before, that the ten commandments, are the most
certain, and most absolute platform of good works. Which thing that it may
more euydently appear, I will by a brief enumeration (as it were in a table)
noate and point out the same. Unto the first commandment, we love, and
assured hope in aduersitye together with patience and constancy. The second
commandment contains the love of chastity, and sobriety. We may refer
unto the eyghth, justice in Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Math.
12.
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength: and thy neighbor as
thy self. And whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, even so do you
unto them.

Wherein this is principally to be observed, The law requires internel
obedience.
that the dyuine law, the sum or effect whereof is the love of God, and our
neighbor: does not require of those that be justified, only external works
and dyscipline: but also the interior and spyrituall motions of the heart,
consonant to the holy will of almighty God, as our savior Christ him self
bears witness, saying: You shall be perfect, even Math. 5.
as your heavenly father is perfect. For praue and corrupt affections, and
cogytations of the inner man, are rebuked and infourmed by the law of God. And
The ten commandments are a rule of life, and as it were a lodesma^ to all
sexes ^ degrees.
therewithal external dyscipline is planted: in so much that by the rule of
the ten commandments, all men, and all orders, and vocations of men: are
informed and instructed in their duty, in all times, and places. All estates,
sexes, and ages, as Princes, Prelates, Husbands, Wives, Masters, servants,
fathers, children, men, women, bond, and free, are dyrected and guyded, by the
law of the ten commandments.

The last part of the description of The ends of good works.
good works remains touching their end. For I said that all the good works
of the regenerate, ought to respect the glory of God, the ornament of our
lives, and the commodity of our even Christian. The faithful do not good
works, to be justified thereby, or to obtain remyssion of their sins, or to
procure unto them selves and others eternal life, they do them not to be
seen of men. But rather that God might be gloryfied amongst men: that they
might show their obedience in walking worthy of their vocation, to the comfort
and profit of their brethren. The Lord and savior Christ says thus in the
gospel: Let Math. 5.
your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good works, may
glorify your Father who is in heaven. He speaks God is gloryfied by our good
works.
signifycantly: That they may see your good works, and glorify your heavenly
father? not that they may worship and gloryfie you. For touching those that
do their works, that they may be seen of men: our savior speaks in the
same gospel. Take heed that you do not your alms before men, Math. 6.
that you may be seen of them. For if you do so, you have no reward with
your heavenly father. In the which he teaches us excellently: that to do
good works in secreete, is to do them with a mind void of vaineglory,
seeking only to please God. And as God is gloryfied in good works: so is he
dishonored with evil works, as Saint Paul alleges out of the Prophet: The
name of God is evil spoken of through you amongst Romans 2.
the Gentyles.

Moreover, the godly are always thankful to God for his benefyts: which thing
is plainly declared in that worthy example of the Samaritane^ who as soon Luke
17. In doing good works, we are grateful to God.
as he saw that he had recovered health: returned immedyatly, and falling down
at the Lords feet, with a loud voice gloryfyed God. Which thing all those
also do, that are purged with Christ's blood, and show them selves grateful
in word and deed, to so bountyfull a Lord and savior. And Christ him self
declares how odyous, ungrateful men are unto him, in that speech of his
unto the Samaritane: Were there not ten cleansed? and where be those nine?
There are none found, that returned to glorifye GOD, but only this
stranger. And Saint Paul: Do you not know, that to whom Romans 6.
you give your selves servants to obey, his servants you are, whom you
obey, either of sin to death, or of obedience to Justice? The faithful,
therefore being now made the servants of Jesus Christ, apply them selves
to obedyence, do righteousness: depart from iniquitye, and Satan, from
whose tyranny they are delivered, by the obedience of Christ.

Besides these things, the godly Good works confyrme our faith in us, and
assure us of our election:
do good works, to confyrme their faith, and to assure and certyfye their
consciences, of their Election. ^ndeuour my brethren (says Sayncte Peter) to
make your vocation, and election certain. And Saint Paul 2. Pet. 1.
counsayleth his scholar Tymothie, to 2. Tim. 1.
styre up, and as it were to kyndle the gift of GOD in him: for as fire
increases, and burns whotter by the adding of woodde: even so An apt
symilytude.
is pyttye and faith, augmented, and confyrmed, by the exercise of good
works. GOD has not called us unto uncleanness, but to holiness: neither into
darkness, but out of darkness into the holy light, whereunto those words of
the Apostle seem to serve. We cease not to pray for you, Colos. 1.
that you would walk worthy of the Lord, that you may please him, in all
things, fructifying in all good works, increasing in the knowledge of GOD,
confirmed with all strength, according to the power of his glory, to all
suffering, and patience with hope. And in another place: Ye were once
darkness, Ephe. 5.
but now are you light in the Lord: walk as children of the light: for the
fruit of the spirit consists in all goodness, justice, and truth, allowing
that which is acceptable to God: and have you no fellowshippe with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather rebuke them. Therefore as the
Apostle commands the faithful to walk worthy of their vocation, and
shows them also how they may do the same: even so the godly always do
those things, which they are commanded, and dyrect their works to this end,
that they may declare them selves to be the children of the light. The
children of God also Good works serve for the profyt of our neighbor. Phil. 2.
in their works labor to profitte all men, and to hurt none. Let no man
(says the Apostle) seek those things that be his own, but that which is
another: as I in all things please all men, not seeking my own gain, but
the profitte of many, that they may be saved.

And these works of Godly men, do exceedinglye please the Lord our God: but
not of their own dygnitie and worthynesse, if ye weygh them in respect of men,
or in them selves: but because they are done of those that are reconcyled to
God in Christ, by faith and new obedyence. And if now and then through the
corruption of our nature, we fall For what cause good works please God
into sin and wickedness, whereby we steyne and pollute the good works: yet
God, such is his goodness, wynketh (as it were) at such escapes, covering our
fylthinesse, and spots, with the garment of his Christ, he washes and
cleanses the same with his most precious blood? whereof the Apostle speaks
thus. There Romans 8.
is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
flesh, but after the spirit: and who shall lay any thing against the electes
charge? It is God that iustifyeth, who is he that will condemn. etc.

And that these good works of Christians are acceptable to God, and please God
rewards the works of faithful men.
him: it appears by that, that God rewards, and crowns the same with
great honors and rewards, both in this life, and in the life to come. Observe
and hear (says the Lord) all those things Deu. 12.
which I command thee, that it may be well with thee and thy children after
thee, when thou shall do that thing which is good, and acceptable in the sight
of the Lord thy God. The Prophet also speaking beforehand of the Christians. I
will Esa. 56.
bring them (says he) into my holy mountain, and I will cheer them in the
house of prayer, their offeringes and oblations shall please me upon my
altar. Whereunto the Apostle no doubt had respect, saying: I beseech you
brethren, by the mercifulnes of God, that you would offer Romans 12.
your bodies, a quick, holy, and acceptable sacrifice to God, which is your
reasonable serving of God. And the promise made by God unto Abraham, in all the
faithful in him is most comfortable, in yt Genesis 15.
he says: He will be their defense and plentiful reward. And the Apostle says:
That godlynes has promise, both in this life, 1. Tim. 4.
and in the life to come. And again: The just judgment of God shall be
declared, which will reward every man according to his deeds. To them which
by continewing in well doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortalytie.
But unto them that are contritious, and Romans ^.
do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, shall come indignation,
and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that does evil.
Wherefore, we see it most euydent, that GOD has prepared most plentyfull,
and lyberall rewards, as well in this life, as in the life to come, to all
those that hate sin, and work righteousness: and the Apostle approoueth
Gods Justice by the same, whiles that he says: God is not Heb. 10.
unjust, that he will forgette your work.

These and many other such places of scripture do sufficiently declare that God
rewards the good works of godly men. And yet it is not to be inferred or
collected that they may trust to be justified In what respect God rewards
his servants.
and saved thereby: For the godly do freely and willingly confess: that their
works are rewarded of grace, and not of their own meryt: especially for that
they ever do feel and perceive, that through humayne infyrmitye, their
works are never so perfyt, but that they have need of Gods mercy, to mytigate
the rigor of his Justice, and examining their good works. Therefore in
consyderation of their hyre, or reward, the godly ertoll Gods grace and mercy:
who gives to the vndeseruinges, as though they had deserved: and perceiving
imbecillytye and wickedness in them selves, are humbled in minds and cry
with the Prophet: If thou O Lord mark our iniquities whoo is able to abide it.
Almightye Gods doing in An apt similytude.
this, and many other matters, may be resembled to carnal parents: who
having sons, to be their heirs by law of nature and byrthright? yet they
inflame and kyndle dertue, setting before their eyes gyfts and rewards. Whose
gracious and virtuous children, acknowledge themselves to owe al even of duty
to their Parents without rewards, and therefore they refer all such benefyts
and rewards to the mere bounty and lyberalytye of their Parents. They look
not for hyre and rewards, as servant and hirelings, but only for the favor
and love of their heavenly father. And as the sons of the free woman, and not
the sons of the bondwoman, are heirs, even so the kingdom of God is not the
stipend of servants, but the reward and heritage of children.

To conclude this matter of meryt The sum or effect of the premysses.
and reward, the merciful and gracious Lord rewards his loving children for
their good works, not for the perfection and dignity of the said works, but
because the doers of those good works, are sons and children. They are made
sons and heirs by adoption in Christ, and therefore their works are
acceptable to God, not in respect of them selves, but for Christ's sake, in
whom they are ingraffed, and of whose moisture (as it were of heavenly dew)
they are partakers, so that all their rewards, are of necessity referred to the
grace and mercy of God. And although we grant renumeration, and reward of
good works: yet meryts or Deserts cannot be inferred thereof, that by our
works we are able to procure eternal life. For the scripture seems of
purpose in all places, to avoid the word merit. The stypend of sin is death,
but eternal life Romans 6.
is the gift of God: through Jesus Christ: and therefore Saint Augustine, wryt
August. in psalm. 31. et in psalm. 88.
very excellently. VVilt thou fall from grace, then boast thy own merits: And
again. When a man sees that all his goodness comes not of him self, but
of God: he easily acknowledges all that which is prayseworthy in him, not to
be of his own merits, but of the mercy of God.

Neither yet is the earnest and ardent Good works not hyndered but furthered by
this doctrine.
desire of working righteousness extinguyshed, and quenched by this doctrine
as our adversaries slanderously lay unto our charge. For as we deny man's merit;
so do we teach Gods reward which we refer to his grace and mercy. We add
also ye Gods holy spirit, dwelling in the faithful, works effectually in
their hearts, that they bring forth good fruits. For God has given unto his
servants, not the spirit of fear, but of power, love, and sobriety. So that
the godly being endued with holy moderation, and humilyty, are afraid to
ascrybe that to their own merits, which of right belongs to the grace of
God, and the merits of his son Jesus Christ: hereunto consents the holy
Father Saint Augustine. Let no man say that Ad valentium Epist. 46
grace is given unto him by his merits as heretics falsely affirm. Not
because there is no good merit of the godly, nor evil meryt of the ungodly,
for if it were so, how should God judge the world. But the grace and mercy of
God, conuerteth man, whereof the Psalm speaks. The Psalm. 78.
mercy of my God shall prevent me. Which thing seeing it is most evident, let
no man leave the only and perfect foundation which is Christ, through whom we
are justified by faith, and not by works: and yet we being settled upon this
foundation, as lyuelye stones: ought likewise buylders, to lay upon the same
in right and decent order, true and perfytte good works.

It appears by that which has been Great difference between the faithful
and unfaithful.
spoken before, what great dyfference there is between the virtues of
Chrystians, and Infydelles. Surely, so great as there is between a beast, and
a child: between a wise man and a fool: or between a blind man, and one
that sees well. For unto Christians is the secreete will of God revealed, and
that mystery, which as the Apostle says, was hyd many ages. Unto Chrystians
God the father of glory has by his spirit in his word revealed wisdom,
and the knowledge of him self. To conclude, Christians are translated out of
the power of darkness, into the kingdom of his dearly beloved son, by
whom we have redemption through his blood, and remyssion of sins: In whom
it has pleased the heavenly father to dwell with all fullness, and by him to
reconcyle all things toward him self, and all things pacifyed through the
blood of his cross, whether they be in heaven or in earth.

Seeing then the excellent dignity of Christian men is such: let them also
think that their life, and conversation, ought to be most excellent, and to
pass all other Nations or professions. For Paynimes and all faythlesse people,
do lead a life, without any faith or hope, they know nothing of eternal
life. And although amongst many of them some do hold the immortality of the
soul: yet their arguments depend of natural reason, and have not force and
effect to persuade weak mynds. Neither touching matters of this life do they
proceed any further then the bare letter of the second table of Gods
commandments, and so much as apperteyneth to the shaddowe of honesty, in
external manners and actions. They being overcome with the lusts of the
flesh, and drawn into vices, know not the occasion of the same, much less
the mean to amend the same: nay, they often freely confess, that they are
violently drawn with their fylthy appetytes, they see better things, and
allow of them, but they choose and embrace the worst: they desire those things
that are forbidden them, they pursue such things as fleet away, and refuse
those things that are offered unto them. Such is the corrupt nature of all men,
that live without the direction of Gods spirit, and the light of the gospel.

But the Christians believing in the The excellent knowledge of Christians.
son of God and walking in the clear light of his gospel: do know that they
are redeemed not with any corruptyble things, as silver and gold, but with
such a matter, whose life has no end, doubtless even with the blood of Jesus
Christ. And An apt simylytude.
for as much as he being both God, and man, lives for ever, and therefore
became man to redeem us, and couple us unto him self, we do know that w^e
shall live in him throughout al eternytes: and in this faith we look for
eternal life when as God shall be all in all. And in this life we resist carnal
concupisenses* and suffer not sin to bear rule in our mortal body. We
resyste not the holy ghost, we serve not the flesh but that serves us. Yea
and although sometime this carnal nature of ours will show it self, yet we
accoumpt it a thing unworthy to follow the bent thereof: and being the
children of God, are led with Gods spirit only.

Let us for example sake vewe these great courtyers, and noble men placed in
dignytye and aucthorytye: who A similytude.
puffed up with ambition and hautinesse of mind, through a vain con eyte of
their office and countenance: contempne the acquayntaunce and famylyarytye of
poor simple men, or use them only to serve their turn and gain. Some
other are become so doltyshe and arrogaunte, that they will not vouchsaufe a
beck, or nodde, to those that with both legs, most humblye salute them.
They are grown into all madness, and follye: blinded with their high office,
and calling, which is a thing mere vain: for it is not their own, but
another: not in them, but without them, as all other the goods of Fortune are.

Which thing if such men do in their fleeting and miserable estimation of this
fyckle world: Why do not Christians a great deal more, call to mind their
dignity, and estymation, who are already redeemed with the pure, and precious
blood of Christ ye son of God? Surely it is our parts once to begin, to have
consideration of our worthy office and calling. We are the sons of God, why
do we therefore give the raynes, to sin and wickedness: for as a certain
writer finely says. I may not accoumpt my self vile, in whom God was so
greatly Hugo.
delyghted, that he chose death, rather then he would loose me. We are now
the sons of God, endewed with the Man is most precious in Gods sight.
Justice of God: and washed from our sins by the blood of his son. Let us
then resist wicked and impure affections: and let us think them to be, too
vile for us to obey: to the which end those words of the Apostle do serve:
Have no care for your flesh, to satissye Romans 13.
the lusts of it. Be you says he, Masters, and let the flesh be your
servants: for the servant of the flesh wandreth in darkness. But the night
is passed, and the day shyneth upon us Christians: let us cast away the
works of darkness, and put upon us the armor of light: let us walk
honestly, as in the day time: let us give continual thanks, to our mercyful and
loving Father: who has promoted and called us, into the most noble and divine
fellowship of his son Christ. Let us have a careful care Romans 13.
that we never commytte any thing unworthy so excellent a calling: and with a
kind of holy and heavenly contempt, despise this wicked world, with the
Prince thereof. Let us keep our selves unspotted of the same, and suffer not
our selves to be taken, with glyttering and vain shows of worldly things.
For it is the will of God, that we should couette, and aspyre after high and
heavenly things, and contemn and tread underfoot, all mundane and earthlye
things.

Hitherto I have spoken of the necessity of good works: and for what cause
The su^me.
Christians ought to do the same: of the dyfference between the works of the
faithful, and unfaithful: and last of all, of the dignity of Christian
men's works, passing, and much excelling the actions of all other Nations,
and professions. Now it rests that I descend partycularlie, to the works of
those three callinges, and conditions: in one of the which all good men ought
to settle them selves: being the scope and end, whereunto all young men's
studies and labors ought to be dyrected and referred. I mean the state
Ecclesiastical, Political, and Oeconomicall: For touching the works
comprehended in the commandments of the first table, properlye respecting our
duty toward God, out of the which these other issew and flow: I shall
peradventure speak more in their proper place: now my bente and purpose is,
to deal with those virtues, which are branches of the second table, and
incur, and as it were, she we them selves, in the eyes of the world, in every
estate and vocation.

And because in what state or vocation soever men live: they have either to do
Man ought to have great care of him self, whether he be alone, or with company.
publicly with others, or meditate, and study privately with themselves: I
think it very needful, to admonish them of their duty, as well when they
are at home, and in their closet, as when they be abroad in company, and
confer with others, of the which two things whether men ought to have greater
care, because of the peryls and temptations, which in every time and place, do
assault and molest them, it seems very hard to judge and pronounce.

There has been some I know, that Company of the vulgar dangerous.
thought it a great furtheraunce to virtue, if a man would sequester himself
from the world, and as much as it is possible to avoid company: one of the
Philosophers, whose name comes not now to my remembrance, used this kind of
speech. I never was more unlike a man, then when I came from the multitude of
men. Seneca writing to his friend Lucilius, counsayleth him after this
manner. Thou do demand my opinion, what I think most convenient for thee
to avoid? I would have thee Seneca Epist. 7. ad lucilium. lib. 1.
come seldom, or never amongst the vulgar, for their conversation is hurtful
unto man: thou shall come from them either more covetous, cruel, or
discourteous. Thou must needs either follow them, or hate them. The company and
example of men, doubtless does both offend honest natures, and unless they
be very well stayed, spotteth and corrupts them: that we may iustlye
accoumpt the Troop and multitude of men, to be that broad and wide gate,
which leads into eternal destruction.

Again, man being alone, is subject to many grievous temptations and
pearylles. Crates the Philosopher, when Seneca Epist. 10. lib. 1. Man is in
great perryll, being solytaric, and alone.
he saw a young man walking alone, asked of him what he did alone. I talk with
my self, quod the young man: Yea said Crates, but beware then that thou talk
not with an ill man. We are wont to watch and keep men, either dystract or
grievously sick, least they then hurt, or mischief them selves: how much more
ought we to have an eye to our selves when we are alone grievously taken and
infected with original sin. And it is out of all controuersye, that mo
sins both in weight, and number, are committed by them that live solitarily,
then by those that frequent the socyety of men. Eve being alone was tempted and
vanquyshed by the serpent: murders, robberies, and thefts are divised in
solytarinesse. David in his Chamber alone, is carried to commyt great
wickedness. The Devil tempted Christ in solytarynesse.

God created man to socyety, and not to Man created of God to society, not to
solytarynes.
solytarinesse. They were created two, male and female, of whose marriage God
has buylt, and deryued his Church: and our savior Christ promises that he
will be present with two or three gathered together in his name: and even so
wear Sacraments ordained in the Church for the society of men. But I break
of this comparyson between solytarynesse and society: for it appears by
these few words, that neither of them are without grievous temptations, and
dangers: and therefore both of them to have great need of instruction and
consolation. I will therefore speak first of man's duty being alone in his
study and bedchamber, as he is sequestered from all fellowship, and company of
men.

And because man consists of soul and body I will say somewhat br^efely of
both those parts. The mind of man is to be garnished, and informed, with the
science The duty of man's mind.
and knowledge of many excellent matters: but especially with those which are
availeble, to a blessed life, to correct and frame manners to true religion and
sinceere worshipping of God: for unto this end ought we to refer al our
studies and endeavors. And without these things, no man can rightly have the
name of a Christian, nor enjoy assured hope of eternal salvation, nor yet a
quiet and peaceable conscience. Let our minds differ very much from the
purposes and intents of the Infydells: who neither seek nor do these things
perfectly or synceerely, not led with the love and fear of God: but are
kindled to virtue either with desire of vain glory, or are stayde from vice
for fear of punishment: and respect nothing less then the glory of God the
profit of their brethren, or the saluat^on of their owen souls. But we that
profess Christ ought most ardently to embrace virtues, inflamed with an
earnest desire to enlarge and set out Gods glory: neither ought we to respect
external dyscipline only: but to do well with a syngle eye, in the sight of
the living God, and to be frutful in good works before men, having always the
assystance of Gods spirit, to lighten our Reason, and to Reason. Will.
guide our will. So it shall come to pass, that faith shining and burning like
a bright lamp before our actions: we shall not be puffed up with a vain
conceit and opinion of our selves, but shall acknowledge our own corruption and
behave our selves humbly before God and man: daily desiring mercy and remission
of sins, and reposing al our confidence and hope of salvation in the mercy of
God, through his son Christ. The solace and comfort which arises of actions
and virtues thus done in Christian men's breasts, is so great, y^ no tongue, or pen
can counterpaise the same, albeit I have indeuowred before to shadow (as it
were) and give a glemish thereof and thus much I thought good to speak of the
mind, now I will come to man's body also.

Let every man so diet and govern his body, that he may conserve the same safe
and sound, so far as he possiblye may: For we ought to have a care of our
health, to the end that we may be The ordering of the body.
more ready to do our duty in our vocations and callings. It behooves us to
regard that we neither corrupt our bodies with riot, and surfettyng, (for we
ought to eat and drink so much that our power and strength, may be
refreshed and not oppressed,) nor yet that we do not eneruate and weaken the
same, with over much abstynence, and famyne, for in both these, there is sin
and offense. Therefore as in all other things, so in this also Mediocrity, is
a commendable and necessary virtue: Although besides a certain perpetual
sobriety, and temperancye in diet, which we ought to observe: we must sometime
as occasion offers rumpresse, and subdue the wanton lousnesse of our flesh,
with fasting, abstynence, and spare diet: because most commonly Lust is a
co^panyon of Gluttony. The body must be chastened therefore, and brought into
subjection, neither may we lawfully take care for the flesh, to satysfie the
lusts of it.

And as those that impare and decay their health, with riotte and surfeiting,
breeding Wylfull murder committed against our selves.
disseases, and hastening their own end are murderers of them selves: even so
they that weaken and utterly destroy their bodies with immoderate abstynence,
and other austerity of life are in no less fault, whiles they make their
bodies unable to ex^cute any thing, unto whom ye Apostle charge us to give
honor. And therefore wryt unto his scholar Timothy, that he should drink no
more water, but to use a little wine for the weakness of his stomach: albeit
I shal-not need to speak many words in this behalf, for few there are found
now a days, that offend in that part: Every man therefore must guide his
body, with skyll and dyscretion: and beware that he dystroye not that which
God has given unto him, to cheryshe, and conserve. All the order of our diet,
motion, and exercise, to geather with all trymming and dressing of the body,
ought to respect sanity and good health: but without delycacy and nyce pleasure.

As in diet it is a fault, and almost Epycurisme, to seek delycacie with all
our care: so to myslyke cleanlynesse, and to refuse good and pleasant meats,
which both content our nature, and conserve God has given us things not only
for necessitye, but also for lawful pleasure.
the same, is a point of mere follye: whereof Seneca writes very finely. As
(says he) earnestly to desire delycate things, is a point of
lycorishnesse: so to refuse things usual and profitable, is madness.
Philosophy requires frugalytie, and not myserie. He does well verily that
drinks water to keep him self low: and he does as well, that drinks Wine
for the weakness of his stomach. He that eats sallettes and herbs does
well: and he does as well that eats flesh, boiled or roasted. In which sense
Seneca also has written thus: He is a worthy man that so uses earthen Seneca
de pauper^^^^*
vessels, as though they were plate: and he is as worthy that uses plate, as
if it were earthen vessels. That is a weak and infyrme mind, that can not use
well riches. Even so let us think, that to be but a supersticious mind, that
dare not eat delycate meats, especially such as may without great cost, and
labor be obtained. For all things are clean, to those that are clean, and
nothing is to be refused, if it be taken with giving of thanks. For that which
enters in at the mouth, does not defyle a man.

and yet I would not that any man should use my words, as a cloak and
defense to lust, ryotnesse, and prodygal^tie, whereunto now a days, most part
of men, are given without any measure: I mean nothing less, and this world
has no need of pleasant pyllowes, and soft coushins. For now, even many are
most precyse, make no scruple to tumble and wallow in all kind of prodigality,
as in deynty fare, in costly apparel, and sumptuous building: and for the most
part of them they make no conscience in spoiling houses of learning, and
study, and in taking away the patrimony of Christ's church. But touching ye
first part, they answer, How things indifferent be abused.
that meats, apparel, and buildings, are matters mere indifferent, and
defend them with ye cloak of Christian liberty. They are things indifferent,
I confess, Cali. just. lib. 3. cap. 16.
if a man do so use them. But when they are couetted with extreme
greedynesse, showed forth with ostentation, and wasted prodigally: the things
y^ were lawful in their own nature, are now polluted, and abused. The
Apostle makes an apt and evident distinction, between things indyfferent:
All things (says he) are clean, to those that are clean: but to Tit. 1.
those that are spotted and unbelievers, nothing is clean, seeing their mind
and conscience are polluted, and defiled. And why are the rych men cursed, who
Luke 6. Amos. 6. Esa. 5.
have their consolation, who are full, who laugh, who sl^epe in Iuery beds,
who join land to land, whose banquets, are full of harmony and music.
Doubtless, Iuery, gold, meats, and music, are the good gifts of God,
appointed by his providence, for the use and comfort of man, and there is no
sin in their natures. But when God has blessed us with these his good
gifts: if we use them with excess, fylthy pleasure, vain iactation: and
being never satysfied, do still groone and gape after more: we abuse Gods good
gifts, and pollute our bodies and consciences. Let men cut of them, in the use
of these things, immoderate lust, prodigalytie, vanity, and arregancie: and
frame their natures to sobriety, and the use of Gods creatures, shall be both
lawful and holy. And this my counsel I offer as well to the poor husbandman,
as to the Gentleman: for they in their callinges, so far as their habylyty
will stretche, exceed in prodygalytie and ryotte: and if they keep a better
stay herein, then others, it is rather for want of power, then of will. And
that vulgar speech, is commonly veryfyed. Under a frees coat oftentimes
there lurketh a purple mind: and again, under purple and fylk, an humble and
gentle nature. This is the best then, for every man to live according to his
calling and order, either homely, or worshipfully: but therewithal to remember
that all men are fed and sustained of God, not to ryotte, but to live: and to
learn with the Apostle, To be content with Philip. 4
that they have* etc.

Seneca inueygheth very earnestly against Lib. 21. Epist. ^6. Necessity and
pleasure conjoined in Gods creatures.
the abuse of necessary things, his words, in some are these. Nature has
commanded, that we should have a care of our selves, but to be ouercarefull it
is a fault. Nature has mingled pleasure, with things necessary, not that
we should desire them. But that those things without the which we can not
live, might be more welcome unto us. If pleasure come alone, it is lousnesse:
We ought then to withstand the beginning: it is more easy to keep them out at
the first, then afterward to expel them. Yea, but thou wylt say, bear with
me but a little, but this little encrocheth, and when you would, you can not
make an end.

Therefore seeing we know so perfectly our own imbecilytie, let us be quiet,
and stay our selves. Let us commyt our weak mind, neither to wine, women,
delectation, ambition, adulation, neither to any vain pleasure. It is wisdom
to avoid deep and stypperie places: our feet are tycklishe enough upon the
fyrme ground. Thou wylt bappely object, that common voice of the Stoikes. You
promise great things, and you command over hard things. We are men, and can
not thus bridle our selves. We will lament, but a little, we will desire but
a pyttance. We will be angry, but soon pleased. But do thou know why
we can not do these things, we can not, because we think that we can
not. For the troth is otherwise: we defend our faults, because we are
delyghted in doing of them, and we had rather nourishe them, then neglect
them: Ill will is the cause, and we pretend want of power. But to return to
my matter. The godly make no difference of meats in respect of salvation: for
they know right well, that Christianisme, consysteth not therein, but in other
far more wayghtye matters. To conclude, we must drive away hunger and
thyrste, with those meats, and drynkes: and such dyette, and apparel, are to
be used: as the constitution of men's bodies, and conservation of their
health, seems to require: for no certain and exquysytte precepts can be
prescribed in these matters.

And if it come to pass, that we fall into some sycknesse, and dyssease, let
us desire the Physytions counsel and help, whose knowledge Physic
necessary, and Phisions to be esteemed.
and aid: yet we ought so to use that we put our chief confidence in the
heavenly Physician, the living God: least the same betyde us, that came upon
Asa king of Israel, who was stryken with a dyssease in his legs. Whereby he
was 2. Cro. 16.
exceedingly payned and tormented, sought not for help at Gods hand: Men
ought first of al to crave Gods aid and help, and then seek for ye
Physician. For the wise Syrache, commands men to honor Syrach. 38
the Physician, whom God has created for our necessity: he adds that this
art was given by God to men, that he might be praised in his wonders, and they
recover their health. Let us mark those words which follow a little after: My
son (says he) in thy sickness call upon the Lord, and he will heal thee.
Cease from sin, and cleanse thy heart from all offenses: Then send for the
Physician, for the Lord has created him, neither let him depart from thee, at
such time as thou have need of him. I thought good to use thus much speech in
this matter, because of some men, that both think and speak amysse of
Physicians: and in the Phisitio^ impiously contempne God, and in Physic a
singular gift of Gods goodness toward man. For by the Physician, as by a
mynister, God expels disseases, and by Physic as by an instrument, he
conserueth health, and restores the same again being lost.

Great consideration we ought to have then of our duetye toward our selves,
when we are alone. Marcus Cicero, Cicero. li. 3 officiorum.
highly praised Scipio the Africane, for that he was wont to say: That he was
never less idle, then when he had leisure: Great care for our selves being
alone.
nor never less alone, then when he was alone. Which was a worthy speech
(says he) and fytte for such a man. And the Epicure is commended by Seneca,
for Epist. 11. lib. 1.
y^ he willed his scholars always to imagine that they had one at their
elbowe, viewing their doings. Many offenses are avoided (says he) if a
witness stand by us. But Seneca, his counsel in another Epist. 41. lib. 1.
place, is more grave and wholesome: that we should certainly persuade our
selves, that God is always present, his words are these. So I say in deed
Lucili, the holy spirit sytteth within us, as if were a watchman and an
obseruer of our life? and as we behave our selves toward him, even so he
deals with us, surely there is noe good man without God. Which lesson let
every Christian man learn, and think with him self, as ye troth is, that
when he is most alone he has many witnesses and eyes watching and beholding
him: For into Man is never alone.
what seecret place soever, he withdraue him self: he has present with him
the living God, his holy Angel, his own Conscience, from whom it is not
possible with any pollycy to hyde and keep secreete his cogitations and
actions.

When therefore we have shut our closet doors and windows, and drawn God
sees our needs and though^s.
the curtens of our beds, and fall to devise or do any thing: let us first
consider whether it be honest or dishonest: if reason tell us that it is foul
and vile, and yet wanton will, and furious affections forcibly carry us, to do
that which reason diswadeth, the rather because we see no man present to
controwle us: then let us remember that Gods eyes are open, even our doings,
and his presence in all places, and therefore not absent from us. That saying
of Saint Augustine is memorable. God is in him self, as the beginning, and
ending: in the world, as the aucthour and governor: in the Aungelles, as
sweetness, and comeliness: in the Church, as the goodman is in his house: in
the soul, as a brydegrome in his chamber: in just men, as a helper and
desendour: in wicked men, as terror and horror. And Saynct Gregory: God is
absent from no place, and yet he is far of from evil men's cogytations:
for he is not far distaunt where he is most absent: where he is absent in
grace, he is there present in vengeance.

Now if we would be loath to have a man or a little child to come upon us as
we are working wickedness: how much more ought we to stand in aw and
reverence of Gods majesty? do we blush at the eyes of a child, and care we
not for the sight of the living God? especially seeing that he being now a
witness, will one day be our Judge. Let us pause a little, and as it were
reason the matter thus with our selves: Shall A just and ^ profitable
examimynation of our selves.
I make the holy spirit sorrowful, that the wicked spirit may rejoice? Has
Christ therefore redeemed me with his precious blood, that I should wylfully
become Satan's bondslaue? Shall I come to the Lords table with this life? Shall
I thus look for the coming of Christ? Shall death take me in this case? These
and such like considerations, if we use in the myddle of Temptation, we shall
not so forwardly commit sin and wickedness.

Hereunto we may add this worthy A consideration that we are the sons of
God.
consyderation and admonytion, that we are made the sons and heirs of God,
and the fellow heirs of the Lord Jesus. Which dignyty in Gods mercy, if we
remember (as we never ought to forget the same) we shall be moved with a certain
lyberall fear and shamefastness to abstain from vice. Surely he that calls
to mind, that he is the son and heir of God, and the brother and fellow
heir of Jesus Christ, will repress sin, and stay him self from
wickedness, not so much for fear of the last day and torments of hell: as
least he should offend and dysplease so loving, and merciful a father. He
that believes with Saint Paul, that his body is the Temple of the holy
ghost, dwelling in him, will not wylfully wallowe in iniquity. He that believes
that he is a Cyttezen with the Saints: in heaven, will follow the virtues in
the Saints: both in pyety toward God, and charyetye toward his neighbor.

The second wytnes or watchman of man's doings when he is alone, is the A
consideration of the holy Angel always beholding us.
holy Angel, whom God has appointed to be his garder and guyder. And what
care ought we to take, that with our fylthy and abominable life, we do not
alienate, and drive away from us, so faithful a keeper? For the good spirits
are not delighted, with shameful and detestable deeds, as Deuylls are: but
with pureness and holiness of life. The Apostle Saynct Paul writing to 1.
Cor. 11.
the Corinthians, says that a woman ought to be covered in the congregation,
whereby she may acknowledge and testify, that she is subject to her husband:
and he adds because of the Angels, showing that if she be not moved with
the shame and reverence of men, she should yet that she ought to do it, in
respect of the Aungelles preesent and beholding her.

What soever therefore thou have in hand, if thou desire to avoid the light
and to work the deeds of darkness: yet remember I say the clear eyes of the
bright Angel vewing and beholding thee. And let the awe and reverence of him,
stay thy enterprise, restrain thy appetyte, and bridle the unlawful
concupisence. The wales and doors may keep back man that he cannot come
unto thee: but the subtle nature of an Aungel will pearse the strongest and
thickest places. God then is present and his Angel sees thee, O wicked and
dampened man if thou contempne such ouerlookers.

The third witness whereof I made mention before, which regestreth and as it
wear enrowleth all, and every of our thoughts and actions, is the Conscience,
and Chrysostom, and Barnarde names Chrisost. in psalm. 50. Bernard. Plato.
lib. 1. de repub.
her: Is a witness, a Judge, a Tormentor: who if she sleep for a time, yet
she breaks out at the last, especially at the hour of death, and gives a
thousand evidences against men. The Conscience Our Conscience always watches
us.
in usual and common speech, is accoumpted in steed of a thousand
witnesses. Seneca amongst many other golden lessons, writes hereof after this
manner. Thou may then think thy self happy, Seneca. Epi. 43. lib. 5.
when thou can live openly, when thy house covers thee, but does not hyde
thee: for many men make walls, and houses, not so much to live co^modiously, as
to sin covertly. I will speak but one thing, whereby thou may judge of men's
manners, and conditions: Thou shall scarcelye find one man in a country, that
will live with his gates open. A guilty Conscience, rather then arrogance, and
safety built doors and gates. But what avails it to lie secreete, and to
avoid the eyes and ears of men? for a good Conscience calls company,
whereas an evil Conscience is careful and fearful being alone. If our doings
be honest, what matter is it if all men know them, but if they bevnhonest,
what commodity is it, that others are ignorant of that, which tormenteth thy
self: A wretch, and a myser art thou, if thou contempne such a witness.
etc. Many other notable sentences are left unto us, in the works of the
Ethnykes, touching this witness the Conscience: which because I have cyted
plentyfully in my book of the Conscience, I will omyt to collect any more in
to this room. And for that as I have said before, our Conscience seems some
time either to sleep, or to give us a lovely and friendly countenance: much A
similytude.
like a Creditour who upon some considerations now and then bears with his
debtour, and gives him a longer day of Pay, but if his patience be to much
abused, and no day observed and kept, he bringth him to an Outlary: Even so
conscience, looks stern at the last, and calls his debtour to a hard, and
wayghty accoumpt.

The wise and welmeaning debtour, who goes either upon the score, or book,
has oftentimes an eye unto the Conscience resembled to a Credytour.
score: least he be ouerreckoned, and run in the lashe: even so we, if there
be any forecare in us, to depart this world quietlye, and to make an even
reckoning, ought oftentimes to resort unto our credytor, the Conscience, and to
have an especial regard, that we may well pass our accoumpt with him. Let
us then every day once at the least, and especially at night when we go to
bed, open our tables, and noates of remembraunces, and take a view as it
were, how we have spent that day. And when we have laid down our actions
seuerallye, let us inquire of our Conscience, her judgment, and opynion: and
she out of hand will open unto us, wherein we have either done, well or
evil. So shall we as the Apostle exhorts us, work our salvation with
tremblyng and fear: we shall shake of security, and carelessness, and
synceerelye walk in our vocation, and calling.

Which order was dyllygently observed, even amongst the Ethnikes: for we read
that Pythagoras gave in commandment to his scholars, that they should
Seneca. li. 3 de ira.
straightly keep his custom. And Seneca has a like e^ample of one Sextius:
Pithacoras scholars, when they go to bed, call them selves to a reckoning ^or
the day spent.
whose words being full of wit and godliness, must needs be both pleasant
and profitable to the Readers. This was Sextius fashion, every night when he
went to rest, to examyne him self, saying: what fault have thou mended this
day? what vice haste thou resysted? wherein art thou better? stay thy
hasty nature, and thou shall come with more moderation before the Judge. In
this disputation, thou waste over whote, and contentious meddle not with the
ignorant henceforth. Thou dealt over sharply with that man: and have rather
offended him, then amended him. Hereafter take care, not only to say the
truth, but also consider, whether thou speak to one that will, and can abide
to hear it etc. This is my manner, and thus I use to do when the candle is
put out: I search and syfte my words and deeds. I hyde nothing from my self,
I pass nothing over: for why should I, moved either with fear, or shame do
so? seeing I may safely say unto my self, I forgive thee now, but amend
this gear, and see thou do so no more. And Seneca adds of his own
immediatlye: What can be more commendable (says he) then this kind of
trial, and examination? what a golden sound, and quiette sleep, must
needs follow? when as the mind is either commended, or amended, with the
grave and upright information of a man's own manners.

These Heathen men shall rise The Heathen men shall condemn impenitent
Christians at the last day.
against us, at the last day, and condemn us: for they moved with love,
of cyuile virtues, have daily and deepelye, looked into their lives spente:
but we that profess Christ, are secure and neglygent, and never cast our
eyes upon yesterdaye, nor purpose to perform any thing, the day following.

If we would inure our selves to this custom, and practyse the same, but a
few days: it would in short space be both most pleasant unto us: and
unless I be deceived, would also breed, and bring forth the fruits,
agreeable to a Christian calling, and profession. But how do we now a days,
most commonly pass the time? Verily, we feast, and banquette, one with
another, day by day, and night by night: so long, that neither eye, tongue,
hand, nor foot, can do their duty: for we are drowned, and even buried in
surfeiting, and drunkenness. So that scarce once a year, much less once a
day, we examyne our conscience, and record with our selves, how we have
run our race, and spente our age. And yet nightly we lay us down to sleep,
and securely snort and snore in our sins: In which case, if soddaine death
should take us in the neck (as no man has a charter, to live until the next
morrow) we are but cast awayes, and dampened cratures, But alack, we think
not once upon these matters, blinded with a vain hope of long life: whereof
albeit we might receive daily admonition, by the example of others, yet we
wylfullye deceive our selves, whiles we think that we are exempte out of the
common number, and to have a certain especial, and particular priuelege
granted unto us.

If the cause of this security, and contempt of good life, were demanded of
Evil custom cause of security.
me. I would answer, that contynewall and daily custom of wicked, and
sinful life, (which obtayneth almost the force of nature) is the occasion
thereof. And as it is a very hard thing, for a man to subdue his own nature,
so is it not very easy to alter, use and custom, which they truly accoumpt
to be almost another Nature. Experience teaches, that those vices which are
bredde, and brought up with us: are with much a do, pulled up by the roots.
Hereunto comes the nyce tenderness, Corrupt Parents.
of Parents, in the education of their children: whom they acquaint, with all
kind of delyghtes, and pleasures, even from their infancye. They teach them
not to abstain from unchaste, and vnreuerent speech against God and man. They
set them out with sumpteous, and gorgeous apparel; of diverse colors sometime
like Routters, sometime like Rouffyns, but seldom like honest folckes. They
breed in them fyercenesse, boldness, and impudencye: they neglect reuerency,
comeliness, and honesty. Whereby it comes to pass, that they cast away care
of obedyence to their parents, lowliness to their elders, and curtesye toward
their equalles, and in every thing think their lust to be Law. So are they
not reclamed from vice, either with fear of God, or shame of man: they have no
care of Religion, and pyetye toward God, much less of virtue and honesty
toward the world. For why? The Parents, now a days, do corrupt and cast away
their children with domestical examples in the beginning: so that afterward
when they would, they are not able to reform the same. Whereas godly and
virtuous Parents ought not to say, or do any thing in presence of their
children, that may give a show of wantonness and dishonestye: but so to
frame, their lives and behave them selves: that in them as in a perfect pattern
and example, their Children might see what is fair and bewtifull. Otherwise it
shall come to pass that Children shall accuse their Parents for their
negligent education.
their own flesh and blood shall exclayme, and accuse them with that young
man: Who said, I may impute my loose and ryottous nature, to my Father: For
he kept me not in subjection, nor gave me any good example of life: but
rather inflamed mee^, to pursue my appetyte. Of those youths then that are
thus depraved in their young years, (as it were in the green herb) either
with evil Parents, or Scholemaisters: what good can be looked for at their
hand, when they come to man's estate? Surely, surely, so many adulterers,
robbers, stealers, cutpurses, coggers, carders, dysers, sellers of lands, and
bankroutes, yssewe out of that lake and fylthy poddel, of negligent and
perverse education: where as carnal and senseless men impute it, blyndly and
untruly to the preaching of the gospel, so brightlye shyning amongst us, and
condempning all dyshonestye, and wickedness.

A way then with wicked use and custom, especially in young and tender A
hard thing to break evil custom.
age: which will be a let and stay from virtue, when men come to ripe years.
That holy martyr Saint Ciprian, said truly. No man can shake of that suddenly
Cyprianus
or quickly, which by contynuaunce of time has grown into use. For when will
that man follow frugalytye, who has been accustomed unto two or three courses
of delycate dyshes? Or how will he be content with course and simple apparel,
who blased and shyned in purple and gold, when he was a child? but rather love
of wine, will lead them, pride will puff them up, anger will inflame them,
greedynesse will prick them forward, ambytion will delyght them, and lust
will destroy them. So that it will be a matter exceeding hard, to bridle
offenses, which by custom are almost turned into nature.

And yet we must labor and endeavor, to restrain our carnal appetites, The
commodity of good custom.
if we hope to be saved. You will ask of me, how shall we do this? I answer.
Accustom your selves but a while to good things, as you have a great while to
evil things, and you shall find no small profit. The matter may happily
seem han^e in the beginning: but there is nothing as Seneca says, invincible
to man's mind, In process of time the pleasure that a man must needs feel
in this excercyse, will mytigate the pain and labor: and we shall find the
words of our Savior Christ spoken to his Disciples, to be true to our comfort.
My yoke is sweet and my burden Math.
is light: For as S. Hierom says: The custom of vices, causes the way of
virtue to seem hard and vnplentie: which if we apply to the better part, the
way of justice will be found more smooth.

And if Stilpho (of whom Cicero writes) Stilpho.
being naturally given to the love of wine and women, was able through the
precepts of Philosophye, so to master and bridle his vicious and carnal
nature, that no man could never by his behavior conceive any suspicion, of
drunkenness, or whordome: Why should Christians think it impossible, with
the assystaunce of Gods grace, and holy spyrite, to tame and subdue the old
man, that he may not rain in our mortal bodies, and to expel wicked and
corrupt custom. Could a Paynyme vanquishe nature, and can not Christians
bridle custom? especially if they endeavor earnestly, and labor dyllygently to
withstand pleasures? And if through humane imbecillytie, they now and then
slyppe, and loose (as it were) their handfaste: yet let them not quayle
therefore, but call for his help, who always puts too his hand and will:
not suffer those utterly to fall away from him, that put their trust and
confidence in him. For he sends unto them his holy spyrite, who styrreth up
in their hearts heavenly motions: and guydeth their studdies and endeavors to a
effect and purpose.

All good men see and perceive, by that which has been spoken before, how
needeful it is for Christians to use a certain reverence toward them selves,
when they are alone: and to beware, that they neither do, nor think any thing
dishonest. Of this duty Cicero had a consideration, in that he writ to his
son Mark. There is no part of man's life, neither in public nor private
matters, neither in conference with others, neither in meditating with your
self, that can want, Duty and in obserung thereof, does the honesty of
man's life consist, and dishonestie in neglecting the same. For although the
fear and reverence of Gods Majesty, present in all places, and searchinge
men's reins and hearts: and therewithal the holy Angel, our keeper, and
watchman, ought to stay and fear us from sin and wickedness: yet besides
those things, that duetye and reverence, which we owe unto our selves, ought
to bridle and let the same.

And to the end, that we may imytate and follow Sextius, his use and
custom, Sextius custom.
and show that shamefastnes and reverence, which is convenient for our selves,
when we are solytarie, and sequestered from company. Let the shortness
Considerations moving men to godlynes.
of our life, and the innumerable perils and dangers, which compass us in
on every side, be set always before our eyes. The Ethnikes have set out the
same with many fine simylytudes: but because they may have less wayght with
Christians. I pray them to consider the holy Scriptures, who Psalm, 90. Esa.
40. Job. 14. 1. Pet. 1. Iam. 1.
compare our life to green grass wythering: to the flowers of the field,
fading away: to a dylluding dream.

But the wise man seemed, of purpose to have gathered them all into one room,
which we ought to read, and ponder Sapi. 6.
deeply, that in consideration of the extreme vanity of our life: we may be
more cyrcumspect in our conversation, and be enflamed with an ardent desire, to
come to our perpetual and heavenly habitation.

The life of all men (says he) even of those that are most wealthye, and
myghtie, but especially of the ungodly, vanishe away like a shaddowe, then
the which there can scarcelye any thing be found more transitory: and yet
Pindarus, extenuating man's life signifycantly, terms Man, But a shadows
dream. 2. Man's life flies away as a Psalm. 90.
yet the passage of our life is swyft, an we fly away.

But those that are loath to restrain the delytes of the flesh, will answer,
Against differing of repentance.
that they will repent when they faule sick and lie on their death bed, I
grant they may do so, and Gods mercy is never shut up, but I would have
them also consider how many impediments and stumbling blocks lie in the way,
hindering them from true repentance. For that I may omyt the care about a
man's will and testament, for his wife and children, and the grief and pain of
the dissease: and many other such things which may seem to be matters of
smaller importance: what assaults does Satan use to give in that case, and
what pollyces does he not practice to bring the seely sick man into
dreadful dyspayre of his salvation? For then even in a moment he calls to
man's remembrance, and sets before his eyes, what soever be has thought,
purposed, said or The practice of Satan at our la^^ hour.
done, throughout all his life: and such offenses as he has committed being
ill enough in them selves, he amplifyeth and augmenteth: that he may shake
their faith, and pluck from them the ancor of salvation and eternal life.
Hereunto may be added the agony of a guylty Conscience, the grievous fear of
death at hand, the heavy and bitter cogitation, of the Judgment seat of God,
and the horror of hell fire, all which things are wonderful obstacles, to true
repentance: so that it were nothing else but mere presu^ption to defer it to
the last hour. And surely repentance in such sort extorted, is not volu^tary,
but compulsyue, and most commonly lame and vnperfyt. If we be wise, let us
amend and repent, when we can offend, other wise y^ common saying will be
verified of us. Sin has forsaken man, and not man sin, And it is to be
feared, least if we amend not when we may, we cannot when Those that repent not
when they may, cannot when they would.
we would. The judgments of almighty are profounde and unsearchable in
punishyng men's faults. For as in his goodness and mercy gives time and
space to men that are wylling to repent, and indureth offenders with great
patience, and longaminyty to bring them to righteousness of life: so when he
sees a man wylfull, obstynate, and contempning his mercy, he withdraws his
grace and favor, and gives him over into a reprobate sense, and looks not
any more for his conversion. And God has appointed unto every man his time and
measure, beyond which they cannot proceed in their myscheefes, and beyond the
which he will not conteyne and stay his plages and punyshments. The
remembrance whereof ought to move us to walk in Innocence and holiness of
life: to use that dutiful reverence toward our selves, which is requisyt when
we are solytary and alone, and to contain and stay our selves from sin,
and wickedness.

But there is nothing more effectual We ought to consider our short time and
sickie state.
to bridle and restrain men from devising, and doing fylthynesse and sin,
when they are solytarye and alone: or when they have ouerlashed them selves and
done amys. With Sextius before they take their rest, to examine and call an
accoumpt how they passed the day, then the often consideration and
remembrance of sudden deaths, wherewith all many mortal men have
pittifullye and dreadfully perished in all times and ages. Plynie in his
natural story, has a whole chapter entitled. Of sudden Plinius. hist. lib.
7. ca. 52. val. max.
deaths. And so has Valerius Maximus, Where they writ that many upon most
light causes have suddenly dyed. One at Rome as he went forth at his chamber
door, did but stryke his finger Examples.
a little on the door cheek and immediately fell down dead. An other did but
stumble as he went forth, and dyed by and by. An Embassedour of the Rhodians,
after he had declared his message to the Senate departing forth of the
counsel chamber, fell down by the way and suddenly dyed. Aeschilus the Poet
lying on sleep bare headded near the Sea: a great Seafoule, thinking his
bauld head to be a stone, whereon he might break the shelfyshe which he
carried: let it fall upon his head, wherewith he was killed out of hand. Lucian
a man learned and eloquent, but a derider of all religion, and namely a
blasphemer of Christian religion: traueling by the way was suddenly set upon
by doges and worried, a death meet for such a blaspheemer, and a terryble
example to all contemners and deriders of religion and godliness. The
scriptures also want not examples, The churlysh rich man Naball, who at his
sheapshearing held a feast in his Reg. ^5.
house like a king: but denied to relieve David then persecuted and in
distress: within ten days after was smytten of the Lord, and so dyed. Ananias
and Sapphira, Act. 5.
pretending that they gave their whole patrymonye to the relief of the poor
in the primatyue church, but indeed reserving a portion to them selves, and so
lying to the holy ghost, were Immediately stricken of God, and so ended their
lives, to the fearful example of all Hypocryts and dissemblers, and specially
in matters perteyning to relygion. Herodes Agrippa, being in most Act. 12.
glorious magnifycence, and contented to hear him self extolled, to be rather
a God then a man, was suddenly smytten by the Angel of the Lord, and dyed
amost miserable death. The rich man of who me mention is made, that he
intended to pull down his barnes and garnaries, and to build larger, said to
his soul. Soul thou have provision laid up in store for many years, and
therefore take thine ease: Eat drink and be merry, but what became of him? God
said unto him: Thou fool even this very night shall thy soul be taken from
thee, and then who Luke 12.
shall have that which thou have provided? The example of Nabucodonozor is very
terrible, who walking in his palace, and glorying in his strong and stately
city Babylon: whiles the words were yet in his Dan. 4.
mouth, was suddenly stricke, with a plage worse then death: for ye use of
reason was taken away from him, and him self turned amongst beasts, became as a
beast eating hay like an Ox: to teach al posteritis ensuing, not to glory in
things of this world which are but vain, but that he which glories should
glory in the Lord.

Nevertheless I grant it to be true, that as well the godly as the ungodly,
sometime are taken with sodden death, as that famous and godly. Humfery Duke of
Gloucester Humfrey Duke of Gloucester.
suddenly dyed in his bed (albeit not without some suspicion of violence) and
much like to that was John Hunne, and John Hunne.
many others. But howsoever the godly dye: dear and acceptable is their death
in Gods sight: and at what time soever they are taken, they are in ease, and
refreshing: whereas wicked and ungodly men's death, especially their sudden
death is as the scripture says, Mors peccatorum pessima. Which fearful Psa.
33.
speech ought to keep good men in awe and fear of God, in reverence toward
them selves, and in examyning surely of their lives and conuersations.

To conclude this part of reverence The sum or conclusion, with a similitude.
and duty toward our selves, when we are sequestered from company: let us
observe and mark what men do in great pestylences and mortabyties, how
sorrowful they are for their sins, and careful to amend their lives, even
so mortal man in consideration of his manyfold peryls and dangers, which hang
over his head every hour, ought to use al dylygent consideration to amend, and
to continue in well doing. But as it fares in these wordly and temporal
matters, so comes it to pass in spiritual matters? For in adversity, as in
pestilences, famyne, war, earthquakes, men acknowledge Gods just wrath and
indignation against sin: but when things goo as they would have them, they
abuse his goodness and mercy: and never think, neither of the hour of
death, nor of the day of doom, nor of the Trumpe of God, nor of the torments
of Hell, nor yet of the gnashing of teeth, and worm of the Conscience which
never dies. The remembrance of which things should never slide out of our
minds, whether we rise in the morning, or lay us down to sleep in the
evening: whether we dyne or suppe, whether we enterprise weighty matters, or
are wyllyng to sport and recreate our selves: In all these things we should
observe the preecept of the wise man. Whatsoever Syrach. 7.
thou take in hand, remember thy end and, thou shall never do amysse. And
hitherto have I written of that duetye and honesty which a man ought to use,
when he is solytarye and alone. Now I will discende to that which is requysit
and necessary for him that will live in publyke and common socyety.

The office and duetye of a Christian. The second part of this treatye.
as he lives publykely, and has to do in the world, is of two sorts, to wit
either pertyculer in respect of some state and vocation in the which he
lives: being either a master or a servant, a Father or a child, a husband or a
wife. etc. or else general in that he is a man and a Christyan man: whereby he
is lynke^ to others with that fast knotte of humanity and pyttie, wherein he
excels all other earthly creatures. Of men's degrees and functions, I shall
(if God permyt) entreat hereafter: now I will touch briefly that decent,
honest, and godly behavior of Christians, which ought to shine like a Lamp
in the eyes of men, that they beholding the same, may glorify God in the day
of visitation. The matter is plentiful, and as it were a large field to walk
in, but to observe any certain order, or method, in it is very hard to
please all men: I will therefore select out of the holy scripture, ye which
s^emeth unto me most convenient to this purpose, and as I said shortly, and in
few words: minding to give unto my Readers an occasion and admonition only, of
further study and cogitation.

That elect vessel of salvation S. Paul, writes hereof after this manner. I
beseech you brethren, by the mercyfulnes of God, that you give up your bodies a
quick Romans 12.
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. And be
not ye fashioned like unto this world: but be you changed in your shape, by
the renewing of your mind, that you may prove what is the good and acceptable
and perfyt will of God. The Apostle exhorts us to dedycate, consecrate, and
vow our selves wholly to God, that we should offer our bodies as a sacryfice
to our God, in mortefying the flesh, in crucifying the old man, in denying of
our selves: and in submytting us totallye to his worshypping and service, in
obeying him in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our life. And
immediately after he says: Love without dissimulation, hating evil, cleaning to
good. Affectioned one to another with brotherly love, in giving honor, going
one before another. Not lyther in business, fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord. Rejoicing in hope, pacient in trouble, instaunt in prayer. Distrybuting
to the necessity of the Saints, given to hospitality: Bless them which
persecute you, bless I say, and curse not. Rejoice with them that rejoice,
and weep with them that weep. Being of like affection, one toward another,
being not high minded: but making your selves equal to them of the lower
sort. Be not wise in your own opinions.

Recompense to no man evil for evil, providing aforehand things honest, not
only before God, but also in the sight of men. If it be possible, as much as
lies in you, live peaceably with all men. Dearly beloved, avenge not your
selves, but rather give place unto wrath. For it is written, vengeance is mine,
and I will reward says the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him,
if he be thirsty, give him drink: for in so doing, thou shall heap coals of
fire on his head. Be not overcome of evil: but overcome evil with good. How
many notable and excellent virtues has the Apostle, couched in this place? as
charytie, brotherly love, patience, perceauerance in prayer, benefycense,
hospytalytie, meekness, or gentleness, modesty, desire of peace, and
concord, pity, and clemency, with many other of that sort.

Hereunto you may add, those things that follow in the next Chapter: Owe
nothing to no man, but to love one another, Romans 13.
for he that loves another, has fulfilled the law. For this: Thou shall not
commit adultery: thou shall not kill: thou shall not steal: thou shall not
bear false witness, thou shall not lust: and if there be any other
commandment, it is in few words comprehended: namely, thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. Charity works not evil to his neighbor, therefore
the fulfilling of the law is Charity. In this text all the commandments
of the law are referred to the love of our Neighbor, to wit, in that part
that the law was given to restrain injuries, respecting cyuile society, and
fellowshyp of men: namely, that no man should be so bold to endammage his
neighbor, in his body, fame, goods, or any other way that might redounde to
his annoyaunce. For he that loves another from the bottom of his heart: is so
far from doing injury and wrong: that he will endeavor with all his might, to
be profitable to his neighbor. And whereas we are commanded to love our
neighbor, even as our selves, in this one word, not only synceere love is
dyscerned from hypocrisy: but also all duties of Charity are epacted and
required. The same Apostle writes also to the Galathians, in this wise. Walk
in the spirit (I say) and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, for
the flesh lusts contrary to the spirit, Gala. 5.
and the spirit contrary to the flesh, these are contrary one to the other,
so that ye can not do that which you would. The deeds of the flesh are
manifest, which are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness:
vvorshypping of Images, witchcraft, hatred, variaunce, emulations, wrath,
strife, seditions, sects, enuyinges, murders, dronkennes, gluttony, and such
like: of the which I tell you, as I have told you in times past: that eue^ they
which do such things, shall not inheryt the kingdom of God. But the fruit of
the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekenes, temperancie: against such there is no law. They truly that are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. If we live
in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit. Let us not be desirous of
vainglorie, provoking one another, envying one another. The words of the
Apostle are plain enough, and need not any exposition. And his counsel is in
sense the very same, which he gives to y^ Romans. That we should tame the
Romans 8.
flesh, and earnestly resist carnal affections. If you live after the flesh
(says he) you shall dye: but if through the spirit you mortify the deeds
of the flesh, you shall live. For those that are led with the spirit of God,
those are the sons of God. And in y^ same Epistle. For I delght in the law
of Romans 7.
God, after the inner man, but I see another law in m^ members, rebelling
against the law of ^^ mind, and subduing me to the law of syn, which is in my
members. And ye same Author to the Ephesians. I therefore (...)*
as a prisoner in the Lord exhort you, that you walk worthy of the vocation
vvhervvith you are called, with al lowlines and meekenes, with long
suffering, forbearing one another in love: Endeavoring to keep the unity of the
spirit, in the bo^d of peace. And a little after: This I say therefore, and
testify in the Lord, that ye walk not henceforth, as other Gentiles walk, in
vanities of their mind: Darkened in cogitation, being alienated from the life of
God, by the ignorance which is in them, through the blindness of their hearts:
Who being past feeling, have given themselves over, unto wanto^nes, to work al
uncleanness with greedines. But ye have not so learned of Christ. If so be that
you have heard him, and have been taught in him, as the truth is in Jesus. To
lay down according to the former conversation, the old man which is
corrupt, according to the lusts of error. To be renewed in the spirit of your
mind. And to put on the new man, which after God is shapen, in righteousness and
holiness of truth. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth unto
his neighbor: for as much as we are members one of another. Be ye angry and
sin not. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath. Neither give place to the
Devil. Let him that stool, steal no more, but let him rather labor, working
with his hands, the thing which is good, that he may give unto him which
needs. Let no filthy communication proceed out of your mouths, but that
which is good, to edify with all, as often as need is, that it may minister
grace unto the hearers. And grieve not the holy spirit of God, by whom ye
are sealed unto the day of redemption. Let all bitterness, and fiercenes and
wrath, and crying, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all
naughtiness. Be ye courteous one to another, merciful, forgeuing one another,
even as God for Christ's sake, has forgeuen you.

To the same purpose tend those words of his in the next Chapter. Be you
therefore followers of God as dear children, Ephe. 5.
and walk you in love, even as Christ has loved us, and has given him self
for us, an offering and a sacrifice, of a sweet smelling favor to God. But
fornication and al uncleanness, let it not be once named amongst you, as it
becomes Saints. Neitheir fylthines, neither foolish talking, neither
jesting, which are not comely, but rather giving of thanks. For this you know,
that no whoremonger, neither unclean person, nor covetous person, which is a
worshipper of Images, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and God.
Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of such things comes
the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Be ye not therefore
companions of them. For ye were sometime darkness, but no we are you light in
the Lord: walk as children of light. For the fruit of the spirit in all
goodness, and righteousness, and truth: approving what is acceptable unto the
Lord. And have no fellowship with the vnfruictfull works of darkness, but
rather rebuke them, for it is a shame even to name those things which are done
in secreet. Herein may we easily perceive what difference there is between
divine, and Philosophical precepts A difference ^et^^e^ne divine and
philosophical precepts.
touching manners. For wheresoever the scripture exhorts men to good works,
it adioyneth by and by some thing out of the first Table of the ten
commandments: as for example, of the fear of God, offayth, of charity, of
obedience toward God, of his promyses and threats, of Christ's benefittes
toward his servant, and of his punishments toward the obstinate and
rebellyous. Which thing profane writers do not touch, when they entreat of
cyuile duties.

They speak not a word in their precepts of the will of God, of the
worshipping of God, neither of faith which is the mother of all Christian
virtues. Neither too they teach men to do well, for Gods honor and glory,
which thing is chieflye inculcate in the Scriptures: neither do they refer
all things to one God, neither make him the end of their actions, neither yet
do they look for rewards at his hand. So that briefly and by these few
words we may see an apparent dyfference between the Phylosophicall and
Apostolycall precepts concerning virtue. The same Apostle writes also to the
Collossians saying. Mortify Colos. 3.
therefore your members which are upon earth, fornication, uncleanness,
inordynate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is
vvorshypping of Images. For which things sake, the wrath of God comes on
the children of disobedience. In which you also vvalked sometime, when ye
lived in them. But now put ye of also all wrath, fierceness, malyciousnesse,
blasphemy, fylthie communication, out of your mouth. Lie not one to another,
seeing that ye have put of the old man with his work. And have put on the
new man; which is renewed into knowledge, after the image of him that made
him. Where is neither Greek, nor Jew, Circumcision nor uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Sythian, bond, free, but Christ is all, and in all. Put on
therefore as the elect of GOD, holy and beloved, bowelles of mercy,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekenes, long sufferinge. Forbearinge one
another, and forgeuing one another, if any man have a quarrel against any:
even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye. And above all things put on
charity, which is the bond of perfectnes. And let the peace of God have the
victory in your hearts, to the which also we are called in one body, and see
that ye be thankful. That which the Apostle names unto the Romans: The
mortifying of the body, through the spirit, he does explain: saying, that it
is no other thing then to master the lusts of the flesh, whereof he
rehearses diverse sorts: and else where he calls them the works of the
flesh, with whom we ought to contend and wrestle in such sort, that syn may
not rule in our mortal bodies: that we should not give over our members as
weapons of unrighteousness to sin: but that we should yield our selves to
God, and our members armor of righteousness.

The same Apostle contynuing his exhortation, adds: Let the word of Christ
dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your own
selves: in psalms, in hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your
hearts unto the Lord. And whatsoever you do in word or deed: do all in the
name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, and the father by him. And to
the Thessalonians: We beseech you brethren, and exhort 1. Tess. 4. 2. Tess. ^.
you by the Lord Jesus, that ye increase more and more as ye have received of
us: for ye know what commandments we gave you in the Lord Jesus. For this is
the will of God, even your holiness, that you should abstain from fornication:
that every one of you should know how to keep his vessel, in holiness and
honor. Not in the lusts of concupiscence, even as the Gentyles, which know not
God. That no man oppress and defraude his brother in any matter: because that
the Lord is the auenger of all such, as we also have forwarned you and
testified. For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. And to
Titus he writes thus. For there has appeared the grace of God, which is
healthful to all men. Teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
we should live soberly and righteouslie, and godly in this present world.
Looking for that blessed hope, and appearing, of the glory of the great God,
and our savior Jesus Christ. Which gave him self for us, that he might
redeem us from all unrighteousness, and purge us a peculyar people to him
self, zealous of good works. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with
all authority, etc.

In these few words, ye Apostle declares very plainly what manner of life a
Christian man ought to lead: expressing the chief and principal virtues both
toward God and man: first he would have us live soberly, that is to say,
honestly, shamfastly, chastely temperatly, and frugally: not uncomely, not
wa^tonly, not immodestly, not incontine^tlye, wherein he exhorts us to subdue
and vanquysh all kind of concupiscences and lusts, and to withdraw as it were
our mind from the society and contagion of the body. Secondaryly he wills us
to live Justly, with our neighbor, y^ is innocently, gently meekely: not to
covet any man's goods, not to be injurious to any man: but to render unto every
man his own, to profit whom we can: and to conclude as we would wyshe that
other me^ should deal with us, let us even so deal with them: and that which
we would not have others to offer unto us, let us not offer to do unto any.
Thirdly, he calls on us to live godly and religiously toward God: that is in
ye true knowledge of God, in worshipping and serving of God according to his
will, in giving him thanks for his benefyts: in following virtues, and in
fleeing of vices: in dyeting all our words and works to his honor and glory.
For this is true pittye and godliness.

Two things there are which are needful for us to regard in the execution of
Two things to be considered in this matter.
these things: the one hindering, the other helping us in doing of honest
actions and virtues. One which especially hinders, is wicked and ungodly
company, from the which we ought to sequester our self and to keep company
with those that be good. And as one does admonish First hynderaunces and
impedimentes.
us, to be conuersaunt either with those whom we may amend, or who may amend
us, Neither ought any man to think that good custom and company, are in small
moment, to practice virtue. For as with ye fellowship of evil me^ we are
infected (as it were) with some contagio^: even so with the daily conversation
of those yt fear God, we are reformed and amended. If our desire then be to
live well, let us haunt and frequent honest, and godly men's company: whereunto
we are exhorted by the wise Solomon. Come not (says he) into the pathe of the
ungodly, nor walk in 1. Pro. 4.
the way of the wicked. And S. Paul writing to the Corinthians, is so earnest
in persuading men to avoid evil company, that he would not have men to eat
and drink with such. If any that is called a 1. Co. 5.
brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or a worshipper of Idols, or a rayler,
or a dronkarde, or an extorcioner, with him that is such eat not. I am not
ignorant that there are some other causes, why such Evil company to be
avoided.
men's companyes should be avoided, either to declare that we mystyke their
conversation, or else that they moved with shame should amend: but surely this
is not the least cause, least we should be infected with their naughty company.
For as a little leven makes a great lump of of dowe sour: even so the example
of one man oftentimes corrupts many. The words of the wise man are notable
and worthy to be marked. Who will Syrach. 12.
have pity upon the charmer that is stinged with the serpent, or of al such
as come nigh the beasts. Even so is it of him that keeps company with an
evil man, and lappeth him self in his sins: who so touches pitche, shall be
defiled therewith: As the wolf agrees with the Lamb, Syrac. 13.
so does the ungodly with the righteous. We know that under good Trees, all
kind of beasts rest and shadow them Chrisost in. 7. Math. hom. 19.
selves, but under thorns and bra^bles, there come nothing commonly but
Serpents. Even so good men and badde, may dwell nigh the godly but there is
no peace, nigh godless and gaselesse persons, but only for serpents, that
is to say, for Deuyls: who as in a Mancion dwell in their hearts. And in the
matter it comes to pass, as Basi. mag. quod deo non fit author mali. et
Procopius in Genesis Cap. 3.
in pestilent and contagious places, where the air being taken and drawn,
casts men's bodies into soden sickness Euenso through wicked company, many
euyls and mischiefs are learned, albeit the inconvenience be not felt in the
beginning. It may happily seem hard to some men, to shake of old and familyar
acquaintance, with whom we have lived pleasauntlye long, and many years: yet
we ought to labor and wrestle to avoid those hurful and dangerous companies.

Amongst many examples whereby we may the rather be induced to follow this A
notable example of
precept: there can none be found more memorable, then that of Henry the
fifte King of England of that name: of of K* Henry in casting of evil company.
whom the Chronicles, write, after this manner. This was the man in deed, who
taught even at the first that honors, ought to change manners: For as soon as
he was crowned king: considering how expedyent it was for him to begin a new
trade of life, he removed, and expelled far from his court all such as were his
mates, and companyons with him in his youthful days: (which are commonly
spent in loosnes and wantonness) and appointed in their rooms grave, prudent,
and valiant counselors, He knew right well. that it was beseeming ^olid. in
Hen. 5.
a Prince to excel other men, in courage, counsel, grauitye and carfulness:
and that a kingdom is rather a burden then an honor, and therefore
distrusting his own wit, he thought good to have about him such men, as might
help him in tollerating that burden, and by whose advise not only rule others,
but him self also, and become a singular spectacle and example to his
subjects. For evil princes do often times hurt more with their example then
with the fact it self, for there are always many followers of princes
fashions, whereby it comes to pass (as Cicero writes) that the evil fact
of a Prince is not so great (albeit great enough in it self) as in that he
corrupts others: and is the cause that as the prince changes his life, so do
the people change their manners. Verily he that rules, is therefore advanced
and honored, to govern prouidently, to correct, and reform the manners of the
people, and to care for those things, which may be honorable for him self, and
profitable for his people, not to put chief felicity in plesures which are
common with the vulgar and rascal sort. Which things if he will not, care
not, or cannot do surely, then he is rather to be accoumpted a servant then a
Prince. And what can be more dishonorable for him that should govern others,
to be governed him self as a Pupil being now past none age? Such a one was
Richard the second, who at the first gave good hope to many, but in the end was
subverted by wicked companions and counselors. Much like unto him was Edward
ye second: but both of the^ had an unhappy end. By whose examples happily K.
Henry being taught to beware, abandoned such old acquaintance of his, as were
given to fill by pleasure, and planted in their places, virtuous and noble
counsaylers.

That speech uttered by a certain Ethnike, is profitable for us to remember
that we may the rather avoid wicked company. Idem habet Seen. Epist. lib. 2.
epi. 59 et de tranquillit. vitae. lib. 1. ca. 7
We receive fashions and conditions of our companions, and as diseases pass
from one body to another by touching: even so does the mind power her
infections into her neighbor. The dronkard leads his guests into dronkennes.
Effeminate men and softlings, cause the stout man to wax tender. Covetousness
transferreth her poison into cohabitants. And on the other side, the force of
virtue has her effect. Now if our old acquaintance, together with their
pastims and pleasures, with other their youthful and ruffyns tricks, come unto
our mind: Let us then apose and set against them the vanity of pleasure, and
the contynuance of the shame: let us consider the shortness of our life, the
uncertainty of the hour of death, the dreadful day of dome, and the endless
torments of hell. So shall we according to the proverb, with one nail drive
out another. So that if old pleasures, and delytes tyckle us: let us reason
thus with our selves. My old mates and companions, Luke 22.
do allure me to accustomed pleasures: but my Savior byddeth me beware that
my heart be not oppressed with surfeiting: and the holy apostle Saint Paul
wylleth me not to oppress my self with wine, wherein is riot, and again
Gluttons and dronkerds, shall not be heirs of Gods kingdom. And Saint Peter
byddeth me be sober and watch: 1. Pet. 5.
And the prophet cries in my ears, we be unto those that arise earlye in
the morning to follow drounkennesse, by Esa. 5.
this means Gods spirit shall strengthen our reason, to overcome lusts, and
our will shall follow, and obey, right understanding. And in deed we may not
forget at any time that it is our parts to give care to the voice of God, and
to stop our ears against louse and vain pleasures: to obey the holy
Angel ayding and guyding us, and to withstand the foul fend tempting us.
Which things if we weygh and ponder aright, shall sone withdraw our selves
from wicked fellowshippe and company: and easyly prefer endless bliss before
vain and momentany pleasures.

Another great obstacle there is, that deteyneth men from good and virtuous The
second let is Idleness.
actions, to wit, Idleness, and Rechlesnesse, whereunto our nature is
exceedingly given. There is one that she weth very fynely, that love and
fylthie lust, can Lucianus in dialog. veneris et Cupid.
have no place with those, who ^f the we Idleness, and are always busied
about some. For out of all doubt, Idleness breadeth in us a desire of
banqueting, of pleasant and wanton company, and leads us headlong into all
kind of lusse, and intemperancie. We shall do then very well, to be dilygent
in the works of our vocation, if we study, and read the word of God, if we
pray incessauntly, if we ^raue his daily aid, if we be thankful unto him for
his goodness: and to conclude, if we occupy our selves always about some
good thing. And if happily we have nothing to do at home, (which
notwithstanding, will argue our evil husbandry) let us repair unto the
Church, and hear common prayer and Sermons: let us confer with our friends,
about matters of divinity, let us visit the sick, and comfortless, so shall
we not faint and fall under the temptations of Satan. Cato his saying is much
commended. In doing nothing, a man shall learn to do evil: according to that
of the holy man. Every idle man is busyed in the desire of pleasures.

Hereof proceed those often and earnest exhortations in the holy scriptures to
Exhort^tions to labor and dylligence.
care, vigilancie, and diligencie. As that parrable of our Savior, of a man
going into a far country, who at his departure: delivered certain goods
unto his servants, and at his return wylled those whom he found dilygent
to enter into the joy of their Master. And so the Apostle exhorts him that
rules, to rule with dylligence: And again, Dillygent in study, and fervent
in the Romans 2.
spyrite. The Prophet Jeremy pronounces him accursed that does his Maystes
business fraudulently.

Many such speeches occure in the holy Scripture, which stir up those that
are regenerate in Christ, to do their duetye, to carfulness, to avoid
sin, and to desire to live well. And surely it is lamentable to consider how
rare this virtue of study, and delygence is now a days amongst those that
desire to be accoumpted Christians: s^eing that without, we use the same in the
Regiment of our life: God will neither hear our prayers, nor gyde us with his
holy spyrit. Let us shake of therefore this Rechles sloothfulnesse and conioyne
our labor with Gods help, in subdewing natural corruption, and repressing
our carnal lusts, in avoiding the intisements of the world: and in resisting
the Temtations of Satan. Let us not think that God will absolve the matter,
if we sleep: but let us (as Christ says) set our hands to the plough, and
according to that of the Apostle with tremblyng and fear work our salvation.
For those that are careless in this world, and suffer sin to bear domynyon in
their mortal bodies: or run headlong after the lusts of the flesh and
delytes of the world: do without doubt make the holy ghost sorrowful;
dryuing him away from them, and being so forsaken of God, perish through their
own default. Labor therefore and care, is most needful in the regiment of
our life, and in all our counsayles and actions: for wheresoever our savior
Christ commands us to watch (*which he does in many places of the
gospel) there he awaketh men snorting, and sleeping in sin, he shakes of
Security, he kindles men (as it were) to dyligence, and care for their
salvation. And these are the chief lets and Impedimentes that hinder men from
the execution of virtue: it now remains, that I also show helps and
furtheraunces to the same.

If reachlesnes and carelesnes of our duty be a mother of sin and impyetye:
Contemplation of heavenly things do further to virtue.
Then a dyligent consideration of the same must needs be a Nurce of virtue and
godliness. Let us then have always a dilygent meditation of heavenly things,
from whence we draw our origin, and offspring. For it behooves a Christian to
advance and lift up his mind from earthly things, and to meditate heavenly
things: in which consideration the godly are often peerced with such joy, that
they bray as it were and pant, to see him face, to face, when they presently
behold, but in part, and as it were in a ryddle. Such a desire was in those
three Disciples: who were with Christ in the mountain in his Transfyguration:
when as they saw Helyas, and Moses unknown unto them: with spyrituall eyes,
as the Christian Poet writes.

Ignotis oculis, viderunt lumine cordis.

At what time Peter ravished said. It is good for us to abide here. This
study Three principal helps to virtue.
and contemplation of divine and heavenly things, breeds those three worthy
and excellent virtues, commonly couppled together, I mean prayer, fasting,
and alms deeds, which never go alone, but have many other virtues attending
upon them. Of which notable ornaments of all true Christians: I will say
somewhat, but briefly, and so much only as may seem to serve this my present
purpose.

I call invocation of Gods name, or Of prayer.
Prayer, an elevation or lifting up of our minds to GOD, when we are desirous
to obtain any thing at his hand: namelye to give us good things, and to
turn evil things away from us.

Christ him self has commanded us to desire such things in many places of
Scripture (all which to recyte were a matter needelesse) and has promised
that our prayers should not be denied.

Ask says he, and it shall be given unto you, seek and ye shall find,
knock and it shall be opened unto you. And in another place he byndeth him
self as it with with an oathe to hear us, saying. Verelie, verelie, I say
unto you, whatsoever ye ask my Father, in my Math. 7.
name, he will give it you. And the Prophets David. He does the will Luke
11.
of those that fear him, and hears their prayers, and saves them. But of
all places which declare the virtue and effycacye of prayer, that of Syrache
Syrach. 35
is most notable, contynewed almost through one Chapter: and adds this
saying as a clause unto to the rest. The prayer of him that humbles him self,
goes through the Clouds, till she come nigh, she will not be comforted,
nor go her way: till the highest God have respect unto her, give true
sentence, and perform the judgment. Of this matter Chrysostom also writes
worthyly. If thou enjoy prosperity, pray to God Hom. de profectum euang.
that it may be fyrme and stable. If thou fear a great tempest: pray to him
to blow over the same. If thou art heard, be thankful: if thou be not heard,
yet persevere that thou may be heard. For if the Lord defer a certain
space: he does it not enuiouslye, but to keep thee with him longer. And in
another place. As the body being knytte together with Synewes, Hom. de diuersis.
is fyrme^: but if you cut the same, the hermony of the body is dyssolued.
Even so devout minds, continue firm through prayer. But if you take from them
prayer, then they are much like fyshes taken out of the water: for as the
water is unto them life, so are prayers to the soul.

Secondarilye, I would have men to use often fasting, which is not a choice of
some certain sorts of meats, but a perpetual Fasting.
sobriety, and temperancie of life, to the end they may the rather bryddle,
and keep under carnal lusts and concupiscences. Our savior Christ therefore
byddeth us beware, that our Luke 22.
hearts be not oppressed with surfeiting. And his Apostle: Oppress not your
self with wine, wherein is ryotte. Fasting is commended unto us in the
examples of Moses, Elyas, Daniel, Christ, and his Apostles. Let us never
forget that vvoo of the Prophet. VVoo be Esa. 5.
unto those that rise early in the morning to follow drunkenness. And that
of Ambrose is worthy remembrance. Use a Lib. 3. de virg, velandis.
little wine to avoid infirmity, not to augment pleasure: wine and youth
kindle a flame. But fasting does bridle young years: and a spare diet does
keep under lust, and carnalytie. And S. Chrysostom. Hom. 58. in Math.
He that coupleth fasting and prayer, has two wings which will make him able
to pass the winds in swiftness.

Thirdlye, Alms deeds are commendable and needful: and it is to be
observed, Alms deeds.
that of these three virtues: Prayer is properly referred unto God: Fasting to
our selves, and Alms to our neighbor. And for that many now a days do orre,
and are deceived in the name of Alms, thinking that to be only when a piece
of money, meat, or cloth, is given unto the Poor: I think it not amysse to
put down Augustines mind touching this matter. Who does not accoumpt
Enchirid ad Laurentium cap. 72.
only those vulger matters to be alms which I rehearsed before: but these
also to forgive the offendour, to amend others with reprehention and
correctition. For many Alms are given to those that are vnwyllinge to receive
them, when we rather respect men's welfayre, then wylfulnesse. Touching the
commendation of this virtue, let us harken to the Prophet saying. Break thy
bread to the hongrye, and bring the poor and stranger into Esa.
thy house, when thou see one naked Cover him, and despise not thine own
flesh, then shall thou pray, and the Lord shall hear thee, and Solomon. Give
of thy first fruits unto the poor: so shall it come to Prou.
pass that thy barnes shall be filled, and thy wynepresse with wine, And again:
He that gives unto the Poor, lends unto the Lord: And Tobias. Prayer with
Alms and fasting is very Tob.
good. Basylyus Magnus, Opens with a fine symylytude how acceptable Alms is
unto all mighty God. Even as seed (says he) which is cast into the ground,
brings increase to In lucam.
the Sower, so does Alms bring forth great commodytye afterward. And
Lactantius: If the worshyppers of false Li. 6. cap. 13
Gods do deck and trymme Idolles and Images, and bestow upon them the most
precious thing they have: which things can neither give them thanks, nor yet
use those things that are put upon them: how much beseeming Christians is
it? to deck and trymme the Images of the living God, who as they are both able
to use them, and to be thankful for them: Even so GOD in whose sight thou
do those things, will both allow thy fact, and requyte thee with reward.

But amongst many cautions in giving In giving alms we ought to be lyberall of
our own.
of Alms, this is not the least or last, to be observed, of faithful
Christyans. That we be lyberall and bountyfull toward the poor, of our own
goods, truly gotten: and that we spoil not one, to relieve another.
Wherefore if any man have unjustly gotten any goods, he ought rather to
restore the same Aug. en^hirid. 22.
to the true owner, then to succor needy strangers therewith. Tobias
therefore Tob. 2.
charged his son to give Alms of his own substance: And Solomon, Honor
God with thy own substance, and give Pro. 3.
unto the poor of the frewts of thy own Corn. And Zacheut the Publican, when
he had promised to give half of his Luke 19.
goods to the poor: he adds, that if be had done any man wrong he would
make restitution four fould.

Some man desirous to find a cloak to cover his extortion, may peradventure
object that of our Savior. Make you Luke 16.
friends of the unrighteous Mammon, And again, the commendation of the unjust
Steward, that he had done very wisely. But the answer is plain and easy.
That he names Mammon (which in the Siriacke tongue, signifies Riches) Mammon.
unrighteousness, either because they are commonly gotten unjustly, whereof
comes that speech. A rich man is either unjust, or the heir of an unjust
Man: or else because they are the occasions of many myscheefes: or else for
that the abuse of them is diverse, and manyfould in this our nature depraved
with original Sin, the parent of all evil and wickedness: For whereas we
should use Riches modestly as our servant, for our own and our neighbors
behalf: we abuse the same, in prodigalytye, and lasciviousness, and turn
often Gods gifts to his reproach. Christ's meaning therefore, was not that men
should Iniuriouslye get riches to give Alms thereof, neither is it needful
that all parts of the Parable should be like. For in the Application of a
Symilytude, we ought to ponder the principal scope, and not to respect any
circumstance and particle. The chief state or scope of the symilytude, is not
in the collation of a fraudulent mind, not in Infydelity or theft: but in the
wise and provident forcare in purchasing friends, whose example therein our
Savior would have us to follow. He did this that being put out of his office,
those whom he had gratified, would receive him into their houses: this ought
we to do in spiritual matters, that when we shall have need we may be
received into everlasting Tabernacles. Christ our savior blames them in that
place, man's contempt, of celestial and eternal things: whose dilligence
and care, is great, and always busyed about things needful for his body,
which are but worldly, and temporal.

But to return to my matter, which is, that we ought to be Chrystians, The
day of doom to be considered.
not only in word, but also in deed, that we may be feared from vice,
and allured to virtue: let us set before our eyes always that dreadful
day. Which the Prophet together with the Apostle, names the day of
affliction and anguishe, the day of calamytie and myserie, the day of
darkness and blackness, the day of Cloud and whyrlewynde: when as God shall
reward unto every man according to his work. Again let the joys of heaven,
and Crown of glory, allure us to virtue and godliness, whereof the Prophet
also and the Apostle speaks thus. The eye has not seen, the ear has not
heard, neither have the joys entered into man's heart, which God has
prepared for them that love him. Let us remember that we must once, will we,
nyll we, forsake this world, but we wotte not when, nor how soon. Death
(as one writes) by means of uncertain chances, is alvvaies Seneca.
imminent. At what time GOD will requytte every man according to his desartes:
either with plagues and punishments endless, in justice, or joys and blysses
eternal in mercy. Let us then be always ready against that day, and
ioyfullye look for death, which can never be far absent: by the example of
Saint Paul, who desired to be loosed and to be with Christ. Which thing Phi.
1.
can not come to pass in us, unless we lead our life according to Gods will,
and repose all trust of salvation in the mercy of God, through the merytes of
Christ. And if at any time we slyppe, and slide into sin and iniquity: (as
by nature we are prone to do evil) yet let us not suffer that to rule in our
mortal body, but endeavor to salve such sores with good deeds, and with
repentance, and newnes of life.

But most part of mortal men now The wyckednes of our time.
a days have no regard at all of temperance and sobriety, but give
themselves to ryotting and surfeiting, and run headlong into all kind of
mischief, having no fear of God before their eyes: they follow their fylthie
lusts, they snatche, they steal, they swear, and forswear, they lie, they
deceive, and to be short, do all things saving that which is lawful. And
yet in the mean time they will needs be accoumpted Chrystians, and
gospellers, and earnest favorers of true relygion. But Chrystians ought not to
be moved with these worldly and wicked examples: but bend all their power to
live godly and holyly, to follow the will of their heavenly Father: and with a
certain lyberal and commendable fear of God, to be detained from doing of
evil: least they either should give an occasion to the adversary, to sclaunder
their profession: or lest the name of God should for them that be evil spoken
of amongst the Gentyles. And if at any time unawares, or through humane
imbecyllitie, they fall and go astray: they will immediately acknowledge their
error, and pacify their merciful father, through true repentance, and with
their hearty prayers, procure his mercy toward them. For he is gentle, and
ready to forgive, if he see us sorye and penitent: and as if we have offended
greeuouslie, so if we lament our faults bytterly, according as S. Cyprian
writes. Whereunto we may add this, as a special consolation and comfort,
that we have a medyatour in heaven, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who is our
advocate and patron, to purchase peace for us: and to make an atonement
between his father and us.

In which consolation and comfort, notwithstanding, Against presu^ption in Gods
mercy.
all faithful Chrystians ought to have this caution: not so to trust in Gods
mercy, that they either fall into presumption, or to live neglygently, and
carnally, or not gospel like. For there are many now a days, that flatter
and deceive them selves, whiles they greedily embrace all such sentences in the
Bible, which set out Gods great mercy: but in the mean season, neglect and
pass over lightly such places, as exhort them to newness, and holiness of
life. The Lord is merciful in deed, but to those that repent. The Lord
would not the death of a sinner: but he would also that he should convert and
live. He that witnesses Christ to be the Lamb, that takes away the sins of
the world: does also will us to repent our former lives, and to bring forth
fruits worthy Repentance. He that affyrmeth us to be saved through the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ: exhorts us also to repent and convert, that our
sins may be done away. He that says that Christ came into this world to
save sinners: does also say that fornicators and adulterers, and other heinous
offenders, cannot inheryt the kingdom of Christ. He that writes that Christ
did bear our sins in his body upon the cross, does add also that we
should dye to sin, and live to righteousness. He that witnesses that
Christ gave him self for us: annexeth that he might redeem us from all
iniquytye, and purifye a people peculier to him self, following good works.
He that says that Christ dyed for us adds also: that those that live,
should not live unto them selves, but to him that dyed and roose again for
them. Hereunto serves that of Ezechiell the Prophet. If the wicked man repent
him of all Eze. 3. 18. 33.
his sins, and keep all my precepts and do Justice and judgment, he shall
live and not dye.

By the which words we may easily gather that he cannot trust in Gods mercy,
that does not repent him of his wickedness: neither can he be rightlye
called a penytente person, or a Chrystian that perseuereth in ungodliness:
neither can sound and perfect faith be in him, who wyttinglye and wyllinglye
works against the testimonye of his own Conscience. Let us not be
Christians therefore in name and tyttle only: neither brag and boaste of
faith with bare words, But let us repent truly, and from the bottom of our
heart, let us turn to GOD in d^ede, and correct vices with virtues, and with
holy life and conversation, abolyshe the remembrance of our sins and
iniquitye. Let those words of Christ be always in our minds. Not every one
that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that
does the will of my father who is in heaven. And if we believe that which
Saint Paul says to be true. That Jesus Christ came into this world to save
1. Tim. 1.
sinners: Let us also believe that other speech of his. That witches,
adulterers, 1. Co^ 6. 6.
fornicators, murderers, thieves, extorcioners, covetous persons, proud men,
dronkardes, Reu. 20.
backbiters, contentious men, shall not inherytte the kingdom of God, and
Christ. And surely if we persuade our self that Saint Paul says true, as well
in the one place as in the other we shall easily perceive, that wicked lyuers
cannot conceive any hope, of Gods mercy, and of eternal life: For as faith
believes that God is merciful to the penitent: so does it tell us, that he is
a punysher of the impenitent. There is no cause then for sinful men to presume
on Gods mercy: they must repent, and amend their lives, before they take
comfort of that matter. Ambrose has included them both Ambr.
in one sentence, whiles that he says: Noman can rightlye repent, unless
he trust in Gods mercy: so no man can trust in Gods mercy, unless he repent.
That saying of the Hebrewe is memorable, and never to be forgotten: Say not,
Tush the mercy of the Lord is great, he shall forgive me my sins, be they
never so many: for like as he is, merciful so goes wrath from him also, and
his indignation comes down upon sinners: Make no tarying to turn unto the
Lord, and put not off from day to day: for suddenly shall his wrath come, and in
the time of vengance he shall dystroye thee. Let every man therefore have good
regard for him self, that his Christian profession be confirmed with Chrystian
conversation, that his work answer to his word, his deed, to his title. Let
every man beware of presumption, in Gods mercy. Let them take heed that
through carnal securitye, and contempt of the gospel, they fall not away
from the spirit to the flesh* from heaven, to the world, and from God to
Bellyall. Let them take heed that they make not a mock of ye Passion of
Christ, that they tread not his blood under their feet, that being purifyed
and washed with his precious blood, they wallow not wylfully in sin and
wickedness, and of the children of God, become, by their owen default, the
bondslaues of Satan, and fyrebrands of Hell everlastingly. And hitherto I have
spoken of a Christian man's duetye pryuately toward him self, and publicly
toward others. Now remains the last part of the duetye of a Chrystian
living, either in the estate Ecclesiastical, Political, or Oeconomicall, in
one of the which three callyngs, all good men endeavor to lead their lives as
the scopes, and ends whereunto all man's studyes and labors, are to be dyrected
and referred. But because that matter requires a long and dylygent tractation:
if God permyt I will handle the same in another voloume.

Glory be to God.
An addytion translated out of that learned Father of the Ex lib. 3. paedagogi.
cap. 12.
Greek Church, Clemens Alexandrinus. Who writ within three hundred years
after Christ: wherein the whole duety^ of a Christian man is comprehended in a
brief sum, necessaryly serving for the practice, of such precepts, as are
contained in the former Treatise.
LEt every man then learn his duetye, and pass the time of his pilgrimage, in
fear and humilytye: knowing that we are redeemed not with corruptible things,
of silver and gold, but with the precious blood, of the immaculate and
unspotted Lamb Jesus Christ. For it is sufficient that we have spent the time
that is past, 1. Pet. 1.
of the life, after the will of the Gentiles, vvalking in vvantonnes, lusts
in excess of vvines, in excess of eating, in excess 1. Pet. 4.
of drinking, and abominable idolatry. We have Christ his cross as our mark
and lymytte, with whom we are crucyfyed, and by whom we have remyssion of
our fourmer sins.

Let us fix our minds therefore upon the truth, let us repent and amend our
lives. For the eyes of the Lord are open upon the Just, and his ears unto
their prayers. The countenance of the Lord is upon them that do evil. And
who is Psa. 33.
it that will hurt you, if you do well. The best education or institution is
moderation, Pet.
which is perfyt comlynesse together, with stable and ordenarie power: rightly
distributing those things that are coherent amongst them selves. Now if you
do not mark those precepts which are given, you shall dye the death: but if
you do attend, you shall enjoy the blessings of the earth, meaning no doubt,
health, wealth, riches, food, and strength. Prou. 24. Esa. 5. Eze. 18. Esa. 1.
1. Cor. 2.
For those be true and perfyt good things, which neither the eye has seen,
nor the ear has heard* neither yet has entered into ye heart of man. But to
return to the way and life of a perfect Christian: the heavenly scholar
comprehends breefly his office and duty, As you would that men should do
unto you, even so do you unto Math. 5.
them And as Christ him self says, all the commandments may be referred
to these two precepts. Thou shall love Math 22
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
might, and thy neighbor as thy self, for herein consist the law and the
Prophetts. And when one asked him, what he should do, to possess eternal
life, he answered: know thou the commandments, and when he said, yea, do
this quoth he, and thou shall be saved. But we will more partycularly lead
you, through the plentyfull Math. 19
stoore of treasures: to the end you may have always some wholesome precepts
in readynesse. First let us behold the Dyalogue given by Moses. Thou shall not
Exo.d 2. et. 20. Deu. 5.
commytte adultery, thou shall not vvorshippe Idolles, thou shall not steal,
thou shall not bear false witness, honor thy father and thy mother, with
many other such precepts as are contained in his holy law. And by the mouth
of his Prophet Esaias he says. Was he your selves, and be clean, and take
away the foreskyn of your hearts from before my eyes, learn to do good, seek
judgment, deliver him Esa. 5.
that suffers vvrong, help the fatherless to his right, let the widows
complaint come before you. And then go to (says the Lord) let us talk
together. Many other like precepts occur every where: as for example sake,
of Prayer and good works. The holy scripture much commends Prayer, and the
form or manner of making our prayers, is expressed. When thou see the naked
cover him, Act. 1. Iac. 4.
and hide not thy self from thy own flesh. Then shall thy light break forth
as the morning, and thy health flourish right shortly: righteousness shall go
before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall embrace thee. Then if thou
call, the Lord shall answer thee, if thou cryest he shall ^saie. 58.
say, here I am. And of Fasting, he speaks thus. Behold when you fast, your
lust remains still, for you do no less violence to your detters: lo, you
fast to strife, and debate, and to smite with your fyst without mercy: now
you shall not fast thus, that your voice may be heard above. Think you this
fast pleases me, that a man should chasten him self for a day? and to hang
down the head like a bulrishe, and to lie upon the earth in an heaircloath?
should that be called fasting, or a day that pleases the Lord? Does not this
fasting rather please me. That thou loose the wicked bands, that thou ease
the over heavy burdens, that thou let the oppressed go free, and break al
manner of yoke? To deal thy bread to the hungrye, and to bring the poor
vvandring home unto thy house? when thou see the naked that thou cover him,
and hide not thy self from thine own flesh. etc. And of Sacrifices he
speaks thus also: Why offer ye many sacrifices unto me, Esa. 1.
will the Lord say? I am full of the burnt offeringes of vvethers, I have no
pleasure in the blood of bullockes, lambs, and goats. When ye come to
appear before me, treading in my courts, who has required this at your
hands? Offer me no mo oblatio^s for it is but lost labor: Incence is an
abominable thing unto me, I may not away with your new moons. When ye hold
out your hands, I will turn mine eyes from you: and though you make many
prayers, yet will I hear nothing at al: seeing your hands are full of blood.
How shall I then sacrifice unto the Lord? A contrite spirit is a sacrifice unto
Psa. 50.
God. What incense shall I offer unto the Lord. He is an odor of sweet smell
unto Eccle. 35.
the Lord, that glorifyeth his creator. And as concerning Patience, Christ
him self says. If thy brother offend thee, Math. 18.
rebuke him, and if he be sorry forgive him. If he offend thee seven times in
a day, and return seven times saying: I am sorry, forgive him. The Soldier
hears. Be content with your wages. Lu. 3.
And the Publycanes: Require no more then your duty.

The Judge has this commandment. Thou shall not accept one person in
judgment. Bribes do blind the Deuteronomy. 16.
eyes of those that see, and corrupt just words, to deliver him that has
done vvrong. Housekeepers and Masters of familyes are taught. That possession
gotten with iniquity, fleeteth away. Of Charity it is written. That love
covers Prou. 13. 28
the multitude of sins. Of Magistrates it is written. Give unto Caesar those
things which belong to Caesar: and to 1 Pet. 4. Math. 22.
God those things that are Gods. Of oaths and remembering of injuries. Have I
commanded your fathers coming out of the land of Aegipt, that they should
Leuit. 19. Eccle. 10. Esa 3. Luke 14.
offer sacrifice and burntofferinges? but I commanded this rather: That every
one thould forget injuries and offenses, and to love no untrue oath. Liars and
proud men hear this threatening. VVoo unto those, that call sweet bitter, and
bitter sweet, and again: VVoo be unto them that are wise in their own
conceytes: And he that humbles himself shall be exalted, and he that exalts
him self shall be brought low. Those that show pity and mercy, Mat. 5.
are pronounced blessed, Because they shall obtain mercy. Envy and
displeasure is accoumpted a hurtful thing, Because it Sirach. 3.
destroys those that be wise. And as for enemies we are commanded, To love
Mat. 5.
them, to bless those that curse us: And unto him that smyteth thee upon the
one cheek, offer unto him the other. Our servants are to be used gently, for
they are men as we be, and there is no respect of persons before God.
Vainglory is also beaten down: VVoo be unto you Pharisees, because you love
the highest Math. 11.
seats in the Synagoges, and salutations in the market places. Of alms deeds
it is written. Come ye blessed children of my father, receive the kingdom
prepared Mat. 25.
for you from the beginning of the world: for I was hungry aad you gave me
meat, I was thirsty and you gave me drink. Faith and troth in word and
deed are highly commended. Wherefore laying aside lies, let every one speak
truth Ephesians. 4.
unto his neighbor, for we are members one of another: let not the Su^ne set
upon our wrath, neither let us give place to the Devil. He that stole, let
him steal no more, but rather let him labor with his hands, that he may be
able to give unto the needy. Let all bytternes and wrath, and fiercenes, and
cursed speaking, be removed from amongst you, with all that which is evil.
Be gentle and mercyful one toward another, doing good one to another, as Christ
has done good unto you. Be you wise, and followers of God as dear children,
and Ephesians. 5.
walk in love, as Christ has loved you. You wives be subject to your own
husbands, as unto the Lord. And you Ephesians. 6,
husbands love your vviues, as Christ loved his church. You sons obey your
Parents. Fathers prouooke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in the
nurtour and admonicion of the Lord. You servant obey your Masters after the
flesh, with trembling and fear, in symplicity of your hearts, as it were
serving Christ from your hearts with good will. And you Masters do well unto
your servant, remitting threats, knovving that both their Master and yours
is in heaven, and is no accepter of persons. If we live in the spirit, let us
walk Gal. 5.
in the spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, envying one another, and
provoking one another. Let us bear one another hurthen. Let us not deceive
our selves, for God is not deceived. And Gal* 6.
again. We beseech you brethren vvarne them that are unruly, comfort the 1.
These. 5.
feeble minded, lift up the vveake, be patient toward all men. See that none
recompense evil for evil unto any man, but ever follow that which is good,
both among your selves, and unto all men, Rejoice ever, pray continually, In
all things give thanks, for it is the will of GOD in Christ Jesus tovvard you.
Quench not the spiritte, despise not Prophesyings. Examine all things, hold
fast that which is good, abstain from all appearaunce of evil. Let your
speech be alvvayes in grace, powdered Colos. 4.
with salt, to know how you ought to answer every man. And again:
Godlynes is profitable to all things, having 1. Tim. 4.
promises of the life that is now, and of that which is to come. And of
serrauntes it is written. And they which have believing 1. Tim. 6.
Masters, let them not despise them because they are brethren: but rather let
them do service, for as much as they are believing and beloved, and partakers
of the benefyte. And that general exhortation is worthy remembrance. Seeing
that we have diverse gifts, according to the grace that is given unto us:
either prophecy after the measure of faith, either office in administration,
or he that teaches, in teaching, or he that exhorts, in exhorting, he that
gives in singleness: he that rules in diligence, he that is merciful in
cheerfulness. Love without dissimulation, hating evil, cleaning to good.
Affectioned one to another with brotherly love, in giving honor, go one
before another. Not lyther in business, fervent in spirit serving the Lord.
Rejoicing in hope, patient in trouble, instant Romans 12.
in prayer, distributing to the necessity of Saints, given to hospitality.
Bless them which persecute you, bless and curse not. Rejoice with them that
rejoice, and weep with them that weep. Being of like affectioned one
toward another: be not high minded, but making your selves equal to them of
the lower sort, not wise in your own opinions. Recompense to no man evil for
evil, providing aforehande things honest, not only before God, but also in
the sight of all men. If it be possible as much as lies in you, have peace
with all men. These few things I have chosen from amongst many, out of the
holy scripture, which I thought good to offer unto my scholars, that they
might learn to pluck up sin and iniquity by the roots. The body of the
holy scripture conteyneth a plentyfull stoore of many other precepts, meet
for an kinds and callinges of men: for the Clergy, and for the layetie, for
Princes, for Priests, for governors, and for subjects, of the which
occasion, may peradventure be given to speak more aptly in another place. Our
heavenly father has left his will unto us in his holy word. And whereas the
horse is broken with the bytte, and bridle, the Ore with the yoke, the wild
beast is caught with the net, the fish with the hook: he has ordained his
word, to alter and transformer reasonable men. Let us most humblye beseech him
to give us his grace, that we may obey his word, and follow his precepts and
commandments: that we may wade through the floodes of sin, and come into
the quiet haven of eternal peace, there to be thankful, and always to extol
the heavenly Father, with his only son, together with the holy ghost world
without end. Amen.


