A BRIEF REPLY OF THOMAS VDALL, GENT. To a short MEMORANDVM, or show of
Answer against his Book Entitled: A brief View of the weak Grounds of
Popery: by B. C. student in Divinity.

Chrysostom. in Math. Hom. 19. Qui mendax est, neminem putat verum dicere.

He that is a liar, thinks no man speaks truth.

Leo Epist. 83. ad Palaestinos. Ecclesiae nomine armamini et contra Ecclesiam
dimicatis.

You arm your selves with the name of the Church, and yet ye fight against the
Church.

LONDON Printed by W. S. for Samuel Macham and are to be sold in Paul's Church
yard at the sign of the Bul-head. 109.

To the Christian Reader.
GOod Reader, It is now more then two years, since I published (for some
special respects) A little Book entitled, A brief view of the weak grounds
of Popery. Of late there came to my hands; A refutation of Master Bells
Treatise, Entitled, the trial of the new Religion, and a short view of Thomas
Rogers untruths; with a short Memorandum for T. V. otherwise called Thomas
Vdall, by one B.C. Student in Divinity, as he styles himself: wherein he
presents me with A short sample of such foul flawes as are in my Book, as he
suggesteth: Which subject he minds hereafter to prosecute with a more full
hand. If his mind change not, Or that the happy news of my Conversion,
cross not his designements. Whereof he seems so confident, that in two
places of the three last leaves of his Preface (which is all that concerns me,
in that Tract) he boldly affirms, that he sees no cause to despair of; If
true zeal of truth, and saving my soul, have set me a work: Which two
principal motives (with a fervent desire I had, to withdraw some of my best
friends from that Egyptian darkness of Popish superstion: which to Gods glory
is since effected) I do ingenuously confess, to have been the sole and only
cause of that small Tract.

But I cannot but marvel, upon what ground, or hope, this confidence of my
conversion should be so presumed; (unless it be to gull some of his Popish
dependantes with the hope thereof) since in this little, he has delivered, he
has only excepted against five particulars, which he has selected out of
several places in my book: And yet, if they were all granted, It nothing
impeacheth the sum and substance thereof; but that it may be notwithstanding
sound and good enough: unless in Master B. C. Logique, these be good
inferences. T. V. has mistaken, or misalleadged some few authorities, in his
Book: Ergo, he has not showed the weakness of the grounds of Popish
Religion: Ergo, the Papists are wrongfully charged with blasphemy: Ergo, the
Scriptures defended by the Papists are not convinced to be Apocripha, etc. But
it seems by Master B. C. proceeding, both with me and others; That such is
the simplicity of the Popish vulgar Catholics, that he assures himself, if
he can but convince a few places, among many, to be mistaken, or misalleaged;
it is sufficient to persuade them, that the whole book is nothing but lies,
and untruths: Albeit, they must be very simple, That seeing ten or twelve
witnesses produced, eight or ten whereof, prove the point directly (though two
of them fail) will not judge the truth sufficiently approved: especially, if
the witnesses be without exception. And surely he must needs be very well
persuaded, either of his own worthiness, or of my insufficiency, that does
thus presume of my conversion, without justifying his own grounds, or laying
open the weakness, of those Engines of mine (as he phraseth them) wherewith
(he says) I labor so much to undermine, the impregnable grounds of the
Catholic Church: which grounds are so sufficiently battered and beaten down,
by the answer of that learned and Reverent Minister, Master VVootton, to A. D.
Treatise of faith, That it rests not in the power of any Popish Procter, ever
to repair them. But that I may not hold thee too long in so short a subject, I
will truly acquaint thee with such substantial stuff, as Master B. C. has
gathered, (as he says) Either for my spiritual profit, or the commodity of
other, or the common good of both: which shall be set down verbatim with
peculiar answer to every Section; in hope that when he prosecuteth the laying
open of the maladies of my Treatise, (as he terms them) I shall receive the
same equity from him: that it may appear what he answers, and what he
omits. And for the better unmasking of that, which he has excepted against in
my Book; I will endeavor first to deduce my own reasons, and then his
answers thereunto, into true form of Sillogisme. That it may be evident to
the judicious, that if all, wherewith I am charged, were granted; yet is the
sum and substance of my Book, untouched, or unanswered. And may not I pray
you, his seduced fellows, glory to have gotten so stout a Champion, that can
with such dexterity disspatch three books at once. And is not this sufficient
to discredit all T. V. Book? No doubt it will stay the languishing desire of
many Papists; that there is now some hope, the grounds of their Religion, shall
be particularly defended; and Tho. Vdals Book wholly confuted: though Doctor
Norris had it six months, before it was printed, and said nothing: and that
it has been now two years, since it was published, and only five poor
places of no consequence at all, for the substance, pretended to be falsified.
But I had well hoped, that Master B. C. professing himself a student in
Divinity: And an accepter of Master Bells Challenge, (with so many and several
coniurations; wherewith he urges, presses, and provoke him to disputation;
Sect. 18. of B.C. Preface.
) having seen in the Preface of my Book, with what earnestness I had
requested; and by so many several reasons urged, to have had my Book
answered: I had well hoped, I say, That Master B. C. would, even for the merit
of winning souls, And for the greater glory of that Catholic truth, whereof
he so much boasts; have made a full, and perfect answer to the same: And not
have wronged the learning and reputation, we might have conceived him to have
had; with such triuiall exceptions. But no doubt this is sufficient to persuade
some of his credulous crew, that the book is answered. And yet, if I should
charge him with the like exceptions, as Master Bell does; and tell him, It
stands not with the credit of the Catholic cause or Romish Divines, to
answer by patches and pieces: I must look to receive the same answer, he has
made to him, in this his Preface to us all, That he hopes the good Reader will
consider, that as he was not bound to meddle with the Pamphlet at all: So was
it at his choice to leave what he listed, and take what he pleased; especially
making open profession of that course: An answer no doubt worthy of such a
refuter, since children, where they cannot read, skip over. And therefore good
Reader, thou may see by this little, what thou must expect hereafter: That
when he has showed the flawes, and maladies of my Treatise, (as he
supposes) and disgorged himself, of some carping exceptions, against some
mistaken questions (if any such happen to occur) The substance of the Book
will stand sound and firm, against all the cauelling Champions of the Romish
Synagogue. And so wishing them all increase of knowledge to Gods glory, I bid
them Farewell in Christ.

Tho. Vdall.

A brief Reply of Thomas Vdall Gentle. to a short Memorandum, or show of
answer, against his Book, Entitled, A brief view of the VVeake Grounds of
Popery, By B. C. student in Divinity, according to the order proposed in the
Preface.
B. C. Sect. 1.
Being thus dispatched of Master Rogers: it remains to speak a word or two
of another Book, which was not long since sent me, and is Entitled. A brief
view of the weak grounds of Popery, compiled together by one Master Vdall, a
lay Gentleman of diverse English Controuertists, as himself seems to
insinuate, and in all probability cannot otherwise be thought, and so no
marvel, if the waters be not sound, when they were drawn from corrupt
fountains, and who can ever look for a well shapen garment, made after a
crooked measure. Grapes are not gathered of thorns, Mat. 8.16.
nor figs of thistles, as our Savior says: yet does it so much please
Master Vdall, that he does seem to take great heart of grace, for that he
was not answered with that expedition he expected. The more haste he makes,
the more he urges his own disgrace, if malice have set him a work: but if it
be true zeal of truth, and saving his soul as he pretends, I despair not
of his conversion: wherefore either for the spiritual profit of himself, or
the commodity of other, or common good of both, I will now present him with a
short sample of such foul flawes as be in his book, minding afterward with
more full hand to prosecute that subject.

T. V.
IT seems, at the first entrance of Master B. C. Memorandu^, That he would
willingly extenuate the matter of my Book, by tearming me A lay Gentleman:
insinuating to his Popish dependants, That they should not so much weigh, what
is spoken, as who speaks: though all men of judgment, weigh rather the
speech, then the speaker. And so (I hope) will not inquire so much what I am,
as what I say. The general scope and drift of my whole book may be thus
deduced.

That Religion which has weak, and uncertain grounds, cannot be the true
Religion: But Popish Religion has weak and uncertain grounds: Ergo, Popish
Religion cannot be the true Religion.
The Mayor is evident, and the Minor is proved throughout my whole book, in
the Refutation of every particular ground of Popery. Against my Book Master
B. C. reasons thus.

That which is drawn from English Controuertists, cannot be sound: But Master
Vdalles Book is drawn from English Controuertists: Ergo, Master Vdalles Book
cannot be sound.
How Master. B. C. has quit himself for the proof either of his Mayor, or
Minor, I leave to the censure of the learned. But I pray you let me ask you
this question: May not truth be drawn from English Controuertists? What will
then become of Hardings works, the Rhemes Testament, Cardinal Allens,
Parsons, Raynolds, Bristowes, and your own, with many others: Surely if the
feathers, you have borrowed from Harding, Stapleton, and others, were plucked
from you; your whole book would be as naked, as Esopes Crow. If I have taken
great heart of grace, for that I was not answered with that expedition I
expected: I may do so still, for any answer I have yet made you: neither do
I see any cause now to discourage me, since that after almost two years
(meeting with one so sharp sighted, as your self) I find nothing answered to
any purpose. For I truly protest, I see not, (neither I think do you) What
spiritual profit to my self, or what commodity to other; or what common
good to both; the short sample of such foul flawes, as you present me with,
should procure either to other, or to me. But you mind hereafter (you say) to
prosecute that subject, with a more full hand: you had need; for this is very
barren, and empty. And if your promises hereafter, prove no better, then
these supposed flawes, now presented; you may well change your opinion: And
say, you despair altogether of my conversion.

B. C. Sect. 2.
IN his Preface to his dearest Cousins, (whom with poison lurking under sugared
words he labors to inuenome) he accuses us of open blasphemy against the
sacred Scriptures: which I think will rather prove a gross untruth on his
part, and where is this blasphemy contained? in a book as he tells us of
Cardinal Cusanus, which is entitled, De authoritate, etc, Of the authority
of the Church, and Councels, above and against the Scriptures. But I beseech
him, did he ever see this book, which so confidently he alleges? if he
has, then should he have done well to have noted where, that the Reader also
might have found it, seeing it is not amongst the three Tomes of his works,
set out at Basil, In the year 1565.
neither mentioned by Trithemius, who has diligently gathered together, the
works of learned writers: nor yet by Posseuinus who has lately entreated of
the same matter. In the year 1565.
If he has not: what indiscretion is it, in so weighty a point, to rely upon
the credit of others. Verily, would such as read Protestants books, but
vouchsafe sometime to examine the quotations, it were not possible that they
could be so pitifully deceived, as they daily be: Cusanus is abused, he never
wrote any such book. This untruth it may be borrowed from Master Jewel,
Detection. lib. 5. page 410.
who does not only cite that book, but also (as though he had known it very
well) quote very many places out of the same, as he is charged by Doctor
Harding: which argues that out of true books he could have proved any thing
for himself, that out of one, which was never written, found so many
testimonies to serve his turn. I would not wish Master Vdall, to employ his
time so badly, as with the touch of his credit, and peril of his own soul,
to retale the untruths of such gross Merchants.

T. V.
THat, which you call Poison, is rather an Antidote against the infection of
such poisoned spirits, as yours: But to the matter, it is true, that in the
Preface of my book I have charged the Papists justly with blasphemy. The
force of my reason there may be thus deduced.

Those, which have published blasphemies in print against the sacred
Scriptures, have uttered open blasphemy: But the Papists have published
blasphemies in print against the sacred Scriptures: Ergo, the Papists have
uttered open blasphemy.
The Mayor is evident, and the Minor is proved by Cardinal Cusanus, Syluester
Prierias, Boniface, the Archbishop of Mentz, Hosius, Eckius, and others.
Against which Master B. C. reasons thus.

If Cardinal Cusanus never writ any such book, then there is no such
blasphemy: But Cardinal Cusanus never writ any such book: Ergo, there is no
such blasphemy.
I deny the consequence of the proposition, though Master B. C. would
insinuate, by the question, and answer, That there had been no other proof,
to justify my accusation, but that of the Cardinals, saying: But where is this
blasphemy contained? In a Book (as he tells us) of Cardinal Cusanus, which
is entitled, De Authoritate, etc. Of the Authority, etc. What? In that book
only? And not also in diverse other places, and authors? Why are all those
omitted? Why is this one singled out of the heard? Surely, because this seemed
likely to admit some cavil; they were out of danger. But is it a just
difference; whether the blasphemy be in the Title of the Book, or in the
book it self? For albeit, it were not in the title of the book (as both
Bishop Jewel, and Doctor Downam affirm it is) yet it is in the book of his
Epistles, as I have showed in the Preface: And to convince evidently this
blasphemy of the Cardinals I will show once again. The Blasphemy maintained
is, that they were to receive the Communion in both kinds, according to the
Scriptures: against which the Cardinal, opposes himself, in diverse places of
his Epistles, and for the justifying of his assertion, he urges these words,
as I have set them down in the Preface. It is no marvel (says he) though
the practice of the Church, Nicola. Cusa. ad Bohem. Epist. 7
expound the Scriptures, at one time one way, and at another time another way;
For the understanding or sense of the Scriptures runs with the practice, and
that sense agreeing with the practice is the quickening spirit; And a little
after he concludes, And therefore the Scriptures follow the Church, but
contrariwise the Church follows not the Scriptures. Now that, which precedes
in authority, is above that which follows: and so the Church, by their
divinity, is avouched to be above the Scriptures. And if the Church follow not
the Scriptures, it is evident (if God, and his word be both one) That he, that
is not with the Scripture is against it. And so the matter of the Epistle is
all one with that title of the authority of the Church and Council, above and
against the Scriptures, though the Epistle it self be not so entitled.

And that you may know this opinion or blasphemy, is not peculiar to the
Cardinal, or to one Papist only: Eckius in his Enchiridion of the authority
of the Church, Answ. the third, has set down, that this position: The
Scripture is greater then the authority of the Church is to be reputed
amongst heretical assertions, and that the contrary proposition is Catholic.
And this blasphemy of theirs is so general, that you shall find this sentence
often inserted in the Common Law. The Church is above the Scriptures.

The other place of the Cardinals there noted, is this: This is the judgment,
(says he) of all them that think rightly; that they found the authority, Ad
Bohem. Epist. 2.
and understanding of the Scriptures in the allowance of the Church; and not
contrariwise lay the foundation of the Church in the authority of the
Scriptures. Now if this be sound divinity; then may your proud Clergy,
assume unto themselves to be Lords of the Scriptures. For how directly so ever
the Scriptures be against them (as in this instance of the communion to be had
in both kinds, it is most directly) they may give it what sense they list: yea
expound it to day, after one fashion; and to morrow after another, as shall
please the Pope, and his Clergy: which can no way agree with the spirit of
God; who is always one and the same. And if this convince not the Cardinals
blasphemy: See the 3. Epistle of the same book page 838. where he says,
When the Church changes her judgment, God also changes his.

But admit I had failed in this proof: yet had the other testimonies been
sufficient, to approve the truth of my accusation: if these and such like may
justly be termed blasphemies Syluest. Prier, cont. Lutheri conclusiones de
potest. Pap.
That indulgences are warranted unto us, not by the authority of the
Scriptures, but by the authority of the Church, and Pope of Rome; which is
greater. Did. 40. C. Si Papa.
That they rather desire the ancient institution of Christian Religion from the
Pope, then from the holy Scripture. Eckius de Eccles.
That the Scripture is not authentical, but by the authority of the Church:
Henric. Magist. Sacr Pa^atii Romae ad legate Bohem. sub Felice pap. 1447.
That the Pope may change the holy Gospel, etc. Vid. Kempnit. exam. part. 1.
page 47.
That the Scripture, without the authority of the church, is of no better worth
then Esopes Fables. And because I will be as charitable to Master B. C. and as
full of good wishes though I have no hope of his conversion) as he is to me: I
could wish, that he would not employ his time so badly, as to color or
justify such open, and palpable blasphemy. And surely, would such as read
both Popish, and Protestants books, Try the spirits, whether they be of God
or no; would not the Popish Priests prohibit the reading of our books: would
the Papists therein hold any indifferency; it were not possible, that they
could be so sedused with Popery.

B. C. Sect. 3.
IN his fourth page, thus he writes. Yea Arias Montanus a chief Papist, in
his Hebrew Bible, writes in the forefront and principal leaf of the book.
There are addded (says he) in this edition, the books written in Greek,
which the Catholic Church following the Canon of the Hebrews reckneth amongst
the Apocrypha. The true sense of Arias Montanus words is corrupted, either by
Master Vdall, or some other, from whom he had them, by foysting in diverse of
their own. That learned man in the edition of the Hebrew Bible, Arituerplae ex
officin^ Christoph. Plaut. 1584.
with the Latin interlineall interpretation, in the Title page, says. There
are adjoined to this edition, the books written in Greek, which are called
Apocrypha. He says not, they be Apocrypha: but that they are so called by
some, that is the Jews, who exclude them from their Hebrew Canon, which he had
there set forth. That other addition, viz. which the Catholic Church
following the Canon of the Hebrews reckons amongst the (Apocrypha) upon
which the force of his charge depends, are not in Arias Montanus: where
Master Vdall had them, himself best knows.

T. V.
IT is true, that in the fourth page I have showed, how the Papists dissent
from the Fathers both ancient and modern. The reason there may thus be
deduced.

That Church, which dissents from the Fathers, both ancient, and modern;
touching the Canonical, and Apocryphal Scriptures, cannot truly boast of
their agreement with them in all points: But the Popish Church dissents from
the Fathers, both ancient, and modern, touching the Canonical, and
Apocryphal Scriptures: Ergo, the Popish Church cannot truly boast of their
agreement with them in all points.
The Mayor is plain in it self; and the Minor is proved by these testimonies,
Hier. in prol. galea. and epist. ad Pauli. et in praefa. lib. Reg. et in
praefa. prolo. Salom.
S. Hierom Ruf. in his expo. upon the Creed.
Rufinus, Cyril. of Hieru. in the 4. of his Catachis.
Cyrill of Jerusalem, Athan. in Synop. Salu. Sempit.
Athanasius, Nazianz. in carminib.
Nazianzen, Epipha. de mensu. et pond.
Epiphanius, Cypr. upon the Creed.
Cyprian, Damas. 49.
Damascenus, Hugo. de Sanct. vict. de Sac. in prolog. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Hugo de Sanct. victor. Radul. in Leuit. lib. 14. cap. 1.
Radulphus Lyr. in pro. in lib. Apoc.
Lyra, Hugo Car. in pr. Joshua.
Hugo Cardinalis. And Arias in his Hebrewe Bible.
Arias Montanus, Against which Master B. C. reasons thus.

If Arius Montanus be corrupted by M. Vdall, or some other, from whom he had
them, by foysting in words of their own, upon which the force of the charge
depends, then is Master Vdall, or some other, from whence he had them, proved
to be corrupters, and those Scriptures, which we defend to be Canonical, are
not convinced to be Apocryphal. But the Antecedent is true. Ergo, the
Consequent.
I deny the consequence of the proposition, because if this place had been
misalleaged; yet had that, which I intended, been sufficiently convinced by the
testimonies of the other fathers and writers, which I alleged. And is not this
a substantial argument, for such a disputant as Master B. C. would be
presumed to be, by his many, and several Coniurings, Adiurings, Prefat. Sect.
18. of his book.
and exorcismes of M. Bell to disputation? But, if herein the untruth, and
corruption be justly returned upon himself; with what countenance will he
look upon his followers, when it may happily come to their knowledge, That he,
that is the Counter challenger, and common taxer of others, shall be found
guilty of that crime, which he objects to others. Would God that lay Papists
would make trial of their teachers sincerity, whereof they brag so much, by
accusing others. But to clear my self from this corruption; let the Reader
see the same Hebrewe Bible which is noted by Master B. C. 1584. and he shall
find the words as I have alleged them, truly delivered; which for his better
satisfaction, I will set down in Latin, least he except against the
translation. The words be these, Accesserunt, and huic aeditioni, libri Graece
Scripti, quos Ecclesia orthodoxa, Hebraeorum Canonem secuta, inter Apocryphos
recenset. There are added (says he) to this edition the books written in
Greek, which the Catholic Church, following the Canon of the Hebrews,
receives amongst the Apocrypha. Thus you see I have proved that, whereon you
confess the force of my charge depends; and therefore, by your own
confession those Scriptures, which the Protestants reject, are approved to be
Apocrypha. But for that I am a lay Gentleman, and Master B. C. A student in
Divinity, I may not usurp that speech of his, and tell him; That if he looked
into the originals, he could not retaile the untruth of such gross Merchants.

B. C. Sect. 4.
IN the fifth page, he writes thus. The Council of Laodicea, assured by a
general Council of Trullo, did set down the same Canon of the Scriptures,
which both the old Church had, Can. 59.
and our Church holds: and commands. Ne aliqui, etc. That none besides be
read, and received into authority. How many things of note, are comprised in
these few lines against Master Vdall. First he seems greatly to reverence
these two Councels, which yet is but a copy of his countenance, to delude the
ignorant Reader, for I do not think that he will stand either to the one or
other, though content he is, to press us with their authority. For example,
the Council of Laodicea, Can. 48. Can. 50.
commands Crisme to be received after Baptism: and that the fast of lent be
observed: neither of which, I am sure, pleases Master Vdall. Likewise the
Council of Constantinople holden in Trullo allows of images, and their
veneration, when it calls them, imagines venerabiles, venerable images, which
I make no doubt, nothing pleases his taste. Can. 82. Can 6. Can. 58.
The same Council forbids Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, to
marry wives after taking of Orders: and commands Bishops not to dwell with
their wives, which they married before they entered into the higher Orders of
the Clergy: which severity of theirs must utterly dislike him, as being in his
opinion, contrary to the word of God.

T. V.
IT is true that in the fifth page, I have alleged the Council of Laodicea
allowed by a general Council of Constantinople in Trullo, for the proof of
that Canon of the Scriptures, which is in question between the Papists and us;
The force of my reason there, may be thus deduced.

The Canon of the Scriptures, which is set down by a particular Council,
allowed by a general Council, is to be held as good and sufficient: But the
Canon of the Scriptures approved by the Church of England, is set down by a
particular Council, allowed by a general Council: Ergo, the Canon of the
Scriptures approved by the Church of England, is to be held as good and
sufficient.
The Mayor is proved by all those Papists, that prefer the Council before
the Pope; for till late days there was no controversy hereof.

The Minor is proved by the words of the Council set down by me, as M. B.C.
relates them: Wherein many things of note (as he says) are comprised against
me, which notes of his I will handle particularly.

The force of his reason in this Section, lies thus.

If the Council of Laodicea, and the general Council of Constantinople in
Trullo do hold diverse things as Chrysme, and that Priests should not marry
after ordination, etc. which Master Vdal dislikes: then is it but a coppie of
Master Vdals countenance to delude the ignorant, to seem to reverence those
Councels by pressing us with their authority. But the antecedent is true.
Ergo, the consequent.
If I would trifle as Master B. C. does, I could tell him, that it follows in
the same 6. Canon, that if those, which will he of the Clergy, will marry
before ordination they may. And in the 13. Canon, that they may not be
separated from their wives, nor deprived of the use of them: and that those,
which under pretext of piety, expel their wives, are to be excommunicated:
all which I am sure pleases not Master B. C. chaste ears. But could any man,
that professes himself a student in Divinity, reason thus impertinently; if
he were not persuaded, that any thing would pass for current amongst the
seduced Papists: and can any man be ignorant, that has read my book; that the
whole scope, and drift thereof, tends to show the weakness of the Grounds of
Popery: of which, that of Councels, is held a chief one with them. For
howsoever the controversy amongst themselves; Whether the Pope be above the
Council, or the Council above the Pope: Or whether Councels should be
confirmed by the Pope, or not confirmed; be not yet determined: yet we profess
to reverence Councels no farther, then their doctrine is consonant, and
agreeable to the Scriptures: according to the opinion of that famous clarke
Saint Austin; who writing against Maximinus long before this new Popery was
hatched, says thus: Cont. Max. lib. 3. ca. 14.
But neither ought I to produce the Council of Nice, nor you the Council of
Ariminum for a prejudice; for neither am I tied to the authority of this, nor
you to the authority of that; but let matter with matter, cause with cause,
reason with reason; contend by the authority of the Scriptures, not proper to
any, but indifferent witnesses to both parts. You see hear, and may in diverse
other places of my book, what opinion S. Austin had of Councels, that would
not have his adversary tied, to the authority of the great Council of Nice;
comparable to which no Council was ever yet, since the Apostles. But if I had
failed in this proof, yet was the matter there intended sufficiently proved by
other testimonies; which you acknowledge to be your own grounds. Greg. Tom.
3. page 291.
Neither was it urged to delude the ignorant, as you either ignorantly or
maliciously affirm but rather to show, how you vary both from Fathers and
Councels, when they make against you.

B. C. Sect. 5.
SEcondly this Council of Constantinople in Trullo is of no authority, as in
which the Pope neither by himself, nor by his Legates, was present, Lib. de
sex aet atibus In Iustiniano.
and Pope Sergius, who then lived, did disanull that erraticall Synod, as
venerable Bede writes: with what conscience then can Master Vdall call that a
general Council, and urge the authority thereof as authentical: when as not
only we, but also the Protestants utterly reject it, albeit in this point, we
for our parts see no cause to refuse it. Thirdly true it is not, that the
Council of Laodicea sets down the same Canon of the Scriptures, which the
Church of England allows: for the Apocalypse or Revelation of Saint John is
omitted. Fourthly, this Council forbids the reading of others, not there
expressed: yet the Church of England reads the histories of Judith, and Tobie
in their public assemblies: which Master Vdall I suppose will hardly show, how
it agrees with the decree of that Council. Fifthly he has corrupted be
Council by adding somewhat of his own: for these words: and received into
authority be not there found. Would any ever have thought, that so many
things, could have been noted against him, in so small a sentence? If Master
Vdall has viewed the original; hardly can he be excused from malice: if he
has not, let him beshrew their fingers, upon whose credit, he committed them
to writing.

T. V.
IN this fifth Section, Master B. C. has showed great store of small knowledge;
by telling how many things of note, Are comprised in these few lines against
me: For if these notes, convince him of much weakness to handle controversies;
then may his Popish dependants wish: that he had answered with silence, as
Doctor Norris did before him: least his too much haste further his own
disgrace: if I may return his own words. But let us examine the particulars.

In the first note, the reason lies thus.

All Councels, that are of authority, must have the Pope, or his Legates
present: But this Council had neither the Pope nor his Legates present: Ergo,
this Council is of no authority.
I deny the Mayor, for I hope Master B. C. being so great a disputant, will
not still beg the question. And we may well hold this position, A novelty of
Popery: unless Master B. C. can show us (which never any yet did) some
testimonies of the ancient Fathers, that are not counterfeit; that ever wrote
or taught this doctrine. Besides master B. C. cannot be ignorant: Sciendu^ est
quod in vniuersalibus octo concilijs, vbi imperatores interfuerunt, and non
Papa, semper inuenio imperatores and iudices suos, cum senatu, primatum
habuisse, and officium praesidentiae per interlocutiones, and ex consensu
Synodi, conclusiones and iudicium fecisse, and non inuenitur instantia in octo
concilijs, preterquam in tertia action concilij Chalcedonensis. Cusan. lib. 3.
cap. 16. de concord. Cathol. Cap. 19.
That the ancient and first Councels, were neither called by the Pope: nor
he, either by himself, or his Legates, President therein. And in the second
general Council holden at Constantinople, Bellarmine confesses, that the
Pope was neither there in person, nor by his Legates; and also he says, De
cont. li. 2. ca. 14.
that Petrus de Aliaco, and Cusanus, both Cardinals, Gerson, Almain, Antoninus,
Tostatus, and many others held, That the Council is above the Pope. And the
same has aso been decreed in the three general Councels of Pisa, Constance,
and Basil; and as yet the contrary was never decreed: as Doctor Whittaker
shows in the fifth question of his Tract of Councels, and as Bellarmine
confesses, the question remains amongst the Catholics to this day. With
what Schollership or conscience then can Master B. C. conclude the Council to
be of no authority, because neither the Pope, nor his Legates were present.
And if Master B. C. be so well read in controversies, as it should seem: then
can he not choose but speak against his own knowledge: for he cannot be
ignorant, that many Popes have cited these Canons, since it appears even by
our adversaries; that these Canons were in times past held for the Canons of
the sixth Synod: And Gratiane often cites the^ in his decrees, and always calls
them Canons of the sixth Synod. And in Gratian did. 16. cap. 6. Adrian the
Pope says, Sextam Synodum sanctam cum omnibus suis Canonibus recipio, I
receive the sixth holy Synod with all the Canons thereof. And though Canus say,
That this Council made no Canons, yet the same is openly refuted in Gratian.
And Innocent in his Tract of the age, and quality of those to be ordered,
cites one of these Canons, and calls it a Canon of the 6. Synod. And the same
also Gratian cites did. 3 2. cap. Si quis. And Pope Adrian the first in the
Epistle to Tarasius, which is extant in the second action of the seventh Synod
openly confirms it. And though Bellarmine answer, that Adrian only recites
the sentence of Tarasius, and refels it not, because it was profitable to the
question then handled; yet does Pope Adrian use these words, In sextae Sinodi
Divine, and legaliter praedicatis Canonibus. In the Canons of the sixth Synod,
holily and lawfully published. And the Popes Legates demanded of the sacred
Synod, whether they received the letters of the most holy Pope or no? The
sacred Synod answered, we follow, receive and approve them. And what other
thing is this but to confirm the Canons of the sixth Synod? Neither is it any
strange matter for one Pope and a Council to condemn the decrees of another
Pope and Council; As I have showed in my book, page 58. 59. Of Pope Stephan
and Pope John.

And thus much for the first note.

The reason of his second note lies thus.

If Venerable Bede says, that the Pope did disanull that erraticall Synod:
then cannot Master Vdall with conscience call it a general Council, and urge
the authority thereof as authentical: But the antecedent is true: Ergo, the
consequent.
I deny the consequence, and demand of Master B. C. why I may not with as
good a conscience as Bellarmine, and diverse Popes and Papists before alleged,
call it a general Council: for Bellarmine reckons this Council amongst
those general Councels, which are partly approved, partly reproved.

And Caranza that gathered the sum of the Councels, shows immediately before
the Canons, that nine Canons, of the same Synod were rejected as bastards, and
that these 102. Canons were not as yet forsaken and cast off. And though many
hold that this Council made no Canons, yet a Council made them with credit of
a general Council. Prefat. Synod. Trul. ad Iustini.
And the next general Council did confirm them. Conc. Nic. 2. cap. 1. And
Caranza shows that the Canons were made in supply of the other two Councels
that wanted, and therefore it was not numbered as the sixth, but called Quini
Sexta; because it supplied that which was wanting to the fifth and sixth. And yet
he calls it a general Council. Now could any man of M. B. C. learning upon
Bedes authority, urge such consequents against all these proofs before
alleged.

And for my urging it as Authent'call, I have showed before how far we
receive the authority of general Councels; and the reason why I urged it. But
I pray you master B.C. is this a Maxim in your Divinity: That whatsoever any
ancient Father has said, is to be believed? Surely, Saint Austin was of
another mind. For he challenges to himself a liberty to judge, In
quorumlibet hominum scriptis, De nature. and gra. contr. pelag. ca. 61. Ibidem.
In the writings of all men whatsoever, And adds this reason, because I do
consent without any stay to the Canonical Scriptures only, Cont. Faust lib.
11. ca. 5.
The rest must be read as he teaches, Non cum credendi necessitate, sed cum
iudicandi liberate, Not with a necessity to believe them, but with a liberty
to judge them. Epist. 48. de Peccat. Merit. and Remiss. l. 1. c. 22
And must be distinguished from the authority of the Canon, For that the
authority of the sacred Scriptures can neither deceive nor be deceived. Cont.
Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 3.
And by those books we may freely judge of other writings, both of Christians
and Infidels. And thus much for the second note.

The reason of the third note lies thus.

If the Revelation of Saint John be omitted by the Council of Laodicea, then
does not the Council set down the same Canon of the Scriptures, which the
Church of England allows: But the antecedent is true: Ergo, the consequent.
Master B. C. would feign find a knot in a rush, so much does it please his
cauelling, and carping spirit. For if he had observed in the third page of my
Book, that the answer which I there set down, in the name of the Protestant
touches only the books, which are in question beeweene us, he might have
found, that the proof I there brought, was touching the Hebrew Canon of the
old Testament. Whereof I might truly say, that this Council sets down the
same Canon of the Scriptures, which both the old Church had, and our Church
does hold: for reproof whereof, the omitting of the Revelation by the Council
of Laodicea (which was not in question) was impertinently alleged by you. And
thus much for the third note.

The reason of his fourth note lies thus.

If the Council forbid the reading of other books not there expressed: then
Master Vdall can hardly show, how the Church of England, reading the history of
Judith and Tobie in their public assemblies, agrees with the decree of that
Council: But the antecedent is true: Ergo, the consequent.
Is not this substantial stuff, and worthy of Master B. C. learning? What if
I could not show this? What inconvenience were it to the Church of England; or
what aduantageth it my adversary? Does any of us acknowledge, that the Church
of England, is bound to follow the decrees of councels in all things? Blush
then for shame is reason thus idely: yet we say with S. Hierom. That the
Church reads those books, See the 4. page of my book. Hierom. praefa. in
lib. Solom. Rufin. in expos. Symb. apud Cyprian
but receives them not amongst the Canonical Scriptures: And that they are
read for instruction of manners, but not alleged for confirmation of doctrine.
But it seems Master B. C. was much pressed by some of his followers to answer
my book: And therefore to give them some satisfaction, he would say somewhat,
though it were to little purpose.

And thus much for the fourth note.

The reason of his fifth note lies thus.

If these words (And received into authority) be not to be found in that
Council: then M. Vdall has corrupted the Council by adding some thing of his
own: But the Antecedent is true: Ergo, the consequent.
To this I answer, that those words are found in the Council; and therefore
Master Vdall is slanderously charged by Master B. C. The words are these, Quae
autem oporteat legi, and in authoritate^ recipi, hec sunt. Those Books which
must be read and received into authority, are these. From which thus I
dispute, those books, which are to be received into authority, are those set
down by the Council: But the books we call Apocrypha, are not there set
down by the Council: Ergo, those books, which we call Apocrypha, are not to
be received into authority.
Now, that I may pay M B. C. in his own coin, how many of these his worthy
notes, may be returned him; for having neither truth, nor Schollership; as the
using that silly shift of wrangling Sophisters; to take that for granted,
which he should have proved: The weakness of his consequence: the charging
me to use the testimony of the Council, for the Canon of the New Testament,
which he knew I applied to the old Testament: the urging of impertinent reasons
without end, or purpose: and the charging me with corrupting the Council, when
the same words are there found? would any man have thought, that he, that
takes upon him to be a Censurer of others, should have been justly convinced,
of so many gross ouersights before alleged?

B. C. Sect. 6.
IN the same fifth page, he makes us to allow the fourth book of Esdras most
untruly, and that contrary to his own knowledge, when as in the second page
he confesses, that we account both the third and fourth of Esdras for
Apocrypha.

T. V.
IN the same page, (from whence you take this exception) my words are these, I
omit many several contradictions, in all or most of the books, which we
reject, and they allow, whereby they may be convinced, not to be written by the
spirit of God, which is always one, and the same. See the 4. of Esdras 10.20.
and 2. Maccab. 2.4. and 1. Mac. 1.6. and 8. touching Antiochus. My reason here
may be thus deduced.

Those books, which imply contradiction in themselves, cannot come from the
spirit of God, who is always one and the same: But all, or most of the books,
which we reject, and they allow, implie contradiction in themselves: Ergo, all
or most of the books, which we reject, and they allow, cannot come from the
spirit of God, who is always one and the same.
The Mayor is evident, and the Minor is, in part thus proved: and may more
largely hereafter, if occasion be offered. Antiochus is said, in the first
book of Maccabees ca. 6. to die in Babylon for grief of the good success of
the Jews: and in the 2. book cap. 1. Antiochus was, with the rest of the
Soldiers, slain in the Temple of Nanea, and his head cut off, and thrown
forth. And in the ninth chapter, That he died a miserable death in a strange
Country amongst the mountains, against which Master B. C. reasons thus.

He that makes us to allow and disallow one and the same book, speaks untruly
contrary to his knowledge: But T. V. in his fifth page, makes us allow the
fourth book of Esdras, which in the second page, he confesses, we disallow:
Ergo, T.V. speaks untruly, contrary to his own knowledge.
You here charge me with the right nature of a lie, though you pretend, you
would not have the quarrel of God prosecuted like the quarrels of the world:
but you have invred your tongue to such immodest terms; that you cannot much
tax me, if I have been more sharp, then I purposed.

But I deny your Minor, and if you can, withal your Schollershippe (out of my
words, which I have set down of purpose) convince me either of untruth, or
contradiction: I will acknowledge you to have more learning, then you have yet
showed in your book. All, that I might have been charged with, was the
misquoting of the Chapters, and the bidding you see the fourth of Esdras: which
being received by both, cannot fit your cauelling spirit to imply any
contradiction or untruth in my words: but you are fitter to cauell, then to
answer the reason there brought: and yet this place must make up the number;
but I pity your necessity.

B. C. Sect. 7.
Lib. 1. de Con. cil. cap. 6. and not lib. 10. cap. 60. as M. Vdall quoteth it.
PAge, 51. To eneruat the force of general councils thus he writes. Bellar.
rejects wholly seven general Councels. That learned Prelate is injuriously
entreated, for who would not think, that Master Vdall spoke of lawful and
true general Counsels, as though such were rejected by Bellarmine, which is
nothing so: for he speaks of certain detestable conuenticles, assembled by
the Arrians and other like perfidious heretics, which they called general,
Primum generale, etc. The first General Council (says Bellarmine) in the
opinion of the Arrians, which is rejected, is the Council of Antioch, etc. If
these be detested by Protestants also for unlawful and wicked, why is
Cardinal Bellarmine singled out as though he alone refused them? or the
matter so cunningly delivered, as though they were reverenced by Master Vdall
and Protestants for lawful general Councels? This is not to deal sincerely,
and to seek truth with a pure and upright heart, unless he be so careless,
as to receive all upon the report of others, which yet cannot wholly be excused.

T. V.
IN the 51. page, my reason lies thus.

If Papists reject general Councels, we may reject them: But Papists reject
general Councels: Ergo, we may reject them.
The Minor is proved in the 50. 51. page, etc. by Andradius, Bellarmine,
Pighius, and Pope Leo. Against which Master B. C. reasons thus.

If those Councels rejected by Bellarmine, were the unlawful conuenticles of
the Arians, and no other: and such as the Protestants hold for unlawful and
wicked Councels; Then is that learned Prelate injuriously dealt with by Master
Vdall, to eneruate the force of general Councels: which is not to seek the
truth with an upright heart: But the Antecedent is true: Ergo, the Consequent.
I deny the Minor, for Bellarmine in the same Section reiectes the Council of
Constantinople and Chalcedon, as (no doubt) be does diverse other Councels, that
have resisted the Bishop of Rome. But do not I charge Bellarmine truly with
the reiection of seven general Councels? But you will say these were no
lawful Councels: Why so? you must now run to your old shift, and say,
because they were not confirmed by the Pope. Damasus in pontificuli. vide Fulk.
Rhem. Test. Act. 15. Sect 7.
And yet Liberius the Pope subscribing to the heresy of the Arians (as S.
Hierom says) no doubt confirmed some of them. But you will say, These were
wicked, and detestable Conuenticles: so say the Protestants. But what makes
them detestable? not the want of confirmation (for then this doctrine was not
dreampt of) but their corruption in doctrine. For many Councels lawfully
called, and lawful and general Councels, and such as Popes have confirmed;
have broached many unsound doctrines, as I have given some particular instances
in my book and shall give more, as occasion shall be offered. Which yet I will
confirm by a learned Papist, (equal with Master B. C. in learning, and
judgment) as I have cited him in my book. Pighius says, It is certain, that
not only these Councels of Constance and Basil, Pighius Hierar. Eccle. lib.
6. ca. 4. and 5. and. 13.
which we now disprooue, have shamefully and absurdly erred, but also many
others. And again, we find, that general Councels, even of holy Fathers, have
erred in decrees of faith: for example of general Councels, The Council of
Ariminum, universal no doubt; and also the Council of Ephesus, and that
likewise universal: these I say are witnesses, that even general Councels and
those lawfully gathered, may err. You see Master B. C. That Pighius, no
partial witness for us, calls some of those Councels lawful, and general,
which Bellarmine reiects: and likewise he reiects the Councels of Constance and
Basil: wherein (no doubt) Bellarmine agrees with him, in that point, where
those Councels prefer the Council before the Pope.

And yet Pope Martin the fifth, in the last Sessio^ of the Council of Constance
approves in his Bull all those decrees, which were made by this Council in
matters of faith, and prayseth and confirms them. And for the Council of
Basil, The Divines of Paris praise and defend the authority thereof against
Leo the tenth, and their commendation and defense thereof is extant in print.

And if Master B. C. sincerity were such, as he pretends, he could not be
ignorant, that Papists have rejected those Councels, which cannot be denied to
be both lawful, and general. And if the untruths, you have objected against
Master Bell, and Master Rogers, be no better proved, you have blotted much
paper, to little purpose. For what are these exceptions against my book, but a
ridiculous biting at the heel, when you are wounded at the heart?

B. C. Sect. 8.
THus much shall serve at this time, for by Gods assistance, I intend
hereafter more to lay open the manifold maladies of his treatise, and to show
with what weak engines he labors to undermine the impregnable grounds of
the Catholic Church. God grant that the happy news of his conversion, may
cross these my designements, whereof I see no cause to despair, if truly
zeal of religion, and desire of salvation, which so much he would seem to
thirst after, has embouldened him being a lay man, to launch into the depth of
these mystical matters. Let him not rely too much unto those, from whom he
receives the substance of that he writes, least together with the loss of
his reputation, he incur also the danger of eternal damnation: and if upon
this small warning, he finds himself to have been deceived, wisdom would,
he should more carefully look how he trusts, where he has been abused: and
with greater diligence both to examine his own writers, and also to read
ours, namely Cardinal Bellarmine, where he shall find the most of his
objections answered, as the Catholic author of that letter, which he has
put down in his book, truly enformeth him. To which, that gives no
satisfaction, alleged by M. Vdall for answer, to wit, that Bellarmines
reasons, are by the learned of his side sufficiently handled and replied unto:
when as the most of the arguments in his book be answered by Bellarmine, and
nothing do I find brought by M. Vdall to infringe his solutions: which gives
me just cause to suspect, that he is with the preconceyted sincerity of his
own doctors, carried away into error, and so looks little into the Originals:
which if he did, he culd not but find that which he pretends to seek for, if
he shut not his eyes against the truth, as he professes he will not. Which
that he may do, I shall not forget to commend him to his mercy, who desires
not the death of a sinner, but that all should come to the knowledge of his
name. But if it shall fall out, that he will still proceed forward in his
former course, yet I would wish him in writing, to abstain from all biting and
bitter words, which sometime he breaks into, that the quarrel of God may not
be prosecuted like the quarrels of this world, but with that modesty, which
becomes the professors of divinity and religion.

T. V.
YOu see M. B. C. that I have justified and freed my self, from all those
unjust imputations, wherewith you charged me. And therefore since you engage
your self, by this your promise; To lay open the manifold maladies of my
former Treatise: and to show with what weak engines (as you phrase them) I
labor to undermine the impregnable grounds of the Catholic Church: I hope
you will take warning by this little, that has been showed you; to deal more
sincerely in that which is to come: wherein it shall be much for your own
credit, and the reputation of the Catholic cause, whereof you so much boast,
to be so impregnable: that you answer not by patches and pieces, picked here
and there for your most advantage (as your Common custom is) but that you set
down my words verbatim: with the same equity that I have showed in this, for
if you deal otherwise, I shall scarce judge you worthy of any further answer.
And in the mean time I dare promise, That your designeme^ts shall no way be
crossed with the news of my conversion: though I protest, I will weigh the
reasons, that shall be delivered by you hereafter, with all indifferency and
good conscience. Albeit, I think it no such boldness, as you censure it, To
launch into the depth of these mystical matters: since I hold it the duty of
every Christian, to know the grounds of his Religion to be infallible; before
he build his faith thereon. And for the relying upon any man. I neither have,
nor will, further then truth shall warrant, as nere as God shall mable me to
judge; so yt if I be deceived (which I see no cause yet to distrust) it is
error in my judgment, not evil affection in my will. And whereas you wish me to
read your Authors: I may truly say, I never refused to read any of the^: nor
conference with any, how learned so ever: Or how much so ever I might thereby
have disaduantaged my self: and yet I was still more and more confirmed in the
opinion I now hold; and wherein I hope to die: unless Master B.C. will, for
the merit of winning souls, make known some more certainty in the grounds of
Popery, then I ever yet read, or heard of. You tell me, That Bellarmine has
answered most of my objections, as the Catholic Author of that letter
(inserted by me) has truly informed me, to which (you say) my answer gives
no satifaction. And which yet is strange, you confess my answer to be
this: That Bellarmines reasons are by the learned of our side, sufficiently
handled and replied too. Against which (very absurdly in my poor opinion (you
reiterate the same speech again; and say, That the most of the arguments in my
book, be answered by Bellarmine; and that you find nothing brought by me to
infringe his solutions: Insinuating, with more skill, then sincerity, That you
had urged some particular instances thereof; whereto I had said nothing. But if
you had truly laid down my answer in my letter; it would much have blemished
the reputation, both of your self, and that Catholic Author; That being so
much urged by me, neither of you both could, or would bring any such instance.
And how should I give a solution to that, which neitherof you both ever
instanced, though I much urged it in my letter, as these words there testify,
viz. And whereas you refer me in the conclusion of your letter, to Bellarmine
de Pont. and de Consiliis, where you say, I shall find most of my objections
of the errors of Popes, and Councels refuted: so can I, when soever you shall
instance any such particular refutation (which may ease you of some pains if
it be so sufficiently performed) refer you to some of the Authors, of our
side; where the same reasons, have been with no less sufficiency handled, and
replied too: assuring my self, that neither any of you have or can, make any
objection against the doctrine we profess, that has not been already
objected, and likewise by us answered. And if any can show me the contrary, I
will be beholding to him; neither will I shut mine eyes against the truth. May
you not now blush M. B. C. to affirm, that this my answer gives no
satisfaction? And having read this, to avouch, That you find nothing brought
by M. Vdall to infringe his solutions: When neither the Author of that
Catholic letter then, (as I have said) nor your self now, durst, as it may be
presumed, instance an answer out of Bellarmine, to any one particular
objection of mine? And yet, if you had done this; it had been but expense, and
loss both of labor and time. For as often as you produce any answer, of the
writers of your side against us: so often must I bring the reply of the learned
of our side, in discharge thereof: and so according to the fashion of this age,
fill the world full of books, touching these controversies, which have been
already handled, with much more sufficiency, then either of us can: for I am
very confident, that neither you, nor I, can bring any thing touching this
subject; that has not been already said: howsoever we may give it a new
gloss, thereby to make it seem to be our own. And since you wish me, if I
be willing to proceed; (whereto I am both ready and willing) to abstain from
all biting, and bitter words; that the quarrel of God may not be prosecuted,
like the quarrels of this world: I must likewise wish, for my own Apology, that
you had observed this your own rule to me and others: for then had I not
failed in satisfying this so good a desire. And for the better effecting
thereof hereafter, and for the sounder trial of those impregnable grounds,
whereof you are so confident: I earnestly request, and conjure you by the love
of truth; that we may both appear, at the judicial seat of a true Syllogism
(which we may do without any safe conduct) where the substance of the plea,
between us shall be: whether there be any certainty in the grounds of
Popery. And for that it seems by your facility in aunswering three books
at once (for so no doubt your Popish followers will conceive of it) That you
are so conversant in controversies, That a man cannot fail to receive
satisfaction at your hands: I beseech you, that this my request may be
performed Logically by Syllogismes, and Theologically, by Scripture proof. So
shall we avoid all impertinent discoursing and trifling; all gibing, and
reproching, and so charitably without bitterness, or endeavor to disgrace each
other; finish this combat to Gods glory, and to the satisfaction of many: for
if your grounds can be justified; all controversies, will quickly be ended.
But I have no great hope to draw you to this course; for you know too well, That
the grounds of your Religion cannot abide the touchstone of this trial: though
it would he great glory to you, but to undertake that, which none of the
learned of your side, could ever yet be drawn too: though I am persuaded, your
Popish dependants will assure themselves, you will not refuse so sure, and
learned a trial. But to conclude with the same charity to you, which you
seem to show to me; I will pray unto my God, that he will enlighten your heart
and understanding, with the spirit of his wisdom and grace: that you may
discern the truth of Christian Religion, to the glory of God and your own
Salvation.

Tho. Vdall.

FINIS.
Good Reader, let me request thy favorable censure touching the faults
committed by the Printer, which escaped by reason of my absence at the time of
the printing, and partly by the difficulty of the hand in the Coppie: all which
I pray thee first take notice of, as they are set down here following and then
read in their due places, as they are here amended and corrected.

Faults escaped.
IN the Preface page 3. line last, for fellows read followers. p. 5. l. 13.
there for Questions, r. quotations. l. 17. for them r. then. l. 18. for them.
r. thee.

Page 4. l. 16. for I have yet made you r. you have yet made, p. 6 l. 12. for
may be borrowed. r. may be he borrowed, p. 8. l. 14. for But is it a just
difference. r. But it is a nice difference, li. 23. for blasphemy maintained
is, r. Bohemians maintained, p. 14. l. 19. for whence r. whom, p. 16. l. 4. for
receives r. reckeneth. p. 18. l. 16. after the word Pope add these words,
who are very many, p. 27. l. 27. for I do r. I owe. p. 31. l. 12. for
consequence r. consequentes p. 34. l. 10. for received r. rejected.

In the Margent
Page 8. l. 18. Doct. Downam against Antich. l. 5. Sect. 10. omitted. p. 11.
for Heric. Magist. r. Heric. doctor Magist. p. 14. for Salu. sempit. r. sacr.
script. for de sar. de sacram. p. 21. Greg. Tom. 3. p. 291. placed in the
margent to no purpose. p. 27. this quotation Prefac. synod Trul. ad Justin.
should be placed 2. lines higher. Many of which the careful reader I hope will
easily observe and pardon.


