A DISCOVRSE OF ETERNITY Collected and Composed for the Common good, By W. T.

coat of arms for University of Oxford ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS
SAPIENTIA FELICITATIS

OXFORD Printed by IOH: LICHFIELD, for WILLIAM WEB, An. D. 1633.

THE FIRST CHAPTER Containing an Introduction to the ensuing Discourse.
THere is nothing can fully satisfy the mind of Man but that which is above
man, Fecisti nos ad te domine, and inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat
in te. Aug, lib. 1. Cons. cap. 1.
all the treasures and riches under Heaven cannot make up a proportionable
object for the soul. For that which must terminate the desires of so excellent
and divine a nature, must be of a correspondent and like condition with it,
that is, infinite and immortal. Now no sublunary blessings extend thus far:
All worldly happiness, and earthly delights have their changes, and have their
death. They are short in their continuance, and uncomfortable in their end. For
they leave us, when we leave the world, and they nothing avail us in the day
of trial, when our bodies shall descend into the slimie valley, and our souls
return to God that gave them, then all the choicest comforts of this life
glide away from us as the stream, and the sun of our joy will set for ever.
Our beauty wherein we have so much prided our selves, shall turn into
rottenness, our mirth into wormwood, our glory into dust. Now if this be the
condition, if such the state of our best pleasing contentations here below, how
indiscreetly, improuident of our souls welfare should we be, to bound our
affections on the things of this world, what a madness beyond admiration, were
it in us, to trifle out our time, to waste and wear out our most precious
days in the vanities under the sun, as if God had placed us here on earth,
like the Leviathan in the Sea, to take our pastime in it; to ingulfe our souls
into the sensual pleasures of this life, as if we had neither hope nor
expectation of a life to come, what an intolerable stupiditie were it, for the
short fruition of a momentary content here, to plunge our selves for
everlastingnes into a sea, as it were of fire and brimstone, where we shall
see no banks, and feel no bottom. Me thinks the serious consideration
hereof, should even cut the heart, and damp the mirth, and wound the very soul
of the most glorious and self pleasing worldling, whose life is nothing but a
change of recreations, to think upon his fading state, his flowing condition,
his declining joy, his dying life, and endless eternity, to see how all
things in him, and about him go speedily forward in a most sensible
declination, to behold with his eyes, how his goods, and his greatness, his
livings, and his life, and all the most precious delights which his sensual
heart enioyes, are already winged as it were for their flight, and must shortly
bid him an everlasting farewell. And then what shall be his stay, where shall
be his shelter, what will remain to be done, but with that sad and
disconsolate Heathen, to shut up all in that hopeless and helpless
lamentation, Anxius vixi, dubious morior, heu quo vado, I have squandred out my
life in an unfruitful way, I have lived vnresoluedly, and die doubtfully, and
now whether away O my soul, woe is thee and alas for evermore. And such is the
bitter close, and uncomfortable end of all those who go desperately on in the
ways of their hearts, and in the sight of their eyes, and make not God their
strength; though their excellency mount up to the heavens (says Job) and their
heads reach unto the clouds, yet shall they perish for ever as their doung,
and the eye which has seen them shall do so no more, Job. 20.6. O then how
deeply does it concern us, to raise up our desires to things above, to fix
our hearts upon the true rock, to draw our waters of comfort from the
everliving fountain, to trust so much more on God, by how much we have less
on earth to trust to. Now for our better encouragement to this duty, and to
the end we may the more easily unloose our affections from the imbracements of
this world, it will not be unworthy our labor to meditate a while upon the
nature of that Eternity which does vnavoidably abide for us either in horror
or happiness in the life to come.

CHAP. II. Containing a description of Eternity, with a brief declaration of
the nature and condition of it.
Eternity is an infinite, endless, bottomless gulf, which no line can
faddome, no time can reach, no age can extend to, no tongue can express. It is
a duration always present, a being always in being, it is one perpetual day,
which shall never see an Evening. Infinite are the descriptions of the
Ancients, and diverse their expressions, touching this Eternity. The Egyptians
conceiving that God was eternal, and his duration and being to be properly
termed Eternity, represented the divine power by a Circle, which had neither
beginning nor end. And hence it was that the Ancient Romans erected Temples
which they dedicated to their Gods in a circular figure. Thus Numa Pompilius
devoted a round Temple to the Majesty of Vesta. And Augustus Caesar the like
in honor of all the Gods: Pythagoras the better to express that God was
eternal, commanded his Scholars that so often as they accommodated themselves
to the worship of God, they should turn themselves round. The Turks every
morning ascend into an high Tower built in the fashion of the Egyptian
Pyramides, where they devoutly salute their God and Mahomet, crying with a loud
and roaring voice, Deus semper fuit, semperque erit, God always has been,
and ever will be. Mercurius Trismegistus, the most famous among the
Philosophers, represented God the true Eternity by an intellectual sphere,
whose Center was every where, but without any circumference, because he was the
beginning and end of all things, not bounded within any compass, nor
terminated in any limits. It was an usual custom among the Nasomons, an
ancient people in Africa, that they coveted to dye sitting, and would alwaie be
buried in the same posture sitting in Cells underneath the earth, and this they
did to fignifie by that immovable gesture, that they should now sing a requiem
from the business of this troublesome world, and had now arrived at the haven
of eternal quietness: Thus we see how these miserable heathen who had no
other light but nature, no other guide but those lame and corrupted principles,
which were left in them after the fall, did notwithstanding according to their
broken and weak apprehensions, tire out themselves in the expression of
Eternity, and how ever they were unhappily ignorant in the ways of God in
this life, yet they earnestly labored to know what should become of themselves
hereafter, and to find out the state of the life to come: Oh how justly might
I (were it not a digression) take up a lamentation and deplore the wretched
condition of our times, how short do we fall, even of the perfection of
Heathens, what man is there amongst us, that casts forth so much as a thought
upon Eternity? we live here as if there were no life hereafter. Our Earth is
our Heaven, and our pleasures, our Paradise, we crown our heads with rose
buds, we eat of the fat, and drink of the sweet, and say in our hearts, no
evil shall happen to us, and yet when we have done all, Omnes humanae
consolationes sunt desolationes, Hearts ease will not grow in this earthly
garden, the true rest will not be found, but in the true place, the eternal
Jerusalem, sound and entire contentment has no rooting in this world. For as
one has it excellently Dispone and ordina omnia secundum tuum velle and
videre, and non invenies, nisi semper a liquid pati debere, autsponte aut
invite and ita crucem semper invenies.
dispose and marshall all things to thine own hearts desire, yet shall thou
(do what thou can) still meet with some cross or presure in the way. Since
it is so, let us not then determinate our affections in these earthly things,
which are of no continuance, but let us send our hearts before us to those
heavenly mansions where they shall be crowned with fullness of happiness, and
shall swim in streams of pleasures for evermore. Certainly there is no true
rest but that which is eternal, and the sweetest refreshment our souls can
find in this world, consists in the serious meditation of the joys to come,
in devoting our selves and all we have to his service, from whom we have them,
in trusting to him, and relying on him, for out of God the soul finds no
resting place to set her foot on, but every where storms and waves, death and
hell abide her, when we have improued our contentments to the very height of
our desires, when we have attained as much happiness as the world can give us,
yet then may we be cut off perchance in the midst of our days, when our
breasts are full of milk, and our bones full of marrow, or suppose we spinne
the thread of our life to a longer day, and God crown us here with the
blessings of his left hand, the comforts of this life, and length of years,
yea though all things favor our longer continuance in this world, yet in the
end time and age will ruin us. We shall bring our years to an end, like a
tale that is told, and shall vanish away like a shadow, though we live many
years, and in them all we rejoice, yet in the end we shall remember the days
of darkness, says Solomon, and the time shall come that the eye which saw us,
shall see us no more. Soles occidere and redire possunt, nobis cum occidet,
semel brevis lux, nox est perpetuo vna dormienda Cat.
The Sun sets, and rises again, but we alas when our glass is run, and
the short gleame of our summers day is spent, shall never return till our last
summons, when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God, and they that
hear it shall live, and come forth of their graves, they that have done good
to the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the resurrection
of condemnation, both to Eternity, and then shall follow that large day, that
shall never shut in, that infinite continuation of time that shall never end,
that unlimited Eternity, which ever has been, and is, and will be the same
for ever, when the Sun shall no more yield her light by day, nor the Moon
her brightness by night, but God shall be our light, and the Lord our glory.
But oh the unhappy condition of our age, who is there that ponders these things
with a digested meditation, that looks into the state of his soul with a
serious eye, that examines his conscience, vnvaileth his heart, and considers
his ways. That endeauours to lay a good foundation for the time to come, we
stand at the door of Eternity, and while we live, we are every day entering
into it, it is but a stroke of death and we are gone, even in a moment, and
whether? from our short and fading delights, to an endless, easelesse gulf,
where our worm shall never die, nor our fire shall never out. Now let all
those who swim in the streams of their voluptuousness, putting far from them
the evil day, who labor to expel from their hearts, and to stifle in the bud
the sad consideration of their approaching infelicities, let them (I say)
know, that they may fall into this vast gulf of Eternity, when they least
suspect it; into which when once they have unhappily plunged themselves, they
may desire redemption, but shall not find it. Postqaum istinc excessu^ fuerit,
nullus poenitentiae locus, nullus satisfactionis effectus, Cyp.
It shall be one of their torments, to know they shall never be out of torment.
All the gold of Opher cannot purchase them one minute of relief from their
inexpressible miseries. But now, even now is the jubilee, now is the accepted
time, now is the promulgation of pardon, there remains nothing for our parts,
but to sue it forth, we need not many hundred of years or number of days to
redeem our misspent time, and to wash out our contracted pollutions, no, one
day, may through Gods gracious favor, and loving indulgence, procure more
mercy here, then Eternity of time may obtain hereafter, one sigh from a true
sorrowful heart here, shall prevail to discharge more debts, then infinite
ages shall acquit or satisfy for hereafter. Here God with patience expects our
repentance, but if we abuse his forbearance and come not in, hereafter with
trembling we shall abide his judgment:

Let us therefore be wise in time, and remember our creator in the days of our
youth, before the evil days come, and the years approach, wherein we shall
say, we have no pleasure in them, before our dust return into the womb from
whence it came, and our lungs be locked up into the brestlesse earth, before
that black and gloomy day, the day of death and dissolution appear to us the
which (if our timely repentance here prevent not our doom) will seal up our
souls to eternal darkness. Let us consider that wheresoever we are,
whatsoever we go about, we stand every minute of our time in the glorious
presence of an Immanifestus omnia autem manifestans per omnia apparet and in
omnibus.
incomprehensible majesty, whose bright and most piercing eye, is ten thousand
times clearer then the Sun, who knows all hearts, sees all actions,
understands all counsels, viewes all persons, there is not a word in the
tongue, not a thought in the heart, not a spark of lust in the flesh, though
never so softly blown, and secretly kindled, but he beholds it altogether, he
is all ear to hear, all hand to punish, and when and where he please, all
power to protect, and all grace to pardon, he that finds not his mercy, shall
feel his fury: and who amongst us can dwell with devouring fire, who amongst
us can dwell with everlasting burnings?

CHAP. III. Expressing how all men do naturally believe this Eternity.
WIthin these hundred years many nations have been discovered and many are
discovered still which were unfound in former ages. Amongst them some have
been found to live without law, without King, but yet none without some
knowledge of God, and of some everlasting being in the world to come. What
moved the Brackmans in India, and the Magies amongst the Persians, to begin and
end their undertakings with prayers to God? What moved Publius Scipio never to
enter into the Senate house before he had ascended the Capital, avowing that
principle as constantly in his practice as he did in his knowledge, A Jove
principium? What made Caligula (which threatened the air if it rained on his
game-plaies) yet, to run under his bed, and wrap his cappe about his head at
a clap of thunder? What moved Attillius Regulus (who had no other teacher then
a natural illumination) to prefer the obligation of his oath before the
safty of his life, and rather then he would break his engaged word and promise
to the Carthaginians, expose himself to all the torments that the cruelty and
malice of his enemies could inflict upon him? what moved the Saguntines a
people of Arragon to that undaunted resolution of theirs, who having plighted
their faith and loyalty by solemn oath to the Romans, chose rather to entombe
themselves voluntarily in a fire which they made in their Market place, then to
break their faith to the said Romans which they had so solemnly swore and
sacredly avowed under their protection? what, I say, could move these mere
naturalists to such a fear of an oath; to such a trembling at Gods judgments,
to such austerity, and care, and censorious circumspection in all their ways
and actions, but that they naturally apprehended what they truly and distinctly
understood not, viZ: Some immortal happiness and everlasting being? and this
they conceived was beyond the mountains, or above them, or in some other
world, they knew not where, according as their several fancies led them.

Certainly they would never have so much undervalued their earthly
contentments, and sold all the comforts of this life (as some of them did) at
so cheap a rate, but that they trusted to some future rest of more enduring
substance after this life, and comfortably expected the immortal fruition of
such joys as should abundantly countervaile the loss of all their pleasures.
When I revolue in my mind the Stoicall reservedness, the moderation, the
unconquerable courage of these miserable Heathens, when I see Cleombrotus in
hope of immortality to tumble himself voluntarily down a hill, when I see
Socrates smile upon his hemlocke, and fullen Scevola burn off his own hand
without ever gnashing his teeth at it, when I see Marcus Cato scorn his own
life because his enemy gave it him, and tear off the salve from his bleeding
sides, which his own sword had peirced: When I thus behold these unhappy
souls in the light of nature, to conquer nature it self, and to build these
their resolutions upon no other ground but the slender hope of some unknown
contentment in the life to come, me thinks these magnanimous acts of theirs
howeuer they are not for the imitation of us Christians, yet do they tend to
our condemnation. Their hope did exceed their knowledge, and our knowledge does
exceed our practice. God has revealed to us the immortality of the soul, and
the eternity to come, in a far more clear and perspicuous manner, then ever
to the heathen Idolaters, and yet we less regard it: what should more affect
us here since our life is but a vapor, then to know what shall become of us
hereafter? and yet the consideration hereof lies like a weight of lead upon our
souls; and we judge the very thought hereof a burden. We readily apprehend
such things as concern us in this world: our honors, our preferments, our
pleasures we look on with a cheerful eye: but alas with how slow and dull a
pace do we proceed in the pursuit of our future blessedness? we meet with
many stops in our way, many turnings in our journey: and the truth is we must
not expect to arrive at so happy a haven without some storms; but what are
these to Eternity that long day that shall never shut in; that vnum perpetuum
hodie, that beginning ever in beginning, in which the blessed do everlastingly
enjoy their happiness, and renew their pleasures, and the damned are always
dying yet never dye? O that the meditation of this our future state could sink
deep enough into our hearts, that we would make that the object of our
thoughts here, which must be the object of our accounts hereafter, that the
sense of our sins were the chief matter of our sorrows, then should we
enjoy an eternity hereafter boundless for time, endless for happiness,
where our joys should be such, as should neither change nor perish.

CAP. IV. Explaining how Nature has represented and shaddowed out Eternity to
us in some of the creatures.
NOw to the end we should be the farther encouraged unto the inquisition of
eternity, God has not only planted the knowledge hereof in the hearts of the
Heathens but has also represented it in the nature of the creatures. For if
we search with a narrow eye into the secrets of nature, how many things shall
we find in the world; as lively resemblances, shadowing as it were, and
traceing out unto us this eternity? Solinus reports of a stone in Arcadia which
being once inflamed burns perpetually. And of this matter were your burning
lamps made, which continued (as Histories speak) so many hundredth years in
ancient Sepulchers. Like hereunto in the nature of it is your Linum vivum, a
certain kind of linen known in India which is vncombustible, nay it is not
only, not consumed by the fire but it is as it were cleansed and washed and
purified by the heat thereof; and hence it was that the body of the ancient
Roman Emperors when they were to be buried according to the funeral rites of
those times, were shrouded up into such linen to preserve their ashes and to
avoid a confusion and mixture of their bodies with common dust.

Behold, here nature it self suggests an eternity to thy soul, while it
presents to thee such things as the fire cannot consume, many other such
Symboles and representations of immortality may be found in the book of the
creatures. The Salamander lives in the fire and perishes not, those famous
hills in Sicily have been on fire continually, beyond the memory of man, and
yet remain whole and unconsumed. The like we read, of that O leum
incombustibile (as Historians call it) an oil that ever burns, but will never
waste, and of the matter of this was that burning torch composed, which was
found in Tulliola, daughter of Cicero her sepulcher: which continued burning
fifteen hundredth years. These and many other shadows and traces of
eternity, God has vouchsafed us to stir up our dead and drowsy hearts to a
more exact inquisition and serious consideration of the time to come. For in
the book of the creature we may see the power of the Creator and out of these
particular works of his we may understand that, that God which has endowed
nature with such admirable qualities can give the flesh also such a condition,
that it shall endure according to his merciful dispensation either torments or
happiness for evermore.

Now then to draw all this to an issue, since it is undoubtedly true that God
has provided an everlasting being for the souls of men in the world to come:
since he has engraven the knowledge hereof as with an Iron pen in the
consciences of the Heathen, since he has given us so many lively resemblances
and traces thereof in the secrets of nature, and in the works of his creation,
Oh how should the meditation of this take up our deepest thoughts, our refinest
affections? how should this cause us to reflect upon our souls; to ponder our
ways and with an vndazeled and vndesembling eye thoroughly to try and to
descry clearly our own state, whether we be already washed with the blood of
Christ and enliuened with a supernatural vigor and life of grace, or yet ly
polluted in our own blood?

Oh, how can any man be at rest and quiet in his mind, till he be assured and
secured in this point; since that upon it depend his everlasting estate in
another world? our days we see are wouen with a slender thread, our time
short, our end uncertain, and when the oil in our lamps is spent, and our
glass run out, then ex vnico momento pendet duplex aeternitas, we fly in a
moment to an everlasting being either in horror or happiness, where we shall
receive according to the works of our hands. If we have approved our selves
sincere in Gods service, just in our actions, diligent in our callings,
faithful in our promises, we shall then attain the end of our faith, the
salvation of our souls; and the conscience of our well spent life, shall at
that dismal day replenish our souls with abundance of consolations.

Then all our tears shall be wiped from our eyes; what we have sowed in
sorrow, we shall reap in joy, when we have finished our course and ended our
combat with sin and death: then shall our crown be sure, our victory
glorious, and our triumph Eternal; our grave shall be but as a sweet
refreshing place to our wearied bodies, and death shall be our day star to
everlasting brightness.

But on the other side; if we have in the whole course of our warfare here,
expended our precious time in the service of sin and Satan, and crumbled
away the best and choicest of our years in the lusts of the flesh, and sports
of vanity; then the issue of all will be death, and our end destruction. Our
mirth will be turned into wormwood, and our joy into heaviness: all our
delights in this earth shall vanish as the flower, our sun shall set in a
cloud, and our days of iollity and contentation shall irrecoverably be
involued and turned into perpetual darkness.

CHAP. V. Containing a short digression touching the eternity of the damned.
AND here it will not be unseasonable, nor any digression from the point in
hand to consider with our selves, for our better encouragement to the ways of
holiness, the condition of that eternity which the damned have in hell. O the
unhappy and ever deplorable state of those poor souls, who feel nothing for
the present but wrath and vengeance, and can expect nothing to come but the
vialls of Gods indignation to be powered on them, in a fuller measure for ever
after! Nec qui torquet, aliquan do fatigatur, nec qui torque tuc, a liquando
moritur, Bernard. meditat. cap, 3.
And that which adds abundant weight to their miseries is; they shall burn
but not diminish; they shall lie buried in their flames, but not consume; they
shall seek death, but shall not find it: they shall desire it, but it shall
fly from them: their punishment consists not in the indurance of any proper or
peculiar pain, but in the accumulation and heap of innumerable torments
together. All the faculties of the soul, all the senses of the body shall have
their several punishments, and that which is more, inseperable, and more then
that, eternal: There shall be (...) degrees in their torments, but the least
shall be infinite. For as the wrath and displeasure of God toward them is
everlasting, so shall their pressures be. They enjoy an eternity like the
Saints, but not the Saints eternity; for their eternity shall begin in
horror, and proceed in confusion: their eternity shall purchase and yield to
them no other fruit but yellings and lamentations, and woe. Their eternity is
such as turns all things into its own nature: for all things where the damned
do inhabit are eternal. The fire is eternal: for the breath of God like a
river of brimstone has kindled it, and it shall never go out night nor day;
but the smoke thereof shall ascend for ever. The worm is eternal, for the
conscience of the damned shall be everlastingly tormented with the sense of
their sin: Their worm dies not, (says the Prophet) and their fire never
goes out. The prison wherein they are enclosed is eternal. The prayers of the
Church could open the prison doors to Peter, but no prayers can pierce these
walls, no power can overthrow them, no time can ruin them; out of Hell is no
redemption, no ransom, no delivery, Cruciantur damnati, cruciantur in
aeternum. This is the last sentence of the Judge, his irrevocable decree, his
immutable and eternal Judgment upon the damned, which shall never be
reuersed: Adesse intolerabile, abesse impossible.
there is no appeal will lie from this Judge; there is no reversing this
judgment, when the sentence is once past it stands for eternity; Hence it was
that the ancient Church repeated this sentence often in their divine service,
Peccantem me quotidie, and non me penitentem, timor mortis conturbat me quia in
inferno nulla est redemptio. Whilst I daily sin but repent not daily as I
ought, the fear of death amazeth me, because after this life ended, out of
hell is no redemption. The blood of Christ shed on Golgotha, is fully
sufficient to save all mankind, but it belongs not to the damned. If
therefore the yoke of repentance seem not sweet to thee (says St Bernard)
think on that yoke which thou shall be sure to suffer, which is Go ye
cursed into eternal fire. But the most deplorable thing which is eternal in
hell, is the irrevocable loss of the beatificall presence of God, the eternal
privation of Gods sight, the uncomfortable want whereof, does more grieve their
hearts, and wound their afflicted souls, then all their bodily torments. Thus
we see the unhappy estate and condition of the damned in the other world, and
how the highest link in all this chain of sorrows, wherewith they are
environed, is the miserable perpetuity of their torments, when their restless
thoughts have carefully run through many thousands of years, yet will they
not then enjoy one day, one little hour, one minute of rest and respiration.
Everlasting darkness is their portion, they begin and end alike, with
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Now since this is certainly true, is it
possible that man should be so forgetful of God and himself? Can he so far
degenerate into a beast, and indurate into a stone, as to read these things and
not believe them, or believe these things and not to tremble? Can the knowledge
of these things swim in our brain without a serious and sound digestion of
them into our hearts? when we see, and know, and believe, that inexplicable,
eternal, endless, easelesse horrors, without true and unfeigned repentance,
abide us hereafter; and on the other side we know not, nor can possibly
discern with how speedy and swift a foot our end approaches, nor how suddenly
we shall be summoned to give the world our everlasting farewell; How can so sad
and important a consideration as this, possess our thoughts and not torment
them? or how can this choose but imbitter our dearest pleasures, and cross our
indulgence to our sensual affections? Did we but reason a while with our
souls, and every one of us in a particular application say within himself: I
am here floating like a ship in the sea of this world ballased on every side
with the cares and disquietings and pressures of this life, and I sail on with
full course toward the haven of Eternity, one little blast of death is able to
plunge me irrecouerably into this bottomless gulf, where one hours torment
will infinitely exceed (for the pain of it) an hundred years bitter
repentance. And shall I now thus standing upon the very battlements of hell,
melt in my delights, cheer up my self in the days of my youth, shall I tire
out my spirits, trifle out my precious time, rob mine eyes of their beloved
sleep for such things, to the which the time will come, when I must bid an
everlasting farewell? Me thinks the thorough meditation of our future state
should even strangle our sensual joys in us, and withdraw our hearts from
the embracements of this world, especially when we shall to our endless
sorrow understand, our dearest contents must close at the last in death and
confusion, and all our precedent pleasures shall yield us no other fruit but
their bitter remembrance to augment our sorrows.

CAP. 6. Wherein the question is answered wherefore a finite sin, is
recompensed with an infinite punishment, wherein also is farther showed that
the severity of Gods justice therein does no way diminish the greatness of
his mercy,
NOW here arises a question to be resolved; how comes it to pass, that our
merciful and gracious God, who is so infinite in his goodness and so abundant
in his love, whose praises the Prophet David amplifies in his 136. psalm,
twenty seven times together, with this conclusion; for his mercy endures for
ever, how can it stand, that this our God, whose mercy is thus exalted above
all his works, should be thus infinitely merciful, and yet so infinitely just
too, as to inflict upon a finite sin an infinite punishment, that he should
continue millions of years, yea to everlastingnesse, in the avengement of
those sins which were committed as it were in a moment of time, so that he
who has offended but temporally, should be bound to suffer pains eternally?
I answer, we shall sufficiently vindicate and clear Gods righteous dealing
toward us herein, if we measure his justice but by our own rules: Scelus non
temporis longitudine sed iniquitatis magnitudine metiendum est. Aug. de
Civitat. Des lib. 21 cap. 11.
for does any law proportion out the time of punishment to the time only in
which the offense is committed, and so measure the continuance of the pennalty
by the time of the fault? Shall the prisoner lie no longer in the Goal, then
he is committing his villainy? Do not we here amongst us often see some
offenses which were suddenly thought of and as soon executed, yet punished
with endless datelesse banishments, which in comparison to this life bear a
proportion with eternity? Now if the wisdom of man does follow this rule in
proportioning of punishments, weighing offenses by the fowlenes of the fact,
Shall we deny God the righteous Judge of all the world the same liberty over
the works of his own hands? Again if this will not satisfy our inquisitiue
minds, let us but take our own hearts to task, and sifte them to the
bottom, and impartially weigh what a world of pollution and deceipte and
perverseness is lodged in them, and then certainly we shall find matter
enough against our selves without farther inquiry for our endless
condemnation: our own consciences will testify to the confusion of our faces,
that just is the Lord, and just are his Judgments, that all the ways of the
Lord are mercy and truth, Nec iniusta eius gratia nec crudelis potest esse
iustitia. Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 21. c. 11.
that his grace is not unjust nor his Justice cruel: Add hereunto that the
fault of its own nature is infinite, because it is a sin against an infinite
majesty? Gods Justice being infinite, the violation thereof by sin must needs
contract an infinite debt; because in sinning we rob God of his glory, which
we must needs repaie him again: Now the satisfaction of an infinite debt,
must needs be infinite either in respect of time or measure; And because a
finite vessel is not able to hold or comprehend an infinite wrath forasmuch as
we cannot bear Gods indignation, propter immensitatem doloris, we must of
necessity satisfy his Justice, duratione temporis; the long continuance of our
sufferings must supply what is wanting in the weight of our punishments. Again
he that dies in his sin without repentance, offends as much as if he had
sinned eternally, quia omnis peccator est in aeternum, si in aeternum vixisset,
in aeternum peccasset; i.e. had he lived eternally, his sin had extended to
the length of his days Peccandi voluntatem non amisit sed vitam. Greg.
for a man sooner cease to live then to love his sin, and therefore God may
justly after many thousand years torments in Hell, iterate their torments to
the damned: because if they had longer abode in their sinful fiesh, they would
still have perpetuated their sinful transgressions. Oh let not then sinful
flesh contend with its maker, let not us prye into the heavens, nor curiously
search into the secrets of Gods will, to find a reason of the obligation of a
sinner to perpetual punishment, but rather in the lowlines of our hearts cry
out with Daniell, O Lord righteousness belongs unto thee, but to us open
shame, because we have rebelled against thee: let us cast down our souls at
the foot of his grace, and humbly acknowledge in the sense of our deformities,
that just is the Lord, and just are his judgments. Our weak understandings
can no way fathom the depth of his counsels; his wisdom is unsearchable and
all his ways are truth: but did we truly apprehend the nature of our sins,
we would never repine at the weight of Gods Judgments, for whereas God made
man a noble creature, both beautiful and glorious, and after stamped on him
his own Image, righteousness and true holiness, how strangely has his sin
disrobed him of all his excellencies, what rebellion has it settled in all his
members, what stains and pollutions has it wrought in all his faculties? It
is our sin which has unjointed the confederacies and societies of the dumb
creatures, and has armed them with an antipathy and rebellion one against
another. It is sin which has so strangely altered the manners and conditions
of our times, that has turned men's brows into brass, and their hearts into
stones, and their hands into blood, and their tongues into Scorpions. It is sin
which has wrought such a confusion and Chaos in all things under the Sun,
which has changed truth into flattery, substances into forms, nature into
art, decency into new fanglednesse, renting of hearts into cutting of
garments. It is sin I say which in this our age has dissolved those sweet
obligations of peace and correspondency, which were formerly knitte between
our neighbor nations, and insteede thereof has sent in, fire and sword
amongst them; and that has rolled up within these few years so many Noble
spirits in those parts into blood and destruction. And lastly it is our sin
that shall at that last and dreadful day turn the very Elements into fire,
and the whole frame of this world with all the things therein, into their
primitive Chaos and Original Confusion.

Oh that we did seriously consider of, and soundly digest the meditation of
these things! For had we but hearts to understand, and eyes to see the
deformity of our sins and did impartially compare the stain and pollution of
them with the pureness of Gods nature, and the brightness of his Majesty, how
should we be confounded in our souls, with the sight of our own filthiness?
How ready should we be rather to admire Gods patience then question his
severity? How should we tremble at his glorious presence; and dread his power,
and justly fear what we have worthily deserved, his everlasting judgment,
since our pollutions have moved him to abhor the works of his own hands and
to distaine the beauty of his own creation? But if now on the other side we
advisedly look into Gods gracious proceedings toward us, and his loving
indulgence in restraining his incensed displeasure, notwithstanding our
infinite provocations, and in showing us a way to escape his fury; I know not
whether we shall find greater cause to vindicate his justice, or admire his
mercy. For true it is, as says Saint Agustine, Deus adeo bonus est vt malum
nunquam sineret nisi adeo potens fuisset; vt ex malo bonum eliceret. Aug.
So Good is our God, that he would never have suffered us to fall had not his
power been such, that he could extract matter out of our sinfulness to
advance his own glory. Oh how unsearchable, how botomlesse, how surpassing the
apprehension of men and Angels is the love of God toward us! whither can we
go? which way can we cast our eyes, where we shall not behold the admirable
foote-steps of his mercy? If we look upward, his mercy reaches unto the
Heavens, says David: If downward, they that go down into the deep see the
wonders of God, says the same Prophet, and his mercies in the great waters. If
round about us, those that put their trust in the Lord, mercy embraces them on
every side. And hence it is that the Apostle Saint Paul to the Ephesians, so
diversely amplifies the love of God in several places of that Epistle, by
sundry appellations or epithites, as his love, his great love, his abundant
love, his love passing knowledge: again, the riches of his glory, the riches
of his grace, the riches of his mercy; God who is merciful says the Apostle,
who is rich in mercy through his love, his great love, even when we were dead
by sins has quickened us together in Christ Ephesians. 2.4.

The Apostle also in the same Epistle and first chapter expresses the Lord,
great in his power, abundant in his wisdom, but rich, exceeding rich in his
mercy. And why rich in mercy only? Is not the Lord rich in Angels, rich in the
Saints, rich in the Heavens? Has he not created the Clouds, founded the Seas,
wisely composed the whole frame of nature? And is he yet rich only in mercy?
True it is; the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, all that we have,
all that we are, is his; but his mercy has an excellency in it above all his
creatures; yea (if I may so speak) above all his attributes, above his
Justice; Mercy (says the Apostle) rejoices against condemnation: Above his
power; Jacob wrestled with God and overcame him; above his greatness; for he
humbled himself to take our nature on him; yea above all his earthly
creatures; for his mercy reaches to the Clouds, there is nothing does more
illustrate Gods omnipotency then his mercy. It was noe marvel that God should
make the Heavens because he is power it self, or that he should frame the
earth; because he is strength it self; or that he should govern the times
because he is wisdom it self, or that he should give breath to all creatures,
because he is life it self; But herein chiefly is God to be magnified, that
he who is infinitely just, should yet be merciful to sinners; yea to sinners
while they wallow in their blood; while they rest in sins, while they have no
eye to look after him, no heart to embrace him, no foot to follow him, no
tongue to glorify him, but lie woefully plunged in the dregs of their
pollutions? Oh the unspeakable goodness of our God, who has so graciously
invited those sheep, who are so unhappily strayed from him: nay who does with
a Omnipotentissima facilitate homines ad scipsum convertit Deus, and volentes
ex nolentibus facit. Aug. ad vita.
loving violence irresistably call those who have trampled on his graces, and
rejected his love. But what should move the creator of all things who has
been thus infinitely provoked, who is armed both with power to strike; and
means to be avenged, to compassionate his enemies? Certainly there is, there
can be no other reason alleged, but that which David so often iterates,
because he is gracious, and his mercy endures for ever. But alas how (may the
afflicted soul say) can his goodness extend to me who am nothing but worms
and dust, and wounds and sores and corruption? Who can give him no oblation
but my sins, no sacrifice but my sorrow? What confidence now can I have in
this love, what strength in this mercy? Who ever thou art, that art thus, and
no better disposed to receive the grace of thy God, bring forth this small
provision, offer this sacrifice upon the Alter. Since thou have nothing else to
part with surrender up thy sins, yield him thy lusts, renounce thy whole
interest in thy sinful delights, in thy immoderate affections Nullius rei
tantum in inferno est, quantum ptopriae voluntatis. Alsted.
and then thy sorrowful spirit shall be a sacrifice to God, thy wounded and
broken heart he will not despise; I am with him says the Lord, who is of an
humble spirit and that trembles at my words. We have his own word for his
mercy, we have his promise for it, we have his oath for it. He is faithful
says the Apostle, who has promised; he is faithful, he cannot deny
himself. The Apostle says not, he cannot deny his mercy, but he cannot deny
himself. If he were any thing but mercy, then he might deny his mercy,
though he did not deny himself: but now by not denying himself he gives
mercy, who by not giving mercy should deny himself. And thus we see how God is
faithful and cannot deny himself. Superare seipsum potest desertos miserando,
nega^e seipsum non potest misericordiam delerendo.
He may overcome himself by pitying the forsaken ones, but he cannot deny
himself by forsakeing his pity. For how can he deny himself to us, who has
given himself for us? How can he deny us his mercy, who has given us his life?

The end of the first book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF ETERNITY.
CHAP. I. Containing an Exhortation to holiness grounded upon the
consideration of Eternity.
THE very soul and life of Christianity consists in the life of a Christian,
as for outward formalities, they plausibly serve to show forth a good man to
the eye of the world, but cannot make him such; it is true, external actions
adorn our professions: but it is, where grace and goodness seasons them,
otherwise, where the sap and juice and vigor of religion is not settled in
the soul, a man is but like a goodly heart-shaken Oak, whose beauty will
turn into rottenness, and his end will be the fire. It was the saying of
Machiavell; that the appearance of virtue was more to be desired then virtue it
self. But Socrates a mere naturalist, advised better, who said, the good man
is only wise. Certainly our glorious shows, and high applauses, and
exaltations amongst the sons of men will prove but miserable comforters in
the close of our age, when the days of darkness come. O then as we respect
the eternal welfare of our poor souls, Qualis videri vis talis esse debes.
Gerb. Med.
let us be what we would seem. Let us turn our words into actions, our
knowledge into affection, and our speculation into practice. Let us not only in
a general and confused manner acknowledge God, but rather labor to know him;
let us not think it enough to believe that Christ came as a Savior into the
world, but endeavor rather by a peculiar, personal, and applicatiue faith to
make him our own. Alas what availes it my soul, that Christ shed forth his
blood for the sins of many; if he died not for me? What joy to my heart,
that Christ is risen for the justification of sinners, if he be not my
portion? Non prodest Christi resurrectio, nisi in te quoque Christus resurgat.
Gerb. Med.
what comfort to my distressed conscience that Christ is come a light into the
world, if I sit in darkness and in the shadow of death? What confidence of
protection can I have from hence, that Christ is a careful sheapheard over his
flock, if I am none of that sheepfold? O then let it be the chief desire of
our souls, Sit scopus vitae Christus, quem sequaris in via vt assequaris in
patria.
and the utmost extent of our endeauours, not only to confess Christ, but to
bring him home to our hearts, to feel him, to affect him, to live in him, to
depend on him, to be comfortable to him: let us willingly hear and cheerfully
follow the voice of that sweet guide, who is both the way, and the iournies end;
that loving Physician who comes to our wounded consciences with healing in his
wings; that meek and tender Lamb, who powered forth for us tears of anguish,
and tears of love; tears of anguish to redeem our souls, and tears of love
to compassionate our miseries. Now what a pressing persuasion have we here to
live unto him, who thus died for us; to make him our joy who has borne our
sorrows; to fix him in our hearts, who for our sakes was fixed to the Cross?
Totus tibi figatur in cord, qui totus prote figebatur in cruce.
How should we mourn in our souls, and weep in secret for him, quem totus
mundus, tota elementa lugebant, at whose sufferings the graves opened, the
Sun shut in his light, the earth trembled, and the whole frame of heaven in
his nature and kind expressed its sorrow. One of the Rabins when he read what
bitter torments the Messiah should suffer when he came into the world (cried
out) veniat Messiah at ego non videam, Let the Messiah come, but let me not see
him. Did his torments seem so dismal to the spectator, what were they then in
the sufferer? If so ghastly to the sight what were they in the sustaining? But
what should we do now? Shall we rail on Judas that betrayed him, or on Peter
that denied him, or the Jews that pierced him, or the Apostles that forsook
him? No, no; let us look into our own hearts, examine our own ways: Do we
not make his wounds bleed afresh with our sins? do we not nail him to the
Cross again with our pollutions? do we not grind him in our oppressions, and
as it were massacre him in our murders? What sin have we ever forsaken for
his sake; what inordinate affection have we abandoned for his love? Can we say
and say truly that we ever spared a dish from our bellies, or one hour from
our sleep, or one fashion from our backs, for his sake? And do we thus
requite our redeemer? Deus tuus parvus factus est, and tu te magnificas
exinaniuit se maiestas and tu vermiculus intumescis.
Was Christ stretched on the Cross, and shall we stretch our selves on beds of
down? Did Christ suck down vinegar for us, and shall we surfeit with plenty?
Was Christ crowned with thorns, and shall we crown our selves with Rose buds?
O let it shame us to bear so dainty a body under so doleful a head: but let
us conform our selves to his life, and let our conversation be answerable to
his doctrine. Let us fix our eye on this true Serpent, and fasten our hold on
this sure anchor. Let us look up unto Jesus the author and finisher of our
faith: Where our treasure is, there let our hearts be also. We have an
inestimable price, a glorious inheritance set before us, let us carefully
embrace all those means that may further our progress, as the hearing of the
word, receaving of the Sacraments, earnest and constant prayer to Almighty God:
Let us strive as we ought, press forward with all violence. The woman in the
Gospel which was so long visited with her bloody issue, it was her holy Victa
est ad violentiam, quia violenta ad victoriam.
violence and pressing our Savior that procured her health for her body and
pardon for her soul: Let this be our endeavor, let us never think our selves
far enough in the way to heaven, but prepare our hearts still, and lay hold
on every advantage that may further us in our journey. Behold now is the
acceptable time, now is the day of salvation, whilst you have time then do
good unto all: whilst you have the light, walk as children of the light: Judge
thy self here, that thou be not judged of the Lord hereafter. Let not thy
eyes slumber, nor thy temples take any rest, till thou have found out an
habitation in thy heart for the mighty God of Jacob. Remember him as David did,
in thy bed, and think upon him when thou art waking: God said of the Church of
Thyatira, I gave her time to repent of her fornication, and she repented not. O
let us not give our good God the like occasion to second the same complaint
against us. Behold God now graciously calls us and offers us his mercy: Behold
the spouse comes, let us go forth to meet him: He stands at the door, and
knocks, let us arise and open speedily to our beloved, to day while it is
called to day, let us hear his voice, let us not put off our time, as Felix
did St Paul, go for this present time, and when I have a convenient leisure I
will hear thee, as if the time present were not the fittest. Let us not stifle
the checks of our consciences, or say, as Festus to Agrippa, to morrow thou
shall hear him, Non quaerit Deus dilationem in voce corvina, sed confessionem
in gemitu Columbino.
All procrastinations in this case are dangerous: Let us therefore take hold of
salvation, whilst occasion serves us. If we shut out our well-beloved he will be
gone. Therefore let our hearts even melt within us, whilst he speaks to us in
his word; if we answer not when he calls us, then shall we call and he will not
answer. The Storke and the Crane, and the Swallow in the air know their
seasons and observe their appointed times, how much more should man, especially
since times and moments, how long we shall enjoy them, are not in our own
power, but in the power of God. The Angel in the Revelation swore by him, that
lives forever, that time should be no more, the time past can never be
recalled, let us therefore take the present time: For the time past was and is
not, the time present is, but shall not be, and of the future we can promise
to our selves no fruition. But alas such is our blindness, such an obduration
is grown over our hearts, that we understand these things, but feel them
not; we have them swimming in our minds, but embrace them not in our
affections. The best of us may take up that complaint of Saint Augustine, Teneo
in memoria, scribo in charta, sed non habeo in vita. Aug.
who averred of himself, that his desires were better then his practice, our
vows are in heaven, but our hearts on earth; our desires are toward our home,
but our endeavors flagge in the way, and we faint in our journey: we have
heavenly hopes; but earthly affections; we all covet after happiness, but we
would take no pains for it; we would enjoy Christ in his benefits, but we
refuse to partake with him in his sufferings; volumus assequi Christum, sed non
sequi, we would share willingly with our Savior in his Crown, but not in his
combat; nay oftentimes we instance God for such graces as we are loath to
obtain: like Saint Augustine, who prayed for continency with a proviso, Lord
give me continency but not yet; nay such is our intolerable sinfulness, and
pollution of heart, that at the same instant, when our hands are lift up to God
for the pardon of old sins, our heads are working in the contriving of new;
as Salvian has it, dum verbis praeterita mala plangimus, sensu futura
meditamur. Thus we draw nigh to God with our lips, when our hearts are far
from him, our affections are buried in the things of this life. Excellent is
that saying of Isidorus, Regnum hoc sempiternu^ ex omni part beatum est,
omnibus promissum, and tamen de illo altum inter nos silentium quotus quisque
enim est qui de hoc commemorat, hoc vxori, hoc liberis, toti hoc familiae
inculcat. Isid. Coelum negligimus, terram non retiuemus, Dei favorem non
acquirimus, mundi perdimus.
The kingdom of heaven, says he, is eternal, blessed every way and promised
to all men, but who is there almost that spends one moment in the serious
meditation of it? What man is there that ever talks to his wife, to his
children, to his family of such a Kingdom? We can riot in the praises of our
native soil, but we blush to speak of, and are ashamed to commend our true
country, our everlasting home. In our dealings about the things of this life,
our understandings are ready enough to apprehend them, and our hearts to
entertain them, and our tongues to discourse of them; but in things that
belong to the eternal salvation of our souls, how deep is our silence, how
slow our speech, how unskillful our expressions?

Thus we forsake heaven for these things which at last will forsake us, and
trifle out our time in things that will not profit us. How far are men now
adays from that sweet resolution of Saint Hierome? Let others, says he,
live in their statues, in their costly monuments: I had rather have St Paul's
Coat with his heavenly graces, then the purple of Kings with their Kingdoms.

O that we would look thus lowly upon our selves; we are Christians in
profession, O let us be such in practice: seeing that God has made us
stewards of his treasures, let us improve them to the benefit of our brethren:
has God given us abundance of his blessings? o let us not hide our talents in
a napkin: let us send our good works before us into Heaven: pauca da, maxima
in coelo recepturus: these slender gifts, which thou do chearefully
distribute in this world, will procure thee an eternal compensation in the
world to come. That sweet speech of Saint John is worth observation, blessed
are those that dye in the Lord, they rest from their labors, and their works
follow them. When our dearest friends, our sweetest pleasures, our most
glorious titles of honor, the world it self, yea even our life it self shall
glide away like a river, and turn to dust, then shall our good works follow
us, non transeunt opera nostra (says one) Sicut transire videntur, sed velut
aeternitatis semina iaciuntur; our good deeds die not with us, but they are
sown in earth and spring in heaven; they are an inexhaustible fountain, that
shall never be dried up: a durable spring, that shall never fail. They are
acts of time, short in their performance, yet eternal in their recompense;
they build up for us, through the mercies of our God, an everlasting foundation
for the time to come.

Lo then here we have set before us viam ad regnum, the way to our eternity;
let us go on herein without intermission; press forward with violence and
strive to attain the crown. Opulentia nimis multa est aeternitas, sed nisi
perseveranter quaefita nunquam in venitur. Bernard.
Eternity is an abundant treasure, an everlasting wealth, but it is not given
save to them that seek it; yea that seek it with their whole hearts.
Certainty did we as truly know, as we shall one day undoubtedly feel the
bitter fruit, that our lukewarm profession, our gross stupidity, and utter
neglect of our everlasting state will produce and procure us in the end, all
our thoughts and language, all our affections and inclinations would be more
eagerly employed, and more faithfully exercised in the pursuit of eternity.
illud propter quod peccamus, amittimus, et peccatum ipsum retinemus.
Oh how senseless are we, how stupid in our selves, and wickedly injurious to
our own welfare, who for a small gain, a fading pleasure, a fugitive honor
wound our consciences, and hazard our souls, to stand as it were on the brinke
of hell?

The whole world promised for a reward cannot persuade us to endure one
momentary torment in fire: And yet in the accustomed course of our lives we
dread not, we quake not at everlasting burnings. But o thou delitious and
dainty soul, who cherishest thy self in the joy of thy heart, and the delight
of thine eyes, whose belly is thy God, and the world thy Parradise! o, bethink
thy self betimes, before that gloomy day, that day of clouds and thick
darkness, that day of desolation and confusion approach, when all the
inhabitants of the earth shall mourn and lament, and all faces (as the Prophet
Joel speaks) shall gather blackness, because the time of their judgment is
come. Alas with what a doleful heart, and weeping eye, and drooping
countenance, and trembling loins will thou at that last and great Assise look
upon Christ Jesus, when he shall most gloriously appear with innumerable
Angels in flaming fire, to render vengeance on them that know him not? What a
cold dampe will seize upon thy soul, when thou shall behold him whom thou have
all thy life long neglected in his ordinance, despised in his members, rejected
in his love; when thou shall see the judgment seat, the Fiet apertio librorum
scilicet conscientiarum, quibus merita, and demerita vniuersorum, sibi ipsis
and caeteris, innotescent.
books opened, thy sins discovered, yea all the secret counsels of thy
heart, after a wonderful manner manifested and laid open to the eye of the
whole world? what horror and perplexity of spirit will possess thee to view
and behold but the very solemnities and circumstances, which accompany this
Judgment; when thou shall see the heavens burn, the Elements melt, the earth
tremble, the sea roar, the sun turn into darkness, and the moon into blood?
And now what shall be thy refuge, where shall be thy succor? shall thou
reign, because thou cloathest thy self in Cedar? shall thou be safe, because
with the Eagle thou have set thy neast on high? O no, it is not now the
greatness of thy state, nor the abundance of thy wealth, nor the privilege of
thy place, nor the eminency of thy worth, or wit or learning, that can avail
thee ought, either to avoid thy doom, or prorogue thy judgment. All states
and conditions of men are alike, when they appear at this Bar. There the
prince must lay down his crown, and the Pear his Robes, and the judge his
purple, and the Captain his banner; All must promiscuously attend to give in
their accounts and to receive according to that they have done, whether it be
good or whether it be evil. Here on earth great men and glorious in the eye of
the world, so long as they can hold their habitations in the earth, have both
countenance to defend, and power to protect them from the injuries of the
times: but when the dismal face of that terrible day shall show it self, then
shall they find no eye to pity, nor arm to help, nor palace to defend, nor
rocks to shelter, nor Mountains to cover them from the presence of him that
sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the lamb. Give me the most
insolent spirit, the most undaunted soul, that now breathes under the cope of
Heaven, who now fears not any created nature, noe, not God himself, yet when
he shall hear that terrible sound, Arise ye dead and come to judgment, how
will his heart even melt, and his bowels quiver within him; when he shall
have his severe judge above him, and hell beneath him, and his worm within
him, and fire round about him. O then whosoever thou art, die unto thy sins
and unto thy pleasures here, that thou may live to God herafter; Sic tibi
cave, vt caveas teipsu^.
go out of thy self, judge and condemn thine own soul for thy sins
against God in this world, that so thou may comfortably receive thy sentence
of absolution in the world to come. Let us learn to be wise in time; let our
sorrow for sin anticipate and prevent our punishment, satius est and suavius
font purgari quam igne: He that grieves not heartily for his transgressions
here, shall woefully smart for them hereafter. in inferno exomologesis non est,
nec paenitentia tunc tribul potest, consumpto te^pore paenitendi.
In hell there is no redemption for the time past, no confession, no
repentance, but a sad and heavy exchange and most uncomfortable translation,
from a short and passing joy, to an endless, easelesse punishment. The serious
and advised consideration of this eternal being in the life to come, was the
ground of that ancient custom in the Roman Church upon the consecration of
their Bishops, at which time these words were recited with a loud voice, Annos
aeternos in mente habe, i. e. remember that eternal year, the date whereof
will never expire. So likewise when the Bishop of Rome is brought to his
pontifical chair, one goes before him, shaking a burning torch and
proclaiming three times Pater sancte, sic transit gloria mundi. Certainly it
would work somewhat toward the enliuening of our drowsinesse, and quickening
up of our dull security if we did in the beginning and end of all our
undertakings say within our selves, Annos aeternos in mente habe; Remember o my
soul those days of darkness which shall never close. For all the pressures
and vexing distempers, that befall us in this life; all the crosses, which the
envy either of men or evil Angels can throw upon us, are nothing, if compared
to eternal miseries. Sapienti nihil magnum videri potest, cui aeternitatis
nota est magnitudo. What if with Saint Paul I underwent labors and perils,
hunger and thirst, injuries and reproaches, what is all this to eternity?

What if I did bear in my flesh the most exquisite pains and bitterest
torments, that created nature is capable of, yet what were all this to
eternity? For all the adversities and alterations, which happen to us under the
sun, have their periods, which they cannot pass: however they disquiet us
for the time, yet as the Prophet Daniel says, the end shall be at the
appointed time, God will perform that which he has appointed for me says
Job: yet vsque ad tempus haec omnia the end shall be at the appointed time. But
of this eternity there will be no end, no bounds can limit it, no time shall
determine it. Certainly first or last, there will happen to thee such an
evening as shall have no morning to follow; or else such a morning, as shall
never see the close of the Sun: And therefore let not the vanishing cares and
transitory disquietings of this world over deeply possess thy heart; but
rather let the whole stream of thy meditations rnnne upon thy latter end; that
at the time of thy dissolution; (thy affection being wholly alienated from the
world) thy thoughts may ascend before, whither thy soul is coming after: So
shall thy sufferings here, make way for thy crown hereafter.

But how few, o how few I say are there that weigh these things? How few do
make it their daily task to meditate on the evils to come? They credit not
such reports; for they care not to believe what they are unwilling to practice.
Hence it is that they go on so securely in their course, as if there were no
heaven, no hell, no God, no eternity. Thus we naturally desire, our days
should be as happy as they are long, and being miserably-insensible of the
sorrows to come, we rashly expose our selves to an irrevocable downfall. Nos
tales, qui mortis nostrae neque negotium ridentes exequimur. Greg.
Without sense or sorrow we run merrily to hell, where we shall
everlastingly feel what we did never fear, death and darkness; weeping and
gnashing of teeth. O how different are our times from those of our Ancestors?
They were not more rigidly superstitious, then we are vainly secure.

How did they pine their bodies and afflict their souls, crucify their most
precious lusts, forsake their friends, their lands, their inheritance, yea
their Crowns, and Kingdoms; nay which is more, through the rigid and austeere
observation of their strict and severe laws expose themselves to the hazard
and danger of their dearest lives, and thrust themselves as it were out of the
world, and forgo all society with men. And wherefore all this, but that they
might disburthen themselves the better by these means from all earthly
allurements; settle and dispose their hearts in a good preparation toward
their home; and to enliuen their affections, and inflame their minds to a more
serious contemplation of the joys to come? Me thinks the consideration of
these former times should strongly invite us to a more serious meditation of
our future state; especially if we remember how swiftly our days draw to an
end, and how soon we are involued into everlasting darkness. For alas what is
our life here, Tota haec vita vnius horulae mors est, one hour at the last
will swallow up all our liue-long days.

Let us then not fear being so near our home; let no storms affright us
being so near our haven: Let us examine our accounts and cast up our sums,
that we may be able to give up a good account at the last day. Certain it is
what ever we go about; whatsoever be the scope of our endeavors; we every
day come nearer to the end of our course, every hour is a new step onward.

So soon as ever a man enters this mortal life, he begins a constant
journey unto death, quicquid temporis vivitur de spatio vivendi tollitur: i. e.
Each part of time that we pass, cuts off so much from our life, and the
remainder still decreaseth; So that our whole life is nothing but a course or
passage unto death, wherein one can neither stay nor slack his pace. This we
know, our daily experience does confirm this truth: and yet do we persist as
securely as ever in our trade of sin: Aegrae abstrahimur ab ijs quibus
assuescimus, i.e. we are hardly drawn from those things which custom and
time has invred us unto. It is a grievous burden to a licentious heart to be
drawn off from dainty fare, full cups, and good company. We lie as dead men
and senseless in our damned pollutions, even drowned in our voluptuousness,
like brute beasts filled up and pampered for the day of slaughter. Thus with
the full stream of our endeavors we plod on in the habitual course of
transgressing, without any sense of our sin, until our short days begin to
shut in, and our evening approach; at which time the weakness of our bodies,
and the strength of our sins make us as unable to repent, as we were before
unwilling. We many times through the incitement of some good motion begin
well but fail in the execution; we make fair promises, Fatemur crimina, sed
sic fatemur, vt in ipsa confessione non dolemus. Salv.
but we do not second them in our practice; but let us not deceive our
selves, God will not be mocked non verbis paenitentia agenda, sed actu: let us
not promise God better obedience with our lips then we perform with our
hearts. Be not rash to vow a thing before God, but when thy word has past thy
lips, then be as careful to perform, as thou wast forward before to promise.

Lastly let us always follow that holy counsel given in Ecclesiasticus, In
all thy actions think upon thy latter end, and thou shall never do amiss:
and that of the Prophet David, keep innocence, and do the thing that is
right; for that shall bring a man peace at the last: peace with God, peace with
men, and peace with our own conscience. In the world says our Savior shall
ye have trouble, but in me ye shall have peace. The world is our sea, but
Christ is our haven; the world is our warfare, but Christ is our rest: The
world is full of storms, but Christ is our peace; Solus is charum non amittit,
cui ille charus est quinon amittitur.
in me you shall have peace. Hence it was that the Saints of God always have
taken exceeding joy in their tribulation; because Christ was their comfort and
peace: he sweetened all their sorrows. Hence it was that Saint Augustine so
resolutely brake forth; Hic ure, hic seca, modo in aeternum parcas; he regarded
not what pressures God laid upon him, So he vouchsafed him patience here and
heaven hereafter. What ever we do or can suffer in this life, the abundance of
our eternal joy shall infinitely recompense the weight of our sorrows: Our
light afflictions which are but for a moment do cause unto us a far more
excellent and exceeding weight of glory. Our combat here is short, but our
triumph eternal. And who would not endure a few crosses and windings in his
way when he knows they will bring him to his journies end? Who would not for a
little season expose himself to the mercy of the waves to be tossed on the
sea, Impossible est, vt in vtroque seculo bearsu sis, vt in caelo and in terra
appareas gloriosus Hier.
when he is assured with St Paul, to come safely to the shore?

Besides, we must not expect to establish our happiness here and to enjoy our
heaven hereafter. It is impossible a man should flow in his delights in this
world; and then drink at the fountain of everlasting bliss in the world to
come.

O then let us embrace the conflict, that we may obtain the Crown. Melior est
modica amaritudo in faucibus, quam aeternum tormentum in visceribus: i. e. a
little gall in the mouth is not so painful, as continual torments in the
bowels. Far better it is to Sum up our reckonings here, then to have our
debts upon the score hereafter; Vna hora erit gravior in paena, quam centum
anni in amarissima paenitentia. Thomas de Kemp.
far better to unloose our souls from the immoderate embracements of the
comforts of this world, and to endure the straits and pinchings of a more
reserved and homely course for sixty or seaventy years in this life, then to
suffer but one torment in the life to come: far better to be lightly
afflicted here, then eternally tormented hereafter.

Saint Chrysostom has an excellent expression to this purpose: Suppose a man,
says he, much desiring sleep, and in his perfect mind, had an offer made him
of one nights sweet rest, upon condition to be punished a hnndred years for
it, would he accept (think you) of his sleep upon such terms? Now look
what one night is to an hundred years, the same is the life present, compared
with that to come. Nay look what a drop of water is to the sea; the same and
no more is a thousand years to eternity. Who then of sound judgment, for the
short fruition of a transitory contentment in this life, would expose himself
to the horror of eternal flames in the life to come? And therefore whiles we
have our abode in this vale of misery, we should always pray with Saint
Bernard, da domine, vt sic possideamus temporalia, vt non perdamus aeterna,
i.e. grant us Lord that we may so partake of temporal felicities, that we
may not loose eternal. All things under the Sun have their alterations and
changings, but things above are permanent, and of an enduring substance. Omnia
ei salua sunt, cui salva est beata aeternitas; he that can be secure, and sure
of the happiness to come, builds up his house upon a firm foundation. How
small a model of time, how short a period is the longest life, when once it is
finished? Recollect with thy self, says Saint Augustine, the years that are
passed from Adams time until now; run over the whole scripture, and the time
since the fall will seem but as yesterday. For what are the times past? If
thou had lived from Adams day till this hour; thou would easily have
judged, that this life has no perpetuity in it, which flies away so swiftly.
For what is the life of any man, suppose the longest age? It is but like the
morning dew, like the twinkling of an eye, in a trice it is gone. I have seen
an end of all perfection says David. But here o Christian, let me deal more
plainly with thee; thou will readily acknowledge all things under the frame of
Heaven are perishing, and heaven is thy thought, Eternity is thine aim. Now if
it be so, why art thou then so dull in thy course of holiness, so frozen in
thy zeal, so inclinable to every motion of sin, so easily overcome by every
incitement to wantonness, never more calm and unseasonably patient, then when
thy affections should be enflamed, and thy heart kindled with a just
indignation in Gods cause: and on the other side never more fretting, whining
and unquiet, then when thou should be meek and patient, and cheerfully
disposed under the burden of of afflictions? How can it be that we should have
eternity in our minds, and yet live no better in our manners? Now that we may
the easier discern the deceitfulness of our hearts herein; let us examine our
selves by the example of Jacob. This Patriarch Jacob served his uncle Laban
seven years for Rachell his daughter, and the greatness of his affection
toward her, made that time seem but as a few days. (to apply this:) Thou art
a servant as Jacob was, but thou serves not such a Master as Jacob did, thou
serves not man but God, thy maker and a faithful rewarder; thou serves not for
a wife, but for a kingdom; not for an earthly contentation, but for an
heavenly habitation: And yet behold the short affliction of one day can
eneruate thy love, and unlock thy affections from God and heaven: Every cross
accident stops thee in thy course, Every little sorrow disquiets thy soul, and
lessens thy contentment. Behold here, measure by the example of Jacob the
strength of thy love: Jacob could serve seven years with cheerfulness for a
wife, but thou can hardly serve thy God so many days with a true affection
for heaven: For reckon up all the nights thou have spent in prayer, sum up
all the days that thou have worn out in religious exercises, and can thou
then truly say to God as Jacob did to his uncle, in thy service night and day
have I macerated my body with heat and cold, and my sleep departed from mine
eyes; twenty years have I labored in thy service: could thou say thus, and
say it truly, o then what would be the end of thy labor, what would thy reward
be? not flocks and cattle, not the daughters of Laban, but God himself would
be thy exceeding great reward, thy life and happiness; He would be unto thee
every thing that, thy heart can desire or long for; Thy soul should flow, and
even melt in abundance of spiritual delights.

But now take a little view of thine own vileness, thy own nakedness, thy
vttter disability to any thing that may be truly called good. Thy hands are
feeble to Gods work, thy feet are slow to Gods temple, thine eyes are seared
or shut up toward heaven; But for the works of flesh and Satan, thy heart is
hot to envy, thy mind prone to revenge, thy tongue voluble to blaspheame, thy
affections even glued and incorporated as it were into the sensual
embracements; And is this to serve God for heaven? shall the blessedness of
the Saints, and the glory of Angels, and the joy, and fruition of God himself
be powered forth upon such works as these? Do thou thus requite thy maker.

O consider, consider I say thy ways in time; labor to serve God as Jacob
did: labor to approve thy self as faithful to God as Jacob was to his uncle
Laban: And if the weight of the labor discourage thee, or adversity oppress
thee, or prosperity seduce thee; then lift up thine eyes to heaven, as Jacob
did to his Rachell: Let heaven be thy love, thy spouse, the delight of thine
eyes, the joy of thy heart; Behold thy Rachell is fair, and lovely, heaven is
both beautiful and glorious: Let thy desires go before whither thou meanest
to hasten after: suffer for a season thy light affliction, having an eye to the
recompense of reward; yet and but a little while, Eo dirigendus est spiritus
quo aliquando est itutus.
and thou shall approach the haven, where thou shall enjoy so much the more
happiness, by how much the deeper thou have drunk in sorrow; and by how much
the more ardent thy affections have been toward God in this life, the more
abundant shall thy reward be in the life to come; then shall thy crosses prove
thy gains, and that wellspring of joy which shall ever rise in thy heart,
shall swallow up all thy sorrows.

CHAP. II. Showing that there is no other way nor possible means to attain to
the true eternity, but by a confident affiance upon the mercy of God in Christ.
SVch and so deplorable is the condition of every man considered in his
corrupted and degenerated state, that albeit he be able by that small spark
of natural illumination, which is left in his mind to see as in a glass
darkely and obscurely an eternity to come; yet is he utterly ignorant of the
true way thereunto, neither has he any possibility in nature to find it out:
He is in no better state then the poor creeple at the poole of Bethesda, who
saw the waters that could heal him before his eyes, but found no means to
help him into them. For that sound and perfect knowledge of the true way,
which man was adorned with in his first creation, is wholely lost and
extinguished in him, he is now a mere stranger from the life of God, Ephesians.
4.18. dead in Trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 1.2. reprobate to every good work.
Tit. 1.16. his very mind is defiled, Tit. 1.15. his wisdom is death, Romans
8.6. Nemo aliunde Deo placet, nisi ex eo quod ipse donaverit.
He is no more able of himself to lead a holy life, acceptable to God, then a
dead man is to perform the actions of one that is alive. Being thus disrobed
of all spiritual endowments and saving grace, how shall he attain to that
joyful Eternity, which his soul (as I have said) may long for, but can no way
reach? Certainly there is no light to lead him, but that Si Christum habes,
aeternitatem per Christum in te habes. Alst,
light of the world; no way for him to take to, but that new and living way,
even him, who has styled himself, the way, the truth, and the life; no rock
to cleave to, but this strong foundation; no name under heaven to be saved by,
but this, even this alone, Jesus Christ, yesterday and to day, and the same
forever. He, and he alone is the only sure, effectual, infallible means of
our salvation: He alone is the true High Priest, who was once offered to take
away sins, and after that entered into the true sanctuary, the very Heaven, to
appear in the sight of God for us, where he is able perfectly to save them,
which come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for
them. Heb. 7.26. He alone is the ground of our hope, the crown of our glory,
and the strength of our confidence. Oculum tuum Domine non excludit cor
clausum, nec manum tuam repellit duritia hominum. Aug.
It Is he alone, who by the sweet influence of his grace, and by the secret
working of his spirit, can (when he will) and does (when he please) subdue and
bring under the most obdurate gainesaying, and rebellious heart, to a
cheerful, willing, and ready obedience to his heavenly will. O the infinite
and in expressible tenderness of our loving Savior toward us! When we, like
sheep, had gone astray, his mercy reduced us: When we lay wallowing in our
blood, his pity refresht us: When we were dead in our sins, his death did
revive us; and here we may truly say with David, his mercy reaches to the
heavens. From the heavens came the price of our redemption. We were not,
neither could we be redeemed by the blood of bulls and goats, by thousands of
rivers of oil, by the cattle that are upon a thousand mountains. It was not
the treasures of the world, the power of men or Angels could purchase this
freedom, nothing could cleanse us, but the blood of the Lamb: He was that
fountain, opened for sin and for uncleanness; He was that Son of
righteousness, that came with healing in his wings. His were the wounds, that
healed our sores; his was the back, that bare our sorrows; his was the price,
that quit our skores; he assumed our flesh to redeem us here, and he reigns
as a king to crown us hereafter. Now what remains after all this to be done
on our parts? Let us rest on this Anchor, let us fly to this hold, and build on
this foundation: For no other foundation can any man lay, then that which is
laid, Jesus Christ. Let us cast our souls into the arms of our Savior: In
brachijs Salvatoris mei and vivere volo et mori cupio, says S. Bernard: O let
this be our desire: Now the gate is open, let us not defer the time of
entrance: Now is the acceptable time, let us not procrastinate the feason: Now
he offers his mercy, he shows his long sufferance, let us not turn his grace
into wantonness; let us follow the counsel of the son of Sirach: Ecclus the
5. Make no long tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to day:
For suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy security
thou shall be destroyed, and thou shall perish in time of vengeance. But alas
far otherwise it is with us in our practice: Magna pars vitae elabitur male
agentibus, maxima nihil agentibus, tota aliud agentibus.
A great portion of our time is crumbled away in doing ill, a greater part in
doing nothing, and our whole life in doing that, which we should not, or in
matters (as we say) upon the by. And as Archimedes was secure and busy about
drawing lines on the ground when Syracuse was taken; so is it with us. Now that
our eternal safety lays at stake, we lie puzling in our dust, I mean, in our
worldly negotiations: But for our eternity shortly approaching, we seldom or
rarely think of it. We are like Martha, troubled about many things, when one
thing is necessary: But this one thing is that, which of all other things is
least regarded, and in the last place. We seldom seek heaven, till death does
summon us to leave the earth: we have many euasions to gull our own hearts,
many excuses to procrastinate our repentance; like Dionysius, the Scicilian
king, who to excuse himself for the present delivery of the golden garment,
which he took from his God Apollo, answered that such a robe as that was,
could not be at any season of the year useful to his God: it would not keep
him warm in the winter, and it was too heavy for the summer: So many there be,
says S. Ambrose, who play with God and with their own soul. You must not
(say they) seek for the vigor and life of religion in the hearts of young
men; For youth, as the proverb is, must have his swinge: Neither can you
expect it in the company of the aged: for their age, and those distempers,
which accompany it, make them a burden to themselves and dulls the edge of
their intentions unto all their serious understandings. Thus both the summer
and the winter of our age are unfit for Gods service. But let us not thus
cheat our selves. If God be God, let us follow him; let us not put off the
day of reconciliation, and say in our hearts to morrow we will do it, when
yet we cannot tell, what shall be to morrow: for what is our life? It is even
a vapor, that appears for a little time and afterward vanishes away. Hence
it was that Macedonius, being invited a day before to a feast, replied to the
messenger, why does thy Master inuit me for to morrow, whereas for this many
years I have not promised to my self one days life? Nemo mortem satis cavet,
nisi qui semper cavet. i.e. No man dreads death as he ought, but he that
always expects his summons; and therefore we may truly judge such men woefully
secure, and wilful contemners of the future good, who can go to their beds,
and rest on their pillowes in the apprehension of their known sins, without
a particular humiliation for them. For how often does a sudden and unexpected
death arrest men? We see and know in our daily experience, many lay themselves
to sleep in health and safety, yet are found dead in the morning. Thus
suddenly are they wrapped from their quiet repose to their irrecouerable
judgment, perchance from their feathers to flames of fire; such is the frail
condition of our brittle lives, within the small particle of an hour, live and
sicken, and dye: yet so gross is our blindness, that from one day to another,
nay from one year to another, we triflingly put off the reformation of our
lives, until our last hour creepes on us unlooked for, and dragges us to
eternity.

Saint Augustine striving with all his endeavors against the backwardness and
slownesse of his own heart to turn to the Lord, bitterly complained within
himself, Quamdiu, quamdiu, cras, cras? Quare non hac hora finis turpitudinis
meae? How long (says he) o how long shall I delude my soul with to morrowes
repentance? Why should not this hour terminate my sinfulness? We are every
minute at the brinke of death, and every hour, that we pass through, might
prove (for ought we know) the evening of our whole life, and the very close of
our mortality. Now if it should please God to take away our souls from us this
night, (as suddenly falls out to some) what would then become of us? In what
Eternity should we be found? Whether amongst the damned, or the blessed? Happy
were it for us, if we were but as careful for the welfare of our souls, as
we are curious for the adorning of our bodies: if our clothes or faces do
contract any blot or soiling, we presently endeavor to cleanse the same: But
though our souls lie inthralled in the pollutions of sin, this alas we feel
not; it neither provokes us to shame, nor moves us to sorrow. Wherefore let us
look into our hearts with a sevearer eye: Let the shortness of our days
stir us up to the amendment of our sinful lives; and let the hour, wherein
we have sinned, be the beginning of our reformation, according to that of St
Ambrose, agenda est paenitentia, non solum solicit verum etiam mature, i.e.
our repentance must be, not only sincere, but timely also, whilst we have the
light, let us walk as children of the light: Let us not any longer cheat our
souls in studying to invent evasions or pretenses for our sins; but rather
lay open our sores, and seek to the true Physician, that can heal them. All
the creatures under the sun do naturally intend their own preservation and
desire that happiness, which is agreeable to their nature: only man is
negligent, and impiously careless of his own welfare. We see the Heart, when
he is stricken and wounded, looks speedily for a certain herb, well known
unto him by a kind of natural instinct; and when he has found it, applies it
to the wound. The swallow, when her young ones are blind, knows how to procure
them their sight by the use of her Celandine: But we alas are wounded, yet
seek for no remedy; we go customarily to our bedds, to our tables, to our
good company; but who is he that observes his constant course of prayer, of
repentance; of hearty, and sincere humiliation for his sins? We go forward
still in our old way, and jogge on in the same rode: Though our judgment
hasten, hell threaten, death stand at the door, yet we thrust onward still;
and in dulcem declinamus lumina somnum: But alas miserable souls as we are,
can we embrace quiet rests and uninterrupted sleeps with such wounded
consciences? Can we be so secure, being so near our time?

But you will say, we have passed already many nights without danger; no
sickness in the night has befalne us hitherto, why then should any fear of
death amaze or trouble us?

Admit all this, yea be not too confident; one hour may effect that, which a
thousand years could not produce: and think with your selves, what a little
distance there is, between your souls and death: Let me ask the strongest of
men on earth, what certainty of life can thou promise thy self, seeing that
either a little bone in thy throat may choke thee, or a tile from thy house
may brain thee, or some malignant air may poison thee, and then where art
thou? There are a thousand ways, Tu te prius ad aeternitatem abrep tum
miraberis, quam metueres abripiendum.
whereby suddenly a man may come to his end; and certain it is that; Mors
illa maxim improvisa est, cuius vita praecedens non fuit provida, i. e. that
death is the suddainest, which is not vshered in with a foregoing preparation.
It is therefore a special point of wisdom to think every day our last, yea
to account every hour the period of our lives. For look how many pores there
are in the body, so many windows are there to let in death: yea we carry our
deaths continually about us in our bosoms; and who can promise himself his
life till the evening? Has not our own experience shown us many, whose
sleeps in their beds have proved sleeps unto death; who have been carried
from their chambers to their grave? Death does not always send forth her
harbingers to give notice of her coming; she often presses in unlooked for,
and suddenly attached the unprovided soul. Watch therefore, because ye know
neither the day, nor the hour: work whilst ye have the day; for the night
comes, wherein no man can work: look toward thy evening; and cast thy
thoughts upon that long Eternity; Death first or last will apprehend thee:
expect it therefore at every turn, and of this assure thy self, Qualis
quisque in hac vita motitur, talis in die novissimo iudicabitur.
as death leaves thee, so shall judgment find thee. How improvidently secure
then are those, who set up their rest in the comforts of this life, and
overly-regard their eternal welfare? This is the general carelessness of our
times.

If a man have a perpetuity but of five shillings yearly rent, what travel
and pains and sweat, what beating of his brain and exhausting of his treasure
will he run through, before he will loose one dram of his right? Yet our
eternal inheritance is cast behind us, and undervalued as a trifle, not worth
the seeking; and this shows our small love to our home: for we little esteem
of that, which we take small pains for. All other things which conduce to our
temporal well being, we seek with circumspection, and enjoy them with
content; but matters of Eternity, we conceive of, as things far distant from
us, we scarcely entertain them in our thoughts. We busy not our
understandings in the search of those things which we see not: things present,
and obvious to our sight do best affect us; we are ill-sighted upward, weak
and dim eyes have we toward heaven.

The truth of this appears even in children, who presently even from the
cradle, drink in the rudiments of vice; they learn to swear, riot, drink
and the like enormities with the smallest teaching; but they are utterly
indisposed to any virtuous inclinations. They soon apprehend what belongs to
the curiosity of behavior, and deportment of the body, and the fashions of the
times; Hoc discunt omnes ante Alpha and Beta puelli; but for Heaven and that
Eternity, they are wholly averse from it, they are utterly incapable of the
things above; they carry about them, as the livery of their first parents, not
only an indisposition, but a very opposition to goodness: And whereas for
other employments and undertakings, they have certain natural notions in
them, bending their intentions to natural works, some one way and some
another; yet they have not so much as a natural apprehension of the things of
God. Homo sine gratia, praeter carnem nihil sapit, intelligit aut potest.
Thus it is with children, and thus it is with all men, even those of the
ripest, and most peircing understanding, until the light of Gods spirit has
shined on their hearts and powerfully wrought some spiritual, holy
dispositions in them. The natural man (says the Apostle) neither does, nor
can discern the things that are of God. O how infinitely-miserable and
deplorable is his state, who having neither knowledge of the true life, nor
possibility of himself to find it out: Cum exulsit a patria exultat in via.
yet runs on securely in his damned way, until he fall woefully and
irrevocably into the pit, where he will not have, (no not when he has
uncomfortably worn out millions of years) the least intermission of sorrow,
or drop of comfort, or hope of pardon? Here on earth malefactors condemned to
dye, have this comfort (though wretched) that one hour commonly terminates all
their griefs in this life: But the torments of the damned are not concluded in
an age; nay the end and period of ten thousand years will not end their
sorrow: And this is it which adds more to their sufferings, even their
unhappy knowledge of the perpetuity of them; they have not so much as any hope
of releasement.

Hope in this life has such a power in it, that it can yield some comfort in
the midst of trouble; The sick man, whilst his soul is in him, he has
hope, but after this life, this small refreshment is denied the damned, all
their hope is turned into desperation. The Prophet Daniell, cap. 4.14. heard
the voice of an holy one, crying, hew down the tree, and cut off his branches,
shake of his leaves, and scatter his fruit, nevertheless leave the stumpe of
his root in the earth. Thus it is with men in this world says Ambrose, their
leaves and their flowers are shaken; their delights are taken from them; but
the roots remain, and their hope is not abolished. But it is not so in hell;
(says he) There both flower and stumpe; nay and even all hope too, are
banished away from them. The day of the Lord, says the Prophet Malachy, shall
burn them up, and leave them neither root nor branch. The very hope, says
Solomon, of the wicked shall perish; what should this teach us, but whilst our
hope remains to improve our few days to our best advantage, to make
straighter paths to our selves, to abridge our inordinate appetites in some
measure of their vain and fruitless joys; and with all the power of our
affections strive to attain that haven, where no billow shall affright us, no
storms astonish us, no perils endanger us? Then shall our dissolution prove
our gain, and our death our glory: if otherwise we persist wilfully in the
paths of our voluptuousness, and solace our selves in the vain joys of our
own hearts, and in the sight of our eyes; certainly it will be bitterness in
the latter end. Extrema gaudii luctus occupat.
All our earthly delights will glide away like a swift river: The rejoicing of
the wicked is short, says Job, and the joy of a sinner is but for a moment.
Though his excellency mount up to the heaven, and his head reach unto the
clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like his dongue, but the righteous is
like a strong mountain and he shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

Wherefore to draw to a conclusion, just occasion might here be taken for
deploring the negligence, and unhappy condition of our times. Where are there
any that take into their thoughts the due consideration of the time to come?
Where shall we find any truly provident for immortality? Sic plerique
vivimus, ac si fabula esset omnis aeternitas; we so live as though we
conceived of Eternity, but as of a fable, or a dream; the sweet allurements
of sin do so strangely beguile many, that by gentle degrees they obliterate
and extinguish in them all love of virtue, and the very inclinations themselves
to any thing, that may be truly termed good.

But let us no longer delude our selves by fancying a perpetuity on earth,
behold the judge stands before the door: Momento fi et quod tota doleat
aeternitas.
The strongest holds in the World will not be able to detain us one minute,
when God shall be pleased to call for our souls: and therefore Ante oculos
prae omnibus habeamus diem vltimum, and momentis singulis supplicia timeamus
dolotum aeternorum.
let us before all things have continually in our sight the last day: and let
us every moment fear the punishments of eternal pains.

CHAP. III. Certain conclusions drawn from the serious and devoute
consideration of Eternity.
The first conclusion.
IF they, who run on in any notorious sin, did but rightly weigh how fast
they go toward the Eternity of torments, (since that by the least command or
stroke of God, Confecto demum scelere, eius magnitudo intelligitur.
they may be vnavoidably hurled to death and destruction:) Certainly they
would not for all the kingdoms in Europe, for all the treasures of Asia, nay
not for the whole world, defer their repentance one hour; much less would
they go so confidently to their beds, without fear or horror, being so near
the pits brinke; and lying in the danger of so great a sin. For what would it
profit a man, to win the whole world, and loose his soul? wherefore whoeuer
thou art Nulli parcas vt soli parcas animae, Omnia siperdas animam servare
memento.
what ever become of all other things, yet have a special care for the
salvation of thy precious soul.

The second conclusion.
The greatest part of men do not believe this Eternity, which shall
undoubtedly follow either in Heaven, or Hell to all; For were they assured of
that truth, they would show more evident proof thereof in the reformation of
their lives. Some indeed will seem to credit it in their words, but deny it
in their actions. Their apprehensions and conceits may perchance sometimes
glance at it, upon some check of conscience, it being as a thorn in their
sides, and a mountain in their way toward their earthly contentment; but they
are soon taken off. Such thoughts have no rooting in the ground of their
hearts, but are suddenly choked by some intervenient employments: they are
commonly nipt in their very bud, and killed in their birth; So that they never
come to any issue. Thus many there are, who Caeci ad aeternitatem adeunt, ex
qua nunquam exibunt.
run headlong and blindfold to their long home, like the rich glutton in the
Gospel, which never began to open his eyes and look upwards, till he was in
torment: All the while he lived on earth, his eyes were shut up, and when it
was too late, namely when he was thrown to hell, then began he to look upward
and about him: And certainly it is no marvel, this rich glutton, and many
more like him, hasten thus unhappily to their vnevitable downfall.

For they go on in a pleasing and easy way. And In via nemo errat sed in fine
viae, via pluribus placet, sed dispicet and terret viae terminus.
they are never sensible that they are out of the way, till they arrive at the
end of their journey. All misery lies in the close of the day, For out of the
pit is no redemption: when once the soul is split upon this rock, it gives to
the world his everlasting farewell, according to that of Job. cap. 7.9. as the
cloud vanishes and goes away; so he that goes down to the grave, shall come
up no more, he shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place
know him any more.

The third conclusion.
Whosoever shall descend into himself, and take a strict and serious view of
this eternity, certainly the meditation thereof soundly digested, cannot but
terminate his desires to a moderate and sparing fruition, even of lawful
contentments.

This will imbitter his carnal mirth, take off the edge from his sweetest
delights, and at length make him say with Solomon, I said of laughter thou art
mad, and of joy what do thou?

It is recorded of Lazarus, that after his resurrection from the dead, he was
never seen to laugh; The stream of his affections were now turned into
another Channel; his thoughts were fixed in heaven, though his body was on
earth, and therefore Aeternis inhianti in fastidio sunt omnia transitoria, i.e.
Bern.
he could not but slight temporal things, when his heart was bent toward
eternal. Oh, that we could work our hearts and souls to a vehement thirst
after Christ, the true eternity! that we could cleave to that rock with
steadfastness, and with immovable affections! For if Christ be our end, our
joy shall be endless, nullo fine regnabis cum Christo, si Christus tibi finis.

The fourth conclusion.
The mind of man is so much the more sensible of the evil present, by how
much less it meditates on the good to come. For he that looks toward the
reward, will vilify the sufferings. Saint Austin runs on sweetly in his
meditations upon this subject; Eternal labor, says he, is but an equal
compensation for an eternal rest. But if thou should endure this eternal
labor, thou could never arrive at that eternal rest: Therefore has the
mercy of God ordained thy sorrows to be temporal, that thy joys may be
eternal; and yet says he, Vbi est cogitatio Dei? nimi, profundae factae sunt
cogitationes Dei Aug.
who is there, thinks on God as he ought? Such thoughts are irksome to us;
But for temporal vanities we think of them with delight; and enjoy them with
contentment: Now, says he, look in and about thy self, see where thou art;
God has his hook in thy nostrills, Noli gaudere, vt piscis, qui in sua
exultat esca: nondum enim traxit hamum piscator. Aug.
and can pluck thee up when he pleases: and though he suffer thee (according
to thy calculation) a long time, yet what is the longest time of man to Gods
eternity? Yea though thou should lengthen out thy days to many hundreths of
years; yet still thou art transitory and exposed to the common condition of
all men. Then fix thy heart on God, and so enjoying that eternity, thou shall
make thy self eternal; and be not discouraged for thy tribulations, and daily
disquietings in this world: for such is Gods love, such his abundant kindness
toward his elect; that he Ideo Deus terrenis faelicitatibus amaritudine^
miscet vt alia quaeratur faelicitae, cuius dolcedo non est falla^.
corrects them here, to the end they might not be condemned with the world
hereafter; boni laborant, quia flagellantur vt filij, mali exultant quia
damnantur vt alieni; God spares those, who are aliens from grace, but whom he
chooses, he chastises; Be not therefore (I say) cast down with any crosses
whatsoever, that may befall thee in this life; for the things that are present,
are temporal, but the things to come are eternal. When we see the friends of
this world, the eager embracers of the comforts of this life, upon every
summons of death strive to defer, what they cannot utterly avoid, their
corporal dissolutions; oh how great care, what indefatigable diligence what
restless endeavors should we use, that we might live for ever? Let us
again, and again, meditate on these things and with due care foresee
eternity, before we unexpectedly fall into it. Certain it is, Omnia
transeunt, sola restat and non tranfibit aeternitas.
all things pass away in this life, only eternity has no period: let us
redeem the time, and work while we have the day; for if we neglect good
duties here, we shall never regaine the like opportunity hereafter. This life
(says Nazianzen) is as it were our faireday or market day, let us now buy what
we want, while the fair lasts. While we have time let us do good unto all
men: Tu dormis sed tempus tuum non dormit, sed ambulat imo volat. Been illis
qui sic vivunt, sicut vixisse se volunt cum moriendum erit faciantque ea quae
in aeternitate constituti fecisse se gaudebunt. Amb.
Happy is the man that so lives here, that the remembrance of his well-spent
life may yield him joy hereafter; For otherwise levis hic neglectus, aeternum
fit dispendium, i.e. A small neglect in the ordering of our time in this world,
will be seconded with an eternal loss in the world to come.

The fifth conclusion.
Death is the ending our days, not of our life. For when our day shall close,
and our time shall be no more, then shall our death conduct us to a life,
which will last for all Eternity: For we dye not here to dye, but to live for
ever. Therefore the best guide of our life is the consideration of our death:
and he alone leads a life answerable to his Christian profession, who daily
expects to leave it. Me thinks 'its strange-men should be so industriously
careful to avoid their death, and so carelessly improvident of the life to
come, when as nothing makes death bad, but that estate which follows it: but
the reason is, we are spiritually blind and see not, nor know, in this our day
the things that belong to our peace, we have naturally neither sight nor
feeling of the joys to come. But when God shall enlighten the darkness of our
minds, and reveal his son in us when once the day dawneth, and that
day star arises in our hearts o then our death will be our joy, and the
rejoicing of our hearts, then shall we infinitely desire to be dissolved and
to be with Christ. Let us therefore with unwearied endeavors labor to bring
Christ home to our hearts, and to keep him there. Let us dye to our selves and
to our lusts here, that so in the world to come, we may everlastingly live unto
Christ and in him.

The sixth conclusion.
Now that we may be the better encouraged to raise up our endeavors to the
attainement of this eternity; Let us in a word consider the abundant and the
ever-flowing happiness in the world to come; neither eye has seen nor ear
has heard, nor tongue can express the joys that God has provided for the^
that love him. Vbi nullum erit malum, nullum latebit bonum-
Saint Augustine being ravished with the desire of this life, breaks out with
an inflamed affection, how great shall that happiness be, where there can be
no unclean thing, where no good can be wanting; Praemium virtutis erit ipse,
qui virtutem dedit.
where every creature does praise and admire his Creator, who is all in all
things. How great shall that reward be, where the giver of virtue shall be
himself, the reward of virtue: how great shall that abundance be, where the
author of all plenty, shall be unto me, life and soul, and raiment, health,
and peace, and honor, and all things; yea the end and complete object of all
my desires: For in his presence, is the fullness of joy, and at his right hand
there is pleasure for evermore. How great shall that blessedness be, where we
shall have the Lord our debtor, who has promised to reward our good deeds;
where we shall have the Lord for our portion, who will be to us, (as he was to
Abraham) our exceeding great reward? How great shall that light be, where the
Sun shall no more shine by day, nor the moon by night; where God shall be
our light, and the Lord our glory? How great shall that possession be, where
the heart shall possess whatsoever it shall desire, and shall never be
deprived of its possessions? Here will be to the Saints an abundant,
everlasting, overflowing banquet; no grief can accompany it, no sorrow
succeed it. Here is joy without sadness, rest Quies motus non appetitus.
without labor, wealth without loss, health without languor, abundance
without defect, life without death, perpetuity without corruption. Here is the
beatificall presence of God, the company of Saints, the society of Angels.
Here are pleasures, which the minds of the beholders can never be wearied
with; they always see them, and yet always rejoice to see them: These are the
flaggons of wine which comforted up David, when he cried out, according to the
multitude of the sorrows which I had in my heart thy comforts have refreshed
my soul: In coelo est vita vere vitalis, In heaven, and only in heaven is the
true life. For there our memories shall live in the joyful recordation of all
things past, our understandings shall live in the knowledge of God; our wills
shall live in the fruition of all excellencies that they can wish for, all our
senses shall abound in their several delights. Here is that white stone, which
Saint John speaks of, even glory and immortality to them that overcome. Here
is that water of life which our Savior speaks of, whereof whosoever drinks
shall never thirst again. Here is that river, the springs whereof make glad
the hearts of men: And how earnestly are we invited to these delights; come,
buy wine and oil without money? Heaven is at sale, Coelum venale est nec multum
exaestues propter pretij magnitudine^: teipsum da, and habebis illud. Aug.
and thou may buy it if thou will, and shrug not at the greatness of the
price, give but thy self to God, and thou shall have it. And who would not
abandon his honors, his pride, his credit, his friends, nay himself? Who
would not be willing to pass through the gates of Hell, and endure infernal
torments for a season, so he might be certain of so glorious and eternal an
inheritance hereafter? Let all the devils in hell (says Saint Austine) beset
me round; Bone Jesus qui parcendo saepius nos a te abijcis, feriendo effice, vt
ad te redeamus Ger. med.
let fastings macerate my body; let sorrows oppress my mind; let pains
consume my flesh; let watchings dry me, or heat scorch me, or cold freeze and
contract me; let all these, and what can come more, happen unto me, so I may
enjoy my Savior. For how excellent shall the glory of the just be? how great
their joy, when every face shall shine as the sun, When or Savior shall
martial the Saints in their distinct orders, and shall render to every one
according to his works? O were thy affections rightly settled on these heavenly
mansions, how abject and underneath thee would thou esteem those things,
which before thou setst an high price upon? As he which ascends an high
mountain, when he comes to the top thereof, finds the middle steps low and
beneath him, which seemed to be high to him while he stood in the bottom; so
he which sends his thoughts to heaven, however he esteemed of the vanishing
pleasures of the world when his heart lay groueling on the earth below, now in
this his transcendency he sees them under him and vilifies the^ all in regard
of heavenly treasures. Let us therefore cheerfully follow that advise of a
Reverend Father: Quod aliquando per necessitatem amittendum est, pro aeterna
remuneratio ne sponte est distribuendum.
Let us here willingly part with that for heaven, which we must first or last
necessarily leave upon earth, and let all the strength of our studies, and the
very height of our endeauours be dispended for the attainment of eternity. For
certain it is howsoever we live here like secure people of a secure age, and
howeuer we lavish out the strength and flower of our days, as if we should
never account for it; yet our judgment is most sure, and shall not be
avoided: The sentence of the Judge will be one day most assuredly published,
and shall not be revoked: We must all appear (says Saint Paul) before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. Then shall our
wickedness be brought to light which now lies hid in darkness. I saw the dead
(says S. John, Rev. 20.12.) both great and small stand before God, and the
books were opened and another book was opened which is the book of life, and
the dead were judged of those things which were written in the books,
according to their works; and whosoever was not found written in the book of
life was cast into the lake of fire. Thus it is evident, every man shall give
up his account; every soul shall first or last come to his reckning: Multorum
vocatio, paucorum electio, omnium retributio, many are called, few chosen, but
al rewarded according to their deeds. Oh then let us prepare our selves to meet
our God; let us come before him with fear, and tremble at his judgments.
Fear not him (says our Savior) who when he has killed the body, can do no
more, but fear him, who can cast both soul and body to hell; I say him fear.
Oh how many of the Saints of God trembled and quaked when they have meditated
upon the last judgment. Hierome says, as often as I think of that day, how
does my whole body quake, and my heart within me tremble? Quoties diem illum
cogito toto corpore contremisco. Timeo Gehen nam quippe interminatam
Cyrill says, I am afraid of Hell, because the worm there dies not, A
dentibus bestiae infernalis contremisco, quis dabit oculis meis fontem
lachrymarum, vt praeveniam fletibus fletu^ and stridotem dentium.
and the fire never goes out: I horribly tremble (says Bernard) at the teeth
of that infernal beast. Who will give to mine eyes (says he) a fountain of
tears, that by my weeping here, I may prevent weeping and gnashing of teeth
hereafter? Let the examples of these Saints of God stir up in our hearts the
like affections. Let it be the pitch of our desires, and the highest strain of
all our endeauours, to attain those heavenly mansions which our Savior has
provided for us; Momentaneum est quod delectat, aeternum quod cruciat.
and to avoid those endless, easelesse flames which God has prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. Who would gain the purchase of a short and transient
pleasure, at so high a rate, as the heavy price of eternal fire? Besides how
shall our tender bodies, which so shrink at the prick of a pin, or flame of a
candle endure those lasting pressures?

Who can dwell (says the Prophet) with eternal fire, who can abide with
everlasting burnings? Oh, let us set before our eyes the judgment to come, and
whatsoever we find our selves worthy to be condemned for, Cessat vindicta
divina, fi conversio praecurrat humana.
by the just Judge at that day. Let us first condemn our selves; for where
man's conversion begins, there Gods displeasure makes his period. Excellent is
that advise of S. Gregory, weigh (says he) and consider the errors of thy life
while thy time serves; Tremble at that strict judgment to come while thou have
health, Culpam tuam (dum vacat) pe^sa, and districtionem futuri iudicii (dum
vales) exhorresce, ne tunc amaram sen tentiam audi as, cum nullis fletibus
evada^.
least thou hear that bitter sentence (Go ye cursed) go forth against thee
when it is too late. Did man know what time he should leave the world, he
might proportion his time, some to pleasure, and some to repentance. But he
that has promised pardon to the penitent, has not assured the sinner of an
hours life. Since therefore we can neither prevent, nor foresee death, let us
always expect it, and provide for it. Let us dye to our sins here, that we
may live to Christ hereafter, and let us suffer with Christ in this world, that
we may rejoice and reign with him in the world to come. Recusat esse in
corpore, qui non vult odium sustinere cum capite. When we depart this life, we
go to an eternity, to an eternity I say, which shall never end, to an eternity
quae facit omne bonum infinite melius, et omne malum, infinite molestius, which
makes every good action infinitely better, and every evil action infinitely
worse. Oh the unhappiness and everlasting woe of those men, who prefer the
small and trifling things of this life, before the eternal weight of glory
hereafter: who to enjoy the short comfort of a miserable life here, are content
to loose the presence of God and society of Angels hereafter.

A PRAYER.
O Merciful God thou that art the eternal truth, the true charity, and long
eternity, so illuminate the blindness of our understandings that the serious
consideration of our short and transitory miseries which we run through in
this life, may drive us to a more feeling apprehension of those eternal pains
which abide us in the world to come Settle our hearts upon the true joy, teach
us so to possess these transient things, that we loose not the enduring
substance, so to lament our sins, that we may escape the punishment, so to
proceed in the way, that we fail not of our iournies end. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
These faults are to be corrected in some Copies.
Page 9. line 2. read breathless. p. 12 l. 1. r perspicuous. p. 34. l 6 r:
run. p. 52. l. 6. r. undertakings.


